blazon or coat of arms of the united kingdoms of England Scotland and Ireland,
under Charles II ^DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT ^
God save the KING.



Published at the Request of the MAYOR, ALDERMEN and other noted Persons of the
City of WORCESTER.

RELIGION EXPRESSED BY LOYALTY: IN A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL
Samuel Swift Esquire; MAYOR of the Ancient, Honorable and Loyal City of Worcester.
The first Sunday after his Inauguration or Instalment, being the 19th. day of
October, in the year of our Redemption 1684. At the Parish Church of St.
Swithin, upon a Tex Selected by William Swift, Esquire; (his truly Loyal Father)
being the 21st. and 22d. Verses of the 24th. Chapter of Solomon's Proverbs, in
these following expressions. --

-- My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change.

-- For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them
both.

By Will: Williams, an inferior Brother to the venerable and Orthodox Clergy.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, by T. Braddyll, and are to be sold by Walter
Davies Publisher in Amen Corner, and by most Booksellers in London and
Worcester. 1685.

To the Right Worshipful Samuel Swift Esquire Mayor, and also to the Worshipful
Aldermen, together with all other worthy Members of the Common Council
pertaining to the City of WORCESTER.
Loving and Loyal Gentlemen,
IT is very observable, that most of you (to whom this Epistle is Dedicated)
were personally present at the delivery of the (following) Sermon, which
discourse I found to be complyable with your Loyal dispositions: otherwise I
had not been solicited (by so many of its Auditors) to publish the same in
Print. And tho I was much importuned thereunto, yet I durst not presume upon
such an enterprise, until I had taken the (wary) advice of much more discreet
and better judgments.

The Text was recommended to my management, by a well-wisher (and good
benefactor) both to the Church of England and the Commonweal, namely Wi. Swift
Esquire and it is an undoubted Testimonial, not only of his Religious Principles,
but also of his Loyal Practices; whose (longing) desire is to see Uniformity
flourishing both in Church and State, the which happiness would much redound to
the satisfaction of all such Persons as have true affection to the present
Government; for if we take a serious prospect of the Primitive times, nothing
more prejudiced the Christian Religion, than the irregular discords of
disaffected People, as appears in the Faction of the Church of Corinth, where
one said, I am of Paul, another I am of Apollo, a third I am of Cephas, and a
fourth I am of Christ, as if Paul, Apollo, Peter and Christ, had various
Professions of the same universal or Catholic Doctrine, which was so far
repugnant with the (uniformal) practice of the Apostles, that St. Paul sharply
reprehended such conceited Parties, for their inordinate and self-willed
distinctions, as if (thereby) they contracted the guilt of Saducaean error, i.
e. in denying the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, as appears in his 1
Epist. Cor. Chap. 15. Verse. 12.

This Capital default was attended with many other Criminous (or Enormous)
mistakes, by reason of their incongruous Practices and Contentious Customs,
which were the perfidious (and unsufferable) Causes, that brought Faith into
Faction, and Religion into Rebellion; like our giddy Dissenters from the Church
of England; who contrary to the course of the Learned and Holy-men, have
imagined and framed strange conclusions in Divinity, as alleging the Choice of
Ministers, to stand upon the approbation of the People, and that they are all
of equal authority, also they affirm the Church of Englands Government to be
unlawful and Antichristian, and that the Lords Prayer commanded by our
Savior, must not be used, no Holy Day observed but the Sabbath, no Primitive
Father scited in the Pulpit, the Book of Common Prayer (or Divine Service) must
be abolished, all Ceremonies of our Church swept away as Popish, that the
calling of Bishops is an Antichristian Hierarchy, that Reformation of Religion
belongs to the Commonalty, that the People are better than the King, and of
greater Authority, that the Presbitery and not the Prince, should bear the
Supreme Government, in matters Ecclesiastical. These (and such like Novelties)
are their seditious and confused Tenets, the reason of all which mistakes, as
St. Peter remarks in his 2d. Epist. the 2d. Chap. Verse 10, is because they are
presumptuous, self-willed, despising Government, and speaking evil of
Dignities; tho the same Apostle obliges them (by the express Rule of Scripture)
To fear God and honor their King, but they (by the Magic of their Separation)
divide that Text of Scripture asunder, which Christ and his Apostle have joined
together, yea, it visibly appears, that though they pretended to fear God, yet
they so far dishonored their King, as to occasion the death of the Lord's
Anointed, to wit, our late Royal Martyr; and it is too apparent, that the like
mischief was lately hatched, in order to depose the Regal Person of our present
Sovereign (had not God preserved him by a miracle of unparalelled Mercy) but to
prevent such Schism, Treason and Rebellion, I shall conclude this Epistle with
St. Paul's rule of Conformity in his 1 Epist. Cor. Chap. 1 Verse 10. where he
speaks these expressions to the Seditious Corinthians. --

-- Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye
be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment:

Which Loyal Gentlemen, Shall be the constant Prayer of your faithful Friend
and Humble Servant, whilst WILLIAM WILLIAMS.

Prove. 24. Chap. 21, 22. Verse. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King: and
meddle not with them that are given to change.

For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both.


THIS Portion of Scripture is so elegantly Emphatical in its important
expressions, that (without controversy) Sovereign Kings and Princes are the
true Types or resemblances of Gods Supreme Majesty; and such a one was the most
Majestic and Magnificent Solomon, who (in reference to his abundant Wisdom)
did more represent his Heavenly Maker, than any other Terrestrial Monarch,
whether preceding or succeeding his Regal dignity; for he was so highly in
favor with the Highest, as to be called Lemuel, a King belonging to the Lord,
also Jedidiah, a King beloved of the Lord, and likewise Shelemo, which implies
a peaceable and a quiet King.

These signal appellations, are the sacred stamps wherewith God Almighty
imprints his own Image upon the Persons of pious Princes; that he may rank
them in the first and most principal Hierarchy of Magistratical Men; where, by
a Deifi'd dignity, his Holiness styles them Gods, and Children of the most
high, as appears in the 82d. Psalm. at the 1st. and the 6th. Verses. Also Moses
says in the 22d. of Exodus at the 28th. Verse. Thou shall not revile the Gods,
nor curse the Ruler of they People. By which supernal Prerogative, they are
priviledg'd to exercise the greater Authority, yet are they so limmited by the
restriction of Divine Precepts, that they ought not to act any thing
contradictory, either to sound justice or judgment; because the Sovereign duty
of these Monarchs chiefly consists in matters of Religion, that is, in
establishing the Faith secundum verbum Dei, according to the word of God, and
to take care when it is so established, that it be reverently esteemed and
practiced, both by themselves and their Subjects; Also the Law of God and
nature duly observed, mildness and meekness used toward the virtuous, likewise
correction and instruction to those that are vicious, in order to reclaim them
unto a sober and Godly Conversation: But in every respect, justice and
impartiality ought to be used toward all manner of Persons, be they of what
Nature, Degree, or Quality soever.

And as these forementioned particulars are the incumbent duties of superior
Powers, imposed upon them for the Glory of God, the good of his Church, and the
welfare of Kingdoms and Common-weals: So likewise, every inferior Person
(through the vast Circumference of the whole Universe) is obliged, both by the
Laws of God and Nature, to pay unto his Governor, whether Statesman, Prince,
King, or Emperor; such respect, love, obedience, dues and customs, as shall
accrue Tributary to that Potentate (or Plenipotentiary) according to the
precepts and injunctions of those practicable and penal Laws: For we may
discern by the light of reason, in case any subject (being capable) will
refractorily omit to support his Prince in time of necessity, when occasion
calls for the assistance of his Purse, or Person, that at such an opportunity
the Prince may justly refuse to own, or protect him as his Subject. But, to
prevent such miscarriages, the wisest of Temporal Kings, even Solomon himself
has left us many presidential Precepts, to create mutual respects between the
one and the other; so that we need not have recourse to the Athenian Schools,
nor consult the writings of Philosophers, for they are so near unto us, as to
be found in the Oracles of God, where, as so many Golden Rules, they direct and
stir us up, to tender our Allegiance unto Supremacy. And this is clearly
evidenced in the Foundation of my present Discourse, where a King prescribing
to his Subject the Law of Loyalty, confers upon him the Title of a Son, that he
might become obedient by the advice of his Father, as observing that a Father
will give no ill Council to the Son, unless when deceived in his own judgment:
And such a Father was indulgent Solomon King of Israel, for when he Reigned in
his unparrallel'd pomp and Grandeur at Jerusalem, he was Pater Patriae to the
Israelites, a Father that gave them good and wholesome instructions; as
apparently appears by the arguments he made use of to make a son born in his
Kingdom, become a Loyal Subject to his Prince, persuading him in the first
place, to fear God and the King; Secondly, not to meddle with them that are
given to change; Thirdly, to beware of their sudden Calamities; Fourthly, to
eschew the ruin of such disorderly Dissenters. All which cautions are
compendiously comprehended in the words of my present Text, where King Solomon
gives this prudent admonition in the Person of one, to all other subjects,
saying to each of them -- -- My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change. -- -- For their Calamity shall
rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? --

In which words we may take notice of four remarkable particulars.

First, Solomon's Exhortation unto every rational Person, to Fear, Honor and
Obey, both God and his Legal Sovereign, as appears in the former clause of the
first Verse in my Text, where he says -- My Son, fear thou the Lord and the
King.

Secondly, His dehortation, to dissuade (or withdraw) a Subject from adhering
to such People as change their principles and practices, from Regal Government,
-- manifested by these words of the latter clause in my first Verse. -- And
meddle not with them that are given to change.

Thirdly, His demonstration of sudden and certain Calamities, that by the Hand
of Divine Justice, are recompensible upon such Schismatical Dissenters. And
this is urged from the first branch of the second Verse in my Text, where
Solomon affirms -- That their Calamity shall rise suddenly.

Fourthly, The destruction of that Empire, Kingdom or Principality; wherein the
Subjects are Arbitrarily divided, both among and against themselves; which also
is inferred from the last branch in my Text, where Solomon propounds this
Ominous Interrogatory -- And who knows the ruin of them both?

I shall Counterpoise these four particulars with four other pertinent
propositions, arising naturally from the words of the Text, where, in the first
place,

I will assert, that it is the incumbent duty of every rational Person, to Fear
God, and Honor his King.

2dly. I shall affirm, that he who fears God, ought in such a manner to Honor
his King, as not to side with those that would alter (or change) his Government.

3dly. I will prove, by (express Testimonies of) Scripture, that sudden
Calamities have ensued upon the Rebellion of Schismatical and Factious People.

4thly. I shall maintain, that in whatever Nation the People are Arbitrarily
divided in opposition to the Government, such enterprises portend those parties
ruin.

5thly, and Lastly, I will infer the application, both from the Premises and
the Conclusion of my Text. -- These are the points which with God's Assistance,
I design to insist upon, in order whereunto, I shall begin with the foremost --
Namely, to Assert, That it is the incumbent duty of every rational Person, to
Fear God, and Honor his King, as being suitable with the first clause in my
Text, where Solomon says, -- My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King.

The Omnipotent and Eternal Jehovah (being the Supreme Monarch of Heaven and
Earth) styled The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, ought to be feared,
honored and obeyed, before any other Potentate whatsoever; forasmuch as he is
their Creator and Governor, bearing rule over all the world, and therefore to
be feared as the King of Nations, according to the observation of the Prophet
Jeremiah, in the 10 Chap. of his Prophecy, Verse. 7. Where he says, Who will
not fear thee O King of Nations? Where King of Nations, is Gods own
Prerogative, although he has given the Earth to the Children of Men, as
appears in the 115 Psalm. Verse. 16. And it is divided into Portions among
Princes (even such as are Gods Vicegerents) to whom, next God, we must also
render our fear and obedience, because they are Commissionated by him, to bear
the Sword of Justice, and that (both) for the punishment of evil doers, and the
encouragement of them that do well, that is, for the encouragement of those who
Fear God and Honor their Lawful Sovereign; living in Peace and Unity among
themselves; which is the duty that Solomon enjoins in the first Clause of my
Text, where he says to every Subject -- My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the
King.

Whatever Laws, or Edicts, are established by a King, either Concordant, or not
contradictory to the word of God; It is the duty of every sober Subject, to
have as much regard to their tendency, as if they were immediately delivered by
the Mouth of God himself; for every Prince is (conditionally) Gods
Pleni-potentiary unto whom he gives tolleration to enact such useful Laws, as
may be requisite toward the support and preservation of his Government; from
which Laws all subordinate Magistrates derive Power to punish such offenders as
wilfully violate, or contemn the same, (according to the merit of the offense
committed) -- An incomparable instance whereof, we have in a gracious
Commission which Princely Artaxerxes (the Persian King) granted to Priestly
Ezra (a famous Scribe in the Law of Moses) as appears in the 7th. Chap. of the
Book of Ezra, at the 25, and 26 Verses, where Artaxerxes delivered his
Commission unto him, in these very words. -- And thou Ezra, after the wisdom of
thy God, which is in thine hand, set Magistrates and Judges, which may judge
all the People that are beyond the River, all such as know the Laws of thy God,
and teach ye them which know them not.

And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.

These are the Legal Penalties to be inflicted upon all those that despise the
Injunctions of God and the King; to make such mutinies and insurrections in a
Realm, as might be detrimental to the form of Government; which must needs be a
great aggravation to the Supreme Majesty of Heaven, who in the eighth Chapter
of Solomon's Proverbs, at the fifteenth and sixteenth Verses; speaks thus of
Superior Powers, --

By me Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice.

By me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth.

Seeing therefore that all Kings, Princes, Nobles and Judges of the Earth, have
their Regallity, Decrees and Ordinances from God; then must it be the duty of
all their inferiors to tender their obedience unto such Decrees, Acts or
Ordinances, as they by Commission from God shall impose upon the Subjects. And
this is the Apostolical advice of St. Peter, in his 1st. Epistle, Chapter the
second, at the thirteenth and fourteenth Verses. Where to the Strangers
scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia, he spoke
these expressions -- Submit your selves to every ordinance of Man, for the
Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well. From whence we may observe, that every Magistrate, acting
for the glory of God, and the good of his King, ought (for their sakes) to be
reverently esteemed and obeyed, I might allege several Testimonies of
Scripture in the proof of this point. As Genesis the 41th. and 40th. Where
Pharaoh said unto Joseph -- Thou shall be over my House, and according to thy
Word, shall all my People be ruled: And in the sixteenth Chapter of Exodus,
Verse the eighth, we read how the Israelites in murmuring against Moses their
Chief Prince, and Aaron their Chief Priest, did (more abundantly) murmur in
their Hearts against God: For says the Text,

The Lord hears your murmurings which ye murmur against him: And what are we?
Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord. Also in the 17th.
Chapter of Deuteronomy, the 10th. 11th. and 12th. Verses, Moses being the Chief
Magistrate of the Israelites spoke unto them these words. -- And thou shall do
according to the Sentence which they of that place (which the Lord shall choose)
shall show thee, and thou shall observe to do according to all that they inform
thee.

According to the Sentence of the Law which they shall teach thee, and
according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do: Thou shall
not decline from the Sentence which they shall show thee, to the right hand,
nor to the left.

And the Man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Judge,
even that Man shall die, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel.

The like Testimony, we find in the First Chapter of Joshua, at the 16th. 17.
and 18th. Verses. Where the Hebrews spoke thus to their Champion Joshua. All
that thou command us, we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will
go. According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto
thee. Whosoever he be that does rebel against thy Commandment, and will not
hearken unto thy words, in all that thou command him, he shall be put to
death.

Whatever Precepts in the Old Testament require our obedience to Superior
Powers, we find such Precepts fully confirmed in the New, as appears in the
22d. Chap. of St. Matthew's Gospel, at the 21st Verse. Where our Savior said
unto Simon Peter, Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God
the things that are Gods. To render God and Caesar their dues, was the godly
practice of the Apostles; and therefore both St. Paul and St. Peter have left
us sufficient rules to imitate their Religious and Loyal Conversation; as it is
apparent in the 13th. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans, at the 1st. and 2d.
Verses, Where St. Paul says, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers:
For there is no Power but of God, the Powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the ordinance of God, and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. St. Peter also has
the like rule, in his first Epistle 2d. Chap. at the 17th. Verse, where he
says, Honor all Men; love the Brotherhood; fear God, honor the King. Thus
much shall suffice in reference to the first proposition, from which I
asserted, that it is the incumbent duty of every rational Person, to Fear God,
and Honor his King, as being suitable with the first clause in my Text, where
Solomon says, My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King.

From whence I proceed to handle the 2d. proposition, namely to affirm, that he
who fears God, ought in such a manner to honor his King, as not to side with
those that would alter or change his Government, as answerable to these words
of the second clause in my first Verse, And meddle not with them that are given
to change.

It is very remarkable (that by the discord of the Arians) Multitudes of People
fell away from Christianity, to Gentilism and Infidelity; so likewise by our
late Animosities in this Kingdom, many changed their Opinions (and Practices)
to Rantism, Atheism and Impiety; in King James his days (of blessed memory
several Persons began to cry for the Geneva Discipline, and Scottish
Reformation in the Church; whereupon the ignorant multitude was so stirred up,
that (like an Egyptian Plague) the whole Land was infested with Sects and
Tumults (in so much) that the State was troubled, the King disobeyed, good Laws
neglected, violence and villainy offered, to all that were possessed with
Loyalty and Allegiance toward their Sovereign; this brought the Kingdom into
such a confused Distraction, that much People grew obstinate and disloyal; some
pleading for Liberty of Conscience, and under that Nicety forsaking Communion
with the Church Catholic, to flock with seditious Multitudes, either to
Mountains, Woods, Barns or Stables, any where, rather than the Place of Holy
Convocation, though consecrated for the Worship and Honor of God, in allusion
unto the Temple of Solomon; whereof David said, In his Temple, shall every Man
speak of his honor. But wilfully forsaking their Mother Church, they suddenly
fell to Sedition, from Sedition, to privy Conspiracy against the Government,
from Conspiracy, to Rebellion, from Rebellion to false Doctrine, from false
Doctrine, to Heresy, from Heresy, to Schism, from Schism to hardness of
heart, and from hardness of heart, to contempt of Gods Word and Commandment;
like unto those filthy Dreamers who despise Regal Dominion, and speak evil of
secular and civil Dignities, as St. Jude remarks in the 8. verse. of his Epistle.

These are the Gradations of a professed Schismatic, and Schism is as ancient as
the Devil himself; for he was the first Inventer of it, as appears by the
Dissension which he made amongst the Caelestial Angels, until he and they
became Apostates; for which presumption he was cast (under the Name of Lucifer)
into the depth of Hell, as appears in the 14. Chap. of the Prophecy of Isaiah
at the 14, and 15. verses.

In the second Place, after he had put the Angels at variance one with another,
and both himself and them, in opposition to God, he proceeds to set man at
difference with his Maker, and that in the Garden of Eden; where Adam and Eve
consenting to his (Serpentine) Temptation, became guilty of sin and eternal
death.

Thirdly, as soon as this (diabolical) Schismatic had set man at odds with his
Maker, he did set one man to destroy another, as appears in the 4. Chap. of
Genesis, v. 8. where (by his evil means) Cain rose up against Abel his Brother,
and slew him.

From hence it may be observed, that wherever Satan sows his seeds of
sedition, there others may reap the fruit of Murder and Confusion: This Truth
might be witnessed, (in the Kingdom of England) by an inhumane and unparalled
Experience, namely, the Assassination or Murder of our late King, (being the
odium of all Christendom) occasioned by the disturbance of our homebred
divisions, which created contention and debate amongst us, being the malignant
Marks of Satan's Synagogue, and directly opposite to the badges of Christ's
Church, which are, Unity, Peace, and Concord, for as St. Paul says in his 1st.
Epistle to the Corinths, the 11. Chap. ver. 16. -- If any man seems to be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.

Seeing therefore that the Church of God, admits of no contentious Customs, let
all of us that own our selves professed Members thereof, join together in one
harmonious consent, to hold the Faith, in Unity of Spirit, in the Bond of
Peace, and in righteousness of life. Acknowledging the Truth of my second
Proposition -- That he who fears God, ought in such a manner to honor his
King, as not to side with those that would alter (or change) his Government,
and this also is answerable to these words of the latter Clause in my first
Verse, -- And meddle not with them that are given to change,

Which ushers me to the management of the Third Proposition -- Namely, to prove
by express Testimonies of Scripture, That sudden Calamities have ensued upon
the Rebellion of Schismatical (and Factious) People. Which also is agreeable
with the first branch of the second ver. in my Text, where Solomon affirms,
That their Calamity shall rise suddenly.

My first Evidence in this respect shall be alleged from the 16. Chap. of
Numbers at the 31, 32, 33, and 34. verses, where it is recorded, That Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, rebelled against Moses, and refused to obey him, whereupon
fire came from the Lord, and consumed Korah and his Company -- And the earth
opened her mouth, and swallowed up Dathan and Abiram, with their Houses, and
all the men that appertained to them, and all their goods, and they perished
from among the Congregation. -- And again, when the Congregation of Israel
murmured against Moses, the Lord sent a Plague amongst them, whereof there
suddenly dyed Fourteen thousand and seven hundred, besides them that dyed about
the matter of Korah, as appears in the 49. v. of the same Chap.

Another Instance we have in the 21. Chap. of Numbers at the 5, and 6. v. where
it is said -- That the Lord sent fiery Serpents amongst the Israelites, and
they bit the people, and much People of Israel dyed, for their murmuring
against Moses (who in those days) was their chief Magistrate.

Likewise Absalom rebelled against King David, Lord and Father, but his great
Army was overthrown, and Twenty Thousand af them were slain, and himself hanged
by the head, forsaken by his Mule, and with three Darts thrust through the
heart by Joab, and Ten young men that bare Joab's Armor, compassed him about,
and slew him, as you may read in the 18. Chap. of the second Book of Samuel at
the 7.14, and 15. ver.

Also Sheba (the Son of Bichri) rebelled against King David, and blew a
Trumpet, and said, we have no part in David, neither have we Inheritance in the
Son of Jesse; and every man of Israel went up from after David, and followed
Sheba; but shortly after, Sheba being besieged by Joab in Abel, had his head
stricken off, and thrown over the Wall to Joab, as it is recorded in the 20.
Chap. of the second of Samuel at the 1, 2, 21, 22. verses.

Baasha the Son of Ahijah conspired against Nadab, his Lord and King; and slew
him; as appears in the 15. Chapter of the first Book of Reg. ver. the 27. But in
the 16. Chap. of the same Book, at the 1, 2, and 3. v. Jehu the Son of Hanani
prophesied against him (saying from God) I will take away the Posterity of
Baasha, and will make thy House like the House of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat,
him that dies of Baasha in the City, shall the Dogs eat; and him that dies of
his, in the fields, shall the Fowls of the air eat.

Zimri a servant to Elah, King of Israel, conspired against his Master and slew
him; but within seven days, Omri whom the People made King, came and besieged
him in Tirzah, and it came to pass, when Zimri saw the City was taken, that he
went into the Palace of the King, and burnt the Kings house over his head, and
dyed, as it is apparent in the 16th. Chapter of the First Book of the Kings,
from the 9th. to the 19th. Verse.

The Servants of Joash, King of Juda, conspired against him, and slew the King
in the House of Millo: as appears in the Twelfth Chapter of the second Book of
the Kings, Verse 20. But in the 14. Chapter of the same Book, Verse 5. It is
said, That, as soon as Amaziah his Son had the Kingdom Confirmed in his hand,
he slew his Servants who had slain the King his Father.

There is also a very remarkable passage in the 21. Chapter of the 2d. Book of
the Kings at the 23, and 24, Verses, where it is said, That the Servants of
Ammon Conspired against him, and slew the King in his own House, and the People
of the Land slew all them that had Conspired against King Ammon. -- And the
People of the Land made Josiah his Son, King in his stead.

A Parrallel of this example we had in the Martyrdom of our Late King, and the
Restoration of our present Sovereign, for his own Subjects conspired against
him, and slew the King at his own House; and the People of the Land (by putting
the Laws in Execution) did cut off some of those that Conspired the death of
their Royal Master: And again Josiah-like, the people of this Land (by the
wonderful Providence of God) did place his Princely Son, to rule (the Realm) in
his Fathers stead; To whose gracious Person, may God grant a long and a
prosperous Reign over us I shall cite Two or Three Examples (from the New
Testament) and so put a Period to this noted Point.

Joseph and Mary, the Parents or our Lord and Savior, (willing to show their
Loyalty and Obedience) upon the command of Augustus Caesar, went up unto their
own City to be taxed, as appears in the 2d. Chap. of St. Luke's Gospel Ver. the
4th. Christ himself paid Tribute to Caesar, and submitted to the judgment of
Pilate, tho he could easily have delivered himself from the same: As appears in
the 17 Chapter of St. Matthew, at the 27. Verse.

We read in the 5. Chapter of the Acts, Verse 37. That one Judas of Galilee
councelled the Jews, that by no means they should pay Tribute unto Caesar; but
to maintain their ancient Privileges and Customs, and so drew away much People
after him; but he perished, and all, as many as obeyed him, were dispersed.

St. Paul submitted to, and pleaded his cause before Felix the Roman Governor;
as appears, Acts the 24th. at the 10th. Verse.

The like he did before Festus, who came in the room of Felix, and afterward
he appealed unto Caesar's Judgment Seat, as it is very observable in the 25.
Chap. of the Acts at the 8. and 11. ver.

Now it plainly appears that Joseph, and Mary, and Jesus, and Paul, were
obedient to civil Magistrates, and Governors; But such as were disobedient and
rebellious, they were rewarded according to their due deserts, as I have
sufficiently demonstrated from the third Proposition,

Whence I proved by express Testimonies of Scripture, that sudden Calamities
have ensued upon the Rebellion of Schismatical and Factious People, as
agreeable with the first Branch of the 2d. ver. in my Text, Where Solomon
affirms, That their Calamity shall rise suddenly.

From which I pass to the Fourth Proposition: Namely to maintain, That in
whatever Nation the People are arbitrarily divided in opposition to the
Government, such Enterprises portend those Parties ruin; which also is
correspondent with the last Branch of my Text, where Solomon propounds this
ominous Interrogatory -- And who knows th ruin of them both?

It is to be observed in the course of all Ages, that the most flourishing
Kingdoms of the World, never received such fearful downfalls, from open and
foreign Enemies, as they have done by secret Innovations and Domestic
conspiracies.

The destruction of Jerusalem (that Metropolis of earthly Cities) began by the
civil, or rather uncivil discords, of Simon and Eleazar; but when Vespatian the
Emperor, and his Son Titus came against it with an Army, they found the whole
Nation of the Jews, divided into three factions, each or them ready to undo the
other: Whereupon followed the overthrow of that Kingdom, and rasing of
Jerusalem even level with the ground; for then there were slain of the Jews
(being Men, Women and Children) as the learned Josephus writes, who (at that
time) was Captain in the field, no less than Eleven hundred Thousand.

It is apparently demonstrable, that every Schism proceeds from it is first
Point, to the full Period of a plain Heresy; of one small spark is kindled a
great fire; Arrius's Heresy was but a spark at the beginning, yet this spark
did set all Africa and Europe on the (furious) fire of Contention, that
hitherto the Church militant recovered not its former esteem and purity. Also
Mahomet (that Antichristian Infidel) began with a very few of his Sect, but in
a short time he overran Asia, and did so deface the beauty of the Eastern
Churches, that (to this day) he continues a Scourge to all Christendom: And it
is observed (by woeful experience) That the Anabaptists (of late years) kindled
such a Spark of Error in Germany (as grew into such a combustible flame) that
many Cities, Towns and Temples, were set on fire, whereupon issued a bloody
Massacre of many thousand People.

But we need not go so far as Jerusalem, Turkey or Germany, for Examples.

This Kingdom of ours, could never be invaded nor conquered, till such time as
the people were at variance within themselves; then was Julius Caesar with a
small Army, the Saxons, Danes and Normans, able to possess, and suppress our
Country.

The like Surprizal happened in the time of our late Rebellion, when England
was deposed of its Princely Patron-ship, to be in subjection to an Usurping
Protector-ship.

It is the opinion of Herodian (an old Writer) that as much as War is worse
than peace, so much, civil Sedition is worse than war. And Titus Livius says;
that it is dissension which causes the ruin of great Empire.

I am sure this our Kingdom has sufficiently shared in such Calamities, and had
not God intervened his good Providence, the horrible designs which were
contrived not long since, might have brought it to utter ruin; For as our
Savior says in the 12. Chap. of St. Matthew, Verse 25 -- Every Kingdom
divided against it self, is brought to desolation, and every City or House
divided against it self, shall not stand. And thus much (briefly) must suffice
in reference to the ruin of that Kingdom and its Subjects, which is undermined
by seditious People; for these might in a (tumultuous way) be so destructive to
each other (and also to the Nation) as to weaken the power of their Prince, to
wage War with a Foreign enemy; so that this point complies with my fourth and
last proposition;

From which I briefly maintained -- That in whatever Nation the People are
arbitrarily divided in opposition to the Government, such Enterprises portend
those Parties ruin, which fitly corresponds with the last branch in my Text,
where Solomon propounds this ominous Interrogatory; And who knows the ruin
of them both?

Which guides me to the Fifth and last Point relating to my present Subject,
that is, to infer the Application both from the Premises and the Conclusion of
my Text.

Since therefore that all Persons fearing God, ought to honor and obey their
lawful Sovereign, and not to meddle with such People as change from his
Government, by reason the Calamities of such shall suddenly arise, yea even to
ruin and destroy them in their unlawful Enterprises. Then let it be our
Christian care and diligence so to fear God, and honor the King; as to be in
due subjection to all the subordinate Magistrates, as those that are sent by
them, for the punishment of offenders, more especially to the right Worshipful
the present Mayor, to whom God, and the King, have committed the Sword of
Justice, to execute Judgment in this City: That (as his name is Samuel) he
might therewith, ( Samuel-like) hew Disloyalty and Sedition in pieces, as Agag
the troubler of Israel was hewed before the Lord in Gilgal, which passage is
observable in the 15. Chapter of the first of Samuel at the 33. ver. -- But in
the 22, and 23. ver. of the same Chap. the Prophet Samuel has an excellent
Observation in reference to Obedience and Loyalty, where he speaks these
Expressions -- Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice; and to hearken then
the fat of rams -- For Rebellion is as the sin of VVitchcraft, and stubborness
is as Iniquity, and Idolatry.

But to put a Period to such wilful Practices, I shall insert this Christian
Caution, That if in case any Persons be dejected by reason of accusing
Consciences for withdrawing themselves (long since) from the Communion of their
Mother Church, or neglecting their Duty of Loyalty to the King, as the
Foster-Father thereof: And notwithstanding all this; have an earnest desire for
the future, of being conformable to the said Church, in compliance with the
Apostle's Council, who would have God to be feared, and the King honored; I do
ardently entreat all such, for the calming, or appeasing of their Consciences,
to lay hold on the present opportunity, that their Obedience, and Gods Mercy
might meet together, so that Righteousness and Peace may (perpetually) kiss
each other: In the pursuit of which duty, St. Paul gives us a Christian (and a
Catholic) exhortation in his first Epistle to Timothy, the 2. Chap. at the 1,
2, and 3. ver. where he delivers this Apostolical charge, -- That, first of
all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of Thanks, be made for
all men. -- For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, -- For this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. This was the practice of the holy
Apostles, and also the Rule of the Primitive Fathers Imitation; as appears by a
certain Prayer or Collect, recited by Tertullian (a reverend Father of the
primitive Church) in behalf of the ancient Emperors, Worded in these
Expressions, God Almighty, who is the Protector and Defender of Kings, Grant to
your Sacred Majesty a long Life, a happy Reign, a secure State and Habitation,
a strong Army, a faithful Senate or Council, and a Loyal People.

This Prayer is very requisite to be minded by every Loyal-hearted Person, both
for the Good of his Sovereign and himself, more especially, by the Subjects of
this Kingdom, that God might be entreated to make our King, so pious,
prosperous and puissant in his Princely Enterprises, as that all European
Tongues may unanimously confess CAROLUS Ille MAGNUS, Charles he is the Great,
By the blessing of God he is great in this Nation, and also Good to the Nation,
for this Kingdom is blessed both in his Regal Descent and Royal Deportment; as
to his Descent, he is well known to be the Son of Nobles, In which respect
Solomon says in the 10th. Chap. of his Ecclesiastes at the 17. ver. -- Blessed
art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles.

Our Royal Charles, is so Noble in all his Actions, that I can parallel him
with none, but prudent and princely Solomon; like unto whom (in the first
Place) God has endued his heart with extraordinary Wisdom: To go in, and out,
before the great People of this Kingdom committed to his Princely Tuition.

2. As Solomon was called Lemuel, a King belonging to the Lord; so also may our
King; For he is one belonging unto him.

1st. In that he is The Defender of his Holy Catholic and Apostolic Faith.

2dly. As Solomon was named Jedidiah, a King beloved of the Lord; so likewise
may our Sovereign; for it is certain, that he was so beloved of the Lord, as to
be wonderfully rescued and preserved from the furious rage of his enemies, not
only before, and at, his Royal Restoration, but also at sundry other times,
both at home and abroad.

3dly. As Solomon was called Shelemo, a peaceable and a quiet King, so may our
CHARLES; for he was so quiet and peaceable, as not to revenge much of his
Fathers Blood upon the heads of his Enemies, neither fully to recompense their
cruelty upon those Persons, who by commixing Villainy with Violence, lately
attempted to embrue their (polluted) hands in his own Royal Blood: So that his
Majesty might have taken up a doleful Lamentation in allusion to that of the
Daughter of Sion, mentioned in the 4. Chap. of Jeremiah, at the 31. ver. That
bewaileth her self, and that spreads her hands, saying, Woe is me now; for my
Soul is wearied, because of Murderers -- But may God Almighty preserve our
Prince his gracious Person, from all such Diabolical and Inhumane Attempts, by
establishing Peace within the Walls of his Three Kingdoms, and Prosperity in
the Palaces thereof; That all his Subjects may live so peaceably and quiet
under their Vines and their Fig Trees, as to be free from the fear of Evil.

Which that we may do, Let us implore God the Father, for the sake of God the
Son, to endue us with the Grace of God the Holy Ghost, at all times, in all
places, and upon all occasions, to put in practice that Sacred Admonition of
prudent Solomon (the Son of David) in the Words of my present Text, where he
says to every Subject.

My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King; and meddle not with them that are
given to change:

For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, a Trinity of
Consubstantial Persons, subsisting in the Deity of one Individual Essence be
ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, Glory, Power and Praise from henceforth,
even for ever more. AMEN.

FINIS.

