AN ADDRESS To those of the Roman Communion IN ENGLAND: Occasioned by the late
Act of Parliament, For the further Preventing the Growth of Popery.

LONDON, Printed for Mat. Wotton, at the Three Daggers near the
Inner-Temple-gate in Fleetstreet. 1700.

BOOKS Printed for Matt. Worten,
The Second Volume of the Remains of the most Reverend Father in God, and
Blessed Mertyr William Laud, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Written by
himself. Collected by the Late Learned Mr Henery Wharton, and Published
According to his Request, by the Reverend Mr. Edmund Wharton his Father.
Occasional Paper, No 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Angliae Notitia, Or the
present State of England, with diverse Remarks upon the Ancient State thereof;
by Edward Chamberlayne Doctor of Laws. The Ninth Edition with Great Additions
and Improvements. In Three parts. Remaks upon an Essay concerning Humane
Understanding, in a Letter Addressed to the Author. No 1, 2, 3. The History of
the Revolution of Port^gal in the Year 1640. Or an Account of their Revolt from
Spain; and Setting the Crown on the Heads of Don John of Braganza, Father to
Don Pedro the present King, and Catherine the Queen Dowager of England.
Echard's Roman History First and Second Part. Charone of Wisdom, in Three
Books. Englished by George Stanhope, D. D. Farnaby's Rhetorik. English
Gardener.
BOOKS Printed for Matthew Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet.
A Guide to the Devout Christian. In Three Parts. The First containing
Meditations and Prayers affixed to the days of the Week; Together with many
Occasional Prayers for particular Persons. The Second for more Persons than
one, or a whole Family, for every day of the Week; Together with many
Occasional Prayers. The Third containing a Discourse of the Nature and
Necessity of the Holy Sacrament; Together with Meditations thereon, Prayers and
Directions for the worthy Receiving thereof. To which is Added. A Prayer for
Ash Wednesday, or any other time in Lent; for Good-Fryday, and any Day of
Public Fasting: By John Inett, M. A. Chanter of the Cathedral Church of
Lincoln. The Fourth Edition Corrected. A Guide to Repentance, or the Character
and Behavior of the devout Christian in Retirement; By John Inett, Chanter of
the Cathedral Church at Lincoln. The Christians Pattern, or a Treatise of the
Imitation of Jesus Christ, in Four Books with Cutts, written originally in
Latin, by Thomas a Kempis, now rendered into English. To which are added
Meditations and Prayers for sick Persons; By George Stanhope, D. D. Chaplain in
ordinary to his Majesty. Price 5 s. The same Book is Printed in a smaller
Letter and sold for 2 s. Salvation every Man's great Concern, written
originally in French, by Monsieur Rapin, done into English. An earnest
Invitation to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, wherein all the Excuses that
Men ordinarily make for their not coming to the Holy Communion, are Answered,
by Jos. Glanvil late Minister of Bath. A Defense of the 39 Articles of the
Church of England, written in Latin by J. Ellis S. T. D. now done into English.
To which are added the Lambeth Articles, together with the Judgment of Bp.
Andrews, Dr. Overal, and other Eminent and Learned Men upon them. Twelve
Sermons preached upon several Occasions; By the Right Reverend Father in God,
Richard, Lord Bp. of Bath and Wells. -- His 2d. and 3d. Parts of the
Demonstration of the Messiah, in which the Truth of the Christian Religion is
Defended; especially, against the Jews. Dr. Stanhope's Sermon at the Funeral of
Dr. Towerson. -- His Sermon preached at the Annual Meeting of the Sons of the
Clergy. The Heinousness of Injustice. A Sermon preached at the Assizes at
Lincoln; by Lawrence Echard, A. M. Mr. Bradford's Sermon preached before the
King. Jan. 30th. Mr. Hole's Visitation Sermon at Bridgwater. Dr. Barton's
Sermon to the Societies for Reformation of Manners. The Character of the True
Church, in a Sermon Preached at the French Church in the Savoy, upon these
Words, How goodly are thy Tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel, Numb.
24. ver. 5. by A. D. Astor de Laussac, formerly a Prior and Archdeacon of the
Church of Rome.
THE CONTENTS
THE Design of this Address, Page 1. Why those of the Roman Communion have not
Reason to expect the same Toleration with other Dissenters, p. 4. Reasons to
persuade those of the Church of Rome to examine the Grounds of their Religion.
p. 15. Of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome. p. 25. Of
Transubstantiation. p. 54. Of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome. p. 95. Of the
Popes Supremacy p. 127.
ERRATA.
PAge 10 in Marg. after Vid. ad 4 Genesis p. 13. line 10. for they, read the
Romanists; p. 27. l. 11. f. it r. is. p. 28. l. 16. f. differs r. differ. p.
32. l. 14. f. pretenses r. pretenders. p. 55. l. ult. f. thing and lies r.
things and lie. p. 57. l. 9. f. terms r. forms. p. 58. l. 9. after Now r. our
Savior. p. 60. l. 21. f. blessings r. blessing. p. 117. l. 16. f. Scripture r.
Scriptures and dele adds. p. 126. l. 5. f. those r. these. p. 141. l. penult.
f. Person r. Persons. p. 143. l. 1. after and r. the.

AN ADDRESS To those of the Roman Communion IN ENGLAND.
THE Design of this Address is not by any means to insult over you; in the
Circumstances under which it has pleased God in his Providence to bring you; or
to raise popular Odium against you. No, however necessary I may judge that
which has lately been done, yet I cannot but have a great compassion for any
thing that looks like Suffering for Conscience sake. And this, I think, I owe
not only to the Principles of Humane Nature, which require that we should have
a tenderness and pity for those that are in Affliction; but to the Principles
of my Religion, as a Christian and a Member of the Church of England. I have
always looked upon it as one of the Glories of the Protestant Religion, that it
gives the dominion over Men's Consciences to God only; that it asserts the
natural Liberty of Mankind to judge for themselves what it is that God expects
from them; that it makes very charitable Allowances for the Ignorance and
Mistakes of Men when joined with Sincerity and a true Love of God; and that in
consequence of these things it does not incline it is Members to a severe
inquisition into the private Opinions of Men, or to be hard upon them upon that
account. And on the other side, that it has been a great aggravation of the
Errors of the Church of Rome, that the Belief of them has been so rigidly
exacted, under no less pain than Damnation in the other World, and the being
Burnt, or at least Undone in this, whenever it has been in their power to
effect it.

But you will say perhaps, That if the Opinion of Protestants be so much
against Persecution, how comes it to pass that there have been so many severe
Laws from time to time made against you; especially this last, which deprives
your Children of their Inheritance, if they will not renounce their Religion;
and deprives you of the comfort and assistance of your Spiritual Fathers by
forbidding them to Exercise any Office of their Function under pain of lying in
a Goal all their Lives if they are caught?

Now in answer to this, I would not aggravate Matters to make you odious; but
as plainly, and as tenderly as I can, lay the Reasons before you which, we may
suppose, the Nation went upon in making these Laws, in some hopes to alleviate
that Exasperation which your present Sufferings may cause, and which may very
likely make you throw away, without considering, all that a Protestant can say
for your Conviction.

Why those of the Roman Communion have not reason to expect the same Toleration
with other Dissenters.
And First, I desire you would consider that there must be some peculiar Reason
of this dealing with you under a Prince, and in a Nation so much inclined to
Liberty of Conscience in almost every Body else. We have indeed, a very ill
Opinion of your Errors, and the danger of them to the Souls of Men; and of the
dishonor brought to God by giving to Creatures the Worship due only to him.
But besides these, there are some things peculiar in your Religion which give
Protestants just grounds of Jealousy, and make your Case very different from
that of other Parties who dissent from the National Establishment.

The first is this, That you own a Dependence upon a Foreign Power, and a Power
which is a declared Enemy to all Protestants. You own for the Vicar of Jesus
Christ, and the Head of your Church, a Person who pretends to a Power to Depose
Princes, and to give away their Dominions to such of your Church as are able to
get them; and who in fact has very frequently Exercised this Power, and by it
caused great Bloodshed and Disturbances in the World. Particularly, he has by
Name Excommunicated Two of our own Princes, Henry VIII. and Queen Elizabeth;
and has forbid all their Subjects to obey, or assist them, and has given away
their Country to any Invader that would come and take it. And he does the same
in effect, every Year in the famous The form of all these Bulls may be seen in
Bullar. Roman.
Bulla Coenae by our King and Government at present.

You cannot wonder if Protestants are desirous at least to disarm all those who
own this Man for the Vicar of Jesus Christ. And this in fact was the Cause of
most of those severe Laws which have been made against you. In the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's days the Papists generally lived as easy and quiet as other
Subjects; but when the Pope Excommunicated the Queen, and Priests were sent
from the Seminaries abroad to alienate the Hearts of Her Subjects, and
Conspiracies were entered into against her; then were those severe Laws made as
against those that were Enemies to the State.

It is very well known how many Conspiracies followed that Excommunication
through the whole course of her Reign, and what danger the Nation was in from
the Spanish Invasion, which was undertaken upon the instigation of Romish
Priests, and upon the Title which the Pope gave the King of Spain to the
Kingdom of England.

But I shall not insist upon these things, or the many Provocations we have had
ever since to this day; or the great danger we may be in at present; so far I
believe must appear reasonable to all indifferent Persons, that it is fit for
us to make all those who expect to enjoy the Privileges of other Subjects to
renounce an Authority so dangerous to us.

It may, perhaps, be said that there are some among you who do not own the Pope
to have such Authority, and that therefore we may safely deal more gently with
them.

As to this, I shall not insist at present to show how far this Power of the
Popes to Excommunicate and deprive Heretical Princes and States is a Doctrine
of the Church of Rome; this is certain, that it has been long pretended to by
the Head of that Church; and those who do not approve of it ought to speak out,
and to renounce Communion with him as a Tyrant and an Usurper, and a Heretic
by pretending such Power from Jesus Christ which was never given him: But so
long as they stick by him, and own him for the Head of their Church, and the
Vicar of Jesus Christ, for the Judge of Controversies, and the Supreme director
of their Consciences, they must not wonder if Protestants can have no
Confidence in them; especially if we consider how many Methods of Deceit have
been taught and recommended by those among them, who have been, and are still
the great Guides of Consciences.

The 2d Consideration I would propose is this, That Protestants have a Right by
the Principle of Self-Preservation to take such Methods with those of the Roman
Communion, as may put it out of their power to do them a mischief; Vid. Council.
Lat. Can. 3. de Haereticis, which is called a General council by that of
Constans Sess. 19. and by that or Trent. Sess. 24.
because Papists are obliged by the Laws of their Religion to persecute
Protestants; and these are Laws that have been as much put in Execution when
ever it has been in their power, and it could be done with safety, as any Laws
they have.

It would be thought too invidious to reckon up all the Wars and Massacres,
Burnings and Crulties of all sorts that have been and are still in the World
upon this account; especially what has been done in a manner under our view in
a Neighbor Country, the sad effects of which not only our selves but all the
Protestant Countries in Europe see and feel, by those vast Numbers of poor
Creatures that flock to us to preserve their Consciences and beg their Bread:
Only thus far we cannot forbear to take Notice, that there have been more hard
things suffered for not submitting to the Pope than ever were inflicted upon
Christians for their Religion by all the Heathen Persecutors together.

Were these things the effects only of sudden Passion, or Factions of State,
which often do hard things to one another; there might be however some hope
left that it might be otherwise, should we ever again come into their power:
But when Men are cruel upon a steady settled Principle of Persecution, there is
nothing left but to guard our selves against them as well as we can. Not that
we may lawfully do hard things to them because they have done so to us, or our
Brethren; for that would be Revenge, or at best the imitating a very bad
Example: But every Man has by nature a Right to defend himself, and if that
makes it wise or necessary for him to do some things which otherwise he has no
Inclination to, it is not his fault, but the fault of those who bring that
necessity upon him.

We are convinced that if Popery should prevail in England, we should not long
enjoy our Estates, or perhaps Lives, if we would not comply with it; and we are
sensible, that more than once we have been in great danger of this; efpecially
lately, when it was almost a Miracle that we were saved from it. We are
sensible also that they are a restless uneasy Party; that they have mighty
dependencies abroad which have much prevailed of late; that we cannot tell what
Foreign Power may be invited over, or in succeeding times what encouragement
they may have at home; and therefore we do conceive that merely in our own
defense we may justly take as effectual measures as we can to keep their
Priests from among them, who we are satisfied have been and are like to be
Incendiaries; and to divert their Estates into better Hands of their own
Relations, that they may not be turned against us. To conclude this matter;
notwithstanding these Reasons, we have to guard our selves against Popery, yet
there are here no Cruelties of an Inquisition, no Burning, no taking away of
Life, no Dragooning; nay, the greatest part, the Traders, and those of the
poorer sort are scarce touched in this Act; and as for others on whom it is
hardest, those of Estates, yet there is nothing done of a sudden and
irremediable; there is Time allowed for Consideration, and Place left for
Repentance and better Thoughts; and in the mean time their Persons are secure,
and they are at Liberty to go into any other Country with all the Money and
Goods they can get, without danger of being sent to the Galleys, if they are
caught; which are Privileges a great many poor Creatures we have lately heard
of would take to be very great Mercies.

Reasons to persuade those of the Church of Rome to examine the grounds of
their Religion.
As far as a private Man may venture to give his Opinion of the Actions of his
Superiors, these I suppose (joined with some peculiar Insolences at this time,
very well known in the Kingdom) were the chief Reasons the King and Parliament
went upon in making this and former Laws against you; and if our Religion be
true and yours false, I believe you your selves will hardly condemn us for it.
And this is the next thing I would desire you to consider of; that you would
not take it for granted, that you are in the right, and so call this
Persecution for Conscience sake, but that you would take this Opportunity to
examine the grounds of your Religion; which will be an advantage to you which
way so ever the matter end.

If upon Examination you find your selves to have been in the wrong, you will
then have the Benefit and Comfort of being converted from very dangerous Errors
and Practices, and of living quietly, and preserving your Estates to your
Families; but if otherwise, you find reason for your present Opinions, it will
be a mighty comfort to you in whatever you suffer, that you do it upon evidence
and conviction of Conscience; and not upon Fancy and Prejudice from your
Education.

And so much, I think, in Justice you owe to your Children, not to Breed them
up in a Religion which must deprive them of their Estates, till you have well
examined the Truth of it your selves: It will indeed be the greatest Blessing
to them to Breed them up in the true Religion let the consequences as to this
World be what they will; but at least, Matters ought to be well weighed before
you do what will be on all accounts so great an Injury to them, if your
Religion should prove false, which perhaps, I may give you just reason to
suspect before I conclude this Paper, if you will but read it without prejudice
and partiality. Only one thing I would desire you to have a care of, that you
be not too nicely sensible of the dishonor of changing your Opinion, now it
may seem to be for your Interest. This I know is a Consideration apt to work
very strong, and to give a greater Biass to the Minds of some Persons than the
greatest Interest in the World. But a good Christian should be contented with
the Apostle to go through evil report and good report, and should despise the
Censure of the World, so he can but please God and save his Soul.

And this suggests another Consideration, that not only your Interest in this
World, but your Souls are very much concerned in this Examination. Your Church
is accused by Protestants as guilty of a great number of dangerous Errors, and
of very sinful Practices; of Superstition and Idolatry, of being the Authors,
and consequently having the guilt of a great Schism in the Church; and it
concerns you to consider whether this Charge be true, or no? Whatever Charity
Protestants may have for those among you, who have no means of being better
Informed, they have just reason to look upon such Errors and sinful Practices
as like to be fatal to those among you who might be better informed and will
not.

But there is another Consideration, which perhaps may weigh more with you in
this Matter than the Opinion of Protestants; which is, That if this Charge
against you be true; if you are guilty of Schism and Idolatry, and such gross
Errors, by the Opinion of your own Divines, you cannot be Saved. This is a
Matter that they themselves often urge against that Charity which Protestants
are apt to have for sincere honest People among you that are invincibly
Ignorant; besides, the very same Reasons which they urge to show the danger
that we are in, do equally hold against you, supposing that you are in the
wrong. If it be Heresy in us to deny the Articles of your new Creed, supposing
they are true, it must be Heresy in you to believe them, supposing they are
false; the Reason is the same in both; and so as to the Schism, if your
pretended Head of the Church be guilty of Tyranny, and Usurpation, and Heresy
and Idolatry, and of imposing these upon Christians, it is He and his Followers
are in the Schism, and not We. And then, all those dreadful things which your
own Writers say against Schism and Heresy, do as much belong to you, supposing
you are in the wrong; as they do to us if we are so. And therefore if what they
say, have any weight with you, it ought to make you consider seriously whether
you are in the right, or no.

I the rather urge this, because it contains a full Answer to that piece of
Sophistry wherewith you often deceive your selves, and endeavor to delude us;
That you are safe by the confession of all Sides, but we are not, and that
therefore we ought in prudence to come over unto you. Which is false; for by
your own Opinion you are not safe, but in a Damnable Condition, supposing that
you are in the wrong: There is no difference at all betwixt us and you in this
Matter, except only where the Truth lies. For if our charitable Opinion of the
Mercy of God to invincible Ignorance be true, this is Comfort to us, supposing
we are mistaken, as it is to you supposing you are so; and on the other side,
if your Damning Doctrine be true, this is as dangerous to you as it is to us.

It lies therefore upon you even from the Opinion of your own Divines to be
very impartial in examining the Grounds of your Religion; though indeed our
Obligation to search after Truth does not arise chiefly from the danger of
being mistaken, but from that desire that every good Man should have to please
God, and to serve him as well as he can; and the want of this desire has more
danger and malignity in it than a great many mistakes in Matters of mere
Belief. To be only concerned to avoid those Errors that may Damn us, is the
same undutiful Temper toward God, as it would be in a Son to have no concern to
please his Father, but only so far as that he may not be dis-inherited. Many
Errors that may not be fatal to Ignorant People, may yet be very dishonorable
to God, bring a great Scandal to our Holy Religion, and do a great deal of
mischief in the World; and these are things which a good Christian would have a
great care of, though at the same time he might hope that God would pardon him,
should he ignorantly fall into them.

This, I hope, may be sufficient to convince you, that you ought to examine
well the Grounds you go upon in your Religion. I shall now endeavor to show
you some of the Errors which we charge upon your Church, and the Reasons why we
Renounced them, and why we think it your Duty to do so too.

As to the particulars, I shall chiefly confine my self to those which the
present Act mentions, those to be renounced in the Test, and in the Oath of
Supremacy.

But before I proceed to them, I would speak a little to that which is the
great ground and support of all your other Errors, the Infallibility of your
Church; which if I can show you to be a mere pretense without any Warrant or
Authority from Jesus Christ, you will then more easily hearken to what can be
said in the other Matters.

It cannot be expected that I should handle these Controversies in their full
extent in the short compass which it is fit this present Address should have;
but if you find what is said here to have weight in it, and that it gives you
just cause of doubting, I hope you will be so kind to your selves as to come to
some of our Divines who may inform you more fully, or to read some of those
Books which have at large examined these Matters.

About the Infalibility of the Church of Rome.
Infallibility is the thing in the World which a good Christian should have the
least prejudice against; for though I do now believe, since I see plainly that
God has appointed no Infalliable Judge, that it is best all things considered
that there should be none: Yet I must confess, were I to judge of things by my
own Reason without any regard to what God has done, I should be apt to think
such a Judge would be a great Blessing to the World. I could not but be very
glad to find an Infallible way to end Disputes among Christians; but
Christianity has now been in the World near 1700 Years, and I do not know any
Age in which there have not been great Contests and Disputes, except some few
that were so stupidly Ignorant that Men hardly knew any thing of Religion, and
then no wonder if there were not many Disputes; from whence, I cannot but
conclude, that either it is the Will of God for wise Reasons, that
Controversies should not be ended; or that an Infallible Judge cannot end them,
or that there has all this while been no Infallible Judge.

But to consider this Matter more methodically; I have these Two, I think,
strong Reasons, which make me conclude, there is no such Judge.

I. That you your selves are not agreed who he is. And II. That the Reasons
commonly brought to prove that there is, or ought to be such a one, do, if well
weighed, rather prove against it.
1. That you your selves are not agreed who he is, and this is a mighty
prejudice in a thing of this Consequence; certainly that which it appointed by
God to end all Controversies, ought to be a thing out of Controversy it self.
There ought to be a plain Commission, a plain Designation of the Person, or
Persons, that Christians might know where to repair in their Difficulties. But
is this Matter plain? Can you assign us any Man, or number of Men, that have, I
will not say such a Commission, but that in fact only have ever since the Apostles
Days been repaired to by Christians, and looked upon as their Judge, and their
Determinations thought to be Infallible? If you can, I for my part shall very
thankfully submit, and own the Authority. But let us see what the People of
your own Church say about it. You are sure that you have Infallibility, but you
don't know where it is. Some say it is in the Pope, as Head of the Church, and
Vicar of Jesus Christ; others say, it is in a General Council, but these
differs. Some say, they are Infallible if Confirmed by the Pope; others, that
their Determinations do not need his Confirmation. But besides these, there are
others that say it is (they don't know how) in the diffusive Body of the Church.

Now pray Gentlemen, does this sound like the Voice of Truth, or a Method
appointed by God to end all Controversies? In Matters of smaller moment we
allow Men to abound in their own Sense, and to differ from one another; at
least we cannot conclude they are all in the wrong because they differ; but in
this we may, and ought, because if there were any such thing as Infallibility
in the Church, and that designed to be the Guide of all Christians, it could
not be a Secret, or matter of Controversy where it was lodged; we should see
the plain Appointment of God, or at least we should see in the History of the
Church to whom Christians had appealed in all Ages. And for the Christian
Church to be at uncertainty where to go for so long a time to end their
Disputes; is the same sort of Absurdity that it would be in a Nation for 1700
Years together not to know where to go for Justice.

But this Absurdity will appear the greater if we consider besides this, that
though the Church of Rome be united together in a strong Bond of External
Government and Polity, yet in truth and reality this Difference about the Guide
of their Faith makes them different Churches and of different Religions. For a
different Guide and Judge, if he be esteemed Infallible, must make a different
Rule of Faith; because his Determinations must be part of the Rule of Faith;
and a different Rule of Faith must make a different Religion. To instance in
particular, those that own General Councils to be Infallible, must take their
Decrees as part of the Rule of their Faith; but now they that own the Pope for
Infallible, must besides, take in all his solemn Determinations, and so have a
much larger Rule of their Faith than the other, and in many Cases, very
different, and what may be much more different than it is now; for if he be
indeed Fallible, as many of them say that he is, he may determine Vice to be
Virtue, and Virtue to be Vice, he may fall into great Errors, as other Fallible
Men may do, and as some of them in fact have done; and yet those of that Church
who own him to be Infallible, must take these things as part of the Rule of
their Faith, and Manners.

These I take to be undeniable Consequences from the differences among them
about their Infallible Judge; and I think, from all together, I may well
infer, that there is no such thing; since it so much concerns the World, if
there be any, to be at a certainty about it; and yet the greatest part of
Christians know nothing at all of the Matter; and those who do pretend to know
it are, in truth, as much at a loss about it as those that do not; only they
agree in a Name, which leads them different ways, perhaps all wrong, and only
more Infallibly secures them in Error.

But I would now speak a word or two to the several Pretenses to it. The first
Pretender is the Pope, who seems indeed to have the best Pretense; for if God
do think sit to appoint such a one, a single Person who is always ready to hear
and determine Matters, seems most proper, at least much more proper than a
number of Men to be sent from all Parts of the World, who can seldom meet, and
never without a great deal of trouble; and this seems to be the most genuine
Doctrine of the Church of Rome; which makes the Pope the Center of Unity, makes
Communion with him necessary, and a Mark of a True Church, and makes his Church
the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; which is hardly Sense without
Infallibility, But as to his Pretense, I shall consider it presently, when I
come to examine his Supremacy, for if that fall, his Infallibility must fall
along with it. One thing only I would observe here, That it seems apparent from
hence that the Primitive Church knew nothing of his Infallibility, in that they
took to that troublesome and chargeable and tedious way of ending their
Disputes by Councils; which, supposing he be appointed by God to determine
them, and enabled to do it infallibly, were not only useless and impertinent,
but indeed dangerous, and very apt to turn Men from the way by which God had
appointed the Church to be Guided. A number of Men may be good for Counsel and
Assistance of one that is Fallible, but must be utterly unnecessary and an
encumbrance to one that is Infallible. And therefore since the Church has
always made use of Councils either General or Provincial, to determine Matters
of Faith, I may certainly conclude they knew nothing of his Infallibility.

Infallibility of General Councils.
As to General Councils, it is not our present Business to enquire of what use
they may be to the Church, or what External deference is due to them if we
could have those that are truly General; but whether they are Infallible or
not? Now as to this, I would only propose this one short Consideration.

That they are not of the appointment of Jesus Christ, but begun 300 Years
after Christ by Constantine; now whatever Wisdom there may have been in calling
so many Bishops together to endeavor by their Authority to Compose the
Differences of the Church, or to Establish good Discipline, yet it was still a
Humane Constitution, and I know no way to annex Infallibility to what is so. If
3 or 400 Men meet together, each of which is confessedly Fallible, they must
altogether be so, unless you can show a Promise from Jesus Christ to secure
them from Error: Now if there be such a Promise as this, we Protestants expect
to find it in Scripture; but however, you your selves cannot pretend to it
unless it be in Scripture, or comes down to you by Tradition from Christ and
his Apostles. As to Scripture the very Name and Thing of a General Council is
quite unknown to it; and as for Tradition, that could as little convey down any
such Promise, for the whole Thing was unknown in the Church for 300 Years, not
so much as the Name ever heard of.

As for the Meeting at Jerusalem, of which we have an account in the 15 of the
Acts of the Apostles, it was only a Meeting of those that were then at
Jerusalem upon occasion of a Complaint that was brought to them; And it was a
Meeting of Men, most of which were by immediate Inspiration singly Infallible;
and therefore can be no President for a Meeting of Bishops from all Parts of
the World: And much less does this which was an accidental Meeting, contein an
Institution for the future, and a Promise to make them Infallible when met in a
Body together, who singly are but like other Men.

If it be said, that they must be Infallible because they represent the
Universal Church which is Infallible; the Difficulty will still return; for
though we should grant the Church to be Infallible, yet who appointed this
Representations? did Jesus Christ? Has he annexed a Promise of Infallibility to
it? Without such a Promise as this, there may be Infallibility in the Church,
and yet 3 or 400 Bishops, or the Majority of them may be mistaken, they may be
a Number of Men packed together to serve a Turn, they may be guided by Faction
or Interest, by their own Interest, or the Interest of those who send them, as
in fact it has been more than once; or if they are good Men, that will not make
them Infallible. We may contrive as wisely as we please, but we can never be
certain to annex the Supernatural Assistance of God to our own Schemes.

To conclude this Head, If the Infallibility you boast of be fixed in General
Councils, there was none in the Church for 300 Years, when yet there was the
most need of them, there having been a greater number of dangerous Heresies in
that Time, than have been in the Church ever since. But what is worse, either
there was no true Faith and Religion all that while, or else it must be
granted, that we may have it without an Infallible Guide; Christians were then,
at least in this respect, in the same Condition that Protestants are now; And I
hope it will be granted, that we need not desire to be in a better than they
were.

The Last refuge for Infallibility, is, that it is in the diffusive Body of the
Church. But this I believe must be at last reduced to one or other of the
former; for it will be very difficult to show how the Church can exert it is
Infallibility so as to be a Guide, but either by means of it is Head which you
make the Pope, or else by the way of a General Council; there is no other way
whereby those of your Communion can be certain what is the Doctrine, and what
are the Traditions of your Church but one of these, and therefore having
considered both of them already, I shall proceed to consider the way of
Reasoning your Divines commonly make use of to prove that there either is, or
ought to be such an Infallible Judge.

As for what they say from Scripture, it is commonly urged so coldly, and with
so much diffidence, that we may see they do not lay any great stress upon it:
But that you may not be amused only with some general Words in truth nothing to
the purpose, I desire you would consider, that there being no Infallibility
which can serve to be your Guide but only that of the Pope, or a General
Council, nothing from Scripture can be pertinent, but that which proves either
the one or the other. No Man, or Number of Men can be Infallible without a
particular Assistance, and we cannot be sure they are so without a particular
Promise. And therefore when you hear any thing alleged from Scripture, only
ask your selves What does this prove? Does it prove the Pope to be Infallible?
Or does it prove a General Council to be so? If it do not prove one of them, it
proves nothing in this Matter, for you are never the nearer your Guide for any
thing else.

Now as to General Councils, I have showed already, that there is not the least
hint of them in Scripture; and as for the Title of the Pope to it, I shall
consider it presently in examining his Supremacy: And in the mean time shall
take notice a little what they urge from Reason to prove that there ought to be
such a Judge; ought to be I say, for all the Reason in the World without a
Revelation from God can never prove that there is one, it being a thing that
depends merely upon the appoinment and good-pleasure of God.

The Writers of the Romish Church, it must be confessed, talk Plausibly enough
when they expose the weakness of Human understanding, and the Infirmities of
Human Nature; and I must say that in reading of them I could hardly forbear at
least to wish, that if it had pleased God, some effectual Remedy had been
provided to secure Men from Error. But this did not at all influence me to
think that God had done so, and that upon these Three Accounts.

1. Because we see in fact, that neither Mankind in general, nor Christians in
particular have been secured from Errors; that there have been as many Contests
and Differences among Christians as we can suppose there would have been,
taking it for granted that they were left in the State, we say they were,
without any Infallible Guide to direct them; and therefore whatever force such
a Consideration from the necessity of ending Controversies might have had in
the first Times of our Religion; the matter of Fact does now in a great measure
take it off; because in 1700 Years the Church has not been freed from them.
From whence, as I said before, we may infer, either that it is not the Will of
God that Controversies should be ended, or that an Infallible Judge will not
end them, or that there is no Infallible Judge; either of which, takes away the
force of this Argument.

2. Because this whole way of Arguing from the weakness of our Understanding,
and proness to Error, and the like, proves nothing in particular, and
consequently does not bring us at all nearer Satisfaction than we were before.
The most natural Inference from it is, That every Man is to be of the Religion
of his Country; for that makes through work, and excuses us from using our
Fallible Reason at all in the Matter; whereas in your Way, however you may cry
out of the uncertainty of our own Reason, yet you must use it in a great many
material Points, and indeed, found all the certainty you have upon it; you must
for instance, Judge by your own Reason, whether the Christian Religion be true,
or not; whether among all the Professors of Christianity, yours be the True
Church; whether there be any Infallible Judge or no, and who he is, and what
his Determinations are. These are things of great weight, and of a great
latitude, and indeed take in the chief Points of Religion, and yet these things
must be judged of by that Reason which God has given every Man, or they cannot
be judged of at all; whereas your whole way of Arguing from the fallibility of
our Understanding, either proves that we cannot judge with certainty of these
Matters, or it proves nothing.

3. This whole way of talking is to me a strong prejudice against what you
would prove by it. For if you had a plain Institution or a Promise of such a
Judge to show, there would be no need of this Arguing, that would be Sufficient;
and without that, no Man can be Infallible; and we may be sure that Men have no
such Commission or Promise to show, when they are forced to use so much
Cavilling and Dispute about the matter, which is indeed nothing to the purpose
without the other.

We do with much more reason infer, that since God has not thought fit to give
any such Commission, that therefore we must make the best of those other means
which he is pleased to allow us; to search the Scriptures, and endeavor to
understand them as well as we can. And this is the Method that our Savior
directed, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and
they testify of me. From which Words, we may plainly infer these following
things.

1. That the Jews had at that time no Infallible Guide in Matters of Religion;
for if they had our Savior would have directed them thither, but we see he
directs them to the Scripture.

2. We may infer that the Persons our Savior spoke to, had without an
Infallible Guide sufficient Abilities to understand the Scriptures, and to have
true Faith; otherwise we may be sure he would not have sent them thither, and
if they could understand the Old Testament without such a Guide, much more may
Christians understand the New which is much easier.

3. We may infer that Private Persons, (for such our Savior spoke to,) may
have sufficient assurance of Divine Truths from examining the Scriptures, though
they go against the Governors of the Church; for our Savior tells them, that
they might find in the Scriptures, that he was the True Messiah, though the Chief
Priests did at that time reject him, and were afterward the Authors of his
Crucifixion: All which do absolutely overthrow the necessity of an Infallible
Judge in order to True Faith. And there cannot be one thing said against
Protestants examining the Scriptures now; but what would have held as well,
against the Command of our Savior here to the Jews; unless they can show us a
positive Institution of an Infallible Guide; but all the Arguments from Reason,
and the imperfection of our Understanding are perfectly the same in both Cases.

The truth is, all our Savior's Preaching did suppose this, for it had been a
vain thing to Preach to People who had not abilities to understand: And if we
go further, to the Preaching of the Apostles, we shall find that they
endeavored to prove the truth of what they said out of the Scriptures, by
which they appealed to the Understanding of their Hearers, and made them proper
Judges of what they said, as far as their own Salvation was concerned in it. We
see in Acts 17.11. The Bereans were commended as more noble than those of
Thessalonica, because they searched the Scriptures daily to see whether the
things the Apostles preached were so, or not. The Apostle St. John commands
Christians to try the Spirits; that is, to examine the pretenses that any
should make to the Spirit of God, which supposes that their Understanding, how
fallible soever, was sufficient to judge in these Matters.

In a word, the Writers and Emissaries of the Church of Rome, do themselves,
when they don't think of it, in effect confess this; for when they bring
Scripture, and other Arguments to persuade us to come over to their Church, I
would ask them, are we proper Judges of these things, or are we not? Will our
Faith be a true Faith, that is founded upon these Scriptures, or these Reasons
that you here bring? If it be so, then we may understand for our selves, and
there is no necessity in order to true Faith, of an Infallible Judge; but if it
be not so, there ought to be then an end of Disputes; for it is in vain to
Dispute where it is supposed that we cannot understand or judge, and all
offering of Scripture or Reason to prove the truth of their Opinions is only
affront and mockery.

But it may be it will be said, Don't we see People differ about the
Interpretation of Scripture? some go one way and some another, and yet all are
consident of their own; how can we be sure that we are in the right any more
than they who are as confident in what they say as we are?

Now this Objection is founded upon this, that we cannot have certainty of what
is once Disputed; which is contrary to the Common Opinion of Mankind, who would
have done Disputing, if they thought they could not be certain when once Men
differed from them. This does indeed overthrow all Reason and Religion. Some
have ventured to Dispute the Being of God, and many more the Truth of the
Christian Religion, and yet I hope we may be very certain of the Truth of both
these. But I would only urge at present this one Consideration. Are all the
World agreed about their Infallible Judge? If not, how can they be certain of
that? But to press this Matter a little more plainly; they say for instance,
that we cannot from Scripture be certain of the Divinity of our Savior, because
the Socinian's a small number of Men, dispute that Matter. But the same
Socinians deny their Infallible Judge, and therefore that must at least be as
uncertain as the other: And not only the Socinians, but all Protestants deny
it, which must make it still more uncertain; and not only all the Protestants,
but the Greek, Armenian, Ethiopian Churches, a vast Body of Men, which must
still add to the uncertainty; and not only all these, but all that in any Age
or Nation have ever differed from the Church of Rome; for whoever differs from
them must deny their Infallibility; and consequently this must have been
Disputed not only as much as any one Point, but as much as all the rest
together.

This, I think, is a demonstrative Answer to this whole way of Arguing, and
shows the manifest Absurdity of it; for it makes things uncertain because they
are Disputed, and yet makes the most Disputed thing in all the World the
Foundation of all the certainty they have.

I have been the longer in examining this Point of the Infallibility of your
Church, as being that which is the great support of all your other Errors.

I now proceed to speak something to the particulars I promised; and first I
shall begin with Transubstantiation, which is the first thing Renounced in the
Test.

The Sense of the Church of England in this Matter seems to be this, That though
Believers in the faithful and due receiving of this Holy Sacrament are made
Partakers of the Benefits of the Death of Christ, that is, of the breaking of
his Body and the shedding his Blood, and so may be properly enough said to be
partakers of his Body and Blood, yet that which they take into their Mouths is
really but Bread and Wine; but Bread and Wine set apart for a holy Use, to
represent the breaking of the Body and the shedding of the Blood of our Blessed
Savior; and therefore in a Sacramental sense may be called his Body and Blood,
though in truth and reality they are but Bread and Wine.

Both Sides do in some Sense own a real Presence of Christ in this Sacrament,
but this one thing, if observed, will sufficiently show the difference; That
Protestants say, that in the devout and holy Use of this Sacrament, Christ will
be present with his Grace and Assistance to the Souls of good People; but that
the Things which appear before us, which we eat and drink, are not Christ, but
Bread and Wine.

Those of the Church of Rome on the other side, say, That the Thing which lies
before them, which they put into their Mouths, though before Consecration they
are Bread and Wine, yet upon pronouncing those Words, This is my Body, and this
is my Blood, they lose their own Nature and Substance of Bread and Wine, and
become very Christ, the very same Christ that was Born of the Virgin Mary, and
that suffered upon the Cross. And therefore pay them the same Divine Honor and
Worship as if God or Christ did truly and openly appear before them.

Now the whole ground of this Dispute lies in the Words of the Institution,
This is my Body, and this is my Blood. They say, that the Words ought to be
understood in the plain literal Sense; we say they ought to be understood as
used by Christ in his Instituting a Sacrament, that is, appointing one thing to
be a representation and a memorial of another; and which because it does
represent, may very well be called by the Name of that Thing which is
represented by it, which we think to be a very natural, easy way of speaking,
and agreeable as to that present occasion, so to other terms of Speech of the
same nature which had been in use among those People to whom our Savior spoke.

But in particular, the time in which our Savior Instituted this Sacrament was
when they had been eating the Passover; which was a Feast much of the same
Nature among the Jews that this is among Christians; that was appointed by God
in memory of their Deliverance when the Angel of God destroyed the Firstborn
of all the Egyptians, and this in memory of that much greater Blessing to
Christians by the Death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ. As therefore the Master
of the Family when he distributed the Paschal Lamb, was to say, This is the
Lord's Passover, as being Instituted in memory of the Lord's passing over the
Houses of the Israelites; so now being to Institute a new Sacrament for his
Church of Christians, as that was for the Jews, he appoints a memorial of the
breaking of his Body and the shedding of his Blood, and in the very same figure
of Speech that the other was. This is my Body, or this is the Lord's Body,
could be no strange form of Speech to them, who just before had heard him say,
This is the Lord's Passever, and who had been constantly used to that form of
Speech. And accordingly, we do not find that they were in any difficulty or
surprise in the Matter, which they could not have avoided if the Words are to
be understood just as they sound; for it was a Matter more than a little
amazing, especially to those who never had been used to such sort of Mysteries,
that their Master should take a piece of Bread in his Hand, and with speaking a
few Words, should make it become, without any apparent change, that very Body
which was then standing before them. That he should hold his own Body whole and
entire in his own Hand; that they should put the same one Body whole and entire
into each of their Mouths, that they should eat him first, and drink him
afterward, and yet that he should stand by them untouched all the while;
besides the very uncouthness and horror of the Institution, to eat their
Master, a Person whom they loved, and had reason to love, and to drink Human
Blood; these are things one would think, should at least, surprise them a
little, and make them ask some Questions about it; for they are indeed strange,
monstrous Absurdities; whereas the sense we give to the Words is natural and
easy, especially to the Persons to whom they were spoken, as being used to such
expressions, and who had heard the like but just before, in a like Case.

I have this one thing more to add in this Matter, That as the Jewish
Sacraments were Signs and Representations as well as ours, and so were commonly
called by the Name of what they represented; so the inward Blessings conveyed
to them was the same that is conveyed by the Christian Sacraments; and
therefore the Apostle tells us, they did all eat of the same spiritual meat,
and drank of the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that spiritual Rock
that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. 1 Cor. 10.3,4.
Now here is altogether as plain evidence that the Jews did eat and drink
Christ before he was Born as the Christians do since: But that is a way of
Transubstantiation which those of the Church of Rome don't yet acknowledge; and
we may conclude, that if the Apostle had known any thing of that Doctrine among
Christians he would have been more wary in his Expressions, and not have
weakened the credit of it by using the same sort of Words where nothing of the
same thing was meant.

From hence we may give an account of that large Discourse of our Savior in
the Sixth Chapter of St. John, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed, etc. For if he were Meat and Drink to the Jews so long before he was
born, he might in the same manner be Meat and Drink to them still without the
portentous way of putting his Body into their Mouths.

Christ is said to be a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; and in the
same sense was Meat and Drink to all good People from the Foundation of the
World; that is, the benefits of his Death reach backward even to the beginning
of the World though he were put to death several Thousand Years after. And they
are the Benefits of his Death which are the great Food of Souls, that which
gives, and preserves Life in them, as the Life of the Body is kept up by Meat
and Drink.

And this suggests another Consideration, That we may know what sort of eating
this is, if we only consider what sort of Life is kept up by it. The eating and
drinking of a Body is proper to keep up the Life of a Body, but it is only the
inward Grace and Assistance of God that keeps up the Life of a Soul; and
therefore we then eat and drink for that, when we do by Faith or any other
method take in that Spiritual nourishment.

In a Word, Our Savior says, He gave his flesh for the life of the World, and
we may then not improperly be said to eat his Flesh, when we receive in that
Spiritual Life and Nourishment procured by it. And that this is the Sense is
apparent from several expressions in that Discourse, as in v. 35. And Jesus
says unto them I am the Bread of Life, he that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst; in which words there
are Two things which directly contradict this gross sense of eating his very
Body; First that he alters here the expression of Eating, and so explains
himself, whosoever comes to me, and whosoever believes in me, which shows that
this Blessing comes by Believing in Christ and not by gross carnal Eating.
Secondly, The Blessing it self is such as does not belong to all that only
externally receive the Sacrament but to such only as come to Christ with true
Faith; as may be seen not only in this Verse but every where through that
Discourse; thus v. 51. If any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. And
v. 53. 54. Verily I say unto you, except ye eat the Flesh of he Son of Man and
drink his Blood ye have no life in you, whosoever eats my Flesh and drinks
my Blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Which
words are very true if understood of the feeding our Souls by the Benefits
received from the Body and Blood of Christ; but cannot be understood of
external eating of him in the Sacrament; for very wicked Men often do that
according to the Opinion of the Romish Church, and are only the worse instead
of being the better for it.

This I believe is abundantly sufficient to show that the Sense we put upon the
Sacramental words, This is my Body, etc. is natural and easy, agreeable to the
design of a Sacrament, and other expressions of the same kind in Scripture; and
if it be so, we need not be solicitous to prove any thing more about it; for
there are so many Absurdities and gross Contradictions in the contrary Opinion
that we ought to lay hold of any thing that can but make sense of the Words,
and avoid those Monstrous Absurdities.

But I shall now endeavor to prove from the Words themselves, that the sense
which the Church of Rome puts upon them, cannot be the true sense of them.

1. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome is, that our Savior by pronouncing
these words this is my Body, made that to be his Body which before was only
Bread; but certainly the literal sense of the words does not import any thing
of this, and it is the literal sense which they must stick to, or else the whole
support of their cause is gone; now according to all the Rules of speaking it
ought to have been his Body before he could truly pronounce it to be so; but
this they deny, and say it was only Bread till these words were pronounced, and
that the calling it his Body made it become so; which is a form of Speech quite
unknown to the World, and I challenge them to bring any Author either Sacred or
Profane that ever made use of words of this kind in such a Sense.

Since therefore it is confessed that what our Savior took into his Hands was
Bread, and that it remained Bread till the speaking of these words, This is my
Body, and since those words in their natural construction cannot be understood
to effect any Change; it must remain Bread still; and be only the Body of
Christ in such a sense as Bread may be called his Body, that is in such a sense
as the Lamb they eat of but just before was called the Passover; by being a
Representation and Commemoration of it.

2. Another Argument I would make use of is this, that our Savior did not by
pronouncing those words make what he gave them to be his very Body and Blood,
because after the pronouncing of them, he calls what he gave in the Cup the
Fruit of the Vine. Verily I say unto you I will drink no more of the Fruit of
the Vine, until that day that I drink it new in the Kingdom of God; In which
words are contained these three, I think, plain Reasons, which prove, that it
was Wine and not his Blood that he gave them.

1. That He expressly calls it the fruit of the Vine, and the Words, they say,
are to be taken in the literal Sense, and literally nothing else is the fruit
of the Vine but Wine, at least, the Blood of Christ is not.

2. In his saying that he would drink no more of it till he drank it new in the
Kingdom of God, it is supposed that he had heretofore drank of what he then
gave them. But I suppose, it will hardly be said, that he ever before drank his
own Blood.

3. As the Words suppose that he had drank before of what he then gave them, so
they do that he would drink of it again; which very likely must be understood
of his eating and drinking with them after his Resurrestion, for then the
Kingdom of God, that is, the new State of the Christian Church, was come. And
therefore unless the Blood of Christ can be properly called the fruit of the
Vine; unless it can be supposed that he had drank his own Blood before, and did
design to drink it afterward, these Words must evince, that it was Wine which
he then gave them.

I would not conceal that though St. Matthew and St. Mark, recite the Words which
I have Quoted, after the Consecration of the Cup, yet one of the Evangelists
St. Luke recites them before, and so they may seem to relate to a Cup that went
about the Table at the Paschal Supper. But this Objection, if well considered,
does rather the more confirm what I have been proving; for two of the
Evangelists do place it immediately after the Consecration and delivery of the
Sacramental Cup, and in them it is apparent they can referr to nothing else but
that. Now if our Opinion about this Sacrament, be true, the difference betwixt
the Evangelists in this Case, is not material, as importing no difference at
all in the Doctrine of the Sacrament, though our Savior's Words are reported
different ways, and so this secures the Honor and Authority of all the
Evangelists. But if our Savior's Words are to be understood as the Church of
Rome understands them, it is impossible in any tolerable manner to reconcile the
Evangelists; for St. Matthew and St. Mark, must, upon this supposition, not
only put his Words wrong together, and out of that order he spoke them, but
must also quite misrepresent his meaning, and that in a Point of great
Consequence: Which, I believe, can be no way consistent with the Opinion which
the Church of God has always had of these Gospels. But I shall consider this
Matter a little more fully in that which I have to urge in the Third Place.

3. I desire it may be considered that the Words of our Savior in the
Institution of this Sacrament cannot be understood literally, because as they
are recited by the Evangelists they are not literally the same, but differ as
to the literal meaning very materially. Mat. 26.28. Mark 14.24. Luke 22.20.
St. Matthew and St. Mark in the Instistution of the Cup recite our Savior's
Words thus, This is my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for you; St.
Luke recites them thus, This is the New Testament in my Blood. Now from this
difference among them, I would observe these Two Things.

1. That the Evangelists being so little curious to recite the very same Words
that our Savior spoke, could not have any Notion of a strict necessity of a
literal meaning, and of such a strange Doctrine which could have no foundation
but in the literal interpretation of the very Words that he spoke; this had
been at best very strange negligence in a Matter of so great Consequence.

2. I would observe that if our Interpretation of the Words be true, the
Evangelists are easily reconciled, as agreeing in the same general Sense though
differing in the Expressions; because both of them denote a Commemoration of
the Blood of Christ, and of the New Testament or Covenant founded upon it; and
it is not, then, very material which is placed first; but if they are to be
taken literaly it is impossible ever to make them agree; and so one of the
Evangelists must not only have mis-recited our Savior's Words; but quite have
mis-understood his meaning, and have done what he could to lead People wrong in
a great Point of Faith: For certainly the true, real Blood of Christ is a very
different thing from the New Covenant or Testament which is founded upon it.

But it will appear still of greater Consequence to keep to the very Words
which Christ spoke if the Opinion of the Church of Rome be true, that it is the
repeating the Words of our Savior which effects the Transubstantiation. For I
would ask, Supposing a Man should Consecrate with the Words of St. Luke, This
Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, would that change the Wine (not to say
the Cup) into the very Blood of Christ? Certainly it would not do it by force
of those Words, for they intimate no such thing; and it is not unlikely but
those were the very Words our Savior spoke, for not only St. Luke uses them,
but St. Paul, and that upon a solemn occasion when it concerned him much to
give a true Representation of this Sacrament; as you may see, 1 Cor. Chap. 11.
The occasion of his mentioning the Institution of this Sacrament was very great
Irreverence, which some were guilty of in receiving of it, indeed such, as it
was almost impossible for them to be guilty of, had they believed what the
Church of Rome now believes about it; it was therefore very necessary that the
Apostle should speak clearly and plainly out in this matter; and we see he does
solemnly usher in what he says with the Authority of Christ, For I have
received of the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you, in etc. And then he
repeats the Words as St. Luke does; and not only so, but calls the other part
of the Sacrament Bread near Ten times in that Chapter.

4. The Last Argument I shall make use of upon this Head, is this, That the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome upon another account does not agree with the
Words of our Blessed Savior. The Opinion of that Church is, That under each
Species, as they call it, whole Christ is contained, Body, Blood, Soul, and
Divinity; so that both are but just the very same Thing, in nothing different,
but in outward appearance, which only deceives our Senses. And it is upon this
Opinion chiefly, that they ground the denial of the Cup to the People; because,
say they, should they have the Cup, they would have no more, but just the very
same thing they had in the other Kind: And supposing their Opinion true, the
Argument may, for any thing I know, have some force in it; but then they ought
not to deny us leave to Argue the other way; That, that Opinion must needs be
false, which makes our Savior guilty of a great Absurdity in appointing Two
Kinds, but both really the same thing, and one of them perfectly unnecessary.

But that which I would chiefly take notice of, is, That this Doctrine of
theirs, contradicts the Words of our Savior, for what they make but One Thing
he plainly makes Two, and calls them by Two different Names. The one he calls
his Body, the other he calls his Blood, which supposes them to be Two different
Things, as plain as Words can express them.

They say indeed, That in the Glorified Body of Christ, the Body and Blood
cannot be separated, and therefore were the Words to be taken in such a sense
as to consider them separated, they would contain a great Absurdity; so that
wherever the one is, the other by concomitancy must be there too.

But who told them, that the Glorified Body of Christ is in the Sacrament? The
Words of the Institution intimate no such thing, but speak of his Body given
and his Blood shed, which certainly was separate from his Body. But however,
this is arguing from Reason against the Words, and is just the very same thing
which they condemn as Heretical in us; And if this be once allowed, they must
throw off the whole Doctrine; for we can show them Ten times as many
Absurdities in the Doctrine of Transustantiation, as they can in supposing the
Body and Blood of Christ to subsist separately.

In short, either we must stick to the very Words of our Blessed Savior, or we
must not; if we must, their Opinion must be false; which makes what our Savior
calls Two Things, to be but One; if we must not stick to the very Words, but
interpret them according to right Reason and other Places of Scripture, they
then give up their Cause.

To conclude this Head, What Reason can there be imagined why our Savior
should in a solemn manner, at different Times, and under different Names, give
the very same thing? call the one his Body, and the other his Blood, when
according to the Nature of the Thing he might as well have inverted the Names,
and have called that his Blood, which he calls his Body, and so on the other
side. There cannot, I believe, be any Reason thought of but only this, That the
one Kind, the Bread, was very proper to represent the breaking of his Body; the
other the Wine, to represent the shedding of his Blood; which is the very thing
that we would have; for then there is a sufficient Reason for these Names
without any Bodily Presence at all.

I have been the longer in considering the Sense of the Scripture in this
Matter, because your Writers commonly boast more of the Scripture being for you
in this Case, than in any other Controversies betwixt us: And, I think, I have
proved more than I need have done, in proving that the Sense your Church puts
upon the Words of our Savior, cannot be the true Sense of them: It being
sufficient in a Matter of this Nature, which is loaded with so many
Absurdities, to have showed that they did fairly admit of another
Interpretation.

But having so fully Confuted this Doctrine out of the Scriptures, I am now
more at liberty to show you the gross Absurdities and the monstrous
Contradictions that are involved in it; though in truth, it is so full fraught
with Contradictions that it is a hard matter to know where to begin; I shall
therefore content my self just to repeat some of them which are ready Collected
to my hand, by a Great Divine of our own.

Chilligworth, p. 165.
That there should be Accidents without a Subject, that is, That there should
be, length and nothing long, breadth and nothing broad, thickness and nothing
thick, whiteness and nothing white, roundness and nothing round, weight and
nothing heavy, sweetness and nothing sweet, moisture and nothing moist,
fluidness and nothing flowing, many actions and no agent, many passions and no
patient, that is, that there should be a long, broad, thick, white, round,
heavy sweet, moist, flowing, active, passive nothing.

That Bread should be turned into the Substance of Christ, and yet not any
thing of that Bread become any thing of Christ, neither the Matter, nor the
Form, nor the Accidents of Bread, be made either the Matter or the Form or the
Accidents of Christ.

That Bread should be turned into nothing, and at the same time with the same
Action be turned into Christ, and yet that Christ should not be nothing.

That the same thing at the same time should have it is just dimensions, and
just distance of it is Parts one from another, and at the same time should not
have it, but all its Parts together in the felf-same Point.

That the Body of Christ which is much greater should be contained wholly in
that which is less, and that not once only, but as many times over as there are
Points in the Bread and Wine.

That the same thing at the same time should be wholly above it self, and
wholly below it self, within it self and without it self, on the right Hand and
on the left Hand, and round about it self,

That the same thing at the same time should move to and from it self and lie
still; or that it should be carried from one place to another through the
middle space, and yet not move.

That to be One should be to be undivided from it self, and yet that one and
the same thing should be divided from it self.

That a finite thing may be in all Places at once.

That there should be no certainty in our Senses, and yet that we should know
some things certainly, and know nothing [Corporal] but by our Senses.

That, that which is, and was long ago, should now begin to be. That the same
thing should be before and after it self.

That it should be possible that the same Man, for Example, You or I, may at
the same time be awake at London, and not awake but asleep at Rome; there run
or walk, here not run or walk, but stand still, sit, or liedown; there study or
write, here do nothing but dine or sup; there speak, here be silent; that he
may in one place freeze with cold, in another burn with heat; that he may be
drunk in one place, sober in another; valiant in one place, a coward in
another; a Thief in one place, and honest in another; that he may be a Papist
and go to Mass in Rome, a Protestant and go to Church in England; that he may
die in Rome, and live in England; or dying in both Places, may go to Hell from
Rome, and to Heaven from Fngland.

That the Body and Soul of Christ should cease to be where it was, and yet not
go to another place, nor be destroyed.

These are some of those monstrous Contradictions which are involved in this
Doctrine of Transubstantiation; I shall only observe these few things more
about this Matter, and then conclude this Point.

1. That you ought not for the avoiding of these Difficulties to content your
selves to believe in general that somehow or other, you don't know how, this
Sacrament is the Body of Christ; for your Church has determined the Matter,
that it is the very Body of Christ which was Born of the Virgin Mary, and was
afterward Crucified, and that there remains no substance of Bread but only this
Body of Christ after Consecration.

2. I would observe that none of these Difficulties are taken off by
considering Christ's Body as glorified, for besides, that if it be a Body
still, it must have the Properties of a Body, this Sacrament was Instituted
while our Savior lived in the World, and had just such a Body as other Men, of
the same bigness, and all other qualities as to his Body the same. And
therefore in interpreting these Words This is my Body, all the Difficlties are
still the same as if he were now living; or as they would be, were they spoken
of the Body of any other Man.

3. I desire that you would consider, that you may be sure we do not
mis-understand nor mis-represent your Opinion, because these Absurdities are
what your own Divines take notice of, as well as ours, and do not pretend to be
able to give any direct Answer to them.

4. I would observe, That though these Contradictions are so apparent and staring
that no Body that hears of this Doctrine can well miss of them, yet they are
new, and none of them ever heard of in the Church for many Hundred Years; from
whence we infer, that the Doctrine it self was as little heard of.

5. We do not find that any Christian for many Hundred Years ever denied or
disputed the truth of this Doctrine, from whence we cannot but conclude, that
it was then unknown in the Church; for it must have had strange good fortune to
escape without any Contradiction, when all the Articles of the Creed had been
Disputed round.

6. As this was not disputed or denied by any Christians, so neither was it
objected against the Christian Religion by any Heathen, not even by Julian
himself, who, as being an Apostate, must have known all the Secrets of our
Religion; whereas in truth, there had been Ten times more weight in this, than
in all the Objections together which they made use of against Christianity.

7. There were several things in the Primitive Church inconsistent with the
belief of this Doctrine, in particular that of mixing Water with the Wine, the
Water to represent the People, as the Wine represented the Blood of Christ; of
which St. Cyprian gives us a full Account. Vid. Cypr. Epist. 63.


8. I would observe, That the Church of Rome can assign no peculiar necessity,
or usefulness of this Sacrament above others, that should give a probable
Reason of the mighty difference betwixt this and others, and of such a strange
wonderful Dispensation as the eating our Blessed Savior himself: Nay, with
them both Baplism and Confession are esteemed much more necessary, and the
omission of them more dangerous than the omission of this Sacrament.

9. To conclude this whole Matter, I think, I have sufficiently showed that
this Doctrine has no foundation in Scripture; I would have considered at large
the Sense of the Primitive Church in it; and I do not question but to have been
able very clearly to make out that it was a Doctrine quite unknown to the
Church of God for many Ages; but that was not consistent with the Brevity I am
at present forced to use; I would therefore only observe this one thing, That
we ought not to conclude this to have been the Doctrine of the Fathers only
from some accidental or general Expressions which they sometimes make use of;
It Is plain that none of them designedly treat of this Matter, or explain it to
us, none of them recite it among the Articles of their Faith, none of them take
any notice of the difficulties of it, no Christians appear to have been shocked
at this Doctrine, and no Heathens to have Objected it; all which could hardly
have been avoided had this been the constant Doctrine of the Catholic. Church.

And as for General Expressions, the calling what they received the Body and
Blood of Christ, that could not be avoided, the Nature of the thing requiring
them even according to our Opinion of this Matter: And we see that
notwithstanding we have made such express Declarations against the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, and that by reason of this Controversy we express our
selves more cautiously, than we may suppose the Fathers would do before any
Controversy was moved ved about it, yet some general Expressions of our own
Divines are often turned against us by those of the Church of Rome, and there
is no question but were the Authors of them as Old as the Fathers, they would
be as confidently quoted for the Proof of Transubstantiation as any Sayings of
the Fathers now are.

And this shows us how this Doctrine, though monstrous in it self, might under
the Covert of such General Expressions, without any great stir or bustle,
insensibly creep into the Church, especially in very Ignorant and Superstitions
Times; though after all, our Divines have sufficiently traced the footsteps of
it, and showed the progress it made, and the opposition it met with in the
World before it could be Established.

The next thing to be spoken to is the Idolatry of the Church of Rome. In the
Sacrfice of the Mass, and in the Invocation of the Blessed Virgin, and of other
Saints, as it is practiced in that Church.

Now Idolatry may be of two sorts.

I. When People worship any thing for the Supreme God, which really is not so.
II. When they give that Worship to any Creature, which is due only to God, and
which he has appropriated to himself.
As to the first sort of Idolatry that of Worshipping some thing as the Supreme
God which realy is not so, we do not charge the Church of Rome with it, unless
perhaps the worshipping of what is but Bread and Wine in the Sacrament instead
of Jesus Christ may come under that head; I say, perhaps here, because I would
not enter into any thing, besides the main cause, that may be contested; for
though Jesus Christ be God, and they worship some thing as Jesus Christ which is
not so, yet the mistake being chiefly about his Human Nature, I would not
positively affirm a thing which may bring on any dispute, which is not to our
purpose.

This they do not deny, that they give the highest Divine Worship, which they
call Latria, to that Object, which they take into their hands, and put into
their Mouths in receiving this Sacrament; which I shall at present call
Idolatry, but with a promise to recant it whenever they shall answer the
Reasons I have given to prove that what they thus Adore is only Bread and Wine;
or whenever they shall give me a more proper Name, by which I may call that
great Sin of giving the highest Divine Worship to a Creature. The truth is,
that such a Worship may not only be called Idolatry, but the most absurd and
senseless Idolatry, that ever the World fell into: But this I shall not now
insist upon, having spoken so much already to that which is the foundation of
it, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

The other Matter in which we charge them with Idolatry, is, the Invocation of
the Blessed Virgin, and other Saints. Now in this we do not charge them with
owning any of those to be God, but only with giving them that Worship and
Honor which cannot lawfully be given to any thing which is but a Creature. In
speaking to this, I shall consider these Two Things.

1. Whether the giving to a Creature the Worship due only to God, may not be
properly termed Idolatry, though at the same time we pay that Worship, we own it
not to be God, but a Creature? 2. Whether the Worship given to Saints by the
Invocation practiced in the Church of Rome, be of that sort, such as God has
appropriated to himself, and consequently such as becomes Idolatrous when
applied to a Creature.
1. As to the first of these, Those of the Roman Church cannot deny but it must
be a very great Sin to give the Worship of God to Creatures; but they deny it
to be properly Idolatry. We on the other side, grant, that it is not Idolatry,
in the highest sense of the Word, and in the sense in which they commonly
understand it, viz. The owning a Creature to be God. So that so far we are
agreed; but then we say, that Word may be used in a lower sense, to denote what
they grant to be a Sin, as well as we, but will not call it by that Name, so
that our difference in this Matter, is only about the use of a Word.

Now we think our selves in the right in the use of this Word, upon these
Accounts,

1. Because we have no other Name to express that which is not denied to be a
very great Sin, The giving God's Worship to Creatures; and having no peculiar
Name for it, we think it not improper to give it the Name of that Sin which is
of nearest affinity to it, and of the same general kind; as is done in many
other Cases. Thus our Savior calls looking upon a Woman to lust after her, by
the name of Adultery, and the like. The next step to owning a Creature to be
God, is to give it the Worship due to God, and therefore we think it not at all
improper to call these two Sins by the same general Name, especially having no
Word in our Language, more proper by which we may express it.

2. We think our selves fully justified in the expression, because the
Scripture does every where charge the Heathen Worship of their Gods and Images
in general, with the Crime of Idolatry; tho nothing can be more apparent than
that many of the Heathen owned only one Supreme God, and that all of them
looked upon many of the Gods whom they Worshipped, not as Supreme, but as Gods
of an Inferior Nature, and had much the same Opinion of them, as the Romanists
have now of Saints and Angels, and had the very same pretenses and excuses for
the Worshipping of them which the Romanists make use of to defend themselves.
They owned many of their Gods to have been born, and to have dyed, and it was
hardly possible to look upon any such, to be the Supreme God. In a Word, There
is nothing more evident than this, that they had several Ranks, and Orders, and
Degrees among their Gods, and it was impossible to look upon all these to be
Supreme: And yet the Scripture every where without any distinction, charges
their whole Worship with Idolatry; and so do the Primitive Fathers, as well as
the Scriptures; particularly, they thought it to be Idolatry to throw a little
Incense into the Fire before the Statues of their Emperors. From whence we may
plainly infer these Two Things;

First, That they thought that there might be Idolatry in giving such Worship
as was appropriated to God, to Creatures, though they were not pretended to be
any thing else but Creatures, only Creatures highly exalted, and in high Favor
with God, as Saints and Angels are supposed to be.

Secondly, That they looked upon the offering of Incense, to be a part of
Worship appropriated to God, and that could not be given to a Creature without
the Crime of Idolatry; which is a Matter the Church of Rome have reason to
consider well of, who offer it every Day to those, who however they may have
been better Men, are certainly no more Gods than the Heathen Emperors were.

To conclude this Matter, The sense of the Primitive Church in the business of
Idolatry, is plainly seen in this, that they every where accuse the Arians of
Idolatry for Worshipping of Jesus Christ, for this very Reason, because they
owned him not to be God, or at least, not the Supreme God; from whence it
plainly appears, that they had the same Notions in this Case, that we now have,
That Men may be guilty of Idolatry in giving Divine Worship to what they
believe is not God.

Thirdly, The Apostle calls Covetousness Idolatry; which though it be a
figurative Expression, yet however, denotes to us the thing for which I am now
pleading. The Covetous Man does not look upon his Money to be his God, or
intend to give it any of that Worship he thinks due to God; I believe no
Covetous Man in the World can be justly charged with either of these; but
because he places his Heart and his Affections upon it, which ought to be given
to none but God; because his Money is the thing in which he puts his trust and
his confidence, therefore it is, that he is said to make an Idol of it, and to
be guilty of Idolatry: And so it is as to the Worshipping of Saints, though their
Worshippers know very well that they are not Gods, yet because they give them
the Worship of God, that outward Adoration, and inward Reverence, hope, trust,
and dependence which are due only to God, they do by that make them Idols, and
are justly chargeable with Idolatry.

I now proceed to the Second Point, To show, that the Worship which the Church
of Rome gives to the Blessed Virgin, and other Saints, by the Invocation
practiced among them, is Divine Worship, such as ought to be given to none but
God.

We are not concerned at present, to enquire into the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, but into the Practice; that being the thing particularly Censured in the
Test-Act; though indeed, the Practice of any Church, is the best Exposition of
Her Doctrine. The Council of Trent leaves this Matter in general Terms,
determines that we must seek the help and aid of the Saints, Opem Auxiliumque.
Sess. 25.
but does not fix the measures of it: However, since it does not Censure what
was then the Common Practice of that Church, we may take it for granted, that
the meaning of the Council was, that we must seek their aid and help in the
Methods which were then in use; for if they disapproved of what was then
commonly Practiced, it concerned them much to speak out, as to set their own
People right, and to keep them out of dangerous Practices; so also to vindicate
the Honor of their Church, which was then openly charged with Idolatry upon
account of those Practices.

We agree with the Church of Rome in this, That we ought to have a great honor
and respect for the Saints of God. That we ought to love their Memory, to
endeavor to imitate the good Examples they have left us, and to bless God for
the Benefits he has bestowed upon the Church by their means.

And above other Saints, we ought to have a great esteem and value for the
Blessed Virgin, who had the Honor to be the Mother of our Lord, and by that,
to be so nearly concerned in the greatest Blessing that ever was bestowed upon
the World,

But we differ from that Church in this, That they Adore the Saints and Pray to
them; and that not as one Friend would desire another to Pray for him, but with
all the solemn Ceremonies and Circumstances of Prayer, and with the very same
with which they pray to God; they do it in their Churches, Kneeling, and with
their Eyes lift up to Heaven, and with all the signs of Devotion which can be
showed, not only from one Creature to another, but from a Creature to its
Creator. They make Vows to them; burn Incense to their Images; dedicate
themselves to their Service; make Offerings to them, and the like.

They pray to them directly to bestow Blessings upon them. Thus in the Office
of the Blessed Virgin, She is not only called the Gate of Heaven, but she is
entreated to loose the bonds of the Gvilty, to give light to the Blind, and to
drive away our Evils, and to show her self to be a Mother. They pray to her
therein, for Purity of Life, and a safe Conduct to Heaven. She is commonly
called the Queen of Heaven, the Mother of Mercy, and which is most Shameful of
all, The Psalms of David, Composed for the Honor of God, and which contain the
highest strains of Devotion which a Creature can give to God, are by a Saint of
that Church Bonaventura
turned to the Honor of the Virgin, by putting her Name where the Name of God
is put by David: And this was neither Censured by the Council of Trent, nor has
been by any Pope, that I can hear of, to this Day; but on the contrary, the
Author of it has been Canonized, and the Book is in Common use, which perhaps,
is one of the blackest pieces of Idolatry that ever was in the World. And though
a Church must not always bear the Guilt of what is published by private Persons
in her Communion, though it do pass without Censure; Yet considering how careful
that Church has been in many Matters of much less moment especially where her
own Authority is concerned, and how solicitous they are to keep Books that make
against them, out of the Hands of their People, it looks at least, like
espousing the Blasphemies, and Idolatrous Prayers and Praises of it, to let
this Book go so freely about without Censure, and to encourage it so far, as to
make the Author of it a Saint.

These, and many other Instances, might be given of the Worship they give to
the Blessed Virgin; and though they are somewhat more modest, with relation to
other Saints; yet what I have taken notice of already, may sufficiently show,
that they give them the Worship which God has appropriated to himself. I would
only therefore mention further, that in many Instances, they pray to them to
bestow those Blessings which only God can give, such as to open the Gates of
Heaven, to unty the bonds of their Iniquity, to heal their spiritual Maladies;
and many other of the same Nature, of which, I shall give them Examples at
large, if required, or, if I find it necessary to confirm any thing that I have
now said.

I now proceed to take notice of some of those Reasons we have to prove, that
this Invocation is part of that Worship which God has appropriated to himself,
and which consequently cannot be given to any Creature, without the Crime of
Idolatry.

1. I desire it may be considered, that the Scripture does every where speak of
Prayer as applied to God, and to none else, and that without the least
intimation of any such Distinctions as are made use of in the Church of Rome.
We have in the Old Testament, the History of the Church of God, for near 4000
Years; and in all that time, there is not the least instance, or intimation, of
any Prayer put up to any Creature.

It may be it will be said, That the Saints were not then in Heaven, and so
were not in a condition to hear the Prayers that should be put up to them, and
had not so much Favor with God, as they may be supposed to have now, since the
Resurrection of Christ, that he has admitted them so nearly into his Presence.

Now in Answer to this, I shall not at present, pretend to determine, whether
the Saints of the Old Testament were in Heaven before Christ's Resurrection, or
not; nor whether they, and other Saints since are there now; because a great
many Christians of no mean Authority in the Church of God, have been of
different Opinions in these Matters; only I think these two or three Things,
are very plain.

1. That Enoch and Elias were supposed by a great many, before our Savior's
time, to be in Heaven; and they must have been looked upon by them, to be very
great Favorites of God, by being taken out of this World in so strange and
wonderful a manner, as the Scripture tells us they were; and yet we hear as
little of praying to them, as to any other Person.

2. Supposing it not agreed upon then, whether Saints were in Heaven, yet all
agreed that the Angels were. And they were altogether as well capacitated to
hear and answer Prayers, which should have been put up to them then, as they
are now, and yet we find as little of Men's praying to Angels, as they did to
Saints in those Times.

3. Whatever Reason can be assigned for praying to Creatures now, would have
held as well then; whatever necessity, or convenience, or advantage, or fitness
there may be in it, were all the same, and indeed much greater then, than they
are now, upon these Two Accounts,

1. Because the Christian Religion is of it self a State of much greater
Perfection than any Dispensation that was before it. God has in it revealed
himself more clearly and plainly to the World, has more evidenced his Love and
Tenderness to Mankind, has given us greater encouragements to draw near to him;
He speaks to us in the Gospel as a Father to his Children, as a reconciled
Father in Jesus Christ; and therefore accordingly, in that Form of Prayer which
our Savior has left us, that is the Appellation which he has taught us to make
use of, Our Father which art in Heaven; Now, why should a Child be afraid to
approach the Presence of his Father? Or, what need has he of any body to
introduce him? Under the Jewish Dispensation, when the Law was given with
Thunderings and Lightnings, when God was called by the terrible Name of the
Lord of Hosts, there might be more reason to think of some body to introduce
them to his Presence; which yet we do not find was ever recommended, or
practiced among them: How much more may Christians come with boldness to the
Throne of Mercy, and expect to find Grace to help in time of need? But what is
more considerable:

2. Christians have Christ for their Mediator, who is able to save to the
uttermost all those that come to God by him; He is in Heaven ready to plead
their cause, and to get their Prayers heard, and their Persons accepted; and
they that have such an Advocate, need not fly to any else. But it was not so
with the Church before Christ; and therefore if the thing had been at all
lawful, they had much more reason to make Saints and Angels their Patrons, than
Christians have. And yet we see that in the Account which we have in the Bible
of the Church of God before Christ for near 4000 Years, there is not the least
hint of any thing of this kind.

3. What I have said already, that all along in the Old Testament, Prayer is
appropriated to God, and that without any reserve, or distinction, may be
sufficient to show the Mind of God in that Case: But I have this further to
add, That the same Scripture, adds with the same general words, condemn as
Idolatrous all the Old Heathen Worship: Now I have showed before, that much of
this Worship was paid to Creatures, under the same Notions and Apprehensions,
that those of the Church of Rome Worship Saints and Angels; indeed there was
this difference, that most of those Worshipped in the Church of Rome, were
probably good Creatures, as most of those whom the Heathens Worshipped, were
bad ones, and it may be Devils: But this distinction of good or bad Creatures,
may make the Worship more or less Impious, but not more or less Idolatrous;
whatever will make it Idolatry in the one Case, will make it so in the other.
The Worship appropriated to God, is no more due to a good Creature, than it is
to a bad one; since therefore I have showed, that the Scripture every where
condemns the Worship which the Heathen gave to what they owned not to be God,
and which they did not intend to Worship as the Supreme God; I say, since this
is condemned, not only as Impious, for choosing ill Creatures, but as
Idolatrous for giving what belonged only to God: this must equally prove all
Creature Worship to be Idolatrous.

4. This Creature Worship, is as little heard of in the New Testament as it is
in the Old. Heard of, it is indeed, but what approbation it met with, we may
see by considering these particulars.

The first Instance is that of the Devil desiring our Savior to worship him,
upon promise to give him all the Kingdoms of the World: But let us see what our
Savior answers; he does not put him off with telling him either the Dignity of
his own Person, or the unfitness of the thing, in Worshipping him because he
was a Devil; but he gives such a Reason as will hold against all Worshipping of
Creatures. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
From which words, I would observe these Two Things.

1. That the Worship which the Devil desires, and which our Savior says must
be given only to God, was not to offer Sacrifice to him, which the Writers of
the Church of Rome, make the only outward Worship appropriated to God, but it
was to fall down and adore him; from whence we may infer, that to fall down
and adore any Creature, must be Idolatry, which part of Worship its apparent
the Church of Rome give to their Saints and Angels.

2. I would observe here, that the Devil did not pretend to be the Supreme God,
but plainly the contrary; for when he shows our Savior all the Kingdoms of the
World, he tells him, that all these things were given to him, Luke. 4.6. in
which he plainly professes, not a Supreme, But a Delegated Power; so that had
not our Savior in his Answer, condemned the Worship of Creatures, though owned
and acknowledged to be Creatures, he had not given a full Answer to the Devil,
for the Devil did not desire to be Worshipped as the Supreme God.

Another Instance we have of this kind, is that of St. John in the Revelations
falling down to Worship the Angel, who we see puts him off it, with the same
kind of general Words, that our Savior uses in the former Instance, See thou
do it not, I am thy fellow servant, Worship God, Rev. 22.18.19. Here I would
observe, as in the former Case, that the Worship which the Angel rejects, and
appropriates to God, is falling down at his feet to Adore him. And in the next
place, I would observe, that had Adoration been due to an Angel, the true
Answer to St. John had been, that he should have a care not to mistake him to
be God, who was but an Angel, and so give him more than was due to him; but we
see he throws off the whole without any reserve or distinction, and for a
Reason that will hold against all Creature Worship, that he was his
Fellow Servants. In a word, it had been no great secret for the Angel to tell
St. John, that God was to be Worshipped, or that God only was to be Worshipped
with an inward apprehension, of his being God, neither of these were any great
Mystery, or to the purpose. And therefore his meaning must be, that Religious
Worship, such as that Adoration was, ought to be given to none but God.

I shall name but one more place of Scripture, in which this Creature Worship
is taken notice of, and that is Coloss. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your
reward by a voluntary humility, and Worshipping of Angels. The Apostle in this,
and the following Verses, makes use of Two Arguments against the Worshipping of
Angels. First, that it is a voluntary Humility, that is, though Men may pretend a
great deal of Humility, that it is not fit for such mean Creatures as they to
go directly into the Presence of God, but that they ought to apply to the
Angels of God to be their Introducers; yet all this, is Humility of their own
inventing, such as God has not required at their hands.

2. That this Worshipping of Angels, is leaving Christ their Head; He is the
only Mediator betwixt God and Men, and therefore applying to any other, is
leaving him who is the Head of the Church; and then no wonder if it beguile us
of our reward. This Argument is very plain and very strong against the practice
of Praying to Saints or Angels, and it has this one thing very observable in
it, That if this Text proves it unlawful to set up any more Mediators but Jesus
Christ, it must be understood of Mediators of Intercession, for no body could
so much as pretend, that Angels were Mediators of Redemption, as those of the
Church of Rome (without any ground at all) make the distinction.

I might show farther the Idolatry of this Practice, of praying to Saints and
Angels, from this, that it must suppose Divine Perfections in the Creatures to
whom we pray; as of Power to be able to supply our Wants, especially, in those
Prayers that are put up to them directly to beg such, or such Blessings from
them; and so of Knowledge, because Prayer (at least Mental Prayer) supposes
that the Persons we pray to, know our Hearts, and the secret thoughts, and
sincerity or insincerity of all the Men and Women in the World, and that they
can perfectly attend to them all at the same time; which are Perfections that
the Scripture never attributes to any but God, and in the Nature of the thing,
it is hardly conceivable of any Creature; but I shall content my self to have
named these things, and shall conclude this whole Matter, with just proposing
those two short Considerations.

1. I desire it may be considered, that in the Church of Rome there is no
External part of Religion appropriated to God, and incommunicable to Creatures,
but the Sacrifice of the Mass, and if in the preceding Discourses, I have
overthrown the foundation of that, there is then nothing at all remaining.

2. I desire it may be considered, that the Reasons commonly given to justify
Prayers to Saints and Angels, would, if well followed, hinder Men from ever
praying to God at all, as in fact, this has much estranged Men from God in
those Countries where they have had no Protestants among them to make them
ashamed of it; and even nearer our selves, I believe, we may justly say, that
at least Ten Prayers are put up to Creatures for one that is put up to God.

Of the Pope's Supremacy.
I now come to consider the Oath of Supremacy, which consists of Two Parts.

I. A Declaration of the Unlawfulness, and Impiety of taking up Arms against
the King upon Account of His, being Excommunicated, or Deprived by the Pope.
II. A Renunciation of the Pope's pretended Supremacy over the Church of Christ,
particularly over that part of it in this Kingdom.
As to the First of these, I need not insist upon it, becanse if I can prove,
the Second, That the Pope has of right no Spiritual Power here, the other must
of course fall with it. I would only observe before I proceed, That if those of
the Roman Communion among us, do believe, that the Pope has a Power from God to
Excommunicate, and to Deprive Princes of their Kingdoms for Heresy, and that
therefore they are bound to concur with the Pope as far they can, to put his
Sentence in Execution, this must make them Enemies to all Protestants, and
consequently, they have reason to expect that Protestants should have a care of
them. But if they do believe that God has not given any such Power to the Pope,
they have then Reason to have a care of their Guide, who is doing what he can,
under pretense of Authority from God, to carry them to Treason and Murder, and
all the Villainies which must follow an attempt to turn out their King, and all
his Protestant Subjects that will stand by him: But I have in some measure
taken notice of these things already, and therefore shall not now enlarge upon
them; but proceed to consider the Grounds of the Popes pretense to Supremacy.

The Opinion of the Church of Rome, with relation to his Supremacy is this,
That Jesus Christ made Saint Peter the Supreme Governor and Head, as of all the
rest of the Apostles, so also of the whole Church; That St. Peter was afterward
Bishop of Rome, and that by Divine Appointment his Successors the Bishops of
Rome, are to enjoy the same Supremacy over the Church which he had.

Their Opinion about the Supremacy of St. Peter, is founded chiefly upon those
Words of our Savior, Mat. 16.18,19. Upon this Rock I will build my Church. --
And I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. They say, our
Savior does by these Words, promise to St. Peter, to make him Monarch of the
whole Church: We say, that though these Words were spoken to St. Peter upon
occasion of his speaking to our Savior immediately before, yet, that this
Promise does as much belong to the rest of the Apostles, as it does to him, and
that therefore, whatever Power may be here promised to him over the Church,
there is none promised over the rest of the Apostles, and that consequently,
his Successors can claim nothing from hence over the Successors of all the
Apostles, the other Bishops of the Christian Church.

But to consider this Matter more particularly, we may take notice,

1. That the rest of the Apostles did not apprehend that St. Peter had here any
peculiar Power promised him above them; for we find that not long after, they
were contending, who should be the greatest; by which it is plain, they did not
then apprehend that our Savior had already determined the Matter: And as for
our Savior himself, he does not at all endeavor to put them right, as it was
of great consequence he should do, supposing that he designed St. Peter for
their Governor; but he endeavors to teach them all humility, and not to
affect Power or Authority over one another. And the same instance we have in
the Case of Zebedee's Children, when their Mother came to desire that the one
might sit on his right hand and the other on his left in his Kingdom, that is,
that they might be the Persons of chief Favor, and Authority with him; their
Petition plainly implies, that they knew nothing of St. Peter's Prerogatives;
and our Savior's Answer, which you may see at large, Mat. 20. implies as
plainly, that neither St. Peter, nor any body else was to have such Power in
the Church, as the Bishops of Rome have since pretended to.

2. I would observe, that these Words of our Savior to St. Peter, do not
actually invest him with any Power, but are only a Promise to him; and
therefore the best way to see what was peculiar to him in it above the rest of
the Apostles, will be to see the fulfilling of the Promise, and his being
Actually invested in it. That this is only a Promise appears from the Words
themselves, which run in the future tense, I will give thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven: And I believe, they of the Church of Rome will not deny
this, because they say, that the Apostles were not Priests till our Savior
made them so in the Institution of the Lord's Supper. Now if we consider the
Actual Investiture into this Power, there is nothing peculiar to Saint Peter.
Our Savior gives them all their Power together, in Words much of the same
Nature with that Promise before to St. Peter; Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose
soever sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose soever sins ye retain they
are retained. And as for the Expression, Upon this Rock I will build my Church,
there is much the same said of all the Apostles. The Church is said to be built
upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief Cornerstone.

3. The best way to see whether St. Peter had any such Supremacy, will be to
see whether he exercised any, whether he did any Acts, or Offices which
belonged to so high a Power. There must be constantly so many occasions for the
exercise of that Power, that if he had any such we could not miss of Instances
of it. The Times of the Apostles were indeed, Times of greater Simplicity, than
these later Ages; and therefore I do not expect they should show me St. Peter
Commanding after the manner of our Modern Popes: But if they can show me any
one single Act of Authority over the rest of the Apostles; if they can show me
St. Peter of himself, making Laws, and Orders for the good Government of the
Church, or so much as presiding in the College of the Apostles; if they can
show me any Appeals made to him, or Controversies ended by him, or, among so
many Controversies as happened, any advice to repair to him, or command to obey
him; I shall not shut my Eyes against the discoveries. But to consider this
Matter a little more particularly: As soon as our Blessed Savior was Ascended,
there was an occasion given to exercise this Supremacy in choosing a new Apostle
in the room of Judas, Acts 1. But we see that the method taken was, that the
whole Multitude chose Two, and then they cast Lots which of the Two should be
the Apostle. And so as to the choosing of Deacons, Acts 7. the whole Multitude
chose them, and presented them, not to Peter, but to all the Apostles to be
Ordained.

If we look a little further into the Acts of the Apostles to Chapter 8. We shall
find the Apostles not sent by St. Peter up and down to their business as
occasion required, but St. John and him sent by them to Samaria; which was not
very mannerly nor very fit had they known him to be their Sovereign.

Acts 11. we find those of the Circumcision, contending with him, and forcing
him to give an account of his Actions, and that without any Ceremony, or
deference proper for one in so high a Place; and we see he patiently submits to
it, without standing upon his Prerogative of being unaccountable, without
chiding them for their Insolence, or any thing of that kind.

Acts 15. we find a solemn Meeting of the Apostles and Brethren at Jerusalem,
where St. Peter speaks indeed, as any other Man might have done, but does not
preside or determine any thing. The Appeal was to the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem, not to him alone; and if any thing in the whole Meeting was done
Authoritatively by any single Person, it was by St. James, for he passes
Sentence, as you may see Verse 19.

If we go to the Epistles, we shall find as little evidence of his Authority,
as we have in the History of the Church in the Acts of the Apostles.

The first Epistle is that to the Romans, not from St. Peter, but from St.
Paul; where there is not the least notice taken either of St. Peter, or of the
great Prerogatives of that Church, which, one would think, could hardly be
avoided if St. Paul had known any thing of them; nay he says some things which
directly contradict their Pretenses, which you may see Chap. 11. He tells them
there, that he speaks to them who were Gentiles, as being the Apostle of the
Gentiles; and if so, St. Peter must not have had so near a relation to them,
because he was the Apostle of the Jews. Then he proceeds to advise them to have
a care of themselves, lest they should fall away, and be cut off; as you may
see ver. 20, 21. Be not high-minded, but fear, for if God spared not the
natural Branches, take heed, lest he also spare not thee. It Is plain, that St.
Paul at that time knew nothing of the great Privileges of that Church, of its
being the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, of its being the Center of Church
Unity, and of its being Infallibly secured from Error and Apostasy.

If we go on to the Epistle to the Corinthians we shall sind there a very
proper occasion to mention St. Peter's Authority, if he had any such as they
boast of, as you may see 1 Ephesians. Chap. 1. Now this I say that every one of you
says I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas [or Peter] and I of
Christ; Is Christ divided, or was Paul Crucified for you? etc. Those People
certainly knew nothing of St. Peter's Supremacy, nor St. Paul neither,
otherwise he would hardly have omitted to tell them of such an Infallible Cure
for their Divisions.

In the Epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians we have many Arguments against St.
Peter's pretended Supremacy; St. Paul tells us there that he had no Superior,
that he had his Authority from none but Christ, Chapter 1.17. He compares himself
with St. Peter, and says that the Ministry of the Uncircumcision was committed
to him as the Ministry of the Circumcision was unto Peter. Chapter 2. v. 7. He
mentions St. Peter as of the same Authority with James and John, when James
Cephas and John who seemed to be Pillars, Verse the 9th. And a little further
he tells us how he openly withstood Peter to the Face, because he was to be
blamed. All these things might be urged at large, but I content my self only
tomention them. But from all together, I think, I may well conclude, that this
Promise of our Savior did not intend St. Peter any Power over the rest of the
Apostles, and consequently, not any to his Successors (if he had any) over the
Bishops of the Christian Church, who are Successors of the Apostles in general;
though we do not deny, but St. Peter had a Power over the whole Church, but only
as the rest of the Apostles had, whose Care, and consequently Authority was not
consined to particular Churches, as it was thought fit in order to the better
Government of the Church, that the Authority of Bishops should be since, but
was left at large, and unconfined as to any certain limits either of Person, or
Places.

But suppose it should be granted, that St. Peter had such Power, as they
affirm he had, yet there is not one Word in Scripture about a Successor, or
about the vast Privileges of the Church of Rome in this Point. And in truth,
there is as little evidence in the History of the Church for many Ages, of this
pretended Authority of the Bishop of Rome, as there is in the Scriptures.

Rome was at the time of the Planting the Christian Religion, a vast City, and
the Head of a very great Empire: This must of it self, give the Bishop of it a
great influence in the Affairs of the Church, which was almost all within the
Roman Empire; this made all sort of Communication with him easy, by means of
the mighty refort that was made from all Parts to the tal City; and Greatness
of his See, did in course of Time bring great Riches to it, and if we add to
this, that it was honored by the Preaching and Martyrdom of two great
Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, we see plain Reasons why the Bishops of Rome
were likely to make a great Figure in the Church; but as for real Authority,
such as is now pretended, there do not appear any footsteps of it for several
Ages.

As for Speculative Opinions, We may not perhaps have so certain an account of
them so long after, unless of those which by some accident or other came to be
Disputed. But Government is a Practical thing, and there happens every day
Occasion to exercise it, especially the Government of the whole Church; and if
the Pope had been from the beginning what he pretends to be, and what he now
makes himself, his Power could have been no more a matter of Controversy, than
it could be made a Controversy whether there were any Christian Church; for the
same History that clears the one must at the same time clear the other.

The Old Body of History of the Christian Church is that of Eusebius, which
contains an account of the Affairs of it for above 300 Years; now if the Pope
were Monarch of the Church for those 300 Years, we can no more miss to see it
in that History, than we can read any History of England for such a Number of
Years, and be uncertain whether we had here any King or no, for so long a time:
No History hardly can be conceived so faulty or imperfect, as to leave such a
Matter a Secret or uncertain; And yet I would Challenge any indifferent Person
to read that History over, and to show me but any one thing in it from which it
can be probably inferred, that the Bishop of Rome was the Governor of the
whole Church; whereas, were it truly so, there must have been something of it
in almost every Page; Because all the business of the Church must in a manner
roll upon him. He must be the Person appealed to in almost all Difficulties, we
must have found his decrees in all the great Affairs that passed, His Decretal
Epistles must have been interspersed up and down in the whole Work; his
Authority must have put an end to all Schisms and Heresies, or at least their
Rebellion against him must have been reckoned as one great part of their Crime.
In a word (as I said before) the thing must have appeared as plain as that
there was any King in England for these last 300 Years.

Next to that History, the most likely place to find his Authority, if he had
any, is in the Works of St. Cyprian, which contain more of the Ancient
Discipline and Government of the Church, than is to be found in any other Old
Author, especially, if we add further, that a great part of his Works is only
Letters to, or from Bishops of Rome. We could not but see, in such a number of
Letters, whether he wrote to his Sovereign or not; we should see it in the
Titles which he gives him, in his Style, in the deference which he pays him. In
short, the whole would some how or other show that it was his Superior he was
writing to, but now the contrary to this is true. He never speaks to him, or of
him in his Letters to other People, but by the Name of Brother; he freely
Censures him and his Opinions, just as he would do by any other Man, and with
as little deference or respect; and he finally differed from him in a Matter of
great consequence, that of Re-baptizing Heretics, and called Councils of the
Clergy, and raised a great Party against him in it, and yet was never, that I
have heard of, charged either with Rebellion, or Schism, or Heresy upon that
account; but is to this day reputed a Saint in Heaven.

To conclude this Matter, The whole Discipline of the Ancient Universal Church,
plainly shows that the Government of it was an Aristocracy, especially, that
strict Account that Bishops were to give to their Fellow Bishops up and down
the World, of their Ordination, and their Faith, and other Matters in order to
hold Communion with one another, which as it is left off since the Pope's
Authority came up, so the use of it must have been inconsistent with it, for it
was taking the Judgment of Things and Persons into their own Hands, which must
not have belonged to them, but to the Sovereign High Priest.

In a word, their forging so many Decretal Epistles for the Bishops of Rome for
so many Ages, is a plain Argument that they have no true Evidences of the
exercise of such Authority in the Ancient Church, as is now pretended to. Had
such Authority been then exercised they needed not have been put to the forging
Evidences of it; we could not easily have missed of as many true Decretal
Epistles, as we have now forged ones, something or other we must at least, have
heard of theirs, upon all the Emergent Controversies and Difficulties that
happened in the Church: In short, We must have known of the Authority of the
Popes of those Ages, by the same methods we know of the Authority of the then
Emperors, by their Actions, by their Laws, by their Rescripts, by their Bulls,
and by the whole Course of their Government. And therefore we must not judge of
a thing of that Nature, by some few accidental and general Expressions in
Authors, or by Compliments, which the Bishops of so great a See could not
easily miss of.

The last Argument I shall make use of is this, That it is not easily to be
believed, that Jesus Christ has left such an Authority in his Church, without
leaving at least, some Rules about it; such as how, and by whom the Person who
is invested with it is to be Chosen, how his Authority is to be executed, and
what are the bounds and limits of it, or whether it has any bounds or no: These
are Matters of great consequence, which have been the occasion of a great many
Schisms, and might have been, or may still be the occasion of a great many
more; Besides, that so vast an Office without any set limits, is mighty apt to
degenerate into Tyranny, and to betray Men into great Exorbitancies, to tempt
them to leave the Simplicity of the Gospel, to Usurp upon the Rights of other
People, and to affect at last, a Secular Dominion instead of a Spiritual Office.

In fact, the want of some such Rules to limit and confine his Authority has
made great differences in the Church of Rome about this Matter: Some say, he
has a plenitude of Power; others say, that he is confined to the Canons of the
Church; some say, that he is above a General Council, others deny it; some say,
that he has the Supreme Authority over all the World, not only in Spirituals,
but also in Temporals, that he has a Power to Erect Kingdoms, to give away
Kingdoms, to deprive Princes of their Dominions, and to take away the
Obligation of Subjects to their Allegiance; others there are, who either
qualify this with distinctions, or else quite deny it; lastly, some there are
who say, that he is Infallible, that what he solemnly determines ought to be a
Rule and Law to all Christians, and to be taken as the Dictate of the Holy
Ghost but many there are who deny this too; besides all which, thereare many
Disputes about his Power of granting Indulgencies, his dispensing with Oaths
and Vows, and with the Laws both of God and the Church. These are Differences
of great moment, both with relation to Faith and Practice, and may carry Men as
different ways as Light and Darkness are different, or as different as Truth is
from the most monstrous Heresies in the World. Thus if the Pope be not above a
General Council, he may carry those into a State of Schism and Disobedience who
believe he is; if he cannot dispense with Oaths and Laws, and Vows, he may
carry those into great Sins who believe he can; if he cannot Depose Princes, he
may carry those into Rebellion, Perjury, Murder, and all sorts of Villainies
who are led by him; and if he be not Infallible, as he pretends to be, God
knows whither he may carry those who follow him: And so on the other side, if
he has all these Prerogatives, they are in as much danger who say, that he has
not.

If Christ had thought fit to appoint a Head of his Church, I cannot imagine,
but He would have given the Church some Rules about his Power, and the
Obedience that was due to him: And I cannot but wonder how the same Church
holds Persons that are of so contrary Opinions in Matters of this consequence:
Let us only consider that single Point of the Pope's Infallibility; I have
already showed that those who do believe it, must have a different Rule of
Faith from those who do not, because his Determinations must be part of the
Rule of their Faith, and consequently, they must have a different Religion,
from those who do not believe it. But that which I would insist upon at
present, is this, That for a Person to affirm himself to be Infallible, and to
be appointed by God for the Supreme Guide and Conductor of the Faith of
Christians, so that whatsoever he shall solemnly determine must be believed
true without examining; I say, for a Person to affirm this of himself,
supposing it be false, is downright Heresy, and that as gross and dangerous
Heresy as almost any Man can fall into: Now to illustrate this, I would only
propose one thing; Suppose Henry VIII. instead of those other Matters in which
he differed from the Church of Rome, had affirmed only this one Point; That God
had made him Infallible, and appointed him to be the Guide of all Christians:
Would this have made him a Heretic, or w^d it not? There is no Question, but
they must say, this would have made him and all his Followers so, or if there
be any worse Name by which they could call them; for if he were in their
Opinion, a Heretic for pretending to be the Head only of the Church of
England, and that without Infallibility; How much more must the other have made
him so? Now what is Heresy in one, must be Heresy in every body, supposing it
equally false; for Heresy is not made so by difference of Persons, but by the
Nature of Things. All therefore that believe the Pope not to be Infallible,
must as much believe this Pretense to be Heresy in him, and his followers, as
they would in the Case of Henry VIII. for the Matter is the same in both, and
the Pretense supposed to be equally false in both, but must be much more
dangero^ in the Pope, because more People ^e like to be seduced by him. That
Reason which makes those of the Roman Church who deny his Infallibility, yet
not speak, or think so severely of it, as they would do of the same Pretense in
another Man, is realy so far from excusing it, that it aggravates the Matter,
and makes it worse and much more dangerous than it would be in any other: They
do not speak out, because the Person who pretends to this Privilege, has great
Authority among them, and is at the Head of their Church, whereas this is the
very thing which makes such a Pretense the more pernicious, that he has great
Authority even with the whole Body of that Church, and has a very great Number
of them, who say, That if he determines Virtue to be Vice, and Vice to be
Virtue; and the same, if he determines Infidelity to be Faith, yet he must be
followed. God knows how many People such a one may carry with him into
Heresies, or Immoralities, or even to Hell it self.

Perhaps they think that God will take care of his Church, and will not suffer
any thing of that kind to happen; but sure they have little reason to expect
such a miraculous care over them, who encourage the Pope and his Followers in
such a pestilent Heresy, by living in Communion with him, and owning him for
the Head of their Church. But besides, how do they mean that God will take care
of his Church, when he has suffered a Person, whom they own to be the Head of
it, to fall into such a dangerous Heresy? Will God preserve him, that he shall
fall into no other Heresies? How do they know that, or how can they expect it?
If any thing puts a Man out of the care and protection of God, certainly such a
false pretense as that, is most likely to do it; And as for those who will
stick by such a Person notwithstanding they see the falseness of his pretenses,
they have reason to expect, that God should give them over to strong delusions,
rather than take any extraordinary care of them while they are in such a way.

I have now done with what I at first proposed to speak to, And I cannot but
hope that I have said enough to give you just reason to comply with the Laws of
your Country in these matters. This I am sure of, that I have not willingly
misrepresented any thing, or made use of any reasoning which did not first
convince my self; If, in this short Address, I have not answered all the
difficulties in these matters, or if you desire satisfaction in the other
points of Controversy betwixt us and your Church, I must renew my request to
you that you would consult some of our Divines, or read some of those Books
which have been written upon the several Subjects, which I am persuaded, can
hardly fail of Convincing you, if they are read impartially. As for my self, if
I find by the success of this, that any thing I can do, may help forward your
Conversion, I shall be very glad to take any further pains in it; And in the
mean time shall not fail to put up my Prayers to Almighty God on your behalf,
that he would be pleased to take away all Prejudice, to open your Eyes, and
bring you to the knowledge of the Truth.

FINIS.

