WARNINGS TO THE Unclean: IN A DISCOURSE From Rev. XXI. 8.

Preached at Springfield Lecture, August 25 th. School. At the Execution of Sarah
Smith.

By Mr. John Williams Pastor of the Church at Deerfield.

Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Michael Perry, at his Shop
over against the Townhouse. 1699.

Bibliography THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE


HENRY STEVENS of Vermont, FSA, etc. 4 Trafalgar Square, London. 1882

TO THE READER.
ALthough in the Popish Sense we may allow no sin to be Venial; ( For the wages
of every sin is death) yet there are doubtless degrees in sin, some are in
their nature and circumstances more peculiarly aggravated, and expose to a much
sorer Condemnation: Among which may be reckoned those which are not only
violations of positive Precepts, but of the very dictates and law of nature; in
such sins there is both a contempt of the Divine Authority, and a great deal of
violence offered to Conscience, which would restrain from the commission of
them, and is a plain demonstration of prevailing Atheism of the heart, and
mighty power and love of sin in it, to over-bear the light they have; but that
such sins should be committed under the clear light of the Gospel, shows men to
be wholly without excuse: It therefore is, and ought to be for a lamentation,
that though we live in such an Age of the World, wherein the Light of the
Gospel shines with greater clearness probably then it ever did since the first
revelation of it; yea, in days too, wherein the Wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against the unrighteousness of men. That in such days there should be
found so many sad instances of these horrid and unnatural sins of Murder and
Uncleanness; but especially of this latter, that there is ground to fear, that
it has been one of the things for which God has so long had a controversy
with the Land: As for what is obvious to men of this nature, we have reason to
hope, that the Land is free from the guilt of it, by the vigilance and
faithfulness of those to whom God has committed the Sword of Justice; but
there are many things of this nature secret, which the method of God in his
Judgments seems directly to point at. It is noted among the procuring causes of
Isreal's miseries, 2 King. 17.9. That the Children of Israel did secretly those
things that were not right in the sight of the Lord; probably this may re^err
to what we read, in 1 King. 14.24. There were Sodomites in the land: However
that be, it is certain the Prophets reckon up the sins of Whoredom and Adultery
among the black Catalogue of their abominations, and the causes of their
calamities, Jer. 5.7. They assembled themselves by troops in Harlots houses;
and Hos. 4.11. Whor^dom and Wine take away the heart; these are such things as
defile the Land, wherever they are committed, and will certainly procure an
increase of Judgments, unless repentance prevents; and whenever God in his
just Wrath leaves any to be monuments of shame and ignominy before the world,
it is a loud call to all who lie under such guilt, to be speedy and thorough in
repentance. God both requires and expects it should be so. Deuteronomy. 13.11. All
Israel shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously, on which account it
seems very suitable to accompany such sad instances with solemn warnings, that
those who are under the like guilt, may be awakened, and others may be awed;
and it is especially needful, that persons be put in remembrance of the
dreadful consequence of these things in the world to come; in comparison of
which, the greatest shame, and severe penalties here, are as nothing; and as
the Judgment of God is more severe, so it is more certain, he has positively
declared, Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers and adulterers God will Judge; these works of
darkness may escape the notice, so the Judgment of men, but there will be no
escaping the Judgment of God; there is no darkness or shadow of death where the
workers of Iniquity may hide themselves; the eye of God follows men into their
darkest recesses, and he will surely have a day to bring to light the hidden
things of darkness. To promote these Ends, it is that many of the Hearers of
the following sollid and seasonable Warning delivered just before the Execution
of a person convicted of these horrid sins of Murder and Adultery, have
desired the publication of it; to which the Author has consented, being
desirous to further the right Improvement of such a sad Example, to deter
others from the like abominations. As for the person Executed for these sins,
she is an awful instance of the infatuating, hardening and stupifying power of
this brutish Sin of Uncleanness, her love to, and frequent practice of it,
having occasioned her stifling many convictions, and contracted a fearful
stupidity and sottishness upon her, near the approaches of death. It is
earnestly to be wished, that such Warnings and Examples might not be in vain;
that all would so improve them, that we might see no more such Examples. To
conclude therefore, let me persuade all to consider, the heinous nature, and
dreadful effects of these sins; the Apostle gives a particular account hereof,
1 Cor. 6.9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Its a sin against a man's own body, it is a
defiling of that which should be the temple of God; it is a Sin loathsome in it
self, and makes those who are guilty of it, loathsome to God, and to men too,
when it is discovered; it is a sin that is ordinarily the punishment of other
sins, Prove. 23.27. A Whore is a deep ditch, and a narrow pit, the abhorred of
the Lord shall fall therein. It is a Sin that dreadfully hardens and besots
those who are guilty of it. Prove. 21.9. it is said of the Harlot, n^ne that go
in unto her return again, neither take they hold of the path of life. (2.) That
persons would more carefully avoid the inducements to this Sin which are too
common: Such are, over cos^ly, light garish Attire, impudent and immodest
carriages, filthy communications, idleness, intemperance, by which the body is
inflamed, and modesty banished; the command that forbids the acts of
Uncleanness, forbids also the occasions and tendencies to it; and unless there
be a tenderness and watchfulness to avoid these, there will be little hopes,
that gross pollutions will be avoided. Thus commending the following Warnings
to the Blessing of God, and to the serious consideration of the Rising
Generation.

I am Your Souls well-wisher. W. Williams.

WARNINGS TO ALL Unclean Persons.
Rev XXI. 8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall
have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone: which is the
second death.
SInners promise themselves a great deal of pleasure, satisfaction and delight
in the ways of Disobedience, to the holy Commands of God; but the destinations
and appointments of God to them are far otherwise. They say they shall sollace
themselves with love, and take their fill of love. But in these words you see
what God appoints them too, not to a bed decked with coverings of tapistry, with
carved works, with fine Linen of Egypt, perfumed with myrrh, aloes and
cinnamon; but to a lake burning with fire and brimstone; a righteous allotment
from God, to all them that burn in their filthy lusts here. In these words by
an elegant Antithesis, we have represented to us the differing frame of the
wicked from the godly; and the differing portion of these from the godly; the
Godly in the foregoing verse are described from their constancy, and
perseverance in opposing whatever was contrary to the holy nature, or holy Law
of God: and happiness in its full complement, or perfection is promised them of
God: The Ungodly spoken of in these words, are such as are for pre^ent ease,
and endless sorrow, and pain are threatened to them. In which words, we have as
it were a Catalogue of those that are appointed to Wrath, or a very severe
Commination, or Threatening, etc. With the Subjects thereof.

1. The Commination or Threatening, shall have their part, etc. an absolute
peremptory threatening, ( shall have) not that its probable, or who can tell but
it may be so, they are in danger, its very much to be feared it will be ^o; but
they shall have their part.

Part] share or portion, so much as has been demerited by their sins, and is
appointed them of God: who will give to every man, according to the fruit of
his doings.

Lake] figuratively put for the place of Tor^ent; Hell, wherein the reprobate
shall be ^ormented.

Burns with fire and brimstone] denoting the ^xtream torments of Hell; when
it is said they shall have their part, etc. it is as much as though ^t had been
said, they shall be adjudged to a most grievous Damnation, by an irreversible
Sentence.

Second Death] Eternal Death, etc. Damnation of Soul and Body in Hell,
concludes under it the separation of the whole man, Soul and Body from the
glorious presence of God; and the delivering of the Sinner to endless pain and
torment in Hell.

2. The Subjects of this doleful Commination.

Fearful] Such as through fear of man, swerve from the holy profession, and
practice of Godliness; comprehending all those who are afraid, from the
encouragements of the Gospel, to commit their Souls to Christ; who dare not on
Gospel Encouragements believe on Christ.

Unbelieving] all that remain in a Christless and Impenitent State, on whatever
consideration, whether from sloth, love of sinful pleasures, or contempt of
Christ, and his Glorious Grace.

Abominable.] Those that are left to sin against nature, and such as are guilty
of Sodomy, and Bea^tiality.

Murderers.] Those that unjustly take away the life of others, or do that which
has a tendency thereto; those that offer violence to the blood and life of
others.

Whoremongers.] Unclean persons, whether married, who are termed Adulterers; or
unmarried, who are called Fornicators.

Sorcerers] Witches, those that have familiar amity with Evil Spirits.

Idolaters] Idol worshippers, that use Idols in Religious Worship: Such also
are all that put the Creature in the room and stead of God.

All Lyars] Such as are deceitful, and dissembling, who speak otherwise then
they think; and do otherwise then they speak; such as accustom themselves to
speak falsely; comprehend those that fall into Heresy, and all practical Liars,
as Hypocrites, who profess that they know God, yet in works deny him; any dying
under the guilt of these sins, are the Subjects of this Commination: Any living
under the single guilt of any one of these heads of sin; are at present under a
Sentence of Death, and nothing but un^eigned repentance toward God, and faith
in Jesus Christ, can prevent their being the Subjects, of this threatening
eternally.

DOCTRINE.
Murder and Uncleanness, are sins that God punishes men, and women dying under
the guilt of; with Eternal Damnation. Or thus, That Impenitent Murderers, and
Unclean persons, will ^e made the Subjects of Hell Torments.

Hell Torments will be the portion of all Impenitent and Unclean Persons. I
have singled out these two, rather then the rest; because God in his
Providence, calls me to ^ear testimony against these, and to warn one in a
peculiar manner convicted of both these, and under a just Sentence of Death,
speedily to repent, and get a pardon in the blood of Christ.

Uncleanness and Murder are Sins that God punishes not only in this life, but
in the world to come; when the natural life of these shall be expired, and that
by Divine Appointment, worse sorrows then ever they endured here, shall seiz^
upon, and apprehend them; the sufferings of wrath here, and loss of li^e, by
divine vengeance, will not expiate, guil^iness; but divine wrath will pursue
and abide on the guilty in the other world: One Death will lead to another; the
First Death makes way for the Second. God don't punish the Guilty only with
Damnation, but Everlasting Damnation: Sinners dying under the guilt of these
sins, shall not only be Damned, but everlastingly Damned.

Quest. How does it appear, that God will punish them that dye under the guilt
of these sins, with Everlasting Damnation?

1. From Scripture Threatenings and Comminations, God is not a man that he
should lie, neither the Son of man that he should repent, has he said, and
shall he not do i^? Or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? God that
said of old, that he would Chastize, as their Congregation had heard, God who
is truth, and cannot l^e, who after he had threatened his imp^nitent people in
ancient times for their Apos^acy, warned them against flattering themselves
with hopes of impunity, by saying, the Lord have spoken it; this God has in
his Word threatened thus to deal with Unclean Sinners, and commanded them not to
deceive themselves with hopes of a less punishment. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.6.
these Exclusions from the Kingdom of Heaven, comprehend in them positive
punishments, even the punishment of Eternal Damnation. If Sinners hearing the
curses and threatenings of Gods Word, embolden themselves with promising
themselves happiness, they will find themselves in the issue, separated to all
evil. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. For heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, than one
jot or tittle of Gods word fail of its accomplishment.

2. Because these are Transgressers of the Holy Law of God, and Damnation is
due to them on this account. Romans 6.23. Romans 1.13. Every Sin is a transgression
of the Holy Law of God; its therefore a meet and a reasonable thing that they
should have their due: Hell and Damnation are as really due to them, and
deserved by them in this their last end, as ever wages were to a man, at the
end of his days work. God is neglected and slighted, his holy Law trampled
upon, for a little present carnal satisfaction; so that the Justice of God is
concerned thus to deal with them.

3. Because these their sins are of a scarlet and crimson dye, aggravated
iniquities filling up the measure of other sins; not barely transgressions and
violations of a holy Law of God, but breaches of his Law, with such
aggravations, that ripen for Damnation.

1. Uncleanness is an aggravated iniquity, filling up the measure of other
sins. Prove. 2.18. this appears,

1 In that it is a sin that God leaves the abhorred of his Soul, and reprobates
to a wallowing and continuing in. Eccles. 7.26. Prove. 22.14. A Sin that he
leaves them to, that he never intends good to; these are left of God, to go the
way to Hell; and not escaping these sins, they may not think to escape
damnation. Prove. 7.27. Prove. 5.5. these expressions that the abhorred of the
Lord shall fall therein, plainly intimates, that many previous and foregoing
sinful courses, have provoked God to jealousy and hot displeasure; and that he
will leave them to this sin, to prepare them for a day of Vengeance.

2. A Sin that takes away the heart from God, and that which is good. Hos.
4.11. It alienates and estrangeth the heart from God, and the holy Commandment;
it causes sinners to disregard and slight promises and threatenings; it takes
away the heart from thinking, and meditating of God, and his Word, from
delighting in God and his Commandments, from contriving and studying how to
please God, and obey his voice; so that they will not hearken to his voice,
they will none of him; when the heart is thus taken off from God, and that
which is good, the measure of sin will be filled up apace. Prove. 2.17.

3. In that they are addicted and accustomed to this Sin, are hardened persons,
and seldom truly repent. Prove. 2.19. Prove 7.13.23. the Scripture speaks of
these, as the most impudent and shameless sinners; yea, as those that refuse to
be ashamed; many of these past feeling. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. Now, when any are
hardened from Gods fear, they will fall into mischief, and the heart of those
will be set in them to do evil.

4. A Sin that has ruined and made desolate Nations and Lands, guilty of it:
It drowned the Old World; it brought down Fire and Brimstone on Sodom and
Gomorrah, Gen 19.13. Sodom had many other sins, as Pride, Idleness etc
Glu^tony; but this sin of Uncleanness made it a desolation; and a sin that
eternally ruins and undoes the Soul. Prove. 6.32.

2. Murder is an aggravated Sin, filling up the mea^u^e of other sins; other
sins treasure up wrath against the day of wrath: This sin ripens for cutting
down, finisheth the transgression, and brings forth death: this appears, in

1. That the cry of this sin, pierces the very heavens, and brings down the
Curse of God. Genesis 4 10, 11. he sinned in his wrath against his Brother; he
finished that sin, in the murder of him. God admonished and warned him, for his
passionateness, and angryness, but when he had committed this s^n, says God,
Thou art cursed from the earth.

2. Inasmuch as usually they are hardened against Gods ^ear, and contemners of
God, that are thus guilty. Genesis 4.9. he does not fall down and cry out against
himself, for his own guiltiness, but as though it were a light thing to break
with God, he adds sin to sin; he lies, to hide his murder, and takes up God
disdai^fully, Am I my Brothers Keeper? A Parent, a Master, a Prince, would
account such language from a Child, Servant or Subject, unallowable sawciness
and contemp^. He speaks as though it was an affront to put such a question to
him: and therefore after God denounced a Curse on him, he does not bewail the
greatness of his sin, he does not relent or manifest sorrow that he had sinned
against God, as he had done; only faith, My punishment is greater than I can
bear; and instead of busying his mind to get his sin pardoned, by building a
City, he diverts his mind from contemplating on his guiltiness.

3. In that God will not permit Murderers to li^e here, but causes them to die
before their time; Blood thirsty men shall not live out half their days Exodus
21.14. Flying to the horns of the Altar, shall be no sanctuary or security to
them. Numb. 35.31. there can be no compensation m^de for the expla^ing of guilt
as to this life. God will have no man plead that the natural life of such a^
one, may be spared. Prove. 28.17.

4. In that a whole Land cannot be innocent, but polluted, that suffer innocent
blood to cry against it, in neglecting the Execution of Justice, for such a
transgression: In that a whole Land shall smart for sparing a convicted
Murderers Life: When Murder is uncertain as to the author of it; see what is
incumbent on a people, for the preventing the Wrath of God. Deuteronomy. 21.1.^^*10. A
people have no reason to expect that it will go well with them, li^ they
neglect execution of Judgment, for this sin. Deuteronomy. 19.11, 12, 13. Numb. 35.33.
the conniving at, and suffering of such sins, greatly moved God to wrath
against Israel. Jer. 2.34.

5. In that the very light of nature, teaches that God is not wont to suffer
this Sin to go unrevenged. Acts 28.4. the Wrath of God is not only revealed
from Scripture light, against this Sin; but the Barbarians by the light of
nature, judge it too great an offense for the Judge of the World to permit,
long unrevenged here.

USE I. Of Information.

1. What great reason they have to be humbly thankful to God, that are
restrained and kept from these Sins. Every one by nature, has the seeds of all
Sin, and disobedience: Its God that witholds all as well as Ahimelech Genesis
20.6. Religious Education, our own wisdom and resolutions cannot restrain even
from such wickedness: Its God that makes us to differ one from another, that
keeps from such pollutions; many of the Wise and Learned of the World, many
that make a profession, have been guilty: We are not to be unthankful for
restraining grace; we are humbly to acknowledge God, when he keeps back from
presumptuous sins.

2. What great reason Ministers, Parents and Heads of Families, have to warn
all under their Charge against, and to restrain them from such sinful practices
and courses. These Sins will not only expose theirs to such calamities in this
life, that will make the ears of them that hear, to tingle, but render them
obnoxious to Eternal Damnation.

3. How they are to blame, who suffer and permit such things under their eye,
and roof, that are leading occasions to such Sins. They are to blame that
suffer and allow their Children and Servants in the black and dark night, to be
absent from the Religious Orders of their Families, to be going the way to such
houses; they are to be reproved, who bring up their Children and Families in
Idleness, which does occasion the abounding of sin, even this sin of
Uncleanness. Idleness occasioned Sod^ms being so vile. Heads of Families are to
be reproved, that see Young Ones, Children or Servants wantonly toying and
dallying one with another, foo^ishly sporting on beds before their eyes,
unreproved. I^ Parents and Heads of Families countenance and wink at such
things: I know no reason they have to exercise charity toward them, that they
will not play the Who^e, and be grossly Unclean out of their sight; they are to
blame that know their Children make themselves vile, and restrain them not.

4. That the case of some is exceeding hazzardous and full of danger, they have
the astonishing guilt of these Sins of Uncleanness and Murder upon their Souls;
they have not only committed th^^^ evils, but have not repented of them, have
the guilt of these sins still lying upon their Souls. If the Consciences of
the^e are a^l^ep, and they under security, yet they are in hazard and great
danger. It may be they s^id, when they were tempted to these sins, they would
yield to them, it would be only repen^ing of them afterward. Oh they are but a
few who addict themselves to such a way and course of Sin, that un^eignedly
repent and turn to God. Prove. 2.19. These had need to fly for refuge, to
escape for their lives.

5. Its a thing much to be lamented, that any among us at this day should be
left to such Sins. Its sorrowful to hear that Pagans and Papists should be
guilty in these respects: much more lamentable, when any among our selves,
especially at this day, are walking on in these ways. God has been hedging up
our ways with thorns, to stop us in ways of sin; shall any in such a day when
God is purging us, be thus Unclean? Shall any contemn the Justice of God, and
flight his anger? Rivers of tears should run down our eyes. We should behold
these Transgressors and be grieved.

USE II. Of Awakening to all that are guilty of these Sins: Know it, that for
these things comes the Wrath of God upon the children of Disobedience. There
is reason that such Sinners should tremble at the Wrath of God; hear what the
Text and Doctrine says to such as you. I would fain have charity, that there
is but one in this Assembly, that has been guilty of Murder in the highest
degree of it; yet I fear there are several that have Murdered in their hearts,
and some who have been guilty of interpretative Murder, for hiding and
concealing the Uncleanness of which this poor Condemned One was guilty, before
she became guilty of Murder, for which she is to dye. I fear the guilt of
Innocent Blood lies also upon some that through a greedy desire to get gain,
have made drunk the heathen, to the occasioning quarrels to death among
themselves, and ploddings of death to others. Oh consider of the words and
truth of God to you this day, and labor to get a pardon for your
Blood-guiltiness. Here also is certainly matter of Awakening to all unclean
Sinners, Adulterers or Fornicators: It may be there are not many before God,
that have before man been convicted of Uncleanness, not many who have in the
sight of man, had Bastards laid to their charge; yet to be feared, much
Uncleanness to be charged on several, who are Whoremongers in the sight of God,
and exposed to this Wrath, that you hear determined from the Lord God of Hosts
against the Unclean. Hear and tremble all you Unclean Ones, elder and younger
who have not only been in heart, but actually unclean before the eye of your
Judge: How can you escape the Wrath of God under the guilt of these? This Sin
of Uncleanness is one great cause why the Land mourns this day, and is a sin
for which many will despairngly mourn at last, unless they speedily repent.
This evil is thought to be a prevailing, growing evil. I shall therefore more
specially have a regard to the guilty of Uncleanness in what remains. Awakening,

1. To all those who can commit this Sin with greediness, and without remorse;
these have got the mastery of their consciences, who can commit this sin
without terror, the wounds that this sin makes, are not felt; time was when the
accusations of conscience made them tremble, filled them with inward horror;
time was, when they could not yield to lesser acts of Uncleanness without much
difficulty, from the arguing of a conscience informed from the Word of God. But
now they are greedy after the pleasures of sin, will and can argue for
Uncleanness, and promise themselves security. So the whorish Woman spoken of in
Prove. 7.15. She becomes an Orator for it, uses all her Eloquence, to inveigle
a companion, does not barely hint a desire of the commission of that sin, but
uses much fair speaking: Now they can watch for fit seasons, and for suitable
companions. Ephesians. 4.17, 18. Fear of Hell, a Religious Education, fear of shame
and reproach will do nothing to prevent the commission o^ this Sin.

2. To all those who are guilty of this Sin just after Sabbaths, and soon after
they are com^ from hearing the Word of God. Some ther^ are, who before they
sleep, or give themselves rest in their beds, are Unclean: Its much to b^
feared, there are those who on the evenings after Sabbaths, are wanton and
unclean; who (...) as though God had been giving them a Dispensation to be
vile; rather than exhorting of them to Holiness of Life and conversation. How
many who do in this way as it were bid defiance to God? and say, they don't
value his word, or like them, the word that has been spoken to us in the name
of the Lord, we will not do it; but we will certainly do whatever goes forth
out of our own mouth; such are surely impudent. Prove. 7.14, 15.

3. To all those who descend from Godly and Religious Parents, who to the
grief, and against the Godly Warnings, and admonitions of their pious
Relations, are Unclean. 1 Samuel 27.25. Those may boast themselves of their
privileges; and say, they have Abraham to their Father; but they are to God,
as Children of the Ethiopians: has not God in his Word said of such as you? If
they forsake me, I will cast them off for ever? Prove. 29.1.

4. To all those who break their Covenant with God and man, for the fruition of
adulterous pleasure. Mal. 2.14. Prove. 2.17, 18. Fornication is not connived at
by God; but he is a swift witness against these. Mal. 3.5. those who sin with
so many aggravating and heightening circumstances as these, cannot be very long
in filling up the measure of their Sin for a judicial process; they have before
witness on earth, in the presence of God, promised Chastity.

5. To all those who condemn it in others, and know that it has brought down
the Wrath of God upon them, and yet live in it; some that are guilty of this
Sin, cry out against others, and speak as though the sorest punishment that
could be thought of, could not be too severe: So did Judah, when his
daughter-in-law, was guilty of Whoredom, yet himself as deeply guilty. Genesis
38.24. Surely these are inexcusably guilty, and in very great hazard and danger
of being filled with the Wrath of God. Romans 1.32. Romans 3.1, 2, 3* these ^o as
it were Justify those that have been guilty after God has punished them, and
slight the Justice of God; therefore you find God so sharply reproving these,
and declaring these more abominable in his sight. Ezekiel. 16.47, 53. Jer. 3.7,
12. God is not wont to suffer such that harden their hearts against Examples of
Wrath on others, to escape his Wrath. Dan. 5.22.

6. To them that live in Uncleanness* whilst they make a high profession of
Godliness: they come, and sit at the Table of the Lord, and yet wallow in
Uncleanness. God that sees what they do in Secret, says, Shall not my Soul be
Avenged of such as these? Oh! in what great danger are Church Member Unclean
persons. If God will answer them according to their Abominations, who set up
their Idols in their hearts, and put the stumbling block of their Iniquity
before their face, when they come to enquire of a Prophet Ezekiel. 14 4. What will
the end of these ^e (...) These have had impressions made by the Spirit of God,
from the word on their Consciences and have been like the Earth that drinks
i^ the Rain, that comes often upon it; and i^ they do after all this, continue
to bring ^ort^ briars, and thorns, may they not look upon themselves nigh to
cursing? Heb. 6.8.

7 To all those whom God has suffered to escape long Unpunished, in the
pursuit of Unclean delights, an awful symptom, and groun^ of fear, that God
intends to punish them Eternally. Oh! many are glad at heart, that they can sin
unpunished, and not be brought to shame, and smart for it here: truly such have
awful ground to fear, that God intends to Damn them Eternally. The letting of
Sinner^ go unpunished is threatened, as one of the fores^ Calamities, inflicted
in this world, for the preparing of the Sinner for endless Torment. Hos^ 4.14,
17. Let such read, Romans 9.22, 23. And se^ if they have any reason to account it
any part of their happiness, that they are suffered of God, to escape long
unpunished, in such a way of sinning.

8. To all those who cover their Uncleanness with Lies, to the doubling of
their guiltiness: These take a course to carry the guilt of their doings into
another world with them. Those that commit Adultery, and walk in Lies, will be
as Sodom to God. Jer. 23.14. Prove. 19.5. They are doubly an Abomination to God:
the Text does once and again threaten those persons. Here Is nothing but matter
of awakening and terror to all Unclean persons, older or younger. God says
that he will punish such as you are: He will take you into his own hands. Heb.
13.4. Oh! what reason have you to tremble and be afraid! your Sin is Damning.
The damage it does you, is not only in this life, and on your bodies, but it
destroys your Souls, and that Eternally. Consider, that Eternal Separation
from God, and every act of disobedience receiving a meet reward, will make you
perfectly miserable. Here consider, for your awakening.

1. That the pleasures of sin will be dear bought. You are now resolved to live
a life of pleasure. You are doubly guilty of folly, as well as wickedness; you
make choice of pleasures: that lie in common with bruits, and refuse the joys
of holiness, and communion with God. You choose also those that you can enjoy
but for a season: they will be but as the crackling of thorns under a pot; and
they will cost you the loss of all happiness, and the sustaining all misery:
You live a jolly, jocund life now, but what will you do in the end thereof?
Madness in your hearts whilst you live, and after that you go to the dead.

2. That God wont punish you for one sin only, or but for a few, but for all.
He will remember all your Iniquities, and visit all your sins. Eccles. 11.9.
Amos 3.2. All your Uncleanness, all your Sabbath Pollutions, all your Sinful
thoughts, words, and actions. Oh! you will find it a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God, under the guilt of Innumerable sins: Can your
hands and hearts endure under this? Can you bear the wrath of God, for
numberless transgressions?

3 God wont only bring you into misery, but the Cup shall be full of wrath,
without any mixture of mercy; that he will make you take and drink down. Wrath
wont fall heavily only on one member of the body, but all; not only on the
body, but Soul and Body too: No friends to pity you, pray for you; no comforts
of this life, to comfort you. Rev. 14.10. Oh! how hard do afflictions sometimes
come upon you now; you say, you cannot live long under them, if they are
continued; and yet you have many mercies mixed with your bitterest afflictions,
many comforts: But then forsaken of all, nothing but wrath, not one single
mercy.

4. God will have no regard to any thing you can devise, to alleviate your
pain. He will take no notice of any of the prayers you made, or profession you
made of Religion. If you took lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridgroom; if
you eat and drunk at his Table: if in his Name you cast out Devils; if you gave
of your Estate to charitable uses; if your Estate were laid out for the
maintaining and upholding the Ordinances of God Worship* and your natural or
acquired parts and abilities, were improved for the good of Gods Church; your
wisdom and your courage improved many years, for the preservation and defense
of Gods people; it would not be Esteemed by God, to prevent your Torment. Matt.
7.21, 22, 23. and Matt. 25.12. God wont regard the Prayers of the most holy
Ministers and Relations that prayed for you, to ease you of your pains. Jer.
15.1. Ezekiel. 14.14. God wont regard your earnest pleadings. Matt. 25.11, 12.
Dives cannot get one drop of water, with all his pleadings. Your descending from
Godly Parents, and that you were the Children of the Covenant, will not procure
any abatement of pain: The rich man crying out in torment, though he cries,
Father Abraham, and is called Son, yet has no ease. Luke 16.25.

5. God will not only rank your sins before your eyes, but he will make them
manifest to your contempt, before the world. God will reprove you, and set your
sins in order before your eyes, when he comes to execute Vengeance, as Matt. 25
41. Psalm. 50.21, 22. He will also make known to the world, what manner of
persons you were to your disgrace and reproach. Psalm. 52.6, 7. Luke 12.2, 3.
All your Secret sins, wicked thoughts, your Hypocrisy, and Apostasy, will all
be proclaimed before all the world. You would be ashamed to be seen in any
company, if the wickedness of your hearts, and thoughts; if the wickedness
committed by you in Secret, were known to all; Oh! how do those that seemed to
be without shame, hang down their heads? How shy are they of any company, or
society, when but a little of their sin is made known? or but a few of their
ungodly pranks brought to light: but now all shall be made manifest, to their
everlasting disgrace.

6. God will not design any good to you in any, in all those sorrows, and torments
that you shall endure. Here when God chastens he aims at profit; he puts into
the Furnace to puri^y: but then his wrath will be a confirming fire: Reprobate
silver shall they be called. God who was so long abused, slighted, and
disregarded, will not have one thought, or intention to do you any good, or to
prepare you by these miseries for his favor: He sentenceth to everlasting
fire, prepared for Devils. You will be separated from all those that God
designs good to: the Judgments of God will be to make you miserable. Oh!
Consider of these things, you that forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver you. Its an ease to the Spirits of many a man and
woman under afflictions, to have comfortable hopes and persuasions, that God is
carrying on a design of Love and Grace to their Souls, by such Dispensations;
that by these he is preventing worse Judgments. 1 Cor. 11.32. but no ease can
come to the Damned from any such consideration. God never designs to bring them
out of torment, but the Smoke of their torment will ascend for ever and ever.

USE III. Of Warning. To Warn all to take heed of those sin; and to warn them
that are guilty of them, speedily to repent, and fly to Christ for pardon and
forgiveness.

1. To warn every one of you to take heed of these sins.

1. Or God may justly suffer you to be punished in the same way that you abuse
others, Job 30.10. God permits this many times by way of retaliation? 2 Samuel
12.11. Hos. 4.12.15. they themselves had been unclean. You would be far from
taking pleasure in having these sins paid back into your own botomes; to have
Husbands or Wives, to have Children, Sons or Daughters left of God to
Uncleanness; but it would be a righteous thing with God to permit you to be
exercised after such a sort.

2. Or you will take a course to bring an unremoveable reproach, blemish and
spot on your selves. Prove. 6.33. If you get a pardon as to everlasting
punishment, yet a spot will remain. 1 King. 15.5. Solomon tells you, a Good
Name is better than precious Ointment. I am sure, they justly forfeit the
reputation of wisdom that will part with a good name, for the pleasures that
are to be enjoyed in this way.

3. Or the best that can be expected, is sorrow unspeakably greater than any
pleasure you can reap in this way of sinning. Sorrow from the Judgments of God,
and that will be sure to overtake you in this life, and rottenness of bones;
being brought to a morsel of bread. How many heart distressing troubles was
David followed with, after he fell into these sins? how was he punished in and
from his own Children, and how by his Subjects revolting? Sorrows from the
Influences of Gods Spirit, in bringing to a sound repentance. He tells of
broken bones, his moisture turned into the drought of Summer, he lost the joy
of Gods salvation. Oh how will Conscience accuse and perplex; who would undergo
the horrors of Conscience, that will fill the Soul of such, to the causing of
them to have a dreadful sound in their ears for all the delight that is this
way to be enjoyed? the Psalmist, Psalm 51. acquaints us how such pleasures bite
at the last. Cain says, his punishment is greater then he can bear; his guilty
conscience makes him fear, that every one that meets him, is Gods Executioner.

4. Or, it is to be feared, that if once you yield, that you will hold on in
such ways till Death overtake you: Sinners are stupefied, that are left to
these ways of Sin: You have heard that few are recovered by unfeigned
repentance. Stolen waters are so sweet and pleasant to ignorant carnal men,
who know not that the dead are there, and that her guests are in the depths of
hell; that they oftimes go on, till a dart strike through their liver, Prove.
7.23. the young man had so much conscience left him, that he would not yield,
till with much fair speaking he was solicited, and then he goes on till death;
these are oftimes so far besotted by their lusts, that reproofs will be
slighted by them, Hos. 4.4.

5. They are Sins that bring great wrath upon a Land. Hos. 4.23. when the Sons
of Eli had given themselves to these sins, God was wrath, and Thirty four
thousand men fell in the Battle, and the Ark of God was taken. The wrath of God
distresseth a Land where such Iniquities abound; Wars, Impoverishing
Dispensations, to many Families and Towns, are the effects of Gods Anger,
stirred up (...) kindled by such provocations. Why should you rebel thus
against the Lord, and so provoke God to be wroth with the whole Congregation.

6. Or you may fear that God will destroy you for defiling his Temple. 1 Cor.
13.17.

Direction 1. Don't disobey Gods Counsels and walk contrary to them, in
refusing Christ Psalm. 81.11, 12. they take a direct course to fall into these
abominations, to their everlasting contempt, that cast contempt upon the Word
of God, and on his Son. A Christless Soul can have no assurance, that he shall
not be left finally to the worst abominations. Prove. 2.10.16^ Prove. 5.12, 13.

2. Don't rely on your own wisdom to be security to you from these
abominations; but endeavor to have your ways such as may please God. Eccl.
7.22. Some are ready to say, as Hazael, are we Dogs, that we should do such
things, and yet both do them, and have pleasure in them that do them: Yea
though they know the Judgments of God against them who do such things. Solomon's
Wisdom was no preventive; grace it self is no preservative from foul acts of
sin; where persons are carnally confident of their own strength. Peter after
his boasts, is so scared by a sorry dams^l, that he denies Christ, and Curses
and Swears. See that your ways are well pleasing to God, that you may be kept
by the mighty power of God, through faith to Salvation.

3. Abstain from all appearance and leading causes to such sins; don't come
^igh the door of her house, don't be out in evenings, and among foolish vain
jolly company, when you should be in your Closets, and on your knees before
God. Prove. 5.8, 9. Prove. 4.14, 1^. the young man spoken of, Prove. 7.1. was
going the way to her house in the black and dark night; he is ensnared. Prove.
17.18, 19, 21. beware and take heed of Idleness, as that which will occasion
your sinning after this sort. Usually Unclean persons, are idle persons; there
was abundance of Uncleanness in Sodom, and that because there was abundance of
Idleness. Ezekiel. 16.49, beware of drinking away your precious time: Drunkenness
ushers in Murder and Adultery: Drunkards are often Unclean.

4. Beware of giving way to other sins against the motions and strivings of
Gods Spirit. So did this poor Condemned Woman, before she was left of God to
this Sin of Murder! for which She must Dye: So did Herod, and he imprisoned and
murdered John the Baptist. Seven worse and more wicked Spirits often enter into
such, and so their last end is worse than their beginning, Mat. 12.44, 45.

5. Consider that all your ways are before God, and the darkness hides not
from him. Prove. 5.21.

6. Beware of indulging your selves in secret sins; you must endeavor to be
cleansed from secret faults, if you would not have presumptuous sins have
dominion over you.

2. To warn them that have fallen into these sins, not to delay repentance; to
beware of doing any thing to the continuing of the guilt of these sins upon
your Souls, and Consciences. Oh hasten, escape for your lives; fly for refuge
to Christ. Look not back, with a desire after them.

1 You have been antecedently guilty of many other sins, ripening you for
these; besides the guilt of these sins, you have the guilt of many other.

2. God will else tear you in pieces, and none shall deliver you. Psalm. 50.22.

3. All your former righteousness, and religigiousness will be disowned, if you
live impenitent under these sins. Ezekiel. 18.24. and 32 12, 13.

1. Remember them against your selves so as to be heartily judging and
condemning of your selves for them. If you would not have God to loath you,
loath and abhor your selves for your Violations of his holy Law: If you would
not have God remember against you former iniquities, you must remember them
against your selves. Your iniquities must be before you; and you must be
judging your selves, before God for them: So did Ezra, Chap. 9.15. So did
David, Psalm. 51.3, 4. This we are counseled to. 1 Cor. 11.31. Thus did
repenting Ephraim. Jer. 31.18.

2, Follow and trace the footsteeps of these your sins, till you find out your
Original Sin, and your impure Nature. Psa. 51.5. Unless men come to see and
know the plague of their own hearts, they will be partial and feigned in their
repentance: They that don't turn with their whole hearts, will fall back again,
when a suitable Temptation and Occasion is offered and presented.

3. Beware that you don't flatter your selves as though you had repented before
you have; repentance is not a saying before God with tears, that you are sorry
for your transgressions: many turn, but not to the most High.

4. See that Christ as a Sanctifier and Justifier be sought after by you, in
respect of the guilt you lie under: you had need improve Christ as a Justifier,
and as an Advocate. Oh! then go to Christ as to him who only can Justify,
acquit, and absolve you from the guilt of Sin. 1 John 2.1, 2. Joh. 1.29. From
the consideration of the Power and Dominion of Sin: you have need of Christ as
your only Sanctifier. Your Prayers, Reformations, Tears, will not Justify you:
Christ must be a Satisfyer for you, or Gods Justice cannot be Satisfied. And you
have no way to get power against corruption, but by going to Christ as your
Sanctification: Your Vows, Promises, Resolutions, Fastings, will not mortify and
kill any one sin in you; it is Christ must subdue your Sin in you, and for you.

5. Improve present influences from the Spirit of God to draw you to Christ.
Unless God by his Spirit draw you, you will never come to the Son: the Number
of your Sins will not make you go to Christ; the Greatness of your Sins will not make
you go to Christ: natural desires of happiness, and escaping Wrath and Hell,
will not bring you to Christ; these may cause you to play the Hypocrite, but they
will not bring you to Christ: times of common Calamity and Judgment will not drive
you to Christ: thoughts and apprehensions of Deaths drawing near and just at
hand, ready to arrest you, will not prevail with you to go to Christ. You that
delay and put off your repentance when God is striving with you, take heed, you
cannot convert your selves when you will, without Gods Spirit. Look upon this
poor object before your eyes, and then consider whether any, or all the
forementioned things, will make you fly to Christ. Improve the Spirit while it
is at work on your Souls.

6. Beware that you don't hearken to vain words and reasonings, tending to the
lessening of your guiltiness, and your danger of Gods wrath and Judgment. Ephesians.
5.6. Oh! know that for these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children
of disobedience. And since the Apostle has cautioned thus, as to this sin; I
would particularly warn you, to take heed that you don't by vain reasonings
prevent your speedy repenting, and turning to God: And shall in a few
particulars show you the Vanity of such reasonings, as have a tendency to
extenuate, and lessen your sin and danger, that you may not hearken to them,
and deceive your own Souls.

1. Some are ready to reason away apprehensions of Divine anger, because it is
so long since they were guilty of them; if they had committed these sins to
day, yesterday, or but a few weeks ago; they should be afraid, and concerned to
get them pardoned: but its so long since, that they have almost forgotten them;
and if God had been much provoked he would not have born with them thus long.

1. Consider. God remembers them all, as though committed but yesterday: they
are sealed up among his hid treasures. God said, Psalm. 50. That he can set them
in order before the sinners eyes. God will not only punish for a few of your
latter sins only, but for all: If they were committed when you were Young, he
hau't forgot them, for he says, He will bring you into Judgment, for all your
Youthful sins. Eccle. 11.9. They that have gone to God aright, have gone for
the pardon of former sins; sins of Youth, as well as latter transgressions.

2. God punishes some men a long time after they have committed their sins.
It Is true because Sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed, that
the hearts of the Sons of men are set in them to do evil; its no argument that
you shall escape punishment, because God has not yet punished you. Though God
did not destroy the people in the Wilderness presently, but bore with their
evil manners for forty years, yet he wasted that Generation. Hear what God
says, Exodus 32.32. God waited on, and warned his people for twenty three years
by his Prophet, and yet after all he destroyed them in his anger. Jer. 25.3, 7.
Jude verse 5. 2 Pet. 2.9.

3. It may be you have been under a Judicial process ever since. Sinners are
sometimes stupid and don't observe the Strokes of God upon them; hear how
unobservant they were that had been for so long a time under a course of
Judgment. Jer. 44.19. compared with 20^^^24. The Judgments of God are sometimes
more Spiritual, and so more undiscorned; God lays his plagues on some men's
Souls, when he lays them on other men's bodies; He sends leanness into some
men's Souls, when he sends leanness on others Estates. Ha^'t God let you alone
and poured upon you a Spirit of deep sleep? given you eyes, that you should not
see, nor perceive, nor be converted to this day? To be left of God to go on
stupidly in impenitency, is a very great testimony of Divine Wrath. Soul
plagues are the forest plagues.

4. The longer ago your sins were committed, the more hazardous your
unconcernedness about ^epenting of them, and getting a Pardon of them: God wont
be patient always, though he is ^ometimes long suffering: if he waits on
Sinners till they bring forth briers and thorns, he would have them know, they
are nigh to Cursing. Yea, such as are impenitent after much long suffering, may
fear that they are Vessels fitted to destruction, Romans 9.22. God says, I come
three years looking for fruit, and find none, cut it down why cumbereth it the
ground. Luke 13.7. ult.

2. Some are ready to argue that their sins are but little; if they had been
left to gross acts of Fornication or Adultery, they acknowledge they should
have had need to have haltened to Chrst for a pardon; but they were only guilty
of some wanton dalliances, therefore they don't think God is very angry with
them.

1. Though some sins comparatively considered are little, yet no sins
absolutely considered are little and small, because against an Infinite God,
and Violations and Transgressions of his holy Laws, and Commands.

2. Such little sins, if your Consciences were awakened and enlightened would
fill you with great perplexity, and distress: As long as the commandment did
not come, with Convictions of its exactness, and spirituality on Paul's
Conscience, he was alive and could do well enough; but when such an exposition,
as Christ put upon the Commandment came, sin revived, and ^e dyed; he was
slain, and could justify himself no longer.

3. God finds stubbornness and rebellion which are as that Sin of Witchraft,
where Sinners can see only humane frailty and sins of Infirmity, 1 Samuel 15.23.
Saul says, he had obeyed, the^ he had a good end in varying from the command,
or the people are to blame, but God tell^ him of rebellion and stubbornness
which were to him as Witchcraft and Idolatry: God tell^ him that he had in so
doing rejected the Word of the Lord. Christ tells us, he that looks upon a
Woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her in his heart. Hear
what account God makes of that which you call a look, a cast o^ the eye, a
little thing. Isa. 3.16, 17.

4. The more madness to break with God, and expose your Souls to Hell Torment
for these things, that had but a little of pleasure to entice. Ezekiel. 13.19.

5. Little Sins make way for greater. One Sin allowed, stupifies and makes way
for great ones; the greatest Sinner began with that which you call little. Eve
first saw that the tree was good: Cain was first wroth with Abel, and then slew
him.

3. Some are arguing thus; God is long-suffering and patient; no hazard of
present danger. Eccles. 11.8. If God strike Sinners dead presently, they should
be afraid to put off Repentance; but God waits and forbears; he waited long on
the Old World, on Sodom, on many wicked men of old; they don't doubt but God
will yet wait on them, they see no appearance of wrath as yet: to this,
Consider,

1. Is not this to despise the riches of Gods Grace and Patience, to the
treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.4, 5. cannot you be content
without a treasure of wrath? that you can find in your heart thus to delay
Repentance.

2. God did not exercise any patience toward the Fallen Angels, and he is
under no obligation to exercise any toward you. Jude 6. 2 Pet. 2.5. What
reason can you give why God should wait any longer on you? can you do him more
Services? God is very arbitrary in his waiting, longer or shorter on Sinners.

3. God does not ordinarily wait so long on Gospel Sinners. Romans 9.28 no
Sinners ripen sooner for cutting down in vengeance than Gospel Sinners. God
makes very quick work with some. Acts 13.46. how quick and sudden was God with
Ananias and Saphira?

4. God threatens to make quick work with them that harden themselves in Sins,
in hopes of long-suffering. Ezekiel. 12.27, 28. So that you have no security in
putting off repentance; its very hazzardous.

4. Some will reason thus with themselves. God is very gracious and merciful,
and pardons great Sins, and Sinners. God pardoned Manasseh, and Mary Magdalen,
and other great Sinners: If God had not proclaimed his Name to be gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, they
should be afraid of delaying repentance; but inasmuch as God is so very
merciful, they hope it will be no very hard thing to persuade him to pardon
afterward. To this consider,

1. That he is a just and righteous God too, and pardons no Sinners but such as
are penitent; it is true, God gives great Sinners encouragement to turn to him;
and upon their repentance, he will forgive their iniquities, yea multiply to
pardon; but remember he is a just God too; when he proclaims his Name with so
much encouragement to repenting Sinners, he subjoyns that he will not at all
acquit the guilty. Nahum. 1.3. as merciful as God is, he will not show mercy
and grace to the wronging and injuring of his Justice.

2. You take a course to be shut out of all mercy, and to have God appear
shutting up all bowels, and pity from you. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Such reasonings are to
be abominated. Romans 6.1. surely you turn the grace of God to wantonness; when
you improve it to encourage you on in ways of sin and rebellion.

5. Some plead for themselves, that they are weak and ignorant; God has not
given them muck knowledge as others; wherefore their sin is not so provoking to
God, as the sins of them that have more knowledge; they hope God will pity
their weakness, and not be so very severe with them.

1. One sin will not excuse you for another; a gracious act presently after a
sinful one, will not excuse you before God; surely the pleading of that which
is a sin, will be no security for a sin. It Is true, the more any sin against
knowledge, the more aggravated is their sin; but ignorance is no defense
against Gods anger; especially in such as you that have had your Education in
New England, under the plain convincing preaching of the Gospel. You must of
necessity have refused to attend to the Word preached, that remain ignorant, as
to the plain principles of Religion; you must have set at naught Gods Counsels,
and closed and shut your own eyes. What excuse will it be for you? if you are
willingly ignorant; you did not see, because you shut your eyes, and would not.

2. You know that such and such courses that you allow you selves in, are sins;
and so your sins are not from weakness, but wilfulness. You know that Whoredom
is a sin; that profaning Gods Sabbaths is a sin, that Unbelief is a sin. You
cannot plead ignorance here.

3. God has declared that your ignorance and weakness shall be no expiation of
his wrath: Isa. 27.11. Hos. 4.6.

6. You say, you don't make such a profession of Godliness as some others do;
if you made a very great profession, and did such things, you are ready to
think, God would be very angry; you do therefore condemn lesser evils in Church
members, and admire how they can be so insensible.

1. Sin will damn them that don't make a profession, as well as others. God
will damn Heathen for their Impenitency, as well as Professors.

2. You do so far make a profession, that your sin will be aggravated. You pray
in your Families, come and join in prayer, and hearing the Word of God. You do
many things, though not all commanded Duties; you profess so high, that your sin
will cast you down as low as Hell, if you repent not.

3. By these things you incapacitate your selves from making a suitable
profession. Will saying that you lived in sins and wickedness, that rendered
you unfit for respecting all Gods Commandments, prevent your being beaten with
many stripes? Luke 12.47.

7. Some will say, that its not in their power to change their own hearts, and
withstand temptation: If they had sinned after such a sort, and had a power to
have resisted temptations; they think God would have been very severe, but they
cannot change their own hearts.

1. Because you cannot do that which is not your work, and what you cannot, will not
you do what is your duty, and what you can? though you cannot change your
hearts, you can reform your life. Many that have no principle of grace, reform
their lives.

2. It Is in your power not to run your selves into temptations, as you often
do; you may as well on an evening, go into your Closet, and confess your sin,
as go into bad company, and bad places.

3. It Is your sin and madness then to provoke God not to help you. Cannot you
repent of your selves? and will you run away from God, who only can? Will you
sin away his help from you? He bids you turn, and he will pour out his Spirit:
if you turn from him, and will not cherish the motions of his Spirit, you take
a course to dye in your sins.

8. It Is your grief and sorrow that you do sin. If you were not affected and
sinned without remorse, you conclude, God would say, shall not my Soul be
avenged on such a Sinner? But you are sorry, you confess your sins with tears;
you can say you are grieved at heart for your sins, you hope God will not be so
exact with you.

1. Some are grieved and sorrowful, but it is for the shame and punishment of
their sins: they acted as though they had no shame in them, when their sins
were hid from man, but when men know of them, they grieve and are sorrowful.
Shame and fear of punishment, not the Violation of Gods law is the moving cause
of some men and women's grief and sorrow.

2. Your grief and sorrow will not quench hell fire, nor wash away the stain of
sin. If you cry night and day, and weep never so much; yea, you cover the Altar
in this sense with tears, God will not regard: these are not the blood of Christ,
which only cleanses from iniquity.

3. Your sorrow and grief are but flattery and dissimulation, so long as you
take no heed to reform. You read of the Pharisees, that they appeared to men to
be sorrowful: yea of those whose Fasts God abhorred, though they made a very
plausible show of sorrow, because they did not reform says God, Will you call
this a fast? and an acceptable day to the Lord? Isa. 58.3* 8.

9. You say, you were solicited, drawn in, and over persuaded by others to
these sins; if you had enticed others, you had been very much to blame; but for
your part you had no intention, not a thought in your heart to do such
wickedness; but others would give you no quiet till you make one with them, and
so you impute it to your being good natured and willing to gratify others,
rather than to the enmity of your heart against God.

1. Could they that enticed you, do as much for you, or against you, as God
could? Surely if you use this reasoning to be looked upon to be good natured
persons, you lay your selves open to a just Censure for folly: Who that is wise
will despise God, to please man?

2. If you are so good natured, why don't you yield to God in his beseechings
and entreaties? you are stubborn, wilful and stout enough here: How earnestly
has God invited you to come to him? he has not failed in giving you suitable
and proper encouragements; God has stood long entreating, many years called
with al^earnestness, and sent by many to persuade you.

3. Others could not make you yield, if Sin within did not entice you, to a
giving a consent, Jam. 1.14. the Devil himself han't a power to make you yield;
it may be you say, the Scripture seems to carry it in the favor of the young
man, spoken of, in Prove. 7.21, that she forced him. To that I say; you would do
well to consider, that the Scripture relates it, as preparing him for such
wickedness, and how fully he yielded; it is said, he was one void of
understanding, one that had refused Christ as his Prophet, that would not come
to him for Eye salve, and that he was out of his place, and idling away his
time, seeking occasions of Sin; he was passing through the Street, near her
corner, and he went the way to her house; and then that he goes after her
straightway, or suddenly as it may be rendered; she did not pull and drag him
along, not forcibly drive him; but he comes after, not make a stand, a stop, or
turn back; but goes after her straightway, and perseveres in the Sin.

4. That God does strike dead even such as these. Prove. 7.23. God don't only
take Vengeance on them that entice, but on them that are enticed. God gives you
no reason by his dealings with such, to hope that you may escape unpunished.

10. You say the days are such days of Apostasy, and the times so degenerate,
that you should be a mere laughing stock if you did not sin; you are ready to
say, that you have found, that the end of such mirth is heaviness: Conscience
has galled, accused and condemned you for them; but if you did decline wanton
expressions and gestures, you should make your selves a prey; others would
censure you as silly creatures, not fit for Society; if others would reform,
you would be glad to reform; but as things are circumstanced, you are afraid to
reform.

1. Better Sinners laugh at you here, than God laugh at you for ever. God will
be ashamed of them that are ashamed of Him, before an Adulterous and Wicked
Generation: God will have them in Derision: Yea, he will laugh at their
Calamity, and mock when their fear comes as desolation; that on such pretenses
set at naught his Counsel. Prove. 1.26. You are afraid sinners will laugh at
you, and count you a silly Creature: you take a direct course to be a fool for
ever.

2. Others have kept from Sin under greater Temptations. Moses, Joseph, Lot,
Daniel, and the three Children.

3. It would be no damage but a benefit to get rid of such Company, whose
favor you think to lose. The Psalmist says, Depart from me you wicked men, I
will keep the commands of my God. Moses counted the reproach of Christ greater
riches than all the pleasures and treasures of Egypt.

4. It may be your Conversion might be an occasion, not only of the
Reformation, but found Conversion of many others. It may be your being so
concerned for Christ, may cause them to say, O thou fairest among women!
Whither is thy beloved gone, that we may go and seek him with you? Cant. 6.1.
It may be you may make them ashamed, that falsely accuse your good Conversation:
you are not sure you shall be reproached by any.

5. Your Conversion to God will rejoice many, God, Christ, your Godly
Relations, and Ministers, will be glad and rejoice. Luke 15.32. 2 John 4. and 3 John 3.

11. You say you are not convinced that such and such things are Sins, you see
no great harm in them; God prospers you in such ways, if you really thought
them to be sins, you would reform: You have heard such Unclean words and
gestures reproved in the Pulpit, but you are not of the Ministers mind: you
have known others that have fled from such things, have been Afflicted, and you
have been Prospered.

1. You don't bring your deeds to the light to know what they are, that it may
be made manifest what they are; you might have been Convinced. Your refusing to
try your actions, renders it suspicious that you have a Secret jealousy they
are naught; you would not willingly know them to be sins Joh. 3.20.

2. You have often from the Ministry been warned of such courses, and have
heard them condemned from Scripture arguments; your saying, you are not of the
Ministers mind, who cites Scripture for what he lays down, whilst you refuse
to search with the Bereans, whether the things be so or no, will be no plea for
you.

3. Your own consciences have accused you for these things, when you have looked
upon Death to be near; when you are well, your love to your lusts, puts a new
darkness upon your judgments, that were before corrupted by the fall.

4. Outward Prosperity is no argument that your ways are good. You can say by
experience, that Soul prosperity don't go along with such ways and courses.
Prove. 1. penult. others have been converted, and you blinded and hardened; you
have lost the things that have been wrought, and are gone backward.

12. You say your Sins are Secret from the eyes of the world, and you were
never left above once to be actually and grossly Unclean. If you had been an
open sinner, one addicted to ways of Filthiness, you think God would be very
angry: but you sinned but once, you hope God will over look that, and pa^s it
by.

1. God that is to be your Judge sees in Secret, and will Damn for Secret Sins:
Secret Sins will Damn you as well as open. Christ denounced woes against
Scribes and Pharisees, for Secret sins. God will bring every Secret thing into
Judgment. Eccl. 12.14.

2. Adam by one act of disobedience was shut out of Paradise: the Angels thrust
out of Heaven.

3. One act of these Sins may fill up the measure of other sins. Ananias and
Saphira they filled up the measure of sin in Lying: one of these sins don't go
alone; many other sins prepare and make way for them.

13. You say you have many good things as well as evil; you hope your good may
be set against your evil. You Pray, Hear, Read, and do many good things; you
hope no present hazard, you should be afraid, were it not that you are
Religious in many things.

1. Such have perished Eternally. The Pharisees could say as much as you in
this respect: Yea Herod did many things gladly; and the young man that came to
Christ, could say, All these have I kept from my youth up.

2. Those things which you call good are an abomination to God, whilst you give
your selves liberty to sin: See what God says to them Isa. 1.11. God threatens
to make them as Shiloah. Jer. 7.14.

3. By your impenitency you take a course to be openly wicked, and to lose your
Religiousness. Though Herod had a respect to John the Baptist a while, by
retaining his Herodias, he is left first to Imprison him who he had heard
gladly, and then Beheads him.

14. You say you have known several do such things, and yet when they come to
dye they have made a very good end, you hope you shall too.

1. Did you never know any that seemed to be as good and religious as they
whilst Sick, that after recovery were worse? Oh! do you think that all that
were profane in Health and Hypocrites in Sickness recover? And that they all
go to Heaven that are full of good Expressions on a Sick bed to Death?

2. It may be God may come upon you with a sudden destruction, that you may
never come on a Sick bed. Who can tell what a morrow may produce! When you
think Death farthest off, and promise your selves years, God may say, Fools,
this night shall your Souls be required.

15. You say you saw religious and good men do such things, and therefore you
apprehend no great harm in them, surely they would never have done such things,
if there had been so much provocation, and therefore so much hazard in them.

1. It may be they were only Hypocrites that you saw act so: So was Judas, so
was Demas, so the Scribes and Pharisees, that were had in such Veneration for
their Sanctity.

2. You are to follow none only wherein they follow Christ. Good men are not
the rule you are to walk by. Consider how the Prophet was punished that was
deluded, upon a Prophets suggesting to him, that an Angel had so spoken to him.
1 King. 13.13.

I would conclude with a Word of Warning to you, that are the occasion of our
being here this day before the Lord, who are under a Righteous Sentence of
Death: To turn to the Lord under the guilt of these sins, before the Decree
bring forth. You have stood before an Earthly Tribunal, and are found guilty;
How will you stand before the Tribunal of Christ? to answer for all your sins?
your day of Grace is almost gone, and within a few hours, you will either be in
Heaven or Hell. Oh! now turn to God, or you will never. I would offer some
things to your consideration, for your conviction of guiltiness, and need you
have to get your peace made with God. You are by nature, a Child of Wrath, and
guilty of Adams Sin; you brought a guilty, defiled Soul into the world with
you: You were shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did your Mother conceive you. You
have long refused and slighted Jesus Christ, and would none of him as your
Prophet, your Priests, and your King, and so are under a Sentence of Death,
from the Gospel, as well as the Law; by your unbelief you have sealed down, the
Wrath of God upon your own Soul; you have fallen also into great Land-polluting
moral evils, Lying, Stealing, Adultery, and Murder. You would not hearken to
the voice of your eminently pious Father-in law, warning of you. You have
accustomed your self to these ways of sin, though you Lived under the convincing
preaching of the Gospel. You closed your eyes, and would not see, though for many
years you Lived under an eminently Soul-searching Ministry; and you have given
up your self to these sins in the day that God was pleading his Controversy,
and hedging up your ways with thorns; in the day of the Lords anger, you have
sinned more and more: when God had driven you out of one Plantation, into
another, by the Enemy; when God had taken away your first Husband by Death, and
suffered your second to be carried into Captivity; when he was in bondage, you
were wantonly doting on your Lovers; yea though you could not look out an your
door, but the Garrison and Soldiers before your eyes proclaimed it to be a day
of Gods anger; your sin is very great, in your violating your Marriage
Covenant. You have relapsed after God filled your Soul with horror for these
abominations, and turned again as a Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in
the mire. You refused to be prevented from Murder, by covering your Adultery
with lying, though so solemnly admonished and cautioned. You have unnaturally
murdered the fruit of your own body, and what in you lay its Soul; have abused
patience and long suffering exercised toward you of God; multiplying lying,
and hardening your heart, and have not feared God, being under a righteous
Condemnation, and Sentence of Death; but to this day continued in lying. You
have slighted the Word of God, quenched the Spirit of God, refused Christ; and
have by these things filled up the measure of your sins; so that you must Dye,
that the Land be not guilty: None may stay you from death, and suffer you to
live; least the Land be greatly polluted. And you are now Enjoying your last
Opportunity in Gods House; you that have idled, slept away, yea whored away
part of so many Sabbaths and Lectures, shall have no more. You that have
disregarded Gods Counsels, how righteously might God say? I will laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear comes^. Yet he says after all these things,
turn, Jer. 3.7. For the life of your body, your case is hopeless. Your sin is
so heinous, that your life cannot be saved without injustice. Well then, since
you cannot live guiltless, labor to die penitent; and since your Body cannot be
saved alive, endeavor that your Soul may be saved alive in death; there is yet
a possibility that your Soul may be saved. See Prove. 1.20, 22, 23, 24. Jesus
Christ the essential wisdom, calls after such an one as you, to come to him;
though you have been long sinning, loved, and delighted in sinning; yea, though
you have hated knowledge, you are called upon, and encouraged to come. God in
Christ is showing how ready he is to show you mercy upon your repentance, and
to help you in your repentance, he offers you the best help, and help suitable.
Oh then come away to Jesus Christ now; left upon your refusal, the after verses
be made good against your Soul.

Direction. Come away to Christ now upon the call and encouragement of the
Gospel. Stay away no longer: Don't think your Prayers, good promises, and
others praying for you, will save you. But hasten away to Christ: There is no
other Name given, whereby you can be saved. Act. 4.12. And no other way of
being saved by Christ, than by coming to him, or believing on him. You are
called this day in an Ordinance of Christ to come for Reconciliation. 1 Cor.
5.19. Christ came to save guilty sinners: Its a faithful saying and worthy of
your acceptance, that Christ came into the World to save Sinners, chief of
Sinners. The greatest sinners have been justified in this way. 1 Cor. 6.11. So
Manasseh that shed much innocent blood.

Consider, for your encouragement, that Christ fully accepts of them that ran
far from him, that refused to come as long as they could retain any hopes of
being saved in any other way, upon their coming to him. Luke 15. God will not
upbraid you upon your coming. Jam. 1.5. Yea, he that comes unto me I will in no
wise cast out; though he have been a great and an old Sinner, though he have
sinned away many Convictions, yet if he come he shall have mercy. Christ Jesus
calls you to come; not to sell you pardon, but give you Grace. Matthew. 11.29. I
will give you rest. Christ aims at your present gain, and not at his own: and
therefore if you have no money, yet you may have the mercy you want. Isa. 55.1.

Consider. 1. That Christ don't call you to come to him to be Punished, but
Pardoned. Christ in the Gospel comes to you to save you, calls you to come to
him, to be pardoned. Its true, if you refuse the calls of Christ in this life,
he will call you in the next life to be punished, and condemned. Oh! Christ
calls you, and you need not be afraid to come to him now; for he does not call
you to come to be punished for sins al^eady committed; but that he may pardon
and forgive them, blot o^t the handwriting of Ordinances that was against you.
May you have a free and full pardon of so many and great sins upon coming? then
delay no longer.

2. Jesus Christ calls you to come, not to pass a Sentence of Death upon you;
but to take it off from you: There will be no Condemnation against your Soul,
when once you are gotten into Christ. Romans 8.1. yea, Christ says, such shall
not enter into Condemnation; for they are passed from death to life; there is a
sentence of death gone out against you in the Law, and it is a holy and
righteous sentence too; now the Gospel offers no mercy, to the repealing and
taking off this Sentence of Condemnation without coming to Christ.

3. Christ calls you to come to him, not to shut you up in the Prison of Hell,
but to set you at liberty. Oh! Christ would bring you out of the pit, wherein
is no water; for Christ received a Commission from the Father, to proclaim
liberty, and the opening of the prison doors, to them that are shut up, Isa.
61.1, 2. the prison and dungeon of Hell is the place you will assuredly be shut
up in, if you stay away from Christ; but the Son will set you at liberty, if
you come to him; who don't choose liberty and enlargement before prisons and
dungeons?

4. Christ calls you not to feed you with the bread and water of Affliction,
but to feast you. Rev. 3.20. Luke 15.23. Here Is bread, which if you eat of you
shall never hunger: Is not bread to the hungry Soul desirable? Why should you
stay away, when you are ready to perish with hunger? Christ Jesus will feast
you, if you come to him. Christ has Spiritual delicacies to entertain you
withal.

5. Jesus Christ don't call you to cloth you with Rags, and bring you to
shame and disgrace, but to cloth you with his righteousness. Christ will not take
away any thing that is good and desirable, and worth keeping, but to give you
Grace and Glory: Nor to speak angrily, but to speak comfortably to you; not to
put you to drudgery, and ignominious service for ever; but to stand before him
to do him Service, in Praising and Glorifying his Name. See what you are
counseled to come to Christ for. Rev. 3.18.

1. Come to him for that which he came into the World for, to be your
Sanctifier; to have Sin taken away; that he would give you repentance. Christ
is Exalted at the right hand of the Father, to give repentance unto Israel, and
remission of sins. God has sent him to bless his people in turning them from
their iniquities. His Name is JESUS, and he will Save them that come unto him
from their sins. You want Christ for this, how can you else think of going into
the holy Heavens? Nothing that defiles enters there: Without Holiness you cannot
see God. Oh! then let that be upon your Soul, to have Christ for Sanctification.

2. Come to him as a poor guilty, polluted Creature: come therefore self
Condemned: They that come because they have made so many Prayers, and have
gotten something good, are not like to be accepted. Remember the poor Publican,
that went down to his house justified; he was one that smites upon his breast,
the Lord be merciful to me a Sinner; he don't say, be merciful to me, who was
once a great Sinner, but I have reformed my life, I have made many an
affectionate prayer, I have taken a great deal of pains; but he comes as
guilty, says not a word to justify himself. So the Prodigal, when he come
home, he comes judging and condemnning himself for what he had done, that he
was so guilty, that God might now justly put him by, he does not say, I did
displease, but I have now done something to turn away thine anger, and to
procure thy favor. See what he says. Luke 15.18, 19, 21. And yet ^^e what
welcome he met with. Verse ^2. And don't you think to go because you have
sorrowed, mourned, and kept from Sinful co^^^es. See how David went to God.
Psalm. 51.3, 4.

3. Come as a helpless, shi^tless, lost Creature. Oh! Consider that in him the
F^^^erless finds Mercy: As one that must have all ^^om Christ. Oh! go to him
as one that is lost, and knows not what to do of your self. Christ came to seek
and save the lost.

4. Justify God in all his comminations, threatenings and curses against sin,
and sinners. So did David, Psalm. 51.4.

5. Come to him from the encouragements of the Gospel, from what encouragements
Christ gives you in his Word; nor because you have gotten a heart to have sin,
love God; or because you are not quite so bad as you have been.

6 Come to him to be Saved from the wickedness of your heart. Oh that you may
be Saved from the unbelief, hypocrisy, worldliness, hardness and carnality of
your heart. So did David, Psalm. 51.1. Create in me a c^ean heart

7. Come to him with a desire to be put into his Service, to do work for him;
so did the Prodigal; make me as one of thy hired Servants. You will say, what
work can I do? that am just going out of the world. Oh consider, that you may
Serve Christ, in making confession of you sin, warning of others, justifying
God; oh come away, consider that Christ will call to you from off the Mercy
Seat no more after a few hours; if you refuse now, how will you dare to make
your appearance before the Throne of Justice? If you are afraid to come to
Christ so affectionately calling you to come to him, where he is Sitting on his
Throne of Mercy, and holding forth the Scepter of Divine Grace? Oh! Come;
behold now, even now, is yet an accepted time. Come, and give your self to
Jesus Christ. Oh! Lift up your heart to God, to draw you, to turn you; and we
will lift up our hearts and desires to God with you, and for you, that he would
draw and turn you.

FINIS.

