Of the Perspicuity of Scripture, and Rules for Interpretation of it. A SERMON
Preached at St. Martins in the Fields, Mar. 2. 1695/6. BEING THE Third of the
LECTURE For this Present YEAR, Founded by the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire.
By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill, Senr and Junr: At the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey. MDCXCVI.

ACTS XVII. 11, 12. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that
they received the word with all readiness of mind, and Searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so. Therefore many of them believed.
THESE Words are the Character of the Bereans, to whom St. Paul and Silas
Preached the Gospel, being drove from Thessalonica, a Neighboring City of
Macedonia, by the Fury of the Unbelieving Jews, that accused them of doing
things contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, and by this means set all that City
in an uproar. But how hardly soever they were used there, they found a better
Treatment from the Bereans, of whom St. Luke says, that they were more noble,
(...) more ingenuous, than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the
word with all readiness of mind, and Searched the Scriptures daily, whether
those things were so, etc.

In which Words:

1. We are Directed to the Rule, by which all Points of Faith are to be
Determined; and that is the Scriptures.

2. There is the Capacity all Persons are in to judge of that Rule; for the
Words are spoken indifferently of the Jews in Berea, the Auditory, to whom St.
Paul Preached; that they Searched.

3. Here are the Qualifications of such as would judge aright, and they are
Sincerity and Diligence: They were (...) more candid, and they Searched the
Scriptures daily.

4. There is the way and means which are to be used in the Interpretation of
the Rule; and that is by comparing the Doctrine with Scriptures; there they
Searched, whether those things were so.

5. There is the Success of this course, Therefore many of them believed.

I have already Treated of the Three First of these in the foregoing Sermon,
and have showed the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith; that it is the
privilege of all to repair to that Rule for satisfaction; John 5. ^9.
and that by Searching, they may arrive thereby to a Knowledge and
understanding of that Rule.

And I shall now proceed to the way of Interpretation, and the Consideration of
the course that is to be taken for the better understanding of the Scriptures.

In Discoursing upon which,

1. I shall premise some things with reference both to the Perspicuity and
Difficulties of Scripture; for it must be acknowledged that the Sacred Books
have a mixture of both.

2. I shall lay down such Rules, as may be of use for the better Interpretation
of it.

As to the former I premise,

1. When we speak of the Scriptures, we take it for granted that the
Translation of it, generally speaking, renders the true sense of the Original;
that is, the Original and Translation are to him that understands both, as it
were but one Book; and so again to him that understands the Translation only,
it is the same as if he understood the Original.

And that this is so, is evident; because all Translations (though not
Expositions) of what Language, Church, or Age soever, do for the most part
agree: And if a Catena or Draught were made of them, as there was of the
Ancient Versions, it would appear so to be, beyond all Contradiction.

So that if any Stranger utterly unacquainted with the Christian Doctrine, or
the Translations, but skilled in those Languages, should compare them, he would
be able to say that the Book was the same, and only differed in the Language;
as the Ancient, viz. The Greek, and Arabic, and Syriack; or Modern, viz.
English, French, German, or Italian, etc.

And let Men differ as they will in their particular Opinions, let them be
Jews, as were the Translators of the Septuagint; Apostates, as was Aquila; V.
Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. and Tertul. contr. Jud. c. 9.
Marcionites, as Theodotion; Ebionites, as Symmachus. Yet unless in those
points in which they industriously corrupt the Text to serve a cause, and
wilfully and apparently depart from the Original, there is a general consent
among them in the main.

Which is a clear proof,

2. That the Scriptures were Wrote so as to be understood; for else how could
different Translators, unacquainted with the Language or Writings of each
other, so exactly hit upon the same rendition of it?

And indeed it would be too bare faced a Reflection upon Almighty God, by whose
Direction and Inspiration the Scripture was Wrote (as I have showed) to suppose
that such a Book thus proceeding from so Divine a hand; and upon so noble a
Design as the Revelation of God's Will to Man, should labor under such a
defect as the Compositions of Men of common Understanding are not guilty of.

Certainly it is as possible to Write so as to be understood, as it is to Speak
and be understood; and since Writing is but a kind of Speech, Speech may as
well be supposed unintelligible as Writing; and if it were so, both the
pleasure and benefit of Conversation would be prevented and lost.

And what a presumption is it to deny that to God which we give to Men; and
that when we grant that Men not only can, but do express their Thoughts plainly
upon occasion by Writing, that God either has not that Power, or Will; but
where he pretends to declare his Will to Mankind, it should, as God says to
Job 38. 2. darken counsel by words without knowledge; and Write so as not to be
understood, which is to Write to no purpose, but only to fill the World with
contention, as if what is called Revelation were not to send Peace, but in the
Letter of it, a Sword of strife among Mankind?

If we own God for the Author, we must say, that the Scriptures were Wrote that
they might be understood.

3. We may suppose further, that at the time when the Scriptures were Written,
they were intelligible by those that were Cotemporaries with the Writers, and
understood the Language they were Written in. Which was a great advantage they
had above all After-Ages; for there is no Nation but what has peculiar Customs,
to which Forms of Speech often relate; nor is there any Language which has not
Idiotisms and Phrases of their own; and therefore where these are not to be
understood, or are not observed, the sense is lost or prejudiced, and
perplexed, as I shall presently show.

4. We may reasonably conclude, that what had no immediate reference to the
persons then in being, nor to the Ages, and Customs, and Proprieties then in
use, but contained common matters, and was Clothed in common Forms of Speech,
was intelligible to others that did not live in those Ages, and generally as
intelligible as to those that did. Such is the Decalogue, which may be
understood by us in this Age as well as those that were at Mount Sinai at the
first delivering of it.

5. The Scriptures being to continue to the World's End, and, generally
speaking, being written for the use of all Men of all Ages and Nations, they
must consequently be Intelligible in the main, and capable of being understood
by all persons in all times; or else they were written in vain: For to what
purpose should they be preserved, or should they oblige Mankind to read them,
if they were not to be understood?

6. I may say, that in Fact the Scriptures are plain in all things that are
intended for the use of all, and that are necessary for all to know, in point
of Faith or Practice.

Such are,

(1.) All the Principles of Natural Religion, such as the Being of a God, and
his Creation of all things; the Worship to be given to him, the Government of
the World by Providence; the Immortality of the Soul, and a State of Rewards
and Punishments in another Life.

These every one may understand as he reads them in Scripture, and which no man
can read, but he must find out and understand.

(2.) Such is the History of Providence, that is God's prospering the good and
punishing wicked Nations; his preserving a Church under all the Storms of the
most violent Persecutions: His carrying on the train of Prophecies through all
interruptions; and accomplishing them at the time, and after the manner long
before prefixed.

These are matters of Fact, and what are obvious to all in the reading of them.

(3.) Such is matter of pure Revelation, and especially that which concerns the
Redemption of Mankind by Jesus Christ. As to his Person, that he was before the
Worlds, which were made by him: That in the fullness of time, according to the
Ancient Predictions, he became Man, and was made Flesh: That he wrought
Miracles in Confirmation of his Mission from God, and of the Doctrine he Taught
and Professed to receive from the Father: That he was Crucified and Died as a
Sacrifice for the Sins of all Mankind: That he rose again the Third Day from
the Dead, and ascended into Heaven: That he sent down the Holy Spirit, and
continues at the Right Hand of God to be our Mediator; and that we are with
respect to that Mediation, to offer up all our Prayers in his Name to the
Father: And that he is to come at the End of the World to Judgment, and shall
raise the Dead, and Summon them all before his Tribunal.

(4.) Of the like kind are all the Proofs and Confirmations of the Doctrine of
our Savior before spoken of under another Character; such are Prophecies and
Miracles. Prophecies, which though sometimes obscure in point of Phrase, yet
there are those that are without difficulty; as that of Josiah and Cyrus by
Name, that of the place of our Savior's Birth, the Stock and Lineage, the
Tribe and Family he should proceed from; the time he should sufferin etc.

And the other Attestation by Miracles is too evident to be insisted upon.

(5.) Of this sort are the terms of Salvation; among those things which are
plainly set down in Scripture; we may find whatever relates to Faith and
Manners of Life: And in these two are comprehended all that is necessary to
Salvation. So that whatever is not plainly set down in Scripture, Aug. de Doct.
Christ. l. 2.
or evidently inferred from it, is not necessary to Salvation.

Now I am apt to think, that no person that comes unprejudiced, I mean not
prepossessed with contrary Principles, or corrupt Affections, but must needs
own the Scripture to be clear in the points before rehearsed, if so be he reads
it with an ordinary Diligence and Care.

But will it be said, Are there not obscurities allowed to be in Scripture, and
difficulties which are not to be surmounted? And what is a clearer proof of
this, than the different Expositions we meet with, and the different Opinions
Men espouse, and therefore espouse them because they conceive them to be the
dictates of Holy Writ?

1. I Answer, That is no Objection against it; for then there can be nothing
certain, if the calling it in question will render it uncertain.

2. This indeed has been an Argument set up to overthrow the Authority of
Scripture, and some have been so impertinent as to make use of the various
Constructions and Significations of Words, to serve this impious cause.

And so among other things, Philos. Scipturae Interp. C. 3. n. 16. and n. 25.
etc. 4.
one quotes that Saying of Quintilian, There are innumerable kinds of words of
ambiguous and various signification; so that it seemed to some of the
Philosophers, that there was no word that does not signify many things.

But if this be a reason why the Scripture is obscure, and the sense not
attainable, then it is common with that to all Books whatsoever, not excepting
even that Book which the Author thought so well of, as to publish for the
Information of the World.

If this were of any force, then it would be to no more purpose to speak than
to write; because the words we use are capable of different senses, as well as
what we write.

This is a way of arguing that proves too much, and goes too far, and serves no
more than an argument that falls short, and comes not up to the Case in hand.

This would make the Divine Oracles like those of the Devil, to be no other
than Aenigma's and Riddles, as if, in the New coined Phrase of the Members of
the Romish Church, they were but the Various figures of Ink upon a Book: Or
served to no other use than white Paper, to Write what you will upon, and make
what sense out of it that a fruitful Brain can invent.

3. Though there are obscurities in Scripture, it falls upon such points as are
not in themselves necessary, and not necessary to all; and notwithstanding
which, a person may be saved though he dye ignorant of them, or of the sense of
those Scriptures which contain them. For there is no greater sign of their not
being necessary, than that they are not what we can understand, or are not
plainly to be found in Scripture.

4. Though there are obscurities in Scripture, yet they are nothing in
comparison to the plain Texts of it; and which no more hinder us from
understanding the plain, than the Spots in the Sun prevent us of the Light of
it.

The Obscurities are like the various Readings, Sermon. Fourtb and Sixth of the
last Year.
of little consequence, and importance, (as I have showed) and nothing
comparable to what remains entire and perspicuous. They are only some things
that are hard to be understood. 2 Pet. 3. 16.


But how many are the plain and intelligible, and especially of things
necessary to Salvation?

5. When, I say, there are Obscurities in Scripture, and that they fall upon
less necessary points, I grant that even those obscure parts are not without
their use; it being here, as in the Heavens, where the Cloudy Stars that
scatter a faintish light through the Galaxy or Milky-way, though not
discernible but by a Telescope; yet (if we may judge of what we do not know of
Nature, by what we do) have their use, and by their Influences, without doubt,
serve a Noble design. So though the Obscure Texts of Scripture afford a dim
light in comparison, and what we can at present give but a slender account of;
yet we our selves have sometimes perceived, when we have come by searching to
understand any of them, that we understood not before, that they prove of very
great advantage; as they serve to confirm the plain, and do give light to those
that were otherwise, and were it not for the light given by these, would have
remained obscure.

And indeed, Almighty God has so wisely ordered it, that as there are some
Works in Nature we do understand, and some we do not; some serve a lesser, and
some a greater end: So has he also tempered the body of Scripture together, the
difficult with the easy, the obscure with the plain, the less necessary with
the greater, that our industry may be excited by our endeavor to understand
them; and our labor be rewarded by the understanding of them: That we may
Search as the Bereans here did, and upon our Searching, may, as they, come to
believe and understand, or be confirmed in our belief of them.

Toward the better understanding of which, 2. I shall direct to some Rules that
may be of singular use to us in our Search and Enquiry.

1. Where in the first place it is advisable, that we be very conversant in the
Sacred Text; and as the Bereans, search it daily; by which means much of the
obscurity will wear off; and the Phrase, and Style, and way of arguing will be
more evident, and the matter of it make not only the stronger impression on our
minds, but be cleared up also insensibly to us. We see how much difficulties
are lessened by practice, as it is in learning the Alphabet, and the first
Principles of any Language or Science; and when we in the beginning struggled
with our selves, and used a kind of force to bend our minds to it, by degrees
the difficulties abated, and we became complete Masters of the matter that lay
before us. So it is in reading the Scriptures, where by use we are wonderfully
let into the meaning of them. For this reason it was that the Prophets were
read in the Synagogue every Sabbath Day, as is implied, Act. 13. 27. And why
also the Scriptures were read as well when not understood as when they were;
according to the practice of the Eunuch. Act. 8. 30, 31.
For to what purpose would it have been for him when alone, without an
Interpreter, to have read Isaias the Prophet upon such an obscure Argument, if
by reading it he might not have been some help to himself, and by degrees have
attained to a further understanding of it more or less?

And I dare appeal to any that have taken this course, and have daily read, and
read them with the like impartiality as other Books, and much more where they
have read them with the reverence and attention due to Divine Oracles, whether
they have not found the difficulties lessen upon their hands. And if such as
daily read those Books with these and the like Qualifications, would but
account with themselves for all the difficulties assoyl'd and solved this way,
without any other assistance, it would be no unpleasant or unprofitable
reflection.

2. Although it be of this advantage to read the Scriptures in course, as was
usual in public in the Synagogues, and in private among persons piously
disposed: Yet it would add much to the rendering the abstruser parts more easy
and intelligible, if they began with the plainest, either for Duty or Matter,
and then proceeded to the more obscure. For this is a reducing things into a
strict and natural method; and is like the beginning with the beginning of a
Book wrote in that way, and so gradually proceeding as we are led along from
point to point, from Proposition to Proposition, till we come to the end of
that, and the difficulties together.

The Scripture I own is far from being Wrote after this humane and artificial
method, but in a way Extraordinary and Divine: and is among other reasons,
composed after the manner in which it is, that we may be obliged to use a
befitting industry in searching into the meaning of it; and it is certainly one
part of that industry so to order it, that as there is this difference plainly
to be observed in Scripture, so we would thus make an advantage of it by
beginning with Words and things easy to be understood, before we attempt to
understand what is in a sphere for the present above our capacity; Hebr. 5. 12.
14.
for such have need of milk, and not of strong meat, which belongs to them
that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil; and I will add, between things plain
and abstruse, more necessary and less, certain and doubtful.

3. Another Rule for the understanding of Scripture, is to be well acquainted
with the principal design, and the chief Subject of it, whether as to Faith or
Practice: For from thence does arise what is usually called the Analogy of
Faith; and which will be a Standard upon all occasions to have recourse to. For
what Sense is to things sensible, and Reason to things merely reasonable, that
is the Analogy of Faith to all Interpretations, and according to whose
Arbitration they must stand and fall: Of this the Apostle gives an Instance as
to Faith, 1 John 4. 2, 3. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; every Spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. And every Spirit
that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God.

And if there should be any place of Scripture that such Heretics would
produce in their favor, we may peremptorily conclude, that the meaning they
would force upon it, is no more the meaning of that Scripture, than that can be
the Spirit of God, which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh.

4. For the better understanding of Scripture, it is a proper way to compare
Scripture with Scripture, the Old Testament with the New, the obscure with the
plain. For that which is obscure and difficult in one place, is usually
explained and made clear in another, as St. Austin, in the Book before quoted,
observes.

Toward the more useful Application of this Rule, it may be convenient to
enquire from whence the Difficulties and Obscurities in Scripture do arise;
Whether from the Sublimity of the Matter; the Proprieties of Language; the
Relation that one thing has to another, as Types; the Modes and Forms of Speech
in Matters Prophetical or Figurative; which we may be helped in by this way of
comparison.

When I have just before said, P. 12.
that there is no greater sign of the matter's being unnecessay, than when it
is what we cannot understand, or is not plainly to be found in Scripture: I
mean thereby, not the matter or thing spoken of, but the Proposition: For the
Proposition may be a plain and a very intelligible Proposition, when the matter
of it is inexplicable, and above our understanding. As the Proposition, God is
a Spirit, is a plain Proposition, and as easy to be understood in respect of
its Sense and Meaning, as that a Triangle is a Figure consisting of Three
Angles; but the matter is vastly different; for who can tell what a Spirit is,
or can give as adequate a Definition of it, as he can of a Triangle? And yet
the Proposition before-recited of God's being a Spirit, is as plain to be
understood, and as necessary to be believed; as if it were in its Nature plain,
and Intelligible, and that we as perfectly knew what a Spirit is, as we know
what a Triangle is: And therefore the Obscurities arising from such Sublimity
of the matter, are not to be brought here to account; for they can never be
made plainer to us than they are, till our Understandings are Elevated and
raised up to them. It Is a Spirit alone that can tell what a Spirit is, and it is
God only knows himself. And though now we have it as plainly Revealed that God
is a Spirit, as that God is; yet we must be contented neither to have an
adequate Notion of God, unless we were as God, nor also the like Notion of a
Spirit, till we become Spirits our selves.

When I say again, That it is a sign of the matter's being unnecessary, that it
is not plainly to be found in Scripture; thereby is meant what is plain to such
as Search, Enquire and Compare, and know how to argue from it: And if by Search
and Enquiry, by comparing and arguing, it comes to be plain, I may as well so
call it, as if it was in so many words therein expressed.

There is a very convincing Argument of a Future State in the Scripture quoted
by our Savior, when God says, I am the God of Abraham, Mat. 22. 32.
etc. from whence our Savior with great strength infers, God is not the God of
the Dead but of the Living; and so those that he is the God of, are alive. But
though the force of the Argument is now very evident, by the light our Savior
gives to it, yet I believe few would have observed it without that Direction,
or to be sure without taking that Method of comparing Scripture with Scripture.

For it is by that Rule,

(1.) We come to understand the Idiotisms and Proprieties of the Language in
which the Scripture was Written; and without attending to which, we shall fall
very much short of attaining to the sense of it. These Idiotisms are common,
with the Hebrew, to all Languages, and so are no otherwise to be understood,
than by a strict Observation of them.

As for Example, Without this Key, how irreconcilable would it be to other
Texts, to have it said, Hos. 6. 6.
God would have mercy and not sacrifice; Mat. 9. 13.
and that our Savior should require his Disciples, Joh. 6. 27.
not to labor for that meat which perishes; and that the Apostle should
forbid Women the adorning themselves with the outward adorning of plaiting the
hair, 1 Pet. 3. 13.
and wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel? All of which were
notwithstanding allowed, and some required elsewhere. But now if we attend to
the Genius of the Hebrew, and compare one Scripture with the other, we shall
find, that the Jews having no Degrees of comparison, were wont to express
comparisons by Antitheses or Negatives; and then the sense of the Negative Not,
is not so much; as labor not, that is, not so much for the meat that
perishes, as for that which endures to everlasting life, etc. And if this be
observed, we shall find there is no contradiction, when in one place Sacrifices
are required, and in another, that God would have mercy and not sacrifice; when
in one place, it is commanded to work with their own hands; 1 These. 4. 11.
and in another, labor not for the meat that perishes, etc.

(2.) By this way of comparison we come to understand the Figurative
Phraseology or manner of Expression in Scripture, and we shall find that such
are not to be understood in a proper and literal, but allusive sense.

As for Instance; God is in Scripture said to have Eyes and Hands, Ears and
Bowels, which are terms belonging to a Natural and Human Body: And also to
Laugh, and to be Angry, and to Repent, which are passions belonging to Mankind.
And yet we read also, that God is a Spirit, and so has not a Body, nor any of
the parts belonging to it: And that he is not as man that he should repent; and
neither is nor can be subject to those Infirmities and Passions which belong to
us. And therefore when such Bodily or Mental Affections and Properties are
imputed in words to him, it is in a figurative and improper sense, and which
are spoken of him after the manner of Men, and in condescension to our
Infirmity, who are not able to conceive of him as, and according to what he is
in himself. So that it would be a gross piece of folly, for the sake of such
Figurative Expressions (as Theodoret says of Audaeus) to conceive of God as a
Corporeal Being; Haeret. Fabul. l. 4.
which is to say, he is not a Spirit, and so to make the Scripture inconsistent
with it self.

Another instance of this kind, is the Assertion of our Savior, This is my
Body; which being a Sacramental as well as Figurative Phrase of Speech,
recourse must be had to the like Institutions in Scripture, and to what has the
nearest resemblance to it; and that is the Passover, the Jewish Sacrament, and,
as I may so say, their Lord's Supper. Now when we read in the Law, of the
Lord's Passover, and that they roasted and eat the Passover, we easily conceive
that by it they meant not the Angel's passing over the Houses of the Children
of Israel (which gave occasion to the Phrase); but the Lamb, which was the
Memorial and the Representation of it. So when in Correspondence hereto, we
read of our Savior, that at the Institution of the Lord's Supper, he said of
the Bread, This is my Body; and that he broke the Bread, and they eat of it; we
can reasonably no more understand that his Natural Body was then actually
broken, and that they did eat his very Body, than we can understand, that when
the Jews roasted and eat the Passover, they roasted and eat the Angel that
passed over the Houses where the Blood was sprinkled. And therefore what was
improperly and figuratively spoken of the one, was after the same manner spoken
of the other, and alike to be understood.

Indeed such Figures and Modes of Speech, are as soon understood, for the most
part, as plain and literal Propositions.

As when our Savior is called a Lamb, a Door, a Shepherd, a Vine, he was no
more really such, nor are such Phrases any more literally to be understood,
than that Herod was a Fox, and the Pharisees Vipers, because they were so
called by our Savior: And therefore as our Savior's Auditors as soon
understood him, when he spoke after this Figurative, as if in the plainest and
literal Phrase of it; so one would think they should, and we may be as certain
they did understand our Savior, when he said, This is my Body, not of a proper
human Body, but only by way of Representation, according to the nature of the
thing, and those places to which this had an immediate reference.

(3.) By this way of comparison we come to understand the Typical Phrase of
Scripture; which of it self is, like the Types, obscure.

There is a great Conformity between the Old Testament and the New, and
especially as to what is the main Subject of the Mosaical Law, (...). 1 Cor.
10, 11.
the Types, Ceremonies, and Rites of it: And where there is this Correspondence
and Conformity, we must for the understanding of the one, borrow light from the
other. And therefore when the like Forms of Speech are used in the New
Testament, as are in the Old, it is to be supposed that we are well acquainted
with the Old; or that we must have recourse to that for the understanding of
the New: Of this the Epistle to the Hebrews is an Instance, the Phraseology of
which is mostly Legal and Ritual; and so we must be acquainted with those
Rites, or the Modes of speaking, to understand it. I shall here content my self
with a particular or two of this sort. (...) Lev. 4. 3, 8.
It is a known case, and very usual in the Old Testament, in the Levitical or
Prophetical part of it, to call a Sin-offering by the name Sin, Isai. 53. 10.
(...).
or in the Translation of the Septuagint, for Sin.

Now this is an Elliptical way of Expression, very customary in those and other
Languages; but what is customary and significant in one, yet if Translated into
another, oft-times looks absurdly; and so it is necessary in such a Translation
to supply it by what was before understood, but not expressed; as it is in the
Cases abovesaid. Thus for instance, Hebr. 9. 28. It Is said our Savior Christ
was once offered to bear the Sins of many; and unto them that look for him,
shall he appear the second time without Sin unto Salvation. But thus he
appeared the first time, he was then without Sin; and therefore here according
to the Subject the Apostle is discoursing upon, it is to be supplied after this
manner, without a Sin-offering. So it is, Hebr. 10. 8. and 2 Cor. 5. 21. So we
have it according to the latter Phrase of the Septuagint, Romans 8. 3. God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin
in the flesh. (...).
For Sin, is a Phrase rough and abrupt; but if we add to it by a Sacrifice for
Sin, it is very agreeable and intelligible.

Now when there is this Mystical Relation, and the Gospel has a respect in its
Phrase and manner of speaking, to the Types and Ceremonies of the Law, the
Antitype is to be explained by the Type, the New by the Old.

(4.) By this way of comparison, we become acquainted with the Prophetical way
of Writing, and may understand what without it would be obscure.

I have just before observed the Relation that is between the Law and the
Gospel; and that if we would understand the Gospel, it is fit to repair to the
Law, as to the Phrase of it; and if we would understand the Law in its noblest
sense, we must repair to the Gospel. And from this Relation between these Two
is it, that the Prophecies of Scripture, especially as to the Future State of
the Church under the Gospel, are clothed in the Phrase of the Mosaical
Institutions and Rites. Thus the Success of the Gospel, and the Enlargement of
the Christian Church, is described under such Characters. Isai. 2. 2. 3. It
shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lord's House
shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and all Nations shall flow
unto it. Isai. 66. 23. It shall come to pass from one New Mood to another, and
from one Sabbath to another, all flesh shall come to Worship before me at
Jerusalem, v. 20. which, and the like Phrases were no more literally to be
fulfilled, than that we shall eat Bread in the Kingdom of Heaven.

But now as the Happiness of the Future State is often described by such
Phrases as belong to this present state, and not to that which they are
literally applied to: So the Prophecies concerning the state of the Church
under the Gospel, are frequently exemplified under such Resemblances and Forms
of Speech as suited the People of the Jews, for whose immediate use they were
wrote; and notwithstanding which, neither they nor others could possibly be led
into such a mistake, as to think that such should the Kingdom of the Messiah
be, as those Expressions verbally signified; when it was evident from the
Prophecies of Scripture, that that Legal State was to be abolished, and also
that several of the things in the nature of them were unpracticable. As for
example; when it was said, that from one New Mood to another, and from one
Sabbath to another, that is, Monthly and Weekly, all Nations should come up to
Worship the Lord at Jerusalem.

And therefore in the Explication of such Phrases, we must not consider what
they exactly signify in their first and original use, but to what purpose they
serve and are applied; and if so we do, we shall lightly as soon understand the
New heaven and the New earth, which St. Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 3. 13. as the
Heaven and the Earth in the First Chapter of Genesi^: And as well shall we
understand Babylon and Euphrates in the Mystical sense of the Apocalypse, as we
do in the Historical Books of Scripture.

But above all, there is nothing does so lay open the Secrets and Mysteries of
Prophecy, as the Event; for by that means, where it is fulfilled, it is as
clear as if it had been Historically related. And as if we look back from the
Event to the Prediction, we the better understand that Prediction, which
without the Knowledge and Observation of the Event we could not perhaps have
understood: So by comparing what yet remains to be fulfilled, with what has
been already fulfilled, we have a useful key for the understanding of the one
by the other; the obscure by the plain, and what we do not know the meaning of,
by what we do.

Thus, for instance, we may understand the Prophetical Schemes of Speech,
concerning the destruction of a Nation, by comparing one of the Testaments with
the other; or what is to be fulfilled with what has been fulfilled. So when in
the Old Testament we find it Prophetically threatened of Babylon, Idumea, Egypt,
etc. that the Stars of Heaven, and the Constellations thereof shall not give
their light -- that all the Host of Heaven shall be dissolved, Isai. 13. 10.
34. 4.
and fall down as the Leaf of a Vine -- And when that we read in Daniel, the
little Horn cast down some of the Host and of the Stars to the ground, Ezekiel.
32. 7.
and stamped upon them: Dan. 8. 10.
We have a key to unlock the Mysterious Expressions of the same kind in the New
Testament. As when it is said (if it be to be understood of the destruction of
Judea) that the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light,
Matt. 29. 12.
and the Stars shall fall from Heaven; and that a third part of the Sun, Revel.
8. 12.
Moon, and Stars shall be darkened, etc. it is to be understood after the same
manner as the other. Now by a reflection upon the state of those Nations
abovesaid, as well as the nature of the thing, we find all intended in those
Mystical Expressions was, That these Nations should be utterly destroyed, and
all Orders and Degrees of men, Genesis 37. 9.
represented by the Sun, Moon and Stars, should be dissolved: And therefore
accordingly are we in the Prophetical passages in the New Testament, to
understand those Phrases and Forms of Speech the like way.

It would be endless to prosecute this Argument as far as it will bear; for
then I might go through the 134 Rules of Franciscus Ruizius; Regulae
Intelligendi Scripturas Sacras. Par. 1550.
but what I have here laid down is sufficient to help and direct us, generally
speaking, in the Interpretation of such Forms of Speech, which often render the
sense of Scripture difficult. But God be thanked, there is little of this in
comparison of what is plain and easy, and in which the main of a Christian's
Duty is concerned. This the experience of every one that is at all conversant
in those sacred Books, will confirm, to the silencing of all Cavils, which some
men of Wit, and others of Design, may pretend to the contrary.

For I dare confidently say, That no one can plead ignorance against his Duty,
or that he failed in it, because the sacred Pages are not to be understood.
What! will such dare to refer their cause to the Judgment-day, and be willing
to be determined to Life or Death, to Salvation or Damnation, as they can make
this good? Will they put Eternity upon this issue, and insist upon it, That
they could not know what they were to believe or do, because the Scriptures
that should have informed and directed them, were obscure, uncertain, and
unintelligible? If they will not offer this by way of relief or mitigation,
then it is plain that all the cry of Obscurities, and Difficulties, and
Uncertainties, are but pitiful shifts, and sorry pretenses. There are plain
places and Books enough and enough, to silence all such presumptuous and
arrogant Cavillers.

If we will believe our own Eyes, and credit our own Understandings, the
Scripture is plain in all that is necessary for us to know; and if we do
according to what that teaches, and we may learn from it, we shall never be
wanting in all necessary qualifications for that Everlasting happiness which is
therein revealed, and for the promoting of which it was written. Which God
grant to us all through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. Line 19. r. he should. p. 9. l. 19. del. of Life. p. 13. l. 5. after
them. del. (.).


