FIVE TREATISES, VIZ. 1. Of Vrines. 2. Of the Accension of the Blood. 3. Of
Musculary Motion. 4. The Anatomy of the Brain. 5. The Description and use of
the Nerves.


BY THOMAS WILLIS, M.D.

NOSCE TE IPSVM NE OVID NEMIS



LONDON: Printed for T. Dring, C. Harper, J. Leigh, and S. Martin. MDCLXXXI.

Since nothing could so well express the meaning and intention of the Author,
as the very Latin and Greek words used in these Tracts, we have continued them
expressly, and though in many places I have given their meaning by Synonymas,
yet for the benefit of the mere English Readers, we have here composed a Table
Alphabetically of all the hard Greek and Latin words, used in the whole Volume;
as also of all Terms of Art, and many other words derived from the Latin and
Greek, though usual among Scholars, yet not frequently known to the vulgar, and
therefore we have fully explained them and rendered them intelligible to the
meanest Capacity in the following Table.

A TABLE of all the hard words derived from the Greek and Latin, of all Terms
of Art and other words not vulgarly received, with the explanation of them.
A
ABdomen, The lower part of the Belly from the Navel downwards. Ablution, A
washing away. Accension, An Inkindling. Accession, A coming to or approach.
Acme, The height or top of a thing. Acid, Sharp. Acidity, Sharpness. Acidulae,
Medicinal waters running forth from Veins of Iron, Copper, and such like,
called Spaws from that famous place for Mineral-waters, the Spaw in Germany.
Acrimony, Sharpness or sourness rather. Actionobolism, An Irradiation of Beams,
or shooting forth of the spirits like beams of the Sun. Aconite, A venomous
poisonous Herb put for Libbards bane. Acute, Sharp, or excessive painful, or
that is quick and dangerous. Aculeated, Made sharp and prickly like a Needles
point. Adhaesion, A sticking to. Adjuted, Helped. Adventitious, Coming by
accident, or by the by. Adust, Burnt or parched. Adustion, A burning or
parching. Aequilibrium, An equal or even poise when the Balance stands bending
neither to the one side or the other. Aequinox, When the Sun is in the
Equinoctial Line and divides the Day and Night into an equal length, which is
about the 12. of March and about the 12. of September. Aetherial, Heavenly or
belonging to the Air or Sky. Aetiologie, The rendering of the Cause or Reason
of a thing. Affection, Taken for the natural Condition, and often signifies
sickness or disease. Affected, Distempered or diseased. Sometimes natural
disturbance. Affusion, A pouring forth of any thing. Agaric, A Drug that purges
Phlegm. Aggestion, A heaping together of any thing. Agitated, A violent shaking
or jogging together. Alembic, An Arabic word for a Still used by Chemists.
Alexipharmaca, Medicines against Poisons and Venom. Alexiterion, The same,
being an Antidote against poison. Alchalisat, A salt made of the herb Kali.
Also taken and applied to salts made of Herbs and shells of Fishes. Alible,
Nourishable, or that nourishes. Aliment, Food. Allision, A striking or knocking
together. Aloes, A juice made out of a bitter herb used in purging Medicines,
also a sweet wood. Amalgama, A Chemical term for the settling and mixture of
several Minerals or Metals, or other things whereby a separation and extraction
may be made. Ambages, A compassing or going about. Ambient, That invirons or
compasses one about as the Air. Amulets, Pomanders or Bracelets made against
Witchcraft and Infection and Poison. Analogy, Proportion, agreement or
likeness. Analysis, The laying open or unfolding of the matter. Anatomy, A
dissecting the Body to see the several parts. Anasarca, The watery Dropsy
swelling up the whole flesh. Analesia, A stupifying disease that takes away the
sense from all parts of the Head. Angle, A Mathematical Term, being the nook or
space at the cutting of two lines, and is of several sorts. A Corner or nook.
Anhelous, Short-winded, or that puffs for want of breath, that breaths
difficultly. Annularie, Ringy, or like Rings. Annular, Ringy, or like Rings.
Anodynes, Medicines procuring ease from pains by sleep or other means. Anomal,
Irregular, out of order. Antasthmaticks, Things good against the Cough or
Asthma. Anterior, The former. Antidote, A Medicine against Poison or any other
disease. Anticipate, To go before. Antihypnotics, Medicines given against too
much, sleeping. Antipyreuticon, A Medicine against a Feavour, or a
Feaver-Curer. Antipyreticks, Medicines against burning Fevers.
Antispasmodicks, Medicines against Convulsions. Anus, The Fundament or
Arse-hole. Aorta, The great Artery the mother of all the rest, proceeding from
the heart, one branch ascending, another descending. Apoplectic, One subject to
the Apoplexy. Apoplexy, A Disease that stupifies and takes away sense and
motion. Apozems, Decoctions or drinking Medicines made with herbs. Appendixes,
Things belonging or depending on another, as the parts about the heart.
Aquosity, Waterishness. Area, The void space in a figure, as a Triangle or
Quadrangle: the plat or floor of any thing. Ammoniac, Salt extracted out of
stones. Arteries, The Vessels that carry the blood to the heart. Arthritick,
Gouty, or belonging to the Gout. Arsnick, Or Orpiment, a poisonous drug.
Archeus, A chief Officer, Workman, or Operator. Articulation, A shooting of
spriggs from the joints. Ascites, A kind of Dropsy which swells between the
skin and the flesh. Asper, Sharp, Asper artery, the windpipe. Assimilation, A
growing or making like. Assimilate, To grow or make like. Asthma, A troublesome
disease, when the lungs being stopped, one cannot take breath. Asthmatical,
Belonging to that disease, or troubled with it. Astringent, Binding. Ataxias,
Disorders, irregularities. Atoms, Small little Bodies, such as Motes in the
Sunshine, Atrabilous, Belonging to the black Bile or melancholy, or to the
melancholic humor. Atrabilary, Belonging to the black Bile or melancholy, or
to the melancholic humor. Atrophie, A Disease causing a pining away, or a
wasting, or Consumption of the flesh. Attrition, A knocking, or bruising, or
rubbing together. Auditory, An Assembly, or those who hear. Aurum fulminans, Or
Thundering Gold, a metal prepared by Chemical Art, that being heated goes off
like a Gun with a Thundering noise. Austere, Biting, harsh. Axillarie, Vein is a
branch of the Vena Cava coming through the arm-hole from the channel bone
descends into the in side of the arm. Axillarie, Artery springs from the left
side of the Aorta above the heart, and ascending obliquely through the
arm-holes, and thence sending branches into the upper ribs, shoulder and chanel
bone, it descends down to the bowing of the Elbow. Azygos vein, is a branch of
the upper Trunk of the Vena Cava, arising on the right side.
B
Balneum Mariae, Is a way of distilling with a Glass-belly, holding the
Ingredients put into a Vessel of water, and so fire being made under it, it
distills with the heat of the water. Balsamic, Balsamie, or belonging to Balsam.
Basilick Vein, A large Vein into which the Axillarie Vein is carried, called
also the Liver vein. Basis, The foundation or foot of a thing. Bechicks,
Medicines against the Cough. Belly, Upper, the head so called. Belly, Middle,
the region of the stomach. Belly, Lower, The parts below the Midriff,
containing the Intestines. Bezoartick, Belonging or made of the precious stone
Bezoar. Bezoar, A precious stone brought out of the Indies very Cordial. Bile,
Choler. Bilary, Belonging to Bile or Choler, sometimes applied to the Vessel
containing the Choler. Bipartite, Divided into two parts. Bolus, Is a Medicine
made up into a thick substance to be swallowed not liquid, but taken on a
Knives point. Botanick, Pertaining to herbs or herbie. Brachial, Belonging to
the Arm. Bronchia, The gristly parts about the Windpipe. Bubos, Filthy
swellings about the groin.
C
Cachexia, An evil disposition of the Body when all the nutriment turns into
evil humors. Cachectical, To such evil state or disposition belonging, or one
troubled with such evil disposition. Cacochymical, Full of evil and bad juice
in the body, or of very ill digestion. Callous, Hard, fleshy and brawny. Calx,
Ashes, Lime, sometimes taken for the remaining parts of things Chymically drawn
off. Capillaments, Small hairy threads of the Nerves. Caput mortuum, The dead
head, being the last thing remaining after several Chemical extraction and good
for nothing but to be flung away, all virtue being extracted. Carbuncle, A red
fiery sore; a Plague Sore. Cardiack, Cordial, or belonging to the Heart.
Carotides, Two Arteries which arising out of the Axillary Artery, are carried
through the side of the Neck upwards into the Skull. Carthamums, A little seed
used in Medicines. Caruncles, Little pieces of flesh. Cartilage, Is a gristle
or tendril, a substance somewhat softer than a bone, and harder than a
Ligament. Cartilaginous, Gristly or belonging to, or full of such gristles.
Cassia, A sweet shrub like Cinnamon, also a drug that purges. Cataplasm, A
Poult is or asswaging Plaster. Catarrh, A great Rheum falling from the head
into the mouth. Cathartic, A purging Medicine. Cava vena, The great Liver-vein
going through the Body. Cavity, Hollowness. Caustic, A Composition made to burn
a hole in the skin and flesh to make Issues. Cautery A Composition made to burn
a hole in the skin and flesh to make Issues. Celiac vessels. Vessels belonging
to the Belly. Celebrated, Performed or done. Cephalalge, The Headache.
Cephalic, Belonging to the head, a medicine proper for the head. Cephalic vein,
Which springing out of the Axillary vein, passes between the first and second
muscle of the shoulder, and so passes evidently into the Arm. Cephalic artery,
Consists of two branches which springing out of the great Artery, ascend up
into the head. Cerebel, The binder part of the Brain from whence the Nerves
proceed that serve to the vital function. Cervical, Belonging to the Neck.
Chalybeat, A medicine made of prepared Steel, or belonging to Steel.
Characteristical, The notes, signs or figures belonging to a Character.
Chlorosis, The Green Sickness, or the Virgins disease. Choleduc vessels, The
vessels that hold and send forth the Gall. Chorodeidal, Belonging to the Net,
like to the infoldings about the Brain. Chyle, Is the Juice or substance of the
meat digested. Chylification, The making of Chyle. Chyme, Is the juice of the
meat further digested. Chronical, Long and tedious diseases. Circumpulsion, A
driving about. Classes, Forms or Orders. Coalition, Nourishment. Coagulation, A
curdling like milk, a turning into a Curd, or a separation of the parts like
Curds and Whey. Coagulum, Any thing that causes such a curdling as Rennet.
Coagulated, Curdled. Coction, Boiling or seething, also digestion. Cohobation,
A dreyning or pouring off from a settlement. Coindications, Things to be
considered with the disease, also signs besides the disease it self. Colcothar,
Dross of metals. Colical, Belonging to the disease called the Colic.
Colliquation, A melting together. Collation, A comparing or coupling together.
Collated, Compared or coupled together. Collision, A striking or knocking
together. Colocynthida, Or Coloquintida, a bitter purging Gourd or Apple.
Colon, The fifth Gut, or that great Gut in which is seated the disease, called
the Colic. Colluvies, A filthy heap of any thing. Commissures, The joynting or
joining together of things, as of the skull-bones. Complication, A folding
together. Conarium, A Kernel sticking to the outside of the Brain in the form
of a Pineapple. Concatenation, A chaining or joining together. Concatenated,
Joined, tied, or fastened together. Conflagration, A burning out, or being in a
flame, as in great Fevers. Conformation, The framing, fashioning, or
disposition of a thing. Congelation, A freezing or gathering together into an
hard substance, as Ice of Water. Congeled, Frozen, stifned. Congestion, An
heaping or gathering together. Conjugation, A yoking together, a derivation of
things of one kind. Consistency, Thickness or substance, as a Jelly.
Convolutions, Roulings about, or together, a twisting together. Contexture, A
weaving together, or a framing or composition. Copula, A joining or fastening
together, fettering. Corollary, Addition, vantage, or overplus. Corrosive,
Knawing, eating corroding. Corrugations, Wrinkling together. Cortex, The bark,
shell, or piel, or rind. Cortical, Belonging to the bark, or rind, or piel of a
thing. Crasis, The disposition, complexion, temperature or mixture of natural
humors. Crass, Thick. Crassament, A thickness or thick settling, as of dregs.
Cribrous, Sivelike, or that has holes like a Sive. Crude, Raw, undigested.
Crudities, Raw and undigested humors, or rawness, or indigestion of any thing.
Crisis, Is the time of the turn of the disease when it either increases or
diminishes, always observed by the Physicians. Critical, To the Crisis, or such
time belonging. Cremasteral, Muscles belonging to the Testicles. Crural,
Belonging to the Leg. Crucible, An earthen Vessel used to melt Metals with.
Cucurbite, A Glass-body with a great Belly, used in distillations. Cuneform,
Wedg-like or in form of a Wedg: a bone so shaped. Cutaneous, Belonging to the
skin, or skinny. Culinarie, Belonging to the Kitchen. Cuticula, The little thin
skin under the Cutis or the upper skin. Cutis, The upper or outward skin of the
Body.
D
Dead head, The same with Caput mortuum. Decapulation, A pouring off.
Defection, A failing, weakness or infirmity. Decoction, A boiling or seething.
Defecated, Made free from dregs. Deflagration, A flaming or burning forth.
Deliquium, As of the salt of Tartar, a clear draining, also a swooning away, or
a failing of the senses. Delirium, A raving madness, as in Fevers. Deltoides,
A muscie in the top of the Arm, having the figure of a Delta, the Greek D.
Demersed, Drowned. Depauperated, Made poor or wasted. Depraved, Corrupted or
marred. Depurated, Cleansed from dregs. Depuration, A cleansing or making pure.
Desultory, Leaping, wavering or inconstant. Diabetes, The Pissing evil, a
disease that causes the party troubled therewith almost continually to piss,
and in a great quantity a clear and sweetish water. Diacodium, A Syrup to
procure sleep, made of the tops of Poppy. Diagnosis, Dilucidation, or Knowledge.
Diagridium, See Scammony. Diaphoresis, Evaporation, as by sweating.
Diaphoretic, That causes Evaporation, or sweating forth of humors. Diaphanous,
Clear and splendid. Diaphragma, The Midriff that separateth the Heart and
Lights from the stomach. Diapneon, A breathing forth. Diapnoe, A breathing
forth. Diarrhaea, A looseness of the Belly, without inflammation, a Lask.
Diascordium, A Cordial medicine made of Scorum and other Ingredients. Diastole,
The rising up of the Heart or Artery, the contrary motion of Systole.
Diathesis, The affection or disposition, Diluted, Rinsed or washed.
Dilucidation, An explaning or clearing. Dioptric, Belonging to the Perspective,
or a Mathematical Instrument, through which they look to take the height of a
thing. Divarications, A varying or severing into parts running up and down, as
the Veins and Nerves. Diversory, A diverting place, or a place to turn of one
side out of the way. Diuresis, Evacuation by Vrin. Diuretic, A Medicine that
causes evacuation by Vrin. Dogmatic, Stiff in Opinion. Duodenum, The first Gut
or Intestine of twelve fingers long. Dura matter, The hard membrane or tunicle
that encompasseth the Brain next the skull. Dyscrasie, Intemperature, as some
humor or quality abounding in the Body. Dysentery, A flux of the Belly that
corrodes the Bowels and often causes blood, called then the Bloody flux.
Dyspathy, A contrariety of affection. Dyspnoea, A pursiness or shortness of
breathing, and a stopping of the Conduits of the Lights.
E
Ebullition, A boiling up. Eccentric, Without Center. Eccathartic, Not purging.
Eccritic, Not critical Edulcorated, Made sweet. Effervency, A being very hot or
inflamed. Effervescency, A being very hot or inflamed. Effluvia, Things that
flow out of the Body, as steam and breath through the pores of the skin.
Egestion, A casting forth as ordure from the Body, or any excrementitious
humor. Egritude, Sickness or not being well. Elastick, That goes off with a
force like Gunpowder, or spreads forcibly forth with a jerk. Elaterium, A
violent strong purging Medicine. Elixation, A boiling. Elixir, An Arabian word
for Quintessence, high Cordials so called. Elogie, A report in praise or
dispraise of a thing. Emanations, Things that flow or proceed from the Body or
its parts; flowing forth. Embryo, The Child before it has perfect shape in the
Mothers womb. Emissaries, Places that sends forth any thing as the sinks of the
Body. Empirical, Belonging to an Empirick or of knowledge in Physic, got by
practice only. Empiric, Such a Physician who has no judgment, but has all his
skill from practice, or by experiments. Empyema, An Imposthume or collection of
corrupt matter with inflammation between the breast and the Lungs, Empyreuma, A
smatch or taste of the fire, as burnt too, or as in most waters newly drawn off
by distillation. Emulgent, Vessels or Arteries, or Veins: two large Arteries so
called springing out of the great Artery, which being carried near to the back
bone are inserted into the Reins. Also two large Veins which springing out of
the Vena Cava, under the Ventricle, are carried into the Kidneys. Emulging,
Vessels or Arteries, or Veins: two large Arteries so called springing out of
the great Artery, which being carried near to the back bone are inserted into
the Reins. Also two large Veins which springing out of the Vena Cava, under the
Ventricle, are carried into the Kidneys. Emunctories, Sinks or cleansing places
for the Body. Encephalon, The head and all its parts. Enema, A Clister. Energy,
The force, or operation, or virtue of a thing. Enervation, Vnnerving, or a
loosing of the strength, a weakening or making feeble. Enthymiama, Medicines
used to express the flowing of the Blood or other humors to any place.
Enthymeta, Medicines used to express the flowing of the Blood or other humors
to any place. Ephemera, Things of a days lasting: a short Fever of a day.
Epidemical, General, universal, public. Ephidrosis, A sudden sweat beginning
about the head and breast passing over the Body, unprofitable and of small use
for that Evacuation of the disease: sometimes taken for sweating. Epigastric,
Belonging to the Epigastrium. Epigastrium, The same with Abdomen, or the
outward part of the Belly, from the Navil to the privy members. Epilepsie, The
Disease called the Falling Sickness. Epiphysis, Is an addition of some bone of
a different description to the true bone to which it is annexed: an addition or
augmentation. Epispasticks, Certain Medicines used for the drawing forth of
ulcerous matter. Epithema, Moist Medicines used to bathe or foment the parts
affected. Epithymum, Dodder of Time, used to purge Melancholy. Equinox, When
the day and night are of an equal length, about the twelfth of March, and the
twelfth of September. Eradicated, Rooted out. Erratic, Creeping, wandering, or
straying. Escharotic, A Plaster or Salve to heal up a wound, and to bring it
to a Crust. Etymology, The true Exposition or interpretation of a thing.
Evident, Plain, clear, manifest. Eventilated, Fannowed, or that receives wind.
Euphorbium, The Gum of a certain Tree so called. Excandescency, A growing very
hot and burning. Excern, Thrust out, to purge, or sift forth. Excrementitious,
Belonging to Excrements: filthy, polluted. Excretion, Avoiding the Excrements,
or superfluities of the Body. Excretory, To such a thing belonging, that puts
forth the excrements of the Body. Excrescences, Things that grow forth out of
the Body, or any other thing besides the Body, or thing, as Warts or pieces of
flesh. Exert, To show or put forth. Exitition, A sparkling, boiling, bubling,
or leaping up, or forth. Exonerate, To disburden, or discharge, to purge forth.
Expansion, A stretching forth, spreading abroad, or enlarging. Expansed, Spread
out at large, or stretched forth. Expatiated, A running forth or about,
enlarged. Explosion, A driving forth with violence. Exploded, Thrust forth, or
driven out. Extravasated, Put, or let forth of the Vessels as Blood out of the
Veins. Extraneous, Strange, or of another kind. Extirpated, Rooted out, or
plucked up by the Roots. Extricated, Delivered, or unintangled. Exuberances,
Swellings forth, or risings up, in the flesh or other parts.
F
Foeces, Dregs. Foeculencies, Dregs or settlements. Farciments, S^ffings or
fillings of any thing. Fermentation, A fermenting or working, like leaven.
Fibrils, Little small strings of Fibers, or of the Nerves or Veins. Fibers, The
hairy strings of the Nerves and Veins. Fibrated, That has small and hairy
strings. Filaments, Little, thin, slender Rags like threads, such as appear in
Vrin. Filter, To strain: A Strainer. Fissures, Clefts, chaps, or divisions.
Fistulous, Belonging to a Fistula, or sore running Boil. Flatulent, Windy or
full of wind. Flatuous, Windy or full of wind. Fluor, A Flux. Fluid, Flowing or
running. Fluidity, Apt to flow, flowing or wetness. Fornix, An hollow place in
the Brain, bending like an Arch. Forum, A place in Rome where Judgments were
given, and Causes decided. Friable, That may be rubbed to powder between the
Fingers. Frictions, Rubbings. Fuliginous, Sooty, or belonging to Soot.
Functions, The Exercises or discharging of some Offices. Fuse, To melt as
Metals. Fused, Melted or running, as Metals made liquid. Fusion, A pouring
forth, also a melting of Metals or other things.
G
Ganglia, Things like the heads of Mushrumps in the Body. Ganglioform, Of the
shame of Ganglias, or the heads of Mushrumps. Galen, An ancient learned
Physician. Gargarisms, Medicines to cleanse the mouth and throat, and to wash
them from filth. Genesis, Beginning, Nativity, or Generation. Genuine, True or
natural. Germination, A springing or budding, or sprouting forth, as of Trees
in the Spring. Gesticulation, A wanton moving up and down of the Legs and Arms
or other parts of the Body, like a Tumbler or Mimick. Glandulas, Are little
round Kirnels every where up and down in the flesh and other parts. Glutaei,
Muscles of the Thigh. Gonorrhea, The running of the Reins, a flux of seed or
matter at the privy parts of man or woman. Grumous, Clottery like blood when
congealed.
H
Haemorrage, An excessive flux of Blood at the nose or elsewhere. Halos, A
Circle about the moon or stars. Hellebore, The root of an herb used in Physic,
two sorts, white and black. Hepatic, Belonging to the Liver, and a Medicine
proper to cure the diseases of the Liver. Hermodactils, Or Mercuries finger,
white and red, used in Medicines. Heterogeneous, Of an other kind or Genus,
strange, not agreeing. Homogeneous, Of the same kind or Genus, agreeable, and
sorting. Horizon, The Circle of the Firmament, terminating our sight. Humid,
Moist, wet. Hydropic, That has the Dropsy, or belonging to the Dropsy.
Hydrotic, A Medicine evacuating watery humors. Hydragogues, Medicines that will
draw forth the watery humor of those who have the Dropsy. Hyoeides, A forked
bone like the letter Y, so called of the Anatomists, consisting of diverse small
bones which are the ground or foundation of the muscles of the Larynx, and the
Tongue and helps to breathing, and swallowing down meat and drink.
Hypercatharsis, Over-purging, or in extreme. Hypochondria, The Praecordia: the
forepart of the Belly and sides about the short Ribs and above the Navel, under
which lies the Liver and the spleen. Hypochondriac, A windy melancholy bred in
the Hypochondria, from whence a black phlegm arises that infects and troubles
the mind, one troubled with such melancholy. Hypnotic, A medicine that causes
sleep. Hypogastrium, The lower part of the Belly, which reaches from the Navel
downwards to the privy parts. Hippocrates, A learned ancient Physician, and the
first methodizer of Physic, and made it Artificial. Hippocrates sleeve, A long
woollen, straining-bag sharp at the bottom, so called, being almost in fashion
of a sleeve or Dublet. Hypothesis, An argument or matter about which one may
dispute. Hypostasis, A substance or settlement, such as is in the bottom of an
Vrin. Hysterical, Belonging to the womb or mother, or troubled with the disease
called the Mother.
I
Jalap, A purging Drug. Ichor, The matter or corruption running forth of a
sore, or Ulcer. Idiocrasie, The proper disposition or temperament of a thing or
Body. Idiosyncrasie, The property of the temperament of Bodies. Idiopathic,
Belonging to the proper passion of a disease, thing or body. Idiopathy, The
proper passion of a disease. Idea, The form and figure of a thing conceived in
the Imagination. Ilion, The third Gut from the Ventricle, wherein the digested
food or Chyle waxing thicker begins to rest; the thin Gut or small Gut. Iliack,
Belonging to the Colic: the Colic in extremity. Iliack passion. Imbecility,
Weakness, feebleness. Impervious, That cannot be passed or gone through.
Impetigo, A certain kind of dry Itch or scurf, like the Leprosy. Impetuous,
Violently or with force, as it were rushing upon a thing. Impregnated, Filled
full with the virtue of a thing, as when any thing is infused in a liquid body,
communicating its virtue to it. Inanition, Emptiness. Incitement, A stirring up
or provoking. Indication, A showing or manifesting by sign. Indomitable,
Vntamable, that cannot be subdued. Inflated, Blown or puffed up as a Bladder
with wind. Ingestion, A putting or pouring into a thing, as meat and drink into
the stomach. Inguinal, Belonging to the Groin. Inordinations, Disorderings,
irregularities, or out of order. Insipid, Without taste or smack. Inspiration,
A blowing in, or a drawing in of the breath. Intense, Strong, violent, great.
Intercostals, Between the Ribs, Nerves, so called, because descending from the
Brain, they run between the Ribs, and so descend to the Inwards. Internodia,
Between the joints or knots, as the spaces in a Ratoon Cane between the joints
or knots. Internuncius, A Messenger that goes between. Interstitia, The spaces
between other distances as the spaces between the Ribs, or the joyntings of the
backbone. Intestines, The Entrails or the Guts. Intrinsical, Inward. Inverse,
A turning inside out, or outside in, upside down, quite contrary. Inverted,
Turned wrong-side out or upside down; quite changed from its natural
situation. Involuntary, Not with the will, unwilling. Irradiation, A beaming
forth or lasting forth beams like the Sun. Sometimes applied to the spirits
beaming themselves forth, or running forth from their Center like beams.
Irrigation, A watering, wetting or moistning. Irritate, To provoke, anger or
stir up. Irritated, Provoked, angered, or stirred up. Ischuria, The disease of
the Bladder, the stoppage of the Water, when it cannot come forth but by drops
and with pain. Ischuretical, One so troubled with that distemper. Jugular,
Belonging to the Throat, the Throat-vein and Artery. Julap, A cooling Cordial,
or a mixed Potion to cool and refresh the heated spirits, used in Fevers.
L
Lactiform, Like milk, or in the form of milk. Languor, Feebleness, failing or
decay of strength fainting, or weakness of spirits. Larynx, The top of the
Asper Artery or the head thereof, which reaches up to the Mouth or Jaw, which
with the bone Hyoides joined thereto, serves for breathing and forming of the
voice, or the air into articulate sounds. Lassitude, Weariness and irksomness.
Lateral, Belonging to the side. Latex, Liquor or Juice of any sort in the Body.
Laudanum, A Medicine used by Physicians to cause rest, given in difficult
Cases. Lienary, Belonging to the Spleen. Leipothymy, A swouning or fainting
away of the spirits. Lethiferous, Deadly, that causes death. Leucophlegmacy,
The kind of Dropsy that rises of white phlegm throughout all the Body, and
makes the flesh spongy. Ligature, A band or string bound hard about the Arm,
Leg, or any other part of the Body. Limature, The powder or dust that comes of
fileing, the fileings of steel or other metals. Limpid, Clear, pure, and bright
like Water. Linctus, A Medicine that is to be licked with the Tongue.
Liniments, Ointments. Lixivial, Belonging to Lie made of Ashes. Lobes, Lappets,
or such as the Liver is distinguished into. Lochia, All that comes away from a
Woman after she is brought to bed. Locomotive, That moves from place to place.
Lucophlegmacy, See Leucophlegmacy. Lumbary, Belonging to the Loins. Luxuriat,
To grow rank or abound. Lymphic, Vessels: that carry or contain the waterish
humors of the Body. Lymphatic, Vessels: that carry or contain the waterish
humors of the Body. Lympheducts, Water-Carriers, or Conveyors, the same sort of
Vessels which carry forth the waterish humors.
M
Magma, The blended dross and faeces of several Metals, as also of Chemical
Extractions. Mammillary, Processes in the Temples, Bones hanging down like
broken brows of Banks representing the fashion of Teats and Cows Vdders.
Mansorius, A Muscle, which springing up circularly from the Throat-bone of the
upper Jaw, moves the nether Jaw. Massoterie, A Muscle, which springing up
circularly from the Throat-bone of the upper Jaw, moves the nether Jaw.
Mandible, The Jaw wherein the Teeth are set. Mastic, A certain medicinal Gum.
Masticator, The Pipe or Conduit that conveys the pituitous matter out of the
Head into the Mouth. Matrace, A Vessel used for Chemical Distillations.
Maturation, A ripening. Maxillary, Belonging to the Jaws. Maxillar, Belonging
to the Jaws. Mechoacan, A purging Drug brought from the Indies. Meconium, The
juice of the Leaves and heads of Poppy. Medastinum, Or Mediastinum: the thin
membrane that divides the middle belly or the Breast, from the Throat to the
Midriff into two bosoms or hollows: one on the right side, the other on the
left, Medullar, Marrowy, or belonging to the marrow or pith, or the white
substance of the Brain. Membranes, The little thin skins joining the bones and
sinews together in several parts of the body: the upper thin skins of any part.
Meninges, The thin skins that enwrap the Brain, both of the pia matter and dura
matter: one called the hard, the other the soft Meninx. Menstruum, A preparation
made by Chemists to dissolve metals, also to extract tinctures and the virtues
of medicinal druggs, woods, flowers, herbs, etc. Mesentery, A certain thick fat
skin, or the double skin that fastens the bowels to the back, and each to
other. Meseraic, Veins arise, or are rather enclosed in Mesentery, being
branches of the great vein, by which the Guts are nourished, and the juice of
the meat concocted, is conveyed to the Liver to be made blood. Mercury,
Quicksilver, and its preparations of it. Metaphysical, Supernatural; things of
sublime speculation beyond nature. Metastasis, Is translation, or when a
disease removes out of one place into another. Metathesis, Is transposing, the
putting of one thing for another. Miasm, Infection or taint. Microscope, A
Perspective-glass to behold minute, and very small bodies, a Magnifying glass.
Millepedes, The hundred-feeted Creature, and Heslog-sows, or Hog-lice.
Mirabolans, A certain medicinal fruit brought out of the Indies. Modification,
A measuring or bringing into measure. Morbid, Sick, corrupt, filthy, or
naughty. Morbifick, That causes the Sickness or disease. Mucilage, Thick
boiling up of a thing to a gelly, or thick consistency. Munited, Defended or
fortified. Muscles, Parts of the body that serve for motion, softer and more
fleshy than the sinews. Musculous, Full of Muscles, or belonging to the
Muscles. Myologie, The doctrine of the Muscles.
N.
Narcotick, Stupifactive, or that makes the part senseless. Nates, Two
prominences in the brain, so called because in the form of Buttocks. Natiform,
In the form of a Buttock. Neoterics, People or men of late times. Nepenthe, A
drink to drive away melancholy. Nephritis, A pain in the reins of the back,
also the Stone or Gravel in the Reins. Nephritic, One troubled with the pain in
the Reins. Nerves, Are the sinews which convey the spirits that serve for life
and motion through the whole body. Neurologie, The doctrine of the Nerves.
Nitre, That as is usually called Saltpetres: A salt taken out of the earth.
Nitrosulphureous, Nitre mixed with Sulphur, or of a nitrous and sulphurous
nature or quality.
O.
Oblique, Cross, traverse, a slope not strait or right. Oblong, Longish or
somewhat long. Oeconomie, A certain order of doing any thing, an household rule,
regiment or governance. Oesophagus, The mouth of the stomach. Olibanum, An
outlandish Gum. Opiologie, The doctrine of Opium. Opium, Made up of the juice
of wild poppie, used to stupifie and bring into a senseless sleep. Opiats,
Medicines made of Opium for some part of its ingredients to cause sleep and
ease for pains. Optic, Belonging to the sight, as the Nerves that bring the
virtue of seeing to the eyes. Opopanax, The juice made of a certain herb.
Ophthalmic, A medicine to cure the diseases of the eyes. Orgasm, Rage or fury.
Orifice, The hole of a wound, or the mouth of any thing. Origin, Beginning,
rise or birth of a thing. Orbicular, Of a round form or shape. Orthopnoea, Is
such a straitness of breath, that one cannot breath, or fetch breath without
stretching out of the neck, or holding it upright. Os Pubis, Is the bone at the
bottom of the belly, just above the privy member. Os Sacrum, Or the sacred
bone, is the great bone upon which the end of the ridge or backbone rests.
Oviparous, Egg-bearing Creatures, or that lays Eggs.
P.
Panacea, All-heal, or a plaster or medicine to heal all things. Pancreas,
Called in an Hog the Sweetbread. It is a remarkable kirnel placed below the
Ventricle, and serves for a division of the Vena porta, as also to defend the
Ventricle from touchingt he back. Papillary, Belonging to the Teats, or like
paps or teats of a dug. Papillae, Little paps, or little pieces of flesh in the
body, so called of the shape of paps. Paracentisis, Is an incision made to draw
forth the water from those swelled with the Dropsy, vulgarly called a Tapping.
Paracelsus, A famous Dutch Emperick. Paradox, A thing contrary to the common
opinion. Paralytick, That is troubled with the Palsy. Parallel, Equal, alike,
like a line drawn to write by another. Parenchyma, The substance of the Liver,
Spleen, and Lights, supposed to be made up of congealed thick blood, therefore
so called. Parotida, The two chief Arteries and Veins on the right and left
side the throat, going up toward the ears. Parotides, The two chief Arteries
and Veins on the right and left side the throat, going up toward the ears.
Parotid, To them belonging. Particles, Little parts or portions of any thing.
Paroxisms, Fits, or the returns of fits, as of an Ague or Feavour. Pathetic, To
passion belonging, Nerves so called by Dr. Willis. Pathologie, The doctrine of
the passions, also as Aetiologie, Pathognomic, That moves the affections, or
that properly belongs to the thing. Pathognotic, That moves the affections, or
that properly belongs to the thing. Pepasmus, A kind of a concoction of the
humors in the disease. Percolation, A straining through. Pericardium, The thin
skin or membrane covering the whole heart like a case. Peritonaeum, The inner
skin or rim of the belly joined to the Caul, wherewith all the Intrails are
covered, called by the Anatomists Siphach. Peripneumonia, An Inflammation or
Impostum of the Lungs, with a shortness of breath. Peristaltick, Motion, a
certain motion compassing about, as in certain Convulsions. Perspiration,
Breathing through, as sweat through the pores of the body. Perturbations,
Disturbings, vexing troubles, disturbances. Pervious, That many be passed
through, or that has a passage or way through it. Peruvian, Belonging to the
Country of Perue, as Peruvian Balsom thence brought. Pharmacy, The Medicines of
the Apothecaries; or the art of making them up. Pharmaceuticks, The part of
Physic that cures with Medicines. Phenomenon, Appearances of things.
Philonium, A Confection made of many ingredients compounded together. Philtre,
A potion to cause Love; or poisonous Medicines that operate magically, or not
naturally. Phlebotomie, Letting blood, or opening of a Vein. Phlegmon, An
Inflammation of the blood, with a red swelling. Phlegosis, The like
Inflammation fiery red. Phthisis, The Consumption of the Lungs, with a wasting
away, Phthisic, Belonging to that disease, or that has it. Physiologie, The
reasoning of the Nature of a thing, or the searching it out. Pia Matter, The
thinner inward soft skin that inwrappeth the pith and marrow of the brain, and
is every were joined to it; called the thinner and soft Meuinx. Pica, The
longing disease of Women with Child. Pineal, Kirnel in the brain, in form of a
Pineapple, called also Conarium. Pituitous, Snotty thick phlegmatic matter.
Plastic, Formative, or that works and forms. Plenitude, Fullness or store.
Plethora, A fullness or plenty of humors in the body, good or bad. Pleura, A
skin or membrane which clotheth the ribs on the inside, which being inflamed by
the blood, causes the Disease called the Pleurisy. Pneumatic, Windy, or
belonging to wind or breath. Pneumonic, One sick of the disease of the Lungs.
Polypus, A filthy disease in the nose, breeding stinking and ulcerous flesh
within the nostrils. Pontic, Belonging to the Sea, or to the Country of Pontus.
Porta Vena, Is a Vein that has many small roots fastened to the Liver, from
whence arising grow into one trunk or stock, which going forth from between two
eminent lobes of the Liver, passes into the Gall, Ventricle, Spleen, Mesentery,
and Caul, and other parts of the body. Pores, Are the little small holes or
breathing places in the skin of the body, through which heat and moisture
insensibly breath continually. Porous, Full of such like holes or pores.
Praxis, Practice or action. Praecipitation, A casting down; used by the Chyfor
a certain way of distillation, when the matter is thrown back into the
Receiver. Praeternatural, Besides or more than natural; not natural, or besides
nature. Praeceding, Going before. Praevious, That went before. Praecordia, The
parts about the heart, as the Diaphragma, or midriff separating the heart from
the other bowels. Praemised, Sent before, or before made known. Praepollency,
Of very great force, strength, excellency, or virtue. Priapismus, Is a disease
in the Yard, that causes it always to be stretched forth, and extended without
any thing provoking it. Primigenious, The first original, not having its
beginning or birth of another. Procatartic, Remoet, not next cause of a
disease. Processes, The parts of a bone (or other parts) that exceed the
natural height or posture, and are yet dependences of the bone and parts, and
proceed or go out from it; as also some Nerves going forth of other Nerves,
being still parts of the main stock. Profusions, A pouring forth, or running,
or spreading abroad. Profluvium, A flowing of humors, a gushing forth in
abundance, a flood. Profligated, Driven away or overthrown, discomfited.
Prognosis, The praescience or foreknowledge, or Prognostication of the event
of the disease. Promptuary, A Store-bouse, or place where any thing is laid up.
Prominences, Bunchings forth, those parts that notably show themselves above
the rest, as a hill in a plain. Prophasis, The appearing or showing of a thing.
Prophylactic, That part of Physic that preventeth and preserves from
diseases. Prostatae, Kernels in the Groyn, or about the priviemembers.
Protension, A stretching forth at length. Protraction, A drawing forth at
length, also a prolonging. Protuberance, A bunching forth above the rest.
Protrusion, A thrusting forward. Psoa, A great muscle beginning at the 11th.
rib, and going through the bowels to the priviemembers. Psora, The seabbado, or
scabbiness with pustles. Ptyalismus, Salivation, or a great flux of spitting.
Ptisan, Decocted Barley, with other ingredients. Puretology, The doctrine, or a
discourse of Feavors. Pungitive, Pricking like needles. Purulent, Full of
matter or filthy corruption; as a Bile or Impostum. Pubis, That part of the
privy-parts, where the hair grows. Pulsific. That strikes as the Pulse or
beating of the Artery, or that causes such striking or pulse. Pylorus, Is the
lower mouth of the stomach or ventricle, whereby the meat being digested, is
transmitted into the Stomach-gut or Maw-gut. Pyramidical, Of the shape or form
of a Pyramide, broad at bottom, and sharp at the top. Pyretology, The doctrine
of Fevers, or of fire.
Q.
Quotidian, Daily or every day: an Ague that comes every day. Quartan, Every
fourth day; an Ague that has two days of intermission, and comes on the fourth
day again.
R.
Ramifications, Branchings forth like the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves up and
down the body, resembling the small twigs and branchings of Trees. Rarefaction,
A making of any thing rare or thin. Ratiocination, Reasoning, debating, or
arguing of a thing, or the faculty of reasoning. Reciprocation, A returning
back, or a mutual partaking of a thing, or depending on another by a mutual
consequence. Re^^^ment, Any superfluous matter, or thing in the blood or body,
or any of the parts. Redundancy, Superfluity, overflowing too much of a thing.
Recesses, The private and hidden parts of the body, or any hid place.
Refection, A repast of meat and drink, a refreshing. Refraction, A breaking
off, or rebounding back. Reflection, A bonding back, or rebounding. Refrigerate,
To make cool, or to refresh with cooling, as fanning one in great heat.
Regurgitate, To swallow up again; or to sup up again what it before had parted
with. Regulus, The dross of metals. Renal, Belonging to the Reins. Reiterated,
Repeated, or the same thing done or performed again. Remora, A stop, let, or
stay to any thing; a figurative speech taken from a little fish so called,
which is said by cleaving to the keel of a ship, to stay it in its course.
Repletion, A fullness or filling full, or abounding. Repullulate, To bud or
spring forth again, as trees in the spring. Resine, A Chemical extraction of
several druggs so called, being in substance like to Rofine or Resine.
Respiration, A breathing forth or a venting. Resolution, A dissolving or
unbinding, a loosning. Retort, A Chemical Vessel. Reverberatory, A furnace by
which matter is calcined or consumed with the flame. Rhomboides, A Geometrical
figure with unequal sides. Rhombus, A Geometrical figure, with equal sides, but
not right angl'd, like a quarry of glass. Rhubarb, A root brought out of the
East Indies, almost like a dock-root, used to purge choler. Risibility,
Laughter, or the faculty of laughing. Riverius, A famous Physician. Rotation, A
going round like a wheel, a moving round. Rudiments, The first beginnings and
principles of things.
S.
Saline, Saltish, or belonging to Salt, Salt peter, Or Salt of the Rock: A Salt
got out of the Earth, contracted from several dungs of Fowls or other
Creatures, as Pigeons, Poultrey, and Cattle, and from the Vrines of Beasts, and
is one of the Ingredients of which they make Gunpowder, much used in Chemistry.
Sal-prunella, A Salt made out of Saltpeter. Sal-ammoniacus, A Salt of the
Earth, found among the Sands in Lybia, Sal-alcali, Salt of ashes made of the
herb Kali, but used also for the salt of other herbs burnt to ashes, and so
extracted. Salvatella, Vein: Is a branch, which springing out of a Cephalic
Vrin, in the outside of the Cubit, stretches above the wrist and extreme part
of the hand, between the Ring-finger and the little finger. Salivate, To spit,
or cause one to void much spittle. Salivation, A great flux of spitting, or
avoiding of spittle more than ordinary at the mouth. Sanguineous, Bloody, or
belonging to the blood. Sanguification, The making of blood, or the changing
the nourishment into blood. Sanguiducts, The Vessels that carry the blood
through the body, as the Veins and Arteries. Sarsaparilla, A drug brought from
the West Indies, used in many elecoctions. Sagapenum, A kind of Gum or Rosin
that runs forth of the shrub called Ferula. Scammony, The juice of an herb
which violently purges choler; it is also called Diagridium. Seapular, Muscle;
a muscle belonging to the shoulders, and serves for the moving of them. Scheam,
Is a figure or draught of a thing; also taken for an Astrological Table of the
12. Houses. Schirri and Scirri, Are hard swellings in the flesh, without pain,
but hardly curable. Schirrous, Full of such bard swellings. Sclerotick, That is
troubled with some tumor in the third panicle of the eye, called the Cornea
membrana, or somewhere thereabouts. Scorbutic, That is troubled with the
disease called the Scorbute or Scurvey. Scordium, A useful herb in Physic,
having leaves almost like Germander. Scotomies, Turnings round; a disease in
the head, when all things seem to turn round. Scotomie, Turnings round; a
disease in the head, when all things seem to turn round. Scrotum, The outward
skin of the Cods, where the hair grows. Scutiform, In the form of a Shield or
Buckler. Sedal, Veins: the Veins in the Fundament. Seclusion, A thrusting
forth, or out. Secundine, The Afterbirth, or that which inwraps the Child,
which follows after the Birth of the Child; vulgarly called the After-burthen;
of Anatomists the 4th. membrane of the eye, called Chorion; and that first
clotheth the optic sinew is called the Secundine. Secretion, A separation or
putting apart. Secreted, Separated apart. Senna, Or Sena, the leaves of a
Plant, that Purges Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy. Sensory, The orgain of
feeling, or of discriminating by the senses; the common sensory or seat of such
organ, placed in the brain. Septic. That has the force of corrupting or
putrefying, or that makes rotten or ripe the matter in a soar. Series, An
order, course, or succession of things, a row or course of things orderly one
after another. Serous, Humor, the whey or watery humor that accompanies the
blood, and which makes it fluid, and is separated and put off from the blood
into the parts of the body. Serosities, Such serous humors abounding. Serum,
The whey or watery humor of the blood, the substance of the serous humor.
Sinus, A bosom or a hollow turning, or outlet of waters, or an inlet or arm of
the Sea. Soldanella, Is the Sea-colewort or Folefoot. Solitive, Loosening, or
that makes the body loose. Solstices, Are two, the Summer and the Winter
solstice; the first is about the twelfth of June, when the Sun is nearest to
us, and makes with us the longest day; the last is about the 12. of December,
when the Sun is at its greatest distance from us, and makes with us the
shortest day. Solving, Loosening or unbinding. Solution, A loosning or
weakening, as of the Nerves or joints. Solvent, That which dissolveth or opens
the parts of the matter to be wrought upon. Spagiric, Belonging to Alchymie, or
to the Chemical art. Spasms, Cramps or Convulsions of the Nerves. Spasmodic,
Belonging to the Cramp or Convulsion, or bauling of the sinews. Spasmology, The
doctrine of the Convulsion or Cramp of the sinews. Speculative, Contemplative
or notional. Speculation, A seeing or discovering a thing by contemplation.
Species, A kind more particular than Genus, and may be communicated to more
generals; as a Cow and an Horse are of a different species, but both Animals or
Beasts. Spermatic, Belonging to the sperm or seed. Sphacelismus, A blasting or
a mortification of a part. Sphincter, Is the round muscle that encompasses the
mouth of the Arse-gut, which keeps the excrements from an involuntary coming
forth. Spine, The backbone, or long-joynted bone that goes down the back.
Spina dorsi, The same; the bone of the back, the Chine. Spinal, Belonging to
that bone. Spiral, A turning about, and as it were ascending. Splanchnic,
Belonging to the Spleen. Splanchnical, Belonging to the Spleen. Splenitic,
Troubled with the disease of the Spleen. Spodium, A sort of soot made out of
the making and trying of brass. Spontaneous, Willingly or of one accord, or by
the command of the will. Sporadical, That seaseth not after an usual manner;
diseases that seize privately here and there on People dispersedly, not
generally or epidemically. Squinancy, Or Squincy, is a swelling in the throat,
with an inflammation. Stagmas, The mixtures of metals, or other Chemical things
set together to ferment and operate one upon the other. Stagnation, A standing
still without motion, as a pool. Sternothyroeidal, Muscle: A Muscle which
reaches from the Sternon to the Os Pubis. Sternon, That part of the breast
where the ribs meet. Stibium, Antimony. Stiptic, Or Styptic, that straitneth,
binds, or is restrictive. Strumous, That belongs to the Kings evil, or he
that bath that disease. Subclavian, Vessels: The vessels that belong to the
little ribs of the breast. Sublimate, White Mercury, or Quicksilver Chymically
sublimed; Mercury sublimate: of a poisonous nature. Subside, To sink down, or
fall to the bottom. Subsidiarie, That comes for aid, or to help, or bringing
aid or help. Subaction, A kneading, working, exercising, or bringing under.
Suffusion, A spreading abroad, or pouring forth. Sudation, A sweating,
Sudorific, That causes sweating. Sulphur, Brimstone which is found in Mines in
the Earth, taken also for one of the Chemists principles. Sulphurous,
Brimstony, or belonging to Brimstone. Superficies, The outside, or overmost
part of any thing. Suppuration, A ripening or gathering together of the matter
of a sore. Surculs, Little or small shoots or spriggs. Sutures, The joynings
together of the bones of the head, which appear as if sowed together with long
stitches. Symptom, Is an effect accident, or passion following any sickness, or
any sensible grief joined with a disease, besides the disease it self, as
Headache with a Feavor. Sympathy, Is a natural passion of one thing to another,
or an agreement in qualities. Sympathic, Agreeing in affections or passions.
Symphony, A consent or agreement in harmony. Sympraxis, A joint exercising or
agreement in practice or action; a consent in operation. Syncope, A swoonding,
or a loss of all sense. Synochus, Is a Feavour without changes or
intermissions, a continual feavour. Synthesis, A figure contrary to Analysis; a
concession of some things arising from the matter. Systasis, Constitution.
System, The work or part of something that is constituted; or a theme or work
compacted of several parts, a part of which is a System. Systole, Is the motion
of the heart and arteries, contrary to Diastole, by the which they are
contracted, but by this they are dilated. Syzygies, Are the Nerves that carry
the sense from the brain to the whole body; also the Conjunctions of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars.
T.
Tabes dorsalis, The mourning of the Chine; a wasting or consumption of the
back. Tabid, Consumptive, pining, or wasting, Tamarinds, An outlandish fruit,
good to quench thirst, and to allay the heat of choler, used in Medicines.
Tarantula, A little venomous Creature found in Apulia, a part of Italy, whose
poison being by biting diffused through the body, strikes the Nerves with
strange tumors and Convulsions, which is only curable by the party so bitten,
being provoked to continual dancing, by which means the poison is evacuated
through the pores from the Nerves. Tartar, Is a concreted matter taken from the
Lees of Wine, very medicinable. Tenacious, Holding or cleaving fast. Tenasm, A
great desire of going to stool, and yet can do nothing. Tenuous, Thin, slender,
or small. Tendons, Certain parts in the top of the Muscles, which serve aptly
for the moving of the muscle, being the lodging place of the animal spirits,
belonging to the muscle, and out of which they issue into the muscle; they are
harder than the muscles, yet softer than a gristle or ligature. Terrestrial,
Earthly or belonging to the Earth. Testes, Certain tubercles in the brain of a
man and beasts, so called because like to the stones of a man. Tetanism, A kind
of Cramp that so stretches forth the member, that it cannot bow or bend any
way. Texture, Frame or make of a thing. Theorie, Contemplation, or speculative
knowledge of a thing. Theriacal, Or Treacle, a Medicine of a diverse
composition invented against Poisons. Therapeutick, The curatory art of
medicine, or that which belongs to the curing part. Theorem, An Axiom
respecting contemplation. Thesis, A position, or a general question or argument
to be discussed. Thorax, The breast or the middle part of the body, reaching
from the throat or neck to the lower ribs. Thoracious, Belonging to the Breast
or Thorax, or medicines good to help the diseases of the Thorax. Tinged, Dyed
or dipped, or that has received a color. Tincture, A dying or coloring, or
the dye or color of any thing. It is used also for high Cordials and Chemical
medicines, of a liquid substance, and stained with some tincture or color.
Tolutan, Balsom: A Balsom brought from the Indies, so called. Topics, General
places or heads for invention; a part of Logic, noting the places of
invention. Torpedo, The Cramp-fish that benumeth the bands of the Fishers,
holding the Net or Angle with a subtle poison. Torpor, A numness, heaviness, or
stiffness and unaptness for any motion. Torrid, Dry, burned, or parched.
Torrified, Made dry or parched, or burnt or scorched. Trachea, The Weasand or
Windpipe; the sharp arteric. Tragacanth, An outland ish Gum, commonly called
Gum-dragganth, Transpiration, A breathing through, as a vapor through the
pores. Transpire, To breath through, as the humors insensibly through the pores
of the skin. Trapezial, Belonging to a Geometrical figure, so called of four
sides. Troches, Are little round Cakes made up of powders, and used in
medicines. Trochlear, Muscle: A muscle made almost like a windlas or pully,
whereby things may be strongly hauled or pulled. Tropicks, Two great imaginary
Circles in the Heavens, being of equal distance from the Equator; the one
called the Tropic of Cancer. to which the Sun being come, he returns back
toward the Tropic of Capricorn; to which being come here again, returns
toward the Tropic of Cancer; being the limits of the Suns progress. Tubes, A
Mathematical Instrument, hollow like a pipe. Tubercles, Little swellings or
pushes, wealks or weals in the skin or flesh. Tubuli, Small little pipes, the
Veins and very small Arteries, or little hollow parts of the bowels so called.
Tumefied, Swelled or puffed up. Tumor, An hard rising or swelling in any part
of the body, with or without inflammation. Turbith, A root much used in Physic
to purge phlegm. Turgency, A swelling or rising up. Turgescency, A swelling or
rising up. Turgid, Swelled or risen up, puffed up, moved very much. Tympany, A
kind of dry Dropsy, or windy swelling of the belly, gathered between the
peritoneum and the bowels, which if it be smitten upon, sounds almost like a
Drum.
V.
Valves, A part of the brain, made like folding doors so called. Van Helmont, A
Famous Dutch Doctor. Vapid, Dead, decayed, without taste or smack. Vegetation, A
growing, or putting forth, or flourishing as a Plant. Vegetal, Belonging to
such a growing or flourishing. Vegetable, That which has life, and grows,
but not sense, as herbs and trees. Vehicle, That which carries or bears
another thing, as the blood is of the animal spirits. Vena Porta, See Porta
Vena. Vena Cava, See Cava Vena, Venous, Belonging or appertaining to a Vein.
Ventricle, Is the stomach, or that part which receives the meat and drink,
being swallowed down' and which has in it self the virtue of digestion.
Ventricles, Of the heart, two notable little hollows caverns on each side of
the heart. Ventricles, Of the Brain, several notable caverns therein.
Vermiculations, Creeping like a Worm, or motions like the creeping of a Worm.
Vernal, Belonging to the Spring, or in the time of the Spring. Verberation, A
beating or striking. Vertigo, A diziness, giddiness, and turning round within
the head. A certain disease; which causes a turning within the head.
Vertebral, Belonging to the joints of the backbone. Vertebrae, Those several
joyntings and knittings of the backbone or chine, so called of Anatomists.
Vesicatories, Medicines that raise or cause Blisters where applied. Veterans,
Old Soldiers, or any thing that has served long in a place. Viaticum, Voyage
provisions, as meat and drink upon a journey. Vibration, A shaking, striking or
quavering. Vicinity, Neighborhood, or nearness of dwelling or being. Viscid,
Clammy or sticking like Bird-lime. Viscosity, A clamminess or glewiness.
Viscera, Are the chief Entrals or Inwards, as Heart, Liver, Lungs, Spleen, the
Bowels, etc. Vitriol, Copperas, a certain Mineral found in several Countries,
used in Medicines. Vitriolic, Belonging or appertaining to Vitriol. Umbilic,
Belonging to the Navel, or of the likeness or shape of the Navel. Undulation, A
wavering like the waters, where one follows upon the heels of the others.
Unctuosity, An oyliness or juiciness. Unctuous, Oily or juicy. Volatile, That
easily flies away, or that is apt to fly or vanish. Ureters, The pipes or
passages, by which the Urine passes from the Reins to the Bladder. Urinary,
Belonging to the Urine, or the passages of the Urine. Uterine, Belonging or
appertaining to the Womb. Uvea, The fourth thin membrane of the eye, called
also Chorion.
W.
Wezand, The Windpipe or Throat.
X.
Xeroeus, Wine: A Spanish Wine so called; I suppose they mean Tent.
THE FIRST INDEX or TABLE, WHEREIN IS Alphabetically digested the principal
matters contained in the Treatises of Fermentation and Fevers.
A.
AGues, Of Agues, Page 68. The reason of the Ague fits, 69, 70, 71. The signs
of the Disease, 72. Of the Cure of the Ague, 74. Of the double Tertian or
Quartan, 75 Of a Tertian Ague or Fever, 77 Some symptoms of the Disease, 78
Its Cure, 79, 80 Histories of the Disease, 81, 82 Of Quotidian Agues, 82 Their
Cure, 83 Of a Quartan Ague, 84 Causes of it, 84 Why it usually begins in
Autumn, 85 Its Cure, 86
Aurum fulminans, What it is, 40.
B.
Beer, How made by Fermentation, 20 Blood, The Blood Anatomized, 57, 58
Compared with Wines, 61 The motions and heats of the Blood, 64 The difference
of the Fermentation of Wine and the Blood, 64 The difference of the Blood
growing hot in Fevers, 90 Of the inkindling of the Blood in a burning Fever,
109 How the Blood is infected by Poisons, 121 and its several mutations
thereby, ibid. Of the great heat of the Blood in malignant Fevers, 131 Of
Blood-letting in the Smallpox, 146 Blood Menstruous, see Menstruous Blood.
Bread, How made by Fermentation, 20 Buboes, In the Plague, 126, 127
C.
Carbuncles, Of Carbuncles in the Plague, 126 127 Catarrhal, Epidemical
Fevers, see Fevers, Causon, Or Burning Fevers, 109 Cautions, Concerning
putrid Fevers, 110, 111 Concerning the Plague, 128
Chrystilisation, Of Salts, how made, 49 Chyle, The Concoction of the Chyle in
the Ventricle is made by Fermentation, 14 Coagulation, What it is, 49
Congelation, What it is, 49 A second manner of Congelation, 51 Of artificial
Congelation, ibid.
Crisis, Of a continual Fever, 91 Of a putrid Feavor, 96
Cure, Of Agues, 74, 79, 80, 83, 86. Of putrid Fevers of every kind, 110 Of
the Plague, 128 Of Pestilential Fevers, 133, 134 The Cure of the Smallpox,
143, 144, 145 Of the Milkey fever, 151 Of the Malignant fever of lying in
Women, 154 155 Of the Symptomatic fever of Women in Childbed, 157 Of
Epidemical fevers, 167, 168, 171, 176, 177, 178.
Cider, How made by Fermentation, 24
D.
Death, And Putrefaction of Bodies, 26 Diarrhea, Of a Diarrhea in Fevers, 104
Dysenterie, Of a Dysenterie in Feavors, 104 Of a Dysenterie in Childbed Women,
157

E.
Earth, Of the Chemists, what it is 5 Ephemera, Or a Fever of a days
continuance, 91 Epidemical, Fevers, see Fevers, Essential, Putrid Synochus,
what it is, 109
F.
Fevers, Of Fevers in general, 57 Of Intermitting Fevers or Agues, see
Agues, 68 Of continual Fevers, 89 What causes continual Fevers, 89 The
several kinds of continual Fevers, 91 Of the Fever for a day, ibid. The cause
of it, and of its Crisis, ibid. An History of such a Fever, 92 Of a putrid
Fever, 93 Four seasons to be observed in it, 94 The causes of it, ibid. A
Prognostication of the Disease, 97 Of the Crisis of a putrid Fever, ibid. The
symptoms and signs of putrid Fevers, 99, 100 Of the putrid Synochus or
continual Fever, 107 Of the symptomatic putrid Fever, ibid. Of the slow
Fever, 108 Of the symptomatioal Fever, from an Ulcer, or a Consumption of the
Lungs, ibid. Of an Essential putrid Synochus, 109 Of the Causon or Burning
fever, ibid. The Cures of putrid Fevers of every kind, 110 Histories of
several putrid Fevers, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118. Of a Pestilential or
Malignant Fever in general, 119 Of a malignant Fever in specie, 131 How it
differs from the Pestilence, ibid. A description of malignant Fevers, ibid. A
difference of them, 133 Causes of them, ibid. The Cure of them, 133, 134 Of
Fevers Epidemical of another sort, 134 An History of a Pestilential Fever,
134, 135 An History of a Malignant Fever, 136, 137 Of the Fevers of
Childbearing Women, 147 Of the Milkey Fever, 150 The causes of it, 151 Its
Cure, ibid. Of a putrid Fever in Women lying In, 151 A figure of the Disease,
152, 153 The causes of it, ibid. Its Cure, 154, 155 Of Symptomatic Fevers of
Women in Childbed, 156 The general reason of them, ibid. The Cure of them, 157
Histories of acute Fevers in Women lying In, 158, 159, 160, 161. Epidemical
Fevers, 163 A description of an Epidemical Fever in the year 1657. ibid. The
causes of it, 164 The difference of it from other Fevers, 166 A
Prognostication of it, ibid. Of the Cure of it, 167 A description of a
Catarrhal Epidemical Fever in the year 1658 169 The causes of it, 170 The
symptoms of it, and the cure of it, 171 A description of an Epidemical Fever
arising in the Autumn of the year 1658 171 The nature and formal reason of it,
174 A Prognostication of it, 175 The Cure of it, 176, 177, 178
Fermentation, What it is, Page 1 What in Minerals, 10 What it is in
Vegitables, 11 Of Fermentation in Animals, 13 Instances to illustrate the
doctrine of Fermentation, 14 Of the Ferment in the Ventricle, 14 Of
Fermentation in Artificial things, 17 What Bodies are fit for Fermentation,
ibid. What promotes Fermentation, ibid. The end and effect of Fermentation, 18,
19. Of Fermentation that tends to perfection, 19 Of Fermentation that tends to
the dissolution of Bodies, 26, 30. Of Fermentation in the precipitation of
Bodies, 45 Of Fermentation in Coagulation and Congelation, 49 Of Fermentation
of the Blood in Fevers, 57
Fire, What it is, and its nature, 36 Flux, Of the Flux in Fevers, 104
G.
Glass, See Vitrisication, Gunpowder, The nature of it, and how made, 41
H.
Habit, Of the Body in putrid Fevers, 100 Head, Pained in Fevers, 103 Heart,
Pained in Fevers, 104 Life proceeds first from the heart, 13
Heat, What it is, 38 Histories, Of Agues, 81, 82 Of an Ephemera or Fever for
a day, 92 Of putrid Fevers, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118. Of the Plague,
130, 131. Of a Pestilent Fever, 134, 135. Of another Epidemical Pestilent
Fever, 136, 137. Of the Smallpox, 145, 146. Of acute Fevers of Women lying
In, 158, 159, 160, 161. Of several Epidemical Fevers, from 163 to 171
Hysterical, Fits, why Women more subject to them than Men, 152.
I.
Indications, Concerning putrid Fevers, 110 Inflammation Of the Lungs, an
effect of the putrid Synochus, 107 Inflammations in the Plague, 127
Intentions, For the Cure of a Tertian Ague, 80 For curing the Ephemera, 92
Intentions for the cure of every sort of putrid Fevers, 110 For the curing
Epidemical Fevers, 176, 177, 178.
Judgment, Or Prognostics of the event of a putrid Fever, 197
L.
Life First proceeds from the fermenting of the spirit in the heart, 13 Light,
What it is, and how made, 39 Lochia, What they are, and their use, 148
M.
Measles, Of the Measles, 144 What they are, ibid.
Malignant, Fevers, see Fevers, Malt, How made by Fermentation, 21 Menstrua,
The two chief for the dissolution of bodies, fire and water, 30 Menstruas of
several sorts, 32, 33. Menstruas for Gold and Silver, 34
Menstruous Blood, its use, and why it flows not in Women with Child, 147
Meteors, What they be, 10 Milk In the Breasts, how made, 147, 148. Minerals,
How they ferment, 10 Moldiness, Whence it is made, 28 Mustiness, Whence it
comes, 29
N.
Nitre, What it is, 40
O.
Opinions, Of Philosophers, concerning the principles of things, 2
P.
Peruvean Bark, used to cure Agues, 86 Pest, See Plague, Pestilential Fever,
see Fevers, Plants, How they germinate, 12 Plurisie, An effect of the putrid
Synochus, 107 Plague, Its nature, 122 Whence its rise, 123 Of its propagation
by Contagion, 124 Its description, 125 Of its signs and symptoms, 126 Its
Prognostics, 127, 128. Its Cure, 128, 129, 130. History of it, 131
Pox, See Smallpox. Powder, Of the Jesuits a peruvean Bark, and its nature,
86, 87. How it operates, 87, 88.
Poisons, How they distemper the body, 119 How they work on the Animal spirits
and nervous liquor, 120 Their various properties, ibid.
Precipitation, What it is, and how made, 45 Principles, Of natural things, 1
What he means by principles, 3 The principles of the Chemists, ibid.
Prognostications, In the Plague, 127, 128. In the Smallpox, 142
Prognostications of Epidemical Diseases, 166, 175. Prognostications from the
Pulse, 105, 106, From Vrins, 107
Pulse, To be considered in a putrid Fever, 105 Prognostications from it, 105,
106.
Purple Spots in the Plague, 127 Putrefaction, How made, 26 Putrid Feavet, its
description, 93
S.
Salt, A principle of the Cbymists, what it is, 5 Salt in the Blood, 60
Salt nitre, What it is, 40 Salts, How Chrystallised, and the reason of the
operation. 49, 50. Signs, Or symptoms of life and death in a putrid Fever, 98
Signs and symptoms of the Plague, 126 Signs of a Pestilential or Malignant
Fever, 133 Signs of the Smallpox, 141
Smallpox, The causes of them, 139, 140. Signs and symptoms of the Smallpox,
141 Prognostications of the disease, 142 Its Cure, 143, 144, 145. Histories of
it, 145, 146 Indications of the Smallpox in Childbed Women, 157
Spirits, Of the Chemists, what they are, 3 Spirits in the Brain, wrought by
Fermentation, 16
Spirits of the Blood, 59 Spots In the Plague, 127 Squinancy, An effect of the
putrid Synochus, 107 Sulphur, A Chemical principle, what it is, 4 Of common
Sulphur, 40 Sulphur in the Blood, 59
Swooning, In Fevers, 103 Symptomatick Fevers, what they are, 107, 108.
Symptoms And signs chiefly to be noted in a putrid Fever, 99 Symptoms to be
observed in a putrid Synochus, 100
Synochus Putrid, its chief symptoms, 100 Its kinds and cure, 107

T.
Tongue, Why covered with a white crustiness in Fevers, 102
V.
Vitrification, Of Vitrification, or the making of Glass, 50 Vomiting, Of
Vomiting in Fevers, 106 Urines, Of Vrines in Fevers, 106 Prognostics from
Vrines in Fevers, 107

W.
Water, A principle of the Chemists, what it is, 6 Wind, The North Wind apt to
produce Catarrhs, 169 Wines, How made by Fermentation, 22 Womb, Of the falling
down of the Womb in Women lying In, 149 Of the distempers of the Womb at that
time, ibid.

THE SECOND INDEX or TABLE, WHEREIN IS Alphabetically digested the principal
matters contained in the Treatises 1. Of Urines, 2. Of the Accension of the
Blood. 3. Of musculary motion. 4. Of the Anatomy of the Brain: and 5. Of the
description and use of the Nerves.

A.
Accidents, Of Urine, Page 1, 2. Air, Stuffed with nitrous particles, 27 More
nitrous in Winter than in Summer, ibid.
Anatomy, Of the Brain, 55 Anatomy of Urine, 1
Animal Spirits, see Spirits. Appetite, How stirred up, 91 Arteries, Of the
Carotidic Artery, 71 Of its ascension into the skull, 72 Experiments of
injecting Liquors into the Carotidic Arteries, 72 Of the Carotidic Artery in
Fowls and Fishes, 76, 77. The reason of the joining together of the Arteries
ascending into the Brain, 82 The difference of the passage of the Artery
passing through the skull in Man and Beast, 84 Of the Arteries Carotides in an
Horse, 85 Of the Vertebral Artery, 87 Why the Carotides Arteries differ in a
Man and Horse from other Beasts, 88 How the Nerves like Reins bind the Trunk of
the Hepatic Artery, 168 Of the Arteries belonging to the Spine or Backbone,
179, 180.

B.
Blood, Of the inkindling of the Blood, 24 Several opinions of the heat of the
Blood, 26, 27. Blood the life of the soul, 25 The Blood very hot in living
Creatures, and for what reason, ibid. How the Blood comes by its heat, 27
Effluvia of the Blood like the soot of flame, 29 The Blood requires
Ventilation, ibid. How the Vital flame is inkindled in the Blood, 30 The reason
of the change of the color of the blood, 30, 31. The office of the Heart as to
the Blood, 31 The animal soul depends upon the temperature of the bloody mass,
ibid. A plentiful stock of inflamable oil is in the blood, 32 The Blood full of
Sulphur, ibid. Why the flame of the blood is not seen, ibid. The Blood affords
an Elastic Copula for the motion of the Muscles, 43 Of the Blood flowing to and
from the Brain, 79 The Blood carried to four distinct places of the head, 88
Whether bloody-humor nourishes, 130, 131. Of the Blood-carrying Vessels in the
spinal marrow, 179 Why the Blood carrying Vessels in the Spine are frequently
ingraffed one into another, 180, 181.
Bodies, Of the Chamfered Bodies in the brain, 102, 103. Of their difference in
Fowls and Fishes, 103.
Bone, Cuniform or Wedg-like, its office, 70 Of the sive-like Bone, what it
serves for, 100 Another use of the Cribrous Bone, 138
Bosoms, Of the Bosoms of the Vessels in the Spine, 181 Why chiefly required in
those parts, ibid. Of the Vertebral Bosoms, ibid.
Brain, Anatomised, 55 The method of cutting up the Brain, 55, 56. A great
analogy between the Brain of Man, and of four-footed Beasts, and between those
of Birds and Fishes, 56 A description of the whole Brain in the skull, 57 58 A
description of the bulk of the Brain being taken out of the skull, 58, 59. Of
the figure of a Man's Brain, 60, 61. Of the Brains of small four-footed Beasts,
as Mice, Conies, Hares, etc. 61 The explication of the first and second figures
of the Brain, 62, 63. A description and dissection of the hinder part of the
Brain, 63, 64. Of the oblong marrow of the Brain, 64 Of the four chief
protuberances of the Brain, ibid. The prominences very small in the Brain of
some Creatures, and very large in others, 65 Of the tube or pipe in an Horses
brain, 66 Of the Cerebel and its Processes, 67 Of the Vessels arising in the
hinder part of the brain, 68 The third and fourth figures of the brain
explained, 70 The wonderful Net in the brain described, 72 The admirable
structure of the brain shows the mighty Wisdom of the Creator, and workmanship
of the Deity, 73 The Brains of Fowls and Fishes described, 74, 75. The figure
of the Brain of Fowls and Fishes, 75 The offices and uses of the Brain, and its
parts, 77 The Brain is the Womb of all the Conceptions, Ideas, forces and
powers of the rational and sensitive soul, ibid. The difference of the site of
the brain of Man, and of Brutes, 78 Of the blood flowing to the Brain, 79 Of
the chief Arteries destinated to the Brain, 84 Of the Dura matter, see Dura
matter, Of the Pia matter, see Pia matter, How the animal spirits are begotten in
the Brain, 87, 88. How created only in the Brain and Cerebel, 88, 89. Of the
Brain properly so called, its description, 90, 91. Wherefore the Brain is made
with crankling, turnings and windings, 92 Why the Brain of Birds and Fishes,
and some Beasts want such crankling turnings, ibid.
The offices of the cortical and marrowy parts of the Brain, 93 The use of the
Callous body, and of the Fornix in the Brain, 93, 94. The inward parts of a
Sheeps brain explained by figure, 94 Of the Ventricles in the Brain, 96, 97. Of
the Tunnel of the Brain, 99 How the humor of the Brain is evacuated, 98, 99.
Of the oblong marrow of the Brain and its parts, 101, 102. The use of the
chamfered or streaked bodies in the Brain, 102, 103. Of the Chambers of the
optic Nerves in the Brain, 103 Of the Pituitary Glandula in the Brain, 105 Of
the Pineal Glandula of the Brain, 106 Of the orbicular prominences called Nates
and Testes in the Brain, 107, 108. Of the uses of the Cerebel or little Brain,
and its parts, 110, 111, 112. Of the orbicular prominences, and annular
protuberance, for what uses, 121, 122, 123. Of the Brain of a Fool dissected,
162 Of the anatomy of a Monkeys Brain, ibid.
Breast, Why a Child new born seeks out the Mothers Breast, or Beasts new
brought forth into the world their Dams teats, 109 Breathing, How effected, 155
How variously interrupted, 175
Brutes, A single Machine, 162
C.
Candle, Why a Candle burns blew in the Mines, 29 Carotides, See Arteries,
Cerebel, Its description, and of its processes, 67, 68. The uses of the
Cerebel, and its parts, 110, 111, 112. Of its parts and accidents, 112, 113. Of
its difference in substance from the Brain, 123
Chewing, How made, 143 Choking, Why there is a sense of Choking in the
Throat in some distempers, 161 Choroedes, The use of the Chorotides, 99 Of the
Choroeidal Infoldings, 106
Cloud In Vrines, what it means, 3 Colic, The cause of the pains in the
Colic, 170 Color, In Vrines, 2, 3. Of the color of sick peoples Vrines, 6,
7, 8.
Conclusion, Of the Anatomy of the Brain, and the use of the Nerves, 192
Consistence, Of Vrines, 6 Contents, Of the Vrines of healthful and of sick
People, 13, 14. Cough, Why a troublesome Cough often causes Vomiting, 156
Cramp, What it is and how, and how made, 46 The Causes of it, ibid. Who are
most obnoxious to the Cramp, ibid.
Crests, Of some Creatures, why erected in anger or pride, 150 Crying, How
made, 143
D.
Diaphragma, Why the motion of the Diaphragma conspires with the praecordia,
163 Of the Nerve serving to the use of the Diaphragma, 174, 175. Of the
irregular motions of the Diaphragma, 175 Why the Nerve of the Diaphragma
proceeds from the Brachial Nerve, 176
Distillation, of Urine, 1, 22. Dura matter Described, 56 Its uses and offices,
78, 79. Of the Vessels belonging to the Dura Matter, 79 What the motion and
sense of the Dura matter is, 79, 80. Its several uses rehearsed, 80, 81.

E.
Ears, Why all Animals at a noise or sound erect their Ears, 118 Elements, Of
Urine, 1 Experiments, Of flame and fire, 28 Of cutting asunder the Muscles to
perceive their motions, 38 Experiments of a live Dog concerning the voluntary
motions of the Muscles, 39 Of intumifying a Muscle, 42 Experiments of injecting
Liquors into the Carotidick Artery, 72 Experiment whether the pulse of the
heart depends on the influence of the Animal spirits, 152
Eyes, Why the eyes so readily show the affections and passions, 110 The reason
of the little black specks or spots, which sometimes seem to be before the
eyes, 139 Of the Nerves that move the Eyes, 140 Of the pathetic Nerves of the
Eyes, ibid. Why Love is admitted by the Eyes, 143 Why the Eyes are made red in
some passions, as anger, joy, etc, 154 Why the eyes and mouth answer so readily
to the motions of the praecordia and Viscera, 160 The reason of flame
proceeding from the Eyes of persons in burning Fevers, 33 The Fibers in the
Eyes, the cause of the act of seeing, 140

F.
Farcy, Of the Farcy in Horses, what it is, and how cured, 134 Fibers, Of the
Nerves, whence they arise, 128 The Fibers in the Nostrils perform the act of
sinelling, 139 The Fibers in the Eyes, the cause of the act of seeing, 140
Figures, Of the Muscles explained, 49 Figures of the brain explained, 62, 63.
The third Figure of the brain explained, 69 The fourth Figure of the brain
explained, 70 The fifth and sixth Figures concerning the skull explained, 73,
74. The Figure of a Man's brain, 60, 61. The Figure of the brains of Fish and
Fowl, 75 Figures of the Nerves explained, 144, 145. Figures of the Nerves in
Tables, from 182 to 192 Figures of the Carotidick Arteries; the wonderful net,
pituitary kirnel, and the lateral bosom explained, 86 Figures of a Sheeps
brain, and all its inwards explained, 94 The Figure of the oblong marrow, 101
The Figure of the marrowy part of the brain of a Sheep explained, 105
Fire, Why it burns fiercer in cold than in moist and hot weather, 27 Why the
Sun beams put out the Fire, ibid. Why Fire seems to leap forth in the night
from the mains of Horses, skins of Cats, and other hot Animals, 32
Fishes, Why they want the crankling turnings in their brain, as in Man and
Beasts, 92 Of the optic Nerves in Fishes, 104 Of the chamfered bodies in Fishes
brains, and their difference from other Creatures, 103
Flame, How made, 27 Why flame shut up from the air goes out, 28 Why the flame
of a Candle burns blew in the Mines, 29 How the Vital Flame is inkindled in the
blood, 30 Why the Vital Flame is not seen, 32 The reason of a shining Flame,
sometimes seen about persons endued with an hot nitrous blood, ibid. The reason
of Flames proceeding from the eyes of people in burning Fevers, 33
Forms, Predestined to natural bodies, 33 Fowls Brains, why they want the
turnings and windings as are in Men and Beasts, 92 Their difference from
Beasts, ibid.

G.
Genital, How made, 173 Glandula, Of the petuitory Glandula in the brain of a
Man and a Beast, 71
H.
Hands, Why the Hands and Arms of Men conspire so readily with the affections
of the brain and heart, 174 Headaches, Great from the distemper of the Pia
Matter, 90 An History of Headaches, 110
Hearing, How made, 144 Of the species of hearing, 119 The difference of the
hearing Nerves in a Man, and in a Beast, 120
Heart, Its office as to the Blood, 31 The heart a mere Muscle, ibid. Of the
Nerves going to the Heart, 150 Whether the pulse of the Heart depends upon the
influence of the animal spirits, 152
Histories, Of one troubled with a Tenanism or Cram, 46, 47. Of one that died
with a Scirrhus or hard swelling of the Mesentery, 82, 83. Of Headaches, 100
Horse, Of the Tube or pipe in a Horses brain, 66 Of the Carotidick Arteries in
a Horse, 85 Why different from other Beasts, 88
Humors, Of the humors in a Muscle, 38 A double humor contributes to the
making of the animal spirits, 99 How the serous humor is sent from the brain,
98, 99. Of the use of the Nervous humor, 128, 133. Of the Nervous and
Nutritious humors, 130, 131. Whether the bloody humor be Nutricious, 130 How
the genital humor is made, 173

I.
Imagination, What it is, 91 Infoldings Of the Nerves, 140 Of the Gunglioform
Enfolding, 157 Of the Mesenteric Infoldings, 158 Of the Hepatic Enfolding,
ibid. Of the Nervous Enfolding of the Spleen, 167 Of the Renal Enfolding, 168
Inspection, Of Vrines useful, 20 Instinct, Of Motion, what it is, 43, 44, 45.
Of natural Instincts, 115
Involuntary Functions, what it is, Of the Nerves serving to the Involuntary
Function, 116, 117.
Juices, Of the Juices nervous and nutritious, 130 Judgments, How to be given
of the Urine, 17, 18. The Ignorance of some in the Judgment of Vrines, 18
Judgment of Vrines wanting color, consistence, contents and quantity, ibid.
Judgment of Vrines having praeternatural contents, 19

K.
Kings-avi^, Why Cured by stroaking, 134 Kissing, Why it irritates Love, 143
L.
Laughing, Why proper to Man, 117 Caused by the fifth Conjugation of the
Nerves, 143 How made, 160
Life, A kind of flame, 27 Life, and fire many ways extinguished alike, 31
Liquors, How they receive heat, 26 Love, Why admitted by the eyes, 143 Why
provoked by kissing, ibid.
Lungs, Why the color of the Lungs is suddenly changed in newborn Creatures,
30
M.
Mamillary Processes, what they are, and their use, 137, 138. Marrow, Of the
oblong Marrow, and its uses, 101, 102. How joined to the spinal Marrow, 124 Of
the spinal Marrow, 124 Of the Nerves from the spinal Marrow, 178 Of the
blood-carrying Vessels from the spinal Marrow, 179
Man, A curious Machine, 162 Meninges, See dura matter and pia matter, Memory,
How made, 96 Mesentery, Of the Infoldings of the Mesentery, 158 Why so many
Infoldings of the Nerves are about the Mesentery, 164
Monkie Dissected, 162 Why it is so crafty and mimical a Creature, ibid.
Motion, What it is, 34 Three things to be considered in every motion, ibid. Of
spontaneous and voluntary motion, ibid. Of involuntary motion, ibid. Of the
motion and sense of the pia matter, 90 The Vebicle of the Instinct of Motion,
what it is, 34 Of local Motion, ibid. Of the increase of the force of Motion in
Artificial things, 39, 4^. How the Motion of the Muscles is made, 42 How the
instinct of Motion is performed, 43, 44. Of the Motions of the animal spirits,
95 How the Motion of the Muscles correspond with the Motion of the Heart, 136
Of the irregular Motion of the Diaphragma, 175 Upon what the peristaltic Motion
depends, 169 The use of intestine Motions in the belly, 165 How the Motion of
Hypochondriacal pains is made from the right to the left side, and so contrary,
169 Of the Motion of the Muscles, see Muscles and Musculary motion.
Muscles, Of the formation of a Muscle, 35 Of the opposite Tendons in every
Muscle, ibid. A Muscle described, 35, 36. Of the simple and compound Muscle, 36
Of the membranous covering of a Muscle, 37 Of the action of a Muscle, 37, 38.
Several experiments of cutting a Muscle, 38 Of contraction and relaxation in a
Muscle, ibid. Of the humors in a Muscle, ibid. Ax experiment of a living Dog,
concerning the voluntary motions of the Muscles, 39 How a Muscle is moved,
ibid. Of the traction of a Muscle, 40 Elastick particulars contained in a
Muscle, ibid. Of the trembling of the Musculous flesh of a Beast, after its
head is off, and heart taken out, 40, 41. How the animal spirits blow up the
fleshy fibers in a Muscle, 41 Experiments of intumifying a Muscle, 42 Of the
nature of the animal spirits coming from the brain into the Muscles, ibid. Of
the fresh supplies of the animal spirits for the motions of the Muscles, 44 Of
the little hairy fibrils of a Muscle, 45 Of the irregular and convulsive
motions of the Muscles, ibid. Explanations of the figures of the Muscles, 49
That the motions of the Muscles have an analogy with the heart, 135, 136.
Muscular Motion, how it is made, 42 Of the Muscular motion, 34 The blood
affords an Elastic Copula for Muscular motion, 43 The reason of the instinct of
Muscular motion, 43, 44. Sea further under Muscles and motion.
Music, Why easily learned by some, and not by others, 119
N.
Nates, And Testes of the brain, what they are, 106, 107. Neck, Why it swells
in anger, or great passion, 150 Nerves, The Vehicle of the instinct of motions,
34 Of the Chambers of the Optie Nerves, 103, 104. Of the Nerves which serve to
the involuntary function, 116, 117. Whence they wise, 116 Ehe fourth, fifth,
sixth, seventh, eighth pair of Nerves serve to the involuntary function, 121 Of
the Nervous System in general, 125 What the Nerves are, 127 When the Nervous
fibers arise; 128 Of the Nervous juice, 131 Its use, 133 Of the first four pair
of Nerves arising within the skull, 137 Of the smelling Nerves, ibid. Their
use, 138 Of the Optie or seeing Nerves, 139 Of the Nerves that move the eyes,
140 Of the pathetie Nerves of the eyes, ibid. Of the fifth, sixth and seventh
pair of Nerves, 141 The fifth Conjugation of the Nerves described, 141, 142.
The sixth Conjugation of the Nerves described, 143 The seventh Conjugation of
the Nerves described, 143, 144. The first and second figures of the Nerves
explained, 144, 145. Of the eighth pair of Nerves, or the wandering pair, 145,
147. Of the wandering pair in Man, 147 Of the wandering pair in Beasts, 148 Of
the Nervous Infoldings, and their uses, 146 Of the returning Nerve, 147 The
uses of the wandering pair, 149 Of the Nerves inserted into the heart, 150 Of
the communications of the wandering pair, 156 The Intercostal Nerve described,
157 The uses of the Intercostal Nerve, 160, 161, 162, etc. Of its lower
branchings serving the lower belly, 164
Of the Nerves that serve the Spleen, 166, 167. Of the Renal Enfolding, 168. Of
the Nerves serving the Pancreas Choleduct, Vessels Duodenum and Pylorus, 168,
169. Of the Nerves of the Womb, 169 Of the Nerves belonging to the Vreters, 170
Of the Nerves serving for Dung, Urine, and Seed, 171 Of the Nerves belonging to
the Testicles, 172 Of the spinal Nerve, 173 The spinal Nerve constantly found
in Man, Beasts, Fowls and Fishes, ibid. The use of this Nerve, 174 Of the Nerve
of the diaphragma, and its use, 174, 175. Why the Nerve of the Diaphragma
proceeds from the Brachial Nerve, 176 The difference of the Nerves of the
wandering pair, and the intercostal Nerves in Man and Bruits, 176, 177. Of the
ninth pair of Nerves arising within the skull, 177 Of the tenth pair arising
within the skull, 178 Of the Nerves arising from the spinal marrow, ibid. Why
the brachial and crural Nerves are larger far than others, 178, 179.
Net, Of the wonderful Net, and its use, 85 The explication of the figure of
the wonderful Net, 86
Nourishment Of the Body, how made, 134 135. Noise, Why Beasts as an assright
make a sud den noise, 118 Why noise or schreeching is made in great passion, 150

O.
Offices Of the brain, and its parts, 77 Of th skull, 77, 78. See Uses.
Optic Nerves, see Seeing Nerves,
P.
Passions, Why troublesome to the Praecordia, and why seen in the face, 108,
109. Why more clearly seen in the eyes, 110
Fantasy, How made, 96 Pituitary Glandula, what it is, 104, 105. Plamater,
Its description, 58, 59. Its uses and several parts, 81 Of the sanguiferour
Vessels covering the Pia matter, 83 What sense and motion is in the Pia matter, 90
Pineal Kirnel, what it is, 106, 107. Praecordia, Their agreement with the
Diaphragma, 163 Why they seem to be drawn downwards in some Hypochondriacks, 167
Prominences, Of the Orbicular Prominences of the Brain, 106, 107, 121, 122.
How different in some Creatures, 122
Protuberances, Of the annular Protuberances of the brain, 121, 122. How
different in Man, and in some Beasts, 122.

Q.
Quantity, Of Vrines, 2 Of the Quantity of sick people Vrines, 6, 7.

R.
Respiration, Variously interrupted, and how, See Breathing, 175
S.
Saitness, Of the Saliness in Vrines, 1 Shreeching Out in a sudden passion, why
made, 150 Seed, How made, 173 Seeing, Of the Seeing Nerves, 139 How Seeing is
performed, 140
Sense, What it is, 34 The formal reason of the commonsense, 95
Sensory, Of the common Sensory, what it is, 102 Sleep, How made, 97 Sight, Why
sometimes things appear double to the sight, 103, 104. Why the sight of some
things cause spittle in the mouth, 141
Skull, The parts of the Skull unfolded, 70, 61. Of the cune form or wedg-like
bone of the Skull, 70 The fifth and sixth figure concerning the Skull
explained, 73, 74. The uses of the Skull, 77, 78. Of the furrows in the Skulls
of Men and Beasts, 78 Of the difference of the Arteries passing through the
Skulls of Men and Beasts, 84
Smelling, Of the Smelling Nerves, 137, 138. Why large in Beasts, 137 The cause
of the nearness betwixt the taste and the smell, 139 The Smelling fibers
differently figured in several Creatures, and why, ibid. Why the Small of some
things causes spittle in the mouth, 141
Sneezing, Why people Sneeze, going suddenly out of a dark place into the
Sunshine, 142 Why men before other Creatures Sneeze, 175 Why and how Sneezing
is made, ibid.
Soul, Two parts of the inferior soul, 95 In what the essence of the sensitive
Soul consists, 130 The corporeal Soul of flame and light, 29 The Soul depends
upon the temperament of the bloody mass, 31 The root of the corporeal Soul is
in the blood, and its branches in the brain and nervous stock, 33 Two chief
faculties in the corporeal Soul, 34
Sounds, Of the Ideas of Sounds in the head, 118, 119. How sharp and flat
Sounds are performed, 150
Spirit, In Vrines, 2 Spirits, How the animal Spirits blow up the fleshy fibers
in a Muscle, 41 Of the nature of the animal Spirits proceeding from the brain
by the Nerves into the Muscles 42, Of the fresh supplies of the animal Spirits
for the motion of the Muscles, 44 How the animal Spirits are begotten in the
brain, 87, 88. How first begot in the Cortex of the brain, 93 After what manner
the animal Spirits diffuse themselves for the producing the faculties of the
Soul, 95 The place of the exercise of the animal Spirits, 101, 102. The reason
of the passage of the animal Spirits through the Nates and Testes, 108 Of the
acts of the Spirits of the involuntary function, 114, 115, 116. The difference
of the Spirits flowing from the brain and from the Cerebel, 114 The passage of
the Spirits compared to light, 126 Of the great troops of Spirits, how they
pass through the Channels of the Nerves, and supply the whole Body, 130 Whether
the pulse of the heart depends upon the animal Spirits, 152 Of the flowing of
the animal Spirits from the nervous infoldings, 165
Spittle, Why the sight and smells of some things causes Spittle to come into
the mouth, 141 Spleen, Its office, 166 Sulphur, In Vrines, 1 Sulphur, the food
of flame, 29 Sulphur in the blood, the cause of its flame. 32

T.
Tables, Of the figures of the Nerves explained from page 183 to the end. Taste,
The cause of the nearness of the Taste, with the smell, 139 Tendons Of the
Muscles, what they serve for, 35 Tenasm, What it is, and causes of it, 46 An
History of it, 47
Testes, Of the Testes of the brain, 107 Testicles, Of the Nerves belonging to
the Testicles, 172, 173. A spirituous Liquor distilled into the Testicles, 173
Tongue, The fifth and ninth pair of Nerves serve to the Tongue, one for its
motion, and the other for its taste, 177 Tunnel Of the brain, 99
V.
Veins, Of the Veins belonging to the Spine, 181 Venerial Act, how the pleasure
and tittillation in the Venerial act is made, 171 Why the loins are enervated
by the Venereal act, 173
Ventricles Of the brain, 96, 97. Vessels That arise in the binder part of the
brain, 68, 69. Of the Vessels of the Dura matter, 79 Of the joining together of
the Vessels of the brain, 82 Of the sanguiferous Vessels covering the Pia
matter, 85 Of the blood-carrying Vessels in the Spinal marrow, 179 Why the
blood-carrying Vessels of the Spine, are frequently ingraffed one into another,
180, 181.
Vomiting, Why caused by a troublesome Cough, 156 Ureters, Of the Nerves
belonging to the Vreters, 170 Urines, The elements and accidents of Vrines, 1
Of the quantity and color of sound peoples Vrines, 2, 3. How Urine is made, 3
Why Urine after plentiful drinking comes forth clear, 4 Of the consistence and
contents of the Vrines of sound people, 5, 6. What the cloud in Urine
signifies, 5 Of the quantity and color of Urine of sick people, 6, 7. Of a
large quantity of Urine suddenly flowing, 7 The several colors of sick peoples
Vrines, what they signify, 8, 9. Of the deep colors, 10, 11. Of pale-coloured
Vrines, 8, 9. Why Vrines grow red in the Scurvy and Gout, 11 Of a green and
black Urine, 12 Why the colors in Vrines change, 13 Of the contents of sick
Peoples Vrines, 13, 14. What Vrines signify full of contents, 14, 15. What the
crust of the Urine sticking to the sides of the pot or glass is, 15 Of the
gravel, sand, or stones in Vrines, 16 Of the white contents in Vrines, 17
Judgments of Vrines how to be given, 17, 18, 19. The ignorance of some in the
judgments of Vrines, 18 Sickness sometimes not showed by the Urine, ibid. The
chief use of the inspection of Vrines, 20 The examination of Vrines, 21 How
Vrines are to be ordered e're you give judgment, ibid. Why many things taken in
at the mouth, color the Urine, ibid. Of the oder or smell in Vrines, 21, 22.
Of the swee smell in Vrines, 22 Of the evaperation and distillation of Vrines,
22, 23 Of the putrefaction of Vrines, 23 How the pain in difficult Urine or
making of water is made, 172
Uses Of several parts, Of the brain and its parts, 77, 78. Of the skull, see
skull. Of the Duramater, 78, 79. Of the Pia matter, 81 Of the wonderful Net, 85
Of the Choracides, 89 Of the Brain properly so called, 91 Of the crankling
turnings and windings in the brain, 92
Of the Cortical and Medullar substance of the brain, ibid, Of the callous body
of the brain, 93 Of the Fornix, 93, 94. Of the Ventricles of the brain, 96, 97.
Of the Tunnel, 99 Of the sive-like bone, 100 Of the oblong marrow and its
parts, 101, 102. Of the chamfered or streaked bodies, 102, 103. Of the chambers
of the optic Nerves, 103 Of the pineal kernel, 106 Of the choreidal enfolding,
ibid. Of the Nates and Testes, 107, 108. Of the Cerebel and its parts, 110,
111, 112. Of the arbicular prominences, 121 Of the annular protuberance, 122 Of
the spinal marrow, 124 Of the nervous humor, 128, 133. Of the mamillary
processes, 138 Of the cribrous bone, ibid. Of the Nerves, see Nerves, Of the
wandering pair, 149 Of the intercostal Nerve, 160 Of the infoldings of the
Mesentery, 164, 165, 166 Of the Nerves that serve the Spleen, 166, 167 168. Of
the Womb, 169 The use of the Renal enfolding, 168 Of the Nerves serving the
pancreas cholduct vessels duodedum and pylorus, 168, 169. The use of the spinal
Nerve, 173, 174. Of the Nerve of the Diaphragma, 174, 175. Of the ninth pair,
177 Of the Nerves arising from the spinal marrow 178 Of the bosoms in the
spine. 181

W.
Water, Of making water, see Vrines, Watery part of Vrines, 2 Wisdom, Why placed
in the heart by the Ancients, 162 Womb, Why furnished with so many Nerves, 169
The bigness of the Womb in Virgins, 170

Y.
Yard, Why sometimes it is involuntarily erected, 172 Yauning, By what means
caused, 143
THE THIRD INDEX or TABLE, WHEREIN IS Alphabetically digested all the principal
matters contained in the Treatise of Convulsive Diseases.
A.
AMulets, For the Epilepsie, 23 Apozems, For the Epilepsie, 24 Diuretic
Apozems in a Fever, 58
Astmah, Convulsive, 102, 103. Of a Convulsive Astmab, by reason of the
Bronchia being affected, 104 Histories of such an Astmah, 105, 106. Anatomical
observations on the same, ibid. The Cure of it, 106

B.
Blood, The Blood not the immediate cause of the Convulsive motion, 5 The Blood
the cause of the morbific matter of spasms, 6 Why the Blood is soon congealed
in Convulsions, 39
Brain, The Convulsive Copula proceeds immediately from the Brain, 5 The Brain
the cane of the Morbific matter of Convulsions by receiving it from the blood,
6 The evil disposition of the Brain twofold, ibid. The Brain the cause of the
Hystorical passion, 78
Breast, Why men beat their Breast in the fits of the Epilepsie, 18 Bronchia,
The Bronchia being affected, the cause of a Convulsive Astmah, 104
C.
Chalybiats, See Steel Medicines, Children, Of Convulsions in Children, 25
Children very liable to Convulsions, 26 The causes of them, 26, 27. Why they
follow upon their breeding of teeth, 28 How to cure the Convulsions of
Children, 29 How to preserve Children from them, ibid. How to Cure the
Convulsion in Children coming of breeding of teeth, 30 Of other sorts of
Convulsions in Chldren, 30 How to Cure them, ibid. Children are subject to a
Convulsive Cough, 102 The reason of it, 103
Convulsions, Of Convulsive motions in general, 1 What they are, ibid. The
conjunct cause of Convulsions, 3 Repletion and emptiness not the cause of
Convulsions, ibid. The kinds of Convulsions, 4 The more remote cause of
Convulsions, 6 How the morbific matter of Convulsions is disposed in the head,
7 Twofold Convulsions continual, or by fits, 8 The evident cause of
Convulsions, 9 Of direct and reflected Convulsions, ibid. Of the places
affected by Convulsions, ibid. The difference of Convulsions in respect of
their origin, 10 The cause of them, 11 Of the extent of Convulsions, ibid. Of
the duration of a Convulsive fit, ibid. Of an intermitting Convulsion, 12 Of
Convulsions in Children, 25 The causes of them, 26 Whey they come upon the
breeding of teeth, 28 How to cure Convulsions in Children, 29 Of other sorts of
Convulsions in Children, 30 Of Convulsive Diseases in those of ripe age, 31
Three kinds of such Convulsions, ibid. Histories of such Convulsions, 33, 34,
35, 36. How the Convulsive matter flows into the Nerves, 32 Why Convulsions
proceed from the extremities of the Nerves, 38 Why the blood is soon congealed
in Convulsive distempers, 39 How to cure Convulsions in Men and Women, 39, 40
Of Convulsions from the extremities of the Nerves, and the nervous infoldings,
41, 42. Reasons of such Convulsions so coming, 42 Histories of such
Convulsions, 42, 43, 44, 45. Of Convulsions arising from the nervous liquor, 46
Three kinds of causes of universal Convulsions, ibid. Of Convulsions arising
from poisons and sorcery, ibid. Of Convulsions caused by the biting of a mad
Dog, 46, 47. Of Convulsions from the Tarentula, 47 Of Convulsions coming by
Witchcraft, 48 The reason of them, ibid. What Convulsions argue Witchcraft, 49
Of universal Convulsions from Fevers, ibid. And the reason of the symptoms,
ibid. A description of an epidemical Convulsive disease in Hassia, 50 The
reason of it, ibid. Of universal Convulsions from the Scurvy, 60 The kinds of
such Convulsions, 61 The nature of the broken Convulsion, ibid. An History of
it, ibid The reason of the symptoms, and cause of the disease, 63 Why it grew
worse by Baths, 64 The nature and manner of continued Convulsive distempers, 66
Histories of such, ibid. The Cure of them, 67, 68, and 71, 75. Of Convulsions
from the Hypochondriacal distemper, 90
Convulsive Diseases, see Epilepsie, Of Convulsive diseases of those of ripe
age, 31 Of an epidemical Convulsive disease in Hassia, and the reason of it, 50
The nature of a continual Convulsive disease, 66 The cure of such Convulsive
diseases, 67, 68, 71. Of a Convulsive Cough, see Cough.
Convulsive Matter, how it flows into the Nerves, 32 Convulsive Astmah, see
Astmah.
Copula, Praeternatural, a cause of Convulsions, 4 The explosive spasmodic
Copula, not from the blood, but from the brain, 5
Cough, Convulsive, 102 An example of it, ibid. Its Cure, 106
Cramp, Or Tetanon, what 1
D.
Diet, To be prescribed in convulsive Fevers, 59 Dog, Convulsions from the
biting of a mad Dog, 46
E.
Electuaries, For the Epilepsie, 23 For Convulsions in Men and Women, 40
Elixirs For the Epilepsie, 23 Emeticks, See Vomits and Purges, Emperical,
Remedies for the Epilepsie, 23 Emulsion, For a convulsive Fever, 59 Epilepsie,
Or Falling Sickness, when made, 7 The Epilepsie, a chief kind of Convulsion, 12
Its description and history of the disease, 12, 13. The seat of the disease. 13
The difference of Authors about it, 13, 14. The primary subject of the disease,
14, 15. The Epilepsie affects the Nerves secondarily, 15 The differences of the
Epilepsie, 16 The conjunct cause of the Epilepsie, where only it consists,
ibid. Other differences of the Epilepsie, 17 Why those troubled with the
Epilepsie fall down with violence, ibid. Why troubled with the foam at the
mouth, ibid. Why beat and knock their breasts, 18 Prognostications of the
disease, ibid. How changed into other diseases, ibid. Of the Curatory part of
the Epilepsie, 19, 22, 23. In what the virtue of specificks consists in their
curing the Epilepsie, 20 Histories of the Epilepsie, 20
Explosion, What is meant by it, 2
F.
Falling Sickness, See Epilepsie, Falling Down violently in the Epilepsie, why
17 Fevers, Of universal Convulsions from Fevers, 49 A description of an
Epidemical Fever infesting the brain and nervous stock, 1661. 51 Its cause and
symptoms, ibid. Why it chiefly invaded Women, Children, and phlegmatic
persons, 54 Why hardly cureable, ibid.
Filling, And irritation causes of Convulsions, 9 Foaming At the mouth in the
Falling Sickness, how it comes. 17
G.
Gassendus, His opinion of the explosion of the animal spirits. 3
H.
Histories, Of the Epilepsie, 21 Of Convulsions in Men and Women, 33, 34, 35,
36. Of Convulsions arising from the extremities of the Nerves and nervous
infoldings, 42, 43, 44, 45. Of some Epidemical Fevers, 55, 56. Of a rare
Convulsive Fever, 59, 60. Of a broken Convulsive distemper, 61 Of a continued
Convulsive distemper, 66, 67.68, 69, 70, 71, 72. Of some troubled with
Mother-fits, 83, 84. Of Hypochondriacks, 95, 96. Of Convulsive Astmahs, 104,
105, 106.
Hypochondriac Passions often proceed from Convulsions, 33 Of the
Hypochondriack distemper, 90 A description of its affections, ibid. This
distemper belongs to the Nerves, 91 The causes of it, ibid. Dr. Heighmores
opinion of it examined, ibid. The Reasons of the Hypochondriacal symptoms, 94
The influences of the Spleen thereupon, ibid. The cure of this disease, 97
Hysterical Passions often proceed from Convulsions, 33 Of an Hysterical
distemper in a Man, 37 The reason of it, 38 Of the Hysterical passion commonly
called the fits of the Mother, 76 A description of it, 76, 77. The causes of
the symptoms, 77 Dr. Heighmores opinion of it examined, ibid. This distemper
chiefly belongs to the brain and the nervous stock, 78 The cause of it chiefly
about the beginnings of the Nerves, 79 And afterward displayed through the
whole, ibid. The reason of its symptoms, ibid. From whence the diversity of the
symptoms happen, 80 The more remote cause of this disease, ibid. How the Womb
is affected in the Histerical distemper, 81 The Womb not always in fault in
these fits, 82 An account of this disease taken from some Anatomical
observations, 85, 86. The cure of the Hysterical distemper, 87, 88. How to
preserve one from it, ibid.

I.
Infoldings Of the Nerves the seat of Convulsive matter, 45 Intentions In
curing the Hysterical passion, 88, 89. Irritation, A cause of Convulsions, 4
How the spirits are explosed by irritation, and how it causes direct and
refected Convulsions, 9 The irritating cause distinguished, ibid. How it
affects the beginnings of the Nerves, 10 How the extremities and middle parts,
ibid.
Julaps For the Epilepsie, 24 For Convulsions in Men and Women, 40 For an
Epidemical Convulsive Fever, 59

L.
Liquor Of the Nerves, a cause of Convulsions, 46 Liquors, To cure Convulsions
in Children, 30 Lungs, Affected a cause of the Convulsive Astmah, 103
M.
Medicines Of steel, see steel Medicines. Method Of curing the Epilepsie, 22,
23. Of curing the Convulsions in Children, 29 Of curing Convulsions in Men and
Women, 39 Of curing some Epidemical Fevers, 57, 58. When insensibleness or
madness accompanies them, 59 Of curing a continued Convulsive distemper, 67,
71, 73, 75, 168. Of curing an Hysterical distemper, 87, 88. Of curing
Hypochondriacal distempers, 97 Of curing the Convulsive Cough, 106 Of curing
the Convulsive Astmah, ibid.
Minenges, Not first affected in the Epilepsie, 14 Mother Fits, See Hysterical
passion. Mortifick Matter of Convulsions, how disposed in the head, 7 How
sometimes carried from the brain into the Nerves, ibid. When it causes the
Epilepsie, ibid. How it affects the spirits falling on the Nerves, and how it
causes continuals Convulsions, and how by fits, ibid.
Motions, How regular motion is made, 1 Of Convulsive motions, ibid. Of
Convulsive motions in Children, 25 Of Convulsive motions beginning from the
extremities of the Nerves, 41, 42. The difference of the motions of a Muscle, 1
How the motion of a Muscle is made, 2
Muscle, Its motion, see motions.
N.
Nerves, Sometimes Convulsive motions are received from the ends of the Nerves,
6 How the mor^ific matter is thrust forth from the brain on the Nerves, 7 The
Nerves in Children, and those of riper years differently by the morbific
matter, ibid. How the morbific matter falling on several parts of the Nerves
affects the spirits, 8 How the beginnings, middle, and ends of the Nerves are
affected in Convulsions, 9, 10, 11. The nervous System secondarily affected in
the Epilepsie, 15 Distempers arising from the origin of the Nerves
distinguished, 31 By what means the Convulsive matter flows into the Nerves, 32
Wherefore Convulsions begin from the extremities of the Nerves. 38 Of such
Convulsive motions beginning from the exmities of the Nerves, and within the
nervous infoldings, 41, 42. The infoldings of the Nerves, the seat of
Convulsive matter, 45 The Liquor of the Nerves causes Convulsions, 46 The
scorbutic disposition of the juice of the Nerves causes universal Convulsions,
60, 61. The cause of the Hysterical passion most commonly begins about the
beginnings of the Nerves, 79 The nervous juice obstructed a cause of the fits
of the Mother, 81 The Hypochondriacal distemper belongs to the Nerves, 91 The
Nerves sometimes the cause of the Convulsive Astmah. 104
Nurses Of Infants, how to be ordered to cure Children of Convulsions, 29
O.
Observations Worth noting in the Falling Sickness, 21 In Convulsions in Men
and Women, 33, 34, 35, 36. In Convulsions arising from the extremities of the
Nerves and nervous infoldings, 32, 43, 44, 45. In some Epidemical Fevers, 55,
56. A rare observation, 59 An observation of a broken Convulsive distemper, 61,
62. Observations on a continued Convulsive distemper, 66, 68, 69, 70, 71.
Observations on the fits of the Mother, 83, 84. Anatomical observations of the
distemper of the Mother fits, 85, 86. Observations on Hypochondriacal persons,
95, 96. Observations on the Convulsive Astmah, 104, 105, 106.
Opinion Of Gassendus, of the explosion of the animal spirits, 3 Of Dr.
Heighmore of the Hysterical passion, 77 His opinion of the Hypocondriacal
passion examined, 91
Ointments For the curing Convulsions in Children, 29
P.
Pills For the Epilepsie, 23 For such as are troubled with Convulsions, 41
Plasters For the Epilepsie, 24 Powders For the Epilepsie, 23 For Convulsions
in Children, 29 For Convulsions in Men and Women, 40
Poison, Of Convulsions arising from poison, 46 Prognostications Of the
Epilepsie, 18 Purges For the Epilepsie, 22 For Convulsions in Men and Women, 39.

R.
Remedies, Great for the Epilepsie, 24 Remedies for a cold constitution
troubled with Convulsions, 40 For an hot constitution troubled with
Convulsions, ibid.
Repletion And emptiness not the cause of Convulsions, 3
S.
Scurvy, Of universal Convulsions arising frow the Scurvy, 60 Sneizing Powders
for the Epilepsie, 24 Spasms, See Convulsions, How they differ from Convulsive
motions, 1
Specificks, In what their virtue consists in the curing the Falling Sickness,
20 Several Specificks for the Epilepsie, 22 Specificks for curing Convulsions
in Men and Women, 40
Spirits, For such as are of an hot constitution and troubled with Convulsions,
41 Spirits, The Animal spirits, the instrumens of regular motions in the body,
1 The explosion of the Spirits makes the motion of a Muscle, 2 Gassendus his
opinion of the explosion of the animal Spirits, 3 How the Spirits are disturbed
by the morbifick matter falling on the several parts of the Nerves, 8
How the Spirits are exploded by reason of irritation, ibid. The Spirits in the
middle of the brain, the primary subject of the Epilepsie, 14, 15.
Spleen, Its use, 92, 93, Its influences producing the Hypochondriacal
symptoms, 94
Steel, Medicines and their preparations, 99 100, 101.
T.
Tablets, For such as are troubled with Convulsions, 41 Tarentula, Of
Convulsions arising from the biting of the Tarentula, 47 Why Music allays the
poison of the Tarentula, 47
Teeth Breeding sometimes causes Convulsions in Children, and why, 27, 28. How
to cure such Convulsions coming of Teeth, 30
Tenasmus, What it is, 11 Three kinds of it, 12
Tetanon, What it is, 1
V.
Vomits For the Epilepsie, 22 For Convulsions in Men and Women, 39
St. Vitus Dance described, 48 The reason of it, ibid.

W.
Waters Distilled for the Epilepsie, 24 For Convulsions in Men and Women, 40,
41.
Witchcraft, A cause of universal Convulsions, 48 How falsely imputed, and how
to know Convulsions coming of Witchcraft, 49
Womb, How affected in the fits of the Mother, 81 Not always in fault in those
fits, 82
Worms, A cause of Convulsions in Children, 30
FINIS.
THE AUTHORS EPISTLE TO Dr BATHURST.
Worthy Sir,
THE Inspection of Vrines, and from them an investigation of directions
concerning the Medicinal practice, began to be esteemed among the Ancients,
even from the first beginning of Medicine: for from hence for the making of
judgments concerning the Sick, and for the choosing the most fit times for
Curing, the great Hippocrates has chiefly taken both his praenotions, and his
precepts, so that that famous and to this day approved statute of old Medicine,
to wit, (...), to compose Medicine according to digestions, cannot be observed
without rightly consulting the Vrinal. Also this seems consonant to common
reason, that for as much as we cannot search into the most intimate parts of
the sick Body, as it were a Vessel shut up, judgment is sought from the infused
liquor, washing all its parts, and taking from many some little parcels. For
neither more certainly do the acidulous or Spaw-waters, show the nature of the
hidden Mine, through which they are strained, than Vrines give testification of
the diverse manners of dyscrasies of our Bodies, and their habitudes. Wherefore
the Contemplation of this Excrement, (as vile as it is) has grown to a
Science, and has exercised the ingenuities of the most excellent Physicians,
both Ancient and Modern. Concerning this thing there are many Books extant,
writ with great diligence; in which are rehearsed the great differences of
Vrines, varieties of Colors, and diversities of Consistence, and their
Contents exactly described, and distinct precepts are delivered for every
excretion of them: Which indeed are esteemed by some of so great certitude,
that from the inspection of the water, a signification is sought of any
Disease, or of the part affected; yea of every accident concerning the sick.
But in this the common people are egregiously deceived, and still
pertinaciously will be deceived, whilst they imagine the knowledge of every
Disease, and the prognostication of it cannot be found out, but by inspecting
the Urine; and esteem a Physician of little worth unless he undertakes to
divine from the Vrinal as from a Magical Glass. But indeed, as to what belongs
to the precepts, and rules, whereon the reason of Judgment by Urine does
depend, there are many collected by diligent observation, that are extant, and
from thence established with good reason and judgment: yet for as much as the
signification of Vrines is by some too largely extended to particular Cases,
very many uncertain things interwoven, and some obnoxious to deceit, and others
plainly false; therefore who shall confidently pronounce concerning the
business of the Sick, by the judgment only of the Water, deserves rather the
name of a juggling Quack, than of a Physician.

But this Doctrine concerning Vrines, abounds so ordinarily with errors, that
the observations which belong to its practice, are either wrongfully made, or
not well reduced into method. We may lawfully suspect that the observations are
not rightly made, because, perhaps from one or two particular cases, oftentimes
a general Rule is established. For Example sake, because some Hydropical people
render a thin and watery Urine, therefore it is affirmed, such sort of Vrines
necessarily denote a Dropsy, when also in some other diseases, such like
Vrines are made; and sometimes in the Dropsy, the Urine are thick, and full of
redness. Also as it is most commonly received, that Vrines on which a cream
does swim (as on water that has Tartar boiled in it) does denote a
Consumption, which is most uncertain, because this sign is more proper and
familiar to Hypochondriacks, than to Consumptive people: And how many dye of
Consumptions, without this? Besides, what is generally asserted, to wit, that
in all diseases whatsoever, Nature does make known the Disease by the Urine, is
altogether false; because sometimes sick people make their Urine like healthful
people; and sometimes those who are very well in health, by reason of some
accident (perhaps from the meats eaten) have suspected Urine, varying from the
natural state or condition. As to what belongs to the method, or doctrine
delivered by most, concerning Vrines, they seem to be altogether Empirical, and
nothing rational: for the naked differences of Vrines are rehearsed, and are
wont to be distinguished according to their color, consistency, and contents:
thence are opposed to the several species of these pathologick significations,
collected only from more rare observations; when in the mean time, the causes
of the appearances, nor of the preternatural alterations in the Vrines, are not
assigned, as they ought to be; nor is the signification of the Vrines applied
to the Causes of diseases, but only to the Disease or Symptom; and therefore it
is most often deceitful, and uncertain; because the same morbifick Cause, and
signification of the same Urine, may in like manner mediately respect at once
diverse Diseases, and Symptoms. As for Example, a thin and watery Urine most
often immediately denotes Indigestion, or a defect of Concoction in the
Viscera: nevertheless, by reason of that condition of Crudity, the
Green Sickness in Virgins, sometimes the Dropsy, or the white watery
phlegmacy, sometimes Headaches, and many other diseases arise. But the task
which you have required of me, Worthy Sir, to wit, That the notions which in
times past we have discoursed together, and conceived concerning Vrines, as it
were collected notes, and what have since fallen under my own knowledge, by my
proper study and observation, concerning this thing, should be framed into a
little Treatise, and that I should write a plain, and new method of
Vrinoscopie. I confess the work greater than can well be performed by our own
proper strength: however, I have resolved as much as I am able, to obey you
therein. But that a doctrine or method concerning Vrines may be instituted,
beyond the vulgar and plainly Empirical manner of Philosophising, there shall
be these two heads of our Discourse. To wit, First that the Anatomy of Urine
may be delivered, of what elements and parts it consists; and also its genesis
in our Body; to wit, by what Concoction this kind of Liquor is made, and then
by what secretion of some Particles from others. Secondly, That the inspection
of urines in the Vrinal may be truly unfolded, and what may be the Rules, and
the Certitude of Vromancie, or divination of the Urine.

OF URINES.
CHAP. I. Of the Elements and chief Accidents of Urine.
WHEN the Liquor of the Urine, being either fresh rendered from the body, or
putrified by a long digestion, is exposed to a spagirick Analysis, it is wont
to be resolved into these parts or principles: In the Distilling, first,
ascends whatever of a vinous spirit is in it, diluted with water; but yet in so
very small quantity, that it is not easily to be perceived by the taste it
self. To this follows a watery liquor, large enough in proportion, with which
are mixed some more loose particles of Salt, and Sulphur especially. Thirdly,
There is stilled forth a very penetrative water; which is commonly called the
spirit of Urine, but in truth almost without any vinous spirit, and is chiefly
phlegm highly sharpened with Salt, and therefore it ascends last, as in the
distillation of Vinegar: but forasmuch as the salt of Urine is volatile, but
that of Vinegar only in the Flux; therefore the liquor stilled forth, which is
greatly impregnated with its particles, is very acid: That which is imbued with
the saline Particles of the other, is exceeding sharp and pricking. It is a
sign that this kind of Spirit of Urine (as it is commonly known) ows its
sharpness chiefly to the Salt; because, though it be most subtle it will not
take fire, but being put to it extinguishes it. After the humidity is wholly
exhaled, another portion of Salt remains with the earth, in the bottom of the
cucurbit; to which if a more hot fire be made, that Salt will be sublimed into
the Alembick, and the earthy feces only remain. This kind of Anatomy of Urine
plainly shows, that the Elements of which its liquor is composed, are a great
deal of Water and Salt, and a little of Sulphur and Earth, and a very little of
Spirit.

The saltness in Urines is perceived by the taste and touch; it comes nearest
to a Nitrous salt in savor: It is drawn indeed from saline particles of things
eaten, which being more plentifully exalted by the concoction in the Bowels,
and the circulation in the Vessels, for the most part go into a volatile Salt.
That is truly Salt and Spirit, by reason of the long accompanying of either
together, are gathered into a most strict bond; and therefore it happens, that
the Salt it self otherways fixed, is carried up on high, and rendered able for
motion, as it were by the wings of the other. Urines contain in them more or
less of Salt, according to the disposition of our body, and have it either more
volatile or fixed; which are therefore of a diverse color and consistency.

That there is Sulphur contained in Urines, their quickly putrefying, and
stink, sufficiently testify: it arises from the fat and sulphurous particles
of Meats, in the concoction being most minutely broken, and boiled with the
serum and salt; so as also there is less plenty of Spirit in it, than is in
Blood, Soot, or the Horns of Animals: wherefore in the distillation of Urine,
there ascends nothing almost of an oily form or fat. But indeed, whilst the
blood is circulated in the Vessels, the spirituous and sulphurous little
bodies, which fall away from it, do for the most part evaporate out of doors;
in the mean time, the saline recrements, and the watery, chiefly constitute the
Piss: nevertheless, Urines do always participate a little of sulphur, but its
quantity and proportion, is diversely altered according to the various degrees
of Concoction and Crudity; and thence also the color and consistence receive
many mutations in Urines.

That there is but a very little of vinous spirit in Urines, the defect of it
in the liquor first distilled forth, also the soon putrefying of the Stale do
testify: but that there is some, the intestine motion of the particles in the
Urine, does argue, to wit, the departure of the thin from the thick, and the
spontaneous separation of some parts from others, and a collection of them into
a settlement: besides, the saline particles (for that they are made volatile)
are married to spirituals, and so they are of a more ready motion, and energy;
yet according to the diverse plenty of spirits in Urines, and their power, there
arise diverse manners of hypostases and settlements; also the Urines themselves,
sooner or slower putrify.

The watery part of the Urine far exceeds the rest in quantity, and is greater
than they by almost a sixth part: it is not so simply drawn forth by
distillation, but that some particles of Salt and Sulphur (for as much as they
are volatile) ascend with it, and impart to the water an ungrateful stink: the
potulent matter, copiously taken with aliments, affords an original to this;
which of what kind soever it be, before it is changed into Urine, lays aside
its proper qualities, and acquires others; for truly, from the assumed liquor,
there is nothing sincere almost left in the Piss, besides mere humidity.

That there is earth, and muddy feces to be had in Urines, its distillation, or
evaporation sufficiently declares: for when the rest of the parts are exhaled,
the earth as it were a caput mortuum, will remain in a moderate quantity in the
bottom: Forasmuch as in the nourishing juice, there is required something solid
besides the active principles of salt, sulphur, and spirit, whence the bulk and
magnitude of the body grows; the recrements of this, viz. the earthy
seculencies, are plentifully dissolved in the serum, and contribute to it a
thick consistence and contents: but these show themselves after a diverse
manner, according to the state of Concoction and Crudity.

These are the principles which constitute the body of the Urine, also into
which it is easily resolved, by a Chemical Analysis: Out of the diverse changes,
and various contemperation of these, the other accidents of Urine arise, viz.
Quantity, Color, Consistency, and Contents, which are as to the sense the most
notable concerning it, and the chief objects of the rendered Urine: For when
there is nothing almost beheld besides in the Piss, they constitute these first
Phenomenon, in which rightly solved, consists the whole Hypothesis of this
Science: Wherefore we shall speak in the next place concerning these, and first
of the Urine of healthful people, what its quantity may be, how colored, with
what consistence and contents endued; and together shall be unfolded, out of
what mixture of Elements, and by what Concoction in the Viscera, and Vessels,
each of these depend. Secondly, shall be shown how many ways the Urines of Sick
people vary from the square or Rule of this of the Sound: and I shall endeavor
to assign, for the several differences of them, proper Causes of their
alterations; and these shall conclude our first proposition in this Discourse,
viz. the Anatomy of Urine.

CHAP. II. Of the Quantity and Color of the Urines of Sound People.
THE Quantity of the Urine in found people ought to be a little less than the
humor, or liquid substance daily taken; for moist and drinkable things daily
taken, are the matter it self of which Urines are first made: But these (hunger
and thirst urging) are more plentifully required, both that they may
sufficiently wash the mass of the Chyme, by which means it may rightly ferment
in the Viscera; and that they may serve for a Vehicle, both to the Chyme,
whereby it may be conveyed to the bloody Mass, and to the Blood it self, that
it might be circulated in the Vessels without thickening; and to the Nervous
Juice, whereby it might actuate and water the Organs of sense and motion: when
the serous Latex by this means has bestowed whatever it has almost of Spirit
and Sulphur, for nourishment, Heat, and Motion, it gives way to a new
nutritious humor; and it self as unprofitable, being secluded from the Blood,
by the help of the Reins is sent away. The nourishing liquor, which will at
last be changed into Urine, of its own nature is diverse, viz. now watery, now
impregnated with Spirit, now with Salt and Sulphur, and according to the
various forces of this or that Element in it Urines are wont to be somewhat
altered: However all liquors taken in at the mouth, do not pass through our body
whole and untouched; but that they undergo mutations in various parts, and lose
a little portion of their quantity, before they are made into Urine: For the
Latex or Humor to be converted into Urine, is first of all received into the
Ventricle, (for I assent not to Reusner, who affirms the same falling for the
most part on the Lungs, to cause the more quick making water after drinking)
whilst that it stays in the Ventricle, it is there boiled; also impregnated
with Salt and Sulphur of its own, or from more solid Aliments dissolved: then
very much of it is confused in the blood, with the nourishable juice; which,
when it is a long time Circulated, from thence receives a farther tincture of
Salt and Sulphur, according to the various temper of the Blood, and its
inkindling in the Heart: Hence some portion of it is derived with the Animal
Spirit, to the Brain and nervous stock; and afterward from thence, being made
lifeless and weak, is lastly reduced into the bosom of the Blood; after that it
has bestowed on the Blood and Nervous Juice, whatever of generous or noble is
contained in the Serum, also no small quantity is consumed by sweat and the
other emunctories; what remains, whilst that the Blood continually washes the
Reins, a precipitation being made, either by a straining or force of a certain
ferment, it is there separated from the Blood, and from thence passes through
the Ureters into the Bladder, and so is carried forth of doors.

From the origin and lustration of the Serous Latex, but now described, it
plainly appears, that the Urine ought to answer to the quantity of the liquids
taken, in somewhat a lesser proportion, perhaps under a third part; which
plainly shows the disposition and strength of the Viscera serving for
Concoction, as also the temper and distribution of the Blood it self, and after
a sort of the nervous juice; moreover it carries with it signs of the
affections of the Urinary passages. The quantity of the Urine declines often
from this Rule, so that sometimes it superabounds, also sometimes is deficient:
and either for a short time, may consist with a disposition not much
unhealthful; but if these kind of distempers continue long, they argue a sickly
condition. Concerning these we shall speak among the appearances of the Urine
in a diseased condition of the Body; we shall now next consider the color of a
sound Urine.

The Urine of Sound People, which is rendered after Concoction is finished in
the Body, is of a Citron color, like Lie a little boiled: which without doubt
proceeds from the Salt and Sulphur of the nutritious juice, and the Blood,
dissolved in the Concoction, and boiled in the Serum. This color does not
arise only from Salt (as some would have it) because the Liquor impregnated
with Salt, unless it be evaporated to a certain thickness, will not grow
yellowish: Also Salt of Tartar, being dissolved by melting, continues still
clear. What may be objected concerning the Lie of Ashes, I say, there the whole
Sulphur is not consumed by burning, but the Citron color arises from some
saline Particles, and others Sulphurous burnt, and sticking together in the
Ashes, and then infused or boiled in the liquor. Neither does the Urine of
sound people acquire this same color from Sulphur only, because Sulphur in a
watery Menstruum, is not dissolved unless by the addition of Salt, nor will it
give any tincture of it self; but if Salt of Tartar and common Sulphur be
digested together in water, or if Antimony be boiled in a saline Menstruum,
both liquors will by that means grow yellow like Urine; after the like manner,
the saline and sulphurous Particles of Aliments, being incocted and most
minutely broken in the Serum, by a Digestion in the Ventricle and Intestines,
and by a Circulation with the Blood in the Arteries and Veins, impart to it a
Citron Color.

This kind of dissolution of Salt and Sulphur, by whose means the Urines are
made of a Citron Color, is first begun in the Bowels; and afterward perfected
in the Vessels, and very much depends upon the Concoction performed in the
Ventricle and the Intestines: For here, by the help of heat and of ferments,
the Aliments taken are chiefly subdued; the bond of mixture being broken, the
saline and sulphurous Particles being most smally broken, and made small, go
into a milkie Cream, and from thence the Serum remaining after that Concoction
and distribution of that milkie juice, becomes of a Citron color: after the
same manner, as when the Salt of Tartar and common Sulphur being dissolved
together, and mixed with some acid thing, indue a milkie color; then the
contents being separated by settling, the remaining liquor grows yellow like
Lie. If that the aliments, by reason of an evil disposition of the Ventricle,
are not rightly digested in the first Concoction, as in the Longing Disease or
Pica, the Dropsy, and other ill dispositions of the Bowels, usually comes to
pass, the Urine also is rendered crude, clear, and almost insipid, like Fountain
water; but if by reason of the ferments of the Viscera being more than duly
exalted, or otherways depraved as in the Scurvy, Hypochondriac distemper, or
Feavourish intemperance, the particles of things eaten are too much dissolved
in the first Region, by that means Urines are rendered red, and thick.

The Serum, as has but now been said, being imbued with a lixivial tincture in
the first Concoction, and confused in the Blood, so long as it is circulated
with it, it is yet further Concocted, and acquires a more deep color; for the
particles of the Blood being roasted and scorched, although for the most part
they are laid aside into the Gall bag, yet being in a manner boiled in the
Serous Latex, they heighten its color; hence the Concoction being ended, the
Urine which is first made, is more Pale, and that which is last, more Red. That
which is made after long fasting, is yet more high Colored. Where the Blood is
more cold, as in Cachectical people, the color of the Urine is made less;
where the Blood grows raging with a feavourish Heat, and is roasted, the Urine
grows highly Red.

Concerning the Urines of sound people, it is worth observation, that which is
made after plentiful Drinking, has no tincture, but is pale like water; of
which we shall enquire, by what means the Serous Latex so suddenly slides away
out of the Ventricle, (contrary to what is vulgarly believed) and passing
through all the Chyliferous passages, then the Veins, Arteries, the bosom of the
Heart it self, and the turnings and windings of the Veins, and Ureters, is put
forth of the Body within so short a space: moreover, how it comes that the
Urine being so precipitately made, contrary to most other things, is not only
changed into no Color in its passage, but it also loses its own proper: For as
the Proverb is, Our Drink goes thick in, and comes forth thin: or We Drink
thick Beer, and Piss clear.

Concerning this we say, that besides the long wandering of the nourishing
juice, to wit, whereby, after some stay in the Ventricle, it slides into the
Intestines, and from thence through the milkie Vessels into new passages, and
thence is carried into the Veins, (which carrying about cannot be quickly
performed) it is most likely, that there is another nearer passage of the same
Nutritious Juce, whereby indeed it may be conveyed immediately and without
delay to the Mass of Blood, and perhaps to the nervous Liquor; and therefore,
after fasting there immediately follows a most quick refection of strength and
spirits, after Eating, and especially after Drinking; which indeed cannot be
thought to be made by the Spirits and Vapors; also from such drinking, the
Urine is presently rendered, and indeed sooner than it can be thought, that the
Mass of the Chyle can be sent out of the bosom of the Ventricle; wherefore, it
is not improbable, that when the Alimentous Liquor is entered the Ventricle,
presently the more thin portion of it, which consists chiefly of Spirit and
Water, is imbibed by its Spongeous Membranes; and from thence being instilled
into the little mouths of the Veins, it is presently confounded with the Blood,
flowing back toward the Heart. For of this opinion (though not very
stubbornly) I always was, That the Chyme was in some measure immediately
derived from the Ventricle, and Intestines, by the branches of the Vena Porta,
into the Mass of Blood; and as the milkie passages carry it about by a long
compass, whereby it may be instilled into the descending Trunk of the Vena
cava; so that it may be carried in a more near way, viz. into the ascending
Trunk of the same, by these Vessels; forasmuch as the Blood being made poorer
in its Circulation, returning from either part, before it had entered the Heart,
it ought to be refreshed with a new juice, whereby it might more lively ferment
in the bosom of the Heart; but forasmuch as the much greater part of the Blood
is carried upwards, surely it may seem agreeable to truth, that at least some
portion of the nourishing Juice may be added to this, as it were a sustenance,
it being before burnt forth, and almost lifeless, for its new inkindling in the
Heart. The Arguments that seem to persuade to this, not of light moment, I
could here heap together, but I should so divert far from our proposition:
wherefore, that we so suddenly make a waterish Urine after Drinking, I esteem
to be done after a manner as was but now said; therefore the Liquor that is
carried so hastily from the Aliments to the Mass of Blood, passing through the
so narrow windings (as are the Membranes of the Viscera) being drawn as it were
by distillation, the more thick matter being rejected, consists almost only of
Water and Spirit; with which indeed it refreshes the vital Spirits, and dilutes
the Blood; about which task, when the spirituous part is consumed, the watery
Latex, because of its plenty, being heavy and troublesome, is continually sent
away by the Reins; and when it comes from the Ventricle, not yet imbued with
Salt and Sulphur, nor is long circulated with the Blood, that it might by that
means acquire a lixivial tincture, it is rendered thin, and clear.

CHAP. III. Of the Consistence and Contents of the Urine of Sound People.
SO much for the Quantity and color of Urines, which proceed from a sound
Body; but as to what belongs to the Contents, we must know, that there ought to
be nothing besides the Hypostasis in a sound Urine; but what this is, and by
what means it sinks down, remains to be unfolded in the next place.

So long as the Mass of Blood, being fused with the serous and nourishable
humor, is continually Circulated in the Vessels, from it a certain nutritious
juice is made, by a perpetual digestion, which being put continually to the
solid parts, goes into nourishment: This first of all is digested into a
glutinous humor, like the white of an Egg, afterward into thin Filaments or
Rags, which being interwoven in the Pores and little spaces of the solid parts,
still afford to them an increase of new substance; but whilst the Serum being
mixed with the Blood, washes all the Regions of the Body, it sucks up into it
self a certain superfluous portion of this last Aliment, to be laid on the
solid parts, and carries it forth of doors with it self; and this it is that
constitutes the Hypostasis or settlement in Urines; wherefore so long as this
is present, it indicates how far Concoction and Nutrition in some measure is
performed, and is accounted a laudable sign; its absence shows Crudity and
Cachectical people, or a Dyscrasie in Feavours; it consisting of small Threads
or Filaments, is dispersed at first through the whole body of the Urine, and
then is collected into a little Cloud, by this means. These Filaments or
Threads, are long, and smooth, also endued with some sharpnesses like
Brier-pricks, that from thence being shaken about, they easily lay hold of one
another, and are fastened together; even as if into an Urinal full of water, you
should cast many Hairs, and then by shaking about the Vessel, the hairs at
first swimming dispersedly, in a little time would lay hold on one another, and
be collected into a little bundle; after the same manner (as it seems) the
little threads which constitute the Hypostasis or settlement being variously
here and there agitated by the color and spirits implanted in the Urine,
entangle and thrust upon one another, until they gather into one little Cloud
by the mutual knitting of all together; and because these Filaments are
compacted, and more solid than the other Contents of the Urine, they sink
toward the bottom with their weight.

It is very likely, that these kind of Filaments, make the Hypostasis in the
Urines of Sound people, for that the Blood being well constituted, and disposed
to nourishment, is very much stuffed with Fibers, or white Filaments: because,
when a Vein is opened, if the Blood let out be received into warm water, it
will be conspicuous to any one; for the red thick substance being diluted with
the liquor, these smooth and white threads swim in the water; wherefore it
seems, that some of these thin or slender rags, being snatched away with the
serous juce, are the matter of this cloud subsiding in the Urine; wherefore in
Cachectical people, by reason of Crudity, the Blood being very waterish, and
unfit for nourishment, is destitute of these well labored Fibrils; also in
Dyscrasies, when the nutritious humor, the Blood being too much scorched, is
not rightly concocted into these kind of Filaments, the Hypostasis in Urines is
either wholly wanting, or is very confused and disturbed.

It is said to be a good and laudable Hypostasis, which is of a whitish color,
of a round and equal figure, and sinks toward the bottom, to which are
required, First, that that last Aliment be rightly labored, whereby the
Filaments may become white, smooth, and solid, like to slender Fibers.
Secondly, that the Urine be sufficiently strong in spirits, which (as is beheld
in the growing hot of Must, or new Wine) may agitate, and compel here and there
all parts. Thirdly, that the liquor be not too thick, nor that its Pores be
first possessed by strange bodies, whereby the motion of the contents may be
hindered, but that a sufficient space may be lest, for the free agitating and
tossing about these kind of Particles.

If the substance be red, it is a sign that that last Aliment is scorched and
burnt, with too much heat; wherefore such a sediment, for the most part is in
the beginning of a Feavour, so long as the Coction in the Viscera and Vessels,
is not wholly perverted; if the Hypostasis be broken and unequal, it is a sign
that the nutriment destinated for the solid parts, is not rightly and equally
concocted, and that its Particles are not homogene, and alike in every part:
wherefore the Filaments do not cohere together, but these with those, and they
with others, are entangled apart; hence some more thick descend toward the
bottom, and others more light swim upon the top. When the Hypostasis does not
wholly sink down, but hangs all of it, either in the middle or upper Region,
that happens, because that those Filaments are not perfectly labored, nor
solid and compact, but more rare and spungy, or because the liquor is thicker,
and more impregnate with Salt and Sulphur, and therefore like Lie it sustains
some weights, which otherwise would sink to the bottom. Sometimes the
Hypostasis is wholly wanting, in sound people, after long fasting, immoderate
labors, or copious sweating, the matter being wholly consumed into nutriment,
or evaporated by sweat; in Feavours, by reason of the very depraved condition
of the Blood; also in the Pica, Cachexie, and other Distempers of that kind, by
reason of the great Crudity.

Concerning the consistency of the Urine in sound people, there is not much
worthy consideration to be met with: It is wont to be of that sort, as midling
Beer is, being purified by a long Fermentation; or Lie a little boiled, viz.
the watery liquor of the Urine, ought to include in its Pores and passages, a
great many Particles of Salt, and Sulphur, most smally broken, and dissolved;
and besides a little of earth, divided very exceeding small, and dispersed
through the whole body of the Piss; if the consistence be thinner than it ought,
as it is in clear, or limpid Urines, and watery, it is a sign of indigestion and
crudity; that the Aliments are not fully overcome, and Concocted; but if the
Urine be thicker, and closer than it ought, it is a sign, that the body of the
liquor, is filled with preternatural Contents. But of these elsewhere, when we
shall speak of the Urines of the Sick.

Thus far of Urine, forasmuch as it is an Excrement, and sign of Concoction in
a sound body (truly performed in the Viscera and in the Vessels) the quantity
or bulk of which is to be determined by the potulent matter; the color Citron,
from the dissolved Salt and Sulphur, and boiled in the Serum; the Hypostasis or
Contents depend upon the Filaments, elaboured in the Blood, for the nourishment
of the solid parts; the consistency on the Salt and Sulphur, together with the
Particles of Earth, filling the Pores and passages of the serous liquor. It
next remains, that we treat of the Urines of sick people: in which also, the
Quantity, Color, Contents, Consistence, and some accidents besides, offer
themselves to consideration.

CHAP. IV. Of the Quantity and Color in Urines of sick People.
IN a Morbous provision of Bodies, or Sickly estate, the quantity of the Urine
does not exactly quadrate with the proportion of the liquid things taken; for
sometimes it wants of its due measure, and sometimes exceeds it. When the Urine
is much less than the drinkable things taken, the reason is, because the watery
Latex either stays somewhere in the Body, or is diverted by some other way of
Excretion, than by Urine: if it remains within; First, it is either heaped up
about the Viscera, and their Cavities, and so is stayed now in the Ventricle,
more than it ought to do, and induces by the distention of it, troubles, with
spitting; but more often, it is laid up in the hollowness of the Abdomen, and
sometimes of the Thorax and head, and there is wont to cause Hydropic Diseases.
Or, Secondly, the Serum stagnates in the Vessels, and so increases the bulk of
the Blood, and Nervous Liquor, and notably perverts its motion; whence
Catarrhs, Rheumatick distempers, and often Palsies and Convulsions are caused.
Or thirdly, this watery humor is fixed in the habit of the body, and so creates
a swelling up of the whole body, or of some parts. Or fourthly and lastly, it
is obstructed in the urinary passages, by the Stone, or thick matter, as it
were a dam opposing it; and causes in those parts pains and Convulsions, and a
fullness of the Serum in the whole body. When the serous water is other ways
bestowed, the Patients are for the most part prone to frequent and troublesome
Sweats, or almost to a continual Looseness.

The distempers therefore which the small quantity of the Urine is wont to
indicate, are sometimes the swelling up of some of the Viscera, and a heaping
up of water in them, sometimes Catarrhal distempers, sometimes evil
dispositions of the nervous stock: sometimes an Anasarca and watery Tumors; and
sometimes the stony disposition of the Reins and Bladder. And sometimes also
the diminution of the Urine is the effect and sign of some other preternatural
evacution, viz. an immoderate excretion of Sweat, Lask, or some other thing. To
describe here exactly all the subsistences of the serous Latex, either in the
body, or the causes of it other ways excreted, and the manner of doing it, were
to transfer hither almost the whole matter of Pathology; for many and diverse
are the occasions and circumstances, whereupon this Serum is heaped up in this
or that part, and subsisting in the body, diminishes the quantity of the Urine;
but for the most part the principal and most frequent cause of this consists
not so much in the fault of the Liver, Spleen, or Reins, as of the blood it
self: to wit, a copious and free making of Urine, as also its stay in the body,
and only made in little quantity, depend chiefly on the temper of the blood,
and either on its kindling, or fermentation in the heart: for if the blood be
strong in rightly exalted principles, ( viz. Spirit, Sulphur, and Salt) it
grows very hot in the Vessels, and so the frame of the liquor being loose
enough, it is duly kindled by the ferment of the heart; and almost
spiritualizes the whole, passes through all parts with heat and a rapid motion,
without stopping, and whatsoever is superfluous and volatile, evaporates out of
doors: and whilst the blood is rarefied, and boiling with heat, passes through
the Reins, what is serous is easily separated, either by the strainer of the
Reins only, or (which is most likely) by a coagulation, and is as it were
precipitated from the remaining mass of the blood. The same thing almost
happens after this manner to the blood, as we may observe in Milk, viz. whilst
it is warmed, and grows hot, it most easily goes into parts, and its Serum is
most easily separated by the least drop of Runnet, or Coagulum put into it: but
if you pour much more strong and sour ferment into it, when it is cold, a
precipitation will hardly follow; so if the blood becomes through an evil
constitution, or ill manner of living, more cool and watery, that being less
endued with active Elements, it grows but dully hot, and is but little kindled
in the heart; it is circulated very slowly and difficultly in the Vessels;
passing through the Pores and passages of the Viscera, it cleaves a little to
them, and leaves something behind it; whence are begotten every where
Obstructions and Tumors; also the blood by this means becoming viscous and
cool, and so unfit for precipitation or percolation, lays aside less readily
its excrements in the Reins; but leaves them every where in the body, because
it hardly, and not without the residence of a certain humor, is circulated.
Wherefore in this state, those things that move the blood very much, as
exercise and a more quick motion; or also such as may fuse it, as it were with
a Coagulum or Runnet, as are sharp things, and preparations of Salts, will more
freely provoke Urine.

It sometimes happens, that the Urines of the sick are made in a large
quantity, and very profuse, that in a day and a nights space, they make perhaps
twice or thrice as much water, as the Liquids they have taken; the causes of
which distemper are also various, and the significations very diverse; if after
the suppression of Urine, or its quantity formerly lessened, if in Hydropick
distempers, Rheumatisms, or passions of the nervous stock, or in the Crises of
Fevers, a flowing down of the Urine follows, either of its own accord, or by
the use of Diuretics, it denotes a Cure of the disease, or preternatural
disposition, or at least a declining of it. But if (as I have often observed)
in a lean and weak constitution (without any of the previous distempers but now
recited) the Urine exceeds much the Liquids taken, and from thence a great
debility of the whole follows; this indeed signifies an evil disposition, with
a tendency to a wasting or Consumption. I have known some women of a tender and
most fine make, who sometimes being ill, for many days, were wont daily to make
water in a great abundance, (exceeding twice the Liquids taken) and that watery
and thin, without contents or settlement; at which time they have complained of
a languishing of strength, difficult respiration, and an impotency to motion. I
suppose in this case, that the blood and nervous juice grow too sour, from the
salt carried forth, and suffering a Flux, and therefore that they are somewhat
loosned in their mixture, and fused so much into serosity, as to be made fit
for it. For it is to be observed, that all Liquids, though more thick and
mucilaginous, if they be kept to a sourness, presently become for the most part
watery and limpid: also the flowing down of the Urine is sometimes seen to arise
from such a disposition of the blood and humors: for that the Urine so
copiously excreted, is like Vinegar in taste; and these kind of distempers are
usually cureed, chiefly by Chalybeates, and not by binding and thickning things.

But as to what respects the Color, the Urine of sound people may be the
square or rule, to which all the rest of the sick may be referred; for as the
color of sound peoples is Citron, the Urine of the sick is paler than Citron,
and so either watery, or white, or higher colored than it; whose chief kinds
are, flame-colour, yellow, red, green, and black. I shall run through every one
of these briefly, and endeavor to weigh them together, by what causes all the
alterations may be made, and what distempers, or provisions of diseases they
are wont to make known.

The Urine is watery or limpid, when by reason of the indigestion of the
Ventricle, the saline and sulphurous particles of things eaten, are not
rightly subjugated, nor being smally broken, are made so volatile, that being
dissolved in the Serum, they may impart to it a tincture, which it may carry
with it, through the several turnings and windings of its passage: For the
Latex or juice to be changed into Urine, because it is forced through very
secret passages, and narrow, as it were by a certain distillation; therefore it
is wholly deprived of the color and consistency, which it had from the taken
Liquids, and imbibes almost nothing, but the volatile part, from the Chyme,
whose Vehicle it is. Wherefore, if by reason of the great crudity, the Salt,
Sulphur, and other contents are not first made volatile in the Viscera, nor
afterward dissolved in the Vessels, that they may make their passage together
with the serous juice; it being at last stripped almost of all, is sent out
like clear water. That such Urines do want the active principles, it is a sign,
because they are kept a long time from putrefaction: This sort of Urine denotes
in Virgins, for the most part, the Green Sickness, in most the Cachexy or
Dropsy; in all it is a note of indigestion and crudity. Sometimes in those
obnoxious to the Stone, it foretells the approach of the fit, viz. whilst the
Serum is coagulated by the stony juice in the Reins, its dissolutions and
contents are congealed into a tartareous matter, only a watery juice or Latex
staying behind. Those who for some time make a thin and watery Urine, whatever
sickness they are obnoxious to, have often adjoined to it a difficulty of
breathing, and shortness thereof after motion, and a distention about the
region of the Ventricle, and as it were a swelling up after eating. The reason
of the former wholly depends on the defect of spirits in the blood, because its
liquor is not fully imbued with active principles (of Spirit, Sulphur, and
Salt) rightly exalted; therefore it is not sufficiently kindled by the ferment
of the heart, whereby the whole may presently leap forth, and break as it were
into a flame: but that hardly fermenting, and being apt to stagnate in the
heart, and for the most part to reside there, burdens it grievously: wherefore
if the blood so disposed, is urged more than it is wont, by a more quick
motion, into the bosom of the Heart, because not being rarefied of its own
accord, it may presently go wholly forth, therefore there is need of great
endeavor of the Lungs, and a more quick or frequent agitation, whereby it may
be carried forth. Therefore watery Urines signify this kind of Crudity in the
blood; because, for as much as they receive no tincture almost from the Salt
and Sulphur, it is a sign that the Particles are little dissolved in the mass
of blood, or are rendered volatile. As to what appertains to the inflation of
the Ventricle (of which also limpid or clear Urines are the effect and sign) I
say, because of a defect of due Fermentation, the Chyle goes not into a
volatile Cream, but (like bread not fermented) into a sad and heavy mass; which
indeed is slowly, and not without a residence of viscous Phlegm, carried out of
the stomach: its relics being impacted in the folds and Membranes of the
Ventricle, obstruct all the Pores and passages, that nothing may vapor forth,
nor that the thin and spirituous part may be conveyed (as it ought to be) by
the secret passages, to the blood: hence flatulencies are begotten, which
continually distend the Ventricle, and blow it up beyond its due bulk: also
when those Feculencies are left a long time in the stomach, they abound in a
fixed Salt, and degenerate now into an acid, now into a vitriolick matter, or
of some other nature; from whence Heart-aches, desire of absurd things,
oftentimes Heat with cruel thirst, and sometimes Vomiting arise: some of which
though they argue a very sharp heat to lie hid within, yet by reason of the
want of concoction, such distempers often render the Urine crude and watery. We
have treated thus largely of a limpid or clear Urine, because from hence the
reasons of the rest (which as to color and consistency are pale and thin in
healthful persons) may be drawn. For from the Salt and Sulphur, more or less
dissolved and boiled in the Serum, the appearances of a pale and straw-coloured
Urine, and of other colors, under a Citron color, are excited; and by the
like means, which was said of the watery, they may be unfolded.

There remains another certain kind of Urine, more pale than the Citron color,
not thin, but thick and cloudy, and of a whitish color; it appears by common
observation, that children do often make such water, when they are troubled
with the Worms: The reason of which seems, because the matter whereof the worms
are made, is a certain viscous Phlegm, heaped up in the Viscera, by reason of
the indigestion of the Chyle, and a defect of making or generating Spirits,
which matter at first transmits no tincture to the Urine, because of its
fixity, the same afterward putrefying is exalted, and is in some manner
volatilized; and then partly by heat and spirit, is formed into worms, and
partly being confused with the passing Chyle, and carried into the vessels,
when it is made unfit for nourishment, it is separated with the Serum from the
blood, and being mixed with the Urine, gives it that white color. Sometimes
also in Fevers, especially of children, the Urine is whitish: the reason of
which is, because the supplement of the nutritious juice being poured from the
Chyle to the mass of blood, is not rightly assimilated, but degenerates into an
excrementitious humor: A portion of which being incocted in the Serum, imparts
to it the thick consistence and milky color: otherwise than in the Fevers of
those of riper years, where when the heat is stronger, the same degenerate
juice impresses on the Serum a red color. Also the Urine is whitish in the
flowing of the Whites, the Gonorrhoea, Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder, and of
the urinary passages, by reason of the confusion or mingling of the filthy
matter, or the corrupted seed: however it be, that the color of the urine be
white, it is produced from its contents, which at last putting down its
settlement to the bottom, the liquor for the most part becomes of a palish and
yellowish color; even as it may be perceived by the making of the Milk of
Sulphur, where the milky substance sinking down to the bottom, the over
swimming liquor is of a Citron color.

Urines whose color is deeper than Citron, owe their appearance, not only to
the Salt and Sulphur dissolved more than usual, but in some sort to the more
thick contents in the liquor. The more plentiful dissolution of the Salt and
the Sulphur, is chiefly performed in the vessels, in the mass it self of the
blood, and from thence the Tincture is impressed on the serous Juice: But this
happens to be done for the most part, after a double manner, viz. either by
reason of the feverish fervor, for as much as the blood boiling in the
vessels, and being more kindled in the Heart, is very much loosned in its
mixture, and so copiously fixes on the Serum the particles of Salt and Sulphur,
wasted as it were by the boiling: Or without a Fever, when these kind of
sulphurous and saline little bodies, wont to be sent forth at other sinks, are
restrained; and so being by degrees heaped up in the blood, are poured into the
Serum. Of this also there are two chief causes or means; for either the
excrements of the blood, which chiefly participate of adust Sulphur, and that
ought to be sent away by Choler-carrying vessels, are retained, and so they
impress, being suffused on the serous humor, a tincture of yellowness: or else
the Effluvia's, which are chiefly of a saline nature, and ought to be
evaporated by insensible transpiration, are restrained, and from those the
urine is filled with a lixivial tincture. The urines of the former kind are
proper to people that have the Jaundice; but those of this latter are familiar
to the Scurvy: for in the Scurvy the saline particles of the blood depart from
volatilization, and get a Flux: wherefore, by reason of their fixity, they will
not evaporate, and so being more fully heaped together in the blood, they more
and more pervert its Crasis, and very much impregnate the serous humor with a
saltness. The contents which heighten the color of the urine, are of a twofold
kind, to wit, either adust recrements, remaining after the deflagration of the
blood, or particles of the nutritious juice, degenerated into an extraneous
matter: Concerning which we shall speak hereafter in their proper place. It now
remains that we describe particularly the several Colors of Urine more intense
or deep than Citron color.

1. The first is a flame-coloured urine, which shines with a brightness like
the Spirit of Nitre: and this is very often seen in an intermitting Tertian
Fever; this color arises from a portion of the thinner yellow Bile, mixed
with the Serum, whilst it is in motion: for that in this Fever there is a
sharp and hot intemperature of the blood, which burns and scorches all the
humors, and so plentifully begets Choler. But although this, for the most part,
is separated from the mass of blood by the bilary vessels and passages; yet
when it abounds in the vessels, a part of it, or (which is the same thing) some
burnt and adust particles of the blood and humors being boiled in the serous
water, impart to it an high or deep yellowness. This urine is thin and shining,
for that there is in this disease almost a continual breathing forth, that
thrusts out the recrements of the nutritious Juice, and all the thicker parts
of the Serum toward the circumference of the body.

2. The Saffron-coloured urine, and which dies Linen with the same color,
undoubtedly is a sign of the Jaundice: it is tinged after this manner by the
yellow Bile or Choler, or by the Salt and Sulphur burnt and plentifully mixed
with the Serum: for the yellow Bile is necessarily begot from the yoked heat
and motion of the blood; but for this the Gall bag is designed by Nature, for
the separating it from the mass of the blood, its passages being rooted in the
Liver: But if such a separation be any ways hindered, that humor flowing back in
the blood, and copiously heaped together, infects the skin with its yellowness,
the blood, and especially the serous Latex. The Saffron-coloured urine differs
from the flame-coloured, because in this only a certain portion of the more
thin Bile is poured into the urine, but in that the more thick part, and much
more plenty: besides, in the yellow Bile the Sulphur, with the Salt, being
joined and long circulated, is fully dissolved by it, that it becomes like
paint, imparting to every subject a Saffron-coloured tincture; as when common
Sulphur and Oil of Tartar are mixed together. But what things cause a redness
in urines, without the restagnation of this Bile, happen after the same manner,
as in the Lie of Ashes: where the particles of the Sulphur, without any
previous disposition from the saline, are forthwith put down with them in the
Liquor.

3. It remains that we speak next of red Urines, which are of a diverse habit,
neither do they always depend on the same causes, nor plainly denote the same
kind of distempers; we shall briefly run through the chief differences and
proper significations of them. First, the liquor of the urine is either red of
it self, and remains after the same manner, nor is the color altered by the
settling or sinking down of any of the parts: or secondly, the redness of the
urine chiefly owes its color to the Contents, which being settled to the
bottom, the liquor grows yellow, or is less red. The distempers that these kind
of urines are wont to show, are chiefly Fevers, and a confirmed Scurvy, and
Consumption. We shall consider the reasons of each.

1. When the Urine that is made red so remains, it is first either of a mean
consistency, and somewhat clear, and then it owes its color to the Salt and
Sulphur, being burnt more than usual, and so boiled more copiously in the
Serum: or secondly, such an urine is red, and also troubled and cloudy: but
this, besides the contents of Salt and Sulphur, has boiled in it some earthy
particles also, which indeed being impacted in the Pores and passages of the
serous Latex, do not descend: because the liquor of the urine is destitute of
convenient spirits, which may segregate all heterogeneous things, and drive
them to the bottom, as is wont to happen usually in dead drink, or Beer growing
sour by reason of Thunder; where the liquor is infected with a troubled Feces,
and by reason of the defect of spirits, will not grow clear; wherefore this
kind of urine is a very bed sign in Fevers, because it shows such a confusion
in the blood of adust and to be separated matter, such as the vital spirits are
not able to master by taming and subjugating it.

2. Sometimes the Urine is made red, by reason of its contents; which settling
in the bottom, the liquor becomes of another color: but these contents, as
before we hinted, are twofold, viz. now thin, which are the remaining matter,
or adust recrements after the burning forth of the blood; now more thick, to
wit, the degenerate particles of the nutritious Juice; both these being
torrified, and separated from the burning blood, are partly thrust forth by
Sweat, and partly mixed with the serous Latex, thicken its consistence, and
heighten its color, viz. so long as these kind of contents are included in the
Pores and passages of the liquor, they are sustained, the color of the urine
appears more deep, and the consistency thicker: but these being precipitated to
the bottom, both the redness and thickness of the liquor are lessened. The
reason of this shall be given anon, where we shall speak of the Causes of the
Colors, and also of the Clearness and Cloudiness of Urines: we shall now
inquire, what is the reason of the difference, that red urines are wont to be
made both in Fevers, and also in the Scurvy, Consumption, and perhaps in
several other distempers.

1. In Fevers, the liquor of the Urine is filled with redness, because of the
more plentiful dissolution of the Salt and Sulphur, and their particles
copiously boiled in the Serum; for whilst the blood and humors grow hot, from
the feverish cause, by reason of the heat being more fully inkindled, the
saline and sulphurous little bodies, being burnt and torrified, are more
dissolved; and being boiled in the serous Juice, impart to it a deeper
tincture: Even as if the Lie of Ashes be boiled over the fire, it grows more
red, than if it were only made by infusion. Also in Fevers, the contents of
the urine most often increase its color, viz. by reason of the intemperance
and deflagration of the blood, both the degenerate particles of the nourishing
Juice, and also other matter (as it were the Ashes remaining of the burning of
the blood) are burnt together, as it were into a reddish Calx; which being
included in the Pores of the urine, renders its color deep, and afterward
sinking down, makes a sediment like red Oker.

2. In a long Scurvy, the liquor of the Urine grows sometimes so highly red,
that it cannot be greater in a burning Fever: if such urine be evaporated, or
exposed to distillation, it will show great plenty of Salt, with a muddy Feces
or dregs: wherefore it seems to be manifest, that this deep redness does
chiefly arise from the Salt, (as we have already hinted) by this Experiment;
because in Scorbutic people the saline particles, which ought to be made
volatile, and so constantly exhaled by transpiration, become fixed, and being
hindered from a flux, are heaped together more plentifully in the distempered
body. The Salt remaining within, is variously coagulated with Sulphur and
Earth, and then is continually dissolved: and from this diverse coagulation and
dissolution, the to be admired Symptoms of this Disease are caused. Also from
the saline little bodies plentifully dissolved with Tartarous feculencies, and
diluted with the Serum, urines are filled with an high redness; to which most
often happen in this inveterate disease vices of the Liver and Gall; for when
these Inwards, being either obstructed or other ways depraved, cannot perform
their tasks, for the separating the adust particles of the blood, they being
more fully heaped up in the blood, are dissolved in the serous Juice, and
infect it yet with a more lixivial tincture. And if the adust particles of the
Sulphur do excel the rest of the fixed and scorbutic Salt, the yellow Jaundice
happens together with the Scurvy, and the urine fixes to Linen a Saffrony
tincture. But if they be less than they, and that the saline particles excel,
the Scorbutic distemper only is produced, in which the urine is intensly red,
yet does not dye the Linen. I am persuaded that it is thus; because, when I
have opened the dead carcasses of many dead of the Scurvy, in whom there was a
red urine, I observed that the Liver or Gall was in fault: In some the Liver
was wholly without blood, and dry like a Cows Udder; in others the bag of the
Gall was empty, and nothing in it; in others it was beset with little stones;
in others it was filled with filth, not bitter; in all these Inwards were so
distempered, that the secretion of the Bile was hindered.

3. By reason of this kind of dissolution of the Salt, Urines sometimes grow
red in Arthritick diseases: for besides the Gout (in which such urine is often
made) I have observed in some a painful distemper, and as it were like a
Fever, caused, with a very high-colored urine; they had wandering pains, now
in this place, now in that, grievously tormenting, that the sick were scarce
able to stand, or to stir their limbs: they were obnoxious to wakings and
frequent sweats; they were also troubled much with thirst, and heat of their
mouth: and they had a urine highly red, with a plentiful red sediment. In the
mean time it did not appear, either by the Pulse, languishing of the Spirits,
or Head aches, that the blood grew excessively hot, or that they had a Fever.
Wherefore I suppose that this kind of distemper does chiefly consist in the
nervous stock, and depends on the exorbitances of the saline Principle, rather
than the sulphurous.

4. Also in the confirmed Phthisis or Consumption, especially if an Hectic
Fever be joined with it, there is a red Urine; the reason of which is, if at
any time an Ulcer is excited in the Lungs, the putrid filth from thence being
mingled with the blood sliding by, causes in it almost a continual
effervescency, whereby the sulphurous and saline particles being more
plentifully dissolved and boiled in the Serum, affect its liquor with redness:
besides, by reason of the blood being defiled after this manner, the nourishing
Juice degenerates almost wholly into putrefaction, by whose recrements the
urine being filled, grows more red, and is very much stuffed with contents: The
sign or note of this is, that the sick for the most part grow hot after eating,
and that they are troubled with an heat through their whole body, followed with
a nightly sweat; besides, their urines yield a thick and copious sediment, to
wit, when the nourishing Juice, being mixed with the blood, is not assimilated,
it stirs up in it a fervor, and being degenerate into an extraneous matter,
exhales partly by sweat through the Pores of the skin, and partly being
transmitted to the urine, very much heightens its color and consistency.

Thus far of a red Urine, whose several species, but now related, have more
degrees of intention and remission, accordingly as the causes, altering the
color and consistence in them, are either weaker or stronger.

4. As to what belongs to a green and black Urine, I confess I have never seen
those kind of deep colors (exactly like those of Leeks and Ink) in any urine:
but I imagine I may have seen the appearance of a greenish color from a more
deep yellow, and of a blackish urine from the same with a cloudy and somewhat a
dark mixture, and from thence called by Authors a green and black Urine. But
those urines, colored after that manner, are esteemed either signs of the
Jaundice, or of being distempered with some virulency of the blood, if they
continue so constantly for some time: or such urines, as occasion offers, are
variously changed, and are now of this or that, and presently of another
color. So I have known Hypochondriacks wont to make such urines, as it were
critically for some time, and then afterward to render them like sound men. As
to the first, when the Jaundice is very great upon them, that the adust
portions of Sulphur and Salt remain a long time in the mass of blood, they
acquire by a long incoction a fullness of the yellow color, at first green, and
afterward black, and impart the same to the Serum: For if the yellow Bile,
being taken out of the bag of the Gall, and put into a Cucurbit, be exposed to
the gentle heat of a Bath, the same in a short time will grow green, and
afterward appear like the blackest Ink: wherefore in the black Jaundice, which
is only the yellow carried forth into a worse state, by its long stay or
continuance, there is nothing more usual than to make black urines. Besides,
these kind of urines sometimes appear in a malignant Fever, and in the Plague,
also often from drinking of poison, and in this case it is for the most part a
sign of death, because it argues the blood greatly corrupted, and the spirits
profligated, and the bond of the mixture loosned, as it were the deadly or
mortified distemper: even as where some part of our body, being distempered
with an Ulcer, is afterward taken with a Gangrene or mortification, forthwith
the flowing corrupt matter, which was at first white, waterish, or yellow,
becomes black. Wherefore in the forementioned distempers, when the urine grows
black, the Serum and the blood being wholly vitiated, the skin also is dyed
outwardly with such a color. As to what belongs to urines periodically
tinctured with a greenish color, and especially with black (which happen often
to Hypochondriacks) it is most likely, that such arise from the melancholic
Feculencies laid up in the Spleen, and from thence, by reason of its
congestion, too much flowing forth sometimes, and confused with the blood: for
such a matter, being often poured into the Ventricle in some men, stirs up
black Vomitings, also in others, the same being supped up from the blood
passing through, may impart suffusions of the same colors to the serous Juice.

So much for the Colors of Urines, of which the more pale arise from too much
Crudity, almost all the high-colored, either from the Salt and Sulphur
plentifully missolved, and sometimes from the adust recrements thoroughly boiled
in the Serum, or from the more thick contents of the urine; whether they be the
Calx and remaining part of the aliment, degenerated in the concoction, or the
wasting or melting of the pining body, or some part of it evilly distempered:
what has been said may be better understood, if the means, whereby these kind
of dissolved things or contents are able variously to change the color of the
urine, be unfolded.

The causes of the diversity of appearances of colors, and their variously
changing, as also of the cloudiness and clearness in Urines, (as in all other
Liquors) depend only on the various incidency and emersion of the beams of
light, as is hinted in another place, in the Tract of Fermentation: For if the
substance of the liquor be rare and thin, with open Pores and passages, that
the beams of light may easily pass through, it is shining and clear like
fountain water: but if the Pores of the liquor be filled with contents, or
little bodies swimming in it, so that the luminous beams are broken in their
passage, but so that at length they may show themselves, according to those
various manners of refraction and emission, there will appear a Citron, a
Saffron, or red color in a yet clear liquor. If that, in the little spaces of
the Pores yet more obstructed, the light cannot pass through, there is a
darkness induced: but then if the immersed beams be a little or nothing
reflected, the liquor will appear of a brown or dark color; but if they are
beaten back, according to the diverse manner of reflection, a white, ashy, or
some other kind of appearance, is induced. From this being supposed, according
as the liquor of the urine, sometimes almost wholly deprived of Salt and
Sulphur, and other things dissolved, easily admits of light, sometimes either
very much stuffed, or else moderately with these kind of contents, either
distorts the beams falling on them in their passage, or wholly imbibes them, or
lastly beats them back; it were easy to explicate all the Phenomenon or
appearances of colors and their consistence.

It often happens, that the color of the same Urine is variously changed: for
what is made red, being exposed to the air, becomes white, or of a dark color,
and then after a long time of a Citron color: the reason of which is this, if
I am not deceived, this kind of urine, when it is made, is red, because the
Pores of the Liquor are very full of contents; yet so long as they are dilated
with heat, they transmit the rays of light, (although variously distorted) that
they may at length show themselves or appear; but this urine is no sooner
exposed to the cold, but that the Pores being straightened, the site and position
of the parts is changed in the contents, and by that means the passage of the
beams of light is hindered: wherefore the liquor presently becomes cloudy, and
according as those beams are reflected after this or that manner, a white, or
brown, or some other kind of color is induced: but at length the contents
falling down toward the bottom with their weight, the Pores being freed,
transmit again the rays of light, and do not distort them; wherefore a clear or
a Citron color appears.

From these things which have been spoken concerning the Colors of Urines, may
appear what is the cause of the various consistence of urines. For as the
particles of Salt and Sulphur, of the adust matter, or nutritious Juice,
depraved in the assimilating, are more or less boiled in the Serum, urines also
get their more thin or thick consistency. It remains next that we speak more
clearly of the Contents in preternatural Urines, whereof we have often made
mention.

CHAP. V. Of the Contents in the Urines of sick People.
WE suppose the Contents in the Urines of sick people to be twofold, viz.
either universal, which proceed from the mass of Blood, and of the nervous
Liquor, and respect the habit of the whole Body; or particular, which are the
layings aside or excrements of one bowel, or part ill affected, of which we
shall speak anon. Those of the former kind, which come away from the whole, are
either natural, viz. Filaments or small threads constituting the Hypostasis or
settlement, as in sound Urines; or preternatural, which chiefly are particles
of the nutritious humor degenerate from assimilation, and constitute the more
thick bodies of the sediment in Urines; and lastly to these, (if there be a
feverish intemperance) the adust matter of the blood after deflagration, and
diluted in the serous Juice, is added, and increases the bulk of the Contents.

But these Contents, both natural and preternatural, of Urines, represent
themselves after a various manner, as the blood more or less unduly grows hot,
also as the aliments in the bowels and vessels are variously concocted, and
either the superfluities or corruptions of the Chyme, from thence made, are
washed away with the Serum: for if the nourishable humor transmitted to the
blood, is not all perverted, but a great portion of it, laid upon the solid
parts, is changed into nourishment, some parts of this also rightly made, being
mixed with the Serum, impress yet some marks of an Hypostasis in urines: Also
from the adust or degenerate matter, a preternatural sediment is framed, yet
little and thin, neither does it wholly blot out the appearances of this
natural. Wherefore in the beginning and declination of a Fever, sometimes also
in a Consumption, or a Cachexy an Hypostasis, though not so perfect, is
perceived. If that the greater portion of the same Chyme, growing hot with the
blood, by reason of the immoderate heat, is perverted into an heterogene
matter, which afterward is sent away with the Serum, as hurtful and
unprofitable, presently an obscure and imperfect Hypostasis appears; and
besides it, very many contents are seen in the urines, which heighten their
color and consistency. Such an urine, which contains an Hypostasis, though
imperfect, together with other things of the same kind dissolved in it, if it
be kept in a warm place, the Hypostasis will be perceived alone; but the rest
of the contents, comprehended in the pores of the urine, dilated by the heat,
are made wholly inconspicuous or not to be seen: yet afterward the little
spaces of the Pores being straightened by cold, the same contents are
precipitated, and by that means they render the site and position changed, and
the urine troubled and cloudy, and blot out the appearance of the Hypostasis.
These kind of urines in the better state of Fevers, in a Catarrh, Cough,
difficulty of perspiration, fullness of humors, and in the more light
Dyscrasies are wont to be made.

But if in the more grievous state of sickness the Concoction be wholly
vitiated, and the whole nutritious Juice changed into a putrefaction, these
kind of contents also may be perceived in the urine without an Hypostasis, and
signifies variously in diseases, after their various ways of being
precipitated, and sinking down, and constituting a diverse kind of sediment; to
wit, as the separation of the parts succeed soon or late, or not at all; and as
the matter falling down shall be little or much, or also of a white, red, or
dark color. I will briefly run through what is most notable and worthy
observation concerning this thing.

1. This kind of Urine being full of contents, is not sometimes at all
precipitated, (unless the substance of the liquor be dissolved by putrefaction
a long time after) but remains a long while troubled and somewhat cloudy, with
little bodies swimming through the whole. The reason of this is, either because
these contents are too much incocted in the Serum, so that the spirits
implanted therein, cannot separate the pure from the impure, the thick from the
thin; as may be perceived in brewing Beer, if that the Malt be too much
boiled, the liquor shall never grow clear: or else the urine remains troubled,
because it is wholly destitute of spirits, which may compel the parts of the
liquor into the motion of Fermentation; as it usually comes to pass in Beer
growing sour by reason of Thunder, or of immoderate heat, and being infected
with a troubled Feces or Lee, will scarce ever be rightly made clear again.
This kind of urine is perceived for the most part in very dangerous Fevers,
and sometimes in a desperate Cachexy, and always portends evil.

2. Sometimes it happens, that the Urine is so full of contents, that it begins
to be troubled whilst it is yet warm. I have often observed it, after this
manner, in a slow Fever, whose heat was gentle and more remiss, to wit, in
which the particles of the nutritious crassament or substance are depraved, but
being a little subdued by heat, or boiled in the Serum, they easily fall out of
its pores: as when common Sulphur is boiled in Lie, if that before it be
perfectly dissolved, it be taken from the fire, the liquor at first clear and
red, by reason of the quick precipitation of the dissolved matter, becomes
presently troubled, dark, and of a somewhat whitish color.

3. But what most usually comes to pass, that this sort of Urine, big with
contents, as long as it is hot, and some time after, seems clear and
perspicuous when it grows cold, is wont to be troubled, and as if some Runnet
were infused to be precipitated according to all its parts; yet the same, if
held near the fire, or in warm water for a little space, shall grow clear
again. The reason of this is already fully unsolded, where we spoke of the
Causes of Cloudiness and of Clearness.

4. After that the Urine being exposed to the cold, is precipitated in this
manner, it may be observed by what means its contents descend to the bottom;
for sometimes they settle in a short time: and if the liquor grows clear in the
space of two or three hours, it is a sign that the liquor of the urine is not
too thick, nor very much filled with Salt and Sulphur: wherefore in the
beginning or declination of Fevers, when the heat is slack, such an urine is
most often made: sometimes such a settlement follows not but in the space of
many days; the reason of which is, because the consistence of the liquor is
thicker than it should be, therefore the contents or dissolved things are not
so easily let go from its embrace, that they may fall down to the bottom by
their weight. These kind of urines are wont to be made in the state or height
of Fevers, and most often precede an evil Crisis.

5. Of no less a diverse kind are the sediments which fall to the bottom. That
I may pass over in this place the filthy matter, and blood, sand, gravel, and
the like, deposited from some parts, I shall mention those which are the
products of the whole body, and they for the most part are either white or
brown, or red like Oker: If you strain urine, when it has stood long, through
brown paper, you may collect these contents. I have often seen a whiteness like
Chalk, and sometimes red like Bole Armene, without doubt there is the same
matter of all, to wit, the recrements of the deflagrated blood, and of the
nutritious juice depraved in the assimilating: which, as they are burnt by heat
in our body, and diversely perverted, appear also in the urine under a various
color and form; even as Antimony mixed with Nitre, as it is more or less
calcined exhibits a Calx, now red, now Saffron color, now yellow, now brown:
The like reason is (as it seems) of the sediments of urines, which are as it
were the Calx of the sulphurous and earthy matter burnt forth by the fire of
the Fever in the Viscera and Vessels.

6. Besides these kinds of Contents, which happen in the Urines of sick people,
I have often observed, that after the urine had stood a long while, something
was affixed to the sides of the glass like sand, and indeed in diverse figures;
for now these little bodies like sand grow together with a sharp and unequal
superficies, now with ridges like the Crystals of Nitre, and some shine and are
pellucid like Ice. I have seen these kind of Crystals fixed to the Urinal,
sometimes in the urines of those troubled with a Dysentery, also in those
troubled with pertinacious wakings. Sometimes in urines, when they have stood
long, a certain Cream will swim on the top, as when Tartar is boiled in water:
this kind of whitish crust growing together in the superficies of the urine, is
commonly thought to be fat and fattish things, and taken for the melting of the
solid parts: wherefore such as are wont to make such an urine, are presently
pronounced to be consumptive, and in a desperate condition: But indeed that is
only a saline concretion, which if put into the fire, will not melt, but grows
hard into a crusty substance. Yea both this and the other concrescences of
urines are as it were the Tartar brought forth in them by a certain
Coagulation: But such a concretion depends altogether on the particles of the
fluid or acetous Salt, combined with others of the fixed or Alcalisate Salt:
For in every subject where there is a commixtion of the Salts of either kind,
Crystallizations and Coagulations of a diverse manner are caused, either
spontaneously by Nature, or may be procured by artificial separation: wherefore
this kind of urine, on which this Cream swims, or that Crystals gather in the
sides of the Vessels, indicates the blood to be departed from its sweet and
Balsamic nature (such as depends on the volatile Salt) into an acid and
corrosive, by reason of the flux and fixity of the saline Principle. Such an
urine, if it be evaporated, leaves in the bottom of the Vessel great plenty of
Salt: the distempers wherein it is usually sound (as I have often observed) are
spitting of blood, Atrophy, or general wasting, and the Hypochondriack
disposition.

In the Urines of sick people it is worth observation, whether they dye the
Urinal or not? For sometimes in Fevers the urine is no sooner put into the
Glass, but presently it darkens its sides with a whitish cloud, and again at
another time this does not happen: I suppose that the Glass is dyed, when the
liquor of the urine is fuller of dissolved Sulphur than its pores can contain
within themselves; as may be perceived in Lie, wherein common Sulphur or
Antimony is boiled: Also every urine, if it stand in the Glass till it
putrify, will infect its sides with a crust or cloud, sometimes whitish,
sometimes reddish, sometimes of another color: for the frame of the liquor
being loosned by putrefaction, the particles of the Sulphur being loosned from
the bond of mixture stick to the Glass: But in the urines of sick people
sometimes this presently follows, because the Sulphur is more copiously
dissolved than can be included in its pores.

As to what respects the particular Contents of Urines, they indeed are
manifold, and may come from many parts and places: yet they most often depend
on diseases implanted about the Reins, Bladder, and Urinary passages: sometimes
it happens by reason of an Imposthume in the Liver, Spleen, Lungs, of other
Inward; or by reason of preternatural humors heaped up in those places, and
flowing out with their fullness, an extraneous matter is transmitted into the
mass of blood, and thence into the serous Juice: but this happens more rarely,
because an Imposthume being broken within, for the most part pours out its
matter into the cavities of the Viscera, from which there is no passage open
into the urinary passages: besides the mass of blood flowing with impurities,
does not presently endeavor to send them forth by urine, but oftener by sweat,
spitting, breaking out of Wheals, Tumors, or by other ways of excretion.
Wherefore it appears by common observation, that the other contents of urines
(than which we have above cited) are chiefly sent from the Reins and their
dependences; the chief of which are sand, stones, blood, matter, bits of flesh,
skins, branny or mealy sediments, which for the most part signify either the
stony or an ulcerous distemper, or both together, planted beyond the emulgent
Vessels.

It is an usual thing for some to void with their water, gravel or small sand
of a red color in great quantity; some of these are obnoxious to the stone in
the Reins, and are frequently tormented with Nephritick fits: I have also known
others without pain, or other grievous Symptom, for a long time to make a sandy
water. All urines whatsoever, if they stand for some time in a leaded or earthy
glazed vessel, affix this kind of red sand to the sides and bottom of the Pot,
to wit, the volatile Salt of the urine is coagulated with the fixed Salt of the
Metal: so when Sal Ammoniac being mixed with the filings of Steel, Sea Salt, or
Vitriol is sublimated, the elevated flours grow notably red: wherefore it seems
that these kind of little sands are begot in the Reins, for that the Salt of
the urine is coagulated with the Tartarous feculencies laid up about the
windings of the Reins, from whence the sandy matter is made, which is presently
washed away by the serous Juice passing through: Therefore the gravel that is
so frequently made are no small parts or fragments of a greater stone, (as is
commonly thought) but extemporary products of the blood and Serum washing the
winding passages of the Reins.

By what means little stones are produced in the Bladder or Reins, is not to be
fully discoursed in this place: But without doubt it is done rather by
Coagulation than Exsiccation or Excalefaction, by drying or heating. I have
observed some sick of the Stone in the Bladder, who after they have made water,
were wont to void with great striving and pain a thick and viscous Juice, which
presently hardened into a scaly matter: the smell of this was like Lie, and of
such a consistence as Lie evaporated to a thickness, the liquor of which being
made thick, presently stiffens into a saline hardness. Lesser stones sometimes
pass through the urinary passages, and are carried out: the greater remain
unmoved in their Cells. The places wherein they are usually begotten are the
narrow winding bosoms of the Reins, from thence the smaller slide into the
Bladder, and if not excerned, they grow into great stones. I once saw many
great stones shut up as it were in a Chest about the sides of the Bladder
between its Membranes; these without doubt being sent from the Reins while
smaller, remained in the passages of the Ureters, creeping between the Coats of
the Bladder, and there by degrees did increase in bulk. A Matron so distempered
long before her death, cast out of the urinary passage a Membrane thick and
broad, full of sandy matter, which (as appeared after her body was opened) was
part of the interior Tunick of the Bladder worn and broken by the stones there
included.

It is ordinary for Nephritick people, or such as are troubled with the Stone,
frequently to void blood or matter with their Urine: for from a greater stone,
and endued with sharpness, the flesh of the Reins is easily worn, and the
mouths of the Vessels opened, whereby blood flowing out tinges the urine; and
when a solution of unity is caused in this manner in the Reins, an Ulcer most
commonly follows, whereby matter and filthy stuff are poured out with the
serous water, and constitute a plentiful and stinking sediment in the urine:
then the sore being more enlarged by the Ulcer, more large profusions of blood
often follow, and the flesh it self of the Reins being worn away, and by
degrees eaten off, is voided with the urine. I visited once an ancient Woman,
who daily voided with her urine, for many months, pure blood in great quantity;
besides, as often as she made water, she used to void in great quantity pieces
of flesh, great gobbets, as it were the little Tubes of the Vessels eaten away,
that it was suspected one of her Kidneys was all thus cut away from her body:
yet afterward by a vulnerary Decoction acidulated with Spirit of Vitriol, that
bloody water was staid, and this Woman lives still well and in health. I knew
another Matron, who used for a long time in making water to void at first blood
with a purulent matter, and Membranes: then the bloody water ceasing, for many
years she made a waterish urine with a copious sediment, and white like snot,
sinking down to the bottom of the Urinal. Afterward when she began to want
that sediment, a feverish intemperance followed with pains wandering here and
there, with a languishing of strength, and other dangerous Symptoms: and when
this sick Woman was brought into danger of her life, a Tumor arising in her
left side about her Reins, and ripening into a Boil or Sore, by reason of the
large flowing out of the matter, freed her: but yet an hollow and sinuous Ulcer
pouring out a thin matter, remained in that place during her life: and being
sometimes healed up, would presently break out again. Scarce two years after
this Noble Lady having endured the suppression of her urine for fourteen days,
became apoplectick and dyed. Her body being opened, her left Kidney was quite
gone, in the place of it a membranous substance growing to the Loins, enfolding
the extremities of the Vessels and Ureter, was grown up: some prints or marks
of the Ureter remained, but without any opening into the hollowness of the
passage: yea a certain ichor or serosity dropping out from the little mouths of
the emulgent Artery, was carried outwardly into that sinuous Ulcer. The other
Kidney was very full of sandy matter and small stones; besides, near the top of
the Ureter a stone about the bigness of ones thumb was fixed, whose extremity
was so fitted and firmly impacted to the passage or cavity of the Ureter, that
it shut it up just like a Tap, and quite hindered the passage of the serous
Juice. The purulent matter comes into the urine, not only from the Reins, but
sometimes out of the Bladder and urinary passage distempered with an Ulcer; and
sometimes also a corrupt seed, or white flux, or menstruous blood are poured
into urines from the Vessels and genital parts, and produce in them
preternatural settlements.

4. In the Urines of sick people are often seen abundance of white Contents
composed of most small bodies; which, when they are settled, fill up above half
the liquor, and make it white and duskish, the rest remaining limpid, and thin
in the upper region of the Urinal: this kind of sediment is called Mealy,
because it is like water imbued with meal. Concerning this it is doubtful,
whether it proceeds from the whole mass of blood, or only from the urinary
Viscera. It appears by observation, that the same sort of urine is always made
in the stone of the Bladder, also sometimes by reason of the Kidney being
oppressed with some great stone. I never saw such a settlement in urines
without a Nephritick distemper; wherefore I have thought it almost indubitable
to be always a sign of the Stone: And it seems that it should wholly depend on
the juice or humor heaped up about the bulk or substance of the stone: For
where the stone is fixed in the Kidney or Bladder, the nutritious humor is
there perverted from assimilation, and degenerates into a more thick mucor,
which uses to be copiously heaped up; like Ichor, which by reason of a Pea put
into an Issue, runs out plentifully. But this mucor or filth being washed with
Serum, makes that white sediment.

CHAP. VI. Of Judgments to be given concerning the Urines of sick People.
SO much for the Anatomy of Urines, wherein are unfolded their Elements and
constitutive Principles, together with their chief Accidents, viz. Color,
Consistence, and Contents, both what ought naturally to be in them per
essentiam or essentially, and also what are wont to happen to them
preternaturally, by reason of the body being ill affected. It will be easy for
any one to accommodate this Hypothesis to practice, and to give Judgment on
Urines beholding them in the Urinal; for from what has been said it appears of
what parts the Diseases are made known by the inspection of the Urines, and
what the Urine signifies in each of them. Concerning this subject there has
been enough said by Authors; I shall therefore only touch upon it briefly, and
lightly pass it over.

Although the matter of Urine, viz. the Serum of the blood washes the whole
region of the Body, and is circulated with the blood through all the several
parts, yet it does not lay open the condition and diseases of them all, but
only of those to which it owes either the natural perfection and genesis of it
self, or from which it receives every alteration: wherefore in some respect it
shows the action and disposition of the Viscera serving to Concoction, and
besides denotes the temper and motion of the blood and humors in the Vessels:
but that any one should pretend to know from the Urinal, and to divine a pain
in the Head, an Imposthume in the Throat, or any other Disease of any part,
from whence nothing is communicated to the Serum, he shows rather his ignorance
than the knowledge of any Disease.

Urines brought from sick persons sometimes are wholly like those of sound
peoples, and then they give no light to the disease or distempered part; but it
may be lawful, having inspected them, to say something negatively, viz. that
the Patient is free from a Fever, that as to the Ventricle and Concoction of
the food, they are indifferently well: wherefore unless he be inclining to a
Consumption, or is sick of an Imposthume, or some other disease of the unity
being broken; whatsoever it be, the distemper seems not very dangerous or hard
to be cured.

But in the mean time I would not have him declare any thing rashly, nor
proceed farther than he can with safety return: for I have often observed in
some most grievous distempers, viz. in a malignant Fever, when with loss of
strength, a weak and unequal Pulse, eruption of Spots, and other dangerous
Symptoms, the Patients have been desperately sick, that the urines as to the
color, consistence, and Hypostasis, have been laudable, as in sound persons,
so that in such a case the Physician by only viewing the Urine, as to his
Prognostication had grievously erred: wherefore there is scarce credit to be
given to the single testimony of the Urine, unless there be other signs
agreeable; but that it is a liar in the Plague and malignant Fevers, and
deceives: the reason is, that in those diseases the blood is leisurely, and as
it were silently corrupted, sometimes without any great fervor: and so,
although its liquor be infected by Coagulation, or by mortification or
deadness; yet because it does not burn out much at the same time, so as to make
an heap of adust matter, as of Ashes, the Serum is little or nothing altered
from its usual disposition or tenor: Besides, sometimes when in such a
sickness the blood grows very hot, whatever of excrementitious is heaped up in
its mass, is presently transferred to the Brain and nervous stock: wherefore
the serous water being free from preternatural contents, remains after its
usual manner; besides this case, when the Urines appear of a deep color,
troubled, and without any sediment, there is no reason why the Piss-prophet
should make a Prognostication.

As often as the Urines of sick people are unlike those of sound, either
something natural is wanting, or what is preternatural is added, or it happens
both together.

1. There may be wanting Color, Consistence, Contents, and Quantity. If the
Color be more remiss than it should, and the Liquor paler, it indicates
Crudity, and a defect of making Spirits, to wit, that the nourishing Juice is
not rightly concocted or exalted either in the Viscera or in the Vessels; so
that the saline and sulphurous Particles being carried out together, following
the distribution as it were the distillation of the Serum, might thoroughly
stick to the same, and impart also to it the tincture: wherefore such Urine
being viewed from these kind of Symptoms, you may unfitly divine, that there is
a weight in the Ventricle, want of Appetite, evil Digestion, a tension in the
Hypochondria, an unfitness for motion, sleepiness, difficult breathing, and a
frequent palpitation of the Heart upon exercise, a pale color, a swelling of
the Feet and Belly, you may say they are in danger of falling (if not already
fallen) into a Cachexy or Dropsy, and if it be a Maid, that she is troubled
with Longings and the Green Sickness.

If the Color of Urines be remitted in a Fever without a Crisis, it is a sign
that the fermentative matter or adust recrements of the blood are separated
from the bosom of the blood, and fixed somewhere, which for the most part
happens in the Brain; and for that cause such Urines use to foretell a Delirium
or Frenzy; in those troubled with the Stone, a sudden alteration of the urine
into a pale and watery color, denotes the approach of a Fit.

A copious and pale Urine often shows the too great resolution or melting of
the Salts, by reason whereof the serosities are sent away as it were in a flood
from the whole body, and chiefly from the nervous parts: such an Excretion
sometimes is healthful, and as it were critical, when the superfluities happen
only to be carried away: sometimes it is symptomatick, and causes a great
debility, to wit, because the nutritious Juice and the good humors are purged
out.

If the Consistence be thin, and the Liquor pale, it argues Crudity, want of
Spirits, or too much Drinking, or the Nephritick distemper: if it be of a
flame-colour, it is a sign of an intermitting Tertian Fever.

If the Contents be wanting, and it be pale, want of Concoction is signified,
and a Cachectick distemper of the body. But if it be of a Citron color, and
the consistency mean, without Hypostasis, you may suppose the Patient to have
used too much labor or exercise; or to be frequently distempered with Sweats
in the night, or perhaps to have an Atrophy, or general wasting, or to be
inclining to a Consumption.

If the Urine be continually made in a lesser quantity than it should, unless
there be a larger transpiration, it is a sign that the blood is not
sufficiently purged from the serous Juice: wherefore there is a necessity that
it become more watery, and that at length a Cachectical disposition of the body,
or a Dropsy be brought in. But if it be suddenly suppressed, or made with pain
and difficulty, it is a sign of the Stone or Gravel.

2. Something is added to the Urine, to wit, when the color is heightened, and
in the mean time the consistency and contents show themselves in due measure,
there may then be a suspicion of a Feverish or Hectical distemper: perhaps
some evident cause may precede, as the use of Baths, Heat, Surfeit, or
immoderate Exercise, which might have heated the blood; or Cold may have
heedlesly been taken, whence may arise a shutting up of the Pores, and
difficulty of Perspiration. If the urine be of a Saffron-colour, and tinges the
Linen with yellowness, you may say it is the Jaundice: but if it be of a
Saffron-colour or red without a Fever, and does not dye Linen, it shows for
the most part the Scurvy or Hypochondriack disposition.

Though the Color and Hypostasis may be in good order, preternatural Contents
are often in the Urine; therefore when it grows cold it is troubled, and makes
a sediment sometimes white, and then there is a suspicion of the blood's
overflowing with filth, also of an impure Ventricle stuffed with
excrementitious matter, or with Worms; sometimes red, which often happens by
reason of Transpiration being hindered, a Consumption, and sometimes by reason
of a Surfeit, or the beginning of a Fever.

Preternatural and thicker Contents are sometimes in Urines, showing themselves
naturally, which denotes a distemper of some part about the urinary passages;
whence Matter, Filth, Blood, the Whites, corrupt Seed, or the like, are mixed
with the Urine: and you may easily know by asking how, and in what place the
Patient is ill, what part is distempered; and the straining the sediments of
those urines will show what the disease is, and you may be more sure of the
nature of the distemper.

When Urines have stood some time, copious white sediments are thence made; it
is not easy at first sight to know from whence they come, viz. whether from
the whole mass of blood, or only from a particular bowel employed for the
preparations of the Serum or the Seed. For the impurities of the blood and
nervous juice being deposited under a mealy species in the bottom of the
Urinal, are wont to cause a suspicion in the Physician of the Whites in Women,
and of the Running of the Reins in Men: such like contents are also seen in
Urines, which proceed from the urinary and spermatick parts. Amidst these
ambiguities, left you should guess rashly and confidently by the urine, and
assert uncertain for certain things, and falsehood for truth, the difference of
these kind of urines ought to be indicated after this manner. If the contents
be universal, and their signs be to be applied to the mass of blood; for the
most part these presently after the making (unless sometimes by chance in a
Critical separation) are wholly inconspicuous (as in a thinner substance,) then
the urine being troubled by cold, they descend slowly to the bottom; and being
settled, and the Urinal heated, they disappear again. But if these white
settlements are sent from a particular nest, they presently disturb and thicken
the urine newly made, are soon precipitated, and vanish not by heat. But that
it may appear to what bowel these kind of particular contents should be
ascribed, it is easily made known to Learned men by other circumstances.

3. The Urine is sometimes wholly altered from the natural state; the color
and contents which should be therein are wanting, and strange things are in
their place; then indeed is indicated that there is an intemperance in the
whole body, and that the Concoction in the Bowels and Vessels is depraved; you
may say the Patient is sick of a Fever; and thence by asking, you may learn
and presently pronounce that he is distempered with the Headache, Thirst, Heat,
queasiness of Stomach, want of sleep, and by consequence with other Symptoms.

It happens sometimes, that the Urine declines from its natural state, yet not
to show the distemper the Patient complains of, but either the cause of the
disease, or the consent of some other part with the distempered; as if any one
should complain of a cruel Head ach, or trembling of the Heart, and make a
watery Urine, that does not denote those distempers, but only a crudity in the
Ventricle, and some obstructions about the Spleen and Viscera, which may be the
cause of those distempers: I say in this case, the urine being inspected, the
chief indications are taken about the Method of Curing, and we must not use
Cephalic or Cardiack Remedies, but either Catharticks, which cause Vomit or
Purging, or Openers, and especially Chalybeats: But the urine is sometimes
vitiated, and yet its signification is wholly a stranger to the distemper the
Patient complains of, as if any one were subject to the sleepy disease, or a
Lethargy, and makes it red and full of preternatural contents, its inspection
suggests chiefly coindications, viz. that we insist not on too hot, but
temperate Remedies.

The chief use of Inspection of Urines will be for the observing the state and
progress of every disease, as also the alterations toward health or death. For
in Chronical diseases, by daily inspecting the urine, is made known to the
Physician, by what degrees the sickness may increase day by day; at what time
purging or altering Remedies will be most fit, and what Medicines will be most
profitable: hence is to be observed, whether Nature prevails on the disease or
not; and a most certain Prognostication may be drawn from hence, either of the
hope or danger of health; to wit, according as the signs of Concoction or
Crudity appear in the Urines. In acute diseases, hence the state and height of
the Fever may be best known, at what time the Crises may be expected, and with
what success; when it is best to insist upon Evacuations, and when on Cordials.
The Compass is not beheld with more certainty and diligence by the Mariner or
Steers-man, than the appearances of Urines ought to be observed by the
Physician for fit times and ways of Curing.

These were what I had to had to say concerning the Judgments of Urine, not
collected from the vain Traditions of Quacks, but what are consonant to reason
and truth. Besides I know there are ordinarily delivered by Medicasters and Old
women almost an innumerable company of Rules and Directions of
Urine-divination, that the Urinal is no sooner inspected, but they will
undertake to divine, whether it be a man or a woman that is sick, how long they
have been sick, what their disease is, and whether the distemper shall end in
health or death; whether the Patient be subject to the passions of Love or
Sadness, whether a Woman has conceived with Child or not, or whether it shall
be a Boy or a Girl, and an hundred other the like; in which using a vain
conjecture, they either impose by their confidence on the minds of the
credulous, or (which is more frequently their custom) by a cunning craftiness
they other ways sift out the matter by inquiring, and falsely ascribe it to
their knowledge in the inspection of Urine.

CHAP. VII. Of the Examination and various ways of proving of Urines.
ALthough the business of the Examination and Inspection of Urines seems
commonly only a simple thing ( viz. the Medicasters and Quacks for the most
part behold the Urine sent in a Glass, shake it a little, and presently give
Judgment) yet to those who honestly endeavor the recovery of the sick, the
matter seems a little more intricate, and they use to observe several
circumstances concerning Judgment by Urine; which being omitted, nothing indeed
can be certainly or directly learnt in the Medicinal Practice from the Urinal.
Moreover, in some diseases, besides the mere inspection of the Glass, there are
other ways of trial to be had, by which, what lies hid in the Urines, and out
of sight, may be made clear: from whence some not unprofitably taking care of
the separation of Urine more accurately, have used to evaporate, distill,
putrify, and precipitate them. Wherefore we shall speak briefly of the right
manner of inspecting Urine, and in some cases of the Analysis or separation
variously to be instituted.

When the Urine of the Patient is offered to the Physician, if it has first
stood for some time in the Glass, and if the liquor be clear, the Hypostasis as
it were gathered into a little cloud, and if the rest of the contents sink down
to the bottom, there is nothing more wanting, but that forthwith a prognostic
sentence may be given. But if the Urine be newly poured into the Urinal, or be
troubled by a former shaking, you must stay till the confused parts be
separated, and the settlement have acquired its due place. If the Liquor be
full of contents, and the Pores straightened, it becomes troubled and dark, and
the Glass must be put in a warm place, till the urine grow clear again, and
then let it be placed for some time near the fire, that whilst the
preternatural or more thin contents are absorpt by the Pores dilated by the
heat, the more thick may fall down to the bottom, and the filaments or little
rags making the Hypostasis, (if there be any) may be gathered together below,
or in the middle region; for so will appear what is the power of Nature, and
what of the Disease: Also in Fevers, the degree of heat and effervescency, the
concoction or depravation of the nutritious Juice, also the congestion or
heaping together of the adust matter in the blood, and its separation begun, or
wholly frustrated, may somewhat appear by the signification taken from Urines;
wherefore you ought to proceed after this manner, when the urine is brought
from far, to wit, whose Particles are disturbed by much shaking, unless it be
kept for some time in a warm place, they will not easily get again their due
place of position. But if you often visit any Patient that keeps his bed, it
will be convenient, that the urine newly made, and put into an Urinal, be
placed near a Stove, where, whilst it grows moderately hot, the several parts
may, after the best manner, be disposed to a settlement without any trouble or
disturbance.

Afterward the Urine thus naked, and as it were disrobed from any covering, is
offered to the sight, the next caution will be, lest any of its Phenomenon or
appearances being accidentally contracted, and not properly belonging to it,
may impose upon the Physician: which indeed sometimes happens, by reason of
alterations caused in them by food taken, and which chiefly consist in the
color and smell of urines, being variously changed besides Nature, and the
expectation of the Physician.

For it is an error commonly committed, when the Urine being yellow, and
tinging the linen by the taking of Rhubarb, Saffron, Sanders, and the like,
undoubtedly to believe it a sign of the Jaundice; also the urine being imbued
with blackness by the taking of Cassia, to attribute it to the melancholic
Tumor or black Bile; also when the urine is deep colored by taking of
Pulse-broth, or a Decoction of Madder, or other drinks, we falsely suppose it to
indicate a feverish intemperance. It often happens from the drinking
plentfully thin liquor, the urine is lessened of its high color beyond
expectation, and heightened by the drinking of strong drink or hotter things:
unless the Physician take notice of these kinds of mutations, he will give but
a false Judgment concerning Urines by looking on them. When therefore the
color is changed in the urines without any manifest cause, the manner of
living must be inquired into, if that the alteration proceeds from what is
eaten or drunk, that it may not be wrongfully ascribed to the disease. A
question will here arise, why forasmuch as most things taken in at the mouth,
before they go into urine, wholly lose all their color; yet some others, which
being eaten, so pertinaciously impress a tincture to the Serum, that they pass
untouched through all the strait turnings and windings of the passages? The
reason or cause of which consists chiefly in this, that some mixtures have the
constitutive parts of their color or dye very subtle, and those highly
volatile; wherefore these being taken only in a small quantity, dye the whole
mass of the Chyle with their color; and from thence the nutritious Juice
conveyed to the blood, ascends colored, and its vehicle, viz. the serous
Latex, is sent away still dyed or tinctured.

What the odor of Urines of sound people may be, is obvious to every one that
can smell, viz. whilst it is fresh made, it is not very ungrateful, by reason
of the sulphurous and saline Particles bound up in the substance of the
liquor; when it has stood so long, that the Sulphur begins to exhale, sharpened
with the Salt, the mixture being loosned, it putrifies and stinks grievously.
Besides we may observe, that sometimes there arises from urines fresh made, a
sweet odor like Violets, and sometimes they offend the nose with a very
ungrateful stink. The former does not depend either on an healthful or
unhealthful condition of the body, but is produced only from things taken:
Turpentine, Nutmeg, and other Gumms and Spices taken in at the mouth, though of
a diverse nature and operation, impart a like suavity or sweetness to the
urine. The reason of this seems to be, because in these kind of mixtures very
many particles of the purer Sulphur (that is imbued with Spirits) are eminent;
which, for that they are volatile, being confused with the Serum, are not
contained in the bond of the mixture: wherefore the urine being made, these
alone leap out, and not accompanied with others of the stinking urine, and so
diffuse a grateful odor; which, although it proceeds from diverse kind of
things eaten, yet remains still after the same manner like Violets, for that in
all, those sulphurous Particles are set free by digestion from the others
joined with them in the same concrete, nor are infected by different ones from
the urine. But as to what respects the stinking urine, that sometimes proceeds
from an Ulcer about the Reins, Bladder, or urinary passages; sometimes also it
is raised from a too hot intemperance of the Reins, or of the whole Body: for
when the Sulphur is deeply boiled in the Serum, its particles being sharpened by
the Salines, (for that they are less closely shut up) do presently evaporate,
and grievously affect the sense of smelling; but besides, sometimes urines
contract a stink from things eaten. For the Balsam of Sulphur, Garlic,
Asparagus, Cider, Rhenish Wine, and many other things taken at the mouth, do
cause a strong smell in the urine. If the reason of this be demanded, we say
that such things which impart a stink to the urine, also provoke it in a more
plentiful quantity: wherefore it seems that these sort of things being taken,
fuse the blood, and greatly hasten the precipitation of the Serum: and when by
this means the serous Juice is pulled away as it were abruptly from the blood,
the frame of the liquor is made lax, nor are its parts exactly mixed, nor
contained in an equal bond of disposition: wherefore when this urine is made
from the body, its frame or substance being before loosned, the particles of
the more gross Sulphur (that is combined with Salt) presently breathe out, and
so diffuse a stinking smell. For urine thus altered by things taken, seems very
like to Lie, wherein Antimony or common Sulphur is boiled, and is asterwards
instilled into some acid thing, because in this Decoction, as also in such
urine, the frame of the liquor being unlocked, the little sulphurous bodies
leap out, and affect the sensory with a stinking smell.

If that any one more curious in the search of Urines, shall seek further than
the examination of the sight and smell, he may easily, by a diverse manual
operation, resolve them into parts, and as it were dissect them to the life,
and thence draw Medicinal directions of no small moment; for that in many
Chronical diseases where the Dyscrasies of the blood are more exactly to be
sought into, that the proportion and temperature of Salt and Sulphur may be
truly found in it, it is sometimes convenient to evaporate urines, or to distill
them; something also is to be learned from them, being precipitated, or loosned
by putrefaction. I knew an honest Woman greatly afflicted with a scaly
filthiness of the skin, which she was daily wont to scratch off in great
plenty, as it were a branny matter. Her urine being evaporated in a little
Skillet, left sticking to the sides of the Vessel, a crusty and salt sediment,
like the excrement of her skin. Not long since I evaporated the urine of a
Gentleman, grievously subject to convulsive motions and painful stretchings out
of the Muscles, in the bottom of which there remained a quantity of salt and
tartarous matter, exceeding the weight of half the liquor. By this means it
will be an easy thing to find the proportion of the saline Principle in the
blood and humors: but whether this Salt be volatile, or becomes fixed beyond
measure, the distillation of the urine will presently show: For if the Spirit
(so called) be copiously drawn out of the urine, and that besides the Salt
ascends into the Alembeck, it is a sign of volatilization: but the contrary to
this argues the fixity of the Salt.

As the evaporation and distillation of the Urine show the power of the saline
Principle, so the precipitation, putrefaction, and Sulphur lay open the thicker
contents of the Urine, as it were in weight and measure. As to the former,
although the liquor of the urine be salt, and often big with contents, yet for
as much as its saline Particles are not (as it is wont to be in most
Menstruums) either wholly in a state of fixity, or of flux, but for the most
part volatile, therefore it is not easily nor presently by any salt infusion
subject to putrefaction; the Spirit of Vitriol and other acetous things effect
nothing: the Salt of Tartar stirs up a little perturbation. But the solution of
Alum, for that it greatly constrains into a little space, presently disturbs
the whole liquor extremely, and delivers all the contents of the urines, as
they were thrust out of their dens, to be seen openly by the eyes. Wherefore by
this means, without any long stay for settlement, you may presently know how
much of sulphurous and earthy matter is deposed from the mass of blood for
recrements in the bottom.

The putrefaction of Urines is wont to exhibit the several particles of every
kind, yet more distinct, and disposed as it were by themselves; for if the
urine be left to stand unmoved for many days in the Glass, the color, odor,
and consistency will be very much altered, for the color will be deeper, the
smell ungrateful, and highly stinking, the consistency thicker, and will have
on the superficies a downiness or hoariness, sometimes whitish, sometimes
bluish; there will be also fixed in the bottom of the Vessel a thick and
copious sediment, and often on the sides a sandy or tartareous crust, of a
whitish or Ash Color. From these kind of appearances, and as the urines sooner
or later putrify, and so are more or less altered from their former state, it
may be conjectured what the proportion of Salt or Sulphur may be, whether of
them exceeds the other: also no unfaithful Judgment of the quality and plenty
of the earthy matter or the contents may be taken from hence.

And thus, Sir, at length you have the Doctrine or Method of Separation of
Urine, such as our unskilfulness has rendered it: I desire you would be pleased
not only to pardon the errors and barrenness of this Discourse, but also to
excuse it in other things, because at first writ by your persuasion, and then
by your command and request made public. Wherefore pray take care of this
child hardly brought forth and almost an abortive, and as it were exposed and
deservedly laid at your door, without portion. Farewell.

Two Physical and Medical EXERCITATIONS, VIZ. I. Of the Accension of the Blood.
II. Of Musculary Motion.

The first Medical and Physical DISCOURSE.
Of the growing hot or inkindling of the Blood.
IT is long since I designed to print my Meditations concerning the remaining
Pathology of the Brain and Nervous stock: But when many Diseases of that kind
affect the animal Spirits, and not rarely the whole Hypostasis of the corporeal
Soul more immediately than the Humors or solid Parts; I therefore thought it
necessary first to publish the Disquisitions of the nature of this Soul, and
its manner of subsisting, and also of its Parts and Powers, that from these
things rightly known, its preternatural Passions may at length be the better
discovered. But concerning these very hard matters, and difficult to be
unfolded, when I had begun to frame (as I think) probable and rational
Arguments, I saw well that they would be looked upon and laughed at by some as
unusual things and Paradoxes; which indeed it becomes me not to take ill, but
to let every one freely to enjoy his own sense, and to use in all things his
own opinion and judgment. Among the many things conjecturally proposed by me,
(which I could not avoid) two chief Arguments are opposed, to wit, that I had
affirmed, that the blood for the continuing of life was inkindled, and that the
animal Spirits, for the motive act, were exploded: which terms, though perhaps
they may sound rough and strange to be applied to the animal economy; yet if
any one shall weigh the Reasons and Arguments which do persuade to the truth of
either opinion, I doubt not, but that there will be none who will not give
their assent, or easily pardon me for mine. In the first place therefore,
because there are so many opinions concerning the growing hot of the Blood, for
that some attribute it to an innate heat, others to a flame in the Heart, some
also to a fermentation of the bloody mass, and others to its inkindling;
therefore I shall endeavor more narrowly to introspect the matter, and as much
as I am able, to build upon a more certain Ratiocination, its genuine Cause,
though very abstruse.

We have formerly discoursed concerning that Soul, which is common to the more
perfect Beasts, with that subordinate or more inferior of Man, and have showed
it to be indeed Corporeal, and to consist of two parts; the one of these rooted
in the blood we called a Flame, and the other dwelling in the Brain and nervous
stock, Light. As we shall here only treat of the former, I think it will be no
difficult matter to make use of the same Reasons and Instances, which truly
conclude, or at least very like truth, that in the first place the blood is
animate or has life: secondly, that this Animation is in its accension or
inkindling, or consists in an affection most analogical to this.

1. Not only the opinions of Philosophers, but the undoubted testimony of the
Sacred Scripture plainly asserts the animation of the blood: to wit, the use of
blood was forbidden in the Mosaical Law, for this reason, because the Blood is
the Life or Soul; which is also apparent by the observation of the most famous
Harvey, for that its motion is to be observed by the eye, shows that it first
lives and last dies. For the greater proof of this, it is commonly known that
Animals only live so long as the blood remains in its due plenty and motion;
and that they presently dye, if either too great a quantity of this be taken
away, or its motion suppressed.

But as to the second Proposition, to wit, that the life or soul of the fervent
blood depends upon its inkindling; this will appear probable, if I shall show:
First, that the liquor of the blood ought to be very hot in the more perfect
living Creatures. Secondly, that this growing hot can be produced or conserved
in the blood by no other means besides accension or inkindling. Thirdly, that
some chief affections, as it were proper passions of fire and flame, are
agreeable to the life only of the blood growing hot. Fourthly and lastly, these
being clearly shown, some other less signal accidents and properties, in which
common flame and life agree, are added, and also we will unfold how and in what
respect they differ among themselves.

As to the first we affirm, that the blood is perpetually moved in all living
Creatures; besides in the more perfect it does estuate or grow hot in act.
Indeed its undiscontinued motion is required, both for the conservation of the
disposition of the blood it self, whose liquor would otherwise be subject to
stagnation and putrefaction, as also that being carried about in the whole
body, it might be able to give a due tribute to all parts. For that the offices
of the blood, at least in the more perfect living Creatures, are diverse and
manifold, viz. to instill matter in the Brain and nervous stock for the animal
Spirits to dispense the nutritious Juice into all the solid parts, to suggest
to the motive parts an elastic Copula, and besides to separate all recrements
and worn out Particles, and to put them aside into convenient Emunctories.

But although the mere motion of the Blood in less perfect Animals, or at least
its moderate swelling up, such as may be perceived in Wine and other Liquors
agitated into Fermentation, is able to sustain and perform the economy of
Nature; to wit, for as much as both a crude nutriment is every where received
from the river of the blood, though cool, continually flowing into all parts of
the whole Body, and that fewer spirits and more thick, as it were separated by
percolation or straining, enter the Brain and nervous stock with that plenty,
that may suffice for local motion, and the Organs of the few senses to be
rudely actuated: yet the blood watering the bodies of more perfect Animals,
require offices of a far more excellent kind; for it ought not only to be
carried about with a continual and more rapid motion, but very much to swell
up, yea actually to grow hot or effervent: to wit, for that end, that its frame
or substance being very much loosned, it may more copiously send forth the
respective Particles of various kinds, every where falling off from it, and may
dispose them here and there for the use and wants of Nature.

But first, for that the animal Spirits are continually to be supplied in great
plenty from the mass of blood, and that there is need for the elastic Particles
requisite for the locomotive function, to be thence perpetually poured into all
the Muscles, it seems very necessary that the liquor from whence these generous
and manifold supplements are drawn should be actually hot, or rather should
burn forth; to wit, that the aforesaid Particles, not sufficiently to be
unlocked but by heat or burning, should freely run out from the substance or
frame of the liquor: which truly is manifest, because from Wine, and also from
the same bloody Liquor, and all other spirituous things, a subtle and
spirituous humor is copiously drawn, but not to be performed by distillation
without heat or fire. Yea the sulphurous Particles, although they are less apt
to be exhaled from any Liquor, yet they most readily fly out by inkindling the
subject. By these there is an apparent necessity of the blood's growing hot for
the perfection of the animal as well as vital function; but that it may appear
by what means this is done, to wit, whether by Accension, or by Fermentation,
or by any other way, we shall first in general inquire, by what means, and for
what causes any liquid things are wont to grow hot; then we shall consider, to
which of these the growing hot of the blood ought to be attributed.

Concerning these we say, that there are only three ways, or so many kinds of
causes, by which Liquors conceive a heat, viz. first, by fire or heat being put
to them, as when water is made to sees or boil over the fire, or that it grows
hot by the heat of the Sun, a Bath, or Stove, or by the dissolution of quick
Lime; instances of all which are commonly known. For the same reason
Bath-waters seem to boil. For, that we may instance in our own Baths, to wit,
they are impregnated neither with Sulphur nor fixed Salt, as I have plainly
experimented, by distilling and evaporating them, and by pouring into them
precipitating Liquors; yea by dissolving them with Sulphur, and many other
ways. They most resemble Limewater, and they, as we believe, grow hot from a
like cause, to wit, by imbibing the fiery little bodies somewhere hid within
the Earth. Of these, unless it had been superfluous, we had here given a fuller
description, which may perhaps be done at some other time. Secondly, when
saline Corrosives, which are of a diverse kind, being mingled with themselves,
or with sulphurous things, work mutually one on another with a great strife
and agitation of Particles, and oftentimes excite heat, yea sometimes fume and
flame; as when the Spirit and Butter of Antimony are poured to, or mixed with
stygian Water, wherein lixivial Salts are melted, or with Oil of Turpentine, or
other distilled things; besides when corrosive Liquors eat metallic Bodies,
they often grow hot. Thirdly, and the only way besides (as I suppose) whereby a
liquid thing is made hot, is when any humor, being very much imbued with
Sulphur or Spirit, conceives a burning by putting a flame to it, and so grows
hot by burning forth. This is ordinarily seen in oily or very spirituous
Liquors, being inkindled and inflamed.

There remain indeed some other ways of Calefaction, to wit, Fermentation,
Putrefaction, and Attrition, whereby more thick Bodies, or Solids, often
conceive a fervor, but they produce not such an effect in Liquids: whilst the
mealy Mass or Dough is fermented, the active Particles being stirred up into
motion, unfold themselves on every side, and lift up the bulk or substance of
the subject; in the mean time, for as much as the sulphurous Particles being
agitated with them, take hold one of another, and begin to be combined, a
certain heat, though more remiss, is excited; in like manner from Putrefaction,
Dung or wet Hay get an heat, to wit, for as much as the sulphurous Particles,
within included, are very thickly heaped up together, then being combined
together, they break out in troops: yet no Liquors, either thin or thick,
whether they ferment or putrify, do for that reason at any time grow hot: For
Wines, whilst in fermenting they break in pieces the sides of the Tun, or
overflow the top of the Vessel with a great noise and ebullition, do not
actually grow hot, yea not so much as grow warm. The blood being let out of the
Body, and placed in convenient Glasses, either to ferment or putrify, does not
get any actual heat: yet in truth we grant the Blood in living Creatures to be
fermented, and by fermenting to be putrified, yea and some other offices of the
animal economy to perform the same: moreover, we have formerly showed from its
Fermentation being hindered, or too much increased, or otherwise depraved,
diverse kinds of diseases to be produced: yet we deny the heat of the blood to
be excited by Fermentation. Because neither the blood of more frigid Animals,
nor Wines, nor any other Liquors, though agitated with the highest
Fermentation, are for that reason actually hot. And indeed the reason seems
evident enough, to wit, because the sulphurous Particles being raised up in
the more thick subjects, though they lay hold on one another mutually, and
being more thickly heaped together, raise up heat: yet in Liquids, the same
kind of Particles, however stirred up or agitated, are immediately disjoined by
the watery coming between, and are hindered from their mutual embrace and
combination; so that they cannot of themselves produce an actual heat: For the
same reason, hard Bodies being rubbed one against another, or violently knocked
or bruised, do not only produce heat, but oftentimes fire; whenas yet Liquids,
however shaken and agitated, do not grow warm. Therefore as there are only
three ways, whereby actual heat may be begotten in all Liquors, we shall
inquire to which of these the heat of the Blood may be ascribed.

First, Some say it is the first way, from the opinion both of the Ancients,
and of some of the Moderns: the Blood is said to grow hot, by reason of some
hot thing put to it, to wit, whilst those affirm an innate heat, and these a
little flame to be placed in the Heart, and to heat the blood passing through
it; but either of these opinions easily fails, from which it is clear, that the
Heart is a mere Muscle, nor does contain in it self any tinder or matter for a
flame or heat (I know not how) implanted, fit for their continuance. For though
it be confessed, that on the continual motion of this Bowel, (which is only
animal) the Circulation of the Blood does depend, yet the Heart borrows heat
altogether from the blood, and not the blood from the Heart.

Secondly, As to what respects the second way of making hot a liquid thing, to
wit, whereby a great heat is excited by the mixing of saline Corrosives
together, or also oily, or by corroding a metallic Body, I think there is none
that will seriously assert, that the blood grows hot from such a cause; for
that its liquor, in its natural state, is always homogene, and although it be
stuffed with plenty of Salt, it is however with that which is volatile, gentle,
and benign only: But there is not to be found, either in the Heart, or in any
other place a saline or any otherwise heterogene Mine, whereby the bloody
liquor, by working or corroding, may get or conceive an heat: to wit, it
behooves either such a Mine or the Body to be corroded, to be perpetually
renewed, because the ebullition and heat raised up by the strife of Salts,
ceases as soon as the Salts are combined, or the Body corroded. If at any time
the saline Particles of the humors in our Body depart from their right temper,
and become enormous and unbridled, for that reason the blood, as to heat and
motion, enters into some irregularities; yet it seems impossible, that it
should originally and perpetually become hot by the congression, and strife, or
corrosion of the Salts.

Thirdly, As to the third way, whereby Liquids are made hot, though it may seem
an uncouth saying, That the blood is so inkindled, yet since we cannot
attribute it to any other way besides, what should hinder from attributing its
heat to this Cause? And the rather, for that the proper passions of Fire and
Flame are agreeable to the life of the Blood alone.

For indeed these three things are chiefly and principally Essentials,
requisite for the perpetuating flame. First, that there be granted to it,
as soon as it is inkindled, a free and continued accession of the Air. Secondly,
that it may enjoy a constant sulphurous food. Thirdly, that its recrements
both sooty, as also the more thick, be always sent away. So then if I shall
show these things to agree after the same manner with life, as flame, and to
those only, without doubt, I think that life it self may be esteemed a certain
kind of Flame.

In the first place therefore, that a flame may be inkindled, and remain
inkindled, there is need of a free and undiscontinued access of Air, and that
not only, that the vaporous Effluvia's, threatening the suffocation of the
flame, may be carried away, and always depart, but much rather, that the
nitrous food necessarily requisite for the burning of any thing, may be
supplied by the Air. For indeed every sublunary fire, and especially flame, is
compounded or made up altogether of sulphurous Particles, breaking out in
heaps from a combustible Body, and of nitrous Bodies, which every where flow in
the Air, meeting with them: when Particles of Sulphur, breaking out slowly or
interruptedly, get to themselves a few nitrous, only planted near them, a fire
is usually produced, such as is seen in a burning Coal: But when the former
going away more impetuously, either of their own accord, or forced by blowing,
presently lay hold on very many nitrous Particles flowing round about in the
whole circuit, a flame arises. In truth the whole region of the Air is
abundantly stuffed with nitrous little bodies, which are every where ready for
the constituting of fire and flame, and they being any where inkindled, meet
them after the manner of a flood, although not always after the like manner or
measure, because it is observed at some times, especially in the Winter-cold,
when the Air abounds more in Nitre, that fire or flame does more ardently burn,
and diffuse farther its heat: on the contrary, in rainy weather, as also when
the beams of the Sun shine upon the fire, and so dissipate the Nitre of the
neighboring Air, the fire is so dulled, as is commonly said, that it is
extinguished by the Sun. If at any time the nitrous Particles of the Air are
excluded from the sulphurous of any subject breaking out in the inkindling or
burning, the fire and flame quickly perish; which appears, because this or that
being put into a Glass, after the Air is sucked out or excluded, they presently
expire. Further, in the open Air, although a naked fire propagates a fire in a
fireable matter by mere contact, yet a flame is hardly inkindled without a
flame be put to it, or a very strong fire: because, for the stirring up of a
flame very many nitrous Particles of the Air, implanted round about, ought to
be inkindled at once; as if Nitre and common Sulphur being pounded together, be
commixed (because both Incentives agree) even the least spark falling into such
a mixture begets an highly impetuous flame, which desiring no farther a nitrous
food, is inkindled or burns under water, in a place void of air, or in any
place as freely as in the open air. In like manner the least sulphurous
things, as a bit of ponderous wood, being cast into a red-hot Crucible, in
which Nitre is fused, the same at first touch presently conceive a flame, and
continue till it be wholly consumed: But that fire and flame being included in
a place empty of air, expire by reason of the food of Nitre being drawn away,
rather than choked by their own proper smoke, Exper. Phys. Mec. 50.
the Illustrious Mr. Robert Boil has most clearly demonstrated by very many
Experiments. For a Candle being lighted, and put into a capacious globe of
Glass, and the Vessel stopped up: as soon as the air was sucked out by a
wind-instrument, the flame did expire. Moreover he observed, what concludes for
our Hypothesis, Exper. 13.
that the flame contracted it self according to all its dimensions, as soon as
ever the Engine began to suck, then after the second or third draught of the
drawn forth air, the flame about the utmost extremities appeared very blue, and
to go back more and more from the Tallow, till at length getting to the top of
the snuff it expired: the same Candle being again lighted, and shut up in the
recipient, this worthy Gentleman tried how long it was able to sustain its
light, when the air was not exhausted, and he found it to endure much longer
lighted than before. From these it clearly appears, that the flame shut up,
expires not so much because it is suffocated by its own proper smoke, as
because it is destitute of the nitrous food of the Air. For in the former
Experiment the air being exhausted, there was more space for the smoke and
sum, that the flame might not be stifled, and yet this dyed sooner, the
Recipient being empty, than the same being full of air; besides, the flame
dying became bluish, for as much as it participated of more Sulphur than Nitre;
and it left the Tallow, and expired at the top of the snuff, for that it
followed its most necessary food as far as it was able, Exper. 78.
to wit, the nitrous Particles of Air. The same Experiment succeeded alike in
live Coals, viz. the naked fire, after the food of Nitre was drawn away,
suddenly dyed. Here also it does what the flame of a Candle does in Mines or
Caves under ground, where the nitrous air is wanting or dispelled, at first it
becomes more contracted and blue, and then a little after expires.

I have been more large in this Argument, because there is for both the like
necessity of drawing in of the air, after the same manner, for the sustaining
the life of the Blood, and for the continuing of flame. For the more hot
Animals, if they are hindered from respiration dye quickly, wherefore the same
means of killing is most ready and common to shut up the breath, which being
wholly obstructed, life perishes as a flame. If it should be objected, that
those choked do dye, because the soot or smoke being retained, blow up and
intumifie the bloody mass, which for that reason, the bulk or substance being
increased, and made almost immovable, fills the bosom of the Heart, and
hinders its motion: I say, that this is improbable, because if the Arteries,
every where in the Limbs and about the Neck, be strained hard together with
Ligatures, that the blood being straightened as to the compass of its circuit, be
very much stopped about the Praecordia, (more certainly than can happen from
the mere retained smoke) yet for that cause death neither presently follows,
nor any deadly Symptoms. That this happens in those that are hindered from
respiration, because the vital flame of the blood is wanting of the nitrous
food of the Air, rather than overthrown by its proper soot or smoke being
detained, Exper. 41.
the most Famous Boil also by his Experiments has put it out of doubt; for he
has observed, that hot living Creatures being put within a glassy Globe, and
shut up, did far sooner expire, the air being drawn away from them, than the
same being left within it, though in the former case, there was more space left
for the receiving the smoke, lest the retaining of it might constipate the
blood: yet however, if the heat of the blood should arise from Fermentation, or
the congression of dissimilar Particles, or from an ebullition, by reason of
admitted heat, or from any other cause besides accension, it is so far that
that effect could be inhibited or suppressed by reason of the air being
excluded, that on the contrary it would rather for that cause become more
strong or intense. For it appears, by a common observation, that Liquors
chiefly sermentable, the more strictly they are kept in the Vessel, the more
they grow hot, and the air being admitted through some vent-hole, they
presently cease from their fury. Moreover, Mr. Boyl's Experiments clearly show,
that the effervescencies or growing fervent, stirred up by the ebullition of
unlike Particles, or by corrosion, also the boiling up of hot water in a
glassie Sphere, are above measure increased after the air is sucked out,
Experiment. Physicom. 41, 42, 43. That most ingenious Tract of the aforesaid
Author supplies us with many Experiments, whereby it is abundantly manifest,
that the intestine motions of those Particles, and almost of every thing,
besides fire and life, are very much heightened or made strong in the space
emptied of air; but their act, presently after the air is withdrawn, is
extinguished: hence we may conclude, the life of a living Creature to be either
fire, or something analogical to it. The like to these is yet more clearly
observed by the diggers of Minerals, who ordinarily experiment in subterranean
Caves, where either the Nitre is wanting, or is driven away by some strange
damp or vapor, so that they are in danger of being stifled or smothered, at
the same time the flame of the Candle is diminished, becomes blue, and at
length expires.

The second thing requisite to sustain a flame, is a constant supply of
sulphurous food, whereby it may continually be fed, which being subtracted,
or by reason of some incongruous mixture depraved, the flame is extinguished;
as is perceived in a Lamp, which for want of oil, or water poured in its place,
expires: further, as this sulphurous food is more or less suggested, sometimes
more plentifully, sometimes more sparingly, the flame being more or less
intense, is sometimes produced clear, sometimes smoaky; in the mean time, the
food being constantly consumed by burning, goes away partly into vaporous
Effluvia's, and partly into ashes, which are made up of some Particles of
Earth, Salt, and Sulphur: But it is much otherwise in Liquors exposed to
Fermentation, to which if new Particles be continually administered, and the old
ones depart, the Fermentation is hindered or disturbed.

In like manner, as in Flame, the Blood of the hotter Animals (and this only in
all natural things, besides fire) requires a constant and copious sulphurous
food; and that being quickly worn, is for the most part consumed in vaporous
Effluvia's, a Caput mortuum being left of Earth, Salt, and stinking Sulphur: In
the mean time from its food consumed by burning, it disposes other Particles
for other uses. That the life or flame of the blood does continually want
aliment, there is none but daily finds it in himself: For if that be for some
time denied, the vigor of the blood is diminished, yea and consuming the solid
parts, it snatches into its bosom their remnants, and other humors of the Body
whereby it may be fed. If the nutriment daily suggested from things taken, be
too thin and watery, the fervor of the blood, like flame without food, uses to
be remitted; but if the food be very sulphurous and swelling with a vinous
Spirit, and plentifully taken in, the blood is presently inflamed, and often
breaks out into a Fever, as it were an open burning. In the interim out of
that food of the blood exhausted or consumed, as it seems by accension, hot
Effluvia's full of soot and vapor go away, which according to a just account,
far exceed all the other excrements of the Body; and that their nature is
plainly fiery, the frequent burning of the mouth and tongue, and infecting them
with blackness like the soot or smoke of a Chimney, witnesses; besides, from
the inflamed blood adust Feces, like a Caput mortuum, are sent into the Bladder
of the Gall, Spleen, and perhaps into other Emunctories.

Thirdly, That inkindled Flame may for some time continue, there is need of
continual ventilation, to wit, that its sooty Effluvia's may still fly away,
which else being detained and heaped together thereabouts, will suffocate the
fire, because by obstructing the Pores of the inflamed Body, they hinder the
eruption of the sulphurous matter to be inflamed. Although this condition does
often interfere with the other more potent, viz. the necessity of nitrous food
to be so drawn in from the air, that it can scarce be distinguished from it;
yet we may plainly perceive, from the detained soot gathered together about the
snuff, the light to be put out: for which cause a Lamp, whose wick is made of
plumous Alum or other incombustible matter, will not (as it promises) endure
any long time, because the soot sticking to the wick, hinders the access of the
oil to the flame; for this reason blasts of wind from the Air wiping away the
sootiness, does not only render the flame more clear, that is free from fume
and thick vapor; but food being sufficiently given to it, it becomes more
durable.

Even as Flame, the life of the Blood requires also continual ventilation; to
which end, besides the greater breathing places of the Breast, innumerable
lesser, viz. the Pores of the skin gaping every where through the whole Body,
do send forth Effluvia's departing plentifully from the boiling blood; which if
it happens to be hindered, or too closely shut up, the blood will grow
excessively hot, being as it were beset with fume and vapor: besides, there is
need to shorten its circuit, that passing through the Lungs with a more
frequent turn, it might there, as much as it can, dispel all its soot or smoke.
When the Heavens are heated, the Air seems as it were immovable and to
stagnate, we are wont very much to estuate or grow hot about the Praecordia;
for that the blood being fed with a more sparing nitrous food, does not burn so
clearly, but glows with a more suffocating and intrinsic burning: further, for
that the Particles of the Air being less nimble, when they are inspired and
expired or breathed forth, do not so readily convey away the vaporous
Effluvia's of the blood; hence it is, that we fan the Air, that it may be made
more moveable, and carry away more quickly and plentifully the soot or smoke
from our Praecordia.

There yet remain some other smaller Considerations of Fire and Flame,
respecting indeed not so much the Essence, as the production and extinction of
either, which, whether and how far they may agree with the life of the Blood,
we shall briefly inquire into.

Fire or Flame is produced two ways, viz. either it is kindled from another
fire or flame, or begot by an intestine motion of sulphurous Particles. We
have largely showed the Species of either, and the manner of their being made,
in our Tract of Fermentation (only we omitted there, that the accession of
nitrous food was necessary for the sustaining it) even as flame, the life also
of the hot or warm Blood, we have observed to be produced by a twofold way, to
wit, it is either inkindled from another life or soul, as in Creatures that
bring forth alive; or intrinsical Particles predisposed to animation, are at
length raised up to life with the blood by a long cherishing of external heat,
as in oviparous or egg-laying Creatures.

If it be further demanded, when and how the vital Flame is kindled first in
the Blood? I say, some small beginnings of it are laid up from the conception
it self in the Genital humor, to wit, when the rudiment of the bodily Soul
culled out from the Souls of the Parents, as a little spark stricken from those
flames, is hid in a convenient matter; which being from thence raised up by the
Mothers heat, begins a little to glow and shine, and afterward being daily
dilated with the blood brought forth, and leisurely increased, is equally
extended with the Body, which it actuates and animates. But yet as long as the
young one is included in the Egg or Womb, the vital fire, getting very little
or scarce any aerie food, does not yet break out into open flame, but like a
Brands end covered over with ashes, burns only slowly and very little, and
spreads abroad scarce any heat; wherefore both the formation and increase of
the Embryo depends very much on the Mothers heat, or the cherishment of some
other analogical thing, whereof being destitute it perishes: but as soon as the
young one is born in due time, and begins to breathe, the vital fire presently
receiving the nitrous food, largely unfolds it self, and an heat or
effervescency being raised up through the whole bloody mass, it inkindles a
certain flame; and because the blood then first rushing into the Lungs, having
there gotten an accession of Air, begins to burn, the flesh of that Bowel, at
first reddish, is shortly changed into a whitish color, like burnt ashes, and
the blood it self undergoes a notable alteration; for what did flow of a dark
Purple color into the Pneumonick Vessels from the right side of the Heart,
returning from thence presently out of the Lungs, becomes Crimson, and as it
were of a flame-colour, and so shining, passes through the left Ventricle of
the Heart and the appending Arteries.

Indeed that in Creatures newborn, the color of the Lungs is so suddenly
changed, I think it ought to be attributed to the blood, there at first more
openly inkindled, and their flesh as it were somewhat roasted; although the
mere inflation of the Lungs in a dead Embryo produces the like effect, because
the Membranes of the Lungs and the Parenchyma being distended and increased
into a greater capacity, shake off the stagnating blood, and so draw it away
into little and scarce to be discerned rivulets.

As to the Color of the Blood, so variously changed into circulating from a
dark purple to a crimson, and from this to that, I say, that the immediate
cause of this is, the admixtion of the nitrous Air with the Blood; which
certainly appears, because the change into a crimson, begins in that place
where the blood chiefly gets the access of the Air, viz. whilst it is
transferred out of the Arteries into the Pneumonick Veins; for in those it
appears of a dark Purple, in these every where florid, as the most Learned
Doctor Lower has observed. Further, it yet farther appears, that this
alteration of the color proceeds from the admixture of the Air, because that
crimson color follows in the superficies of all blood, let out of the Vessels
by reason of its meeting or mingling with air; and if the flowering or top be
taken away, another presently arises. Besides, the blood being let out of a
Vein, and very much struck with a switch or rod, it becomes crimson through
all: and in like manner the blood of living Creatures shines at first within
the Pneumonick Veins, to wit, presently after the influx of the air by the
Windpipe; and from thence, by reason of the same Particles of inkindled air
being yet retained, it passes through all the Arteries still florid; in the
mean time, from the Nitre of the Air mingled with the sulphurous Particles,
and burning with them, the blood being greatly rarefied, and in truth expanded
into flame, impetuously swells up within all the passages of the Pneumonick
Vein and the great Artery, sending from it self copious breaths and hot
Effluvia's; but being dilated toward the ends of the Arteries, and returning
toward the Heart, that it may enter more closely into the little mouths of the
Veins, it lays aside its turgid and burning aerie Particles, and being presently
made more quiet and half extinct, and so both its vigor and also its color
being changed, it returns through the passages of the Veins, that at length
running into the Lungs, it might renew its burning. After this manner, that the
inkindled blood might flame through the whole Body with a perpetual and equal
flame, and successively renew its burning in all its Particles, it ought to be
carried about by a perpetual course from the nest of its accension into all
parts, and from these to that. For this end the Machine or Engine of the Heart
was needful, as a Pin or Cock, which being made with a double bosom, might
receive in it self from the whole Lungs the blood fresh inkindled, that it
might presently drive forward, whilst burning, into every part of the whole
Body, and might then receive the burnt and half extinguished blood returning
from the whole Body; which being imbued with new inflammable juice, it might
deliver to the Lungs to be re-inkindled.

In performing this task, although the Heart be a mere Muscle, and exercised
only with an animal motion, seems to serve alone for the Circulation of the
Blood; yet in the mean time, it so much helps to moderate the accension of the
blood and its burning, according to the rage of the passions, and to direct
other works and uses of the animated Body, that we have thought the vital or
flamy part of the Soul to have its chief, and as it were Imperial seat in the
Heart and Lungs, in every distemper or affection, as of Grief, Joy, Fear, and
the like; also in the fits of Diseases, the Heart is disposed after a various
manner, and hence it comes to pass, that the blood flowing in fluctuates, and
is inkindled with a diverse rage; of which there will be a more opportune place
of discoursing, when we shall treat of the Passions.

Whilst we consider that the burning of the Blood, and for that reason the
vital or flamy part of the Corporeal Soul does not appear lively or vigorous in
all, nor ever after the same manner or measure; yet it exists according to the
various constitutions of the blood, to wit, as it is more or less sulphurous,
spirituous, faltish, or watery, yea and according to the diverse constitutions
and conformations both of the food, with which this flame is nourished, as also
of the little spiracles or breathing holes, by which it is eventilated; and
further; of the Heart it self, whereby it is agitated and driven about here and
there; the accension of blood varies also in every one, by means of several
other accidents, to wit, as its flame is sometimes great, clear, and expanded,
sometimes small, contracted, or cloudy, sometimes equal and in order, sometimes
unequal and often interrupted, yea and it becomes subject to many other
mutations; also because the Soul it self having gotten a various nature or
disposition, it conceives diverse affections and manners, whereof we shall speak
hereafter; for as much as it is not a little thing, that the disposition of the
whole Soul depends upon the temperament of the bloody mass, and the degree and
manner of its accension or inkindling.

It clearly appears, from what has been said, that Fire and Life do dye or are
extinguished alike many ways, to wit, there is an end of either, if the access
of nitrous food, or the departure of Effluvia's be hindered, or if the oily or
sulphurous aliment, requisite to either, be consumed, too much withdrawn, or
perverted from its inflammable disposition; of each whereof it is so clearly
apparent, that there needs no farther explication.

Thus far we have shown, that the Life of the Blood, or that part of the Soul
growing therein, is a certain kind of Flame; let us now see by what means it is
disposed to burning, and how near it comes to the similitude of a burning
Candle or Lamp.

A common Lamp, whether designed to give heat or light, for the most part is
wont to be made after this manner; to wit, the Oil flowing perpetually to the
wick, gives continual food to the flame; wherefore as there is but one
fireplace or hearth only of light and heat, the action of either is limited
only to one place, and so as often as there is need of more places at once, or
diverse parts of the same space or body to be illuminated or made warm, we place
here and there diverse lighted Candles or Lamps. But if an Instrument made with
great artifice (such as is truly an animated Body) with one liquor only
contained in it, should be made hot throughout the whole, and to be kept always
warm, it ought not only to be lightly inkindled in the wick, but in the whole
superficies, and derived by fit Tubes or Pipes to all the parts of the Machine,
then the burning liquor ought to enjoy, proportionably to all its parts, an
access of nitrous Air, and to lay aside Effluvia's and other recrements, and
ought also to have a supply of that constant expense: these kind of offices are
not to be performed any where up and down, but only in some set places;
therefore the burning liquor ought to be carried about through the whole with a
perpetual turn, that all its portions might enjoy successively all those
privileges, and at once heat the whole capacity of the containing Machine, to
wit, both the inward and outward recesses. Indeed such a Bannian or Bathing
Engine, artificially made, might aptly represent the real Divine handiwork of
the Circulation of Blood, and what burns in it, the Life-lamp.

But it may be objected, that the Blood seems not to be inflammable of its own
nature; further, since there is no flame of this heat or effervency to be
beheld with the eyes, it may well be doubted, whether there be such a thing or
no. I say first, That the Chemical Analysis of the blood shows very many
particles of Sulphur and of Spirit, yea a plentiful stock of inflammable Oil,
which are however mixed with other more thick Elements, in a just proportion,
to bridle their too great inkindling; to wit, that this liquor might flame out
by little and little, and only through fewer parts, for the constituting of a
benign and gentle Lamp of life: wherefore the blood being let out of a Vein
upon a burning fire, does in some measure burn, though it is not like the
Spirits of Wine, or Oil of Turpentine turning all into a flame; besides, the
whole mass of blood, as the Oil of a Lamp, ought not to be fired; yea its
burning is instituted for that end, that whilst all the Particles of the
Mixture being freed, some sulphurous and spirituous are consumed by burning,
others more subtle being sent in Troops, might serve for the necessary uses of
the animal Regiment; and also others more thick or crass and nourishing, as it
were boiled or roasted, might be dispensed for the cherishing all parts;
besides, that all the dead, or worn out, and excrementitious may be sent away
by fit or convenient sinks, and others constantly substituted in their places
by nourishment.

But in the interim, that the vital Flame, which destinated to so many offices,
we suppose to be inkindled in the Blood, (otherwise than the common flame,
which is plainly conspicuous) appears not at all, a probable reason thereof may
be given; as it is most thin, and burns in the Heart, and its depending Vessels
as it were shut up in Receptacles, it does not clearly flame out, but perhaps
remains in the form of smoke, or a vapor, or breath; yea, although the blood
should openly flame out, yet it might be so done, that its shining being most
thin, may not be perceived by our sight, as in the clear light of the day we
cannot behold a glowing red-hot Iron, nor shining sparks, nor false fires, nor
rotten wood, nor many other things shining by night; why then may not the vital
fire, even thinner than they, quite escape our sight? Although sometimes hot
living Creatures use to send forth a certain fire or flame only conspicuous by
night: For we have known in some endued with a hot and vaporous blood, when
they have put off their inner garments at night going to bed near a fire or
Candle, a very thin and shining flame to have shown it self, which has
possessed the whole inferior region of the Body. The reason of which affection
seems wholly the same, as when the evaporating fume of a Torch just put out is
again inflamed by a light inkindling, and manifestly argues that another flame,
the root of this extrinsick one, lies hid within the Body. For this very cause
it is, that from the Mains of Horses, and the Skins of Cats, or other hot
Animals being shaken, little sparks as it were of fire leap out, and often
flames, only conspicuous in the dark, arise. Besides, we here take notice in a
burning Fever, caused by immoderate drinking of Wine or strong Waters, that
the blood, as the flame of it is very much increased, ^oth grow excessively
hot, and such are wont to emit dry breaths, and sharp Effluvia's of heat, not
like those that proceed from fermenting or boiling Liquor, but only inflamed.
That which some in Fevers have imagined to have seen or observed even burning
fires and flame in the eyes, argues indeed that the flame of the blood is very
strong, and also that it penetrates the enclosure of the Brain. I knew a
certain ingenious Man of a very hot brain, who affirmed, that after a very
plentiful drinking of Wine, he was able in the darkest night to read clearly;
from hence also may be collected, how the accension of the blood, like that of
burning Liquors, is to be increased or made stronger, viz. by an agitation of
the parts, and a more plentiful affusion of sulphurous food.

But that in the hot blood of living Creatures, the Properties, Affections, and
many other accidents of Fire or flame are found without the manifest form or
species of it; what if we should say the cause to be, for that the vital flame
of the blood is subjugated, or made subordinate to another form, viz. to the
corporeal Soul? Wherefore, although it retains the chief qualities and
affections of common flame, yet it loses the species of flame or fire; for in
every natural mixture, the superior form exercises a Right and Dominion over
all included Particles whatsoever, however fierce and untameable they may be in
themselves, and stripping them of their species, ordains and disposes them to
peculiar actions in that proper Concrete: when the form of fire excels, that
bright burning, that it might propagate largely its ends, destroys and consumes
all inflammable objects. But if the form of the corporeal Soul be induced upon
the fire, kindled within the blood, it burns forth without fulgor or shining,
or destruction of the subject, and is invisible, and as it were subjugated
flame, is ordained for the sustaining of life and its offices: but truly the
Divine Providence, from the very Creation of the World, has seemed to have
predestined Forms to natural Bodies, to wit, that they might remain as so
many Figures or Types, according to which every portion of matter framing the
Concrete, whether animate or inanimate, might be modificated; so that the Mass,
according to the virtues of the hidden Seeds, being disposed after this or that
manner, happens to have the form of a Stone, a Plant, or Brute, or of any other
kind; then the acts and affections, appropriate to such a Species, follow the
form it self. When therefore Life or Soul is destinated to these kind of
Functions of the more perfect Animals, for the performing of which, the blood,
after the manner of burning Liquors, ought to be perpetually hot, and as it
were inkindled; what should hinder, but that the act of Life, or of that
corporeal Soul (consisting in the motion and agglomeration or heaping together
of most subtle and agil Particles) may be called a certain Burning or perpetual
Fire of the bloody Mass? Wherein although the accidents and chief qualities of
common fire are implanted, yet the form of fire is obscured, as being
subjugated to a more noble form, viz. of the corporeal Soul: not much unlike
water, which being congealed into Ice or Snow, lays aside the species of water
for a time, and may be applied to other uses far distant from fluidity.

But truly, though we affirm, that the corporeal Soul does stick in the Blood,
yet we do not, that it is adequated or limited to it: because whilst the more
thick portion of it, as the Roots of some Tree, fixed in the Earth, are sowed
in the bloody Mass, the more noble part of the same Soul, as the higher
branches, are expanded in the Brain and nervous System; or as we before hinted,
when the vital or flamy part of the Soul is contained in the blood, the animal
or lucid portion of it is contained in the Head and its Appendix; by which just
limit the Sphere of either may be defined, neither may the vital flame
impetuously break through the animal Region, the substance of the Brain being
more cold, and also shining or bright, is opposed to it, as it were an icy or
glassie Bar, whose interior frame or substance, the small and slender as it
were rivers of the blood, for the sake of cherishing heat, can enter: but truly
spirituous Particles plentifully flow from its juice or liquor, every where
heaped up near the confines of the Brain, and there disposed as it were to be
stilled forth, which being immersed in the Brain, and more exalted, affords
matter, out of which the animal Spirits are procreated, to be derived through
the Nerves into the various Regions of the Body.

The second Medical and Physical DISCOURSE.
Of Musculary Motion.
AS there are two chief or primary Faculties of the Corporeal Soul, to wit, the
Sensitive and Motive, we have assigned certain exterior Powers of either of
them, which are chiefly acted in the Nervous stock, and others interior, the
Exercises of which lie within the Brain, to wit, such as the Imagination,
Memory, Appetite, etc. What we have publicly discoursed of some time since
both concerning internal and external Senses, may perhaps hereafter be brought
to light and made public: in the mean time, because I am opposed, concerning
both the natural and convulsive Motion, I think it fit at present to publish
what I had meditated touching the Motive power, and what Hypothesis I had
conceived of so hard and highly intricate a thing.

The motive Faculty of the bodily Soul is wont to be exercised with another
kind of Action than the sensitive, viz. with a diverse aspect and tendency of
animal Spirits. For that every Sense is a certain passion, wherein the Soul, or
some portion of it, being outwardly struck, is forced to nod or shake, and a
wavering of the Spirits being inwardly made to look back toward the Head; but
on the contrary, every Motion is a certain Action wherein the Soul seems to
exert it self whole, or part of it self, and by a declination or fluctuation of
Spirits being made to bring forth a Systasis, and to extend something as it
were its member. Further, whilst the Soul so exerts it self, or some part of it
self, that the works then designed might be performed, an heap of animal
Spirits being every where disposed in the motive parts, sometimes one,
sometimes more are raised up by the Soul, which by that means being expanded
with a certain force, and as it were exploded, they blow up the containing
bodies, and so the same being increased as to their thickness, and made short
as to their length, are made to attract the adjoining member, and stir up local
motion.

1. In every motion, these three things ought to be considered: viz. First, the
original of the Action, or the first designation of the Motion to be performed,
which is always in the Brain or Cerebel. Secondly, its instinct or transmission
of the thing begun to the motive parts, which is performed by the commerce of
the Spirits lying within the Nerves. Thirdly, the motive force it self, or
exertion of the Spirits implanted in the moving parts, either into a
contractive or elastick force. From this threefold Fountain, viz. as the
business is performed in every one of these in a various manner, very many
kinds and differences of Motions are deduced.

1. As to the original or beginning of Motion, we shall take notice, that that
which proceeds from the Brain, with a knowing and auspicious appetite, may be
called Spontaneous or Voluntary; but that which is wont to be excited from the
Cerebel, where the Law of Nature presides, such as are Respiration, the Pulse,
with many others, may be called merely Natural, or Involuntary: either of these
is either direct, which is stirred up of it self, or primarily from this or
that beginning, as often as the appetite requires this or that thing, out of a
certain proper, and as I may say, intestine deliberation, and chooses out
respective motions; so in like manner, when the ordinary offices of the natural
and vital Function are performed, according to the solemn Rite of Nature; or
the motion of either kind is reflected, to wit, which depending on a previous
sense more immediately, as an evident cause or occasion, is presently retorted;
so a gentle titillation of the Skin causes a rubbing of it, and the more
intense heats of the Praecordia stir up the Pulse and Respiration.

2. As to the Vehicle of the Instinct, which we suppose to be wholly done by
the Nerves, for as much as it is performed by a single Nerve, or by more at
once, it is called either a Simple or Complicate Motion; then for that some
Nerves help motion more or less than others by sooner or later moving, this or
that member is said to be moved first, or by it self, and another by consent:
yea, and that consent is wont to be acted or done with neighboring or more
remote parts, and that with a diverse respect: But we have in another place
largely shown instances of these kind of sympathetick motions, as also the
causes of each of them, and their manner of being made.

3. There is another, and that a remarkable distinction of Motions, taken from
the various constitution of the moving parts: to wit, parts endued with nervous
Fibers, and in which the motive Spirits dwell; either they are Muscles, which
perform local motions; or membranaceous bodies, the motions of which are
terminated in themselves, which therefore we call Intestine. As to what belongs
to local motion, of which only we treat at present, although it be confessed by
all, that the Brain or Cerebel, and the Nerves and Muscles together one or
more, as it were with joint forces, do contribute to this motion; also, though
it may be sufficiently understood, that the beginning of the motion to be
performed is designed in the Brain or Cerebel, and that its instinct is
conveyed wholly by the Nerves; yet by what means the Muscles perform that work,
far exceeding any mechanic virtue or operation, seems most hard to be made
plain.

That local Motion is performed by traction, and does depend upon the
contraction of a Muscle, is not only a vulgar Opinion, but is also plain by
ocular demonstration; yet it is very much disputed and variously controverted
among Authors concerning the manner of Contraction and efficient Cause; some
think it enough to say, that the Soul it self, by its presence, does actuate
the Muscle, or contract or draw out here and there its Fibers, as it were a net
spread forth. But indeed this is to attribute to the sensitive Soul a
supernatural, and as it were Divine virtue. To wit, that the same, by its mere
Spirit, was able to bend and force heavy and very great bodies whither it
pleases. Further, for what end are the motive Organs framed with wonderful
artifice and manifold difference, unless that after the manner of Machines,
they might perform their operations by an orderly structure, and as it were
mechanical provision of parts? Truly it will be no hard thing to apply the
exercises of a Muscle and of the whole nervous Function, and to explicate them
according to the Rules, Canons, and Laws of a Mechanic. Before I enter upon
this, I think it not amiss first to speak something of the make, conformation,
and use of a Muscle in general. The ancient Anatomists, almost all with one
consent, did divide the body of a Muscle into Head, Belly, and Tail; taking for
the Head the extremity of the Muscle connexed to the part, to which contraction
is made; for the Tail, the end or portion of the Muscle inserted to the part to
be moved; for the Belly, the part of the Muscle coming between, which is beheld
more tumid, with a bulk of flesh; then for the performing of motion, they did
suppose the Muscle to swell up about the Head and Belly, and so to grow short
as to its length, and to attract nearer to it self the hanging part; yet by
what means, and for what cause the belly of the Muscle swells up, none yet has
clearly unfolded.

Moreover, although the Doctrine of the Nerves has been much described by the
most skilful Anatomists of every Age, so that the Muscles of the whole Body (as
it is thought) have been exactly recounted, and offices assigned them, and
monstrous names fitted for the expressing them, yet the true frame of a Muscle,
not yet showed by others, first began to be delivered lately by the most
ingenious Doctor Steno. He has found out in every Muscle two opposite Tendons,
into which both the Fibers go; yea, and has taught, that the same Fibers
wholly, which compose strictly on one side, the Tendon of the knitting being
more loosly joined, do constitute the flesh; yet so, that some being laid upon
others, compose the thickness or profundity of the Muscle, and some laid nigh
to others, its breadth or latitude: he calls the former Fibers Ordines or
Orders, but the other Versus or Turnings; then the parts and composition of a
Muscle being after this manner laid open, he aptly reduces its Figure to
Mathematical Rules, and according to Canons thence taken, shows the action to
be unfolded: because he advertising, that in a Muscle with a simple right line,
all the fleshy Fibers, parallel within themselves, and for the most part equal,
are carried from one Tendon obliquely into another; and that those Tendons are
sowed in the opposite ends or angles of the flesh, whereby he most ingeniously
describes a Muscle to be, a Collection of moving Fibers, so framed together,
that the middle flesh constitute an oblique angular Parallelopipedum, but the
opposite Tendons compose two quadrangular Prisms or Figures. The Instrument
which Painters use for the describing many Examples of the same thing, fitly
represents the figure of this delineated in a plain: because the styles being
fixed to the opposite Angles, express the insertions of the Tendons and the
Parallelogram it self the fleshy part of the Muscle: for when the opposite
Angles are diduced to a great distance from one another, and made sharper, the
two sides come nearer together, and render the Area or middle of the Figure
longer, but narrower, a Muscle not contracted is denoted: But if the same
Angles are brought nearer, and made more obtuse, the two sides go farther
apart, and so make the middle of the Muscle shorter, but also wider, a
contracted Muscle seems to be represented. In the mean time, in either site of
the aforesaid Parallelogram the quantity or longitude of the sides is not
changed, but only their position, and the largeness of the Angles is varied:
whether it may be also so in a Muscle, shall hereafter appear. In the mean time
we shall take notice, out of the observation of the same most Learned Steno,
that a Muscle is either simple, which consists of one belly and two Tendons, of
which sort there are many in the Arm and Leg, which are the movers of the
fingers and toes, yea and almost every where in other parts of the Body; or
compounded, that has many bellies, to every one of which, two opposite Tendons
are hung; yet so, as when those compounded Tendons, to wit, two together, shall
be joined, one compound Tendon enters the middle of the flesh, and the other
embraces the middle on both parts. This is evidently discerned in the Masseter
or Throat-muscle, the Deltoid, and diverse others, in all which, even as in a
simple Muscle, whilst the fleshy Fibers (to which only the motive power
belongs) are contracted, the opposite Angles are enlarged according to the
insertions of the Tendons, and so the bellies being made shorter, and at the
same time thicker, do swell up.

In a simple Muscle, according as one Tendon or both together, or either by
turns, ought to be drawn; besides, according as the part to be drawn is thin,
or broad, or planted near or far off, and for several other respects the fleshy
belly is diversely formed; and as the Rhomboides is its chiefest regular figure,
yet that also is sometimes triangular, sometimes trapezial or quadrangular,
pyramidal, spiral, semilunar or like an Half Moon, or of some other irregular
form. But in all these kind of Muscles, the fleshy Fibers, according to all
their positions, whilst they are contracted, at the same time intumifie or
swell up, and are shortened from either end toward the middle, though in all
Muscles not always in a like manner and dimension; for if either Tendon be to
be drawn at once, the contraction from either fleshy end, is for the most part
equal; but at the same time, if one only be drawn from the others that are
immovable, the contraction is made less, and sometimes, viz. where the flesh
immediately sticks to the bone without any notable Tendon, almost none.

The compounded Muscles are distinguished with a fear greater variety; for
besides their diversity of figures, all which would be an immense labor to
enumerate, according as they are more or less compounded, or have their bellies
more or fewer, with a manifold Series stretched out here and there, with Fibers
sometimes of the same, sometimes of a diverse order, they are very much
differenced.

The more thin and less compounded Muscle, when perhaps it is sorted into two
or three bellies, disposed in the same being plain, has the series of fleshy
Fibers for the most part looking diversely, all the exterior Tendons embracing
one end of the Muscle, and has the others intermediate or that come between
immersed about the other end; so that the several fleshy Fibers of every Belly
lie parallel between the one extreme Tendon and the other intermediate Tendon.
The thicker and more compounded Muscle, that it might perform at once quick,
hard, and long motions, has many bellies planted in diverse plains, and the
series of fleshy Fibers (which are all short) looking many ways. The frame of
them, although it be very intricate, that one can scarce number all the
bellies, much less observe their habitudes, mutual dependences, and means of
connexions among themselves; yet they may in some sort be reduced to this
common Rule in most, to wit, in the great compounded Muscles, such as are those
round ones which contribute mighty strength and elastick force to the middle of
the Arms and Legs, we may take notice, in one end of two vast exterior Tendons
covering almost the whole superficies of the Muscle, which being divided
presently into many fissures or clefts, are stretched out between a broad shoot
or claw to the other extremity of the Muscle; then on the opposite side, about
this other end, a great Tendon enters the middle of the flesh, which also is
cleft or divided presently into many laps, distributed through the whole
interior belly of the Muscle. And as these interior lamens or laps meeting
with the exterior, and being stretched out almost to the opposite end, look
many ways, and have their superficies turning on every side, some every where
are destinated to others opposite, and are committed or sent through the
intervenient series of the fleshy Fibers: such a Muscle, whose very many
bellies being planted in diverse plains, do look many ways, can by no manner or
way be cleft or pulled asunder, but that the other series of fleshy Fibers must
be broke asunder in the midst. The bellies of a Muscle, so very much
compounded, although manifold, yet are very slender, so that the fleshy Fibers
thereof being most short, and having their Angles always equal, but oblique,
with the tendinous laps, for that cause make a most strong attraction. Because
the numerous series of fleshy Fibers seem as it were so many distinct posts or
supporters set together for the moving of any weight, or rather, for that
either great Tendon is presently so cut into many lappets, it is like, as if a
mighty draw-rope, hung for the drawing up a body, should be presently divided
into many little ropes or cords, by which many men might draw at once. For
whilst the several series of the fleshy Fibers are shortened at once, they draw
the opposite Angles of all the tendinous lappets together, and so the belly of
the whole Muscle being intumified or swelled up, they strongly draw either end,
or that which is moveable toward the middle.

On every Muscle, both simple and compound, there is stretched on every side a
membranaceous covering; besides, other little Fibers transverse, to wit,
membranaceous, are woven between the direct moving fleshy Fibers of every one,
which clothe each of them, and keep or fasten them together, yea (as it seems
probable) they both communicate to all the fleshy Fibers the same instinct of
obeying the motion, and also carry to the Tendons, the troops of the inflowing
Spirits, received from the Nerve.

The Arteries and Veins, inserted in the middle of every Muscle, send forth
little branches on all sides, obliquely cutting the moving Fibers, from which
lesser branches dispersed between the Interstitia of the flesh, water them all
with a flux or reflux of the blood. But the Nerve entering the fleshy belly of
every one, distributes some smaller circles only in the neighboring parts, as
it were bearing only the Symbol or mark of the commanded action, commands the
execution of it to the Guard or inferior Company of the fleshy Fibers and
membranaceous Fibrils.

I had designed Figures, almost of every kind of Muscles to be engraved
according to the natural appearances: but the Printer making haste, I had not
the opportunity to dissect an humane Body, having only taken some few Muscles
from the Leg of an Ox, we have caused them to be delineated to the life, which
are to be seen at the end, although the famous Steno has already accurately
performed this task. Which Figures, if any one think too much bending to
Mathematical Rules, he may with an easy labor behold the same Conformation of
a Muscle, as he has described it in the flesh it self. For if a simple regular
Muscle be cut out of any Animal, and so placed, that the Tendons here and there
be held on the sides, the fleshy Fibers between them intercepted in oblique and
equal Angles, be pressed upon an Horizontal plain, the flesh will be exactly
like a Rhomboides or an oblique angular Parallelopipedum. Then if the site of
the same Muscle being changed, and its Tendons placed above and below, you
shall cut long-ways the inferior Tendon, and pull the parts one from another,
and divide by tearing the whole Muscle into two parts, you shall presently see
a most elegant spectacle, all the fleshy Fibers disposed in one series, yea and
parallel between themselves, and of the same longitude, to proceed from one
Tendon into another, and to make both Angles always oblique and equal; although
we cannot cleave after this manner the compounded Muscles, whose manifold
bellies have a diverse plain, yet it will easily appear, to one curiously
cutting them, either raw or boiled, two Tendons to be fitted to each
Parallelogram of the flesh.

As to what respects the action of a Muscle, we plainly saw in dissected living
Creatures, (which only show this) that it is contracted, yet not so as the old
Opinion declared, to wit, that the Fibers being contracted from the end toward
the beginning, one extremity of the Muscle was carried toward the other; but
the fleshy Fibers only and their ends are seen to be contracted toward the
middle, the Tendons being still unchanged and altered neither as to their
longitude or thickness: which thing also the most Learned Steno did first of
all observe long since. This is clearly perceived in the Diaphragma and the
Muscles dedicated for Respiration, which are moved with a constant change: for
as often as the Muscle is contracted, you may behold all the fleshy Fibers, in
either extremity, to be pulled together at once, and as if they would enter on
either side one another to be carried nearer, and so at once to become shorter
and thicker, then from that constriction to return loose to their wonted
longitude and slenderness. Whilst you behold this to be so done, you will
easily think, that something, to wit, spirit or subtle matter does flow from
the Tendons into the flesh or fleshy Fibers, which entering them on either side,
blows them up, and at the same time draws them together nearer within
themselves, that presently all the Fibers are made shorter and intumified; then
when that matter recedes from the flesh or fleshy Fibers into the Tendons, the
Fibers being emptied and loosned from their corrugation or wrinkling, are
restored to their former longitude, and so by turns: whether this in truth be
so done or no, shall be discoursed anon.

In the mean time, that we may proceed to other appearances of Musculary
Motion, if that the Membrane of the Muscle being drawn away, you shall separate
some fleshy Fibers from others by cutting the little fibrils, whereby they are
joined, and loosen them quite, you will see them so singular and free, to be
wrinkled or drawn together in every motion like the others compacted together.

Further, I advertise you, that these Fibers so loosned and freed, some cut off
in one end, and separated from the Tendon, did yet contract themselves to the
motion of the Muscle, together with the other Fibers, about the other whole
end, without that cut off in the mean time growing flaggy or loose. After this
I divided with a pair of Scissers, a certain fleshy portion of the thinner
Muscle, in three or four pieces transverse, the bigness of an inch: which being
done, the portions cut off in either end, only entered into, for a short space,
some light and inordinate corrugations, and presently became immovable. The
other extreme portions of the Muscle so cut, sticking to the Tendons, continued
to be much more lively and longer contracted, but irregularly and convulsively,
to wit, with a certain intortion of the Fibers. Truly, in the Fibers so cut
off, some small footsteps of contraction did remain for a little while, partly
by reason of the Instinct of Motion delivered through the membranaceous
fibrils, by which they did yet cohere with the whole flesh, and partly because
the animal Spirits, implanted in the fleshy Fibers, now divided from the rest,
and left without influence, did exert or put forth their utmost contractive
endeavors after the usual manner. For this reason sometimes in the Heart taken
out, and in a piece of it cut off with a Sword, as also in other Muscles, after
the Nerves and sanguiferous Vessels are cut off, a contraction and relaxation
continue for some time. The other Fibers cut off only by reason of the access
and recess of the Spirits from the Tendons, were able still in some measure to
be contracted and relaxed.

When in the Diaphragma I had freed many singular Fibers from the knittings of
others, I tried what Ligatures put in several places of them might effect. Some
of them then being bound about the middle, were contracted even as the whole
fibers, but with some little swelling about the Ligature. When I had bound
others about the ends, where they cohere to the Tendons, now one, then another,
the motion was chiefly and almost only continued about the free end. Further,
in the fibers bound at both ends at once, the contraction wholly ceased.

Contraction and Relaxation are not only seen, and indeed probable, in the
Heart, but in the Diaphragma and other Muscles appointed for Respiration, which
use to be performed in all, acting vicissively, according to the Instincts of
Nature, and for the most part equally (though there are not the like intervals
of motions in all) yea, and the Muscles serving to the voluntary function,
enter oftentimes into spontaneous Contractions, unless they be hindered by their
Antagonists, as it appears, for that the Spasm or Cramp of one Muscle comes
upon the Palsy of another. Contraction and Relaxation are iterated more
swiftly in the Heart, than in the Muscles of Respiration, and so perhaps in
these, than in several others. In those ready to dye, the fleshy Pannicle every
where trembling, clearly shows their changes by innumerable beatings or
leapings.

As to what respects the Humors, whereby all the fibers of a Muscle, viz. the
fleshy, tendinous, and membranaceous, and what lies between them, seem to be
watered, filled, or blown up, we ought to take notice of them, at least two of
them, (to wit, the bloody and nervous liquor) if not more. And in the first
place it is clearly manifest to the sense, that the blood does wash all the
fleshy and membranaceous fibers which are interwoven with these: because, if
the Spirit of Wine, tinctured with Ink, be put into an Artery belonging to any
Muscle, the Vein in the mean time being tied close, the superficies of all the
fleshy fibers and transverse fibrils are dyed with blackness, the Tendons being
then scarcely at all changed in their color; it appears from hence, that the
blood does every where outwardly water all the flesh or fleshy fibers, and only
those. We have not yet found by any certain mark, whether the blood enters more
deeply the fleshy fibers, or instills into them the subtle liquor falling from
them, although this last seems most probable; but indeed we affirm, that all
the fibers, viz. the fleshy, tendinous, and membranaceous, are perpetually and
plentifully actuated by the implanted and inflowing animal Spirits, and
constantly imbued with the nervous liquor, which is the Vehicle of the Spirits.
But how far, or how much the aforesaid humors conduce to the exercise of the
animal Faculties, does not easily appear; but because the animal Spirits cannot
consist without the nervous liquor, and depend very much upon its disposition,
we may conclude, that it does serve something to the actuating the motive
power; for that reason also, that the continual afflux of the blood is
nevertheless necessary, an Experiment cited by the Ingenious Steno, and proved
of late by others, plainly confirms. He has observed, that in a living Dog,
the descending great Artery being tied without any previous cutting off, the
voluntary motion of all the posterior parts have ceased, as often as he tied
the string, and as often returned again as he loosned the knot.

These are the chief Phenomenon to be observed concerning the frame and action
of a Muscle in the dissection of Animals, both of such as were living, as also
of the dead and dying. From which, however placed together and compared among
themselves, how difficult a thing it is to constitute the Aetiology of the
animal motive faculty, appears even from hence, that the most Ingenious Steno,
after he had very accurately delivered the Elements of his Myology, by himself
first invented, nevertheless he wholly avoided that Hypothesis which might be
founded out of them; for that he yet doubted, whether the explication of a
Muscle by a Rectangle were convenient to Nature in all; wherefore when many run
to the manner of musculary Contraction, by the repletion of the fibers, and
others from their inanition, and some to both, he ingenuously professes, that
the true causes of this thing do not clearly appear to him.

And as to this abstruse matter, although I do not believe that I am able to
bring to light, or show any thing more certainly than others; yet as in
mechanical things, when any one would observe the motions of a Clock or Engine,
he takes the Machine it self to pieces to consider the singular artifice, and
does not doubt but he will learn the causes and properties of the Phenomenon,
if not all, at least the chief: In like manner, when it is brought before your
eyes to behold and consider the structure and parts of a Muscle, the
conformations of the moving fibers, their gests and alterations whilst they are
in motion, why is it that we should despair to extricate the means or reasons
of the motive function, either by truths or by what is next to truth? Wherefore
I think it may be lawful for me here to bring before you our conceptions and
notions concerning this thing, indeed not rashly taken, or to comply with our
former Hypothesis, or to oppose any other; which if they shall not satisfy
all, may at least excite others to find out better.

But we shall here repeat what we have mentioned before, viz. that the power or
virtue by which a Muscle is moved, proceeds from the Brain, is conveyed through
the Nerves, and is performed by the fleshy fibers contracted, and by that means
abbreviated. This latter is proved by ocular demonstration, yea it appears by
it, that the motive force does depend also upon those former, and is so
transferred by a long passage, that the influence of the Spirits being
suppressed in their beginning, or intercepted in the way, for that reason the
exercise of the designed motion may be hindered. Further we notify, that the
motive force is far greater in the Muscle, or in the end, than in the beginning
or middle: because the Brain and depending Nerves are made of a tender and
fragil substance, and can pull or draw nothing strongly; but the Muscle putting
forth strongly its contractive force, seems almost to be equal to the strength
of a Post or Crow, or of a Pully or Windlace. Sometimes the local motion is a
compound Action to be performed of many Organs, which consist in diverse places,
and as its virtue is far more strong in the end than in the beginning or way,
we will inquire by what means, as it were mechanical, the motive force may be
so augmented or multiplied in its progress, then what is brought to the motion
from the several Organs.

As to the first, in Artificial things, when for the facilitating of motion,
and the increasing the moving force, many Instruments are invented, all of
them, or at least the chief, may be reduced to these two Heads, viz. first,
either the same force or impression may be continued, without the addition of
any new force, from one term or end to the other, or from the first mover to
the thing moved, which notwithstanding may be much increased in the way, as the
Centers of Gravity are farther off or multiplied; for the farther the motion is
begun from the first Center of Gravity, the stronger it proceeds, as is beheld
in a Crow or Leaver, and in other things reducible to a Leaver. Then if other
things be disposed beyond the first Center of Gravity successively before the
end of the motion, as in a circular Wheel, the same motive force is wont to be
increased very much. But to this there is required, that the instruments of
motion be sufficiently strong and tenacious in their whole tract; for otherwise
the motive force being increased, the same breaking falls down before the
designed action be performed. Secondly, there is another way of multiplying the
motive force to a great degree, and also at a great distance, which is
performed with the addition of new forces or of fresh supplies, to wit, when
the elastick Particles, or those making the force, being disposed and shut up
in private places, as it were little Cells, afterward, as occasion serves, are
sent forth by a light contact or blast of a remote Agent, into the liberty of
motion, which they readily perform. By this means, Air compacted and shut up,
when it is permitted to get out, impetuously forcing a Bullet or other object,
sends or drives it out a great way. It is sufficiently known what mighty and
often horrid forces Gunpowder yields about the end of the Explosion, when in
the beginning or first in kindling, the force being transmitted through the
fiery fume, as yet weak, might be restrained by a light impression of the hand.
There are also other explosive little bodies of a various kind, which being hid
in convenient Boxes or Cells, when they are raised up into motion by an
inkindling, or irritament, or provocative, do often exert an incredible force.
It behooves us then to inquire from which of these ways it comes to pass, that
the motive force does in the Muscles so far exceed the force transmitted from
the Brain through the Nerves, or whether the action of the Musculary Motion be
merely contractive, or rather elastick, or in some measure explosive?

Concerning these things it manifestly appears, that the Muscles do draw, to
wit, being abbreviated, do bring the Tendon with the hanging part toward it
self. Further, for as much as there is need for the offices of traction to be
sometimes more strongly, sometimes more weakly performed by them, so to have
the Centers of Gravity now nigher, now farther off planted from the beginning
of the motion; hence the Muscles which extend or bend the Thigh, especially the
Psoae and Glutaei (great Muscles beginning in the Breast, and reaching into the
Thigh) do hide their fleshy moving fibers deeply within the Trunk of the Body:
but those which turn about the Thigh are constituted either near the hole or
the rising of the Bone of the Thigh, or somewhere thereabout; in like manner it
is observed in all the rest of the members, that the belly of the Muscle gets a
more remote or nearer site from the article or hinge of motion, as it designed
for performing either a stronger or weaker motion: But truly this does not hold
as to the other moving parts, to wit, the Brain and Nerves, which cooperate
with the Muscles in the motive Act; because, although the motive force is
carried by a long passage through all these Organs, yet it seems impossible,
that a contraction so strongly performed by a Muscle, should be begun by the
tender and immovable Brain, and continued through the small and fragil Nerves,
but that it must necessarily be supposed some motive Particles are hid in the
Muscle, which, as occasion is given, are stirred up according to the Instinct,
delivered by the Nerves from the Brain, into motion, as it were with a certain
explosion. But what these Particles may be, by what means they are instigated
into motion, and how they induce the contraction of a Muscle, seems most
difficult to be unfolded.

Truly it may be lawfully concluded from the effect, that elastick Particles,
and fit to move themselves, are contained in the Muscles, and hid every where
within the fibers, because the Anatomy of living Creatures discovers often a
motion in a separated Muscle, yea in its fibers divided one from another. The
Hearts of some Animals beat a long while being pulled out of the Body, the
Muscles cut off, sometimes perform the motions of contraction. In great
laboring Beasts slain or dying, although the Heart and the Brain be taken out,
the fleshy Pannicle performs for some time very many turns of contractions and
relaxations. From these it is manifestly clear, that there are among the
Particles of the Muscles some agil and self forcers, or carried by their own
force heaped together, which, although the animal economy be very much
disturbed or overthrown, do enter into motion of their own accord, yet in a
tranquil estate they perform no actions, unless commanded by the Brain or
Cerebel, and delivered by the Nerves.

Whilst a Muscle is contracted, the cutting up of a live Creature shows only
the fleshy fibers to run into motion by themselves, to wit, being made more
tumid, sharper, and shorter at the same time, to amplify or enlarge the belly
of the Muscle, and in the interim, the Tendons, as if immovable of themselves,
to wit, not altered either as to their thickness or length, only pulled as it
were by the fleshy fibers, to be moved, and to draw with them the moved part;
whence it seems to be manifest, that the animal Spirits or elastick Particles,
whichsoever they are, whilst they perform the Musculary Motion, are only or
chiefly agitated among the fleshy fibers. Further, hence any one may strongly
think, that such Particles are not at all contained, or are wholly idle in the
tendinous fibers; for as we have noted, that the Tendon is not changed in the
act, we may lawfully suspect, that it is only instead of a Crook, by which
means the fleshy fibers being contracted, may draw the member to be moved at a
distance from them toward themselves.

But indeed it sufficiently appears by evident signs, that the animal Spirits
or elastick Particles do lodge within the tendinous fibers, and truly much more
plentifully than in the fleshy: First, the sense shows this, to wit, the touch,
which is much sharper and far more sensible in the Tendon than in the flesh:
yea any irritation or breach of the unity happening in that part, bring not
only a most troublesome sense, to wit, a very cruel pain, but besides, is wont
to excite in the neighboring flesh a Tumor or Swelling, and frequently most
grievous Convulsions; whence we necessarily conclude, that the animal Spirits
do inhabit the tendinous fibers in great abundance: but what they do there, and
by what means they serve to the motive function, we will next inquire.

As often as the motion of a living Muscle was beheld by me, I considered and
weighed in my mind by what means all the fleshy fibers were contracted and
released by turns, I could conceive or collect no other thing than that in
every contraction, the Spirits or certain elastick Particles did rush into the
fleshy fibers from either Tendon, and did intumifie and force them nearer
toward themselves or together; then the same Particles presently coming back
from the flesh into the Tendons, the relaxation of the Muscles happened. In a
bare or naked Muscle, when I had separated every fleshy fiber or a company of
them apart from the rest in the whole passage by help of a Microscope, I most
plainly perceived the Tumor, begun at either end of the flesh, to be carried
toward the middle, as it were by the Spirits, entered here and there at once.
Further (which I mentioned before) each fiber being tied about the middle,
being as it were as yet free and compacted with the others, was contracted or
drawn together; but a Ligature being put to both ends, it remained flaggy
constantly above or beyond the bound place. But that I might no longer doubt
concerning this, I applied two Ligatures, at equal distances from the middle
and the ends, about the same bundle of fleshy fibers, which being done, a
contraction and swelling up arising presently from either fleshy extreme to the
places bound, went no farther; the middle part between in the mean time being
unmoved, remained flaccid; whence it may be well concluded, that in every
musculary contraction the animal Spirits or elastick Particles do leap out from
the tendinous fibers into the fleshy, and vicissively in the relaxation, recede
or run back from these into those.

However this being proved and granted, there yet remain very many difficulties
concerning Musculary Motion; for first, it may be asked how the animal Spirits,
which enter silently, or without any incitation, or Tumor, the tendinous fibers
do so blow up the fleshy fibers, that they are able to force them altogether
into shorter spaces.

For the producing this effect, plenty of Spirits leaping from the tendinous
fibers, do not seem alone sufficient; but besides, we may suppose some other
kind of Particles, implanted in the fleshy fibers, meeting with the others
flowing from the Tendons, do forthwith strive, whence a mutual rarefaction, and
turgescency or swelling up of them, or an inflation or sudden blowing up of the
containing bodies, together with an abbreviation or shortning of them, does
arise; not much unlike, as when the Corpuscles or little bodies of fire entering
into a piece of leather, or any thing, and forcing variously here and there its
implanted Particles (whereby they are presently ensnared) make it so to be
stuffed and wrinkled; in like manner also the animal Spirits, although they
pass through the Tendons, where they are solitary or by themselves, without
moving them (as the Effluvia's of heat in Metals or more dry bodies) yet being
dilated in the flesh, for that there joining with elastick Particles of another
kind, they are expanded or stretched out, they cause the sudden inflations and
corrugations of the containing fibers. But we have elsewhere shown, that such
Particles diverse and wholly heterogene to the nature of the Spirits, may be
copiously and easily carried to the Muscles. For indeed it is plain by ocular
demonstration, that the blood does every where wash and water outwardly all the
fleshy fibers, which besides, it is thought not only to nourish, but also to be
busied about the offices of the animal Function: and what can be less
suspected, than that it does instill into their Pipes a certain subtle liquor,
whose Particles being agitated, and also rarefied by the Spirits flowing
therein, stuff up the fibers, (as we but now hinted) and compel them
intumified, by reason of the assault on either side made, into shorter spaces?

But that the fleshy belly of the Muscle, whilst it is contracted, does swell
up, is not at all to be doubted, because this is evidently beheld by the sight
and touch in the dissection of living Creatures: to wit, all the fleshy fibers
being wrinkled together, are made more tumid and sharper, and so shorten the
Muscle, and make it also thicker and broader: For the more certain belief of
this, when I had bound some of the fleshy fibers, separated from the knitting
of the rest, and had left others near them loose, there appeared a notable
difference between those flaccid or not swelled, and these intumified or
swelled up in every contraction of the Muscle.

But if it be demanded, of what nature, to wit, whether spirituous saline, as
may be believed, or of any other disposition, the animal Spirits, derived from
the Brain into the Muscles, may be; and then whether the other Latex,
immediately carried to them from the blood, is sulphurous or nitrous.
Concerning these, because it appears not to the sense, we shall pronounce
nothing rashly or positively. But even as in other natural things, the active
Particles of a various kind, which being unlike among themselves, are found apt
mutually to grow hot, or to be struck off from one another, or otherwise to be
rarefied or expanded; and as the intestine motions of Bodies, and especially
the elastick, such as are the contractions of the Muscles, can only proceed
from the congressions of such like, certainly it may be lawful to presume, that
these do wholly depend upon such a cause.

Therefore as to the Musculary Motion in general, we shall conclude after this
manner, with a sufficiently probable conjecture, viz. that the animal Spirits
being brought from the Head by the passage of the Nerves to every Muscle, and
(as it is very likely) received from the membranaceous fibrils, are carried by
their passage into the tendinous fibers, and there they are plentifully laid up
as in fit Storehouses; which Spirits, as they are naturally nimble and
elastick, where ever they may, and are permitted, expanding themselves, leap
into the fleshy fibers; then the force being finished, presently sinking down,
they slide back into the Tendons, and so vicissively. But whilst the same
animal Spirits, at the instinct given for the performing of motion, do leap out
of the tendinous fibers into the fleshy, they meet there with active Particles
of another nature, supplied from the blood, and presently they grow mutually
hot; so that by the strife and agitation of both, the fleshy fibers, for that
they are lax and porous, are stuffed up and driven into wrinklings, from all
which being at once wrinkled or shrivelled up, the contraction of the whole
Muscle proceeds; the contraction being finished, the sincere or clear Spirits,
which reside or are assuaged, go back for the most part into the tendinous
fibers, the other Particles being left within the flesh; the loss or wasting of
these the blood supplies, as the Nerves do those. By what instinct the
musculary contraction begins and ends, shall be inquired into presently.

That the animal Spirits, flowing from the tendinous Fibers, may enter equally
all the fleshy, there are two Tendons in every simple Muscle, which are so
constituted, according to opposite Angles, that the Spirits running to them
from a twofold starting place or bound, might presently fill the whole belly of
the Muscle, and that motion being finished, might immediately swiftly retire.
If the contraction ought to be performed indifferently toward the middle of
the flesh, the Tendons for the most part are equal; but if the motion inclines
more toward one region of the flesh, one Tendon (to wit, which may supply a
greater company of Spirits) exceeds the other in magnitude. If the Muscle,
whereby it may be the stronger, is big and endued with an ample bulk or
substance, it is divided as it were into many Lobes or Bellies, and two Tendons
are ordained to each of them; to wit, to the end that the animal Spirits might
be carried through short passages from the Tendons into the fleshy fibers, and
might leap back again: because the compounded Muscle does not always contain
more series of moving fibers, that it might perform many and diverse motions,
but that it might make the same motion often with the greater strength. For, as
we hinted before, as a simple Muscle was as a single leaver or bar, the
compound seems as if it were many leavers or bars serving for the removing the
same body conjunctly.

Further, hence we may observe in some Muscles, which are simple and regular,
that all the fleshy fibers are equal, and so all the tendinous of one extreme
being put together, are equal to all of the other end being put together; yet
they single, where they are shorter in one Tendon, are longer in the other, and
so disposed, that the tendinous fibers on either part, the top and bottom, have
their excesses inverse, and at once equal; to wit, that here a long is laid
upon a short, or the longest upon the shortest, and there quite contrary, the
shortest upon the longest, to the end, that the motion might be so made every
where in this or that side of the Muscle, or at the end more strong, more
plentiful Spirits flow together into those parts from the longer tendinous
fibers, and on the contrary: wherefore in some Muscles less necessary, where
the part of the flesh growing to the bone, either becomes immovable, or only
serves for the filling up of empty spaces, one Tendon is shorter or lesser, and
oftentimes degenerates into a bony or cartilaginous hardness. Further it is
observed, as to other strong and greatly moving Muscles, that their Tendons are
not so disposed, as if they were only stays, props, handles, or hanging crooks
of the fleshy fibers; for so they are only constituted in their extreme ends;
yet the tendinous fibers, that they may be made more apt promptuaries of the
animal Spirits, being stretched out almost into all parts of the Muscle,
receive every where both ends of the fleshy; which indeed yet more manifestly
appears in the compound Muscles, for that one Tendon being compounded, embraces
the extreme flesh, and the other enters into the middle of the flesh, as has
been already shown.

But truly the animal Spirits, whilst they leap out of the tendinous into the
fleshy fibers, are not sufficient of themselves for the wrinkling of them, but
require another elastick Copula from the blood; this may be argued from many
reasons. First, it seems to appear from this, that the same Spirits being
solitary or by themselves, though most thickly planted within the Tendons, stir
up no Tumor or Contraction whilst they are moved in them; wherefore being
dilated within the fleshy fibers in a lesser quantity, and having got a larger
space, they would be stretched out, unless they met or strove with other
Particles, much less would they obtain a contractive force. Besides, when any
wound or grievous trouble happens to a Tendon, the belly of the Muscle or
fleshy part is chiefly troubled with a Tumor or Spasm; for the Spirits being
irritated, not so much within themselves, but where they are violently driven
among heterogene Particles, stir up the greatest tumults and inordinations. But
further, when the fleshy fibers are watered with the sanguineous humor beyond
other parts, and more than may suffice for their nourishment, for what other
use should it be assigned, unless that it may contribute to the motive
function? Especially we take notice in lean Bodies, which are more sparingly
nourished, that the Muscles being fused or drenched with more plentiful blood,
do perform the strongest endeavors of motions: moreover, it does not appear by
what way besides, the expense of the Spirits in a Muscle, consumed with
continual hard motions or labors, should be made up or renewed, unless,
besides the small supplements by the Nerves, others sufficiently plentiful
should be supplied from the bloody mass. Add to these, that members destitute
of the wonted afflux of blood, easily fall into weakness or a Palsy; and that
from the observation of Doctor Steno, in a live Dog the trunk of the descending
Artery being tied, all the lower or posterior members were suddenly deprived of
motion. And though it does not yet appear plainly to me, whether the exclusion
of the blood from the spinal Marrow, or from the Muscles themselves, or from
both together, be the cause; yet however it comes almost to the same thing, for
as much as the animal Spirits being procreated within the Head, and stretched
out by the medullary and nervous Appendices into every member, without the
concourse of the blood, they should not be able to perform the loco-motive
power.

Having thus far explained by what means a Muscle being contracted in the
fleshy part, as to all the fibers at once, performs the motive function; we
shall next inquire, what is the reason of the Instinct whereby every motion,
both regular and irregular, is wont to be obeyed or is performed. Concerning
this in general, it first appears, that the motions of every regular motion,
yea and the impulses of some irregular motions being conceived within the Brain
or Cerebel, are transmitted from thence by the Nerves to every Muscle. This (as
we have elsewhere shown) is most evidently declared by the effects and
consequences: yet here great difficulties remain, to wit, how by the same
passages fresh forces of animal Spirits are conveyed from the Head to every
Muscle, and at the same time the old ones exercising the Empire of the Soul;
besides, with what difference and diverse carriage of the inflowing Spirits, the
Nerves perform either of these tasks, or both these offices.

Of these, as I conjecture, it seems that the animal Spirits, which flowing
continually from the Head to refresh the forces of the implanted Spirits, are
carried to the Muscle by the Nerves, do move to it quietly and easily, and
being there presently received by the membranceous Fibers, they go apart into
the Tendons: which kind of relief, although it should be but little in bulk,
yet because it is carried night and day by a constant course, it easily arises
to a sufficient provision for the continual filling up of the Tendons. But that
we suppose, the Spirits so brought perpetually to the Muscle to be transferred
by the membranaceous Fibers, and not by the fleshy, to the Tendons, the reason
is, because if they should first enter into these, straight running into an
elastick Copula, they would stir up the Muscle into continual motions: more
over, for that in the Heart and Muscles of Respiration the fleshy Fibers are
exercised with a perpetual motion, they wait not for the passage of fresh
Spirits to the Tendons.

But as to what respects the Instincts delivered through the Nerves from the
Head for the performing, or staying, or any ways altering of the musculary
motion, of these we ought first to consider, that the moving animal Spirits,
whose companies or throngs constitute the Hypostasis of the bodily Soul, have
these two properties as it were implanted in their nature; to wit, that whilst
they are lively, numerous, and free, they exert or expand themselves, then that
force being finished, they being a little diminished, retire themselves and
grow quiet; but afterward being refreshed, they leap out again, and so
vicissively. Waking and sleep, and the alterations of work and idleness or
rest, inbred in all living Creatures, sufficiently declare this. Wherefore to
the impulse or instincts of some Muscles, (which are wont to be perpetually
contracted and released) scarce any thing more is required, but that their
Tendons may be supplied by the Nerves with a constant influx of animal Spirits;
but the Spirits themselves, because they are numerous and expeditious of their
own nature, do willingly leap out into the moving Fibers, then the charge being
performed, after a small loss or expense, they immediately withdraw, and being
again presently recruited, they are again expanded, and so vicissively.
Further, their actions (which chiefly are Pulse and Breathing) are variously
changed according to the degrees of heat or of the affections, for as much as
the Spirits being brought by the Nerves, are sent from the Cerebel, sometimes
more remisly, sometimes more plentifully, or more nimbly.

Further, in some other Muscles subject to the Empire of the Appetite, as the
animal Spirits naturally affect turns of expansion and recess, there is only
need of a sign to be given, either for the performing or stopping of the
commanded motion; either of which, the inflowing Spirits by their various
knocking against the Muscle, easily perform, in ordering the implanted Spirits
into various aspects or tendencies. When the Muscle is contracted, the
implanted Spirits, whilst they are loosned from either end toward the middle,
look and tend with a changed front from the middle toward either end. And so,
whilst the inflowing Spirits carry the Symbol of performing Contraction, they
being incited by heaps within the Nerve, more fully blow up its end, inserted
to the Muscle, (where they are more thickly crowded together) and so cause it
there to be contracted and abbreviated; whereby it comes to pass, that the same
inflowing Spirits, about to enter into the Muscle, are at that time stopped by
a mere heap, or rather are called back toward the intumified Nerve; wherefore
by and by the whole series of the implanted Spirits (hence their inclination
being changed) also looks that way, and so the inhabitants of the Tendons,
leaping out from their little Cells into the fleshy Fibers, cause motive
contraction: then the motion is broken off or ceases as soon as the Spirits
being before called back toward the Nerve, do tend again into the Muscle, and
so the front of the Army being again changed, bands of the implanted Spirits
are presently compelled into the Tendons. That the thing is in a manner thus, I
am persuaded, not out of a mere agreeableness or concinnity of our Hypothesis,
but from Anatomical observation. Because once dissecting a Whelp alive, when by
chance I beheld some Muscles of the hinder part of the Head and Neck divided
and separated at the same instant, wherein the fleshy Fibers, as also the
Nerves inserted into them, were seen at once to be contracted, and being
intumified, to be abbreviated.

For the promoting the recess of the Spirits out of the fleshy Fibers into the
Tendons, whilst the Muscle is contracted, the membranaceous Fibrils, which
every where cut cross-wise the flefly, and thickly stick between, seem to help.
The texture of these never to be enough admired, is better perceived in a
Muscle endued with large Fibers, viz. an Oxes being boiled to a tenderness. For
in such a one, if gently opening the fleshy Fibers, you shall draw them one
from another through the whole series, you shall see little Fibrils, like
hairs, most thickly extended upon every one of those Tubes, which little
Fibrils, not only close and knit together the fleshy Fibers, but also lying
upon every one of their series, and cutting them in oblique Angles, they also
are all carried parallel, from Tendon to Tendon, in an opposite site to the
fleshy: therefore whilst the Muscle being contracted, the fleshy Fibers do
swell up, the Fibrils embracing them, that they may give place, are somewhat
distended; then as soon as the swelling up remits, these returning to their
wonted straitness, press together every where the flesh, and the Spirits being
expulsed on either side, they reduce them to their pristine length. It makes
for this, that whilst the Muscle is contracted, the Spirits inflowing through
the Nerves, depart from their membranaceous Fibrils; wherefore these being
empty and lax, are able more easily to be distended; but whilst the Muscle is
relaxed, the Spirits again entering the Fibrils, fill them, and that they may
the better bind the fleshy Fibers, they make them shorter.

The Instincts of Motions, to be obeyed by the Muscles, so delivered by the
Nerves, are, being sent either from the Brain, performed at the command, and
with the knowledge of the Appetite; or from the Cerebel, according to the Laws
of Nature, for the most part unknown to us. But besides, sometimes the Muscles
are carried beyond, or contrary to the pleasure of the Appetite or Nature, into
irregular motions, viz. violent and convulsive, and that happens after various
manners and for diverse causes. Concerning these, some time since discoursing
more largely, we have shown, that from thence do arise many kinds and
differences of convulsive motions; as the Spasmodick matter being somewhere
fixed, does subsist either about the beginnings, middle, or ends of the Nerves;
or because the same thing being wandering and loose, runs about here and there
through the whole passages of the Nerves, and so variously transfers from place
to place convulsive distempers. But besides these diverse kinds of Convulsions,
which are excited by reason of some evil or vice sticking somewhere to the
Nerves themselves, this our Myology or Doctrine of the Muscles, has discovered
some Convulsions of another kind arising from the Muscles being chiefly
affected.

For indeed we must advertise you, that the animal Spirits, disposed among the
Muscles themselves, by reason of a taint or evil derived from the Brain, or
from the Blood, or perhaps oftentimes from both together, are infected with
certain heterogene Particles, by reason of which they cannot rest or lie quiet
in their Cells; but being always unquiet and restless, leap out of their own
accord from the tendinous Fibers into the fleshy, and so oftentimes produce
frequent and cruel Convulsions. But this we have observed to be done after a
twofold manner, viz. first, for that the Spirits being burdened with an
elastick Copula, remain not long within the Tendons, but leaping out. from
thence into the fleshy Fibers, induce frequent Convulsions of a Muscle, but
short, and as it were by leaps; or secondly, because the animal Spirits,
although they sometimes lie quietly within the Tendons, yet being inordinately
snatched into the flesh, and there cruelly exploded, they cannot be presently
repressed, brought into order, or reduced into the Tendons, but whether we will
or not, they persist a long while expanded, and so bring forth a long and very
painful contraction of the Muscle. Which kind of Spasm, sufficiently known, we
vulgarly term the Cramp.

The former distemper (called the Convulsive Leaping) is familiar both to
malignant Fevers, and to the Scurvy. As to those, we have ordinarily known,
when either no Crisis, or an evil one is obtained, that heterogene Particles
from the blood and nervous juice very much vitiated, are not only laid up in
the Bowels, (whose dispositions and functions they pervert) but almost every
where in the Muscles; and there growing to the Spirits, do affect them with a
certain madness, so as they cannot continue peaceably together, or rest within
the Tendons, but being divided and distracted one from another, leap out from
thence by bands into the flesh, and there stir up the lesser and most frequent
Spasms or Convulsions. In like manner, by reason of the Spirits inhabiting the
Muscles, being burdened with an elastick Copula there growing to them, some
laboring with an inveterate Scurvy, cannot contain their limbs in the same
site or position, but are necessitated sometimes to extend the hands or feet,
sometimes to fling them about here and there, to transfer them variously, and
sometimes to subdue their madness by running, leaping, or other hard labors.

Treating some time since of Convulsive Motions, we did almost wholly omit the
Aetiology of the continuing Spasm or Tetanism, as a thing which depended upon
the Doctrine of the Muscles, to be treated of afterward: Then we only hinted,
that the contraction of that kind did arise in one Muscle, because its other
Antagonist was resolved or loosned, which indeed oftentimes happens in the face
and some members; in which, whilst the parts upon one side are troubled with
the Palsy, those opposite on the other, as it were loosned in the Reins, are
too much contracted. Notwithstanding this kind of Spasm for the most part is
without pain; besides, this is not easily or presently passed over or cured no
more than the Palsy, which is the cause of it.

Therefore as to what belongs to the formal reason of the Spasm, called in our
Idiom the Cramp; every one laboring with this distemper, perceives in himself
one or more Muscles to be most strongly and involuntarily drawn together, and
they being for some time so highly distended, remain as it were stiff; and in
the mean time, for that the fleshy Fibers being cruelly contracted, do
violently haul or pull either Tendon, to wit, that which is fixed to the
immovable part, perhaps no less than the other part to be moved, they cause a
most troublesome pain. But sometimes this Spasm being excited, by reason of the
animal Spirits carrying themselves out impetuously into the fleshy Fibers, does
not cease until the same Spirits being returned into the Tendons, suffer the
flesh to be relaxed; therefore its nearest causes will be both the greater
impetuosity of the animal Spirits among the fleshy Fibers, with which they leap
thither unbid; and also their long continuance or stay, for that they return
back more slowly and difficultly into the Tendons. For the secondary causes may
be reckoned, both the evil disposition of the animal Spirits, and also the evil
conformation of the Tendons, viz. sometimes this, sometimes that, and not
seldom both together.

As to the former; this distemper, as other Convulsions, seems to arise, for as
much as the animal Spirits, being burdened with heterogeneous Particles or an
elastick Copula, at length being irritated, they are incited to the striking of
it off: which notwithstanding, being thick and viscous, and for that cause more
tenacious, is not soon nor easily shaken off, but that the Spirits being still
provoked by the same, and shut up within the fleshy Fibers, are longer detained
in the expansion: which thing perhaps happens not so much unlike, as when water
and air being joined together, make a bubble; which, if it be made of water,
wherein a little Soap is put, is more tenacious, much more large, and continues
longer than that made only of mere water. So we observe, that they who abound
in thick and tartareous humors, are most obnoxious to these kind of Cramps,
and besides, that they who presently sleep upon drinking or eating gross meats,
after full eating, and especially after a large and plentiful supper, do suffer
most cruel assaults of this disease; but sometimes the Tendons themselves are
found to be in the fault, for that they being too hard bound together or
obstructed, they do not easily admit the Spirits returning from the fleshy
Fibers. The obstruction of the Tendons is the cause, that Gouty and Scorbutic
people, whose Tendons salt and tartareous humors easily run into and obstruct,
are wont to be cruelly tormented with these kind of painful Cramps: But that
the constriction of the Tendons does sometimes bring forth this disease,
appears by this, for that some Women with Child, (as I have been often told)
about the latter end of their Time, by reason of the Muscles of the Abdomen
being too much extended, are wont to be troubled with frequent Cramps, only in
the bottom of their Bellies. For the illustrating of this Pathology we will add
this following Case.

A Noble Woman, young and fair, some time since obnoxious to Hysteric
distempers, and now above two years ago to Convulsive, and in a manner
Epileptical; of late, by reason of the frequent and most cruel assaults of the
disease, she became also Cachectical and Paralytical, that at length her
Abdomen was distempered with an Ascites, and her Legs with a waterish Tumor,
and lastly, all her lower parts, below her Hips, were deprived of motion;
hence, as often as the Convulsive fits infested her, she was wont, not now to
move her body or members here and there, but sometimes these, sometimes those
parts being snatched with the Tetanism, were variously bent and twisted about,
that in the mean time, she her self sitting in her Bed or Chair, remained stiff
and almost immovable. It is not long since, that seeing the whole manner of
one of these Fits, I observed, not without great admiration, diverse sorts of
turns and changes of alterations of the Spasms. At the first assault, her eyes
being turned about swiftly hither and thither, she was presently taken with
insensibility, then by and by her head being turned and contracted of one side,
presently her arms and legs at once became stiff, and all her Joints, sometimes
of one side, sometimes of both, were bowed or stretched out: perhaps after four
or five minutes these Spasms both in her Head and Limbs remitting, of a sudden
others, for the most part opposite, followed; which being often finished in the
like space, others far different did arise, and so for two or three hours,
longer Spasms almost of every kind and fashion, being excited through her whole
Body, followed upon one another; so that her head being convulsed or pulled by
turns from the right to the left, and contracted before and behind, yea and all
her Limbs being bent inwardly here and there, or distended outwardly in the
Course of one Fit, she exhibited all sorts of Convulsive gestures. When at any
time the Spasms of one sort continued longer in the Head or Limbs than usual,
it was the custom of the Servants about her to blow up strongly into her
Nostrils the Fume of Tabaco; which being done, as the Spirits recovered within,
the present Spasms immediately remitted, but upon them others of a new kind
succeeded. Of late the Legs of this Lady were so debilitated by being loosned,
that she could neither go nor stand, yea her Tendons under either Ham, being
made tumid and shorter, were so contracted, that she could not stretch out her
Legs straight.

Concerning the case of this sick Noble Lady, it may be demanded, wherefore
upon the first coming of the Fit, no throwing about of the Body or Limbs, as is
wont in most Convulsive or Epileptical people, but only continued Spasms or
Convulsions variously translated from one part to another, and so others, did
arise? For the solution of this, we say, that the Spasmodick matter is not only
heaped up in the Brain and Nerves, but also in the Muscles themselves, and
grows to the Spirits inhabiting the Tendons: And as that matter is tenacious,
and the Spirits weak, and unable for the striking off quickly or easily such a
Copula; therefore as often as these being irritated, do leap out of the Tendons
into the flesh, the Muscles being first possessed, they cause strong and long
Contractions; in the mean time, other Muscles, especially their Antagonists or
opposites, being hindered and bound up from motion, until the Convulsions of the
former are remitted; hence the Members, however convulsed, are not moved out of
their place, because the moving or carrying of the Body, or any Members, is not
performed but by the help or duty of many Muscles, whilst some of them either
rightly cooperate with others, or at least obey them, to wit, so that some
respective Muscles, observing due cooperation, are contracted at once, then
those being loosned, the contraction of others immediately succeeds. But if
they which are unequal and unlike, are at once contracted and strongly
convulsed, and so continue long, so that other Muscles in the mean time cannot
be contracted, there will be a necessity for the members bent or extended here
and there, to remain as they are wholly stiff. But that the present Convulsions
were always remitted by the blowing the smoke of Tabaco up her Nose, the reason
is, because the region or some part of the bodily Soul being vehemently
affected, if by chance a new passion equally violent be brought upon another
part, the first is presently abolished or ceases: For in truth, it appears by
constant observation, wherever the greater or fresher trouble is, that
thither greater plenty of Spirits presently flock and make a tumult: wherefore
any new irritation being excited in the Brain or its Meninges, whatsoever
others were begun outwardly among the Muscles, immediately vanish or are
obscured; then as soon as this fresh trouble is passed over, Convulsions
outwardly arise forthwith again, but in other parts where more heaps of
Spasmodick matter lie not yet consumed. But that long continued Spasms do
arise, either by reason of the Spirits being burdened with a more tenacious
Copula, or by reason of the Tendons being obstructed with a viscous or
tartareous matter from either or both, it appears from hence, because this
disease increasing (as in the case of this Noble Lady) the Tendons are at
length so shortened by the more plentiful heaping up of the morbifick matter,
that they become stiff and shorter, and for that reason they hardly or not at
all grant any place to the Spirits for the constant performing of the motive
function.

Thus much for the Musculary Motion, both natural and convulsive, and the
reasons of both, which we have proved with what diligence we were able, and by
Anatomical Experiments: But if any one shall object, that they are not very
firm, because we have noted in the cutting up of live Creatures, that the Heart
and Muscles of Respiration and the fleshy Pannicle, after that the Nerves and
Arteries are cut away, do continue for some time their turns of Contraction and
Relaxation, whence it is argued, against our Hypothesis, that their motions do
not depend upon the constant influx of the blood and animal Spirits; it will be
plain to return this Answer, That in those about to dye, it sometimes happens
so, because the Soul being then distracted and drawing near to dissolution, all
the implanted Spirits at once being cut off from the commerce of those
influencing or flowing in, do of their own accord exert themselves, and perform
(as long as they are able) their wonted motions; which being continued for a
little space only, need not the subsidy or assistance of fresh forces, because
the veterane, till they are quite worn out, perform their wonted tasks; yea
also the old sanguineous Copula, till it be wholly consumed, receives and lets
go their embraces with a constant change: But this more rarely succeeds in
other Muscles subject to the Empire of the Appetite, and wont only to be
exercised as occasion served.

Moreover, as we have affirmed, that the Instinct for the performing of Motions
is brought altogether through the Nerves from the Head to the Muscle, and as
every Trunk of the same Nerve, being oftentimes broken into many shoots,
variously distributing them, sends it to many destinated Muscles, it may very
well be doubted, how the animal Spirits, conveying the Symbol of the motion to
be performed with a certain choice, do actuate only these or those branches
apart from other branches of the same, and do not indifferently enter all the
branches or shoots of the same; to wit, as the blood passes through the Trunk
of the Artery, and all its ramifications equally. The most Learned Regius, that
he might solve this knot, supposes in the Nerves some little doors, like to
those which are found in musical Organs, the apertures whereof admit the
Spirits to these or those parts especially, the rest being shut up. But he
ought to have shown, if not the little doors themselves, yet at least by what
instinct and by whose direction sometimes these, sometimes those are locked up,
and others opened. But in truth, this may rather be said, that all the shoots
of the Nerves and lesser branches remain distinct and singular among themselves
from the parts to which they are inserted, even to their beginnings; so that a
peculiar tract of the Spirits or way of passage lies open, from the Brain and
its medullary Appendix, to every Muscle and nervous part; for in truth,
although the Nerves, according to their beginnings, may seem to arise from the
greater Trunks; yet it will easily appear, if you shall open the trunk and
those branches, that in them many little Nerves, only like hairs, for the sake
of a better conduct, are collected together in the same bundle; yea, the
coverings being separated, you may follow oftentimes the little Nervulets, and
those single to the respective parts and members, to which they are destinated.

But in the mean time, although there be singular passages or channels of the
animal Spirits of most Nerves, distinct among themselves; yet some do variously
communicate with others through the branches and shoots sent on either side;
which indeed ought to be so made, that when many Nerves together, are required
to some motion of a Muscle equally, all these, by reason of the commerce
mutually had between themselves, might conspire in the same action; hence, in
some motions of the members, as in the striking of a Harp or Lute and other
complicated actions, many Muscles cooperate with admirable celerity; so that,
although many be employed at once, they perform their task severally without
any confusion. Besides, there is need for the Nerves to communicate mutually
among themselves, because of the Sympathetical motions of the members and of
some of the parts, for neither for any other cause is the Nerve of the
Diaphragma inserted into the brachial branches, or those belonging to the Arms,
than that the exercise of living Creatures, especially in running or flying,
might be proportionate to the tenor of Respiration. Hence it also proceeds,
that in any passion, the Praecordia being bound up or dilated, the countenance
and aspect of the face, yea and the gestures of the hands and members are
pathetically figured. We have proposed sufficient Instances of this sort in our
particular History of the Nerves, so that we need not here add any thing more.

What remains for the illustrating our Myology or Tract of the Muscles, we have
taken care to have added, viz. four Figures, which may represent to the life
both the exterior and interior true and natural faces or appearances both of
a simple and compounded Muscle.

muscle less compounded Fig. III.


compounded muscle Fig. IV.


muscle Fig. I.


muscle with the tendon cut off Fig. II.


The Explication of the Figures.
The First Figure
Shows a simple regular Muscle, described according to its natural appearance,
in the Belly of which the fleshy Fibers being opened, are diduced one from
another, that the membranaceous Fibrils may be the better beheld. A. The right
Tendon. B. The left opposite Tendon. C. The fleshy Belly; all the fleshy Fibers
of which lie one by another equal and parallel, but in even and oblique Angles
between either Tendon. D. The aperture of the fleshy Fibers, which being drawn
aside, the membranaceous Fibrils, thickly crossing them, appear.


The Second Figure
Shows a simple Muscle cleft in the middle, after the Tendon being cut off, and
portions of it pulled away, that the interior series of the fleshy Fibers, or
their commixtures or mingling with the Tendons, may appear. AA. The right
Tendon being placed above, both portions of which divided, do in some measure
appear. BB. The left opposite Tendon placed below, either portions of which
divided, lie hid for the most part under the Flesh, those toward the edges
being only conspicuous. CD. Portions of the fleshy Belly divided and separated,
which before (this being laid upon that) did cohere, in either of which all the
fleshy Fibers proceed equally, and in like manner obliquely from one Tendon to
another. E. Some membranaceous Fibrils represented, thickly crossing the fleshy
Fibers.


The Third Figure
Exhibits a certain Muscle less compounded, to whose two fleshy Bellies two
compounded Tendons also (equal to four simple ones) are destinated. A. The
exterior compounded Tendon, embracing either side of the fleshy Fibers, which
being almost only conspicuous on the edges, lies hid for the most part under
the Flesh. B. The interior compounded Tendon, entering into the middle of the
Flesh, which receives on both sides the fleshy Fibers, sent from either side of
the exterior Tendon. C. The first Belly of the fleshy Fibers, all whose equal
and parallel Fibers lie between the opposite sides of the Tendons in oblique
Angles and equal. D. The second Belly of the fleshy Fibers, all whose Fibers
being in like manner formed, are beheld in the same as in the other Belly. EE.
Both extremities of the exterior compounded Tendon. F. The extremity or end of
the interior compounded Tendon, the like to the other being opposite, at an
equal distance from the end of the Muscle.


The Fourth Figure
Shows a regular compounded Muscle, divided and opened in the middle, so that
the interior face of either Belly may appear. A. The exterior compounded
Tendon cleft into four parts. BB. Portions of one side of the divided Tendon
separated from the other. C. Portions near sited, of the other side of the
divided Tendon, which for the greatest part lie hid under the flesh. DD. The
flesh of one Belly also divided, and separated one far from another. EE. The
flesh of the other Belly also divided, and placed near one another. F. The
interior compounded Tendon entering the middle of the Flesh. GG. Portions of
the same Tendon divided, and with portions of the Bellies, which they receive,
separated apart.


THE ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN.
The Authors Epistle Dedicatory to his Grace Gilbert Archbishop of Canterbury,
etc.
Most Honorable Prelate,
ONCE more your Sidley Professor and your Servant (the more happy Title) flings
himself at Your feet, with this only Ambition, that he might render something
of Thanks for Your Kindness and benefits, and that our Labors might choose such
a Patron, that might give Credit to the Author. But I fear, lest by my repeated
Duty I may seem troublesome, and no less in acknowledging Your Benefits, than
others in suing for them: But so great is my Gratitude, and so exceeding is
Your good Nature, that they cannot be crowded into a little compass, much less
wearied out or drawn dry.

But there is another Reason, which if it does not command what I do, may at
least excuse and defend it. For when I had resolved to unlock the secret places
of Man's Mind, and to look into the living and breathing Chapel of the Deity (as
far as our weakness was able) I thought it not lawful to make use of the
Favors and Patronage of a less Person, neither perhaps would it have become
me. For You indeed are He, who most happily presides (both by Merit and
Authority) over all our Temples and Sacred Things. Therefore after I had slain
so many Victims, whole Hecatombs almost of all Animals, in the Anatomical
Court, I could not have thought them rightly offered, unless they had been
brought to the most holy Altar of Your Grace.

I am not ignorant, how great the labor is that I undertake: For it has been
a long while accounted as a certain Mystery and School-house of Atheism to
search into Nature, as if whatever Reasons we grant to Philosophy, should
derogate from Religion, and all that should be attributed to second Causes, did
take away from the first.

But truly, he does too much abuse the Name of Philosophy, who considers the
wheels, curious frame, setting together, small pins, and all the make and
provision of a Clock, by which invented Machine the course of the Time, the
orders of the Months, the changes of the Planets, the flowing and ebbing of the
Sea, and other things of that kind, may be exactly known and measured, if that
at length, when by this his search and consideration, he has profited himself
so much, he should not acknowledge the Artist, to whose Labor and Wit he owes
all those things.

I am sure I am of another mind and opinion, who look into the Pandects of
Nature, as into another Table of the Divine Word, and the greater Bible: For
indeed, in either Volume there is no high point, which requires not the care,
or refuses the industry of an Interpreter; there is no Page certainly which
shows not the Author, and his Power, Goodness, Trust, and Wisdom.

In the mean time, there is no right Weigher of things that can lay to our
charge as a fault, that we have studied these Rolls of Nature, because some
Atheists may be made thereby; which may be objected to the studies of Divines
in Sacred Letters, that from their provision Heretics have taken their
Arguments and Opinions, and turned them against them and Godliness.

That I may deal freely, whoever professes Philosophy, and does not think
rightly of God, I do judge him not only to have shaken hands with Religion, but
also with Reason, and that he has at once put off Philosophy as well as
Christianity. Therefore I desire, that all mine may be tried and approved, no
less by the demonstration of Piety and Canons of the Church, than by the Rule
of Experience and Knowledge, to which I keep: Neither do I entreat and respect
only the Mecaenas of humane Arts, but also the Primate and chief of Divine,
whilst I openly profess my self, with all due observance,

YOUR GRACES Most humble and obliged Servant, THO. WILLIS.

The Preface to the Reader.
THE Romans sometimes promised to themselves an Empire, an Eternity by the
happy Augury of an humane Head being turned out of the Glebe; neither could
they persuade themselves, that the Capitol should be the Head of the World,
unless it had been built upon the Skull of a Man. I do not think of Empires in
Arts, nor do I promise to my self Triumphs by overcoming the World of Letters:
But in the mean time, I had wholly frustrated those Illustrious Documents I had
long since learned, unless with those Auspices I had labored in Philosophy,
especially the Natural.

For the Province, which I hold in this Academy, requiring that I should
Comment on the Offices of the Senses, both external and also internal, and of
the Faculties and Affections of the Soul, as also of the Organs and various
provisions of all these; I had thought of some rational Arguments for that
purpose, and from the appearances raised some not unlikely Hypotheses, which
(as uses to be in these kind of businesses) at length accrued into a certain
System of Art and frame of Doctrine. But when at last the force of Invention
being spent, I had handled each again, and brought them to a severer test, I
seemed to my self, like a Painter, that had delineated the Head of a Man, not
after the form of a Master, but at the will of a bold Fancy and Pencil, and had
followed not that which was most true, but what was most convenient, and what
was rather desired than what was known. Thinking on these things seriously with
my self, I awaked at length sad, as one out of a pleasant dream; to wit, I was
ashamed that I had been so easy hitherto, and that I had drawn out for my self
and Auditors a certain Poetical Philosophy and Physic neatly wrought with
Novity and Conjectures, and had made a Fucus as it were with deceits and
incantations for either of us.

Wherefore all delay being laid aside, I determined with my self seriously to
enter presently upon a new course, and to rely on this one thing, not to pin my
faith on the received Opinions of others, nor on the suspicions and guesses of
my own mind, but for the future to believe Nature and ocular demonstrations:
Therefore thenceforward I betook my self wholly to the study of Anatomy: and as
I did chiefly inquire into the offices and uses of the Brain and its nervous
Appendix, I addicted my self to the opening of Heads especially, and of every
kind, and to inspect as much as I was able frequently and seriously the
Contents; that after the figures, sites, processes of the whole and singular
parts should be considered with their other bodies, respects, and habits, some
truth might at length be drawn forth concerning the exercise, defects, and
irregularities of the Animal Government; and so a firm and stable Basis might
be laid, on which not only a more certain Physiologie than I had gained in the
Schools, but what I had long thought upon, the Pathologie of the Brain and
nervous stock, might be built.

But for the more accurate performing this work, as I had not leisure, and
perhaps not wit enough of my self, I was not ashamed to require the help of
others. And here I made use of the Labors of the most Learned Physician and
highly skilful Anatomist, Doctor Richard Lower, for my help and Companion; the
edge of whose Knife and Wit I willingly acknowledge to have been an help to me
for the better searching out both the frame and offices of before hidden
Bodies. Wherefore having got this help and Companion, no day almost past over
without some Anatomical administration; so that in a short space there was
nothing of the Brain, and its Appendix within the Skull, that seemed not
plainly detected, and intimately beheld by us. After this, when we entered upon
a far more difficult task, viz. the Anatomy of the Nerves, then very much
appeared the plainly to be admired skill of this Man, as also his indefatigable
Industry, and unwearied Labor: For having prosecuted, with a most exact
search, all the divarications, wandering on every side of the Nerve, how minute
or small soever, and immersed, and variously infolded within other Bodies, and
so turning over the Labyrinths of the Branches, and shoots of every pair, far
and near diffused, he drew out with his own hand the Schemes, Images, or
Draughts of them, and also of many passages of the Blood, as they appear in
this Tract; which indeed, that they might be faithfully and most exactly shown,
without any falsity or error, he caused, that no Table might contain scarce
any line or the most light passage, whose conformation and exact habitude he
had not found proved by the marks or inspection of many Animals for that
purpose killed.

Besides the helps brought me by his most skilful dissecting hand, it becomes
me not to hide, how much besides I did receive from these most famous Men, Dr.
Thomas Millington Doctor in Physic, and Dr. Chr. Wren Doctor of Laws, and
Savill-Professor of Astronomy; both which were wont frequently to be present at
our Dissections, and to confer and reason about the uses of the Parts. Besides,
the former most Learned Man, to whom I from day to day proposed privately my
Conjectures and Observations, often confirmed me by his Suffrage, being
uncertain in my mind, and not trusting to my own opinion. But the other most
renowned Man, Dr. Wren, was pleased out of his singular humanity, wherewith he
abounds, to delineate with his own most skilful hands many Figures of the Brain
and Skull, whereby the work might be more exact.

But although instructed by these helps, and as it were hemmed in by the
plentiful assistances of these Illustrious Men, I come forth on the Stage, I
presume I shall not be however safe from calumny, and free from blame and most
just reprehension: because here is inquired into the recesses and most inward
dens of the Brain, and its depending parts as it were shut and sealed up;
concerning the certain uses of which, scarce any thing may be brought forth,
but that, as it may be published and shown, for the Judgments of the more
Learned, so it may be carpt at and torn by the opprobries of detractors. In
other parts, where matters appear to the Senses, we do not so easily run upon
errors. For in most of the Viscera and Vessels, the Contents and contained
humors, as also their passages within the larger Cavities of the containing
parts, are discerned by the sight: But in the Brain and Nerves, neither the
rushings on or impressions, viz. the Animal Spirits themselves, nor their
tracts or footsteps, can any ways be seen. Wherefore to explicate the uses of
the Brain, seems as difficult a task as to paint the Soul, of which it is
commonly said, That it understands all things but it self: for in truth, the
unwearied labor of the Brain beholds or searches the hidden places of other
Bodies, in the mean time the economy or regiment of its own Family and Kingdom
being wholly hid and unknown.

But what we profess to be performed by us in the following Tract, and hope for
the future from the help or labor of others, is chiefly this; to wit, that we
have not rashly described the parts themselves, of which the Anatomy is
instituted, but that we have with diligent care and great trust collected the
various appearances and Arguments of Observations by a manifold Dissection.
Which things, if you shall delineate out of those Sentences and granted
Decrees, as it were to a Mathematical Rule, and from thence would collect a
Theory, as yet lame, and that may not appear absolute in all its numbers, no
doubt but that a longer time, and the getting of more Observations may give it
a more perfect form, that Antiquity may not have said altogether in vain, That
Minerva was born from the Brain, Vulcan with his Instruments playing the
Midwife: For either by this way, viz. by Wounds and Death, by Anatomy, and a
Caesarean Birth, Truth will be brought to Light, or for ever lie hid.

THE ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN.
CHAP. I.
The Method or Anatomical Administration of Dissecting the Brain is proposed.

AMong the various parts of an animated Body, which are subject to Anatomical
disquisition, none is presumed to be easier or better known than the Brain; yet
in the mean time, there is none less or more imperfectly understood. All of it
that appears, and is commonly described in the forepart or forehead, is beheld
almost at a sight or two after some rude cutting up; but if you seek what lies
hid in the recesses for that end, new bosoms and productions of Bodies, before
hid, are every where laid open: yea the parts of the Brain it self are so
complicated and involved, and their respects and habitudes to one another so
hard to be extricated, that it may seem a more hard task to institute its
perfect Anatomy, than to delineate on a plain, the flexions and Meanders of
some Labyrinth: Because, as we are not able to estimate the measure or to paint
forth the pattern or draught of the frame of this, so neither of that, unless
the bulk or substance of the subject be first searched to the bottom, and its
frame broken into pieces. Hence it came to pass, that the old Anatomists in
dissecting the Brain, not sufficiently attending what was placed first, what
second, and what after that in the order of Nature, cut its Globe as it were
into slices or parts, and the Phenomenon arising by chance from such a
dissection, they easily esteemed for true parts of the Brain; when yet in the
mean time, by others from a dissection otherwise made, the parts and processes
of it appear far different from the former. The reason of which is, because the
substance or frame of the Brain and its Appendix lies so within the Skull, that
there are many swellings or tuberous risings, with several tails or little feet
compacted together: all which, although distinct one from another, and are
endued with figures diversely expanded; yet they, that they may be contained in
a lesser room, are thrust as it were into the same Globe, and so complicated
among themselves, that it is a hard thing to find out where the beginning and
end of the Brain, as also where the limits and partitions of the near adjoining
parts do remain; further, that the several parts of the Encephalon so
complicated, may retain their site, nor presently being loosned one from
another, may spring forth, they are knit together into due foldings, with
Fibers and Membranes stretched out from part to part. And as often as the
substance or bulk of the Brain so conglobated or rolled together is cut, there
is as often a necessity that the slips being cut, the portions of diverse parts
cleaving together, are carried away with them. Wherefore that a true and
genuine description of the Brain might be showed before its substance and
continuity is dissolved, before all things its whole frame or substance ought
to be explicated, and the knitting of the Membranes being wholly loosned, the
several parts ought to be turned over and stretched forth into their proper
dimensions. By what means these things may be done, and by what Method the
dissection or Anatomical administration of the Brain may be best performed,
ought here in the first place to be shown; then these things being first done,
we will more largely deliver the Description of the Brain, together with the
use and action of its several parts.

That the perfect knowledge of the Brain and its parts may be gained, it is
necessary not only to dissect and look into men's Heads, but all other kind of
living Creatures heads: for besides, that the humane Heads or Bodies are not so
readily to be had, that one may from day to day behold the Brain and its frame,
and carefully consider the situation of the parts, and search one after another
their respects, habitudes, and dependencies; besides also, the immense bulk of
an humane Head is in it self an hindrance, whereby its most intricate frame and
various recesses and Appendices are the less accurately discerned and
investigated: all which being reduced into an Epitomy, are plainly represented
more commodiously in the dissection of Beasts. Wherefore when the form and
composition of the Brain in a Dog, Calf, Sheep, Hog, and many other four-footed
beasts, were little different (the magnitude only excepted) from the figure of
the same, and the disposition of the parts, in a man, I was the more satisfied
to compose a certain Anatomy of the Brain by the frequent dissection of all
sorts of living Creatures. And in this employment, for that I shall show the
communities and differences which the subjected parts obtain in various
Animals, compared among themselves, and with Man; certainly from such a
compared Anatomy, not only the faculties and uses of every Organ, but the
impressions, influences, and secret ways of working of the sensitive Soul it
self will be discovered. Concerning the Heads of living Creatures, in the
dissection of which it happened for us chiefly to be exercised, it was
observed, as to the chief parts of the Head, that there was a notable Analogy
between Man and four-footed Beasts, also between Birds and Fishes: For when the
first Inhabitants of the new-made World were produced, as one day brought forth
Fowl and Fishes at once, another in like manner Man and four-footed Beasts; so
there is in either twin species a like form of the Brain; but between that
Child of the former, and this of the following day, there is found a great
difference as to those parts. For as much therefore as Men and four-footed
Beasts have got more perfect Brains, and more alike among themselves, we have
ordered our Observations from their Inspection: Then afterward we shall
deliver the Anatomy of the Brain in Fowl and Fishes. And here first concerning
the Heads of Men and four-footed Beasts, (as we hinted but now) we will propose
a Method of Dissection it self, or of Anatomical Administration, and will at
once recite all the parts one after another, and as it were in a compendious
Catalogue; then we will by and by more largely draw out the Particles of the
Brain and of its Appendix, so shadowed, in a short Table, and will design their
uses and actions for the exercise of every faculty.

When therefore we had in our hands the Head of a Man, or Dog, Calf, or Sheep,
its more outward coverings were taken off; concerning which, as they are well
enough known, we are not at all solicitous: then the covering of the Skull
being divided by a Saw or Instrument, and taken away, on every side the bones
are broken off with a pair of Scissers or a Penknise to the Basis of the Skull,
that so the Contents might, as much as may be, be all made plain or open to the
Spectators. What therefore comes first in view is the hard Meninx including all
the rest with a common covering. This Membrane outwardly and above is knit to
the Skull in diverse places, especially about the Sutures; but indeed about the
foot or Basis it most strictly cleaves to the bones, so that it cannot easily
be pulled away. Inwardly (or in its hollow superficies) it is lax and loose
enough, unless that nigh all its bosoms by the insertions of the Veins, and in
the Basis of the Skull by the Arteries and the Nerves it is tied to the Pia
Matter.

This same Membrane between the Interstitia or division of the Brain, and
besides of the Cerebel it self insinuating it self deeply on one side, and
rising up again on the other, leaves some duplicatures or infoldings, in which,
being shut up above by the increase of the same Membrane, Cavities, which they
commonly call Bosoms, are formed: to wit, by this means, almost the three first
bosoms are constituted; but the fourth is a smooth and longish, and also hollow
process of the same Membrane, which is sent through the Interstitia of the
Brain, nigh the end of the callous body, even to the pineal Glandula. The
Cavities of the greater Bosoms are severed in many places, as it were into
little Cells; as it seems for that end, that the blood passing so through the
various turnings in those ends, may be hindered from a more rapid motion.

Besides, this Meninx or Film of the Brain admits two Arteries from either
side, one conjugation of which arises not far from the Carotick Arteries
through the holes of the Cuniform bone, but the other from the bone of the
Forehead: all which indeed being diffused through the exterior superficies of
the Membrane, water it; but are terminated, partly in the Skull, especially
nigh the Sutures, whither they convey the blood, and partly in the bosoms,
where, what is superfluous is laid up. Moreover, these Arteries perforate the
hard Meninge in several places on the top of the Brain (as Webser observes) and
impart some shoots to the Pia Matter. Lastly, the exterior superficies of this
Meninge is no where planted with so many shoots of Veins as Arteries; but from
its four Bosoms (which are the veinous Receptacles of the blood) many Veins go
out through the interior superficies of this Membrane, which being inserted in
the Pia Matter, are presently dispersed through its whole compass, and the same
sliding down on every side from the bosoms, meet every where the Arteries
ascending from the Basis of the Head, and being intermingled with them,
constitute the manifold infoldings of the Vessels.

That these may be the better beheld, after the Arteries are sufficiently
noted, let the hard Meninx be cut round near the border of the broken Skull;
then let whatever of it serves for a covering and partition to the Brain and
Cerebel, be lifted up, that the goings out of the Vessels, viz. the Veins and
their distributions into the Pia Matter may be considered; which being
afterward broken asunder, let the Membrane with its bosoms be wholly taken
away; but the relics of this Membrane, which stick to the bones at the bottom
of the Skull, should be separated; so that the whole frame or substance of the
Brain and its Appendix may be somewhat clevated, and moved here and there, be
every where conspicuous, and at length taken from the Skull. But that these
things may be performed, you must begin from the anterior or fore part, where
the bone of the Forehead separates it.

Therefore if the prow of the Brain, hid under this bone, be a little lifted
up, the mammillary processes come presently in sight, together with the
smelling Nerves hanging to them; which being dissected near the insertion,
there will appear an hollowness in either process. These are large and round,
also full of clear water in Calves: but in either smelling Nerve a manifest
Cavity is found continued on either side to the anterior Ventricles of the
Brain, to which if a Pipe be put and blown into, presently the whole substance
of the Brain will swell.

Next the smelling Nerves about the Cocks-comb two small Arteries are seen to
arise from the Skull, and to be carried toward the Interstitium of the Brain,
which in truth are branches of the Carotides, which are knit to the dilated
Comb before, and from thence are seen to be reflected to the anterior Brain.

These Vessels being there dissected, the coming together and going out of the
Optic Nerves follow, the trunk of which being cut off a little lower, the
Tunnel, and out of both its sides the Arteries called Carotides, arising out of
the Cuniformbone, do appear; which are more clearly beheld, if the Brain be
lifted up. These also being cut off, and the brain farther bent back, the
moving Nerves of the Eyes presently show themselves; and so from thence the
other pairs of Nerves follow in order, that one pair of them being cut off, and
the brain with its Appendix more lifted up, the next is still obvious to those
beholding it, till all the Nerves arising within the Skull, and also the
Arteries, both the Carotides, and the Vertebral being at length cut off, the
whole frame of the Head may be taken out of the Skull.

But (that these Vessels may be described in the same order as they are met
with in the cutting them up) two small Nerves follow after those moving Nerves
of the Eyes, which, for a reason hereafter rendered, we call Pathetick. These
Nerves higher than the rest, arising behind two round Prominences called Nates
and Testes, (the Buttocks and Stones of the Brain) and bending down forward,
and entering for a little space under the dura Matter, then coming out through
the same hole, together with the former, from the Skull, are propagated into
the sight of the Eye. This pair is called by Fallopius the eighth, by us the
fourth.

Beneath these little Nerves, from both sides of the annulary protuberance,
(which being sent from the Cerebel compasses the oblong Marrow) two Nerves of
noted magnitude arise, which, after they have passed through the dura Matter,
send forth another notable branch on either side straight down without the
Skull, the other branch, by a longer tract, passing through both sides the
Skull near the Turkey Chair. These Nerves (as is shown afterward) having gotten
a larger Province, are enlarged in the Palate, the parts of the Mouth and Face,
and also their branches in the Nose and Eyes, yea they impart roots to the
intercostal Nerve. We call this pair the fifth, commonly esteemed the third.

Nigh to the beginning of these, out of the lowest foot of the oblong Marrow or
Pith, two lesser Nerves, endued with a single trunk, arise, which being dilated
forward, and presently entering under the dura Matter, come out of the same hole
with the moving Nerves of the Eyes, and are all carried into the balls of the
Eyes. This pair is called by us the sixth.

Next to these Nerves follow the auditory or hearing pair, which indeed arises
higher from the sides of the oblong Marrow, in what part the Cerebel is hanged
to it, viz. nigh the lesser annulary process; from whence it is immediately
carried with a double process into the hole of the stony Bone: one of its
branches is harder, serving chiefly for motion, the other altogether medullary
and softer, as it were only destinated to sense.

A little lower arises the wandering pair, which is commonly called the sixth.
This seems to be made of many Nerves, many of which arise together; and to them
comes another, endued with a greater trunk, which being brought from the end of
the oblong Marrow, yea beyond this, out of the spinal Marrow, is united with
the former. And so all being made like a bundle of Nerves, go out through the
hole of the hinder part of the Head; through which also goes out the greater
branch of the internal jugular Vein. This is by us called the eighth pair.

Under the wandering pair, almost out of the Basis of the oblong Marrow, another
pair arises, consisting also of many Fibers, which going straight down, and
being presently immersed in the dura Matter, comes forth again through a
peculiar hole out of the Skull; then either Nerve, being inoculated into the
trunk of the wandering pair, is presently bended back toward the Tongue. In a
man, a peculiar protuberance grows above the oblong Marrow, out of which the
beginning of this Nerve proceeds. This we call the ninth pair.

Below this, in the lowest part of the hinder part of the Head, out of the
sides of the oblong Marrow, where it is about to go into the spinal, another
pair, consisting also of many Fibers, arises; which tending toward the spinal
Marrow, enters the dura Matter at the same place where the vertebral Artery
ascends into the Brain; yet it arises out of the bosoms of the bones, but below
the first Vertebra or Joint, from whence it is carried into the Muscles of the
hinder part of the Neck, so that it is doubtful, whether this pair ought to be
called the last of the Skull, or the first of the Vertebrals.

When these parts, viz. the aforesaid Nerves and Arteries, both the Carotides
and the Vertebrals, with the jugular Veins (by which the Encephalon is fastened
to the foot or basis of the Skull) are cut off, and their ends stretched out as
much as may be; either let them remain in the taken out substance or frame,
whereby the beginnings of all the Nerves may be plainly noted; or the trunks of
them being cut off near the roots, may be left in the holes of the Skull,
whereby their goings out and distributions may be observed. The images of
either Example are delineated in the first and second Table.

The business of Dissection being thus far brought, the residue of the Skull
shows many things worthy consideration, of which we shall speak particularly
afterward. But first we ought to view thoroughly the taken out frame or
substance of the Brain, together with its Appendix, and to examine all its
appearances as they follow in the order of Dissection.

The substance or bulk being taken out, which is of a somewhat round figure or
spherical, it exhibits to the sight in its superior and unequal part the Brain
and Cerebel; but the oblong Marrow, with the utmost borders or edges of the
superior bodies, possesses almost all the basis or its lowest part. The
thinner Meninx covers these three placed near, and the outward superficies of
them all; nor does it clothe the same loosly, but deeply insinuating it self
into all their cavities and recesses, covers and binds them strictly. And as
this Membrane is every where interwoven, with the folds of the Vessels, by its
stretching out, it reaches the same to every part and portion, and so waters
the whole with a sufficient afflux of blood. Here we must consider the Vessels
of this Membrane and its protension.

As to the former, the whole superficies of the frame of the subject may be
seen, covered with the infoldings of Vessels, as it were with a net admirably
variegated or flourished, and its sight or aspect shows like the picture of a
fruit-bearing wood; the Idea of which, the Vessels of the Brain more aptly
represent, and are themselves seen better and more distinctly, if you first
squirt into the Carotidick Artery some black liquor. The Vessels interwoven
within the thin Meninge or Pia Matter are Arteries and Veins. The Arteries are
four, viz. two Carotides and two Vertebrals. Out of either side of the Tunnel
the ends of the cut off Carotidick Arteries show themselves, the trunks of
which ascending upwards, are presently diffused from either side into the
anterior and posterior, or fore and hinder branch. Either pair of these
inclining one toward the other, are mutually conjoined: moreover, the
posterior branches so joined, are united with the Vertebral branches (growing
together first into one trunk.) For the Vertebral Arteries, arising from the
last hole but one of the Skull, fall at first divided through the sides of the
oblong Marrow; then united in its basis, they go into a single chanel, which
meeting with the hinder branches of the Carotides, (as it is said) it is joined
with them; and from that place of the joining of them together, a noted branch
ascends on either side under the edge or rim of the Brain, which being dilated
upon the shanks or stocks of the oblong Marrow, is cleft or divided into very
many small shoots like hairs, some of which ascend to the Glandula's placed
behind the Cerebel, but the rest make the arterious part of the Choroeidal
infoldings. The anterior branches of the Carotides, before they are united,
send from themselves on either side a noted branch, which creeping upwards like
a bounding River, distinguishes either Hemisphere of the Brain as it were into
two Provinces; but after the aforesaid branches are united, presently departing
again from one another, they are carried to the Prow of the Brain, and from
thence bending back between its Hemispheres, they fall upon the callous body.
All these Arteries, before and after their mutual joining together, send forth
shoots and little branches on every side, which do not only creep through and
intimately bind about the utmost compass of its Sphere, but its Penetralia and
more inward recesses, like the young branches of Vines. The ramifications or
these sorts of branchings, both of the Carotides and of the Vertebrals, are
shown in the first Table, as they are found in a Man, and as in a Sheep in the
second Table.

Moreover, this thinner Meninx or Pia Matter clothing the whole Brain and its
parts, as it receives the Arteries ascending (as has been said) from a
fourfold Fountain, so it is stuffed throughout with Veins, sent from four
bosoms. These Vessels mutually meeting are complicated together, and almost
every where constitute by their branches derived from both, and meeting one the
other, and variously contorted among themselves, the net-like or retiform
infoldings; which indeed are not only outwardly in the superficies, but in the
diffection, wherever you may separate one part from another, without breaking
it, these kind of infoldings of the Vessels are to be found. Because, if you
behold this frame, taken out of the Skull, collecting together the tops of all
the turnings and the Interstitia in this Membrane, and covering them with the
joynings of the Vessels, it will make the whole compass or frame of the
Encephalon appear like a curious quilted ball. But if you go on to cast abroad
this Sphere, and to separate the cleaving parts, knit together, of this
Membrane, one from another, you will soon find, that this Meninx covers the
gapings of the crevices or turning chaps of the Brain, binds the Interstitia of
either moity or Hemisphere, draws together the hinder part of the Brain,
otherwise being lax and hanging loose, and compassing about every border of it,
as it were with a Welt, knits it to the oblong Marrow: and what is the chief of
all, the universal Cortical or shelly substance of the Brain (to wit, in which
the animal Spirits are procreated) is covered over with this Membrane planted
with most frequent infoldings of the Vessels; notwithstanding the interior
superficies of the Brain being stretched out, (which being called the Callous
body, is altogether medullary and white) is not clothed with this Membrane;
but instead of it many foldings of Vessels, commonly called Choroeides, are
hung and as it were freely flow within its complicature. The reason of which
is, because as this part, to wit, the callous body, is rather designed for the
Circulation than for the generation of Spirits, therefore it admits not a more
plentiful influx of blood: nevertheless, for as much as there is need of heat,
whereby the Spirits may be there more easily circulated, the blood being moved,
within the Vessels hanging there through the empty space, might afford heat as
it were from a fire kindled within a Stove. But within all the other recesses
of the Brain, and besides within the folds or lappets of the Cerebel, yea and
the Interstitia or gaps of both these, and of the oblong Marrow, this Meninx
insinuates it self, and inserts the distributions of the Vessels. In truth, the
protension or out-stretching of this Membrane seems therefore the more
admirable, because having no where a peculiar place of its origin, it not only
binds about the Head or Encephalon with a common covering, but also clothes all
its parts with proper coverings, and knits together their tops and processes.
Yea this Meninx seems to enjoy a manifold and diverse original: for wherever
the gapings or Interstitia of any parts or processes happen, portions of this
Membrane there springing forth, cover them all, and gather them together, and
reach to them the ramifications or branchings of the Vessels. In a moister
Brain this Meninx may be easily separated, and ample and large portions of it
pulled away with the fingers; which being drawn away, the insertions of the
Vessels, into the substance of the Brain and its Appendix, every where clearly
appear. Lastly, by this means the brain being thus left naked, unclothed of its
Membranes and Coverings, its make or fabric, and the disposition or order of
all its parts are next subjected to Anatomical Inspection.

That the Anatomy of the Brain, properly so called, might be rightly
celebrated, I judge we ought not to proceed after the common way of Dissection.
But whenas the substance of the whole Head, taken out of the Skull, stands in
view, first let the hinder partition of the brain, where it is knit to the
Cerebel and oblong Marrow or Pith, the Membranes being every where cut or
pulled off, be freed (as much as it may be) from its cleaving to the subjected
parts; then it will easily appear, that the substance of the brain is not
united to those bodies, but of it self is altogether free and independent of
them, unless where it is joined toward the superficies by the knitting of the
Membranes. Also this keel or hinder part of the brain being divided by this
means from the neighboring parts, if the fore part be bent back, the shanks of
the oblong Marrow will appear wholly naked, and distinct from the brain and
Cerebel (unless where they are in some places hung to it.) Moreover, when the
partition of the brain, being loosned from its cohesion, is lifted up, the
three Ventricles, commonly so called, go into one empty space or mere vacuity,
resulting from the complication of the brain. Besides, it may be observed, how
the brain before is only united to the oblong Marrow; and that in two places of
its shanks, as it were the tops, it is fixed; which Fornix so called, or arched
Vault, is as it were a string or ligament, which arising before, where the
brain is hanging to it, is carried to its hinder border, to which it is united
as it were with two stretched out arms, and so it holds together the whole
frame of the brain, lest it be rolled out into a plain, still in a spherical
figure, and firmly binds the same to the shanks of the oblong Marrow. From the
knitting of the other parts of the humane brain divided and lifted upwards,
whereby the vacuity resulting from its enfolding, and esteemed for Ventricles,
also whereby the Fornix or arched Vault and shanks of the oblong Marrow, naked
and distinct, may be beheld, is represented by figure in the fourth Table.

And truly, this Position or Aspect of the Brain, to wit, when its hinder
border or partition, being freed from its cohesion by the Membranes to the
oblong Marrow, and elevated, is bent forward, exposes to be seen by the eyes
themselves, its whole frame or substance, to wit, whatever it has without or
within, or before and behind, and also plainly detects what its habitude and
respect is to the other parts. The chief things of these I shall add, and in
the same order wherein they occurred to Inspection.

The figure of the Brain, especially in a man, shows somewhat globous or
spherical: the outward superficies is on all sides noted with chinks turning
and winding like to the rollings about of the Intestines: each breach or
involution, yea the whole circuit of it contains a twofold substance, viz. the
Cortical or rindy, which is the outmost and of an Ash Color; and the medullary
or marrowy, which lies under it, and appears white. The brain being as it were
plowed with these kind of rollings about, like so many ridges and furrows, is
cleft in the middle, and parted as it were into two Hemispheres; yet both the
moities come together, and are as it were founded in one like white substance,
which covers inwardly, and as it were in Chambers or Vaults, the whole bulk of
the brain. This is harder than any other portion of the brain, and as it is
altogether medullary, it receives all the marrows of the circumvolutions within
it self, and is to them instead of a common basis. In either Hemisphere of the
brain, about the fore parts, this callous body or marrowy substance, becomes
more firm and thick by far than in any other place; and there it is on both
sides fastened to the tops of the oblong Marrow. From those tops, as it were its
beginning, this medullary substance, covering over or chambering or arching the
brain, is stretched out toward the hinder parts, and by degrees lessens in its
thickness: at length the outward border of this stretched out, is drawn
together more narrowly, and more below, it is conjoined by the knitting of the
Membranes and Vessels (as we but now mentioned) to the tail of the oblong
Marrow. Besides, for its more firm connection, a medullary process arises from
the fore part of the callous body toward the tops of it, which stretching
under the fissure or cleft of the brain, reaches to its border; to which it is
united, as it were with arms bending on either side: which arms indeed embrace
the tail of the oblong Marrow, and so more firmly knit to it that border of the
brain.

This medullary process, commonly called the Fornix, under its rise or
beginning, has two white and medullary roots, either of them alike going out
from the callous body, which roots nigh the tops, where the brain is hung to
them, meeting together, pass into the Fornix or Vault it self, as if it were a
broad process, which stretches under the chamber of the brain, like a beam.
Under this twofold root of the Fornix is laid cross-wise, of the same
magnitude, a medullary trunk, by which, like a bridge, there is a certain
passage and communication between two processes of the form of a Lentil, and
chamfer'd or furrowed bodies beaming or shining in them. Further, from the
midst of the superficies of this Fornix, a thin and pellucid hedge or pale is
erected, which is affixed to the chanel or furrow of the callous body, almost
along its whole passage. And for this reason, whilst the three-sided Fornix
stretched underneath a chamber, arising from the complication of the brain, it
distinguished its appearing cavity as it were into three partitions, and so
caused, that in it three Ventricles were represented.

The interior recesses of the Brain will lie yet more clearly open, if the
border, being on every side separated and lifted up, as much as may be, from
its cohering with the oblong Marrow, be cut a little further through the
substance at the sides of the same Marrow, to which it is united, nigh the
chamfer'd bodies, and also the Fornix, being cut nigh the roots, be bent back,
together with the brain; for then the frame of the brain may be wholly lifted
up, turned forward, and unfolded into a plain, so that the whole interior
superficies of the callous body being stretched out into a broad floor, may be
seen and handled. Where, besides the medullary, and its most white substance,
may be observed many white parallel lines, which cut the partition of the brain
in right angles, as if they were certain tracts or footsteps, in which the
animal Spirits travel from one Hemisphere of the brain to the other, and return
back again.

After this manner, in very many perfect four-footed Beasts, the frame or
substance of the brain was wont to be turned over, the Sphere being projected
into a plain, and its interior superficies to be unfolded into breadth. Also
this kind of Method of Dissection may be used in a man's brain, where the same
Phenomenon wholly occur to Anatomical observation. The chief difference is,
that the bulk of the brain of a man, for that it is very large, and also far
thicker, and endued with more turnings and windings; therefore it cannot be so
easily and thoroughly inverted, as that of a Calf or Sheep, and reduced into a
broad plain: yet it may be so far expanded and lifted up near its border or
partition, that all the interior recesses may appear in view. The third and
fourth Figures show the image of an humane brain bent back: but in the seventh
Table is shown the aspect or sight of a Sheeps brain wholly unfolded, and as it
were spread plain.

In the lesser four-footed Beasts, as a Mouse, an Hare, Coney, and some others,
the superficies of the brain being wholly plain or even, wants the turnings and
windings; however from the complication of the border, and the under-stretching
of the Fornix, there results a cavity representing Ventricles.

After that we have thoroughly viewed all things which belong to the Brain, in
the order as we have said, let either Hemisphere, covered within with the
callous body, by which it hangs, be divided and removed from the tops of the
oblong Marrow: which indeed may be exactly done, by cutting it near to the
sides of the Lentiform prominencies, which are found in the vulgar dissection
of the Head, within the interior Ventricles: for those prominences are the tops
or heights of the shanks of the oblong Marrow, to which the callous body is
immediately fixed. When the brain is cut after this manner, that the
prominencies, which are the tops of the shanks of the oblong Marrow, may be
left naked, let them be cut long-ways through the midst (to wit, in the
medullary part, where they are conjoined to the callous body) and their
interior substance will appear through the whole chamfered or streaked; viz.
medullary streaks or chamferings are seen to ascend and descend forward and
backward; that none may doubt, but that these chamferings or streaks were made
by Nature, as it were passages or channels for the passage and return, or going
to and fro of the Spirits out of the callous body into the oblong Marrow, and
on the contrary. The Figure of the shanks of the oblong Marrow, divided from
the Brain, with their tops, which are the chamfered bodies, is expressed in the
eighth Table.

After these striated or streaked bodies, the shanks of the oblong Marrow being
divided for a little space, go forward, then being united, they meet together
in the same stock, made up as it were of two stems. But the stock or trunk of
the oblong Marrow in its whole tract, viz. before and after the coalition of
its shanks, has many Processes, Appendices, Prominences, and Infertions of
Vessels, some of which arise from one side, and others from the other side, and
make it unequal, with various productions and protuberances; of which hereafter.

The First Figure
Shows the Basis of an humane Brain taken out of the Skull, with the Roots of
the Vessels cut off.

AAAA. The anterior and posterior Lobes of the Brain quadripartite or divided
into four parts. BB. The Cerebel or little Brain in the hinder part of the
Head. CC. The long Marrow or Pith. DD. The smelling Nerves or the first pair.
EE. The Optic or seeing Nerves the second pair. FF. The moving Nerves of the
Eyes the third pair. GG. The pathetick Nerves of the Eyes or the fourth pair.
HH. The fifth pair of Nerves. II. The sixth pair of Nerves. KKKK. The auditory
or hearing Nerves and their two processes on either side of them the seventh
pair. LLIIII. The wandering pair, or the eighth pair consisting of many Fibers.
MM. The Spinal Nerves coming from afar to the origin of the wandering pair. NN.
The ninth pair consisting also of many Fibers (which tending downwards, grow
together into one Trunk) which arises a little above the process of the hinder
part of the Head. OO. The tenth pair tending downwards. PP. The Trunk of the
Carotidick Artery cut off where it is divided into the anterior and posterior
Branch. QQ. A Branch of it going in between two Lobes of the Brain. R. The
anterior Branches of the Carotides go away united, moving forward into the
fissure or cleft of the Brain. S. The posterior Branches of the Carotides
united, and meeting with the Vertebral Trunk. TTT. The Vertebral Arteries and
their three Branches ascending. V. The Branches of the Vertebrals growing
together into one Trunk. WW. The place designed where the Vertebrals and the
Carotides are united, and either Branch ascends to the Choroidal enfolding. X.
The Tunnel. YY. Two Glandula's or Kernels placed behind the Tunnel. aaaa. The
annulary Protuberance, which being sent from the Cerebel, embraces the stock of
the long Marrow.
The Second Figure
Shows the Basis of a Sheeps Brain taken out of the Skull, and the Roots of the
Vessels cut off, where all the Arteries, by Ink being injected into one of the
Carotides, are made black and more conspicuous.

AA. Two Hemispheres of the Brain without Lobes, different from that in a Man.
BB. The lateral portions of the Cerebel. CCC. The oblong Marrow. DD. The
olfactory or smelling Nerves cut off nigh to the mammillary Processes, that
their Cavities may appear. E. The coalition or joining together of the Optic
Nerves. FF. The motory Nerves of the Eyes, or the third pair. GG. The Pathetick
Nerves, or fourth pair. HH. The fifth pair: the Trunk of which Nerve is
presently divided into two Branches. II. The sixth pair. KK. kk. The seventh
pair, or the hearing Nerves, on either side of which are two Processes: LL. The
eighth or wandering pair, the origin of which is made up of very many Fibers
seeming to grow together. MM. A Nerve coming out of the spinal Marrow to the
beginning of the wandering pair. NN. The ninth pair, consisting also of diverse
Fibers arising distinctly, which afterward grow together into one Trunk. OO.
The tenth pair tending downwards. PP. The Trunk of the Carotidick Artery cut
off, where it is divided into the anterior and posterior Branch. QQ. The
inosculation of the anterior Branches. R. The posterior Branches of the
Carotides united, and meeting with the Vertebral Trunk. SSS. The Vertebral
Artery ascending with a triple Branch. TT. Where the Carotides meet the
Vertebral, and on either side many Arteries ascend to the Choroeidan enfolding.
V. The coalition or joining together of the Vertebral Branches into the same
Trunk. W. The Tunnel. X. A white Glandula or Kernel placed behind it.
CHAP. II.
The Parts of the oblong Marrow, and the rest of the hinder Parts of the Head
are recounted, and their Dissection shown.

HAving described both the Meninges, and the ramifications of the Vessels in
them, also the fabric of the Brain, properly so called; and next showed its
outward partition gathered together into folds about the shanks of the oblong
Marrow, and either middle or marrowy part of it hung to the chamfered bodies;
we will now follow the remaining parts of the Head in order.

The chamfered or streaked bodies, or the tops of the oblong Marrow, are two
lentiform Prominences, which are beheld within the former Ventricles of the
Brain, as they are commonly termed; the heads of these, which are more large
and blunt, incline mutually one to another, and are almost contiguous. Out of
the angle of this inclination the Fornix arises with a double root; to which is
subjected or underlaid a certain transverse medullary process, and seems to
knit together these streaked bodies, as may be seen in the seventh Table GG:
but the ends of those bodies, being made sharper, are reflected outward, and
make as it were two sides, with a sharp triangle, to whose anterior superficies
the marrow of the callous body sticks for a long tract; where, if these bodies
be cut long-ways through the midst, the medullary streaks (as was already said)
will presently appear. The figure and place of these, as also the medullary
chamferings, are truly represented in the eighth Table.

Where the streaked bodies end, the chambers or Thalami, as they are termed, of
the optic Nerves, possess the next part to the oblong marrow; to wit, in this
place, its shanks rise into unequal protuberances, out of the ridges of which
the Optic Nerves arise, and from thence, being bent down in the forepart with
a certain compass, they join together about the base of the same marrow, and
seem to be united; by and by being again parted, and going forward toward the
ball of the Eye, they go out of the Skull. In this place the shanks of the
oblong marrow in a Man are for the most part distinct, and gaping one from
another, leave a descending opening, which is the passage to the Tunnel; but in
most four-footed Beasts the shanks of the same medullary stocks are there
distinct, only a little lower, and have a chink cut for the Tunnel: but the
ridges of them, in which the beginnings of the Optic Nerves lie hid, are
somewhat conjoined, and for the space of half an inch do grow together.
Wherefore in Brutes there is one hole before this growing together, and another
behind it, both which lead toward the Tunnel. The reason of this difference
is, because in a Man, for that the frame or substance of the brain it self is
very large, and that its marrowy parts are remote one from another, it is
behoveful for its shanks, whereby the tops of the oblong marrow may be the
better fitted to the same, to be separated, and from their mutual touching to
be bent into a greater aperture. Hence it is observed, that in a Man the shanks
of the oblong marrow, from the hanging on of the brain, go forward with a
greater angle of inclination, and with a certain bending compass; but in Brutes
the same lie almost parallel. After what manner these parts are sormed in an
humane brain the third and fourth Figure shows; after what manner they are in
four footed Beasts is shown in the seventh Figure.

From the same ridges of the medullary shanks, from whence the Optic Nerves
take their origines, certain medullary processes arising, and being dilated on
either side above the brim of the second hole, grow together about the root of
the pineal Glandula. These processes (as it seems) are those parts, which the
Famous Carts supposes to be Nerves belonging to the pineal Glandula: but I
rather suspect them to be productions only, by which the Optic Nerves may also
communicate near their origines. Their figure is very well described in the
seventh Table.

After the Thalami or Chambers of the Optic Nerves, other notable
protuberances, commonly called Nates and Testes, the Buttocks and Testicles (of
the brain) grow to the superior part of the medullary Trunk or stem, and cover
its superficies about the space of an inch; and for that they are not
contiguous in the midst, there is under them a certain hollowness in their
whole tract. These protuberances are lesser in a Man, also in a Dog and Cat;
lastly, if we observed rightly, in other living Creatures, which are newly
brought forth, that are impotent, and not instructed for the finding out of
sood. In a Calf, Sheep, Hog, and the like, they appear far greater: in Fishes
and Fowls they are wholly wanting.

In number they are four, viz. two grow to either side of the oblong marrow.
The former called Nates or the Buttocks, seem the greater and principal; to
which the other latter called Testes or the Testicles, hang as if growing out
of them. As to their figure, they are round, and are commonly taken for two
shanks on either side of the brain and Cerebel planted near, which being bent
inwardly, and turned back one toward the other, are said to grow together, and
so to constitute the oblong marrow. But this opinion, as we shall show more
largely hereafter, by the dissection ordered according to our Method, is
clearly false. For it plainly appears, that the brain is fixed, long before
these bodies, to the oblong marrow; nor is there any commerce between these and
that, unless very remote.

But if the site of these parts, and their respects and habitudes to the
neighboring bodies, be well noted, it will appear plainly, that they make as
it were a certain peculiar Region wholly distinct from the Brain and Cerebel,
also from the oblong marrow it self. Their situation is remote enough from the
fore-parts, and sufficiently separated by the Cavity or Ventricle under-lying
from the medullary stock or stem: yea a proper way, or one process, seems to
lead from the long marrow into these prominences, and another to go from them,
and thence to be carried into the Cerebel. From hence we may suspect, that
these prominences (especially the Natiform, or of the shape of a Buttock, which
are the chief) are certain places of diversion, in which the animal Spirits go
apart in their passage from the oblong marrow into the Cerebel, and from this
to that on the other side, and there stay for some animal uses, of which we
shall speak hereafter. As to the way, which leads from the oblong marrow into
these prominences; it is manifest, that beneath the origines of the Optic
Nerves on either side a medullary Process descends, with little Villages proper
for it self, which terminates in the aforesaid prominencies. Then, if from
these, you look for a passage out, it is equally clear, that from the
hindermost prominences, which are called Testes, on either side, a medullary
process does obliquely ascend, which being dilated into the Cerebel, is
divaricated through its whole frame. But that the Natiform or Buttock-formed
Prominences are Principals, and the Testes their dependences, or the heads of
medullary Processes, which are carried from thence into the Cerebel, manifestly
appears in a Sheep, Calf, or Horse, and in some others, where the Nates are of
a noted magnitude, the Testes of a very small bulk grow to them, and in the
middle between these the medullary Processes, the Appendices of the former
Prominences, exist. The aforesaid Prominences, as also the medullary Processes,
which lead forward and backward, to and from them, are aptly represented in the
fourth Table, but yet more clearly in the eighth Table TT. PP.

Further, because the animal Spirits residing in either Promptuary and
Appendix, before they are carried to the Brain, ought to be confounded and
mingled together, therefore the two prominences of either side do mutually grow
together as it were with wings stretched out one to another; but for as much as
it is behoveful for those growings together to be distingushed from the oblong
marrow, therefore an hollowness comes between, which is by some esteemed the
fourth Belly, and by others a passage to it. These prominences in a Man, Dog,
and Cat, and some other Animals (as was above mentioned) are very small, and
almost even; also they appear, as the other portion of the oblong marrow, of a
white color. In a Calf, Sheep, Horse, and many other fourfooted Beasts, the
former protuberances, commonly called Nates or Buttocks, are remarkably great,
also outwardly they appear to be of a flesh color, because they are clothed
with the thin Meninx or Pia Matter, which contains in it self very many Veins
and Arteries; which if separated, the interior substance of those parts is of a
wannish color, and such as is not in all the oblong marrow or pith besides.
But it plainly appears, as in Brutes, so in Man, the hinder or posterior
prominences are Epiphyses or additions of the former, and that from these
additions or dependences the medullary processes ascend obliquely into the
Cerebel; near which, other processes cutting those, descend direct from the
Cerebel, which seem not to be inserted into the medullary Trunk, but going
about it, do constitute the annulary or ringy protuberance. This annulary
protuberance is greater in a Man than in any other Creature. Besides, it is
observed, that where ever the superior prominence of the Buttock-form is
larger, this inferior annulary is very small; and so on the contrary. Further,
those medullary processes, ascending toward the Cerebel, communicate mutually
among themselves by the other transverse medullary process; and out of this
transverse process, two small little Nerves arise, the fourth pair of those
which we have recounted, and which are called by us Pathetical. Each of these,
delineated in fit figures, the seventh Table shows clear enough.

Not sar from the aforesaid Prominences, to wit, between these and the Chink,
which is called the Anus or Arse-hole, the Pineal Glandula or Kernel is placed.
This is put in a Valley, which lies between the Natiform protuberances, and
those which are the Chambers or Thalami of the Optic Nerves; in which place
that Glandula or Kernel is fixed, sometimes by very many small Fibers, and
sometimes by two noted medullary roots subjected to the part; and besides, it
is included in a Membrane, which is a portion of the Pia Matter, as in a Chest;
and as this Membrane is stuffed with very many Arteries and Veins, some small
Vessels also enter into this Glandula.

Under the Prominences but now described, (as was above hinted) a narrow Cavity
or Ventricle is stretched out with a long passage, which, although it obtains
some egregious uses, yet it self seems to be only secondary, and as it were by
chance; for that the processes of either prominence ought to be conjoined among
themselves, and to be distinguished from the under lying medullary Trunk. Two
holes lie open into this Trunk, one of which is placed in the beginning, and
the other in the end of it, and through the middle of its passage the
down-bending aperture tends toward the Tunnel; so that the serous humor
entering at either hole, may presently slide away into the Tunnel. Moreover,
into the same aperture of the Tunnel there lies open another passage, to wit,
through the first hole, which is placed near the roots of the Fornix; so that
from every quarter of the Head the serosities might be carried into that sink:
to wit, that through the first hole, from the infoldings or the anterior
Ventricles of the Brain; through the second hole, the humors which are gathered
about the orbicular prominences, do come away; and through the third hole,
those which are laid up nigh the confines of the Cerebel, do find a passage.
These several holes, with the distinct ways to the Tunnel, are plainly
delineated in the seventh Table H. M. T.

Above the Pineal Kernel, as it were above the Button, the enfolding of the
Choroeides seems to be hung; now this enfolding is made after this manner: out
of either side of the oblong marrow, where the border of the brain is knit to
it, two Arteries arising from the posterior branches of the Carotides, where
they are united to the Vertebrals, do directly ascend; which being presently
divided, like many Rivers planted near together, are carried toward the pineal
Glandula, and there seem to be terminated by a mutual meeting: and in that
place, out of the fourth bosom, sent down upon the pineal Glandula, the veinous
branches come out on both sides, which in like manner being divided into
filaments or small threads, meet with the capillary or hairy Arteries, and are
in many places inoculated into them, and variously complicated with them; and
so these Vessels, being Net-like, much interwoven among themselves, and
interserted with the Glandula's, do constitute the to be admired infoldings.
These kind of infoldings of the Vessels, as it were with two out stretched
wings, are thrust out on either side upon the shanks of the oblong marrow, even
to the streaked bodies; but yet they only lie upon their superficies, nor are
they more firmly affixed either to the oblong marrow, or to the callous body by
any insertions of the Vessels; so that the blood seems only to be brought to
these places, and carried away without any afflux of it made into the subjected
parts; for what uses shall be spoken of hereafter. The Choroidal infoldings,
with the pineal Glandula, are drawn out in the seventh Table G. F. E.

And thus far concerning the appearances sound above the oblong Marrow, between
the streaked bodies and the Cerebel; which indeed are almost constantly after a
like manner both in Man and four-footed Beasts, unless that they only differ in
bigness. Within this space, in the Pedestal or Basis of the same Marrow, many
things worth noting occur: For besides the ends of the cut off Vessels, which
are above recited, the site and structure of the Infundible or Tunnel deserve
consideration. For behind the coalition or joining together of either Optic
Nerve between the shanks of the oblong marrow there gaping, is sent down a
receptacle as it were tubulated or made like a Pipe, covered without with a
thin Membrane arising from the Pia Matter, and defended within with a medullary
substance. The orisice of this is placed higher between the shanks of the
oblong marrow, and receives their bending aperture; from thence a short Tube or
Pipe being sent down, is inserted to the pituitary Glandula or Kernel. We see
this Tube in an Horses brain greater than a Gooses quill, also shining and full
of clear water; that it is not to be doubted, but that by this way the serous
humors slide away from the brain to the pituitary Glandula: but how these
humors are carried away from thence, shall be afterward inquired into, because
they are not carried into the Palate or roof of the mouth, as is commonly
believed.

Nigh the lower border of the Tunnel, in a Man, underneath there are two
whitish Glandula's; though in Brutes only one, but greater, is found. What is
the proper use of this part shall be told hereafter: in the mean time, whether
it be doubled or only one larger, it seems to be as it were instead of a bank
to defend or preserve the thin Membrane of the Tunnel, lest it should be broken
or thrust out of its place: on the other side the growing together of the
Optic Nerves serves instead of the same kind of defense.

What besides is contained in this space are only the shanks of the oblong
marrow it self, which proceed directly from the chambers of the Optic Nerves
toward the hinder part of the Head in a straight passage; and when both grow
together below the Tunnel, they are afterward distinguished in their whole
tract by a line drawn through the midst. These shanks of a man's brain are far
larger than in brute beasts: to wit, in that they seem to be made up of very
many medullary chords or strings joined together in one, as if in this common
passage and highway of the animal Spirits, they were so many distinct paths,
which the Spirits enter into respectively, according to the various impulses of
sense and local motion. Moreover, this space of the oblong marrow therefore
appears shorter and more broken in a man, because much of it is hid by the
annulary protuberance, which is sent from the Cerebel, and is very big. The Pia
Matter, all about covering the sides of this medullary Trunk, clothes them with
most thick infoldings of the Vessels; by which heat and the nervous juice are
carried, as a continual provision for the Spirits, taking a long journey. Thus
much for the first Section, or anterior portion of the oblong marrow: now our
order carries us to the inspection of its hinder Region, to wit, where the
Cerebel grows to it; and the Processes sent from this either compass about its
Trunk, or are inserted into it; out of which also, the other Nerves produced
within the Skull, take their beginnings. Concerning these we will speak in
order.

CHAP. III.
A Description of the Cerebel and its Processes, also of the hinder Region of
the oblong Marrow.

BElow the orbicular Prominences, the Cerebel follows to be inspected. The
figure of this, like the Brain, is somewhat globous, also it appears unequal,
marked with certain turnings and windings about; the ridges and furrows of
whose turnings about the Pia Matter stretches over, and reaches out the
infoldings of the Vessels to them all, and deeply inserts them into all.
However the Cerebel is diversisied or variegated with its turnings and rollings
about, not as the Brain, after an uncertain manner; but its folds are disposed
in a certain orderly series; for the exterior frame of it seems to consist of
thin lappets, or little rings or circles, being contiguous and infolded, also
going about through the whole compass with a parallel site or situation.

Either Region of the Cerebel, to wit, the former and the hinder, is terminated
in a process in form of a Worm. According to these ends, as it were in a double
Pole, these Circles are very short; thence ascending toward the top or
Equator, they are by degrees enlarged, as it were Parallels in a Sphere or
Globe. These Circles are outwardly Cortical or barky, and within medullary, and
all their marrowy parts pass into two ample middles; which indeed seem to be
the same in the Cerebel, as the callous body in the brain.

The Cerebel in some Animals consists of one frame, and all its little circles
are placed in the same parallel site, and keep the same proportion among
themselves; but in others there grow to the Cerebel as it were the primary
Sphere, and endued with greater circles, some other bodies as it were Wens or
Extuberances, or additional Spheres marked with lesser circles. These being
eccentrick to the Cerebel it self, have oftentimes labels or folds ordered in a
diverse series from it.

But the Cerebel it self (whether it has these little Excrescences growing to
it or not) is found almost in all Animals of the same figure and proportion,
also made up of the same kind of labels or lappets. Those which have the brain
diversely framed from a Man's, as Fowl and Fishes, also among four-legged
Creatures, Conies and Mice, whose brains want turnings about or convolutions,
have the like species and the like disposition of the folds and composure of
the other parts of the Cerebel. The reason of this difference in the brain, and
of the conformity in the Cerebel, is rendered hereafter, when we treat of the
Use of the Parts.

As the Brain, within its Cavity, has the Choroidal enfolding made up of
Arteries and Veins variously complicated, and of Glandula's thickly
interserted; so also the Cerebel has got the like infoldings of Vessels, and
those marked with very many Glandula's, and greater than those in the Choroidal
enfolding. These infoldings and heap of Kernels, the Pia Matter being separated,
which clothes the hinder part of the Cerebel, easily appear in sight; for in
that place these creep upwards on either side nigh the Worm-shaped process, as
it were with two branches; and receive the Artery on either side, from the
Vertebral Artery, lying under the Basis of the oblong marrow and the veinous
passages, sent from either lateral bosom. We shall inquire hereafter into the
use of this Enfolding and of its Glandula's.

In the mean time, that we may describe the site and hanging on of the Cerebel;
the same standing on the oblong marrow seems to be fixed to its sides, as it
were by two little feet; between which, planted on either side, and the Cerebel
placed above, and the trunk of the long marrow below, (because all these should
be distinct one from the other) there comes a cavity or hollowness between,
which is commonly called the four Bellies.

In either little foot, sustaining the Brain, are found three distinct
medullary Processes. The first of these, sent from the orbicular Protuberances,
ascends obliquely; the second descending straight from the Cerebel, and passing
through the other across, compasses about the oblong marrow; the third process,
descending from the hinder Region of the Cerebel, is inserted into the oblong
marrow, and increases its trunk as it were with an additional cord or string.
These several Processes are truly represented in the seventh Table Q. P. R.

But as to what belongs to the annular or ringy Protuberance, by which the
medullary Trunk, both in Man, and in some four-footed Beasts, is compassed
about, that is made after this manner. The second or middle process of the
Cerebel, descending straight to the oblong marrow, seems not to be implanted in
it, as soon as it touches its sides, but growing into a larger bulk, goes about
the superficies of the same marrow with diverse circular Fibers. And so when in
either side both those kind of processes of the Cerebel, being dilated or
carried from the top of the medullary Trunk toward its Basis, do mutually meet,
they make that circular protuberance. The substance of this is far larger in a
Man than in any other Animal; in an Hare, Rabbet, Mouse, and the like, it is
very small; in Fowl it is either wholly wanting, or for its smalness scarce to
be discerned by the eyes. Concerning its bulk, this is a constant observation.
They who have the orbicular prominences before the Cerebel small, have this
annulary protuberance very big; and on the contrary, they who have those
prominences big or very great, have this ring very small: further, they who
wholly want the Buttock-form protuberances, as in Fowl, seem also to want this
annulary.

In many brute Animals, but not in Man, nigh to this greater Protuberance, a
little lower, another lesser, in like manner orbicular, stands, and compasses
about the superficies of the oblong marrow; the root of which is a white and
medullary line, stretched out under the Cerebel, above the bottom of the fourth
Ventricle. From the sides of this lesser protuberance the auditory Nerves
arise: In Man the auditory or hearing Nerves are seen to arise out of the
utmost brim of the greater protuberance, in like manner they have for their
root a white medullary line covering the fourth Ventricle.

That this line, and the three distinct medullary Processes, which constitute
either little foot of the Cerebel, may be more plainly shown, also that the
most inward frame of the Cerebel may be viewed, its whole globe ought to be cut
through both Poles, viz. in the middle through the Vermiform or Worm-shaped
processes; then it will plainly appear, that in either Hemisphere there is an
ample middle or marrow, wherein the marrowy branches, being stretched abroad on
every side, like those of a tree, spread through the Cortical substance of the
Cerebel, every where diffused; and that in either middle or marrowy part, the
three distinct processes, which make either trunk, or little foot of the
Cerebel, are inserted. Each of these are fitly represented in the seventh Table.

Thus much for the Cerebel, and by what means it is fastened to the oblong
marrow, Beside these, it is to be observed, that about the bottom of the Basis
of the oblong marrow, out of the greater Ring, come out two medullary strings,
which being distinct from the rest of the medullary Trunk, go right forward
toward the spinal marrow, and in its progress, being made straiter by degrees,
like Pyramids, after about the space of an inch, end in sharp points. The
extremities of these consist on the other side, where the wandering pair of
Nerves have their orignal, and make a certain rising up in the oblong marrow.
Hence it is likely, that these strings are passages or channels of the animal
Spirits, wherein they are carried from the greater Ring, or what is the same
thing, from the Cerebel into the wandering pair, and the beginnings of other
Nerves implanted near; for what end, shall be said hereafter. These pyramidal
Bodies do not so manifestly appear so long as the Pia Matter clothes them, and
hides them with the infoldings of the Vessels; but this Membrane being pulled
away, they are so conspicuous, especially in a Man and a Dog, that they seem
like greater Nerves. In those Animals, where the annulary Protuberance is
greater, these processes being brought from the same in right angles, are
greater and more conspicuous; and on the contrary, in Fowl they are clearly
wanting.

Concerning this hinder Region of the Head, there is not much besides worth
noting, except the productions of the Vessels. But there are Vessels which
chiefly belong to these parts, the latter six pair of Nerves arising within the
Skull and the Vertebral superficies of the human brain Fig. III.
Arteries. We have already described in some measure the beginnings of the
former; what belongs to the more full knowledge of them, we shall leave to be
handled in its proper place. As to the Vertebral Arteries, they reach from
about the farthest end of the oblong marrow, now about to end in the spinal, to
its sides. These Vessels, as they are smaller, so they enter the Skull with
lesser provision than the Carotides; for they are neither flourished first with
Net-like infoldings, nor are carried in a long journey by compassing about; but
either Artery, passing directly through the Cuniform or Wedge-like Bone,
embraces the medullary Trunk on either side. Although these go forward divided
for a little space, yet afterward they are united, and with a single chanel or
passage, they meet with the posterior Carotides inclining mutually one toward
the other; and so all the branches, meeting as it were in a threefold way, are
inoculated one in another. The Vertebral Arteries, first showing themselves
within the Skull, are disposed otherwise in Brutes than in men: in the latter
they fall through the sides of the oblong marrow parallel for some space, then
as it were with a certain semicircular compass, they mutually incline one
toward the other, and presently meet. The branches which first go forwards
divided, are sometimes only two, to wit, one on either side, sometimes three,
and then besides the two former, another is produced in the middle. But in
Brutes, either Trunk of the Vertebral Artery, at the first coming to the
marrow, inclines presently to the meeting of the other with an acute angle, and
quickly both meet together. The Vertebrals, even as the Carotides, send forth
manifold branches in their progress with an innumerable series of shoots, which
cover over the oblong marrow, the Cerebel, and all their cavities and recesses,
and water them all with a plentiful flood of blood.

These are the Phenomenon or Appearances which the whole frame of the Brain and
its Appendix is wont to exhibit Anatomical Inspection, and which, as to its
fabric, and all its parts, and processes, are to be found both within and
without. As it is a hard and troublesome business to inquire into the actions
and use of each of these, so it is also joined with so much pleasure and
profit, that I dare promise to my self and others, that it will be a thing
worth our labor and while. Yet before we enter upon this, there remain to be
unfolded some things hid in some of the bones of the Skull, such as are the
pituitary Kernels, the admirable Net, and some others; also we ought to show
first, briefly at least, a type or figure of the Brains in Fowl and Fishes.

The Third Figure
Shows the outmost or superior Superficies of the humane Brain taken out of the
Skull; where the border of the Brain being loosned from the knitting of the
other Parts, made by the Membranes, is elevated and turned outward, that the
shanks of the oblong Marrow, the Fornix or arched Vault, the Nates and Testes,
with the pineal Kernel, and other Processes, may be clearly and distinctly
beheld.

AA. The border of the Brain, which in its natural situation was contiguous to
the Cerebel. B. The brim or margent of the callous Body besmearing either
Hemisphere of the Brain, which in its natural site leans upon the pineal
Glandula. C. The Fornix or arched Chamber. DD. The Arms of it embracing the
shanks of the oblong Marrow. EE. The shanks of the oblong Marrow, out of which
the Optic Nerves proceed, and the tops of which (situated further out of
sight) are the streaked Bodies. F. The pineal Glandula, between which and the
root of the Fornix, stands the chink leading to the Tunnel. GG. The orbicular
Protuberances which are called Nates or the Buttocks. HH. The lesser
Protuberances called Testes or the Testicles, which are Excrescences of the
former. II. The medullary Processes which ascend obliquely from the Testes into
the Cerebel, and constitute part of either of its Meditullium or marrowy part
of it. K. The meeting of those Processes through another transverse or cross
Process. LL. The beginning of the pathetick Nerves out of the meeting of the
aforesaid Processes. MM. A portion of the oblong Marrow lying, under the
aforesaid Processes and Protuberances. N. The hole of the Ventricle or Cavity
which is placed under the orbicular Protuberances. OO. A portion of the
annulary Protuberance sent from the Cerebel, and embracing the oblong Marrow.
PP. The outmost and upper superficies of the Cerebel.
The Fourth Figure.
The Effigies of an humane Brain of a certain Youth that was foolish from his
birth, and of that sort which are commonly termed Changelings; the bulk of
whose Brain, as it was thinner and lesser than is usual, its border could be
farther lifted up and turned back, that all the more interior parts might be
more deeply beheld together.

AA. The border of the Brain lifted up, and very much bent back, which in its
natural site, being knit to the oblong Marrow, nigh the Cerebel, did hide the
Nates and Testes. B. The border or inferior margent of the callous Body. CC.
The Fornix, with its two Arms, embracing the shanks of the oblong Marrow. DD.
The internal cavity or hollowness of the Brain resulting from the folding
together of its border about the oblong Marrow. EE. The tops of the shanks of
the oblong Marrow, or the streaked or chamfered Bodies. FF. The Chambers of the
Optic Nerves. G. The pineal Kernel, between which and the root of the Fornix
the hole is, whose passage leads both to the Tunnel, and to the Ventricle lying
under the orbicular Protuberances. HH. The Protuberances called Nates. II. The
Protuberances called Testes. KK. The medullary Processes stretching out from
the Testes to the middle of the Cerebel. LL. The laid aside Hemispheres of the
Cerebel (...) two through the midst, that the Trunk of the oblong Marrow may be
the better seen, where its medullary substance branches out into the form of a
tree. M. The Furrow below the medullary stock, which being covered by the
Cerebel, makes the fourth Ventricle in the form of a writing pen. NN. The
medullary Processes which seem to be passages out of the oblong Marrow into the
orbicular Protuberances. O. The end of the oblong Marrow giving place to the
spinal.
CHAP. IV.
The Parts and some of the Contents of the separated Skull unfolded.

IT is not our intent, nor will it be needful for us to delineate the figures
and situation of the several Bones of the Brain-pan, or to describe their
various holes, which transmit the Trunks of the Vessels like the hanging
weights of a Clock. All these are well enough known; so that to treat of these
Gates or Entries is superfluous. Besides also, by what means the Nerves,
arising within the Skull with their ramification or branching forth, enter the
dens and caverns of the Bones, shall be delivered particularly afterward.
Wherefore for the present our business shall be only to take notice of some
things, chiefly worth noting, concerning the sanguiferous Vessels passing
through the Cuniform or Wedge-like Bone, not sufficiently noted by others.

Among the various uses and offices which the Cuniform or Wedge-like Bone
yields to the Brain and its Appendix, it is not of the least note or moment,
that it transmits the Carotidick Arteries, not without a certain mechanical or
artificial provision; and that in the middle way, by which they must pass, it
contains the pituitary Kernel, and sometimes the wonderful Net. Each of these
deserve consideration; the more, for that in diverse Animals they are after a
different manner; and because it is much controverted among Physicians
concerning their frame and use. But we will first speak of the pituitary
Glandula, because this part, being placed higher, is observable to Anatomical
Inspection before others.

The pituitary Glandula or snotty Kernel is hid within a proper Cell or stall,
made hollow in the middle of the Wedge-like Bone, being shut up in the Chest
sometimes youth's brain Fig. IIII.
more strictly, sometimes more loosly: For in a Dog, Cat, and some other
Creatures, sticking to the Tunnel, it is pulled away together with it when it
is removed; and then its bulk consists of two Glandula's or Kernels distinct
among themselves, and easily to be separated one from another. But in a Calf,
Sheep, Hog, and many others, it is strictly included on every side, except
where it admits the Tunnel, and clothed with the hard Meninx or dura Matter, and
with its coverings shut up between the cavity of the bone. Besides, in these,
its frame or substance seems but one and undivided, though, in truth, it is
made up of a substance which is of a twofold nature or kind.

This Glandula is found in all perfect Creatures; for Man, all four-footed
Beasts, yea Fowl and Fishes are provided or endued with it: from whence we may
conclude it to have some necessary uses in the Brain. But as to its quantity or
bigness, its proportion is various in diverse Animals, according to the bigness
of the head and body wherein it is; because in a Lamb it is greater than in a
Man or a Dog; also its bulk in a Horse is lesser than in an Ox. But the reason
of this difference seems to consist in this chiefly, for that the pituitary
Glandula in some, respects the bulk of the brain only laid upon it, and in
others both the brain and the Carotidick Arteries ascending near it; and so as
it has a respect to both these together, or only to one, its substance or bulk
is either greater or lesser. For truly in some Animals the Carotidick Arteries
being dilated within the Skull, are presently divaricated into Net-like
infoldings, and from those infoldings many shoots of the Vessels every where
enter this Glandula, and are interwoven into its substance. Further, because
this enfolding of the Vessels, called the wonderful Net, is found very large in
some, and in others very small; therefore this Kernel, for as much as it admits
from these, few branches, and from those far more, and in some other Animals
scarce any shoots from the Arteries, answers to this diverse distributions of
the Vessels, with the various proportion of its bulk. Because it is observed in
some Animals, as chiefly in a Man and a Horse, that this wonderful Net is
wholly wanting; and whereas in such, either Artery is carried about by a long
compass between the recesses of this bone; from its trunk in a man sometimes
one or two shoots, sometimes none, are carried into the pituitary Kernel; also
in an Horse fewre branches enter into it, and so its bulk in these becomes
lesser.

But in very many other Animals (especially those who have the wonderful Net)
it may be proved, besides ocular inspection, also by this Experiment, that many
sanguiferous Vessels enter this Glandula: for if an inky liquor be squirted
into the Carotides with a Syringe, the exterior part of the Glandula, that is
interwoven with the bloodcarrying Vessels, will be very much dyed with a black
color. Wherefore without doubt, it may be thought, that this Glandula does
receive into it self the humors, to wit, flowing into it from the Tunnel in all
kind of living Creatures, and in some from the branches of the Carotides. Yet
by which way these humors are carried away again, does not so plainly appear;
for we affirm, with the most Learned Schneider, that they do not at all fall
down into the Palate through the holes of the under-lying bone. Yet in the mean
time, we suppose those holes to be only made to procure lightness to the bone;
because in those Animals, which have the greater pituitary Kernel, those holes
in the bone are more and larger: further, I have often found vessels or channels
to be contained between those holes: and when I had injected Ink within the
great hole of the same bone in a Calf, the black liquor presently entered the
lesser Vessels subject to the bone, and at last the Jugular Vein. And by this
Experiment chiefly we conjecture concerning the office and duty of this
Glandula; of which we shall speak more fully hereafter, when we inquire into
the use of this and the Tunnel.

Nigh to either side of the pituitary Kernel, if the dura Matter be opened, the
Carotidick Artery lies stretched out upon the wedge-like bone, about the length
of an inch: for as this Artery rises up below the Turkey Chair, sometimes
higher, sometimes farther within the Skull; the same being presently bent in
from its first ascent, goes in under the dura Matter till it comes to the
anterior border of the same Chair; where again being intorted, and being sent
forth upwards with a certain compass, it perforates the hard Meninx, and is
carried straight toward the Brain. So this Vessel with its double ascent and
crookedness (to wit, above the Basis of the Skull, and then above the hard
Meninx, together with its situation, stretched out in length under the same)
represents in most the letter (...) inversed; but in a man (as shall hereafter
be more largely shown) its site, by reason of the longer tract of the Vessel
and its greater curvature, represents the same letter double after this manner
(...).

The Carotidick Artery in all Animals ascends obliquely within the Skull; but
as to its site or protension nigh the pituitary Glandula, it is not after the
same manner in all: for in a man passing through the Canal-bone, peculiarly
engraven by it, with a single Trunk, it lies every where stretched out at
length; and out of this Trunk it sends forth sometimes, though not always, some
shoots to the pituitary Glandula. Also in a Horse, its Trunk is single; but
where it first arises within the Skull, either Carotides, through the cross
branches sent from one side to the other, before they perforate the dura Matter,
communicate among themselves. And as in most other living Creatures, the
Artery, however before branched forth, yet being made one single Trunk, goes
into the Brain; in a Horse either Carotick Artery being parted in two, sends
forth upwards two branches, arising from the dura Matter, in two distinct places.

In a Dog, Fox, Sheep, Calf, Stag, and many other four-footed beasts, either of
the Carotides, whilst hid within the Skull under the dura Matter, being divided
into small shoots, and complicated with other Vessels, to wit, both Veins and
nervous Fibers, constitutes the Net-like infoldings; which infoldings, being
stretched out on either side of the Turkey Chair, fill the cavity there
existing; then after manifold divarications of all the Vessels, some arterious
shoots being disintangled from the others, and again united, grow together into
one Trunk, which boring through the dura Matter, pasles straight into the Brain.

The aforesaid Enfolding is, commonly called the wonderful Net, and that
deservedly, for there is nothing in the whole fabric of the animal Body more
worthy of admiration; in which, besides the arterious little branches which
proceed from either of the ascending Carotides, the veinous shoots, though
fewer, meet with those descending from the inward Jugular branches; and both
kinds of Vessels being divided into small shoots, like a bundle of twisted
silk, are variously folded together: which complications of the Vessels however
are sustained by the nervous Fibers, supplied from the greater Trunk of the
fifth pair of Nerves. The aforesaid enfolding of the Vessels or wonderful Net
in some Animals is far greater, and contains much more divarications of the
Vessels than it has in others; for in a Calf, Sheep, Goat, which are fed with
grass, its frame is larger than in a Dog, Cat, and other flesh-eating and
hotter Brutes. Further, it is observable, where the wonderful Net is greater,
that the enfolding of one side is ingrafted into the enfolding of the other
opposite side, and that from both, many more shoots of the Vessels do enter
into the pituitary Kernel; so indeed, that if you shall inject Ink into the
Trunk of the Artery below the Skull, the Vessels on either side, or the
infoldings, will be dyed with the same tincture, and the black liquor will flow
out of the Trunk of the opposite Artery.

In truth we have often seen this kind of Experiment repeated. Let the
Carotidick Arteries be laid bare on either side of the Cervix or the hinder
part of the Head, so that their little Tubes or Pipes, about half an inch long,
may be exhibited together to the sight; then let a dyed liquor, and contained
in a large Squirt or Pipe, be injected upwards in the trunk of one side: after
once or twice injecting, you shall see the tincture or dyed liquor to descend
from the other side by the trunk of the opposite Artery: yea, if the same be
more copiously injected toward the Head, from thence returning through the
Artery of the opposite side, it will go through below the Praecordia, even to
the lower Region of the Body; when in the mean time, little or nothing of the
same tincture is carried through the outward and greater Jugular Veins. Then the
Head being opened, all the Arteries, before the entrance of the Head, and the
Veins of the same band with them, will be imbued with the color of the same
injected liquor. Further, in the Vessels which constitute the wonderful Net,
and which cover the Basis of the Brain, some footsteps of the same tincture
will appear. But that this liquor does descend so plentifully by the opposite
Artery, and not by the Jugular Vein, either associate or opposite, the reason
is, because it cannot enter those Veins, unless the region of the whole Brain,
being first passed through, it had entered the bosom; but the liquor being
plentifully injected, could not so suddenly pass through the very small Vessels
covering the Brain: wherefore rather than the force should be carried to the
Brain by the violent impulse of the liquor, it, returning from the injection,
and otherwise threatening a flood to the Brain, finds the way of receding also
by the opposite Arteries, for that end, both before they enter the Brain, and
after they have entered it, communicating among themselves. And here we cannot
sufficiently admire so provident (and to be equalled by no mechanical Art)
interior of the human skull Figure V.
a dispensation of the blood within the confines of the Brain. For in as much
as the Carotidick Arteries do communicate between themselves in various places,
and are mutually ingrafted; from thence a double benefit results, though of a
contrary effect: because by this one and the same means care is taken, both
lest the brain should be defrauded of its due watring of the blood, and also
lest it should be overwhelmed by the too impetuous flowing of the swelling
stream or torrent. As to the first, lest that should happen, one of the
Carotides perhaps being obstructed, the other might supply the provision of
both; then, lest the blood rushing with too full a torrent, should drown the
channels and little Ponds of the brain, the flood is chastised or hindered by an
opposite Emissary, as it were a Flood-gate, and so is commanded to return its
flood, and haste backward by the same ways, and to run back with an ebbing Tide.

By this kind of provision the Arteries about to enter the Brain are provided:
yea, and the passages of the Veins, destinated for the returning of the blood
from thence, seem also to be disposed with a wonderful artifice. For when the
anterior bosoms transfer their load into the two Laterals, which are the
posterior, and they themselves end in the Jugular Veins, it is observed, that
those latter bosoms have furrows or cavities insculped whereby they may settle
or rest upon the hinder part of the Head: and whenas either bosom, through a
proper hole, being about to go into the Jugular Vein, slides out of the Skull;
nigh that hole, in the outward part of the Skull, a round and ample den is made
hollow, and covered over by the extremity on either side of the same bosom,
enlarged into a greater capacity, to the end, that the blood, whilst it slides
forth out of the Head with a full torrent, should not rush into the Veins with
too rapid and vertiginous an influx, and so make a forcible entry on the Heart
it self, therefore it has here a diversion large enough, in which estuating or
boiling up, till a more free and open space may be granted to its course, it
may be staid without any trouble. Certainly there can be nothing more
artificial thought upon, and that can better argue the Providence of the great
Creator, than this fit or convenient disposition of the blood in the brain, and
without it, and the way of its reciprocation in diverse Animals, accommodated to
the necessity of every one. And lastly, in the dissection of Beasts, other
miracles of the same nature happen, whereby showing the finger and Divine
workmanship of the Deity, a most strong and invincible Argument may be opposed
to the most perverse Atheist.

The Fifth Figure
Shows the interior Basis of an humane Skull; where is shown after what manner
the Vessels of every kind cut off from the Brain, and about to go out of the
Skull, are hid or laid up under the dura Matter.

A. The hollowness of the Bone of the Forehead. B. The close or mound of the
Cribriform or Sieve-like Bone. CC. The mammillary Processes, which are much
thinner, and endued with a less open cavity, than in four-footed Beasts, endued
with a more excellent sense of smelling. DD. The Optic Nerves, being far
separated, go out of the Skull otherwise than in most brute Beasts. E. The
pituitary Glandula or Kernel with the top of the Tunnel inserted into it. FF.
The Carotidick Arteries showing themselves nigh its sides. GG. The moving
Nerves of the Eyes going out of the Skull. HH. The pathetick Nerves, hid under
the dura Matter, go out from the Skull at the same hole with the former. II. The
fifth pair of Nerves hid under the dura Matter. KK. The sixth pair stretched
forth under the dura Matter, and go out also at the same hole with the third and
fourth pair. LL. The seventh pair entering with a double Process the stony Bone.
MM. The eighth or the wandering pair seen to grow together with an accessory
Nerve of many Fibers, NN. as it goes out of the Skull. NN. The accessory Nerve
to the wandering pair. OO. The ninth pair. PP. The tenth pair tending downwards,
hid under the dura Matter, where the Vertebral Artery ascends. QQ. The lateral
or Side-bosom.
The Sixth Figure
Shows the Basis of a Calves Skull; where is shown after what manner the Vessels
cut off from the Brain, and about to go out from the Skull, are drowned under
the dura Matter.

AA. The hollownesses of the spongie Bone. BB. The mammillary Processes, which,
the smelling Nerves being cut off, appear hollow. C. The Optic Nerves united,
being presently separated again, they go out of the Skull. D. The pituitary
Kernel. EE. The Carotidick Arteries emerging nigh its sides. FF. The motory
Nerves of the Eyes going out of the Skull. GG. The pathetick Nerves of the
Eyes, hid under the dura Matter, going out of the Skull at the same hole with
the former. HH. The fifth pair of Nerves demersed under the dura Matter. II. The
sixth pair drowned under the dura Matter, and going out at the same hole with
the fourth and fifth. KK. kk. The seventh pair entering the stony Bone with a
double Process. LL. The eighth pair, or the wandering pair, with many Fibers,
and an accessory Nerve, seen to grow together, going out of the Skull. MM. The
ninth pair. NN. The tenth pair tending downwards, hid under the dura Matter.
CHAP. V.
The Brains of Fowls and Fishes described.

WHat hitherto we have shown concerning the description of the Brain and its
Appendix, we chiefly owe to the observations made of the dissection of the
Heads of a Man and of four-footed Beasts. We shall now proceed to the
commenting upon these Observations; to wit, that we may endeavor, from the
fabric rightly considered of the parts of the Brain, so described, to erect
their offices and uses, and so to design the government of the animal Function:
But because a compared Anatomy may yield us a more full and exact Physiology of
the Use of Parts; therefore before I enter upon this task, it will seem worth
our labor to inquire into the Heads of some other Animals, to wit, of Fowls
and Fishes.

We have already hinted, that the Brains of Men and of four-footed Beasts, were
alike in most things; and also that the contents in the Heads of Fowls and
Fishes being far different from both the former, yet as to the chief parts of
the Head, are found to have between themselves an agreement. The kinds of
either Animals being coetaneous, and as it were Twins from the Creation of the
World, do testify their affinity in nothing more than in the fabric of the
Brain. That it is so in Man and four-footed Beasts plainly appears already: we
shall now see if that the Anatomy of Fowls and Fishes will show us any thing
worthy of note.

That we may begin with Fowls; the covering of the Skull being taken off, the
hard Meninx or Membrane embraces strictly the bulk or mole contained within. In
the midst of it, where the brain is divided into two Hemispheres, it has a
bosom stretched out at length, which notwithstanding, no Falx (or Scythe) being
let down between the interstices, is inserted less deeply in the brain: then,
where this Membrane distinguishes between the brain and the Cerebel, two
lateral bosoms are formed. Besides, in Fowls there is a fourth bosom, which
has its place a little more backward than in a man or four-footed beasts; for
a little below the pineal Kernel a hollow and smooth process of the hard Meninx
is sent down upon the shanks of the oblong marrow, where presently it is
divided into two branches, on either side whereof it sends forth one upwards
into the cavity between the streaked Membrane and interior of a calf's skull
Fig. VI
P. 74

the Hemisphere of the brain, planted in the hinder part of the brain.

This superior Membrane or hard Meninx being cut off, and separated round about
the Pia Matter, appears very thin, which is not, as in man or other perfect
Creatures, marked with such frequent infoldings of the Vessels; but this most
subtle Meninx being made of a texture of Fibers, only clothes, and every where
intimately binds about the even and plain superficies of the brain contained
within, and wholly destitute of turnings and windings about.

The fabric of the brain in Fowls is otherwise than in man or four-footed
beasts: for besides that in its compass the inequalities and the turnings and
windings are wholly wanting; also more inwardly, the callous body and the
Fornix, as also the chamfered bodies, which we described before, are all
lacking: and besides, the substance of the brain it self is figured after
another manner. That these may the better be beheld, make the dissection of the
brain of a Goose or a Turky-Cock; and the Membranes being cut off, by pressing
lightly the fissure or cleft of the brain, you may divide the middle of it one
from another, and go forward to separate it, till you come to its bosom, in
which place are two marrowy bodies, which being stretched out like Nerves,
connect the Hemispheres one to another. Either side of the Interstitium or the
space between, is clothed with a whitish Membrane, which is marked with streaks
or beams, lying or running from the whole compass or circumference, to the
lower corner; and these streaks concenter about the insertions of the medullary
bodies. Then, if this Membrane be cut, in either Hemisphere of the brain, there
will appear underneath a cavity, which goes under the whole space, from the
side of the Interstitium, and for a great part, the hinder region of the brain,
and is arched or chambered with that streaked Membrane. Either cavity or
hollowness, about the bottom, is opened into an intermediate or common passage,
which lies open to the Tunnel; and from either side of this passage the shanks
of the oblong marrow are stretched out, to which, on either side, the
Hemisphere of the brain is hung by two medullary bodies; to wit, one marrowy or
medullary body goes out from the mole or substance of the brain lying under the
Ventricle, the other from the streaked Membrane covering the Ventricle. From
these two, placed on either side, the medullary bodies being stretched out
cross-wise, like Nerves, join the two Hemispheres of the brain to one another.
Besides, these two growing together on either side, fix either Hemisphere of
the brain to the shanks of the oblong marrow.

So the figure of the Brain in Fowl, if you compare it with the brain in men
and of the more perfect four-footed beasts, seems to be as it were inversed.
For as in these the Cortical part is outward, and the medullary laid under it;
so in Fowls, the lower frame of the brain, which consists of a thick and closer
substance, is instead of the Cortex or shell; but the outmost and upper
Membrane, chambering the Ventricle, appears medullar or marrowy above any other
part. Moreover, the Ventricles in the brains of a man and four-footed beasts
are placed beneath, and near the bottom; in Fowls, above and nigh the outward
border. The reason of this difference seems to be, because in a more perfect
brain, such as is in man and four footed beasts, the animal Spirits have both
their birth and exercise; viz. they are procreated in its Cortical or shelly
part, and in its medullary, which being large enough, lies under this, they are
circulated and variously expanded for the acting of their faculties. But truly
in the brain of Fowls there is space enough for the generation of Spirits, but
for their circulation there is scarce any left: to wit, the brains of Birds
seem not to be much possessed with the gifts of fantasy or memory: yea it is
thought, that the Spirits begotten in the brain are exercised chiefly in the
oblong marrow for the preserving the animal function; for there, as we shall
show anon, the medullary substance, which is instead of the callous body,
consists; and like the streaked bodies in others, in these are streaked
Membranes, through which the Spirits, procreated in the brain, are carried,
without any order there, forthwith into the oblong marrow: but because the
Spirits, begot in the brain, ought to lay aside a serous excrement; therefore
the Ventricles, from the complicature of the streaked Membrane upon the keel or
lower part of the brain, and on the shanks of the oblong marrow it self, do
serve conveniently enough for this business. Notwithstanding, because in the
brains of Fowls, the Fornix is wholly wanting, there are only two anterior
Ventricles; between which, the Choroeides enfolding is stretched out; the
veinous portion whereof, as was but now said, arises a little lower from the
fourth bosom; but the Arteries ascending, come from either side of the oblong
marrow.

Nor is there a greater heterogeneity or difference of conformation in the
Brain it self of Fowls, than in the oblong marrow from the same in men and
four-footed beasts. For in the first Section, from whence the Optic Nerves
arise, two noted protuberances grow to either side. These are much greater in
proportion than the orbicular prominences in the more perfect Creatures; so
that they seem another additional brain: either of them of a white color, and
purely marrowy, is hollow within; so that in these kind of Animals are found
two bellies or Ventricles in the brain, and as many in the oblong marrow. And
seeing in these, as in all other Animals, a cavity is put under the Cerebel,
the Ventricles in the whole Head differ as well in number as in figure and
position.

In the middle of the medullary Trunk, to wit, where those prominences grow to
its sides, the Chink, leading to the Tunnel, is cut, but into it the aperture
of either Ventricle gapes or opens, that it is not to be doubted, but that the
serosities heaped up there, are sent out by that way. Moreover it is likely,
that these hollow and medullary prominences in Fowls supply the course of the
callous body, to wit, in which the animal Spirits are circulated for the
exercising their faculties: because in the brain the space is so narrow, that
the Spirits cannot be produced and circulated together within its confines.
Further, as in Fowls, the use of the animal Spirits is required for the act of
the sensitive and loco-motive faculty, more than for fantasy or memory;
certainly the chief place where they may meet and be exercised, ought to be
placed rather in the oblong marrow than in the brain.

The Carotidick Arteries, which carry the blood to the brains of the greater
Birds, are so small, that there is no proportion of these to the same in man
and four-footed beasts. Their Trunks being carried within the Skull, ascend
without any branchings into net-like infoldings, alter the same manner as in
other Animals, nigh to the pituitary Glandula, and pass right into the brain,
and distribute some small shoots of the Vessels both to its exterior compass,
and through its inward recesses. But in truth, the brains of Birds are watered
with a very small portion of blood, in respect of other living Creatures;
because, where the fancy or imagination is little exercised, there is not much
blood required for the refreshing the animal Spirits.

Fowl (otherwise than some affirm) have both the mammillary processes, and the
Cribrous or Sieve-like bone. For the anterior productions of the brain being
highly extenuated and involved with the dura Matter, stretching out almost to
the middle part of the bill, are inserted into the triangular bone, which has
a double bosom, distinguished between with a thin mound or pale. But these
processes being dilated within the bosom of the aforesaid bone, and in Bladders
full of clear water, which are very like the mammillary processes in a Calf,
full of clear water. Besides, as out of the fifth pair of Nerves, a noted
branch on either side passing through the ball of the Eye, enters into the
cavern of the Nostril, a shoot of it being sent out of the Trunk, is bestowed
to the very orifice of the Nostrils; in the mean time, both the greater Trunks,
compassing about the Cribrous bone, meet together, and presently going one from
the other, and being carried to the end of the bill, are distributed into the
palate. After this manner Fowls, even as men and four-footed beasts, are
furnished with a peculiar organ of smelling, to wit, with a double mammillary
process; and besides, they have within the Nostrils additional Nerves out of
the fifth pair, by whose action and communication of branches into other parts,
and among themselves, so strict an affinity is contracted between the smell and
the taste. The other pairs of Nerves are almost after the same manner as in men
and four-footed beasts. In like manner we also observe, that there is no great
difference as to the Cerebel and the other portion of the oblong marrow,
between Birds and the other Animals we have already considered on, unless that
the orbicular prominences before the Cerebel, and the other annulary under it,
meeting within them, are both wanting in Fowls; indeed these latter seem not at
all to be required; but instead of the former, they are easily supplied from
the hollow medullary prominences, such as we have shown to be in Fowls.

And these are what are chiefly worth noting to be found in the brains of
Fowls. We have already mentioned, that there is a certain likeness between
these and Fishes as to the most parts of the head: wherefore it will seem to be
to the purpose, that here for a conclusion we should say something of the brain
of Fishes. First, we shall observe, that as the heads of Fishes, in respect of
the whole body, are greater than of any other living Creatures, yet they
contain in them less brain than others. For two little moles or substances,
placed before, sustain the whole place of the brain, properly so called; out of
these, two signal smelling Nerves proceed, which are carried by a long and
straight journey to the holes made hollow, out of either side of the mouth, and
which are instead of nostrils: and this is singular to Fishes. Moreover, we
advertise concerning the Optic Nerves, that they, as in other living
Creatures, inclining mutually one to the other, are not however united, unless
perhaps toward the superficies; but they are crossed, and a Nerve arising from
the right side of the oblong marrow, is carried into the left Eye, and so on
the contrary: so indeed, that the visory rays have their refraction, not only
in the Eye, but within the very bodies of the Nerves. The oblong marrow in
Fishes, wholly after the like manner as in Birds, has two signal protuberances
hollowed within; and in truth, as to local motions, the Spirits in either seem
to the exercised after the like mode. For as Fishes swim in the water, so the
flying of Fowls or Birds seems a certain kind of swimming in the Air. Further,
in these it is observable, there are the pituitary Kernel, the Tunnel, and the
Carotidick Arteries as in other Animals; also many pairs of the Nerves have the
same origines and distributions, excepting that the hearing Nerves are here
wanting; although Casserus Placentinus attributes this gift to the smelling
Nerves. The figure of the Cerebel is the same as in more perfect Animals.
Besides, what we have remarked concerning the wandering pair of Nerves in man
and four-footed beasts; to wit, many fibers of it arising together, the trunk
of the Nerve from the spinal marrow comes to them: in like manner the same is
in Fishes. But to describe them all further is needless: for the rest, as those
which are proper to them only and Birds, as also those which they have common
with Fowls and the more perfect Animals, may be easily known, partly out of the
peculiar similitude with birds, and partly out of the universal Analogy of all.
Therefore we will now philosophise upon the Use and Action of the Brain and its
Parts, and of its Appendix, together with the whole economy of the animal
Function: where in the first place, we will inquire into the offices of a more
perfect Brain, such as of man and four-footed beasts; and also secondarily and
collaterally we shall explain the Offices and Actions of a less perfect Brain,
and of its Parts, such as that of Fowls and Fishes.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Offices of the Brain and its Parts: where first of all the Uses of the
Skull and the hard Meninx or Dura Matter is treated of.

THE Poets feigned Pallas to be formed within the Brain of Jupiter, and from
thence to be born. In truth, within the Womb of the Brain all the Conceptions,
Ideas, Forces, and Powers whatsoever both of the Rational and Sensitive Soul
are framed; and having there gotten a species and form, are produced into act.
Wherefore it will be worth our labor to inquire into these places, of the
generation of these more noble faculties, and the first rise and primitive
beginnings of them, as also more curiously to consider the diverse parts of the
Brain, or the Organs serving to their Generation: And I go about this part of
my labor the more willingly, that I may by handling the thread of our
dissection again, bring all the Phenomenon, before given to our inspection and
sense, before the Eye of Reason, and to be again weighed by a more severe
Examination of Discourse; at least those things which seem to be of the greater
moment, and chiefly worth taking notice of. Neither do we think here to heap up
into a great Volume the several things worn out by the handling of others, and
offered to common observation.

Therefore recollecting the Anatomy of the Brain, the first things to be
considered are its coverings, to wit, the Skull, and the two Meninxes or
Matters. Concerning the first it is observed, that all perfect Animals have an
hard and bony Skull. A double reason for which may be given: First, that the
Head being destinated for the most noble use, might be protected with a more
firm and not easily penetrable covering, as a natural Helmet, against the
injuries of external strokes; besides secondly, as this is in the place of
Armor, so also of a Cloister; because the same covering the dura Matter within,
may restrain and keep within the Brain the Effluvia's of the animal Spirits,
lest they should too thickly evaporate, or in heaps. Further, as the Skull for
these ends is made bony, the efficient cause are the saline Particles of the
blood watering the brain, which being unprofitable to the interior work of the
animal Spirits, and so to be sent away outwardly, grow together thus in the
circumference, and are congealed into a stony hardness: For indeed the blood
being carried toward the Head, as it abounds very much in Spirit, so in Salt;
its Particles highly volatile, being joined to the Spirits, are bestowed on the
brain; in the mean time, the saline little bodies, which are of a more fixed
nature, being thrust out into the circumference, from the Spirit implanted in
the Brain, constitute the stony Skull, as it were a bubble covering enclosed
wind.

Within the hollow superficies of the Skull, there appear many furrows and
inequalities imprinted by the protuberances of the Vessels; and we perceive
frequently either border or plate of it to be perforated by the passing through
of the Vessels in several places: but the Arteries, arising in the exterior
superficies of the dura Matter, make these kind of little ditches through the
concavity of the Skull. For when the whole substance of the brain is at first
soft, and easily giving place, like Wax; the Arteries underneath it continually
beating, as it hardens by degrees, easily imprint the marks of their tracts.

The figure of the Skull in four footed beasts is narrow and pressed down, but in
man, the substance of whose brain is large, there is required a more capacious
and almost spherical figure. For as God gave him an upright countenance to
behold the Heavens, and also endued his brain with an immortal Soul, and fitted
for the speculation of Heaven; therefore his face is erect or lifted up: so the
brain it self is placed in a more eminent place, to wit, above the Cerebel and
all the Sensories. But in Brutes, and such whose faces are prone toward the
Earth, and have a brain unfit for speculation, the Cerebel, however serving to
the more noted action and office of the Praecordia, is placed in the highest
seat to which the mole of the brain is subjected. Besides, some organs of the
Senses, to wit, the Ears and Eyes, if they be not superior, they are placed at
least equal to the brain. In an humane Head, the Basis of the Brain and Cerebel
being placed nigh together, yea of the whole Skull, is made parallel to the
Horizon; whereby it comes to pass, that there is less danger for any portion of
the Head to be jogged here and there, or to be moved out of its proper seat:
But in four-footed beasts, who go with an hanging down head, the Basis of the
Skull makes a right angle with the Horizon; wherefore the brain being
subjected, the Cerebel is put in the highest place; so indeed, that this seems
less stable, and that it may shake, or be moved from its seat. However against
this inconvenience, lest a frequent concussion of the Cerebel might induce a
sinking down or loss of the Spirits, or irregularities about the Praecordia, in
some it is taken care of by a wonderful artifice of Nature; for as in all the
frame or substance of the Cerebel is most strictly bound fast together by the
dura Matter, besides in some it is staid by a bony fence; but in others, as in a
Hare, Rabbet, and other lesser Brutes, a certain portion of the Cerebel is
included on either side by a stony bone, and so by this double hold its whole
bulk or substance is firmly tied to the Skull. Concerning the chief bones of
the Skull, viz: the Cuniform or Wedge-like bone, the Cribrous or Sieve-like
bone, and the auditory or hearing Organ, they shall be spoken of in their
proper places, when we come to treat particularly of the Ventricles of the
Brain, and of the Senses to which these bones serve. We shall pass next to the
hard Meninx or dura Matter.

The dura Matter or hard Meninx, formed of a double kind of Vessels and
Processes, bears also a double Aspect, and owes part of its office to the
Skull, that is about it, and part to the Encephalon contained within it. The
exterior processes of this Membrane are insinuated within all the bosoms and
cavities of the Skull; to some whereof they are a covering and defense, but to
others they impart a sensible force; which manifestly appears in the Sieve-like
bone, through whose holes the fringes of this Membrane passing, conduce
something to the sense of smelling. Also the productions of this, lying over
the recesses and caverns of the Wedge-like bone, fortify the ways for the
entrance and coming out of the Vessels. The interior processes of the dura
Matter, which belong to the Head, divide and distinguish between the parts of
the brain and Cerebel; and in those places the dura Matter is very thick, lest
in any great concussion of the Head, these two should be smitten one against
another, and should press one upon the other. Wherefore in Dogs (as we have
already hinted) who are wont to run violently with their heads down, there is
sent down between these bodies a bony fence. In like manner in a Cat, Horse,
Fox, and many other Animals, from whose manner of living and use it is
required, that they be moved with a swift motion, that bony fence, commonly
called the Triangular Bone, is sent down deeply between the Brain and the
Cerebel; yea, and all the bosoms pass through that bone in the holes curiously
made hollow in it.

The Vessels belonging to the dura Matter are either Arteries, that carry the
blood thither; or they are Veins, which receiving from thence the superfluous
blood, and from the whole Head besides, return it toward the Heart. As to the
first sort of Vessels, on either side, two Arteries arising from the Carotidick
Artery on the same side, before it comes to the Basis of the Brain, are carried
into the dura Matter: which notwithstanding, only possessing the exterior
superficies or unequal part, carry blood and juice to this Membrane, also in
some measure to the Skull and its coverings. As to the Vessels carrying the
blood back, this Meninx contains four, into which, as into a great Sea, all the
Rivulets of the Arteries, serving the whole Head, do exonerate themselves: to
wit, there are observed in this Membrane four noted Cavities, commonly called
Bosoms; which are disposed after that manner, that, like Promptuaries or
Storehouses framed in several places, they receive the blood returning from
every region and corner of the brain: For the third bosom, or the longitudinal,
looks toward the anterior brain, the fourth toward its middle; but the first
and second admit the blood flowing back from the Cerebel and hinder part of the
brain. Further, out of these the third and fourth disburden themselves into the
first and second; and these at length transfer their burden into the Jugular
Veins. On every side, from these bosoms, the lesser Vessels, viz. the channels
of the Veins are sent forth, which going out night the interior or concave
superficies of the dura Matter, are presently inserted into the Pia Matter, and
following its protension, being distributed through the whole compass, and all
the interior recesses of the brain and its Appendix within the Skull, and being
complicated with the Arteries, receive the superfluous blood, and carry it into
those greater cavities. That it is so, it plainly appears, because if you
squirt a liquor, dyed with ink, into the Pipe of the Artery, that passing
through the arterious shoots, and then the veinous, goes through at last into
the bosoms.

Whilst the blood, returning from the whole interior Head, is collected within
those bosoms, as with a full belly, it seems also in another respect to be of a
very notable use; to wit, for the supplying of heat, requisite for the
distilling forth of the animal Spirits, as if it were a certain Chemical
operation. For as much as the blood to be distilled, is contained in the
Vessels, interwoven into the Pia Matter, the superior Rivers diffused on every
side through the dura Matter, the heat being brought to it like a Balneum
Mariae, flow about the underlying blood, and so force out of it a most subtle
Liquor into the substance of the Brain; or rather, the blood raising up heat
within the bosoms, is like the fire of suppression, which in the distillation
by descent, is inkindled round about the Vessel containing the matter to be
distilled. For indeed the interior substance of the Brain, for that it is
endued with plenty of Salt and very little Sulphur, is of a more frigid temper:
wherefore, that from the blood watering its superficies, the spirituous part
may be stilled forth, and forced into its middle or marrow, the degree of the
ambient heat ought to be made the more strong, such indeed, as the blood
collected in the ample Estuaries of the bosoms, may easily afford. Further, as
those bosoms being distended with heated blood, are like a certain distillatory
Bath; so the other Membrane of the dura Matter being stretched out about the
whole Head, is like an impervious Alembick, which with its covering keeps
within the spirituous breaths, that they may not be immoderately evaporated.

Concerning this Membrane there may yet be considered, with what motion or
sense it is endued. And as to sense, it is not to be doubted, but that it has
it exquisitely: For since all the Membranes have feeling, and owe that faculty
to the afflux of the animal Spirits from the Brain, surely this Meninx, for
that it is nearer and very much of kin to the Brain and its Appendix, so that
it clothes very many Nerves going out of the Skull, it obtains a very accurate
virtue of feeling: which thing also may be argued from the effect; because the
pains of the Head often proceed from the breach of unity excited in this
Membrane. But that it has motion, it can hardly be thought, because it is tied
in very many places to the Skull; and yet it is probable, that the same may
sometimes, in some parts at least, be contracted and wringled or drawn
together: And certainly there is no doubt, that it is contracted and remitted
in sneeling. In like manner, when from an hurt of this a Vomiting or Convulsive
motions follow in the Viscera or Members, this Membrane is the cause, which
being somewhere contracted or divided, infolds with it self the substance
contained within with the same Convulsion or Spasm.

Concerning the motion of this Membrane, a curious mind may yet further
consider its texture, and especially how it is within the cavities of the
bosoms, and the Interstitium or separation of the Brain and Cerebel. For in
these places are found many Fibers, or as it were greater or nervous cords or
strings, such as we have observed to be variously stretched out in the
Ventricles of the Heart. Within the bosoms, from the various processes of the
Membrane, a cavity full of turnings and windings, and manifoldly divided, as it
were with many little Cells, is constituted. This seems to be thus made, to
this end, to wit, that the blood returning back from diverse little rivers into
the cavities of the bosoms, may be retarded by several obstacles, as it were
little floodgates; lest perhaps rushing too impetuously and by heaps, it might
flow within this Sea with a vertiginous and inordinate motion. But there is
observed, besides these intrications and little cells of this Meninx in the
heads of four-footed beasts, that moreover in the whole cavity of the bosoms,
very many cords, as it were Ligaments, are every where produced from one side
to the other. The office of these is partly, that they may contain the sides of
the cavity within their due ends of aperture and dilation, lest they should be
distended above measure by the vehement rushing in of the blood, and so may
press upon the substance of the brain. Yea the contexture of these whitish
Fibers, which are met with, both within the cavities of the bosoms, and in this
Meninx, going about the Cerebel, and distinguishing between it and the Brain,
seems to intimate, that they serve also to some motion. For it may be
suspected, that those strong Fibers, and as it were Ligaments, do sometimes
contract, sometimes dilate, and variously draw the Membrane to which they are
knit. From these kind of motions of the dura Matter, the blood flowing within
the bosoms, may be variously agitated, and as occasion serves, sometimes
hastened in its Circle, and sometimes restrained or hindered; for in many
affections of the sensitive Soul, the blood being disturbed from its equal
circulation, is sometimes precipitated by heaps and impetuously to the Heart,
and sometimes detained from its nest longer, nigh the confines of the Brain.
But that various whirlwinds of passions stir up such irregularities in the
motion of the blood, the nervous parts implanted about the Praecordia, are in
some measure the cause, which by contracting or dilating the same, variously
moderate the course of the blood; yet so, that in the mean time, some part of
this office is due from the brain it self, or at least to its Appendix. Indeed
the brain it self wants motion; but the blood passing through its substance,
for as much as it is poured wholly in this Meninx, and passes through its
receptacles, is at the motion and beck of this Membrane, sometimes driven away
from the brain, and commanded to succor the Heart, as in fear and great
sadness, sometimes being hastened toward the brain, is for some time
prohibited from flowing back, as in shame, indignation, and some other
affections.

Truly, that these kind of interior processes of the bosoms, and as it were
transverse strings or cords, do conduce to the more commodious reduction of the
blood, we gather also from hence, that in working beasts, whose brain (because
they feed and go with a prone and hanging down head) is in greater danger of an
inundation of the blood, those processes are very big, for that they being
successively contracted, may leisurely thrust out the blood, apt otherwise to
stagnate by reason of the inclination of the head. Neither is it from the
purpose to observe here, that these same Animals are always furnished, for that
reason, with a greater wonderful Net: by which means indeed it is provided,
that the blood may not too much invade the brain by heaps; as care is taken by
the artifice but now described, lest the same should make too long stay in the
brain, and so oppress its more weak frame.

Therefore in the last place, that I may recollect what I have said of the dura
Matter, and rehearse its chief uses: First, It covers over the Skull within, and
reaches to it somewhat of nourishment by the Vessels. Secondly, It is a
covering to the whole head, and serves to distinguish its chief parts. Thirdly,
It contains the Vessels designed for the reducing the blood from the whole
interior head; which, in the mean time, by reason of the plenty of the blood
contained in them, and the opportunity of their situation, administer requisite
heat for the distillation of the Spirits. Fourthly, It provides ways for the
admission and going out of all the Vessels within the Skull, and fortifies
them; to which may be added, that it bestows on some of them their Coats, as
shall be shown anon. Fifthly and lastly, This Meninx being here and there
contracted or divided by the animal Spirits variously moved, according to the
passions of the Soul, or the necessities of Nature, stays the blood sometimes
longer near the confines of the Brain, sometimes drives it forward from thence
toward the Praecordia.

CHAP. VII.
Of the thinner Meninx or Pia Matter, of its stretching out, as also of the
Infoldings of the Vessels every where interwoven with it.

THE interior Meninx or Pia Matter is far thinner than the exterior, and
consists of a most subtle contexture of Fibers. This does not compass about the
Encephalon's superficies as loosly as the Dura Matter; but embraces it so very
strictly, that it is very hardly separated from it: besides, it insinuates it
self into all its turnings and windings and furrows, and clothes their inward
parts. Further, this Meninx, although it be thin, yet being covered over
throughout with the infoldings of Arteries and Veins, is interwoven with them,
and so waters all the spaces of the Brain and Cerebel with innumerable rivers.
For as the Region of either of these, especially of the Brain, is full of
turnings and windings, this Membrane in like manner grows to the deep furrows
of the crankling turnings about, and also to the tops of the ridges; yea, the
chief complications of the Vessels are still placed in the valleys, as if they
were there hid in regard of their safety. Neither does this Meninx only cover
the gapings of the turnings and windings about; but also gathers together the
tops or heights of all their interstices or places between, and knits them
together, and so makes the whole superficies of the Head plain, globous, and as
it were like the World.

That the diffusion of this wonderful Membrane into all the turnings and
windings of the Brain, and the distribution of the Vessels through those most
intimate recesses, may be the better beheld; let the head of a man, or of a
brute beast that dyed of the Dropsy, be opened: For in such, whose brain
abounds with much moisture, the little stays, whereby this Meninx is fixed to
the substance of the brain, are loosned, so that the Membrane, with the
infoldings of the Vessels, may be easily drawn away, and pulled off almost
whole: which indeed being pulled off, the folds of the brain will appear naked;
also the insertions of the Vessels every where into the more inward substance
of the brain, may be perceived. But to a sound and dry brain the Pia Matter
sticks so closely, that it can scarce be drawn away in any part, or separated
with a Penknife.

We have already shown after what manner the Veins and Arteries (which creeping
like Ivy, are knit into the Pia Matter, and variously interwoven into it) cover
over with most thick little shoots, the whole compass of the Brain and Cerebel,
and their Interstices, the gapings of the crankling turnings and windings
about, bosoms, and cavities, and send forth every where small shoots into the
medullary substance; so that it is not to be doubted, but that the animal
Spirits, being as it were stilled forth immediately from the blood, every where
in the whole head, are received into the Pores and passages of the Brain and
Cerebel. From hence it will be easy to assign the use or office of the Pia
Matter: viz. First, this Membrane clothes the universal parts of the whole
Encephalon, and distinguishes them all one from another. For indeed, this lying
over all the gapings and interstices of the turnings and windings, is instead
of a mound or fence, by which the animal Spirits are restrained every where
within their proper cells and orbs of expansion, nor are they permitted by this
means to run beyond their bounds, and so confound the acts of the many
Faculties. Then secondly, this Meninx sustains all the blood carrying Vessels,
viz. both the Arteries and Veins, together with their manifold productions, and
so affords a passage to the blood, by carrying it to and fro toward the brain.

Concerning these Vessels, which are knit to this Meninx, and follow its
stretching out into all parts, there are many admirable things to be met with,
and highly worthy of note, the uses and reasons of which is our purpose to
search into.

As to these, we shall first observe, that these Arteries and Veins, otherwise
than in any other part of the body besides, not arising nigh one another go
forth as companions, but going forth from opposite ends, meet every where
mutually, viz. the Arteries ascend from the Basis of the Skull, and by creeping
through the whole, emit upwards shoots and branches, which are met by the Pipes
of the Veins arising out of the bosoms, and carried downwards. By this means
the rivers of the blood seem to be made equal every where in the Brain, viz.
whilst the smaller shoots of the Veins follow or match the greater branches of
the Arteries, and on the contrary, the small branches of the Arteries the
Trunks of the Veins.

Secondly, We have already shown, that these Vessels are variously and very
much ingrafted or inoculated among themselves, not only the Arteries with the
Veins, but what is more rare and singular, Arteries with Arteries; to wit, the
Carotidick Arteries of one side, in many places, are united with the Carotides
of the other side; besides the Vertebrals of either side among themselves, and
are also inoculated into the posterior branches of the Carotides before united.
The joynings together of the Carotides, in most living Creatures, are made
about the Basis of the Skull under the Dura Matter, and that after a diverse
manner; in some communicated through the Vessels of the wonderful Net from one
side to the other; in others (as in a Horse we have observed with a certain
admiration) the arterious chanel is produced between the Trunks of the
Carotides, whereby the blood may be carried from one side to the other, and so
on the contrary. But besides, between the Dura Matter, about the Basis of the
Head, the same kind of ingraftings of the Arteries are still seen in man and
all perfect four-footed beasts.

The reason of these seems to be partly, that the blood to be carried from the
Heart into diverse Regions of the Brain, might be exactly mingled as to its
parts and particles, before it come to the place designed. For the Torrent of
the blood, because divided into lesser rivulets, is incident to languish in so
long a circuit, and its Spirits to be depauperated, and lastly it self to grow
cool; unless that various courses of its Latex should anew inkindle this vital
flame about to be extinguished or dye.

But there is another reason far greater than this of these manifold
ingraftings of the Vessels, to wit, that there may be a manifold way, and that
more certain, for the blood about to go into diverse Regions of the Brain, laid
open for each; so that if by chance one or two should be stopped, there might
easily be sound another passage instead of them: as for example, if the
Carotides of one side should be obstructed, then the Vessels of the other side
might provide for either Province. Also as to the Vertebral Arteries, there is
the same manner of provision made. Further, if both the Carotides should be
stopped, the offices of each might be supplied through the Vertebrals, and so
on the other side the Carotides may supply the defects of the shut up
Vertebrals.

After this manner, lest there should be wanting an afflux of the blood at any
time in any part of the Brain, or its Appendix, within the Skull, there is care
taken with singular Art: For as there are four distinct passages, and those
remote one from the other, of this Latex, if perchance three of them should
happen to be shut up, the blood being carried through one only, will soon
supply or fill the channels and passages of all the rest. Which thing I have
found by Experience often tried, not without admiration and great pleasure. To
wit, I have squirted oftentimes into either Artery of the Carotides, a liquor
dyed with Ink, and presently the branches on either side, yea and the chief
shoots of the Vertebrals, have been dyed with the same tincture: yea, if such
an injection be sometimes iterated by one only passage, the Vessels creeping
into every corner and secret place of the Brain and Cerebel, will be imbued
with the same color. Also in those who have the wonderful Net, the Tincture or
dyed Liquor being injected in one side, it will come through the Net like
infoldings of the Vessels in both sides. Hence it plainly appears, that there
is a communication between the Vessels watering the whole Head; and although
every Artery is carried to one only Region, as its peculiar Province, and
provides for it apart; yet, lest that any part should be deprived of the
influence of the blood, more ways lie open to every part by the ingraftings of
those vessels; so that if the proper vessels by chance should be wanting in
their office, its defect may presently be compensated by others neighboring.

It is not long since we dissected the dead body of a certain man, whom a great
Scirrhus or hard Swelling within the Mesentery, growing at last ulcerous, had
killed. When his Skull was opened, we beheld those things belonging to the
Head, and found the right Carotides, rising within the Skull, plainly bony or
rather stony, its cavity being almost wholly shut up; so that the influx of the
blood being denied to this passage, it seemed wonderful, wherefore this sick
person had not dyed before of an Apoplexy: which indeed he was so far from,
that he enjoyed to the last moment of his life, the free exercise of his mind
and animal function. For indeed, Nature had substituted a sufficient Remedy
against that danger of an Apoplexy; to wit, the Vertebral Artery of the same
side, in which the Carotidick was wanting, the bulk of the Pipe being enlarged,
became thrice as big as both its Pipes on the other side: because, the blood
being excluded the Carotidick, adding it self to the wonted provision of the
Vertebral Artery, and flowing with a double flood into the same belly, had so
dilated the chanel of that Artery above measure. This Gentleman, about the
beginning of his sickness, was tormented with a cruel pain of the Head toward
the left side. The cause whereof cannot be more probably assigned, than that
the blood excluded from the right Carotidick Artery, when at first it rushed
more impetuously in the left, had distended the Membrane; and therefore the
same distemper did afterward vanish of its own accord, to wit, the superfluous
blood being derived through the Vertebral Artery.

Thirdly, Concerning these sanguiferous Vessels covering the Pia Matter, we
observe, that the Arteries and Veins, whilst they meet one another, going out
from opposite ends, do not only transfer their burden immediately through the
several branches or shoots, mutually ingrafted, as is wont to be done in other
parts of the Body; but being variously complicated and interwoven, do
constitute every where admirable infoldings, into which, for the most part,
very small and very numerous Glandula's or Kernels are inserted. Which thing is
seen, not only in the infoldings, which are called Choroeides, (by which name,
besides those which are found within the plicature or folding up of the Brain,
we also intend others planted together behind the Cerebel) but these kind of
infoldings of the Vessels, with Glandula's sowed between, are seen every where
to be sprinkled through the whole compass and interior recesses of the Brain
and Cerebel, and especially between the gapings of their turnings and windings
and interstices. This is clearly manifest in a moister Brain, or in an
Hydropical, where the very small Glandula's, which otherwise are scarce to be
seen, being intumified by the moisture, are easily beheld. Moreover, from the
aforesaid infoldings, on every side implanted, little slender Vessels, being
every where sent forth, enter the Cortical, and in some measure the medullary
substance of the Brain and its Appendix; for if you squirt into the Carotides a
black liquor, besides the shoots of the Vessels, which it dies every where with
the same color, little blackish pricks will appear sprinkled in the substance
of the Brain. Further, if the brain of a living Animal be cut up, the live
blood will spring forth both from its Cortex and medullary part. The reason and
end of all which, if they be inquired into, it seems that these foldings of the
Vessels, being variously complicated with repeated windings about, as if they
were little serpentine channels hanging to an Alembick, through whose narrow
straits the blood passing with a long circuit, becomes still more subtle and
elaborated; to wit, its thicker part, being by degrees put off in its passage,
or sent away by the little branches of the Veins, and so at length the only
pure and most spirituous blood, and it self now ready to go into animal
Spirits, is admitted within the Pores and passages of the brain. But as the
blood or sanguinolent part is supped up by the Veins, so it is very likely the
Serum or watery part is received by the Glandula's or Kernels interwoven in
them. For it appears not for what other end these Arteries are every where
beset with so many Kernels, unless they should lay up in them the superfluous
serosities. Between these infoldings there appear not any Nerves to be found,
which may require any juice or serous humor from these Kernels; and it is not
yet found, whether these Lymphaeducts or Water-carriers be accompanied with any
Vessel: wherefore it may be lawful to suppose, that whilst the purer and
spirituous part of the blood, being separated from the rest of its mass, is
stilled forth into the brain, the serous humidities are received by the
Glandula's, which are numerous, and that they are for some time retained by
them, till they may be sent away into the Veins growing empty again.

Thus far we have beheld only the superior branchings forth of the
blood-carrying Vessels, which are every where interwoven in the Pia Matter; and
their infoldings, which like the leaves of a Wood, or creeping Ivy, cover the
exterior compass of the whole Head. But by what means, and as it were Chemical
Artifice, these Vessels do instill the animal Spirits into the Brain and
Cerebel, and serve for the use of one another besides, shall be told anon,
after we have considered of the inferior Aspect and next the ground of this
most thick Wood, viz. the greater Trunks of all the Arteries, which are
destinated for the Brain, where they pass through the Skull, and show
themselves beyond it.

CHAP. VIII.
Shows with what difference the Arteries in various Animals passthrough the
Skull; also for what use the wonderful Net is made, and the reason of it.

THE Arteries, destinated to the Brain, are four in number, viz. two Carotides,
and as many Vertebrals. Concerning the former, we have already observed, that
their Trunks pass through the Wedge-like Bone, as it were with a mechanical
provision; to wit, either Artery is so bowed and intorted in its ascent, that
the blood, before it can reach to the Brain by a repeated stopping of shores,
or hindered by a certain let or impediment, might flow to it less rapidly and
more slowly. But this is not effected after one and the same manner in all
Animals: for although the ascent of the Artery be oblique and intorted in all,
yet in some, viz. in a Man and a Horse, it being bowed about with a greater
compass, still enters, even to the Brain, with a single and undivided Trunk:
when in most other beasts the same passes the Skull with a lesser circuit, and
sliding presently under the Dura Matter, diversifies it self there into Retiform
infoldings, commonly called the wonderful Net. Therefore it seems to be to the
purpose, that we inquire into the various reasons of this difference.

In the first place therefore we shall advertise you, that the Carotidick
Artery in a man enters a little more backward the Skull, than in any other
Animal, viz. nigh that hole through which the lateral bosom slides out of the
Skull about to be implanted into the Jugular Vein; for in the rest, this Artery
arises within the Skull under the end or acute process of the stony Bone. But
in an humane Head, the same being carried about by a longer compass, (that the
Torrent of the blood, before it comes to the border of the Brain, might flow
slowly and pleasantly with a broken force) attains to the Basis of the Skull
nigh the den made by the ingress of the lateral bosom; where being presently
intorted, it enters the proper Chanel insculped in the Wedglike Bone, and for
the greater assurance it is clothed besides with a thicker additional Coat.
This double defense seems to be given it, lest the blood, boiling up too much,
and whilst it is carried violently toward the head, should make a Whirlpool
about the ingress of the Skull, to wit, where it begins to be wreathed about
from its direct ascent, and should break by its flood the banks of the Belly,
unless they were more firm. The Artery being slid out of the bony chanel, lays
aside also its ascititious or additional Coat; and now being well enough
defended within the Skull, goes forward clothed only with its proper Coat, and
creeps under the Dura Matter, and being as it were depressed in the midst of its
passage into a valley, being immediately carried out again, it goes on till it
comes to the head of the Turkey Chair; where again being bent in and intorted,
with a certain compass, it ascends straight, and boring through the Dura Matter,
is carried toward the Brain. The Trunk of this Carotis, like a Meander,
passing through the Skull with a very much bending way or passage, is aptly
represented in the first Figure of the following Table.

If the reason of this kind of Conformation be inquired into, it easily occurs,
that in an humane Head, where the generous Affections, and the great forces and
ardors of the Souls are stirred up, the approach of the blood to the confines
of the Brain, ought to be free and expeditious; and it is behoveful for its
River not to run in narrow and manifoldly divided Rivulets, which would scarce
drive a Mill, but always with a broad and open chanel, such as might bear a
Ship under Sail. And indeed, in this respect, a man differs from most brute
beasts, in which, the Artery being divided into a thousand little shoots, lest
it should carry the blood with a fuller chanel, or more quick course than is
requisite, makes the Net-like infoldings, by which indeed it comes to pass,
that the blood slides into the Brain very slowly, and with a gentle and almost
even stream. If that be true, as some affirm, that the wonderful Net also is
sometimes found in an humane Brain, I believe it is only in those sort of men,
who being of a slender wit or unmoved disposition, and destitute of all force
and ardor of the mind, are little better than dull working beasts in fortitude
and wisdom.

Secondly, The conformation of the Carotidick Artery in a Horse, comes nearest
its structure in a man; for in this the Artery enters the Skull also lower, and
with a greater compass than in other four-footed beasts: which being passed,
its Trunk being intorted, with a certain compass, and then a little depressed,
goes forward whole to the side of the Turkey Chair still with a full and broad
chanel: which truly ought to be made so, because magnanimous and fierce forces
are convenient for this Animal, born as it were for War and any dangerous
attempts; and so there was need, that the blood might ascend the Brain with a
free and plentiful course, and (when occasion requires) with a full Torrent.
But though the blood passes through the Basis of a Horses Skull in the same
undivided chanel, yet it ought not to come to the Brain it self in one single
passage; because the frame or substance of this in a Horse being far weaker and
colder than in a man, it might be overthrown and drowned by the blood rushing
in by heaps: wherefore the great River of the Artery disburdens it self by two
Emissaries, and pours out its Latex at so many distinct places of the Brain.
Further, as if by this means there were not yet sufficient caution against the
Deluge of the Brain, a transverse or cross chanel, as it were a diversion, is
formed between the channels of either Artery; through which the blood, being
straightened for room, may go aside, and flow and reflow from one bank or chanel
to another, rather than oppress or overflow the Brain. Also besides, certain
shoots being sent out from the Trunk of either Artery, are inserted into the
pituitary Glandula, the use of which is doubtless to separate certain
serosities of the too watery blood, and to lay them up into that Glandula,
whereby the rest of the bloody Latex, to be carried to the Brain, becomes more
pure and free from dregs. By what means the Carotidick Arteries, in the head of
a Horse, pass through the Basis of the Skull, is represented in the second
Figure of the following Table. I have not yet had the means to inspect the
brains of a Lion or a Monkey; but there is reason to suspect, that in these
also the Carotides do pass through the Skull with a single Trunk. In a Sheep,
Calf, Hog, yea in a Dog, Fox, Cat, and other four-footed beasts, which I have
hitherto opened, this Artery is divaricated into Net-like infoldings, which
Vessels, for what causes and for what uses they are so made, we shall now
inquire into.

Thirdly therefore, most other four-footed beasts, different from a Man and a
Horse, have the wonderful Net adjoined to the Carotidick Artery. In truth, this
is met with in so many, that common Anatomy has ascribed it to all Animals,
and also to man it self. In whom it is found, we observe, that the Artery,
about to enter the Skull, is not carried about with so long a compass, but
rising up nigh the hinder part of the Turkish Chair, is presently divided into
small shoots; yet so, as one little chanel is stretched right out, which the
blood quietly running to, passes through without any stay, being carried
straight into the Brain: but from the side of this many rivulets are derived on
every side, into which the blood impetuously ascending, may be easily diverted.
These little rivers are partly ingrafted into the veinous passages of the same,
and the Vessels of the other side, and are partly carried into the pituitary
Glandula, and partly a compass being fetched, are returned into the former
chanel or belly of the Artery. That it is so, besides naked inspection, appears
plainly by this Experiment. If below the Skull, an inky liquor be gently and by
degrees injected into the Trunk of the Carotis, that passing through the strait
passage, is carried presently into the Brain, nor does it dye the lateral
infolded Vessels with its tincture; but if this liquor be immitted continually
and forcibly, presently running into the folds, it will make black the Vessels
of the same and of the opposite side, also entering the hither part of the
Glandula and its interior substance. If the use of these kind of infoldings of
the Vessels, or the wonderful Net be inquired into, I say, that it is made
chiefly for these ends: viz. First, that the Torrent of the blood being divided
into small rivulets, its more rapid course may be so far dulled or broken, that
it may be but leisurely instilled into the Brain. For otherwise in laboring
beasts, who go with their heads hanging down, and have but a weak brain, the
more free influx of the blood might easily overthrow the fabric of the Brain,
and spoil the animal Spirits. Secondly, the divarication of the Carotides into
Net-like infoldings, has another use of no less moment, to wit, that the more
watery blood being (as it is its temperament in most Beasts, and especially in
those who are fed with herbage) before it be poured upon the Brain, might carry
away some part of the superfluous Serum to the pituitary Glandula, and instill
the other part into the branches or shoots of the Veins to be returned toward
the Heart. Thirdly and lastly, for as much as the Vessels on either side are
mutually inoculated by this means, there is care taken both that the blood may
be exactly mixed before it ascends to the Brain, as also that more certain ways
may be made for its passage: because, if perchance an obstruction should happen
in one side of the wonderful Net, the blood by that enfolding being presently
carried to the other, may find a passage: for this cause, to wit, that the
blood might be the better prevented from any impediment in its passage, the
Vessels are not only inoculated under the Dura Matter about the wonderful Net,
but the Arteries again on either side, do the same thing as soon as they, being
knit to the Pia Matter, reach the superficies of the Brain, as has been already
shown. By these sort of ingraftings of the Vessels in the wonderful Net, it
comes to pass, that an inky liquor being injected into one of the Carotides,
and forced upwards, descends by the Trunk of the Artery on the opposite side,
as we have elsewhere observed. Some rude draught of the wonderful Net is
expressed in the third Figure of the following Table.

The First Figure
Shows the ascent of the Carotidick Artery, and its situation within an humane
Skull, before it is carried toward the Brain. A. The Trunk of the Artery
ascending toward the Skull. B. The same, whilst it is included in the bony
Chanel, being clothed with an additional Coat. BC. The incurvature or bending
of the Artery, reaching within the bosom of the Skull representing the bending
of a double S. D. The Trunk of the same being carried toward the Brain.
The Second Figure
Shows the ascent of the Carotidick Arteries, and their situation in a Horses
Skull. AA. Either Carotidick Artery ascending toward the Skull. BB. The Trunk
of either, having past the Skull, pressed down as it were into a valley. CC.
The communications of either by cross Branches. DD. A Branch from either Trunk
destinated for the Dura Matter. dddd. Little shoots on either side sent into the
pituitary Glandula or Kernel. EE. FF. Either Carotidick Artery being divided
before it reaches the Brain, and ascending with a double Trunk.
The Third Figure
Shows the wonderful Net with the pituitary Kernel in a Calves Skull. A. a. The
direct Chanel of the Artery. B. The Net-like Infoldings of the Vessels
stretched out by that Chanel toward the pituitary Kernel. C. The pituitary
Glandula or Kernel.
The Fourth Figure
Shows after what manner the lateral Bosom goes into the Jugular Vein with a
diverting place hanging to it. A. The lateral Bosom descending. B. That Bosom
sliding into the Skull, and dilating it self into a large and round Cavity, for
the receiving of which there is a peculiar Den formed in the outward part of
the Skull.
ascent of carotidick artery Fig: I


ascent of carotidick arteries Fig: II


pituitary kernel in calf's skull Fig: III


lateral bosom entering jugular vein Fig: IIII


C. The aforesaid Cavity or diverting place, in which the blood, about to
descend, may go aside, lest it should else rush too strougly upon the Jugular
Vein; by which also care is taken, that the blood may not flow back or
regurgitate out of the Jugular Vein into the Bosom. D. The beginning of the
Jugular Vein.
But as the Carotides (of whose office and ascent we have hitherto spoken)
carry the destinated Tribute of the blood to the Brain; so the Vertebrals serve
chiefly for the watering the Cerebel and the hinder part of the oblong Marrow.
Hence we observe, because the conformation of the Cerebel is alike in all
Creatures, therefore also the Vertebral Arteries, different from the Carotides,
are found alike in all without any great difference. Nor does there seem to be
need of any great provision for the admission or entrance of the Vertebral
Arteries within the Skull; because, as they carry a lesser portion of the
blood, and for that the blood it self that is to be bestowed on the Cerebel, is
wont there to be agitated or moved with no perturbations of passions or
conceptions; therefore there is not that necessity that there should be placed
any remora or any incitement for its Torrent.

The Vertebral Artery, arising from the branch in the fifth Rib, in its whole
ascent through the hinder part of the Head, passes through the little holes cut
in the extuberances of the Vertebrae, till it comes near the Basis of the
hinder part of the Head; where the same being bent down on either side, and
admitted into the Skull by the last hole, excepting where the spinal Marrow
goes forth, is carried by the side of the oblong marrow; but as soon as it is
brought to the region of the Cerebel, it sends forth branches on either side,
which cover its superficies, and besides on its back side make infoldings no
less signal than those commonly called the Choroeides, and with larger Kernels
more thickly interwoven. As those shoots convey the Juice requisite for the
stilling forth the animal Spirits, so these convey the heated blood and the
purified from the serous Colluvies. Further, beneath the Cerebel, both the
Vertebral branches, inclining mutually one to another, are united, as it were
for that end, that if the flowing of the blood should be stopped on either
side, it might be supplied from the other to the whole compass of the Cerebel
and its neighboring parts. These sanguiferous Vessels covering the Cerebel,
even as the others do the Brain, make signal infoldings both in its outward
superficies, and in that of the oblong marrow, and also within its lappets and
folds; from which small shoots are sent forth every where into its under-lying
substance: so that from these a subtle liquor, as it were stilled forth and
imbibed by the Cortical substance of the Cerebel, seems to go into animal
Spirits. By what means, and in what parts of the Head the production of the
animal Spirits is performed, remains next to be inquired into.

CHAP. IX.
Shows by what provision, and in what places of the Head the Animal Spirits are
begotten: Also other Uses and Accidents of the Pia Matter are added.

FRom the description of the Sanguiducts or Blood-carrying Vessels, which cover
and weave about on every side the Pia Matter, hitherto handled, we are led by a
certain thread to consider by what provision, and in what places of the Brain
and its Appendix the production of the animal Spirits is performed.

1. As to the first, it appears from what has been already said, that the
blood is it self the matter out of which the animal Spirits are drawn; and that
the Vessels containing and carrying it every where through the whole compass of
the Head, are like distillatory Organs, which by circulating more exactly, and
as it were subliming the blood, separate its purer and more active particles
from the rest, and subtilize them, and at length insinuate those spiritualized
into the Brain and its Appendix. Concerning this matter to be distilled, there
is care taken, and indeed by the best means, that its stock or provision may be
still supplied in fit quality and due quantity.

In respect of the quality, from the whole bloody mass, a portion highly
volatile, spirituous, and endued with active Elements, ought constantly to
arise toward the Head; which thing succeeds partly of its own accord, and
partly that it might be more commodiously done, care is taken with a certain
artificialness; to wit, the Vertebral Arteries, in all Creatures ascending
straight, and almost perpendicularly, do in a manner cause, that only the more
subtle and light blood is carried upwards, the remaining more thick as it were
sinking down for the baser offices of the Limbs and of some of the Bowels. Yea,
also the Carotides in a man, having an erected head higher than the rest of the
parts, and in a Horse in some sort lifting up his face, have also the same
privilege; to wit, that by their more steep ascent only the more pure and
volatile blood may ascend to the region of the Brain. But in other fourfooted
beasts, who go with a prone or hanging head, and who have a more frigid and
watery blood, which may easily slide into, and too much wash the Brain, this
evil is in some part prevented by the wonderful Net and pituitary Glandula
joined to the Carotides; which indeed receive the superfluous humidities of the
blood, and so make it more pure and free from dregs before it comes to the
brain.

But that the blood may be supplied still in due quantity, to wit, as it were
in weight and measure, from the distillatory Vessels, stretched about the
compass of the Head, there is a notable provision made in all the Carotides
about the Basis of the Skull: because their crooked imbowings and branching
into infoldings, hinders the too great or too rapid approach of the blood:
then, lest the passage of it should at any time be shut up, the mutual
ingraftings of all the Vessels on either side, do help or provide for. After
this manner, the business of extracting the animal Spirits is performed even as
a Chemical Elixir; to wit, great care is taken in the beginning of that
Operation, both that choice of matter may be had, and that only a due
proportion of it be exposed to distillation.

The blood by this means, as it were a Chemical work prepared, is carried by
the fourfold Chariot of the Arteries to four distinct regions of the Head: and
as the sanguiferous Vessels, being distributed with separate ramifications or
branches through the whole compass of the Brain and its Appendix, cover all the
heights of its compassings about or^gyrations, and also all its crevices and
their gapings and recesses, they bring to their doors the matter to be
distilled into the Head every where through the whole circumference of the
Brain and Cerebel nigh the Cortical substance of either; out of which as the
Spirits are distilled, by this means it is brought about, that they are
insinuated into the subjected substance of either. The blood being carried
through the narrow infoldings and divarications of the Vessels, as it were (as
was said) through the serpentine channels of an Alembick is made extremely
subtle, as much as may be, in its liquor; in the mean time, what is bloody is
received by the little shoots of the Veins associates, or meeting one another
every where, and what is serous by the Kernels every where dispersed; yet its
more purified and spirituous part being carried on further through the very
small shoots sent forth on all sides, are instilled more deeply into the very
Pores and passages of the Brain and Cerebel; which presently flowing from the
Cortical substance into the medullary, there exercise the gifts of the animal
Function. What peculiar body and constitutive particles of the Brain it self
and Cerebel, conduce to the generation and perfection of the animal Spirits
within the substance of either, shall be shown hereafter, when we treat of the
Use of those Parts: now shall be taken notice of what we before mentioned, to
wit, that the fluid extillation of the spirituous liquor from the blood about
the Pia Matter, is performed after a signal manner, both from the ambient heat,
which is stirred up from the blood contained within the bosoms, as it were from
a Balmo Mariae, enriched by the continual flowing of it anew, and also from the
obduction of the Meninges, like an Alembick, by which the spirituous Particles,
apt to fly away, are constrained and forced into the parts beneath.

But indeed, though the animal Spirits are procreated wholly from the blood,
yet the blood watering the Brain and its Appendix, is not only bestowed on this
work: for as to the sanguiferous Vessels, which arising out of the Trunks both
of the Carotides and the Vertebrals, cover over the whole Head and all its
parts and processes; though many of them, yet not all, are little distillatory
channels of the animal Spirits. For the animal Spirits, are not produced in all
places, to which these Vessels reach; for we affirm, that these Spirits are
only procreated in the Brain and Cerebel: (which it were easy to prove by the
Symptoms which happen in the Apoplexy and Palsy, and shall be afterward
clearly shown) and from this double fountain of the animal Spirits they flow
out into all the rest of the parts, and irradiate, by a constant influence, the
whole nervous stock. In the mean time, the oblong marrow and its various
processes and protuberances are either retreating places, or high roads for the
animal Spirits, procreated in the Brain and Cerebel, and flowing from thence.
But for as much as the Arteries and Veins clothe these parts also with a thick
series of shoots, and that within the enfolding of the Brain the folds called
Choroeides are hung slack and loosly, these seem to be so made for other
reasons, viz. both that these parts might be actuated by heat, supplied as it
were from a continual fire, and also that the nourishing Juice might be
bestowed on the Spirits which flow there.

As to the first, that the animal Spirits now perfected, may be freely
expanded, and irradiate the nervous System, there seems to be required, that
the ambient heat, being excited by the blood flowing thither, might open all
the little spaces for their passage, and notably dilate or lay open for them
ways or roads: wherefore we intimated before, because the little shoots of the
Vessels ought not to be deeply inserted into the callous body, (for that, lest
the commerce of the Spirits, diverting in this Mart or meeting place, should be
disturbed by the perpetual influence of the blood) therefore the enfolding of
the Choroeides is hung under its chamber, that at least by this nigh situation,
as by a Stove or Hot-house, the heat there might be preserved. Besides, we
intimated another use of this enfolding; to wit, that the blood, passing
through the very narrow Meanders and convolutions or rollings about of the
Vessels, might lay aside its serous recrements into the Glandula's or passages
of the Veins.

2. But secondly, That many branches and lesser shoots of the same Vessels
which water the Brain and Cerebel, cover also the oblong marrow, and in some
measure enter into its Pores and deeper substance (within which the animal
Spirits are not begotten, but only exercised and expanded) I say, that this is
so made for this other respect; to wit, that the substance of the oblong marrow
might imbibe a constant provision of nourishment from the pouring in of the
blood whereof it has need. For whilst the animal Spirits, flowing into the
nervous stock from the Brain and Cerebel, pass through this passage, as it were
the high road, some food he^e ought to be administered to them, as it were in
their journey, from the watering blood: For indeed we suppose (which also will
afterward clearly appear) that the oblong marrow, together with the nervous
parts, is moistened with a double humor, viz. one spirituous and highly active,
which flows altogether from the Brain and Cerebel, and being from thence
derived into the whole nervous stock, bestows upon them the sensitive and
moving Faculties; and the other humor softer and more oily and sulphurous,
which being supplied from the blood, and affused immediately on every part, is
the Author of their Heat and Vegetation. Both these Juyces agree among
themselves, and being every where joined together and married, they are as it
were a masculine and feminine seed mixed together; and so they impart to all
parts both sense and motion, and all the powers of life and growth. Wherefore
it is observed, that all the parts of the whole body, by which motion and sense
are performed, do not only swell up with the animal Spirit, of whose influence
being deprived, they presently suffer a resolution or loosning; but also they
admit the sanguiferous Vessels; of whose Tribute if they be defrauded,
presently they wither away, or are distempered with a mortification or
Gangrene. Wherefore, that the flesh, membranes, and all the hones may be
watered with the blood, (as may be perceived by the help of a Microscope) the
very little or minute bodies of some of the Nerves are surrounded with
Capillaments or little hairs of Arteries and Veins, together with their proper
Fibrils, that we need not doubt to assert, that the Vessels penetrating the
superficies of the Brain and Cerebel, do distill into them a subtle matter for
the generation of the animal Spirits; but that some other shoots of the same
Vessels, covering the oblong marrow, do only impart to it heat and nourishing
Juice. Lastly, that the infoldings of the Choroeides were built under the
chamber of the oblong marrow, chiefly for the dispensing of heat, and in some
measure for the sake of separation of the serous Latex. But concerning these,
we shall have occasion to speak more largely afterward, when we shall treat of
the nutritious and nervous Juice, and when we shall consider of that famous
Controversy, viz. whether nourishment is made by the blood or Nerves: further,
we shall elsewhere speak more fully of the Nature, Hypostasis, and diverse
Disposition of the animal Spirits; also, what the substance of the Brain, and
the conformation of the parts, may contribute to their production.

Thus far concerning the Pia Matter and the blood-carrying Vessels, which are
woven in it, and following its protension, water the whole Head, we have
treated largely. But before we quite leave the consideration of this Membrane,
we will inquire what sense and motion it may have. Certainly it is not
undeservedly that we ascribe the most cruel Headaches to the more acute sense
of this; (in which however, by what means this Meninx is affected, does not so
easily appear.) It is the common opinion, that sharp and tormenting Vapors,
being raised from the Viscera of the lower Belly, especially from the
Ventricle, Hypochondria, or Womb strike against this Membrane, and so pierce it
with pain. But we say, though this be impossible, that Vapors passing so many
interstices and bars of the Viscera and bones, without any trouble, should ever
come to the Head and hurt it: yet we do not deny, but that sometimes vaporous
Effluvia's do proceed from the blood boiling or estuating within the confines
of the Brain, which being shut up together under the Pia Matter, and as it were
gathered into a Cloud, do greatly blow up and distend it, and so distemper it
with pain. I have often seen, in a Head newly opened after death, the Pia Matter
distended, and shining like a Bladder, that the same seemed to be intumified,
with much water included under it; which notwithstanding was found to be so
done by wind distending the Membrane, for that being dissected, that Tumor fell
down without the effusion of water.

But we think the Headaches, which happen by reason of the evil of this
Membrane, are chiefly excited by another means, to wit, for as much as this
Meninx suffers a breach of the unity by the blood boiling up above measure, and
rushing into its Pores and so it is contracted into lighter Convulsions. I have
sometimes opened the Heads of the defunct, which when living, were obnoxious to
most miserable Headaches; in which, near the longitudinal bosom, where the feat
of the pains was, the Pia Matter or interior, grew to the Dura Matter or exterior
for some space, oft-times for two fingers breadth, and by their growing
together had excited a sharp and unequal Tumor; in which the mouths of the
Vessels were so wholly stopped up, that there was left for the blood, though
very much boiling up, no passage into the adjoining bosom.

As to the motion of this Membrane, we wholly deny, that it has in it self a
perpetual Systole and Diastole; however, the Pulses in some Arteries, have
seemed something like it, which have given occasion perchance to this vulgar
Opinion. Yet in the mean time, it may be lawful to believe, that this Meninx,
for that it is very sensible, is rendered obnoxious to Cramps and convulsive
motions: and that from its greater contraction the fits of the Falling Sickness
do arise, and from its lesser and more partial corrugation or wrinkling
together, Headaches, as has been said, and also sometimes Scotomies,
Vertigoes, and often Convulsions of the Members and Viscera, planted at a great
distance from the origin of the Nerves, being drawn into consent.

CHAP. X.
A Description of the Brain, properly so called, and the Explication and Use of
its Parts.

WE have thus far beheld the Coverings of the Brain, both the bony and the
membranous, also the Arteries and Veins growing and knit to them, like Ivy, and
distributed through the whole compass of the Head. There now remains, these
coverings being removed, that we next consider the Fabric and true Hypotype or
Character of the Brain and its Appendix, together with the action and use of
all the parts. And here at first sight we meet with three things, to wit, the
Brain, the oblong Marrow, and the Cerebel: of which the oblong marrow seems to
be a common Trunk, to which the Brain and Cerebel grow like branches: wherefore
some contend the medullary Rope to be the principal part, and the Brain and
Cerebel its dependences. But that it is otherwise appears by this, because
these bodies, both in the generation and dispensation of the animal Spirits,
are of more noble use than the oblong marrow; so that if the out-flowings of
the Spirits from the Brain or Cerebel be shut up or hindered, the nervous System
presently suffers an Eclipse; in the mean time, if this be primarily
distempered, the Brain and Cerebel suffer not for its fault.

That we may begin with the Brain, it may be considered in a double respect; to
wit, both as to its unequal or exterior superficies, as it is beheld in its
proper site and position; and as to its interior cavity, to wit, as the Brain
appears opened, its concave superficies being expanded and turned upside down.
We have already taken care to delineate its true form or Type in either manner,
by what has been before said, to wit, after what manner it is both within and
without. There now remains, after its fabric and conformation being rightly
weighed, for us design its offices, and to show the uses of it and of every one
of its parts. Concerning which, we ought to unfold in general, first, what the
office of the whole Brain is, then secondly, when we shall descend to
particulars, there will come under consideration, 1. The division of the Brain,
to wit, its double Hemisphere, also the two Lobes or partitions of either. 2.
The narrow crankling turnings and windings, or the gyrations and convolutions
or rolling together of the Brain. 3. Its double substance, viz. Cortical and
Medullary. 4. The common Basis of all, viz. the callous body. 5. Its subtension
or Fornix. 6. The appension or circuit of the Brain over or above the oblong
marrow. 7. And what results from thence, the void space or Ventricles made by
its enfolding together. Concerning these, we shall take notice of what things
occur worth noting; concerning the smelling Nerves and their processes, we
shall inquire afterward, when we shall speak particularly of the Nerves.

1. The Brain is accounted the chief seat of the Rational Soul in a man, and of
the sensitive in brute beasts, and indeed as the chief mover in the animal
Machine, it is the origin and fountain of all motions and conceptions. But
some Functions do chiefly and more immediately belong to the substance of this,
and others depend as it were mediately and less necessarily upon it. Among
these, which of the former sort are accounted the chief, are the Imagination,
Memory, and Appetite. For it seems, that the Imagination is a certain
undulation or wavering of the animal Spirits, begun more inwardly in the middle
of the Brain, and expanded or stretched out from thence on every side toward
its circumference: on the contrary, the act of the Memory consists in the
regurgitation or flowing back of the Spirits from the exterior compass of the
Brain toward its middle. The Appetite is stirred up, for that the animal
Spirits, being some-how moved about the middle of the Brain, tend from thence
outwardly toward the nervous System. The rest of the Faculties of this Soul,
as Sense and Motion, also the Passions and Instincts merely natural, though
they depend in some measure upon the Brain, yet they are properly performed in
the oblong Marrow and Cerebel, or proceed from them.

2. In some Animals, the substance of the Brain is divided into two parts, as
it were Hemispheres, distinct one from another almost through its whole
thickness, even to the callous body, which is instead of a bottom; and in like
manner also in all the Sensories, and in most of the other Organs of the
necessary Functions, the Brain is as it were twofold, that there might be a
provision made against the defect of one side by the supplement of the other.
Further, in man, who has a brain more large and capacious than other
Creatures, either Hemisphere is again subdivided into two Lobes, to wit, the
Anterior and the Posterior; between which a branch of the Carotidick Artery,
being drawn like a bounding River to both, distinguishes them as it were into
two Provinces. Certainly, this second partition of the humane Brain also seems
to be designed for its greater safety; that if perchance any evil should happen
to one or both the foremost Lobes, yet the latter, for that they are separated,
may avoid the contagion of the neighboring and farther spreading evil: So the
Brain, like a Castle, divided into many Towers or places of Defense, is thereby
made the stronger and harder to be taken.

3. Also the universal frame of the Brain appears yet more divided and
variegated within all its aforesaid partitions; for all its whole exterior
superficies is made uneven and broken, with turnings and windings and rollings
about, almost like those of the Intestines. Those Gyrations or Turnings going
from the forepart of the Brain toward the latter with a creeping compass, and
as it were a spiral circuit, encompasses both its Hemispheres, that they might
mutually furnish all the convolutions with a continued passage: in a more moist
Brain, or long kept, the Pia Matter, clothing every one, and collecting them
together, is easily pulled away; and then the turnings or folds being opened
and separated one from another, the substance of the brain is seen to be
plowed, or laid as it were with furrows; out of which arise banks or ridges of
broken crevices, not in a direct series, but cross-wise; so that in the bottom
of every furrow, a convolution arising from the right side, is carried to the
left, then others following next, being sent from the left side, is drawn to
the right, and so by turns the inequalities of the whole brain are variegated
in this order.

If it be inquired into, what benefit its Turnings and Convolutions afford to
the brain, or for what end its whole anfractuous or broken crankling frame is,
we say, that the brain is so framed, both for the more plentiful reception of
the spirituous aliment, and also for the more commodious dispensation of the
animal Spirits for some uses. As to the aliment to be bestowed on the brain,
because it is required to be subtle and extremely wrought or elaborated;
therefore it ought to be admitted, not by a more open passage, but only by very
small pores and passages. Wherefore that there might be sufficient plenty of
spirituous liquor supplied, it is not only drunk in every where in the plain
superficies of the brain from its Cortical substance; but that superficies of
the brain or Cortical substance is uneven and rough with folds and turnings
about; that the spaces for the receiving the Juice might be enlarged as much as
may be: For the anfractuous or crankling brain, like a plot of ground, planted
every where with nooks and corners, and danks and mole-hills, has a far more
ample extension, than if its superficies were plain and even. Further, those
cranklings of the brain do more fitly hide the sanguiferous Vessels, for that
they are very small and slender, and more safely keep them, being variously
interwoven into one another infoldings, than if they should be openly
distributed; for so being carelessly laid, they would be liable to too frequent
hurt.

But a reason and necessity of the turnings about in the brain, and not of
lesser moment than the other, is fetched from the dispensation of the animal
Spirits. For as the animal Spirits, for the various acts of Imagination and
Memory, ought to be moved within certain and distinct limited or bounded
places, and those motions to be often iterated or repeated through the same
tracts or paths: for that reason, these manifold convolutions and infoldings of
the brain are required for these diverse manners of ordinations of the animal
Spirits, to wit, that in these Cells or Storehouses severally placed, might be
kept the species of sensible things, and as occasion serves, may be taken from
thence. Hence these folds or rollings about are far more and greater in a man
than in any other living Creature, to wit, for the various and manifold actings
of the superior Faculties; but they are garnished with an uncertain, and as it
were fortuitous series, that the exercises of the animal Function might be free
and changeable, and not determined to one. Those Gyrations or Turnings about in
four footed beasts are fewer, and in some, as in a Cat, they are found to be in
a certain figure and order: wherefore this Brute thinks on, or remembers scarce
any thing but what the instincts and needs of Nature suggest. In the
lesserfour-footed beasts, also in Fowls and Fishes, the superficies of the
brain being plain and even, wants all cranklings and turnings about: wherefore
these sort of Animals comprehend or learn by imitation fewer things, and those
almost only of one kind; for that in such, distinct Cells, and parted one from
another, are wanting, in which the diverse Species and Ideas of things are kept
apart.

But that in more perfect Animals, all the turnings about are made of a twofold
substance, viz. Cortical and Medullary; the reason seems to be, that one part
may serve for the production of the animal Spirits, and the other for their
exercise and dispensation. For we may well think, that the animal Spirits are
wholly or for the most part procreated in the Cortical substance of the brain;
for this severs and receives immediately from the blood the subtle liquor, and
imbuing it with a volatile Salt, exalts it into very pure Spirits. It is
obvious to every one, that the Arteries enter the Cortex of the brain with a
more frequent insertion of shoots, and instill to it a spirituous liquor; the
leavings of which, or what is superfluous, the Veins in like manner entering it,
do sup up and carry away; in the mean time, the more subtle portion being here
set free, goes into Spirits. In truth, the blood waters the medullary substance
of the brain in a very small quantity; which seems truly to be rather for the
sake of exciting of heat, than that the animal Spirits should there be
generated by the flowing in of that blood. For indeed, the volatile Salt, which
like Ferment, spiritualizes the subtle liquor stilled forth from the blood, is
had more copiously in the Cortex of the brain, rather than in its middle or
marrowy part; because that part, being endued with an Ashy color, shows by its
aspect the spermatick Particles and Humor contained in them, in which Spirit
and a volatile Salt very much abounds; yea and plainly resembles an Armeniack
smell, (such as either part alike breathe forth.) In the mean time, the
medullary part of the brain seems very like the oblong marrow and the spinal.
But it is well enough known, that these medullary parts serve for the exercise
and dispensation of the animal Spirits, and not for their generation. The sign
of which is, that wherever an obstruction happens in them, whatever is below,
being destitute of the influx of the Spirits, suffers an Eclipse; whence it
follows, that the animal Spirits, irradiating the medullary Rope, are not
produced in it, but flow in from elsewhere; and why should not we think the
same of the middle marrow of the brain? Truly, that this part is rather the
Mart or Exchange of the Spirits than its Shop or Workhouse, appears from
hence, because the Animals which excel in Memory, Imagination, and Appetite,
are furnished with a more ample marrow of the brain; as is observed in man and
the more perfect four-footed beasts: and they who seem to have little need of
those Faculties, as the lesser four-footed beasts, also Fowls and Fishes have
the Cortex of the brain greater, but the medullary part very small. It is a
familiar Experiment among Boys to thrust a needle through the head of a Hen,
and that she in the mean time, whose brain is so pierced through, shall live
and be well a long time. The reason of which is, because the whole substance of
the brain in these sort of Animals is almost merely Cortical; wherefore from
the suffering such a hurt, (as long as the marrow remains unhurt) the Spirits
are generated in a lesser quantity, but their commerce to the necessaries of
life, are not therefore presently interrupted. Indeed the brains of Birds
consist almost wholly of a Cortical and Ashy part; and the medullary part is
exceeding small, and is only like a smaller Nerve descending on either side
from the substance of the brain it self.

After the animal Spirits are begot by a constant afflux of the blood within
the Cortex of the Brain, being there begotten, having obtained a watery Vehicle,
they flow presently more inwardly, and soon enter into the marrows, filling the
furrows and baulks of all the turning and winding Crevices; from whence being
carried farther through all the particular tracts of each marrow into the
marrowy substance, which lies under all the winding Crevices, as their common
Basis, they are brought at last into the Callous Body, as into a spacious
field; where, as in a free and open place, these Spirits being newly produced,
are expatiated or issue forth.

5. Indeed this medullary substance called the Callous Body, which chambering
the more inward superficies of the brain, receives into it self the marrow of
all the turning Crevices, seems to be made for that end, and disposed there for
the same purpose; to wit, that the Spirits flowing into it on every side, might
be stretched out as in their proper Sphere, and begin to exercise the acts of
the animal Faculties. In this place, they which come out of the several winding
Crevices, do meet together, and remain as in a public Emporium or Mart; from
whence, as occasion serves, they are raised up, and drawn forth for the uses of
every Faculty. But whilst they here remain at leisure and not busied, they
become purified or refined more and more by a continual circulation: because
these Spirits newborn, do gently and perpetually flow on every side from the
outmost bounds of this body (to wit, where this common marrow besmears the
hinder productions of the brain, or the border of either of its Hemispheres)
toward the forepart of this callous Body, where it is thickest; and there, if
there be need, they are employed on the act of the Imagination, or entering the
shanks of the oblong Marrow, they actuate and inspire the nervous Appendix: but
what Spirits are remaining there, after these offices are served, run forthwith
into the Fornix, and passing through its passage, they are remanded back again
to the hinder region of the brain by a certain circulation; and lastly, after
this manner, penetrating through the narrow passages of the Fornix, those
Spirits are made more subtle, and also, as it seems most likely, they perform
in this circulary motion those more subtle acts of the Fantasy.

6. Truly, that we may here speak something of the Fornix, it seems that this
part serves for a twofold use: viz. first, lest the more inward sides of the
Brain hanging slack and loosly, might fall together among themselves, or might
be removed beyond the limits of a just protension or out-stretching; for they,
not only by the coming between of the Pia Matter, and by little cords drawn from
it, cohere to the oblong marrow and the Cerebel; but besides, the Fornix, like
a Ligament or string brought from one end of the brain to the other, constrains
and keeps its whole frame in its due figure and situation. For this part purely
medullar, and of the same substance with the callous Body, seems to be a
certain process of this, which arising more forward between the streaked
bodies, and falling upon the two shanks of the oblong marrow, first of all
distinguishes them; afterward, being separated from them, is carried through
the midst of the cavity, and about the hinder part of the brain is divided as
it were into two Arms, which being bent on both sides, and again cleaving to
the border of the callous Body, strictly embrace the oblong marrow, and knit
and firmly tie the hinder bulk of the brain to its Trunk, lest it should flow
or slide forth. But the other, and that the more noted use of the Fornix seems
to be what we but now mentioned; to wit, that the animal Spirits may
immediately pass through its passage from one end of the brain to the other,
and so; as it were through the bill of a Pelican, they might be circulated into
their own intorted belly.

That those things which were but now declared concerning the Penetralia and
inward recesses of the Brain, may be the better understood, we will here add a
Scheme of its Sphere turned inside out, and stretched out as it were upon a
plain, so that the concave and inmost superficies of the callous Body, together
with the Fornix, may be sufficiently seen.

The Seventh Figure
Shows the Brain of a Sheep bent back and cut a little open in the places where
they stick together near the streaked bodies, that its interior substance may
be turned the inside out, and unfolded on a plain.

AA. The substance of the Brain cut asunder, which in its natural situation
being folded together, did cohere with the rest of its substance a. a. upon the
remaining streaked Bodies. B. The Trunk of the Fornix or Psalloides cut
asunder, which in its natural site coheres with the Basis of the same Fornix E.
CC. The Arms of the Fornix which embrace the medullary Trunk on the other side
of the Pineal Glandula. DD. The brim of the callous Body which embraces the
medullary Trunk near the Cerebel. E. The Basis of the Fornix. FF. Two straight
Roots of the Fornix lying between the streaked Bodies. GG. The transverse
medullary Process knitting the two streaked Bodies one to another. H. The Chink
near the Roots of the Fornix leading to the Tunnel. II. The streaked Bodies,
whose Superficies the small Arteries and Veins cover over. KK. The interior
Superficies of the callous Body marked with transverse medullary streaks or
chamferatings, or reaching from one Hemisphere of the Brain to the other. LL.
The Chambers or hollow places of the Optic Nerves. M. The anterior hole
leading to the Ventricle lying under the orbicular Protuberances, which also
goes slope-wise to the Tunnel. N. The Pineal Glandula which appears more plain,
the Pia Matter and the Choroeidal enfolding being separated and removed. OO. The
Natiform or Buttock-like Protuberances, which are here far greater than in a
Man or a Dog. PP. The lesser Protuberances called Testes, which are additions
or things growing out of the former. QQ. The medullary Processes stretching
from the Testes into the middle or marrowy part of the Cerebel. R. The meeting
together of those Processes. SS. The Pathetick Nerves of the Eyes arising out
of the meeting together of those Processes. T. The posterior hole leading into
the Ventricle, lying under the orbicular Protuberances, and also into the same
opening of the Tunnel. V. A Furrow in the medullary Trunk, which being covered
by the Cerebel, makes the fourth Ventricle. WW. The Ramifications or Branchings
of the medullary substance of the Cerebel, which appear like a Tree. X. The end
of the oblong Marrow about to go into the Spinal.
sheep's brain Fig: VIIa.


CHAP. XI.
Shows with what motion and tendency of the Animal Spirits the Exercises of the
Animal Faculties are performed within the Confines of the Brain: Also what the
use of its Ventricles is.

HItherto setting forth the uses and offices of the Brain, properly so called,
and of its parts, we have showed after what manner the animal Spirits are
procreated from the blood in this their principal Shop or Workhouse; and into
what diverting places, they being newly brought forth, do depart of themselves,
and are there kept as it were in distinct Cloisters or Cells to be drawn forth
for the manifold Exercises of the animal Function. But because these Spirits,
so brought to perfection, and ready for their work within the same parts of the
Brain, enter into other manner of motions, and diverse ways of emanations;
therefore before we proceed any further, for the searching out their tracts
within the oblong Marrow and Cerebel, we ought to declare concerning these
Spirits disposed within the confines of the Brain it self, with what forces
they are furnished, in what form they unfold themselves, and in what ways they
diffuse themselves and go forward as often as being mustered in due order, they
produce the acts of the Imagination, Memory, Appetite, and other superior
Faculties of the Soul. But for as much as hereafter, when we have finished the
explication of the Head and nervous Appendix, we have resolved, for a
conclusion, to treat of the Soul of Brutes and its powers, I may therefore for
the present lay aside this task; unless that in the mean time it may not seem
amiss to give a taste only in general of these few things: viz. as there are
two parts of the inferior Soul, or of Beasts, to wit, the vital or flamy, being
inkindled in the blood, and the sensitive or lucid, being diffused through the
whole Head and its nervous dependences, the animal Spirits being continually
produced in the Brain and in the Cerebel, do constitute a double as it were
Root or Fountain of this lucid part: yea, the Spirits of either lineage, for as
much as they are continued both within those Fountains, and from thence through
the frame or substance of the nervous System, as it were under the same beamy
Systasis and contexture, they effect or cause the whole Hypostasis or
subsistency of the sensitive Soul.

But there happen to this Soul, because it is apt to be moved with a various
impulse, and so to contract or dilate its species in the whole, or in part, for
that reason diverse manners both of Actions and of Passions, to wit, the Senses,
which we call its Passions; and Motions, which we name the Actions of the same.
The formal reason of the former, viz. the Senses, consists in the retraction or
drawing back of the Spirits, or a flowing back toward their Fountains. For
wherever the impression of a sensible object is carried to this radiant or
beamy contexture, presently either the whole frame, or some portion of it,
whereby it admits the species, is compelled to wag, and to be moved back, as it
were to leap back and recede into it self: on the contrary, the actions or
motions of this Soul are made, for that this shadowy Spirit, being incited or
stirred up in the whole, or in a certain part, unfolds it self more largely,
and by an emanation, and as it were a certain vibration of the Spirits, exerts
or puts forth its virtue and force of acting.

Both the Senses and Motions of this sensitive Soul are made either transient,
when the Spirits, or its constitutive Particles, being moved somewhere in the
System of the Nerves, draw together with them the containing parts, and deflect
them with the like carriage or gesture with themselves, as is observed in the
five outward Senses, and the local motions of the Members: or else, either both
Actions and Passions are continuing, to wit, when both the Motions and Senses
are silently performed without any great agitation or moving of the body, or
its parts, within the first Fountains of the Soul, viz. the Head it self. These
kind of Passions indeed, made within the substance of the Brain, are the common
Sense and Imagination; but the Actions are Memory, Fantasy, and Appetite: and
either of these, as to their beginnings and instincts, depend for the most part
upon the outward Senses.

Concerning the former, we take notice, that as often as the exterior part of
the Soul being struck, a sensible impression, as it were the Optic Species, or
as an undulation or waving of waters, is carried more inward, bending toward
the chamfered bodies, a perception or inward sense of the Sensation outwardly
had or received, arises. If that this impression, being carried farther, passes
through the callous Body, Imagination follows the Sense: Then if the same
fluctuation of Spirits is struck against the Cortex of the Brain, as its utmost
banks, it impresses on it the image or character of the sensible Object, which,
when it is afterward reflected or hent back, raises up the Memory of the same
thing.

The active Powers of this Soul, viz. Local Motion, Memory, Fantasy, and
Appetite follow sometimes immediately the Passions, sometimes are induced apart
from them upon other occasions. For indeed the sensible impression striking the
streaked or chamfered bodies, oftentimes, the Brain being in no wise affected,
causes the local Motions to be retorted with a reciprocal tendency of the
animal Epirits; so in sleep (the Appetite knowing nothing of it) when pain
troubles, presently we rub the place, moving the hand to it: but more often,
after that the sensible Species, having past from the common Sensory to the
callous Body, has stirred up the Imagination, the Spirits, reflecting from
thence, and flowing back toward the nervous Appendix, raise up the Appetite
and Local Motions, the Executors or Performers of the same: And sometimes a
certain sensible impression, being carried beyond the callous Body, and
striking against the Cortex of the Brain it self, raises up other species lying
hid there, and so induces Memory with Fantasy, also often with Appetite and
Local Motion associates. Further, these active Powers, sometimes upon other
occasions, are wont to be stirred up and exercised apart from Passion. In Man,
the Rational Soul variously moves the sensitive, and at its pleasure draws
forth and brings into act its Powers, sometimes these, sometimes those.
Moreover, the blood boiling up above measure, and by that means striking
impetuously the border of the Brain, excites the species of things lurking in
it, and driving them forward toward the middle or marrowy part of the Brain,
causes also the various Acts of the Fantasy and Memory to be represented.

Concerning the aforesaid interior or abiding Faculties, we shall at present
further take notice, that their more perfect Exercises are chiefly and almost
only performed by the Spirits already perfected and highly elaborated; for
those a making, or that are new made, being numerous, they very much obstruct
and hinder the acts of the animal Function: to wit, when from the Vessels, on
every side watering the Cortex of the Brain, the subtle Liquor is plentifully
instilled for the matter of the animal Spirits, this flowing inwardly stuffs
all the pores and passages of the Brain, and so excludes for that time the
Spirits from their wonted tracts and orbs of expansion. Wherefore whilst the
chief reflection of the Brain and Spirits is celebrated, sleep, or an Eclipse
of the animal Spirits happens; then waking returns, when from the Liquor
instilled, the more subtle part is exalted into very pure Spirits, and at
length the more watery, being partly resolved into Vapors, is exhaled, and
partly supped up by the passages of the Veins entering the substance of the
Brain, or else is sweat out into the vacuity lying under the callous Body.
Concerning these. I hope we may discourse more largely afterward. In the mean
time; that we may proceed to the rest of the things proposed, concerning the
frame of the Brain, properly so called, there yet remains that we speak of its
Ventricles: But since they are only a vacuity resulting from the folding up of
its exterior border, I see no reason we have to discourse much of their office,
no more than Astronomers are wont of the empty space contained within the
vacuity of the Sphere.

But in truth, as there is nothing met with in Nature that is not destinated to
some use, surely we suspect this same Vacuum or empty space not to be built in
vain within the Globe of the Brain. The Ancients have so magnified this Cavern,
that they affirmed it the Shop of the animal Spirits, both where they
themselves were procreated, and performed the chief works of the animal
Function. But on the other side, the Moderns or those of later days have
esteemed these places so vile, that they have affirmed the same to be mere
sinks for the carrying out the excrementitious matter. But indeed that opinion
of the Ancients is easily overthrown, for that the animal Spirits, being very
subtle, and apt to fly away, require not such large and open spaces, rather
than the more narrow passages and little pores, such as are made in the
substance of the Brain: for these Spirits (because they ought; for the various
Faculties of the Soul, to be composed into various series, and diverse orders
and dispositions, therefore) ought to be moved within peculiar orbs and tracts.
Further, if any one shall exactly consider the fabric of the Brain, and
seriously weigh, that these Ventricles are not formed out of the primary
intention of Nature, but result only secondarily and accidentally from the
complication of the Brain, he will be far from thinking, that the supreme seat
of the Soul is fixed there, where being hemmed in with a most noble Guard of
Spirits, it does execute and perform its Functions. For it neither appears at
all out of what matter, and by what artifice the Spirits are there begotten,
nor by what ways of emanation they are derived from thence into the other parts
of the Brain and nervous System. Wherefore almost all Anatomists, who are of a
later Age, have attributed that vile office of a Jakes or sink to this more
inward chamber of the Brain. To which Opinion there has been some trust given,
for that these Ventricles are often seen in the dead to be filled with water;
also from these, ways seem to lie open for excretion, both toward the Tunnel,
and also into the Sieve-like Bone. It is observed, that wherever the blood
flows more copiously into any part, and waters it, there Vapors or watery Humors
are begotten from the superfluous Serum left in the circulation, which for the
most part either exhale out through vaporous Effluvia's, or are brought back
into the blood by the Veins or Lymphatick Vessels. But when the blood, by a
plentiful influx, waters not only the Cortex of the Brain, but the interior
marrow also, it remains, that the serous Latex (whenever it abounds more in
the blood, than that its superfluities may be reduced immediately by the Veins,
or by the Lymphaeducts, if they be there, or may be separated by the
Glandula's) should slide down into this den, made hollow within the enfolding
of the Brain. Truly there are many instances, which plainly evince, that the
serous humors are ordinarily laid up in the Ventricles of the Brain. Anatomical
Observations of men dying of many Cephalic diseases, and especially of
soporiferous or sleepy distempers, confirm this. Yea, it may be lawfully
thought, that natural sleep follows, for that the Pores and passages of the
Brain are occupied and stuffed with a watery Latex, which serves for a Vehicle
to the Spirits. Then as often as a profound sleep invades any one from a
Surfeit, or drinking of Wine, the cause is, that the little spaces in the
medullary substance of the Brain, destinated for the motions of the Spirits,
are too much obstructed by a Narcotick or a watery humor: certain relics of
which, being resolved into vapor, and thrust out from the company of the
Spirits, do often sweat out, or drop into this Vacuum or empty space.

After this manner, it may be believed concerning the Ventricles of the Brain,
or the empty space left within its plicature or folding together. But in truth,
because this matter has been very much controverted among Physicians of every
Age, and the right decision of it seems to be of great moment, for the
explicating the offices of the other parts of the Head; I will here compare
together the reasons for and against this Opinion, that we may at length give
our Judgment of this Opinion, what may be either true, or most likely.

CHAP. XII.
It is inquired into, whether the serous Humors, heaped together within the
Vacuity of the Brain, be sent out by the Pituitary Glandula and the Sieve-like
Bone, or not?

SInce Experience testifies, that the Serum and excrementitious, I may justly
say morbifick, and oftentimes deadly Humors, are found frequently within these
Ventricles of the Brain; we ought to inquire more diligently concerning their
passage in and out: and the rather, for that it is very much doubted by some
concerning the use of these Dens, nor are there wanting those in this late Age,
who have endeavored to bring into vogue the ancient Opinion, though long since
exploded, concerning the Spirits being begot in this place, and here exercised.
I believe without doubting, for the reasons before alleged, that the Spirits
are not here begotten, nor exercised: and no less certain is it made by
Experience, that the serous Colluvies is here often gathered together. This
therefore only remains, that we should see from whence, and how this flows
hither, and then by what ways of Excretion the same should be carried out.

As to the first, it is exceeding probable, that the serous Latex, which is the
Vehicle of the Spirits newly produced, and is introduced together with them
into the Pores of the Brain, after it is grown stale, and being attenuated into
Vapor, does distill forth into this Cavern, and there at last grows into a
watery Humor: for otherwise what becomes of that Humor, or into what other
Receptacle could it be derived? Besides this ordinary, and I believe assiduous
heaping together of the serous Colluvies within the Ventricles of the Brain,
certainly it may be believed, that this kind of serous Humor is distilled out
of the Glandula's inserted in the Choroeidal enfolding, being too much filled,
into the Ventricles so called. I have often seen in a Dropsy the Glandula's of
the Brain to be intumified, and like grains of Barley, bursting with too much
wet, to become flaccid or withered, so that they could not retain the
serosities brought to them, but continually disposed them into the Cavity
beneath. Truly in a Dropsy of the Brain these Cavities or Ventricles are
always seen to be full of water; the cause of which kind of distemper is, the
blood being made more watery, puts off in its circulation a greater heap of
Serum than the Veins can presently carry back, or the Glandula's are able to
receive and retain. For indeed, that the Serum, redounding on every side from
the Vessels, may the better slide into the Ventricles of the Brain, it is so
ordered, that the greater infoldings of the Vessels, with the inserted
Glandula's, should be disposed near all the Ventricles of the Head: because,
not only the enfolding Choroeides is placed nigh the concourse of the three
Ventricles in the Brain, but another enfolding, and no less noted, (which we
above described) with greater Glandula's, is set behind the Cerebel nigh the
fourth Ventricle. In all, as it seems, for that end such care is taken, that
the watery part, coming from the blood, which is destinated either for the Brain
or the Cerebel, for that it is not fit for the procreating of Spirits, might
run into these infoldings of the Vessels. But yet if a greater plenty of Serum
be there laid up, than can be contained in them, or may be sent away outwardly,
whatever is superfluous will slide into the Cavity underneath.

Hence it appears, from whence, and by what means the serous heap is gathered
together within the Ventricles of the Brain: certainly to deny this going out
is no other than to assert every ones Brain big with a Viper, which cannot be
brought forth but by gnawing asunder the bowels of its parent. Who shall
lightly consider the parts nigh the Ventricles, and their Fabrics, at first
sight only would swear with the Ancients, that the excrements of the brain were
laid aside both lower through the Tunnel into the Palate, and above or more
forward through the mammillary Processes into the Nostrils: But if the
structure of these parts be a little more diligently searched into, there is no
body who presently will not easily think, that by neither of these ways the
excretion of any humor can be made; for neither from the pituitary Glandula
through the Wedge-like bone, nor from the mammillary Processes through the
holes of the Sieve-like bone, is there any manifest aperture or opening to be
perceived. But in very truth, we do suppose that the brain is in some measure
purged by both these Emunctories, for that objection may be answered, That the
translations of Humors in living Creatures are easily performed through places
that seem impervious or unpassable; for while the Pores and passages in all the
parts of a living Creature are dilated by spirit and heat, they transmit the
rain of the Serum as through the fine texture of a woolen Cloth. This plainly
appears from Arthritick distempers, in which the serous Latex creeps by degrees
through the nervous bodies, and passing through very small spaces, makes a
falling down of humors sometimes upon these parts, and sometimes upon others;
so that it is obvious, that the Membranes and nervous Processes drink in the
serous humors like Sponges, and then by a light compression render them by
heaps, as is manifest in the Toothache; for as often as a Bodkin or Instrument
is put up into a hollow Tooth, clear water will come out plentifully. Indeed,
in the body of a living Creature the passages of humors are not only made
through open passages and channels; but the thinner and more watery Latex creeps
through the solid and smooth bodies of the Nerves, as also the Fibers and the
Membranes, as through the holes of a Filtre, and so is transferred through
imperceptible straits from place to place. I sometime knew in the Impostume of
the Lungs the humor to have been derived through the Membranes growing to the
Pleura from the bag into an Issue made in the side, and so the spitting
ceasing, the disease that seemed otherwise incurable, was healed by such a way
of Evacuation. Why in like manner may we not suppose the serous humors falling
down from the Ventricles of the Brain into the pituitary Glandula, and the
mammillary Processes to be carried away through the Nerves or Membranes passing
through here or there?

Concerning the Tunnel, the thing is probable enough; because the position and
structure of this seem to show, that some humor is carried out of the
Ventricles of the Brain toward the pituitary Glandula. For this part is so
constituted, that a falling down of the humors may be made from every angle and
recess of the interior Brain and its Appendix into its aperture or opening. And
as in several Animals, the figure and site of the Ventricles vary very much,
(as we have already shown) yet in every one of them all the Ventricles of the
Head, whatsoever they be, have their openings gaping toward the Tunnel. But
that this Kernel or Glandula, to which the passage of the Tunnel is inserted,
receives and carries out the serous humors, seems also to appear from hence;
because it admits, not only those falling from the brain into its Pores, but
also those secreted from the blood ascending into the brain: For that in many
four-footed beasts, certain Vessels are inserted to this Glandula from either
Carotidick Artery, which intimately enters its substance: a sign of which is,
that Ink being injected into the Trunk of either Artery, dies with a black
color the wonderful Net, if it be there, and oftener the interior substance of
this Glandula: whence it may be argued, that the office of this Glandula is to
receive the superfluous serosities; and it receives not only those sent away in
the return from the brain, but sometimes preoccupies or prevents them, and is
wont to derive them from the blood before it is carried to the brain. And
therefore this Glandula is very small, if the superfluities of the Serum be
derived to it only from the brain; but greater, if they come to it also from
the blood, to wit, as it executes either one or a double office, as we have
already shown at large.

But as to what respects the way of passing through, to wit, by which the
humors, deposited in this Glandula, are carried out, the vulgar Opinion is,
that they do come away through the holes of the bone beneath into the Palate:
wherefore in those kind of Animals, who have the wonderful Net, and many of its
shoots enter this Glandula, more holes are made in the underlying bone.
Further, if you take away the ditch or gutter of the Wedge-like bone, or the
seat of this Glandula, cut off from the Skull, and pour water upon its holes
being made bare from the Membrane, it passing presently through the substance
of the whole bone, will suddenly still forth through other holes lying open in
the sides of the bone. Yet this Experiment concludes nothing for the Opinion
proposed: because these holes are wholly wanting in some Creatures, and very
much in an humane Skull; in those who have them, as in a Calf, especially it is
observed, that the same are filled by some hollow Vessels; into which if a
black liquor be cast by a Syringe, that passing through the substance of the
bone, will go into many other Vessels lying under the bone, and at length into
the Trunk of the Jugular Vein; which certainly is a sign that the humors are
not carried from hence into the Palate. But as to the Vessels which cover over
the holes of the bone, and which more abundantly lie under the same, they seem
to be either Veins or Lymphaeducts.

But among these it is lawful to conjecture, the chief means of Excretion,
whereby the serous humors, laid up in the pituitary Kernel, may be carried out;
to wit, that they are remanded back from it, as from most other Glandula's or
Kernels, into the mass of blood. In a Calf the thing lies open to ocular
inspection, nor is it to be doubted of other Animals, who have the admirable
Net: because, as the arterious branches, so also the veinous reach to this
Glandula; which sup up not only the humors deposited from the Arteries, but
also those falling from the Ventricles of the Brain. Yea, it may be lawfully
believed, that in a Man also, a Horse, and in other Creatures, who want the
strange or wonderful Net, there are other Lymphaeducts or Water-carriers, or
some such kind of Vessels, as are seen in the head of a Calf, that most
certainly carry the humors from this Glandula. We cannot so easily find out
their footsteps, because, before these break out of their dens, the tracts of
the Lymphaeducts, if there be any, would vanish. Nor can we find out these
Vessels in all, as in a Calf, by injection; because the holes of the bone, by
which, as by the leading of a thread, the injection arrives at, and dies the
Vessels, otherwise lying hid, are ^^nting in most. No doubt but time will
render sufficiently manifest the reductions of the humors from the pituitary
Glandula in other living Creatures: in the mean time, it may be lawfully
suspected, for that the serosities in some are remanded from thence into the
bloody mass, that in all it is done after the like or the same manner, although
the ways of the passing do not yet sufficiently lie open.

As to the other Emunctory of the Brain, to wit, whereby the serous humors,
laid aside from the Ventricles of the Brain into the mammillary Processes, and
thence are thought to be sent away through the holes of the Sieve like bone:
truly, concerning this way of Excretion, it is much more to be doubted, because
these holes in the defunct being covered over and fully stufft, with the
insertions of the Dura Matter and nervous Fibers, sent on either side from the
mammillary Process, transmit nothing of humor, how clear soever it be. Further,
there is nothing more certain, than that the serous humors are pressed out from
the Glandula's and extremities of the Vessels ending within the Nostrils into
their Caverns; so besides that it is scarce possible for the humors to descend
thither from the brain, it is not absolutely needful to suppose this sort of
means of Excretion. But that we may reason a little farther concerning these;
if it may be lawful to argue from the provision, and from the effects of the
parts, there is no reason but that I may probably believe, that some humors
also do shower down from the Brain into the cavities of the Nostrils: for it
being supposed, that the serous humor passes through, not only open channels,
but the more strict Pores and passages also of the Nerves, and creeping both
through the Fibers and Membranes, as through the straining or holes of a Filter
or Strainer, is carried from place to place, (which it were easy to
demonstrate) what should hinder but that the same sort of Latex may descend
through the Fibers impacted in the holes of the straining bone? For although in
dead Creatures those parts seem to be impervious or unpassable, yet during the
life of the Animal the passages and blind ways of the nervous bodies, being
dilated by Spirit and Heat, most easily transmit a copious humor wherewith they
are watered.

The Sieve-like Bone in diverse Animals is variously perforated for the manifold
necessity and difference of smelling. A Process from the Dura Matter and
manifold nervous Fibers pass through every one of its holes, and besmear the
inside of the Nostrils. But as the impressions of sensible things, or sensible
Species, continued as it were by the undulation or waving of the animal
Spirits, ascend through the passages of these bodies stretched out from the
Organ toward the Sensory; so the humidities watring the same bodies, for as
much as sometimes they may be more superfluous than usual, may distill into the
Nostrils through the same ways. For indeed such humors as are perpetually to be
sent away from the brain, ought so copiously to be poured upon the Organs of
Smelling, as we shall show hereafter, when we shall speak particularly of the
smelling Nerves; in the mean time, that there is such a way of Excretion
opening into the Nostrils, some observations, taken of sick people troubled
with Cephalic difeases, do further persuade. I have known some very obnoxious
to the Scotomy and Vertiginous distempers, who had great plenty of clear water
that distilled forth about the end of the Fit; by which kind of Evacuation, as
it were Critical, the Fit was wont to be ended. Not long since, a Virgin living
in this City, was afflicted a long time with a most cruel Headache, and in the
midst of her pain much and thin yellow Serum daily flowed out from her
Nostrils: the last Winter this Excretion stopped for some time, and then the
sick party growing worse in her Head, sell into cruel Convulsions, with a
stupidity; and within three days dyed Apoplectical. Her Head being opened, that
kind of yellow Latex overflowed the deeper turnings and windings of the Brain
and its interior Cavity or Ventricles. I knew a Gentlewoman that was wont to be
infested with a most cruel Headache, also with a Vertigo, and a frequent
melting of the animal Spirits, or Swooning away; who when she began to be
better, after a grievous Fit, felt at first a creeping motion in the top of her
Brain, as it were the sliding down of water: then that motion passing a little
more forwards and downwards, at length many drops of clear water distilled from
her Nostrils. This Symptom she used to have so ordinarily, that the sick
Gentlewoman did not doubt but that this water stilled out from the brain it
self. I could here bring many other reasons, which might seem to persuade, that
the Ventricles of the Brain, or the Cavity made by the complicature or folding
up of its border, is a mere sink of the excrementitious Humor; and that the
humors there congested, are purged out by the Nose and Palate: But it is time
for us to hasten to other matters, and to pass from the Brain, properly so
called, to its Appendix, viz. the oblong Marrow and the Cerebel.

CHAP. XIII.
The Actions and Uses of the oblong Marrow, and of some of its Parts are
unfolded.

WE will pass now from the Brain to the explication of its Trunk, to which both
it and the Cerebel do grow like Mushrooms or large Excrescences. This part is
commonly called the Oblong Marrow; under which name we comprehend all that
substance which reaches from the inmost Cavity of the callous Body, and
conjuncture in the Basis of the Head, to the hole of the hinder part of the
Head; where the same substance, being yet farther continued, ends in the spinal
Marrow.

The superficies of the oblong Marrow, though it be made unequal with some
protuberances and processes, yet it is not variegated or garnished with any
turnings about, and involutions, as it is in the Brain and Cerebel; neither is
its exterior and cortical substance, or of an Ash Color, and the interior,
medullar or marrowy and white; but all its frame or substance is in a sort
marrowy or medullous: nor does it however appear pure and bright, but much
darkened with fibers and hairs variously stretched forth, and diversely going
out. To wit, its fibers being figured in various places, after a diverse
manner, in some places they are found chamsered, and as it were beamy, in
others direct or stretched out at length, and in other places again circular.

The figure of this is forked, and as it were like the Poets Parnassus, seems
like the ter Y: for its shanks arising more forward from ^^her Hemisphere of
the Brain, and inclining one to another, grow together near the center of the
Skull into one and the same Trunk; which notwithstanding, a line being brought
through the midst, seems to be made as it were out of two stalks, and those to
be distinguished in its whole process.

The oblong Marrow seems to be a broad or high Road, into which the animal
Spirits perpetually flow from their double Fountain, to wit, the Brain and the
Cerebel, to be derived from thence into all the nervous parts of the whole
Body: which Spirits, whilst they are orderly disposed in this common passage,
as it were by series and orders, carry a twofold aspect; to wit, they are
directed either outward toward the Nerves, when they exert the loco-motive
Faculty, or they look inward toward their Fountains, when the acts of sense,
or rather the apprehensions of sensible things are performed.

Within this open way, a more large and greatly open path leads straight to the
spinal Marrow, through which the Spirits flow forth to the Nerves, the
Executors of spontaneous Motion in most members. In the mean time, out of the
same tract of the oblong Marrow, lesser paths are carried outwardly, here and
there, by particular Nerves, arising from the same, within the Skull. Also
besides, many diverting places, viz. various processes and protuberances grow
to this medullary Trunk, into which, the Spirits destinated to some peculiar
offices, go apart: lest that all the Spirits traveling this way and that way
in the same path, should meet one another and disturb one another offices.

Whilst after this manner, for the performing the acts of Motion and Sense, we
suppose the animal Spirits to be expatiated within the oblong Marrow; we
affirm, that they are not there begotten, but only exercised. For indeed, they
being created only in the Brain and Cerebel, as they proceed from this or that,
they perform the offices, neither of a merely involuntary Function, or else of
a spontaneous, as shall be showed mo^^ ^argely hereafter.

But that we may unfold here all things which belong to the oblong Marrow, I
shall mete it forth from its first coming out to the end of its race, and
handle its several St^dia; diverting places, and cross ways. Where the callous
Body is thought to end, the oblong Marrow begins; to wit, when the medullar
substance of the Brain is thickest nigh the bosses or knobs of either
Hemisphere, a body of a whitish color and somewhat darkened or obscured, and
streaked like Ivory, is joined to that marrow on both fides. These two bodies
are the extremities or tops of the shanks of the oblong Marrow; between which
and the Brain there are nigh and very immediate commerces. Either of these
seems as it were a Cylinder rolled about into an Orb, which nevertheless
constitutes the top of either shank, not spherical, but oval, and something
bent downward in the hinder part. A more large portion of its superficies is
joined to the medullar substance of the Brain; but yet some part of it, being
free from the cohesion with the Brain, shows it self apart, and makes that
protuberance showing it self in either lateral Ventricle. These bodies, if they
should be dissected along through the middle, appear marked, with medullar
streaks, as it were rays or beams: which sort of chamferings or streaks have a
double aspect or tendency; to wit, some descend from the top of this body, as
if they were tracts from the Brain into the oblong Marrow; and others ascend
from the lower part, and meet the aforesaid, as if they were paths of the
Spirits from the oblong Marrow into the Brain. And it is worth observation,
that in the whole Head besides there is no part found chan^^ered or streaked
after the like manner.

If the use of these be inquired into, this presently occurs, that these
bodies, placed between the Brain and its Appendix, are the great and common
diverting places of either; to wit, which receive whatsoever impulses or forces
of the animal Spirits are sent from either, and communicate them presently to
the other: Or that I may speak more plainly, this part is the common Sensory,
to wit, as Aristotle says, (...), the first Sensory that receives the strokes
of all sensible things, dilated from the Nerves of every Organ, and so causes
the perception of every sense; which kind of strokes of sensible things, when
from hence they are passed further into the Brain, presently Imagination
succeeds the Sense: and further, these bodies, as they receive the forces of
all the Senses, so also the first instincts of spontaneous local motions. To
wit, as often as the Appetite discerns any thing to be done, presently the
reciprocal tendencies of the animal Spirits, that is, from the Brain into these
parts, are disposed here to act the conceptions of motions coming from any part
or member. For here, as in a most famous Mart, the animal Spirits, preparing
for the performance of the thing willed, are directed into appropriate Nerves.
That it is so, it appears, because every influence from the Brain into the
nervous stock, and on the contrary, from this into that, and the mutual
commerce of the animal Spirits, must of necessity pass through these bodies.
Wherefore all the Nerves, also those which belong to the more inward Organs of
the Senses, arise behind these chamfered bodies. For the Optic and smelling
Nerves creep through the superficies of the Brain by a long passage and
windings about, that they might be inserted below this part of the oblong
Marrow.

For indeed, the Species of sensible things, received by those Nerves, might
more immediately be carried to the middle of the Brain, unless that they ought
first to be staid at this Sensory. Further, we may lawfully conjecture, that
these parts perform the aforesaid office from their chamfered, and as it were
beamy contexture: For as those chamserings, with which these bodies are marked,
(as we but now intimated) are of a double kind, to wit, some descending, which
look from the Brain toward the oblong Marrow; and others ascending, which are
carried distinctly from this toward that, it may be lawfully concluded, that
in these carried upwards, the impressions of sensible things are perceived: and
in those tending downwards are performed the Instincts of Motions.

Further, that these bodies, as was said, perform the offices of the first
Sensory, besides the fabric of their parts, and the Analogy to be collected
thence of their use, it seems yet more certainly to appear from some
Observations concerning these chamfered bodies, after what manner they are
affected in Paralytick diseases. For as often as I have opened the bodies of
those who dyed of a long Palsy, and most grievous resolution of the Nerves; I
always found these bodies less firm than others in the Brain, discolored like
filth or dirt, and many chamferings obliterated. Further, in Whelps newly
littered, that want their sight, and hardly pen^^^^ the other faculties of
motion and sense, these streaks or chamserings, being scarce wholly formed,
appear only rude.

The chamfered Bodies, inclining one to another near their blunt and greater
angles, are almost contiguous; but that the Trunk of the Fornix intervenes with
its twofold Root: yet in that place where the two Roots of the Fornix, being
sent straight down, are inserted into the callous Body, a transverse medullar
process, like a great Nerve, stretched from one chamfered body to the other, as
it were joins the same, and makes them to communicate one with the other.
Certainly, this joining together of the chamfered bodies is made, that their
actions and passions may not be double: but though the species of the sensible
object or conceptions of the motions to be performed, coming from the Brain or
Sensory being double, are carried also double to the first Sensory; yet for as
much as either substance or frame of this, communicates with the other, every
impression coming this or that way, becomes still one and the same. For it may
be observed, in the whole Head, that though almost all things are double, yet
each of them communicate among themselves, either by a contiguity, or by
processes sent forth. And so as by the duplication of it, care is taken against
the absolute privation or defect of the act, so the joining together of its
duplicature provides against the empty or confuse multiplication of the same
species.

After this manner, the chamfered bodies in Man and four-footed Beasts are
constantly found of the same species or form, and in every one of them, figured
after the same manner; and are as it were the Joints that join the Brain to the
shanks of the oblong Marrow. But we have already shown, that in Fowls and
Fishes, whose brains being alike, differ from those of men and four-footed
beasts, the thing is somewhat otherwise: For in Fowls the callous body is
wanting to the brain; but what serves instead of it, is found in the oblong
Marrow, to wit, two little Ventricles show themselves nigh the chambers of the
Optic Nerves, which are arched or chamber'd with a whitish substance, such as
the callous body is in man or four-footed beasts. Then on the contrary, the
chamfered bodies, or the parts which serve in their stead, in Fowls, are not a
portion of the oblong Marrow after the usual manner, but are entered into the
Brain it self. For near the fissure of the Brain, two Membranes being marked
with medullar chamferings, both distinguish either Hemisphere of the Brain, and
cover over its Ventricles. The streaks or rays of either Membrane descend, and
being concentred about the Basis of the Brain, go together into a medullary
process, which is inserted on both sides to the oblong Marrow. So these parts,
viz. the callous body, in which the animal Spirits are expanded, and the
chamfered bodies, in which their passing to and fro is instituted, seem to be
transposed in the head of Fowls. The reason whereof, (as I elsewhere hinted)
unless I be deceived, is this: because these Animals are of less excellency in
Imagination and Memory than four-footed beasts; yea also, for that the sense
and motion of them are their chief Faculties: therefore for the exercises of
these to be performed with a greater expansion of Spirits, the callous body is
transferred into the oblong Marrow, and in its place the chamfered bodies are
removed into the Brain.

About the lower end of either chamfered body the smelling Nerves are inserted.
For you may take notice, that the mammillary Processes, a little more obscure
in man, but much more conspicuous in brute Animals, who are endued with a more
remarkable sense of smelling, do pass into firm and plainly whitish bodies of
Nerves, which being dilated or brought nigh the lateral turnings and windings
of the Brain, are implanted into the oblong Marrow on either side about the
lower angle of either Ventricle behind the chamfered bodies; yet so, that the
Tube or Pipe of either Nerve may open into the Cavity of the Ventricle, as we
before showed. After this manner these Nerves are carried by a long journey
from the fore part of the Brain, that they may bring the sensible species to
the chamfered body, as to the common Sensory, first and rather than to the
Brain. But we shall speak of the smelling Nerves more particularly hereafter.

Where these chamfered Bodies end from either side, a marrowy substance
succeeds, which being somewhat of a darkish color going forward for some
space, is distinguished by a peculiar bending forward from the other contiguous
parts. This Galen (perhaps not improperly) calls the Chambers of the Optic
Nerves; for in this place the Optic Nerves showing themselves from the highest
region of either side, being carried downward with a certain compass, are
united about the Tunnel. Then being divided again, and carried a little
further, enter the Skull, going straight forwards to either Sensory. The
growing together of these Nerves, and their being again separated, seems to be
ordained for this end, that the visible species, received from either Eye,
might appear still the same, and not double; for this conjunction of the
twofold Organ frames the double image into one; which once united, when
afterward it is carried to either side of the common Sensory, for that it is
on both sides alike, appears still the same. If at any time, through
drunkenness, or a distortion of the Eyes, the object appears double, and two
Lights upon a Table, it is because the image of the same thing is received
after a different manner by one Eye than the other, for that reason the objects
are represented like two distinct things. For that this Eye is distorted after
one manner, and that after another, the same Species, coming to either Pupil by
a diverse angle of incidence, appears diverse or double. There is another
reason of the coalition of the Optic Nerves, to wit, that one Eye being hurt,
all the visible animal Spirits might be bestowed on the other. Further, for
that these Nerves are carried with a long passage, their uniting helps to their
mutual strength and support.

Whereas the Optic Nerves arise here from the oblong Marrow, all or its most
intimate substance is not bestowed upon them; but these Nerves are inserted
into the medullar Trunk, as branches of a Tree to the stock, that so they may
receive by that means the influence of the Spirits, and by this way transmit
the Species of visible Things. In the mean time, this more inward substance of
the oblong Marrow is the common passage both to the Eyes and to the other
nervous System arising more backward: through which, by the going and returning
to and fro of the animal Spirits, the impulses of sensible things, and the
instincts of Motions between the Brain and the other nervous parts, which
depend upon it, are performed. Forasmuch as the smelling and seeing Nerves
arise so near the chamfered bodies, the reason hence is plain, why odors or the
objects of the sense of smelling so strike the Brain it self, and immediately
affect it; also why there is so exceeding swift a communication between Sight
and Imagination.

Concerning the Optic Nerves in a man, (which also in some measure is after
the same manner in other living Creatures) we shall advertise you, that when
they, after their uniting or mixing together, being presently again separated,
do go out of the Skull, the sanguiferous Vessels going out of the Skull with
them, and following either Nerve even to the Basis of the Eye, are knit into
the Trunk of either. There is a noted shoot of the Artery destinated to this
office, carried from the anterior branches of the Carotides. Hence, as I
suppose, a reason may be given, wherefore, when by drinking or more plentiful
eating, a sleepiness is caused, presently a great heaviness, and as it were an
oppression, is felt about the Eyes. For when the blood, very much boiling up,
fills above measure the Vessels watering the Brain, and by distending them,
obstructs the Pores of the Brain, those Nerves also from the blood in like
manner boiling up within the Optic Vessels, are pressed together in their
whole passage.

In Fowls and Fishes this chamber of the Optic Nerves, bunching out with a
great bulk, is not much less than the Brain it self; for, as we but now
intimated, what is instead of the callous body is placed here; and in this
place the animal Spirits seem to have their chief Mart or Empory in a most
large medullar chamber, or the Sphere of their Expansion. And so, when from
hence the animal Spirits are derived from so full and plentiful a Storehouse,
it is for that reason Fowls are furnished with so curious an Eye, and with so
highly perspicacious and acute a sight. And the same perhaps may hold
concerning Fishes, if that we consider the sight in these is performed in a
thicker Medium, and often double.

In some Animals, in the midst of these chambers of either Optic Nerve, the
shanks of the oblong Marrow a little opening, leave a chink or aperture, which
receiving the serosities coming from every region of the Brain and its
Appendix, sends them through the Tunnel into the pituitary Glandula.

There is no need that we should discourse much here of the Tunnel and the
pituitary Glandula, because, already speaking of the Ventricles of the Brain,
or the empty space left within its plicature, we fell occasionally on the
consideration of both these; where we showed, that the serous humors, which
were wont to be heaped together within many places of the Brain and of its
Appendix, do all slide down on every side from each angle and recess of it into
the steep opening of the Tunnel; and so there is a necessity that they should
be poured out by it into the pituitary Glandula. Further, it is manifest, that
this Glandula, in some Animals, is charged with a double office; to wit, as it
receives the serosities sent from above from the Brain, so also it separates
the humors from the blood brought to the same from the wonderful Net by the
Arteries, and prepossessing them, imbibes them before their ingress to the
Brain. Wherefore this part is furnished with a substance of a double kind: viz.
one reddish, more thin, and interwoven with Blood-carrying Vessels, which
constitutes either side of it; and the other more white placed in the middle,
to which the Tunnel is inserted.

oblong marrow from a sheep Fig: VIIIa


But having shown, that this Glandula receives the humors so brought by a
double Tribute, we did diligently inquire concerning the ways and means whereby
they are at length carried away from thence: and as it appears by an
Experiment, that there is a passage open from this Glandula into the Vessels
lying underneath the bone, and from thence into the Jugular Veins, we affirmed,
that 'twas most likely, that the humors to be carried away from this Glandula,
(after the manner of others) may be reduced at last into the bloody mass. I
shall not add any more concerning these things, but proceed to the other parts
of the oblong Marrow. But that, what has been said, concerning the shanks of
the oblong Marrow, and their tops, viz. the chamfered bodies, may be the better
understood, it will seem to the purpose that we represent the Images of all
these in the following Figure.

The Eighth Figure
REpresents the oblong Marrow taken out of the Head of a Sheep with the Brain
cut off and removed, and with the Cerebel and one streaked Body cut in two in
the middle, and other things chiefly belonging to the medullar Trunk.

AA. The chamfered Body cut in two in the midst, that its marrowy chamferings
may appear. B. The other chamfered Body whole covered with the Choroeidal
Enfolding with the extreme portion of the callous Body CC. sticking to the
same. CC. The brim or extremity of the callous Body cleaving to the chamfered
Body. D. The Basis of the Fornix. E. The right wing of the Choroeidal
Enfolding. F. The passage of the Veins being stretched out from the fourth
Bosom, which being presently forked, constitutes the veinous portion of either
wing of the Choroeidal Enfolding; under the beginning of this passage, very
much beset with Fibers and sanguiferous Vessels, the Pineal Glandula lies hid.
G. The hole or chink leading to the Tunnel. HH. The chambers of the Optic
Nerves. II. The medullary Processes, or the ways of passage which lead from the
medullar stock into the orbicular Protuberances. KK. The Buttock-form orbicular
Protuberances. LL. The lesser Protuberances called Testes. M. The meeting
together of the Processes ascending obliquely from the Testes into the Cerebel.
N. The hole of the lower Ventricle lying under the orbicular Protuberances. OO.
The Pathetick Nerves of the Eyes. PP. The medullary Processes stretched out
from the Testes into the Cerebel. QQ. Other medullar Processes, which being
sent from the Cerebel toward the oblong Marrow, compass about its stock, and
constitute the annular or ringy Protuberance. RR. The lowest or third Processes
of the Cerebel, which being inserted to the medullar Trunk, become additional
cords or strings of it. SS. The medullar Ramifications or Branchings of the
Cerebel. TT. The middle marrows of either Cerebel in which its three medullary
Processes, constituting either little foot of it, grow together. V. The Ditch
constituting the fourth Ventricle in the medullar Trunk. X. The extremity of
the oblong Marrow about to end in the Spinal.
CHAP. XIV.
Of the Uses of the Pineal Glandula and the Choroeidal Enfolding; also of the
orbicular Prominences which are commonly called Nates and Testes; and other
Parts which seem to be dependences of them.

BElow the Chambers of the Optic Nerves in a common Valley which lies between
the tops of these and the Buttock-form Prominences, is placed the Pineal
Glandula or Kernel in form of a Pine apple, called also Conarium; this is not
only found in Man and four-footed beasts, but Fowls and Fishes also are endued
with the same. Wherefore, although from hence it may be concluded, that this is
of necessary use; yet we can scarce believe this to be the seat of the Soul, or
its chief Faculties to arise from it; because Animals, which seem to be almost
quite destitute of Imagination, Memory, and other superior Powers of the Soul,
have this Glandula or Kernel large and fair enough.

It is observed in all Animals of every kind and form, that to this Glandula,
always placed nigh the holes or passages, open to the Tunnel, the Choroeidal
Enfolding is continually joined; yea this enfolding (seeming to hang from the
Pineal Kernel sustaining its middle Process, as it were by a nail or hasp, from
thence) is divided into two wings stretching out on either side upon the shanks
of the oblong Marrow, Wherefore we may justly suspect, that this Glandula is
chiefly made for the sake of this enfolding; and that the office of it is no
other than of other Kernels, which are placed nigh the concourse of the
sanguiferous Vessels: to wit, that it may receive and retain within it the
serous humors deposited from the arterious blood, till the Veins being emptied,
may sup them back, or the Lymphaeducts (if there be any there) may convey them
outwardly. For it is observed, that the Choroeidal enfolding is beset with very
many lesser Glandula's or Kernels, and every where interwoven with them, which
imbibe the Serum secreted from the blood, in the smaller Vessels; therefore for
this very same office, where all the Vessels concur, this Kernel is placed, of
a bigger bulk, that it might be able to receive and contain the serosities
there plentifully deposited. Moreover, it is of no small moment, that this
Glandula sustains and keeps duly stretched out the Chroeidal enfolding
otherwise hanging loose, and apt to fall down into it self, or at least to
slide out of its proper place. Wherefore I have often taken notice in the
Dropsy of the Brain, that this Glandula being loosned at the roots by too much
moisture, and often broken off, and removed from its place, the Choroeidal
enfolding has slid together from its proper expansion, and slipped down lower,
and also suffered its Vessels to be folded together disorderly.

From these things thus premised concerning the pineal Glandula, it will not be
difficult to assign also the use of the Choroeidal enfolding: Concerning which
there will be little need to resel that Opinion of the common sort, which
asserts, That the animal Spirits, to be bestowed upon the whole Brain, are
begot in this enfolding: because the Vessels of this instill nothing to the
substance of the Brain or its Appendix, for that they are no where inserted to
it; but it was before shown, that the Ventricles of the Brain, or the Cavity in
which these same Vessels are hung, do not at all contain the Spirits; which
further appears more plain, because in Cephalic diseases those Ventricles are
filled with water, and the continuity of the enfolding is dissolved by too much
moisture, when in the mean time the sick are indifferently strong in the
exercise of the animal Faculties.

But indeed we suppose, that this enfolding serves for a twofold office: viz.
First, that the more watery part of the blood, destinated for the Brain, might
be sent away into its Vessels, to the end, that the remaining portion of the
bloody Latex might become more pure and free from dregs to be distilled forth
into Spirits; even as is wont to be done in a Chemical Distillation, to wit,
when there is a peculiar Receiver fitted for the receiving of the Phlegm by it
self, more sincere, pure, and subtle Spirits are instilled into the other more
noted Receiver. The more watery blood entering the arterious Vessels of this
Enfolding, being carried from them into the Veins, is remanded back toward the
Heart. In the mean time, lest the Serum, too much redounding, and boiling up in
these Vessels, might hinder circulation, its superfluities are received for
some time both by the lesser Glandula's thickly inserted, and also by the
pineal Kernel.

The other and no less noted use of this Enfolding, is to conserve the heat of
the blood boiling within the complications of the Vessels, and as it were
circulating about, being excited as from a fireplace within the enfolding of
the Brain. For though the Pia Matter need not implant thick shoots of Vessels in
the callous Body and inward Marrows of the Brain, for that they are rather
dedicated to the Exercise than to the Generation of the animal Spirits; yet
that the heat requisite for the circulation of the Spirits, might be kept
constantly in that place, this enfolding is hung upon the whole neighborhood.
For as the blood, aggested or heaped together within the Cavities of the
Bosoms, is instead of an hot Bath, whereby the animal Spirits are distilled
plentifully into the outmost and cortical part of the brain; so the blood
contained within the small Vessels of this enfolding, seems to be in the place
of a lesser and more temperate Bath, whereby the same Spirits might be fitly
circulated in the more inward and medullar substance.

Lastly, Another reason may also be given, why the Choroeidal enfolding is
found always within the Ventricles or Cavity of the Brain, made by its
enfolding, and after what manner soever figured; to wit, that another sort of
commodity might result from thence; that when the Vessels of that Enfolding,
carrying too watery blood, lay aside more Serum than the Glandula's are able to
receive or contain, what is superfluous might slide down opportunely into the
underlying Cavity, as into a Sink. Wherefore the Pineal Glandula, though set in
a more eminent place, is however placed always near the hole or passage that
lies open toward the Tunnel in every brain.

Next to the Pineal Kernel are found in the upper superficies of the oblong
Marrow certain noted Prominences, which are commonly called Nates and Testes.
These being placed near together, do constitute as it were four Mole-hills,
which yet are joined one to another by certain processes. Beneath these
Mole-hills, or rather between the joining of them and the trunk of the oblong
Marrow, placed underneath, a narrow and long Cavity or Den is left, which by
some Anatomists is called the fourth Ventricle; but according to others later,
who place the fourth Ventricle under the Cerebel, this Cavity is affirmed to be
a passage to it.

The hinder extremity of this Den ends nigh the beginning of the fourth
Ventricle; the more fore-extremity of it opens before the former Mole-hills or
little bulkings out, called Nates. From the midst of this Cavity or narrow Den
a passage goes straight to the Tunnel. It is very much controverted among
Anatomists concerning the site of these parts, and of their dependency on one
another, and of other parts, and of their use: Concerning which this is first
to be noted, as we hinted above, that these four Protuberances are far greater
in some brute Animals than in a Man, as in a Sheep, Calf, Goat, and the like;
also in a sound, dry, and old Head they are more conspicuous, and their
processes, joynings, and habitudes may be more easily noted than in a younger,
moist, or otherwise sickly brain. Indeed the use of these (unless my conjecture
deceives me) seems far more noble, than that they should deserve those vile
names of Nates and Testes, Buttocks and Testicles.

Notwithstanding, to what office these parts were designed, neither have the
ancient Anatomists delivered, nor will it, by the help of Reason, be easy to
guess for certain. We have already shown, that these aforesaid Prominences
ought not to be taken for the two shanks either of the Brain or Cerebel bending
back one toward another, and so growing together into the oblong Marrow. For
although from this supposition a very neat Hypothesis may be made for the
economy of the animal Function, to wit, by affirming that these double shanks,
on either side, were so many distinct ways of passage through which the animal
Spirits, for the performing of motions, flowed from the Brain and Cerebel into
the oblong Marrow, and returned thence from this into those for the performing
the acts of the Senses: yet from our Method of Dissecting it plainly appears,
that the brain is not fixed to the oblong Marrow nigh this place, but far above
it; so that indeed the anterior Prominences, unless mediately only, viz. by the
chamfered bodies, receive not any portion of the medullar stock, or any
influence from the brain, nor can have any dependency from it. Besides, if the
Protuberances called Nates were shanks of the brain, why should the same be in
man, (he having got the greatest brain, the least) or at least lesser than in
most other living Creatures? Then between the Prominences called Testes and the
Cerebel, although there happens a certain communication; yet it seems that
there lies open a passage from those little lumps into the Cerebel, and not
from this, through them into the oblong Marrow. For out of these aforesaid
Prominences a medullar Process ascends obliquely on either side into the
Cerebel, by whose passage the animal Spirits, tending from one stage to the
other, cause a mutual commerce between those parts and the Cerebel: But indeed
the Processes which lead from the Cerebel into the oblong Marrow, and carry to
it its influences, being distinct from the former, stand somewhat lower, as
shall be more clearly shown hereafter, when we shall speak of the Cerebel.

But in the mean time, concerning the offices and uses to which the aforesaid
Protuberances serve, we shall make this conjecture. The animal Spirits
perpetually flow out and leap back again from the fountain the brain into the
oblong marrow, so that there may be had a constant commerce between the brain
and many organs of sense and spontaneous motion: from which those parts are
entertained which perform their actions, not at the beck of the Appetite, but
either by the instinct of Nature, or the blind impulse of the Passions; for
such receive wholly their influences from the Cerebel, as afterward shall be
more fully showed. Whilst therefore the Spirits, flowing from the brain, abound
in the oblong marrow, it is fit that some of them should be carried from thence
into the Cerebel: (for what uses this ought to be done, shall be told by and
by) wherefore from either side of the oblong marrow a Protuberance grows forth,
into which indeed the Spirits designed for the Cerebel, may go apart from the
common passage of the oblong marrow; and these Prominences are the former,
which are commonly called Nates, and, as we have said, are far greater in most
brute Animals than in man (the reason of which shall be declared anon.) The
other hinder Protuberances, commonly called Testes, grow to these former, and
are only certain Epiphyses or Excrescences of them, as it were the heads of the
medullary Processes, which are from thence carried by an oblique ascent into
the Cerebel; for when the animal Spirits ascend from the former Prominences
into the Cerebel, they enter these latter first, as it were the more large
beginnings or entrances of their passage, from whence they go forward by the
passage of the medullar Processes into the Cerebel.

Besides we may take notice, that when the animal Spirits are carried out of
the oblong marrow into the greater natiform Prominences to be derived toward
the Cerebel, they, according to their custom, (as often as they tend toward
the common Sensory from a double Organ of any Faculty) ought to be confounded
and mingled together before they enter the Cerebel: wherefore both the first
Prominences, and also the second growing to them are joined together with
certain Processes like wings reaching one another; which connection indeed of
them, because it ought to be distinguished every where from the medullar Trunk
lying under it hence, from the separation or empty space that comes between the
oblong marrow and the growing together of the Prominences, that cavity arises,
which is by some called the fourth Ventricle, and by others the passage to it.

If it be yet farther inquired, to what end the animal Spirits are carried by
this bypassage from the common passage of the oblong marrow into the Cerebel,
and thence back again; I say, that this is done for a twofold respect, viz.
both that the Passions or Affections of the sensitive Soul, begun from the
brain, may be transmitted to the Praecordia and Viscera; then secondly, that
the natural Instincts, excited in the Praecordia and Viscera, might be
communicated to the brain. These reciprocal commerces which are had between the
brain and the Organs of involuntary Functions, ought to be instituted or
performed by this private passage, lest otherwise the exercises of these
involuntary Faculties should very much disturb the acts of the outward Senses,
or the intentions of spontaneous motions.

As to the first, it is observed, that by every passion of the sensitive Soul,
as from Anger, Sadness, Pleasure, and other Affections, the Praecordia are
disturbed, whether we will or no; which variously dilate or constrain
themselves, and so stir up in the blood diverse fluctuations. Moreover, from
this kind of force of the Passions the countenance or the aspects of the Face
are wont to be altered and distorted after various ways. The reason of all
these seems to be, because when the animal Spirits, existing within the brain,
are moved according to the Idea of the conceived Passion, the other Spirits
also flowing within these diverting places, being in like manner moved, affect
the Cerebel, and that coming between, the original of the Nerves, serving to
the Praecordia, Viscera, and Muscles of the Face, and so the parts to which
those Nerves are distributed, are also stirred up or provoked into motions
answerable to the same passion.

But the aforesaid Prominences and their dependences serve no less also for the
conveying of the impressions of natural Instincts to the Brain, that from
thence the Appetite and local motions might presently be retorted: by which all
the exigencies or wants perceived by the Praecordia or Viscera might be
supplied. When in a young one newly born the stomach cries out for hunger, the
Instinct of this is carried by the passage of the Nerves to the Cerebel, and
from thence by the medullar Processes to these Protuberances; and the Spirits
there inhabiting, form the Idea of the impression, and carry it to the brain,
wherein presently, without any previous knowledge or experience, such kind of
conceptions of the Soul are stirred up, that every little living Creature
presently seeks out the Mothers breasts and sucks.

But it may be objected, it does not seem of necessity we should suppose these
kind of acts of the Passions and Instincts to be made apart in this by-place;
for why are not the commerces of the animal Spirits ordained by the influence
from the Brain into the Nerves leading to the Praecordia and so back again
through the common passage of the oblong Marrow? But to that it may be readily
answered, That this reciprocal motion of the Spirits ought to be made through
the middle region of the Cerebel, from one stage to another for the exercise of
these Faculties: And therefore (since that all manner of communication between
the Brain and Cerebel is performed by these Prominences) there should also be
had a passage by the same way between this and the Organs of the Functions
merely natural. Besides, if the rage or furious motions of the Passions and
Instincts should be carried in the same path in which the forces of sensible
things are carried, their acts might be greatly confounded by the mutual
meeting or gathering together of the animal Spirits. But this kind of
Hypothesis concerning the Acts and Progress of the Passions and natural
Instincts, shall be made more clear afterward, when we design the Actions and
Uses of the Cerebel, and of the other parts, which in like manner seem to be
destinated to the same offices with these Protuberances.

In the mean time, what we have affirmed, that the latter Prominences are only
Additionals or Excrescences of the former, will clearly appear to any one
beholding them. But this, as we have already hinted, is seen without
Controversy in the brains of a Calf, a Sheep, and some other four footed
beasts; where, when the Nates are signally great, the Testes grow to the same
in a very small bulk. Further, that the medullary Processes lead from these
into the Cerebel, and convey the animal Spirits by this by-path, is so
manifest, that none who has carefully beheld these parts, can be able any
further to hesitate or be doubtful of it. For indeed the little hairs or fibers
wherewith these processes, ascending into the Cerebel, are marked, are
otherwise figured and placed than those which are beheld in the neighboring
process descending from the Cerebel toward the oblong Marrow.

Moreover, either pair of Prominences do not only communicate among themselves
mutually by their stretched out wings, but also another medullar Process, going
cross wise, knits together the aforesaid Processes stretched out from thence
into the Cerebel; and from this joining together of them two small Nerves are
produced, which bending down on either side, and being carried forward, enter
the Dura Matter, and so go straight through it, till having reached to the
moving Nerves of the Eyes, they go forth of the Skull at the same hole with
them, going forward straight to the Trochlear Muscle of the Eye. Concerning
these little Nerves it is observed, that when many others proceed from the
sides or the Basis of the oblong Marrow, these arise from the aforesaid
Prominences in the bunching forth at the top. The reason of which, if I be not
mistaken, is this: We have affirmed, that these Prominences do receive and
communicate to the Brain the natural Instinct delivered from the Heart and
Bowels to the Cerebel; and on the other side, or back again, do transfer
toward the Praecordia, by the mediation of the Cerebel, the forces of the
Passions or Affections received from the Brain; but in either action the motion
of the Eyes is affected with a certain manifest Sympathy. For if pain, want, or
any other signal trouble afflicts the Viscera or the Praecordia, a dejected and
cast down aspect of the Eyes will declare the sense of its trouble: when on the
contrary, in Joy, or any pleasant Affection of the Praecordia or Viscera, the
Eyes are made lively and sparkle again. In like manner, the Eyes do so clearly
show the Affections of the Mind, as Sadness, Anger, Hatred, Love, and other
perturbations, that those who are affected, though they should dissemble,
cannot hide the feeling and intimate conceptions of the mind. Without doubt
these so happen, because the animal Spirits, tending this way and that way in
this diverting place between the Brain and the Praecordia, do at once strike
those Nerves as the strings of a Harp. Wherefore from this kind of conjecture
which we have made concerning the use of these Nerves, we have called them
Pathetical, although indeed other Nerves also may deserve this name.

There yet remains for us to take notice of the aforesaid Prominences, that
either of these pairs, and the Processes hanging on them, are distinguished
from the trunk of the oblong Marrow lying under by the Cavity between them; so
that this Cavity or Ventricle seems to exist only secondarily, because the
empty space between the aforesaid bodies, placed above and beneath, separating
the same one from another, ought to come between. But this Cavity seeming to
result so by accident, has a very signal use; for in the middle of its passage
a sloping aperture reaches toward the Tunnel, through which the humors sliding
into either of its holes, one made more forward, the other more backward, are
sent out. The more forward hole is placed between the chambers of the Optic
Nerves, a little before the pineal Glandula, into which the serous heap being
laid up nigh to the confines of the oblong Marrow, slides by degrees: but the
other hole is opened more backward into the fourth Ventricle which is planted
under the Cerebel; which hole is covered with a thin Membrane, which girding
about its mouth and that of the Cerebel, provides lest the humors, derived from
the fourth Ventricle, or the confines of the Cerebel, should fall down any
other way than into that hole; but if at any time that little hole be broken
asunder by a deluge of the Serum, the watery Latex sliding down upon the Basis
of the oblong Marrow, overwhelms the origines of the Nerves, and so brings
Convulsive distempers and meltings, and not seldom deadly, of the vital
Spirits, as I have observed in the bodies of many dying of Cephalic Diseases.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Uses of the Cerebel, and of some of its Parts and Processes.

HAving hitherto continued the former Tract of the oblong Marrow, which as it
were the Kings Highway, leads from the Brain, as the Metropolis, into many
Provinces of the nervous stock, by private recesses and cross ways; it follows
now that we view the other City of the animal Kingdom. The situation of this
being remote enough from the former, its kind of structure is also different
from it: yea it seems that there are granted to this, as to a free and
municipal City, certain Privileges and a peculiar Jurisdiction.

The Cerebel is placed a little below the orbicular Prominences in the hinder
part of the Head; where growing to the trunk of the oblong Marrow by a double
little foot, it appears almost of a Spherical figure. Its superior gibbosity
coheres toward the superficies to the border of the Brain by the intervention
of the Pia Matter; but nevertheless it is intimately united to it, nor is there
any immediate commerce between this or that or their parts. There has been
spoken enough already of the figure and situation of the Cerebel, and of its
various Processes, and how it is fastened to the oblong Marrow; it now remains
that we proceed to design or draw out the offices and uses of it, and its
several parts. Where in the first place shall be inquired into, what kind of
office the Cerebel is endued with in the animal economy; then when we shall
descend to particulars, there are more things worthy to be noted, which will
offer themselves to our consideration: viz. first the infoldings of the Vessels
covering the whole compass of the Cerebel, and especially its hinder part, with
the heap of Kernels: secondly, its folds and lappets ordained with a certain
and determinate series, and almost after a like manner in all: thirdly, the
double substance of the folds, viz. cortical and marrowy: and the concentring
of all the medullary tracts in two large Marrows or middests: fourthly, either
little foot or pedestal of the Cerebel made out of those two middle Marrows:
and in either pedestal three distinct medullar Processes to be found: fifthly,
the annular Protuberance made by a process of the Cerebel descending into the
medullar Trunk: sixthly, some Nerves, which arising immediately from this
Protuberance and other Nerves in the neighborhood, which being designed for
the involuntary Function, receive the influences of the animal Spirits from the
Cerebel: Lastly, the Ventricle or Cavity lying under the Cerebel ought to be
considered.

1. As to the office or use of the Cerebel in general: nothing of it occurs,
spoken by the Ancients, worthy its fabric, or agreeable to its structure. Some
affirm this to be another Brain, and to perform the same actions with it: but
if any one should have a soft and foolish Brain, I greatly doubt, if he should
become wise, though he should obtain perhaps a more hard and solid Cerebel.
Others place the Memory in this part, supposing the Cerebel to be as it were a
Chest or Box, wherein the Idea's or images of things, before laid up, are kept
apart from the incourse of fresh Species. But it is far more probable, that
this faculty resides in the cortical spires of the Brain; as we have elsewhere
shown. For as often as we endeavor to remember objects long since past, we rub
the Temples and the forepart of the Head, we erect the Brain, and stir up or
awaken the Spirits dwelling in that place, as if endeavoring to find out
something lurking there; in the mean time, there is perceived nothing of
endeavor or striving motion in the hinder part of the Head. Besides, we have
shown, that the Fantasy and Imagination are performed in the Brain; but the
Memory depends so upon the Imagination, that it seems to be only a reflected or
inverse act of this: wherefore that it should be placed with it in the same
Cloister, to wit, in the Brain, is but necessary; for it plainly appears, that
there is no immediate commerce between the Brain and the Cerebel.

When some time past I diligently and seriously meditated on the office of the
Cerebel, and revolved in my mind several things concerning it, at length, from
the Analogy and frequent Ratiocination, this (as I think) true and genuine use
of it occurred; to wit, that the Cerebel is a peculiar Fountain of animal
Spirits designed for some works, and wholly distinct from the Brain. Within the
Brain, Imagination, Memory, Discourse, and other more superior Acts of the
animal Function are performed; besides, the animal Spirits flow also from it
into the nervous stock, by which all the spontaneous motions, to wit, of which
we are knowing and will, are performed. But the office of the Cerebel seems to
be for the animal Spirits to supply some Nerves; by which involuntary actions
(such as are the beating of the Heart, easy Respiration, the Concoction of the
Aliment, the protrusion of the Chyle, and many others) which are made after a
constant manner unknown to us, or whether we will or no, are performed. As
often as we go about voluntary motion, we seem as it were to perceive within us
the Spirits residing within the forepart of the Head to be stirred up to
action, or an influx. But the Spirits inhabiting the Cerebel perform
unperceivedly and silently their works of Nature without our knowledge or care.
Wherefore whilst the Brain is garnished as it were with uncertain Meanders and
crankling turnings and windings about, the compass of this is furnished with
folds and lappets disposed in an orderly series; in the spaces of which, as in
designed Orbs and Tracts, the animal Spirits are expanded according to the Rule
and Method naturally impressed on them. For indeed those in the Cerebel, as it
were in a certain artificial Machine or Clock, seem orderly disposed after that
manner within certain little places and boundaries, that they may flow out
orderly of their own accord one series after another without any driver, which
may govern or moderate their motions. Wherefore forasmuch as some Nerves
perform some kind of motions according to the instincts and wants of Nature,
without consulting the government of the will or appetite within the Brain, why
may it not be imagined, that the influence of the Spirits is derived wholly
from the Cerebel for the performing of these? For it seems inconvenient, that
for these offices which should be performed without any tumult or perturbation,
the Spirits should be called out of the Brain, which are continually driven
into fluctuations as it were with the winds of Passions and Cogitations.

As I only imagined of the use of the Cerebel after this manner, I was led to
it at length by a certain thread of Ratiocination; to which afterward happened
an Anatomical inspection, which plainly confirmed me in this opinion. For in
the frequent Dissection of the Heads of several sorts of Animals certain
Observations did occur, which seemed to put this matter out of all doubt. For I
first observed, the pairs of Nerves, which did serve to the Functions, wont to
be performed by the Instinct of Nature, or the force of the Passions, rather
than by the beck of the will, so immediately to depend on the Cerebel, that
from thence only the influence of the animal Spirits seems to be derived into
their origines or beginnings. By what means the Nerves arising from the
Cerebel, or receiving from it the provision of the animal Spirits, do perform
only involuntary actions, shall be declared hereafter; in the mean time, for
the confirmation of this Opinion, we have in readiness another Reason of no
less moment.

Therefore secondly, we took notice, that not only the conformation or make of
the Cerebel was ordained after a certain and peculiar manner, that is, that its
frame or bulk was couched together with folds or little circles, disposed in a
certain distinct series, and apt method, and proportionate within themselves,
as has been said; whence it may be argued, that the Spirits arising from
hence, and flowing outwardly, are employed or bestowed on some certain works
determinate to one thing. But further it is observed, that in all Animals,
although they differ in form and kind, yet the figure of the Cerebel is always
very like or wholly the same. The Brain and oblong Marrow are figured in many
after a diverse manner; for as we have showed before, there is some difference
of these parts found in man and four-sooted beasts: but between either of
these, and Fowls and Fishes, there is a notable difference as to these parts.
Notwithstanding in all these the Cerebel, furnished wholly with the same
lappets or little circles alike infolded one in another, is marked with the
same form and proportion; which certainly is a sign that the animal Spirits in
this workhouse are begotten and dispensed, as it were by a certain dimension,
for certain necessary offices, which are performed in all after the same
manner; and which cannot be any other than the motions and actions of the
Viscera and Pracordia. As to the other Faculties, of which sort are
Imagination, Memory, Appetite, yea local motions and sense are exercised after
one manner in those living Creatures, and after another manner in others;
wherefore their brains are formed after a diverse manner. But the motions of the
Heart and Respiration in all endued with an hot blood, are performed after a
like manner, that is, with a perpetual vicissititude of Systoles and Diastoles.
Besides, another office is to be assigned to the Cerebel, and different from
what is convenient or agreeable to the Brain; because where the folds and
turnings are wanting in the Brain, they are constantly found in the Cerebel.
Besides these reasons drawn from Anatomy, the Pathology of the humane Body
affords many others, which confirm the aforesaid office of the Cerebel. For it
oftentimes happens, that cruel and horrid Symptoms infest the Praecordia and
the region of the middle or lowest Belly; whilst in the mean time, the
morbifick cause lies in the Cerebel or nigh its confines. I have known
sometimes men laboring only in appearance with a Dyscrasie of the hinder part
of the Head, who complained of frequent Swooning and repeated meltings of the
Spirits or Deliquiums, as if they were just dying: in whom notwithstanding
nothing more could be detected of the morbifick cause or its seat, but that the
Patient perceived a great heaviness and pain in the hinder part of the Head,
and that upon any sudden motion or bending back of the Head, they were ready to
dye. In truth, the Symptoms which are wont to be raised up in the distemper
called the Incubus or Nightmare, viz. loss of speech, and a mighty weight or
load that seems to lie upon the breast, proceed altogether from the morbifick
matter fixed in the confines of the Cerebel, and obstructing the passages of
the Spirits destinated for the Pracordia. But indeed this Hypothesis of the
office of the Cerebel shall be more illustrated and confirmed from the uses of
its several parts, being rightly designed or drawn forth.

As to the parts and accidents of the Cerebel, 1. we take notice, that the
infoldings of the Vessels every where cloth the Cerebel no less than the
Brain, also that the ridges and furrows of its folds intimately hide or cover
it, which certainly is a sign that the animal Spirits are begotten in this
other workhouse of them from the watering blood, and instilled into its
substance: which thing also more clearly appears, because the Arteries and
Veins are not only variously complicated in the superficies of the Cerebel, but
both of them in like manner as in the Brain, send forth frequent shoots into
its more inward substance; wherefore whilst the most subtle and spirituous part
of the blood being carried through long windings about, and as it were
serpentine channels of the Vessels, and so sublimed into Spirits is received
within; the bloody part is carried away by the shoots of the Veins sent also
deeply down. Further, even as the more watery portion of the blood, destinated
for the Brain, runs into the Choroeidal enfolding; (whereby it may there lay
aside its unprofitable Phlegm into the Glandula's) so for the sake of
separating the Phlegm an heap of Glandula's, with the foldings of the Vessels,
as it were a Receptacle fitted for this business, is placed in the hinder
region of the Cerebel.

2. From the blood, after this manner cleared from Phlegm, and made subtle by a
long circulation, a very pure and spirituous liquor is instilled into the
cortical substance of the Cerebel, which is presently exalted by the Ferment
there placed into animal Spirits. For indeed we have affirmed, that the Spirits
are procreated only in the cortical part of the Cerebel, as in that of the
Brain: wherefore, because this kind of Cortex is wanting to the oblong and
spinal Marrow, we think these parts do serve only for the exercise of the
animal Spirits, and not for their production.

3. The Spirits every where produced within the cortical or exterior compass of
the Cerebel, in which they are presently prepared for the work of the animal
Function, are derived from all the folds into the medullar tract, and thence
into two ample middle Marrows; where they keep full as it were the fountain or
spring, and there like the bubling up of waters, are circulated within with a
perpetual turning, and from thence they continually stream forth into the parts
of the nervous System proper to themselves.

4. As to the ways of Emanation it is observed, that the two middle Marrows of
the Cerebel pass as it were into two pedestals or little feet, by which they
are fastened to the trunk of the oblong Marrow; and for that in either little
foot of it three distinct medullar Processes are found, all these, or at least
two of them, are as it were so many paths whereby the animal Spirits stream
forth from their fountain and flow back again.

5. The first of these Processes ascends into the Cerebel from the orbicular
Prominences: the use of this we have already declared; to wit, that there may
be a certain passage between these Prominences and the Cerebel, in which,
whilst the animal Spirits, as in a by-path, move this way and that way, to and
fro, they may transmit both the force of the Passions from the Brain by the
interposition of the Cerebel to the Praecordia, and convey also the natural
Instincts delivered to the Cerebel from the Praecordia and Viscera toward the
Brain. But the second Process descending straight from the Cerebel, embraces
the medullar Trunk, and so going round about it, constitutes the annular or
ringy Protuberance, out of which the fifth, sixth, and seventh pair of Nerves
take their originals; so indeed, that this Protuberance seems to be the
Warehouse or Storehouse of the Spirits flowing from the Cerebel, from which
they may influence and be derived into the opposite passages of the Nerves.
Lastly, the third process of either little foot, descending from the Cerebel
into the oblong Marrow, is inserted into its trunk over against where the
eighth pair of Nerves have their original; so that it should seem very likely,
the provision of the Spirits destinated for this Nerve is derived also by this
way from the Cerebel; then what Spirits superabound, remaining longer than this
Nerve requires, they sliding down into the common belly or chanel of the oblong
and spinal Marrow, increase the plenty of those parts. For this same end the
smooth and pyramidal bodies are reached out of the annular Protuberance above
the oblong Marrow toward the Spine, to wit, that by the passage of those
Processes the Spirits of that provision or stock superabounding, might flow out
partly into the beginning of the eighth pair, and partly into the common tract
of the medullar Trunk.

Thus much we have spoken briefly and summarily of the Uses of the Cerebel, and
of its parts and Processes. But that it may be the better understood, and also
that this new thought of Theory concerning the involuntary Function of the
animal Regiment, may be more clearly illustrated, we shall here give you a more
particular Order or Method of the Spirits brought forth in the Cerebel, and as
it were take a view of, or muster their Arms or Forces. Further, it will seem
to the purpose, that we should design or draw forth more openly the abundance
or plenty of the Nerves receiving their gifts from this Fountain of the Spirits
concerning the Acts to be performed only of the involuntary Function.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the various Order and diverse manner of Exercise of the Spirits produced in
the Cerebel for the Acts of the involuntary Function.

AFter having shown, that the office of the Cerebel is to procreate animal
Spirits apart from the Spirits begotten in the Brain, and to dispense them into
the Nerves, the Executors of the involuntary Actions and Passions; there yet
remains to be unsolded by what manner of economy or government the Spirits
inhabiting the Cerebel and made free, are busied both by an intestine
Circulation, within their proper dwelling places, and also are wont to be
expanded and flow out with an exterior irradiation for the necessities and
wants of other parts: then these things being shown, we shall design more
particularly the Uses and Offices of the Nerves, and of some other Processes
doing service to this Government.

As to the first, as the Cerebel is the other primary Root of the sensitive
Soul, or the Fountain from whence the animal Spirits, being diffused through
the whole substance of it and its Appendix, are continued still under the same
Systasis and radiant Contexture, it is to be noted, that this radiation of the
Spirits from the Cerebel does flow after another manner than the other from the
Brain: because this being left to it self, is bestowed by a constant efflux or
flowing out on the Organs both of the vital Function and the merely natural,
and its expenses by an equal continual provision of Spirits, are made up again
from the bloody mass continually instilled in. But on the contrary, the Spirits
flow out from the Brain, neither by such a continual course without
intermission and by little and little, nor are sustained by a perpetual
provision and sliding in by degrees; but both the loss of them, and their
refection, are uncertain, unequal, and variously interrupted. For neither are
the spontaneous Acts of the Function it self, to which they serve, performed
after any constant or always the same manner; but according to exterior
accidents and occasions we put them forth by heaps, and with a certain force
sometimes, and again sometimes we suffer them to be wholly intermitted and
unimployed. Therefore the Spirits also are in like manner supplied with an
uncertain measure; to wit, they are instilled in sleep plentifully and more
copiously, but waking more sparingly and with hard labor, or scarce not at
all. Yea the involuntary portion it self of the sensitive Soul (which flows
from the Cerebel) for that it has a near commerce and affinity (as was already
said) with the other radicated in the Brain, therefore it is wont to be much
disturbed in the performing its office equally and peaceably, and being
variously affected and agitated by the impulses sent here and there, or from
this place and that, it is compelled, sometimes to contract, sometimes to
extend its Systasis in the whole or in part, and so is rendered obnoxious to
several Passions, and ordinarily instigated to the performing irregular and
disorderly actions.

But indeed the contexture of the Spirits, or the part of the Soul irradiating
the Cerebel and its Appendix, is both affected with a certain sense, and is
urged into motions appropriate to it self, though diverse. The sense or Sympathy
belonging to this, if it be terminated within the confines of the Cerebel, is
always private, nor goes any farther forward to the Brain with a more strong
undulation or wavering; and because it is performed the living Creature knowing
nothing of it, unless by the effect it cannot be known, for that it excites a
peculiar motion. But such an affection of the Cerebel is implanted in it, that
by every new disposition of the Praecordia and Viscera communicated to this
from beneath, also from every violent passion excited within the Forum of the
Brain, and so sent from above, a certain impression is carried to the
inhabitants of the Cerebel: by which indeed they are disposed into various
ordinations for the performing these or those motions respectively.

For examples sake, so long as the tranquil region of the Cerebel, like a
serene and fair Heaven, is free from all perturbation, the Spirits its
inhabitants, being poured out with a pleasing sense, or as it were a certain
complacency, flow within their proper habitations, both with a gentle
circulation, and also with an equal flowing out enter the beginnings of the
Nerves serving to the Functions both vital and natural: by which indeed easy
Respiration, the Pulse, Chylification, and other offices of the same nature,
are performed peaceably. But if that any trouble or molestation happen
outwardly to any one, from whence an impression of it is communicated to the
Cerebel, presently a troublesome sense being stirred up there, it disturbs the
animal Spirits in the Fountain it self, and so is wont to excite irregular
motions in the Organs of the involuntary Function. For from hence the frequent
alteration of the Pulse and of Respiration, also Cramps of the Viscera, and
convulsive motions arise unknown to us, or also against our wills. But an
impression sent from elsewhere to the Cerebel, and inducing the same kind of
troublesome sense, either ascends by the passage of the Nerves from the
Praecordia and Viscera, or it is carried from above from the Brain by the
passage of the orbicular Prominences; as shall be shown more largely anon.

In the mean time, from these things already showed of the passive power or
sense of the Cerebel, it may be easily collected, by what means, with what
order and series the animal Spirits, arising from the same, are moved. But
first you must distinguish between their twofold motion. For one is customary
and ordinary, consisting in a perpetual and equal efflux of Spirits; by which
indeed, they flowing into the beginnings of the Nerves nigh their risings,
especially of the intercostal and wandering pair, the solemn acts of the Pulse,
Respiration, Chylification, and others of the involuntary Function are
performed. Then secondly, the other motion happens extraordinary and
occasional, which the same Spirits perform confusedly, as it were in disturbed
orders: as when the Pulse becomes quicker or slower than it ought, or the
Respiration unequal or interrupted; and when the other Faculties, which belong
to this Class, are perverted from their regular and constant manner. But these
kind of extraordinary motions are again twofold, to wit, for that its
instigation proceeds from a double bound; for the impulse whereby the Spirits
inhabiting the Cerebel, are compelled into an irregular action, (as we have but
now intimated) is carried either from beneath, viz. from the Praecordia and
Viscera; or it is wont to be transmitted from above, to wit, from the Brain.

As to the first, if at any time the Praecordia grow too hot, and are burnt
with a feverish heat, presently by the passage of the Intercostals and the
wandering pair of Nerves, the Spirits residing in the Cerebel, being warned of
this evil, institute more frequent and stronger acts both of the Pulse and of
Respiration. In like manner, if by chance the humors and sharp Juyces irritate
or greatly trouble or afflict the Coats of the Ventricles or Intestines through
the sense of this affection communicated to the Cerebel, the instinct of
performing the motion is reciprocated, whereby the fibers of the parts, being
contracted and wrinkled together, endeavor the shaking off of the hurtful
matter. More instances might be here brought of all the other acts of the vital
or merely natural Function: of which besides it may be observed, that when a
sense of the trouble is immediately conveyed from the Praecordia or Viscera to
the Cerebel, this affection, like the waving of waters, is either stopped or
terminated there, from whence a motion, as the business requires, unknown to
the Brain, is presently retorted, as when the actions of the Praecordia are
altered by a feverish distemper without our knowledge; or secondly, that sense
of the trouble being transmitted to the Cerebel, for that it is more vehement,
it unfolds it self more largely, and like a stronger waving of waters, passing
through the Cerebel, goes forward further even to the Brain, and warns its
inhabitants of the evil; by which they being incited to oppose the enemy, cause
a motion of another kind: So (as has been said) when the Praecordia grow
cruelly hot, the Cerebel feeling this, makes the Pulse and Respiration
stronger. But further, the Brain being warned of the same trouble, seeks and
diligently requires cold drink and other remedies to moderate the heat.
Moreover, it is after this manner also in several other actions, which though
they are regular, yet being made in the Brain without any previous knowledge,
they are said to be done by Instincts merely natural; as when brute Animals,
being newly brought forth, presently seek for the Dams teats, and greedily
suck; or Birds, without any showing or example, build nests with wonderful Art,
lay eggs, and hatch young ones. In these kind of works the Brain being taught
before by none, directs fit means to the ends instituted by Nature: which
indeed seems to be done by this means. The sense of every necessity being
brought to the Cerebel, incites the Spirits inhabiting it to succor it; which
when they are not able to do, the impression going from thence further forward,
is carried to the orbicular Prominences: by which the Spirits there inhabiting,
being presently struck, form the Appetite or the intention of performing, which
being thence communicated to the Brain, it readily causes that local motions,
fit for the executing of the work, be retorted. Of these we shall speak anon a
little more largely, when we treat of the respect which happens between the
orbicular Prominences and the annular Protuberance.

In the mean time, we shall take notice in the second place, that the irregular
motions of the Spirits in habiting the Cerebel, are wont also, by reason of the
force of the affections, to be transmitted from thence to the Brain: for as
often as a violent passion, as Joy, Sadness, Anger, Fear, or of any other kind,
is conceived in the Brain, presently the impression of the same being brought
through the bypath of the Prominences into the Cerebel, disturbs the Spirits
destinated to the vital or merely natural Function in their very fountain, and
for that reason presently induces notable mutations in the Organs of those
Functions.

What has been spoken hitherto of the Cerebel being employed about the offices
of the involuntary Function only, also concerning the sense and the motions
both usual and irregular of the Spirits inhabiting it, will be made more clear,
if lastly we shall show the offices of the Nerves and of the other processes,
immediately depending upon the Cerebel, to be no other than such as perform
only involuntary Acts: which shall be briefly and succinctly done, as far as is
pertinent to our purpose, because a more full consideration of them is left to
another place.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Nerves, which receiving the stores or companies of the Spirits from the
Cerebel, bestow them on the Acts of the involuntary Function.

WE have already showed, that out of the annular Protuberance (which is a
certain Process of the Cerebel) three pairs of Nerves, to wit, the fifth,
sixth, and seventh immediately arise. We have said that Protuberance to be as
it were a Repository or Store house, wherein the Spirits flowing out of the
Cerebel, and to be derived into the depending Nerves, as occasion serves, are
kept: and in the mean time, whilst they remain there, they who stream out from
either middle Marrow of the Cerebel divisively, meeting mutually in this
Cirque, are united together. But as the aforesaid three pairs of Nerves receive
the forces of the Spirits from the Cerebel by the mediation of that
Protuberance; so also the eighth pair having its rise near the insertion of the
other ( viz. the lowest) medullar Process sent down from the Brain, seems to
derive by its passage the influence of the Spirits no less from the Cerebel:
wherefore when these four conjugations of Nerves owe the Tribute of their
Spirits wholly to the Cerebel, if I shall show that all these Nerves serve
chiefly and almost only to the involuntary acts of the Senses and Motions,
surely this will be a signal Argument, that according to our Hypothesis, the
office of the Cerebel is to beget and to dispense the animal Spirits requisite
for the involuntary Functions.

Therefore in the first place we observe of the fifth and sixth conjugation of
Nerves, that as this arises out of the Basis of the greater Ring, and that from
its sides both in man and in four-footed beasts; the fifth pair being carried
more forward, distributes its branches into the Glandula's of the Eyes, into
the Nostrils, into the Palate, Teeth, yea and into most parts of the Face and
Mouth; but the sixth pair is wholly bestowed on some Muscles of the Eyes.
Further, out of the trunk of the fifth pair two shoots, and another out of the
Nerve of the sixth pair bending back behind, meet together; and what is
wonderful, and not before taken notice of by Anatomists, the intercostal
Nerves, destinated to the Praecordia and Viscera, do make a Trunk; so that the
Nerves of the fifth and sixth pair stretch out a double Ramification, to wit,
one more above about the parts of the Mouth and Face, and the other lower
through the Viscera of the middle and lowest Belly. But it will appear clearly
to any one considering this thing more carefully, that the chief branches of
either partition are employed about the involuntary offices of Motion and
Sense, of which sort those are chiefly, that either cause the passions, or
perform the natural Instincts.

1. Concerning the intercostal Nerve, which (as was said) being radicated in
the Nerves of the fifth and sixth pair, depends as to its origin wholly on the
Cerebel, it is not here to be doubted but that it looking toward the
Praecordia and Viscera in a man, and toward these latter only in most
four-footed beasts, is bestowed on the Functions only vital and merely natural,
and so confers little or nothing to spontaneous actions. Further, forasmuch as
this Nerverea ching forth into the Praecordia and Viscera of the whole Abdomen,
is continued by its superior ramification also into the Eyes, as also into the
parts of the Mouth and Face; certainly from hence a true and genuine reason may
be given wherefore in every passion the Eyes, Face, and Mouth do so correspond
with the affections of the Praecordia, often unknown to us or against our
minds, that oftentimes we are compelled to betray the most intimate sense of
the Heart by the countenance and aspect. Yea, hence a reason may be brought,
why in sneesing, yawning, laughing, and crying the Muscles of the Face conspire
so in motion with the Praecordia. Besides, when in man different from any other
living Creatures besides, as we shall show afterward, many shoots are sent
from the intercostal Nerve to the Nerve of the Diaphragma; this certainly is
the cause why risibility is the proper affection of man.

But the Trunk of the fifth pair being carried more forward, and distributing
its branchings through the parts of the whole Face, causes the same not only to
be pathetically moved, and figured according to the affections of the
Pracordia; but also produces some acts, both of motion and sensation, of
another kind, which for the most part are involuntary, and so seem to depend
wholly upon the Cerebel immediately. For example, this Nerve imparts shoots to
either mandible requisite for the business of chewing: but it is very well
known, that the taking in of the food at the mouth is the first and oldest
business of every Animal, which indeed is taught by natural Instinct before any
knowledge of the Brain. But as to the Senses, the branches of this pair conduce
something to the smelling, but for the most part for the knowing and choosing of
savors. Hence it comes to pass, that as odors refresh the Brain by the smelling
Nerves, so also they affect the Cerebel by the branch of this pair, and are
wont by that means to recreate the Viscera and Praecordia. But sapors or tastes
(for that they are almost the peculiar Province of this) carry whatsoever they
have of pleasantness or trouble, first to the Spirits inhabiting the Cerebel,
and then by their consent to the Praecordia and Viscera. Hence it is, that a
Pectoral not only allays hunger, but the very first tasting of Wine raises up
those that are fainting or swooning away. Moreover, forasmuch as from this
Nerve certain branches serve for the taste, and others for the smell, there is
contracted so strict an affinity between either of these Sensories, that
nothing pleases the taste unless it be approved of by the smell: and the loss
of one of these senses oftentimes causes the privation or the diminution of the
other.

2. Concerning the Nerve of the sixth conjugation we observe, that as one shoot
is bent back for a root of the intercostal Nerve, the remaining Trunk of it
being carried forward toward the ball of the Eye, is distributed to two of its
Muscles, viz. to the seventh, proper to beasts, and to the drawing Muscle.
Hence may be inferred, that this Nerve, besides the influence of it bestowed on
the vital and natural Function, serves also for the producing some pathetick
motions of the Eye, to wit, such as are wont to obey the affections of the
Praecordia and Viscera; so that the whole provision of the animal Spirit, which
it receives from the Cerebel, it bestows only on involuntary acts.

3. The seventh pair, or the hearing Nerves, seem also to depend upon the
Cerebel, forasmuch as they take their originals out of the annular
Protuberance: but the use of them is a little otherwise in man than in
four-footed beasts. For in him the annular Protuberance is one, and that very
big, from whose lower margin the auditory Nerves proceed: but in Brutes the
Protuberance is twofold, viz. one greater, sent down from the Cerebel, in which
the beginnings of the fifth and sixth pair of Nerves consist; then near this
there is another lesser, and as it were secondary, from which the auditory
Nerves proceed. This lesser and lower Ring does not so manifestly depend on the
Cerebel, as the former; but there is stretched out from either height of it a
white medullar line upon the oblong Marrow in the bottom of the fourth
Ventricle: so as this seems to receive either the Spirits from the oblong
Marrow, or at least to carry into the same the sensible Species: for what use
it is so constituted shall be inquired into afterward; for concerning these
Nerves of the seventh pair, forasmuch as some offices of them very much
illustrate the government or economy of the Cerebel, we shall discourse here a
little more largely.

Therefore in man, who has got a great and undivided annular Protuberance, the
auditory Nerves coming out of its margin or brim, show its stock received of
the Cerebel: by which means we may see the tasks of those Nerves quadrate with
the assigned government of this. We have shown before the Processes (which in a
manner may be called distinct Nerves) of the seventh pair to be twofold on
either side: one, the softer of these, serves only for the sense, but the other
harder seems to perform some motions. This latter Nerve, being carried without
the Skull, is divided into three branches, all which serve to pathetick
motions, or at least to such as are performed without consulting the Brain.

1. The first of them being bent back toward the auditory passage, is bestowed
on the Muscles of the Ear. Without doubt, by the action of this, it is
effected, that all Animals at the sudden impulse of a sound or noise, erect
their Ears at it were to catch the sound too soon passing by. 2. The other
branch of this same Nerve climbing over the Muscles of the Jaw, sends forth
shoots toward either corner of the Eye: which are inserted into the Muscles
lifting up the Eyelids; the office of which is certainly to open suddenly the
Eyes at the sudden approach of any sound, and as it were to call them forth to
watch, that by the stroke of the Air being brought to the Ear, the Eye might
presently look about to see what is the matter, and whether there might be any
danger near or not: which also all Creatures do unthought of. 3. The third
branch of the same auditory Nerve descending toward the root of the Tongue, is
distributed to its Muscles, and to those of the Bone Hyoides, and so actuates
some of the Organs for the framing the Voice. For this reason in some measure
it comes to pass, that living Creatures being astonished at an unaccustomed or
horrid sound, presently putting forth an uncertain voice, cry out and make a
noise. But the conformation of these kind of Nerves in man serves for another
more noted use, to wit, that the voice might fitly answer to the hearing, and
that this might be set as the Echo of the sound admitted by this: so indeed, as
on the other side, there be two Nerves of the same pair, the sound is received
by the hearing through one, which is rendered again by the voice through the
other. The common and extrinsick Echo consists in this, that a certain
undulation or waving of the Air shaken or moved, being stirred up, and tending
toward or about, when by reason of some stop or hinderance, it cannot go any
further directly, being presently repercussed or struck back or reflected at
certain angles, it is terminated contrary to the former bound. In like manner,
in the hearing, the impression of the sound, or the Species admitted to the
Ears by the hearing faculty of the Processes of the same or neighboring Nerve,
and being carried inwardly toward the Cerebel and common Sensory, and from
thence again reflected on the vocal process, it is carried out by the Mouth.
But between these there is some difference, to wit, forasmuch as the outward
Echo renders back the sound immediately; but the sound of the Hearing is not
necessarily carried forth at the mouth presently, but that this leaves an Idea
in the Head, according to which afterward, as occasion serves, the voice is
formed, which bears the type and image of that, though some time before
admitted.

But here (if I may digress a little) we should inquire in what part of the
Head the Ideas of sounds are left: whether only in the Brain, which is the
Chest of Memory acquired as it were artificial; or whether not also in the
Cerebel, which is the place of natural memory? Truly we suppose, that sounds
belong to both these, as it were to distinct Storehouses. Every audible
impulse being struck against the Ear, it is presently carried by the passage of
the auditory Process to the annulary Protuberance; but from thence it is
carried, as other sensible Species, to the chamfered bodies or the common
Sensory; (which way it passes thither, shall be showed afterward) this
impression tending from thence farther, and being also delivered to the Brain,
stirs up the Imagination, and so leaves in its Cortex an image or private mark
of it self for the Memory. Further also, as the auditory Process depends on the
Cerebel, and receives from it the provision of the animal Spirits: so it is
most likely, that by the recess of the same Spirits the Ideas of the Sounds are
conveyed also to the Cerebel; which forming there footsteps or tracts, impress
a remembrance of themselves, from whence when afterward the Species there laid
up are drawn forth by the help of the vocal process, voices, like the sounds
before admitted, and breaking forth in a certain ordained series, come to be
made.

Hence it is usual, that music or melody is soon learnt by some men, which
afterward they bring forth with exact Symphony, without any meditation or
labor of the Brain; to wit, from the distinct accents of the heard harmony,
the Spirits moving within the Cerebel are disposed into peculiar Schemes;
according to which, when they flow on both sides into the vocal process of the
auditory Nerve, they render as it were with a certain spontaneous voice, and
like a Mathine or Clock with the succession of Species, the measures or Tunes
of the Instrument which they had drunk in at the ears. Without doubt hence the
reason may be sought, why some men learn Music without any trouble, and others
hardly or not at all. For it is observed, that some Children, before they can
speak distinctly, quickly sing, and remember certain Tunes; whilst others,
though very ingenious men and of excellent memory, are very Fools at Music,
and become incapable, as an Ass for the Harp; wherefore that faculty. In the
mean time, it is to be confessed, thatin these the Organs of the Voice are not
defective; but all the fault, though wrongfully, is cast on the hearing.

But in truth the genuine cause of this defect seems to consist in this, that
when in all, the audible Species go to the Cerebel sooner and more immediately
than the Brain; yet in some the Cerebel being harder, and not easily yielding
to the received impressions, those Species, because they could impress nothing
of themselves in their passing to the Cerebel, being-carried toward the common
Sensory, leave their Types or Ideas chiefly and almost wholly in the Brain:
which part being still busied with disturbed motions, is less apt to keep
distinctly the composures of Harmony. But in the mean time, in others the
Species of audible things, besides that they are carried to the common Sensory
and to the Brain, do also affect the Cerebel, especially if they are
harmonically figured (forasmuch as in them there is a soster capacity of the
impressions) with a peculiar order and Scheme of the animal Spirits: where, as
the Species of the Harmony being disposed in convenient little places and cells
are kept, afterward they flow out from thence, almost unthought of, without
any endeavor or labor of remembrance, but in a distinct series, and as it
were in composed modes and figures, and so by blowing up the vocal processes,
they constitute sweet Tunes and vocal Music.

If that the diverse ways of passage are inquired into, to wit, whereby the
audible Species, being carried into the annular Protuberance, do get-both to
the Brain and Cerebel; I say it is not improbable, but out of that Protuberance
both a passage lies open into the underlying tract of the oblong Marrow, and as
it were the high road; as also another passage is opened into the Cerebel
through the medullar processes of the same Ring. But lest there should
perchance be a consusion of the animal Spirits and the sensible Species, (which
indeed can hardly be avoided) if the way made for their passage should Iye open
into various passages and manifold apertures; therefore concerning this it may
well be supposed, that the Ideas of the Sounds pass through the Cerebel, when
they are carried to the common Sensory; which region being first past, they are
at length brought by a by-path, viz. through the orbicular Prominences to the
chamfered Bodies: which perhaps is partly the reason, that in the Hearing the
perception of the sense succeeds so late, and the impulse of the object, in
respect of sight, follows so slowly.

Whilst therefore the audible Species passes through the Cerebel, in some men,
it leaves in this region (for that it is of a soft temper, and fit for the
receiving impressions) tracts and marks of it self, and so they obtain musical
ears. But in others who have a harder frame of the Cerebel, they produce no
tracts of the same Sounds, and therefore such are wholly destitute of the
faculty of Music.

As therefore we suppose the audible Species to pass through the Cerebel after
this manner, a reason may be given from hence, wherefore Music does not only
affect the Fantasy with a certain delight, but besides chears a sad and
sorrowful Heart; yea, allays all turbulent Passions excited in the Breast from
an immoderate heat and fluctuation of the blood. For since the animal Spirits,
serving for the motion of the Pracordia, are derived from the Cerebel; as the
perturbations conceived in the Brain, the influence being transmitted hither by
moving these Spirits in the Fountain it self, transfer the force of their
Affections on the Breast; so the Melody introduced to the Ears, and diffused
through this Province, does as it were inchant with a gentle breath the Spirits
there inhabiting, and composes them, called off from their fury, to numbers and
measures of dancing, and so appeases all tumults and inordinations therein
excited.

From these may in some measure be known the reason of the difference, why the
hearing Nerves are after a different manner in man and in four-footed beasts:
for, because in these there is little need that the audible Species should pass
through the Cerebel, either for the reciprocations of the sound heard, by the
voice, or for the impressing there the Tunes of the Harmony (for neither is
Music required, whatever Poets feign, to the taming the Affections which move
the breasts of beasts) therefore in these (I mean in four-footed beasts) the
annular Protuberance dispensing the animal Spirits to the auditory Nerves, and
receiving from them the sensible Species, requires not so strict an affinity
with the Cerebel: yea, whenas it may suffice, that those Nerves arise from the
oblong Marrow, yet the annular Protuberance, as it were a common Porch, ought
to be prefixed to them; to wit, in which both the Spirits going out from either
side, and the sensible Species to be carried to either, ought first to be mixed
and united together, lest otherwise every sound should become double.

Among the Nerves which are seen to belong to the Cerebel, and to persorm its
offices, lastly follow the eighth or wandering pair, which indeed has its rise
out of the common Trunk of the oblong Marrow, near the place where the last
process of the Cerebel is terminated, and over against where the pyramidal
bodies, being produced from the annular Protuberance, end: so that we think
these Nerves also, by that process coming between on either side, and also
perhaps in some measure through the passage of the pyramidal bodies, do derive
all manner of influence of the animal Spirit from the Cerebel.

The beginning of these consists of very many fibers and filaments or little
threads presently distinct one from another; to which belongs, from the very
beginning of every Nerve, a noted Trunk arising out of the spinal Marrow. The
description of the wandering pair of Nerves, and its protension into the
Pracordia and some Viscera, are added hereafter. For the present it shall
suffice, that we take notice, that for as much as this Nerve is bestowed
chiefly on the Pracordia, the acts whereof are involuntary, and are performed
without our care or knowledge in sleep as well as waking; and for that the same
Nerve seems to receive the forces of the Spirits wholly from the nearer
fountain of the Cerebel; from hence it may certainly be well concluded, that
the government or economy of the Cerebel regards only the involuntary Function.

So much for the Nerves, which being subjected to the Government and Laws of
the Cerebel, seem to obey and serve under it: among which moreover ought to be
placed the sourth pair, or the pathetick Nerves of the Eyes, to wit, which
arising out of the first processes of the Cerebel, come between that and the
orbicular Processes; of the use of which we have spoken already. Further, we
shall here take notice, that some other Nerves to be described below, for that
they communicate with the aforesaid Nerves near their originals, cause also
some involuntary acts to be performed; of which sort are first the ninth pair,
the spinal Nerve accessory to the wandering pair, also the Nerve of the
Diaphragma, and some others, as we shall show more at large in the particular
History of the Nerves.

We may also observe, concerning the Nerves but now described, which owe their
stock to the Cerebel, and seem to be designed for the offices of the
involuntary Function, that sometimes some of them, though of another Dominion,
are compelled to obey the beck and government of the Brain: for we are wont to
draw the parts of the Face, usually moved pathetically and unthought of, and
also at our pleasure, into these or those Configurations or postures: we are
able also in a measure to alter the motions and actions of the Pracordia and
Viscera at the will or command of the Appetite. The reason of these is, partly
because the Nerves of either Government communicate variously among themselves
with shoots sent forth one to another, so that oftentimes the offices of the
one are drawn into the parts of the other. But besides, we have mentioned
before, that the sensible impression being inflicted on the parts of the
involuntary Function, forasmuch as it is vehement, like a strong waving of
water, passing through the Cerebel, affects the Brain it self. In like manner
it may be thought concerning the motion which belongs to those parts, viz. that
made after the ordinary manner, that it is performed by the command of the
Cerebel. Notwithstanding some more severe Edicts of the Brain, by the
by-passage of the Prominences, belong also to the Cerebel, and determine the
Offices of the Inhabitants of it to be performed at the beck of the Appetite.
As every one sees that violent Passions (whether the will be privy or not)
easily do this; why therefore may not the will it self also, as occasion
requires, exercise the same dominion? But in the mean time, this derogates
nothing from the privileges of the Cerebel, that it may not be called a free
and municipal City, and so Mistress of the involuntary Function; for that in
some few it is after the manner of the Brain: because the Brain it self in many
things is compelled to serve the Cerebel and its Government, as we have already
shown, and is necessarily bound to it. For the Brain owes much to the Cerebel,
forasmuch as it receives from the vital Function (which is of its Province) the
provision of the blood, and by consequence the Tribute of the Spirits produced
of it: so indeed that both these parts, though Principals, perform mutual
offices, and as it were in a circle, require and accomplish services one for
another.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the relation or mutual respect of either Appendix of the Cerebel, to wit,
of the anterior, which are the orbicular Prominences; and the posterior, viz.
the Annular Protuberance: Also of the remaining portion of the oblong Marrow
continued into the Spinal Marrow.

BEsides the aforesaid Nerves, to wit, the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and
eighth pair which are employed for the performing the tacit Edicts of the
Cerebel for every involuntary Function, and those equal in number to the rest
subject to the Brain, that cause the Cerebel to have an Empire divided with it;
there are also some Processes and Protuberances, which being placed before and
behind the Cerebel, are its Appendixes, that are taken into part of the same
Office and Ministry. The description and use of these, are already particularly
delivered. But for that (as a while since we intimated) there happens a certain
respect or habit between the orbicular Prominences, which is the anterior
Appendix of the Cerebel, and the annular Protuberance, which is the other
posterior Appendix of the same, and that one part is proportionate to the
magnitude of the other; so as when the natiform Prominences are greater or
greatest, the annular Protuberance is always smaller or smallest; and on the
contrary, they who have this latter in a very great bulk, in them the other is
lesser; and so for that either part seems to be a peculiar Repository of the
Spirits, which belong to the economy of the Cerebel, when a greater provision
of them is laid up in one Storehouse, therefore there resides a lesser in the
other; when I say there is this kind of constant relation found between these
parts, it yet remains for us to find out for what end this is so constituted.

Seeing that the animal Spirits are disposed within the several parts of the
Head in distinct Schemes of Rays, through which are variously transmitted, as
through Perspective glasses, the impressions of sensible things and the
instincts of motions to be performed; it easily occurs, that there are
commerces had this way and that way in the natiform Prominences between the
Brain and Cerebel; and that the Spirits inhabiting the annular Protuberance are
Internuncii or Messengers going between, which transfer the mutual respects of
the Pracordia and Viscera, as also of the parts that are wont to be
pathetically moved. But if it be inquired into, what kind of commerces and
respects those are which the Brain carries to the Cerebel, and on the contrary,
and that either have to the Organs of the vital and merely natural Function, we
shall in so difficult and very intricate a matter propose our Opinion, though
with an hesitating and doubtful mind.

We have before intimated, that the orbicular Prominences did deliver to the
Cerebel the forces of the Passions to be carried from the Brain to the
Pracordia, and did receive from it, and communicate to the Brain the
necessities of the natural Instincts delivered from the Pracordia and Viscera
to the Cerebel. To these moreover we add, that the annular Protuberance serves
wholly for the same offices, though after another manner; to wit, this receives
the forces of the Passions, as it were at a second hand, from the Deputiship of
the Cerebel, and transfers them then immediately to the Praecordia; and this
seems to be the chiefest office of this part. Further, the same Ring receives
immediately the natural Instincts from the Viscera of the middle and lowest
Belly, and impresses them on the Cerebel to be conveyed further to the Brain;
which kind of use it exhibits secondarily by affording only a way of passage:
For indeed such Instincts having past through the Cerebel, we suppose to be
formed and perfected within the orbicular Prominences, from whence being
transmitted into the Brain, they draw forth requisite actions without the
previous knowledge of it, or intention of doing.

Hence it may be supposed, that the annular Protuberance contains chiefly the
animal Spirits which perform the intestine commotions of the Affections. In
every violent passion of the Soul, presently the Praecordia are greatly
troubled, to wit, the same being variously drawn together or spread abroad,
compel the blood into diverse fluctuations; but indeed a great company of the
Spirits, somewhere got together and ready for Excursions in a set Battle, do
perform these disorders and irregular motions of the Praecordia; and for that
the Spirits can be disposed for this in no other part than here, before the
beginnings of the Nerves, constituted for these offices; therefore this
Protuberance in a man, by reason of the ragings of the Passions to be performed
by a certain force and incitation, is far greater than in any other Animal. For
as he is wont to be suddenly and vehemently disturbed, therefore the Promptuary
or Storehouse is required to be more large, in which a greater plenty of
Spirits may be kept, to be bestowed on such inordinations of the Affections.
Next to a man this part is greatest in a Dog, Cat, and Fox; in a Calf, Sheep,
Goat, Hare, and other milder Animals it is very small.

But as the annular Protuberance seems to be the chief Organ or Chest of the
Spirits, from whence the winds of the Passions, destinated for the exciting the
Pracordia, are conveyed into the breast; so we suppose the orbicular
Prominences to be a means of passage, and the very instruments whereby the
instincts and necessities of the Praecordia and Viscera are communicated from
the Cerebel to the Brain. Yea, the animal Spirits dwelling in this, as a
retiring place, do not only transmit these kind of Ideas or formal Reasons of
the Instincts, but in some measure form and prepare them for the Brain. For
when as some brute Animals, whose Brain is not imbued with a previous knowledge
or practical habits, choose and bring forth some spontaneous actions as it were
with judgment and deliberation, certainly we may believe the intentions of
these kind of acts are suggested from some other place than the Brain, to wit,
from the aforesaid Prominences. Wherefore it is to be observed, that in some
Brutes endued with an indocil or dull Brain, the Buttock-like Prominences are
greatest, as may be seen in a Calf, Sheep, Hog, and many others; which Animals,
as soon as they are brought to light, presently seek for their food, and what
is congruous for them they readily know. But in a Man, a Dog, Fox, and the
like, who are more apt to learn and acquire habits, these Prominences are very
small; and these Animals being newly born, are furnished only with a rude and
imperfect sense; besides, they are found wholly unapt to seek out their food.
Upon this Observation (which holds good in most Animals which I have yet
happened to dissect) as upon a Basis or foundation I dare build this kind of
abstruse Hypothesis concerning the natural Instincts and Affections of the
Praecordia. For as the living Creatures which are more strong in instinct, as
Sheep, Hogs, Oxen, Goats, and other slow and gentler beasts, that are not
obnoxious to Passions, are also less docile or apt to learn; and on the
contrary, they in whom the Affections are wont to predominate, and who are
furnished with a certain wit, (as besides Man, are Dogs, Foxes, and some other
hotter Animals) are less powerful in Instinct: and as I have observed in the
frequent Dissection of all sorts of Heads, that in those kind of living
Creatures, who live rather by Wit than Instinct, the annular Protuberance,
placed below the Cerebel, was notedly great, and the orbicular Prominences only
very small; but in other living Creatures, where the Instinct exceeded the wit,
and who were less prone to strong Affections, the orbicular Prominences were
very great, and on the contrary, the ringy Protuberance exceeding small: From
hence I was forced to think, that the orbicular or natiform Prominences, where
they are great, are instead of another or supplementory Brain, and the chief
Organs of the natural Instincts; yet so, as these parts also serve for a way or
means of passage for the transferring the Passions from the Brain toward the
Cerebel and Praecordia; and that (as we have already hinted) the greater
existency of the annular Protuberance is to contain plenty of Spirits requisite
for the winds of the Passions; yet in the mean time, by a further tending
forwards or declination of the Spirits inhabiting this, the Species of the
natural Instincts, being sent from the Praecordia and Viscera, pass through.
But however the business is, because nothing can be certainly affirmed, or by
demonstration, if this our Opinion please not others, at least it may be
pardoned.

There remains not much more to be spoken concerning the Offices and Uses of
the Cerebel and its Appendix. Concerning its substance, there is something more
worthy taking notice of, to wit, that it very much differs in this respect from
the structure of the Brain also, for that its cortical little circles are not
founded in the stretched out Marrow, as the convolutions of the Brain; but
being deeply cut in, are discontinued in their whole tract: so that the whole
System of the Cerebel is as it were a cluster of Grapes compacted closely
together; in which, although the Berries be contiguous, yet they remain
distinct one from another, and bring forth fissures through the whole thickness
of the mass. Yea the outward superficies of the Cerebel consists as it were of
very many Tubercles or little Tad-stoles or Puffs which grow together on little
stalks; and those stalks pass into greater branches, and they at length being
bipartite or twofold, go together into two larger Marrows near the bottom of
the Cerebel, in either of which are three distinct medullary Processes: of
which threefold processes on either side we have already spoken. But of these
concerning the use of the Cerebel in general, we shall yet further advertise
you, that as very much of its substance is cortical, it begets animal Spirits
in great plenty, to which in the circulating there is not granted, as in the
Brain, an equally great space; for that there seems not to be much need of it
in the animal Government. For the Spirits so produced in the Cerebel
plentifully by a perpetual emanation, ought to flow outwardly for the offices
of the natural and vital Function: but more inwardly for the impulses variously
sent into them, they admit certain undulations or wavings, by which some
occasional acts of the involuntary Function are brought forth, as is shown
before.

But as it is manifest enough, that the animal Spirits are generated within the
cortical little circles of the Cerebel, it does not seem needful that we should
ordain their Workhouse in the Ventricle subject to its frame. For that Cavity
(as we have already shown) is only an empty space, which lying under its double
little foot and medullar Trunk, comes between it and the overlying bunching out
of the Cerebel. But indeed there belongs to this besides a certain use, to wit,
that the serous warry heap laid aside out of the Glandula's and infoldings of
the Vessels, as also from the substance of the Cerebel, being made over-moist,
distilling down, might slide into this Cistern. From whence, lest it should
flow down upon the beginnings of the Nerves, by a restraining Membrane it is
compelled into the hole of the strait Den lying under the orbicular
Prominences; and from thence is received from the declining aperture of the
Tunnel, and carried out.

Below the Cerebel, the oblong Marrow going forward with the rest of its tract
even to the hole of the hinder part of the Head, ends at length in the spinal
Marrow: but in its Trunk, as yet contained within the Skull, besides the Nerves
and Processes but now recited, the beginnings of the ninth and tenth pair of
Nerves are also radicated. Of which there will be hereafter a proper place to
speak, when we shall institute the whole Neurology or the Doctrine of the
Nerves. In the mean time, we shall take notice of the beginning of the ninth
pair, which is peculiar in Man, and different from what is found in Brutes: To
wit, in Man below the origin of the eighth pair, a certain Protuberance grows
to either side of the oblong Marrow. Out of that four or five distinct Fibers
do come forth; one or two of which binds about the Vertebral Artery passing
through it, but all grow together into the same Trunk, which is the Nerve of
the aforesaid pair. This Protuberance, the Pia Matter being pulled away, may be
easily seen, and seems to be the Repository or Storehouse of the Spirits
destinated to this Nerve.

For as this Nerve is bestowed on the Tongue and its Muscles, and so conduces
chiefly to the performing of speech in Man, who has a greater and more
frequent use and exercise of the voice, there seems to be need of a great
provision of Spirits, plenty of which ought always to be in a readiness. But in
Brutes, who have none, or a rarer necessity of the voice, such a Protuberance
is wanting, because it is not required in them that the Spirits should be
gathered together by heaps, as it were in a certain Porch, before the Organs of
the Voice, but that it may suffice for them to be called forth by degrees out
of the common tract of the oblong Marrow. Further, whereas some fibers of this
Nerve bind about either Vertebral Artery, unless I am deceived, that is so
ordained for this end, lest perhaps in speaking, when at any time we are more
vehemently moved, the blood being stirred up, might rush upon the Brain with a
torrent. For this Nerve binding about the Vertebral Artery, as it were with a
bridle, and so as a Moderator not only of the Tongue, but also of the Blood,
restrains its more rapid influence. After the same manner, and for no other
ends, do the recurrent Nerves, destinated to some part of the same office,
variously bind about the Trunk of the great Artery, as shall be shown
afterward.

As soon as this inferior portion of the oblong Marrow is uncloathed from the
Pia Matter, the pyramidal bodies come in view otherwise lying hid. These in all
Animals, endued with the annular Protuberance, are constantly found; also as
that Protuberance is bigger, so these bodies appear more noted: but indeed in a
Man and a Dog they seem like two large Nerves, which being produced out of that
Ring, end over against where the eighth pair arise in sharp points. If the use
of these be sought into, it is most likely, that the animal Spirits
superabounding in the annular provision or store, do flow out as it were by
these Emissaries, which Spirits however run into the beginnings of the eighth
pair placed near, and so are bestowed by their proper means on the offices of
the involuntary Function.

Although the oblong Marrow retains not its name beyond the limits of the
Skull; yet it is the same substance, which from thence being continued further
into the cavity and utmost recesses of the whole Spine or Backbone, is called
the Spinal Marrow: but it is brought forth for this, that the Nerves to be
distributed into the Limbs and Members more remote from the Head, might more
commodiously arise out of the same medullar substance stretched out into the
neighborhood of every part. Indeed all this whole medullar Trunk, which is
continued from the bottom of the Brain even to the Os sacrum, seems like the
Pneumatick Chest, or Bellows of a pair of Organs, which includes the blast or
breath destinated to every Pipe; for in like manner the animal Spirits are
contained in this marrowy tract, which blow up and actuate all the Nerves
hanging thereto, as occasion serves.

If you behold the origin of the whole, it seems that the whole frame both of
this oblong Marrow and the spinal, is of a medullar or marrowy substance, every
where growing dispersedly through the Brain and Cerebel, and then being
gathered more round together in the middle of either, becomes as one heap. For
the Marrows besmearing all their folds and turnings about, are as so many
little rivers, which springing from thence, begin to be congregated in the
middle, and to be poured out in one great one; but being from thence united,
they make the oblong Marrow, as it were the chanel of the Sea, big enough for
the motion or ebbing and flowing and reciprocation of the animal Spirits: which
belly or chanel, however stretching it self further beyond the Skull, is
increased into the spinal Marrow, as it were the bosom or process of the former.

But as the medullar tracts, besmearing the folds and convolutions of the Brain
and Cerebel, unfold themselves into their middle Marrows and medullar Trunk,
and so the Spirits springing dispersedly from their first fountains, congregate
as it were into a certain diffused Sea; so from this Sea, causing an ebbing and
flowing, or a continual or very frequent influence of the animal Spirit, the
same Spirits flow out into the depending channels of the nervous System.

Concerning this part of this Marrow, which being included in the long bosom or
chanel of the Vertebrae or Backbone, and according to all their joyntings,
being marked with as it were knotty processes, is called the Spinal, there
occur not many things worthy consideration, besides what are commonly known.
The figure, situation, as also the body of this, in its whole tract, are known
generally to be cloven in two, not only by Anatomists, but by every Butcher.
The ramifications or branchings of the Nerves, proceeding from the spinal
Marrow, are delivered hereafter. Concerning its conformation something peculiar
occurs. For as the spinal Marrow is as it were the common passage or chanel of
the Spirits flowing out of the Head into the Nerves, it may be observed, that
this chanel, not after the usual manner of other passages, where many rivers
flow in, does swell up more; but on the contrary, in what place it has more
and greater Emissaries, its magnitude is increased; for in those parts of the
spinal Marrow, out of which the brachial and crural Nerves arise, (or those
Nerves belonging to the Arms and Legs, whose beginnings are more and larger)
its Trunk becomes much thicker than in the rest of the frame or substance. The
reason of this is, because within the medullar tracts the animal Spirits run
not, nor pass through with so swift a passage, but for the most part flowing
leisurely from their Fountains, when they have filled the whole space, they
s^ay therein; and as many Spirits, upon occasion offered, are wont to be
bestowed on every work, those remaining there in readiness frame certain
convenient Promptuaries where they may divert themselves. Wherefore we
ordinarily observe, not only of this Marrow, but of the Nerves themselves, that
as often as a small branch is distributed into many shoots or suckers to be
sent forth here and there, always in the very knot of the division there grows
a far greater fold than in the rest of the Trunk of the Nerve; so that it is a
wonder from whence the Nerve should acquire so in the middle of its passage a
new substance and more ample bulk. But of these things and others belonging to
the Doctrine of the Nerves, it behooves us to discourse in the following
Chapters.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Nervous System in general, where its parts (which are the Nerves and
Fibers) being designed, a prospect of the whole Animal Government is exhibited.

WHenas hitherto having beheld the several Regions of the Brain it self, the
Cerebel, and medullar Appendix, and the provision and offices of them all, we
have designed or drawn forth the uses and employments also of the parts and
processes, and the sanguiferous Vessels belonging to every one of these; it is
now time for me to stop and retire into the Port from this troublesome and
intricate Sea of Disquisition: But indeed, because I find that I have not yet
reached to the farthest shores and utmost parts; but that beyond this Sea,
which we have sailed through, as yet the nervous System, and very many Creeks
or Bosoms, Meanders, and highly intricate Recesses or private places in it
remain to be viewed; therefore although we know it is difficult to proceed with
full Sail, we have resolved to undertake the task of the Doctrine of the
Nerves; and the rather, because without the perfect knowledge of the Nerves the
Doctrine of the Brain and its Appendix would be left wholly lame and imperfect;
for neither what has already been delivered concerning them can be
sufficiently understood or illustrated, nor (which I chiefly desire, and is the
end of the former Disquisitions) without those things before known can the
Pathology of the Brain and nervous stock be rightly instituted. And indeed
there are many things which might easily deter any one from such an
undertaking: to wit, the hardness of the work, and full of hazard; which
promises at first sight more difficulty and thorny labor, than pleasure or
profit. Then some will object, that this Province is already so perfectly
cultivated, and adorned by former Anatomists, that by a repetition of the same,
I may seem to have meddled with a thing done to my hand. But I may readily
answer to these, first, That the Anatomy of the Nerves yields more pleasant and
profitable Speculations, than the Theory of any parts besides in the animated
Body: for from hence the true and genuine Reasons are drawn of very many
Actions and Passions that are wont to happen in our Body, which otherwise seem
most difficult and unexplicable; and no less from this Fountain the hidden
Causes of Diseases and their Symptoms, which commonly are ascribed to the
Incantations of Witches, may be found out and clearly laid open. But as to our
Observations about the Nerves, from our following Discourse it will plainly
appear, that I have not trod the paths or footsteps of others, nor repeated
what has been before told.

Therefore that according to our determination we may enter upon the
explanation of the nervous System, we shall comprehend under this name all
parts, upon which gifted with the animal Spirit, Motion and Sense necessarily
and immediately depend, to wit, for the performing either one only, or both
together in the whole Body. But these kind of parts, in respect of the Head and
marrowy Appendix, are like a branching stock or imps growing out of the trunk
of a Tree: for supposing that the cortical substances of the Brain and Cerebel
are in the place of roots, and that the substances every where medullar are
taken for the stock or pith; the nervous germination or budding forth expanded
into divarications of Nerves and Fibers, will appear like so many little
branches, twigs, and leaves. Or if the Head containing in it self the chief
part and power of the sensitive Soul, be taken for the body of some Luminary,
as of the Sun or a Star; the nervous System shall be that radiant or beamy
concretion compassing it about. Because the animal Spirits flowing from the
Brain and Cerebel, with the medullar Appendix of either, as it were from a
double Luminary, irradiate the nervous System, and so constitute its several
parts, the Organs of Motion or Sense, or of both together, as has been said.

The parts of the nervous System, as a radiant or beamy texture, are either
primary, viz. the bodies themselves of the Nerves, into which the animal
Spirits immediately flow from the Head and its medullar Appendix; or
secondarily, which are Fibers planted or interwoven in the Membranes, musculous
Flesh, Tendons, and some of the Parenchyma, which also contain in themselves
animal Spirits; but they receive them not but mediately and secondarily derived
from the Head through the bodies of the Nerves.

We have already showed that the animal Spirits are procreated only in the
Brain and Cerebel, from which they continually springing forth, inspire and
fill full the medullar Trunk: (like the Chest of a musical Organ, which
receives the wind to be blown into all the Pipes) but those Spirits being
carried from thence into the Nerves, as into so many Pipes hanging to the same,
blow them up and actuate them with a full influence; then what flow over or
abound from the Nerves, enter the Fibers dispersed every where in the
Membranes, Muscles, and other parts, and so impart to those bodies, in which
the nervous Fibers are interwoven, a motive and sensitive or feeling force. And
these Spirits of every part are called Implanted, forasmuch as they flow not
within the Nerves, as the former, with a perpetual flood; but being something
more stable and constant, stay longer in the subject bodies; and only as
occasion serves, viz. according to the impressions inwardly received from the
Nerves, or impressed outwardly by the objects, are ordained into diverse
stretchings or carryings out for the effecting of motion or sense either of
this or that manner or kind.

Indeed the animal Spirits flowing within the Nerves with a living Spring, like
Rivers from a perpetual Fountain, do not stagnate or stand still; but sliding
forth with a continual course, are ever supplied and kept full with a new
influence from the Fountain. In the mean time, the Spirits in the rest of the
nervous kind, especially those abounding in the Membranes and musculous stock,
are like Ponds and Lakes of Waters lately diffused from the channels of Rivers,
whose waters standing still are not much moved of their own accord; but being
agitated by things cast into them, or by the blasts of winds, conceive diverse
sorts of fluctuations.

But because there is no light difference between the motions and consistency
of the Spirits and of Waters, perhaps it will better illustrate the matter, if
the Spirits of either kind, to wit, the inflowing and implanted, are compared
to the beaming forth of diverse rays of light. And so when light is let into a
dark chamber, and presently inlightens the whole, we may conceive the particles
of the light so swiftly diffused to be of a twofold kind; to wit, some are
bodies sent from the light it self, which diffuse themselves every way into an
Orb; and other luminous particles are as it were Etherial little bodies
existing before in the pores of the Air, which being agitated by the former,
and as it were inkindled, cause as it were a flamy, though most thin
contexture, stretched out in the whole clearness. After the like manner, the
animal Spirits flowing from the medullar substance into the Nerves, are as it
were rays diffused from the light it self, and the other Spirits every where
abounding in the Fibers, are as so many lucid particles included and implanted
in the Air, which are actuated by the former, and being stirred up by them into
motion, perform the acts both of the sensitive and locomotive Faculty.

That it may the better appear by what means the animal Spirits do irradiate
and swiftly pass through the parts of the nervous System, both primary and
secondary; so that light is scarcely carried swifter through a diaphanous
Medium, than the communication of the Spirits is made from one end of the
nervous System to the other; it will be requisite to inquire here a little
concerning the Origin of the Nerves and nervous Fibers, also of their Fabric
and Conformation, to wit, what pores and passages either of these bodies have,
and how disposed for the passing through and commerce of the animal Spirits.

As to the Nerves, it is manifest from what has been said, that all of them
are produced immediately out of the medullar Trunk or its processes; so that as
these parts are the common and broad roads which lead both from the Brain and
from the Cerebel, all the Nerves are particular paths reaching out from them on
every side into the several Regions of the animated Body. Wherefore the same
Marrow, which is the original of every Nerve or Sinew, forasmuch as it is drawn
into a more thin thread, constitutes the matter of the same Nerve; which
indeed, that it may be made more solid and compact, is clothed with a peculiar
production of the Pia Matter: for as from a Silver mass gilt or enriched with
Gold, all the threads produced from it are gilded; so the same Membrane, which
covers the medullar Trunk, is produced together with all the Nerves coming out
from the same, and clothes them all. Further, very many Nerves arising
together out of that marrowy beginning, go forth as it were by bands; which
notwithstanding, for the sake of the better passage, being presently united and
carried out of their bony Cloister, are included in a common Coat taken from
the Dura Matter. For we suppose (which also shall be more clearly showed anon)
that all the Nerves, destinated to any parts or every particular member, do
arise distinctly and apart, and so remain in their whole passage. But in that
oftentimes a Nerve appearing as it were one Trunk, afterward seems to go into
many branches, it is because those branches being indeed singular, and divided
in the whole passage, are collected as it were into one bundle; for sometimes
we have separated those Nerves, seeming to grow together as it were into one
rope or cord of a Nerve, one from another, dividing them to their very
original; for neither otherwise could the Instincts of the Motions to be
performed be carried so respectively to these or those parts, separate one from
another, to which the branches of the same Trunk belong.

The passages of the Nerves are not bored through as the Veins and Arteries;
for the substance of those are not only impervious to any Bodkin, but no cavity
can be seen in them, no not by the help of Spectacles or a Microscope. As to
what belongs to the smelling little Pipes, they seem to be so made, not for the
passage of the animal Spirits, but that some serosities might slide down that
way: but the Spirits themselves are carried in the sides, and not in the cavity
of either Pipe; but the substance of the other Nerves appears plainly firm and
compacted, that the subtle humor, which is the Vehicle of the Spirits, may pass
through their frames or substances, even as the spirits of Wine, the extended
strings of a Lute, only by creeping leisurely through. Hence it may be argued,
that because the animal Spirits require no manifest cavity within the Nerves
for their expansion; neither is there need of the like for them within the
substance of the Brain; but that the Ventricles, commonly so called, ought to
be deputed to some other office than this.

But the Nerves are white, smooth, and round bodies: within the Skull and nigh
their beginnings, being as it were only covered with the Pia Matter, they are
soft and easily broken; without this, for that many of them are for the most
part gathered together, and also clothed with the Dura Matter, they become
somewhat hard and more tenacious. The Nerves themselves (as may be discovered
by the help of a Microcosm or Perspective-glass) are furnished throughout with
pores and passages, as it were so many little holes in a Honeycomb, thickly
set, made hollow, and contiguous one by another; so the Tube-like substance of
them, like an Indian Cane, is every where porous and pervious. Within these
little spaces the animal Spirits or very subtle little Bodies, and of their own
nature ever in a readiness for motion, do gently flow; to which is joined, both
for a Vehicle, as also for a Bridle or stay, a watery Latex, and that it self of
very subtle parts, This Humor diffuses with its fluidity the Spirits through
the whole nervous System; also by its viscosity retains them, that they be not
wholly dissipated, but as it were in a certain Systasis and continued Series;
for it seems, that without such an Humor the Spirits could not consist within
the nervous stock, but they would vanish away into Air. Further, the same Humor
is no less required for the passing through of the sensible Species: because
the animal Spirits, we suppose, like the rays of Light, to be diffused through
the whole nervous System; and those rays, unless the humid particles of the Air
be mingled with them, do not easily transmit the forms or images of things; as
is obvious in an Optic Scene, which is hid or shadowed by the clear beams or
brightness of the Sun. And in like manner, from the defect or depravation of
the nervous Juice, we can readily show, that the inordinations of the animal
Spirits, and oftentimes most horrid distempers of the Brain and the nervous
stock do arise.

This nervous Juice being derived from the Brain and Cerebel into the medullar
Appendix, is carried from thence by a gentle sliding down through the Nerves
even into the whole nervous stock, and waters its whole System. Upon the equal
emanation of this depends the expansion of the animal Spirits through the
whole; and the substance of these, yea the Hypostasis of the sensitive Soul it
self is founded on the diffusion of the same humor. The animal Spirits being
left to themselves, follow the motion of this Juice, and flowing together with
it in the same course, are pleasingly or quietly expatiated; but in the mean
time, as occasion is offered, the same Spirits, as a breath moving upon those
waters, conceive other spreadings abroad, and those more rapid. For as in a
River, from winds or any thing cast in, diverse undulations or wavings are
stirred up; so the animal Spirits being raised up by objects for the performing
the offices of sense and motion, do tend this way or that way to and fro within
the nervous stock, and are agitated hither and thither by other means.

But to return to the parts of the nervous System, besides the Nerves
themselves, Fibers also being dispersedly interwoven in the Membranes, the
musculous Flesh, the Parenchyma, and other parts, and united in the Tendons,
are the Organs of sense and motion. Yea, the acts of their faculties are
principally and more immediately executed by the Fibers than the Nerves; for
they, by drawing together the Muscle and other motive parts, cause the motion
it self; but the Nerves only carry from the Head the instinct for the
performing of that motion. In like manner, in Sensation the Fibers receive
first of all and immediately the impressions of sensible things, and express
the same (as musical strings do the strikings of a quill or fingers) by an
intrinsecal modification of the Particles, and represent the various approaches
of the object by the like motion of the Fibrils, as by a moveable and fluid
Character, whose Idea the Nerves transfer only to the Head.

Concerning the nervous Fibers it behooves us to inquire from whence they have
their rise? For it appears plainly, that they arise not immediately from the
Head or its medullar Appendix; nor is it less improbable, that they are
produced (as it is commonly said) from the Nerves: because what is asserted,
that the Fibers are productions of the Nerves, and little bits or pieces of
them torn off, as it were into hairy branches, seems unlikely; for that the
Fibers in some parts, being placed nigh, exceed in their bulk the magnitude of
the Nerve that is brought to that part, at least an hundredfold: which thing
appears clearly from the Tendon of every Muscle, which being made up of united
Fibers, is observed to be far greater than the Nerve inserted to it. And indeed
for almost the like reason we are induced to think the nervous Humor it self
also, whereby the Membranes and musculous Fibers are wont to be watered, to be
derived unto them not by the only means and passage of the Nerves; because it
is heaped up much more plentifully and in more abundance than can be carried
thither through those narrow passages, as appears clearly in Ulcers of the
Kings Evil, or in Impostumes or Wounds of the Tendons and nervous parts, in
which a glutinous Humor drops forth in so great abundance, that all the Nerves
of the whole Body could scarce be able to supply it.

Wherefore concerning these, it seems that we may affirm, that the Fibers are
not continued portions of the Nerves broken off into little hairy strings or
Capillaments; and that all the Fibers originally proceed not from the Nerves,
because some of them, viz. those interwoven to the Heart and its Vessels are of
equal birth with the Nerves themselves, and coexist with them together from the
beginning. However most Fibers, as to their production, depend upon the Nerves;
and all, which way soever brought forth, receive constantly from the Nerves the
forces and supplements of the animal Spirits, and also the Instincts of the
Motions to be performed by them.

Therefore to recount the births or kinds of Fibers; they are first either
spermatick and first begotten, the rudiments or first beginnings of which being
of the like antiquity as the Heart and Brain, placed in the Conception,
afterward leisurely increase; to wit, such are, as has been said, those in
the Heart it self in its depending Vessels, the Membranes and some other parts,
which form the first stuff or threads of the Embryo: or secondly, other Fibers
are produced secondarily, and by a second birth; of which sort chiefly are such
which are interwoven into the parts taken for the completing of the animal
Fabric, and especially those termed Sanguineous, which we think to be begotten
after this manner.

The Heart and Brain, with the Arteries and Nerves hanging to them, are
primigenious parts, and highly original; but these, for the second birth of
others, and for the nutrition and increase of all the sensitive parts,
distribute a twofold humor: viz. one spirituous and endued with very active
Particles which perpetually flow, though but in a very small quantity, through
the passages of the Nerves from the Brain and Cerebel; and the other slow and
softer, which being every where laid aside through the Arteries from the bloody
mass, is rendered more plentifully. This latter being of it self dull and
thicker by much, is actuated by the former, and being imbued by it, as by a
certain Ferment, acquires strength and power of growth or vegetation. But
indeed the nervous Juice, forasmuch as it diffuses with it self the animal
Spirits, imparts to every part, besides the faculties of Motion and Sense, the
determinations also of form and figure. Further, whilst that, being joined to
the other arterious humor, is disposed into the substance and matter of the
member or part to be nourished, it forms some tracts as it were, to wit, the
Fibers themselves, in which the animal Spirits, coming together with them,
reside and are expatiated. These twofold or twin humors, coupling together in
every sensitive part, constitute a liquor truly nutritious, to wit, which is
both spirituous and nourishable. And in truth, both these Juyces, viz. the
nervous and arterious, being married together, are as it were the male and
female seed, which being mingled in a fruitful womb, produces the plastic
Humor, by whose virtue the living creature is formed and increases. Hence may
be observed, as the particles of the spirituous liquor, or of the other more
watery juice ( viz. this latter being supplied from the Arteries, or that from
the Nerves) are strong or excel, as to their properties or powers, all living
creatures become more or less nimble, active, and ready to any motion and
labor. Besides, from the default or depravation of the one and the other humor
excelling, the sorts or kinds of this or that disease are excited; concerning
which, and also what belongs to the explication of the nutritious Humor, we may
perhaps have some other time occasion to discourse.

The animal Spirits which enter and fill the ordained series of the Fibers as
so many little places, flow thither by the passages of the Nerves;
notwithstanding the Spirits which are seated in the Fibers, interwoven with the
musculous stock, receive nourishment, yea and as it were auxiliary forces, from
the arterious blood there plentifully flowing: whereby indeed both the Spirits
themselves acquire for the performing of Motions a greater force and as it were
elastick; so that their force being stirred up by a strong endeavor, it seems
like the explosion of Gunpowder; and also the same Spirits being continually
consumed within the Muscles more profusely than is wont to be in the Membranes
and other parts, are in some measure made up or repaired from the bloody
sustenance: because whenas the arterious Juice joins more plentifully with the
nervous flowing within the sanguine^^s parts, it may be well thought, that it
also lays upon the Spirits brought thither with it, as it were some
nitrosulphureous particles, and intimately fixes them on them; and so, by
reason of this Copula, highly flatuous and apt to be rarefied, the Spirits
themselves become there more active, so that in every motive endeavor, whereby
the Muscle is suddenly intumified, they, as if inkindled, are exploded.
Moreover, a sudden refection of the consumed or wasted Spirits, after great
exercise or labor, is for this reason also performed by the blood; for that
the spirituous particles being left and forsaken by motion, presently a new
Copula of the same kind of matter, apt for explosion, is joined to them. For it
is not possible, that the immense loss of Spirits which happens in hard labors
(if they were wholly destroyed) in so short a time, should be able to be
restored by supplements coming only through the Nerves, We shall discourse more
largely of these things, if at any time hereafter we shall treat of the Motions
of the Muscles.

The animal Spirits being disposed within the several Muscles, according to the
series of Fibers, seem as it were so many distinct Troops or Companies of
Soldiers; all which being set as it were in a Watchtower, are ordained, as a
new impression is carried to them by the Nerves, either from the objects
outwardly, or more inwardly from the Head, forthwith into various forms and
peculiar orders for the performing of motion or sense of this or that kind. The
carriage or behavior of these is worth the seeing in an animal newly killed
and its skin taken off. For when life perishes, and all the force of the
Spirits flowing in through the Nerves has quite ceased; yet the Spirits
implanted into the whole Body breaking forth from the Muscles, still move and
shake them, and force them into several Convulsions and trembling motions.

From what has been said we may gather, what the disposition or order of the
animal Spirits may be in the whole animal Body: to wit, those procreated in the
cortical substance both of the Brain and Cerebel, are congregated into the
middles of either, as it were into distinct Empories or Marts; and an expansion
being made in either, they cause certain interior powers of the sensitive Soul
to be exercised; yet the same Spirits, affecting more room, enter the oblong
Marrow (as it were the Chest, as has been said, of a musical Organ) and sill
it full; within which flowing, they carry to and fro the impressions of
sensible Things and the Instincts of Motions. From the oblong and spinal Marrow
the same Spirits, unless when they are otherwise busied, tending outwardly,
flow toward the several parts of the whole Body; which notwithstanding
wandering so out of doors, because they pass through very strait ways in their
passage, ^o wit, the slender bodies of the Nerves, they break not forth in
heaps, or in a thick troop, but only contracted orderly, and as it were by
bands or divisions: but they being carried beyond the extremities of the
Nerves, and there possessing the Membranes, Muscles, and other sensible parts,
dilate themselves as it were into a most ample field, and with a very diffuse
Army they dwell in the Pores and passages of the Fibers planted every where
about; where also being endowed from the blood with new food, they become more
lively and more expeditious or ready for the designed offices.

Here perhaps it may be demanded, how the animal Spirits, diffused in such
numerous troops through the habit of the Body, are able to be supplied by so
strait channels of the Nerves? To which we reply, That those which reside more
outwardly do not quickly evaporate, nor are remanded back by Circulation:
wherefore when all the Fibers are filled by an influx of the Spirits made by
little and little from the beginning, very small supplements suffice to repair
their expense: For neither are those dwelling more outwardly, for that they are
repaired by the bloody food, much consumed, though in frequent action.

Hence may be noted the difference between the distributions of the blood and
animal Spirits. That Latex, because it is reduced in a circle, its Vessels are
in the whole passage proportionated as to the bulk of the Trunk and the
branchings sent from it, to wit, so that the branches of the great Artery,
being carried from the Heart, contain at the least so much of the blood, as the
shoots reaching forth from them, into all the parts. But because the animal
Spirits, being once begotten and carried more outwardly, subsist longer there,
and evaporate very slowly and by little and little; therefore the Vessels
carrying them, viz. the Nerves, in respect of the Fibers receiving them, are
made much lesser in proportion; lest perhaps by too great a supplement of the
animal Spirits, and the too thick gathering of the fresh ones still into the
nervous parts, the Army of the Veterans, before instructed, should be
confounded, and so the orders of all being disturbed, the exercises of the
animal Function should be performed any how. For indeed when at any time the
Spirits are made too sharp, so that being therefore struck as it were with
madness, they rush upon the nervous System with tumult and impetuosity; from
thence a great unquietness and continual throwing about of the Members are wont
to be excited, to which sometimes madness and fury succeed.

In the order and ordination of the animal Spirits, such as was but now
described, the Hypostasis or the Essence of the sensitive Soul consists, to
wit, which is only a certain Systasis or shadowy subsistence of those Spirits,
which like Atoms or subtle Particles, being chained and adhering mutually one
to another, are figured together in a certain Species. Moreover, the faculties
of the same Soul depend upon the various Metathesis and gesticulation of those
Spirits within the aforesaid Organs of the Head and nervous System. But the
consideration of this Soul and its powers requires a peculiar Tract, which
hereafter (God willing) we intend; in the mean time, our Method demands of us,
that (according to our weak skill) by the cense or numbering of the Nerves,
being particularly made, we should deliver an exact Neurology or Doctrine of
the Nerves.

But for that in the premised general consideration of the Nerves and Fibers,
there was mention made of the nervous and nutritious Juice; notwithstanding
what belongs to their powers and natures, has been neither fully nor clearly
enough delivered; therefore we will a little divert here, and make it our
business to inquire what sort of Juyces and Humors are carried into the parts
of the animated body for their nourishment, and by what ways or passages: then
this difficulty being removed, a plain and easy way leads into the Doctrine of
the Nerves.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Nervous Liquor, and whether that or the bloody Humor be Nutritious.

SInce the Circulation of the Blood was made known, and it has been plainly
made appear, that it did no where stagnate and stand still long, but was
carried in a reciprocal motion, always as in a circle; it began to grow
doubtful, whether its Latex is nutritious or not. For besides, that the more
rapid course of the blood, as of a torrent, might seem to wear the banks which
it flowed between, and to carry away some Particles from them, rather than to
be able to affix any thing to them; the substance it self also of the blood,
for that it is more torrid and uneven, is thought to be altogether unfit for
nutrition. Wherefore that a Juice may be found more convenient or fit for this
office, the passages and hidden recesses of the Nerves are to be viewed; and as
a certain Latex is found to flow within their Pores and passages, presently the
blood being rejected, that nervous humor is gifted with the title of
nutritious: but yet by what right, and after what manner nutrition is
performed, shall be our present purpose to inquire.

And here first of all, that we may take the part of the blood, it will be
easy to show, that there is matter contained in it fit enough for the
nourishment of the body, and a sufficient store of it. For besides the
sulphurous substance of the blood, which within the fire place of the Heart,
with a continual inkindling, and by that means deflagration in the Vessels
produces life, and in the more perfect Animals heat, there is found also a
certain other humor soft and alible, which in the Circulation, being
distributed through several parts of the Body, by increasing them adds
nourishment and bulk: yea the deflagration it self of the blood, plainly as a
Kitchin-fire in dressing meat, as it were boils and prepares this humor,
whereby it more easily is assimilated into the substance of every part to be
nourished. Hence it comes to pass, that by reason of a defect of heat in the
blood, no less than of excess, nutrition is often hindered. But that this kind
of alible Juice is contained in the bloody mass, the Anatomy or spontaneous
Analysis of its Latex sufficiently declares; for the extravasated blood, when
it goes into parts of its own accord, this liquor being disjoined from the
purple thick part, and swimming a-top of it, appears clear or limpid; but by
reason of its more thick contents, to wit, the nutritious Particles, like the
white of an Egg, it is easily made thick, and grows white by a gentle heat:
which thing appears by this familiar Experiment, to wit, if you shall evaporate
a little of it only in a Skillet over the fire, the whole liquor will presently
grow together into a white Gelly. By this liquor, as the blood is more or less
imbued with it, living Creatures grow and become more fleshy or lean: for both
the blood of younger Animals being loosned from cold, is wont to show much more
of this kind of white than more ancient or older Creatures; and we may take
notice daily at our Tables, that very much of this kind of Gelly comes out of
the flesh of a Lamb or Calf being boiled or roasted, and nothing almost from
Mutton or Beef, especially if old. Therefore we may lawfully suppose, that the
blood is truly nourishable; and that the whole, or at least the greatest part
of the matter, for the adding bulk or substance to every part, is dispensed
from it: but if at any time it be defective in this its office, that happens
not out of the natural unfitness of it, but because its disposition is
sometimes depraved, and as the Stomach laboring with some vice, rejects or
perverts the Chyle to be cooked by it.

But the blood, as it is not the only and alone humor, which is distributed in
the animated Body, so neither seems it able to perform alone and of it self the
whole office of nutrition. For besides that, being diffused through the
Arteries and Veins, another Latex is every where dispensed from the Head
through the Nerves; which shall be shown to afford something at least to
nourishment.

As to the first, there are many reasons which declare that kind of humor to be
in the Brain and nervous stock, and to abound in their whole passages. For
unless the animal Spirits, continually flowing out, should be founded in such a
Latex, which is their Vehicle, they would not be contiguous or joined, nor able
to continue and knit together the Systasis of the sensitive Soul. For if
Hippocrates did observe long since, that Cramps and Convulsive motions were
produced from dryness and emptiness, that perhaps might happen by this means:
to wit, because the humor in the Nerves or Fibers being deficient, the Spirits
distracted one from another, were separated; which notwithstanding, that they
might still retain their mutual embraces, and as it were folding of hands, bend
the containing bodies, and very much contract, and so force them into
Convulsions. Besides, Wounds and Impostumes of the Tendons and nervous parts
seem to witness the diffusion of the nervous Juice, either of which drop forth
a thin Ichor, and wholly unlike to the mere bloody Excretion: no less may be
argued from the Ganglia and Evil running Sores. In time of sleeping the
aforesaid humor is wont to flow more plentifully into the Brain and Nerves, and
to obstruct their passages; and therefore yawnings and stretchings come
frequently upon those awaking, that its relics might be shook off. Lastly, we
might readily show, that from the depravation of the nervous humor, Melancholy,
Madness, and some wonderful Convulsive distempers proceed. But it may be
objected, that there is no such kind of humor, because the Nerves being cut
asunder, it is not perceived to flow out; and that the Nerves being also bound,
they do not swell above the Ligature, as Arteries and Veins. But it may be
answered, That the liquor flowing in the nervous stock, is very subtle and
spirituous, and which, by any striving or wrinkling up of those parts, when
they are roughly handled, may easily evaporate and be blown away or dispersed
unperceivably. Then further, it is observed in the Whelps of some Animals newly
litter'd, who have as yet that juice viscous, and not easily to be dispersed,
and that have their Nerves greater, if they be bound hard together with cords,
they will swell above the Ligature.

Therefore seeing it appears, that a certain Humor does creep through the blind
Pipes and passages of the Head and of the Appendix, both medullar and nervous,
it behooves us next of all to inquire from whence that comes thither, and
whither it tends; and lastly, of what kind of nature and use it is. Concerning
these first it appears, from what has been said, that the aforesaid Latex,
serving for a Vehicle of the animal Spirits, is perpetually instilled, together
with them, from the blood watering the exterior confines of the Brain and
Cerebel, which from thence, passing through the medullar Trunk, is afterward,
with a gentle spring, poured through the whole frame of the nervous System; so
that the first fountains of the nervous humor are in the Brain and Cerebel. But
further, to this Juice conveying the forces of the animal Spirits, and supplied
only from the Head, there joins a certain other humor, as it were auxiliar in
the whole passage, and restores and refreshes it otherwise about to grow
deficient.

We think that these kind of supplements and subsidies, which happen to come
from elsewhere to the nervous Juice flowing from the Head, are received and
admitted inwardly from the sides and extremities of the medullar and nervous
System. We have already showed that an humor, as it were secondary, is
instilled from the blood watering these parts in its whole passage; because the
Arteries follow not only the medullar Trunk, but also the greater Trunks of the
Nerves in many places, and insert into them sanguiferous shoots. Besides,
forasmuch as the animal Spirits flowing within the nervous stock for the
performing of sense and motion, tend to and fro, and so bear a double aspect;
it is probable also, that the liquor watering the Nerves, as it most commonly
tends forward, so sometimes backward; and so that the extremities of the
Nerves, implanted in some parts, imbibe from them the humor, at least some
Effluvia's, with which they are satisfied, and oftentimes transfer them into
the Brain it self. Certainly there is no doubt, that the Fibers and nervous
Filaments or threads which cover the Sensory of taste, and the Viscera serving
for Concoction, do immediately receive some tastes of the taken in food, from
which supplies are carried to the Brain it self in great hunger and saintness
of Spirits. Because if at any time the Spirits inhabiting it, being exhausted
very much with heavy and long labor, begin to sail, a most swift refection is
performed, Pectorals or Cordials being scarcely swallowed, and long indeed
before the alible Juice can be able to reach to the border of the Brain by the
passage of the blood. Moreover it is most likely, that not only the benign
Effluvia's of the aliment are received by the extremities of the Nerves ending
about the Viscera; but also by this way, that oftentimes an infestous matter,
and in a manner malignant, is communicated by the Nerves and their passages to
the Head. But indeed the preternatural Juyces heaped up about the Hypochondria,
the Spleen, Womb, and other Bowels emit vaporous little bodies, which not only
infect the bloody mass, and distemper the Head by that means, but they climb to
the Brain more immediately by the passage of the Nerves, and strike it with an
heavy ill. For from hence in part it comes, that Hypochondriacks and Hysterical
people are so cruelly punished through the Symptoms stirred up in the Brain and
nervous stock for the faults of the lower Bowels; hence it is, that little
Pills of Opium, being scarcely dissolved in the Stomach, cause a Torpor or
heaviness. But here is no place to discourse more largely of these. It behooves
us to consider what remains, the Springs of the nervous Juice, the Auxiliaries
but now detected, and its Virtues and Influences.

Concerning the nervous Liquor we shall inquire what that does in its passage,
to wit, whilst it flows within the Marrows or middles of the Brain and Cerebel,
the medullar Trunk and the bodies themselves of the Nerves: secondly, then for
what uses, it serves, when being sliden from the ends of the Nerves, it is
spread abroad on the secondary parts of the nervous System.

1. As to the first, whilst that of the nervous Liquor passes through the Head,
and either of its Appendix, its chief office seems to be for a Vehicle of the
animal Spirits, which indeed it carries along with its diffusion, and contains
them under the same Systasis. Yea, this Latex shows various Schemes of the
Spirits for the performing of sense and motion; even as the humid Particles of
the Air pass through the Optic Configurations of the Rays of Light. Also
moreover, the nutrition of the aforesaid parts and accretion or growth into a
greater bulk, depends in some measure upon the nervous Juice watering the same,
as shall be showed by and by.

2. But the greatest question is concerning this Liquor being diffused beyond
the ends of the Nerves upon the secondary parts of the nervous System, and in
the passages of them on the whole Body; to wit, whether such a Juice be
nourishing of all the solid parts, or of some of them by themselves, as Authors
variously think; or to what other office it is destinated.

Concerning these it first appears, that the Brain and Nerves, with the Juice
flowing out of them, contribute matter, or at least some influence to the work
of nutrition; the which if it should chance to fail (a sign of which defect is,
if the animal Faculty falters in part) the nourishment there is wont presently
to be hindered or perverted. This is plainly seen in the Palsy, excited from an
evident cause, without any previous Dyscrasie of the blood, where suddenly an
Atrophy follows the privation of motion or sense, or of both together. Further,
in the Scurvy, where the taint has corrupted the nervous Juice, when the sick
begin to be afflicted with the Vertigo and swimming of the Head, and with
wandering pains, Convulsions, and a frequent loosning of the Members, the flesh
falls presently away, as in a Consumption, and without any fault of the Lungs,
the sick wither away, as if distempered with a Phthisis. It is a vulgar
observation, That from the immoderate use of Venus, also from an inveterate
Gonorhrea, from Strumous or running Ulcers, and other Impostumes, by which much
of the nervous Juice is wasted, a leanness or wasting of the whole Body is
produced. Certainly, if I be not deceived, there are some Atrophies, yea, and
sorts of breakings out, which seem to depend wholly upon the defect or the evil
dispensation of the nervous Juice, when the blood, as to its quantity and
disposition, is not much in fault. Lastly, the consideration of some Diseases
and Symptoms so plainly confirms the diffusion of the nervous Liquor and its
great influence on all the parts, that there is even left no room for doubting.

Also no less does the curing of some Diseases and the use of Remedies confirm
the same. For from hence a reason is taken, wherefore Cephalic Plasters
oftentimes yield such signal help in the Phthisis; not because they stay the
Catarrh of the Serum falling down on the Lungs, (as the common people think)
but because by corroborating the Brain they restore the disposition of the
nervous Juice, before vitiated. For this cause it is, that some diseases being
stirred up by the fault of the nervous Liquor, of which sort among others are
Cancrous and Strumous Ulcers, or such as come of the King's Evil, are hardest of
all to be cured; because the morbid tincture of the Brain, and of the Latex
watering it (whether it be innate or acquired) is not easily mended: yet
sometimes when the root of the disease, lurking in the Brain or nervous stock,
is taken away by the help of Nature it self, or by Chance, by the use of some
remedy; presently the Symptoms of other parts, though neglected in the whole,
vanish, not without the suspicion of a miracle. But how much the alteration of
the Brain serves for the curing of some most grievous diseases, some instances
taken from the Farriers Art will clearly show.

For when many Medicines and Methods of Administrations are wont to be tried in
vain for the curing the stinking disease in Horses, commonly called the Farcy
(which Helmontius asserts to be like the French Pox, and the Author of its
Contagion) the most certain means of curing (which I have very often known to
be applied with good success) consists in this; that some sharp Medicines, of
which sort are Hearts-ease, Water-Pepper, Ranunculus or Crowfoot, and the like,
which very much abound in volatile Salt, being bruised into a mass, and put
into the Ears of the diseased Horse, and kept there for twenty four hours: it
is scarce credible by what means all the Ulcers are presently dried up, and the
disease healed, as it were by Enchantment, is quickly profligated in the whole.
For since this Application is made far from the affected parts, without any
alteration of the bowels or the blood, it should be so healed at a distance;
certainly the cause of such an Energy must only be, that by this kind of
Medicine the Dyscrasie or evil disposition of the Brain and nervous Juice is
taken away, and so the first root of the sickness being cut off, the shoots and
fruits presently wither. It were worth our labor to try such kind of
Experiments also in our Medicines. Yea it may be well suspected, that such a
way ought to be ordered for the common Cure of the King's Evil. Among our
Countrymen, as delivered from our Ancestors, it is thought that the seventh
Son, or he that is born the seventh one after another in a continued series,
can cure this disease by stroking it only with his hand; and truly I have known
many, whom no Medicines could help, to have been cured in a short time only by
that remedy. Few doubt but that this disease is wont to be cured often by the
Touch of our King. The reason of such an effect (if it be merely natural) ought
to be assigned not to any other thing than that in the sick (especially those
of ripe age) the Fantasy and strong Faith of the hoped for Cure induces that
alteration, or rather strengthening to the Brain, whereby the morbid disposition
radicated in it is profligated. But I shall return from whence I am digressed,
to inquire what the nervous Juice contributes to nutrition.

2. I say therefore secondly, although nutrition depends in some measure upon
the influence of the nervous Juice, yet it is highly improbable, that all the
several parts of the whole Body should be nourished only by this provision. For
besides that this were to impose upon the Government of the Soul it self, and
its primary Organs, the cooking office of nutrition wholly unworthy the
excellency and dignity of those parts; it seems also that the nervous Liquor
should be altogether unfit for the administering to this Province: because when
oftentimes immense expenses are made of the aliment to be assimilated into the
substance of the solid parts, especially by immoderate sweat, also by continual
labor and exercise, which Countrymen and Laborers daily use, it is not
possible that such losses should be repaired only by the nourishment supplied,
or sent through the small passages of the Nerves.

When I had long and seriously considered with my self concerning this thing,
what I at length thought, I shall tell you freely, and without any covering, or
making any reflection, or blaming the Opinions of others. It seems first, that
the nourishing matter of the whole Body is distributed into all parts from the
blood through the Arteries; yet it may lawfully be thought, that the conversion
of this matter into nutriment, and the assimilation of it into the substance of
the part to be nourished, is performed by the influence and help of the nervous
Juice, as it were of a certain spirituous Ferment. As to the first: we have
already noted, that the sanguiferous Vessels do not only follow almost every
where the Muscles and Bowels, but also the Head and its Appendix, yea the
Membranes, Bones, and Nerves themselves, and affix to them all thick shoots, as
so many little channels, for the receiving the nourishment. Moreover, as there
is a purple crassament or thick substance in the blood, whose substance stuffs
and nourishes the Pores of the Parenchyma of the Muscles; so there is a whitish
Gelly, by which the Membranes and the whiter parts seem to increase. Besides it
may be observed, that the blood it self increasing, contains in it self fibers
and small threads, such as are interwoven in the Muscles and nervous parts; and
if the same stand long in any Vessel, it is presently coagulated into longish,
white, and hard crusts or bits, whose substance is plainly fleshy; so that the
blood produces flesh of it self, though the same be rude and unformed:
wherefore the configuration and the apt disposition of the nourishing matter,
supplied from it, depends on the coming and Energy of the nervous Juice: but
after what manner this is done, we shall endeavor now to show.

After the web or stuff of all the parts is laid, it is required then that they
be both drawn forth in due proportion, and grow in substance, and also that the
little spaces which are left by reason of the Effluvia's perpetually falling
off, may be continually filled with the nourishing substance cast in. In these
two things the business of nutrition chiefly consists; for the performing of
either of which the blood affords matter, and reaches it forth (as was said) in
the circulating to the several parts of the concrete, and as it were stands at
the doors of the part to be nourished: yet, that this matter may be rightly
disposed, and its particles, to wit, the thick and thin, saline and
sulphurous, and others of a several nature, separated one from another, may be
employed with some choice to the destinated uses, there seems need of a certain
directing faculty, and as it were plastic virtue, got somewhere else than from
the blood it self. For indeed the blood being destitute of animal Spirits, is
unfit for the performing these offices. Wherefore, for that it appears there
does lie hid in the nervous stock, a certain juice, and the same being gifted
with animal Spirit to be diffused to all parts, how can we suppose less but
that this subtle and spirituous Liquor, every where meeting with the arterious,
which is duller and thicker, actuates and inspires it, and as it were ordains
it for the performing the designed work of nutrition? especially when it
plainly appears, that by reason of the defect or depravation of this nervous
Juice, nutrition is always frustrated or perverted.

Therefore it may be lawful, in the difficult Controversy concerning the
Matter and Method of Cure, to propose this our Hypothesis, though it be a
Paradox and very abstruse; to wit, that the nervous Juice (which we have said
was like the male seed) is poured out with the nutritious humor copiously
suggested from the Arteries, as it were the genitive or seed of another Sex,
every where upon all the parts; and that this former, being endued with active
Elements, imbues the more thick matter, as with a certain Ferment, and
impregnates it with animal Spirit; and when it so makes it, with a mutual
entering in or coming together, to be dissolved and to go into parts, its
particles being extricated one from the other (the Spirit infused helping) they
are put upon bodies of the same measure with themselves, and are assimilated
into their substances. In the mean time, because the animal Spirits are poured
out in great plenty with the nervous Juice, those which are at leisure from the
work of nutrition, or remain after that is finished, turn aside every where
into the Fibers, as into proper dwelling houses, and there being ready for the
offices of sense and motion, stay; which offices indeed, that those Spirits the
Inhabitants of the Fibers, may the better perform, they acquire from the blood
watering the Muscles, certain auxiliary forces, wherefore they being endued
with a certain elastick force, are apt to be highly rarefied and as it were
exploded.

But indeed we suppose, that as the nervous Liquor, being turgid with animal
Spirit, causes the arterious humor to become nutritious; so in compensation of
this the animal Spirits remaining of the work of nutrition, and every where
disposed within the Fibers, receive from the arterious blood a mixture or
certain Copula; by whose help and cooperation the same Spirits exert or put
forth much more strongly their locomotive force. For it seems that little
sulphurous bodies are added to the spirituous-saline particles from the
watering blood; and so when the animal Spirits are furnished with this Copula,
they being stirred up into motion, shake off the borrowed particles, which
being struck with a certain force, like the explosion of Gunpowder, suddenly
intumifie the Muscles, and so by contracting them very much, they cause a
vehement motive endeavor. We shall have an occasion of discoursing more at
large of this, when we treat of the Motion of the Muscles.

Yet in the mean time, we shall take notice, that the Muscles of the whole
Body, as to their motion, have a certain Analogy with the motion of the Heart.
For indeed the animal Spirits in the Heart, flowing within the fibers and
nervous threads, (with which this part is much beset) receive plentifully
sulphurous little bodies from the inflowing blood distending the sides of
either bosom, which whilst the same Spirits, being filled to a fullness, shake
off and as it were explode, a Systole of the whole Heart (its sides being
carried with a certain force inwards) is brought in or caused, whereby the
blood, from either side the bosom, is cast out as it were by the impulse of a
Spring or Bolt. Truly, unless the Spirits inhabiting the Heart, should receive
food and matter of explosion from the blood it self, their stock, supplied or
sent by the passage of the few and small Nerves, would not suffice for the
performing of the undiscontinued motion. A sign of this is, that from a defect
or depravation of the blood, as well as of the animal Spirits, the motion also
of the Heart is defective or diminished. And not much unlike in the Muscles, as
in the Heart, is the business performed; the Spirits inhabiting their Fibers,
receive a sulphurous Copula and apt for explosion, from the blood there more
plentifully flowing than about the Membranes, with which being endued, as often
as they receive from the Nerve as it were the fiery inkindling or the match,
the instinct of the motion to be performed, they being excited, and striking of
their Copula, very much inflate or blow up the Muscle, and intumifie it for
performing or compassing the motive endeavor. Nor is it much to purpose, or
makes any great difference, that the motion of the Heart, stirred up by a
perpetual instinct, is found always necessary; but the Muscles the most of them
only occasionally and at the command of the Animal, do put forth their motive
power; for the Diaphragma and some Muscles, dedicated to Respiration, are urged
with a perpetual Systole and Diastole, as well as the Heart it self.

From the aforesaid Hypothesis concerning the offices and uses of the nervous
and arterious Juice, Arguments that otherwise determine the work of Nutrition,
may be easily answered. For that the blood is said rather to prey upon the
solid parts than to replenish them, that ought to be attributed to the Disease
and Dyscrasie of it, and not to it simply: because sometimes the blood is
accused, for that it too much stuffs the solid parts; to wit, forasmuch as its
mass being waterish and weak, it lays aside the alible Juice (which not being
truly cooked, is still crude and vicious) with very great plenty about the
habit of the Body, and so induces an Anasarca. In the mean time it ought to be
granted, That as it is the blood that is evil which heaps up too much vicious
nutriment; so it is the same, which being well and right, does laudably perform
the office of Nutrition.

But that it is argued, That the nervous is rather the nourishing Juice,
because by reason of its defect, depravation or too prodigal expense, the acts
of nutrition are wont to be hindered or perverted; it is easy to reply to this,
That the impediments of the nervous Juice, being made vicious, respect the form
of nourishment, and not the matter of it: to wit, it sometimes happens, that
the blood dispenses the alible matter in due plenty and disposition; which
notwithstanding, by the fault of the nervous Juice, is not rightly assimilated.
When an impotency of motion comes upon a too great distension of the Muscle or
Tendon with pain, shortly nutrition being hindered, a Jelly grows about the
distempered part: which notwithstanding drops not out of the Nerve (as is
commonly said) but the glutinous humor being poured out of the Arteries for
aliment, for that it cannot be received by the hurt part, is gathered together
there: nor is it to be thought, that Tumors, or Strumous Ulcers or the running
Sores of the Evil do contain or pour out only a nervous humor, since the matter
of either is for the most part bloody, which by reason of the evil Ferment of
the nervous Juice, puts on a strange form, and that diversely degenerous.

This supposition of the twofold Humor, for the matter and form of nourishment,
is taken to be of egregious use for the solving of the most difficult
Phenomenon, which are met with about the Distempers of the Brain and nervous
Juice: yea, that Pathology, seriously considered, seems to infer as a certain
necessary consequence, that a twofold Juice is necessary for the work of
Nutrition; as some other time perhaps we may show. In the mean time, leaving
this Speculation, we shall proceed to the remaining Task of our Anatomy, to
wit, the Neurologie or of the Nerves in particular.

THE Description and Use OF THE NERVES.
CHAP. XXI.
The first four Pair of Nerves arising within the Skull are described.

THE division or distinction of the Nerves, by reason of their various
respects, is wont to be manifold: to wit, as they are either soft or hard,
singular or numerous in their beginnings; or that they serve either to the
faculty of Sense, or Motion, or to both together. But they are commonly
distinguished, That some Nerves arising within the Skull, proceed from the
oblong Marrow; and others going out of the joints of the Vertebrae, are derived
from the spinal Marrow. But besides these, another manner of differencing them
seems best to us; to wit, That some Nerves, as it were Clients and Servants of
the Brain, perform only spontaneous Acts, and others, Ministers and Servants of
the Cerebel, are employed only about the exercises of the involuntary Function.
There will be no need to assign different Essences or Constitutions of Nerves
according to these several differences: but rather that there be instituted a
particular Cense or Muster of them, and following the order of Nature, that we
especially unfold every one of them in the series in which they are disposed in
the animal Body.

Among the Nerves arising from the Skull, the smelling Nerves, or those which
are commonly called the Mammillary Processes, lead the way; for that they have
their rise before all the rest, and are stretched out forward beyond the Brain
it self. These Nerves go out of the shanks of the oblong Marrow within the
chamfered bodies and chambers of the Optic Nerves; and being endued with a
manifest cavity, open into the first Ventricle of the Brain on either side
behind the same chamfered bodies; so that the humidity flowing between the
folding of the Brain, is carried through these channels into the mammillary
Processes; whether they go farther forward, shall be anon inquired into:
Because these Nerves being broad and large, arising near the chamfered bodies,
and from thence stretched forward under the Basis of the Brain, their bulk is
increased by degrees till they go into the round Processes like Paps, by which
either bosom of the Cribrous or Sieve-like Bone is besmeared. Within the Socket
of this Bone these Nerves, as yet soft and tender, obtain Coats of the Dura
Matter; with which being divided into many fibers and filaments, and passing
through the holes of the Sieve-like Bone, they go out of the Skull: from whence
being dilated or carried forward into the caverns of the Nostrils, and
distributed on every side, they are inserted into the Membrane bespreading
those Labyrinths.

If we inquire into the nature and use of these parts, without doubt the
mammillary Processes and their medullar roots, with the fibers and small
threads hanging to the same, are truly Nerves, and serve properly for the very
Organ of the Smell. Seeing these conduce to the sense only without any local
motion, therefore (even as the other hearing Nerve) whilst they are within the
Skull, they are plainly medullar and soft; whereby the animal Spirits more
easily moved within the more tender substance of the Nerves, might convey more
readily and accurately to the common Sensory the Ideas or forms of the sensible
Species: But because the effluvia's or odorous breaths to be received by the
naked Organ, carry oftentimes with them sharp and pricking Particles hurtful to
the Brain and Nerves; therefore in the first course these Nerves being about to
go out of the Skull, borrow Coats from the Dura Matter, which serve for Armor.
Further, as these breaths (lest they should strike more sharply by rushing
impetuously on the Sensory) being admitted only by little and little, and by
small bands, ought to be brought through diverse narrow turnings and windings of
the Nostrils; therefore that these Nerves may the better receive the effluvia's
flowing within the several dens, they are so divided into very many fibers and
small threads or filaments, that there may be no passage of the Nostrils to
which at least some of them are not destinated. And after this manner, although
the exhalations, as it were torn into little Clouds, are received by the
nervous filaments, and so care is sufficiently taken, that they being more
thickly elevated, may not overwhelm or obscure the Sensory; yet lest any thing
sharp and troublesome should be carried with them to the Brain, the cribrous
bone is set before the doors as an obstacle, through whose little holes being
strained, they may put off all sharpness. And lastly, they being carried
through the softer Nerve, as it were another Medium, and so broken again, they
at length being soft and gentle enough, are staid at the first Sensory.

But that these Nerves are noted through the whole with an open hollowness
within the Skull, the reason seems to be, that the watery humor stilling out of
the foldings of the Brain, and being derived into those channels, might beat
back and temper the impressions of the odours, when too sharp and fiery: for as
the humors included in the Eye, variously refract the visible Species, whereby
it passing at last through the Optic Nerve without any force, slides
pleasantly to the common Sensory; so it is not improbable, that the water
contained within these passages of the Nerve^, does in like manner sweeten the
species of the odours, and prepare them in some ^easure for the Sensory.
Wherefore it is observed, that Cattle and Beasts which are ^^d with herbage,
have the mammillary Processes exceeding large and always full of water; to wit,
lest the odours of the herbs continually attracted by them (unless their force
should be blunted after the aforesaid manner) might hurt or overthrow their
more weak brain. Besides, it is very likely that this watery juice falling down
from the enfolding of the Brain, does not only flow into the open channels of
the Nerves and the mammillary Processes, but also does pass through by the
passage of the fibers and filaments the holes of the Sieve-like Bone, and does
wet and continually moisten the cavities of the Nostrils, apt to be dried or
torrified too much by the Air thither attracted, and by the breath continually
blown out. For it clearly appears, as we have elsewhere shown, that the serous
humors creep through the blind passages of the Nerves and Fibers, and by them
wander from place to place. Yea it may be thought, that not only water,
sufficient for the watering the Nostrils, does by this way sweat through; but
also whenever the serous heap is gathered together in the Ventricles of the
Brain, its superfluities or the excrementitious humor does very often pass
through the cribrous Bone by the passage of the Fibers, and is sent out. But we
have in another place discoursed more largely of this.

The smelling Nerves, which have within the Skull their mammillary Processes
depending on them, are much greater in an Ox, Goat, and in Cattle, and such
like beasts that live on herbage, than in flesh-eating Animals; to wit, because
in those there seems to be more need of the sense of smelling to be more
exquisite for the knowing the virtues of the manifold herbs. Also these Nerves
are larger in all Brutes than in Man: the reason of which is, because they
discern things only by the sense, and especially their food by the smell; but
Man learns many things by education or nurture and discourse, and is rather led
by the taste and sight, than by the smell in choosing his aliments. These Nerves
in Birds, as also in Fishes, are conspicuous enough; for either of these, even
as four-footed beasts, seek out and choose their food by the help or knowledge
of the smell.

As to the Fibers and Filaments or little strings stretching out from the more
soft Nerves through the holes of the Sieve-like Bone into the caverns of the
Nose, these are found in all Creatures who have the mammillary Processes: so
that it is not to be doubted, but that these Processes, with this Appendix and
its medullary origin, is the Organ of the Smell. And what more confirms this
thing, these filaments or little strings are far more, and more remarkable in
hunting Hounds than in any other Animal whatsoever. But besides these Nervulets
drawn through the holes of the Sievelike Bone into the Nostrils, two branches
also are sent hither from the fifth pair, and distributed into both the
Nostrils. The reason of this seems to be, because though the Nerves but now
described, or of the first Conjugation, are properly smelling Nerves, and
effect by themselves the sense of Smelling; yet these are assisted or joined
with other Nerves, also by those sent from the fifth pair, because the Organ of
the Smell ought to have a consent with all other parts, which those subsidiary
Nerves, by reason of the manifold branching out of the fifth pair, are wont to
perform. It chiefly appears, that there is a certain nearness or strict
affinity between the taste and the smell: and the cause of this consists, in
that out of the same Trunk of the fifth pair certain Nerves are sent to the
Palate, and others to the Nostrils. Concerning the reason of that wonderful
consent which the Nostrils have with the Praecordia in sneezing, also wherefore
that light titillation stirs up a Cough, shall be spoken of hereafter, when we
come to unfold the fifth pair and the intercostal Nerves. But in the mean time
we shall take notice, that although many Nerves belong to the Organ of
Smelling, yet that sense is properly performed by the Fibers interwoven in the
inward Coat of the Nostrils: for those Fibers being struck by the sensible
object, move and contract themselves variously according to the Idea of the
impression; which Affection of them being carried by the passage of the Nerves
to the Head, forasmuch as it is there staid by the common Sensory, causes the
perception of the sense. Those sensible Fibers are diversely figured in several
Animals; which is the reason, why odorous things do not alike affect all
Animals. For what things by a man's nostrils, as endured with too sharp and
pricking Effluvia's, are esteemed highly naught and stinking, as especially are
dung and putrid flesh; the same are to Dogs, whose Organ of Smelling is made or
consists of more robust or strong Fibers, and proportionate to those
Effluvia's, as very grateful and chosen for food.

The second Conjugation are the Optic or seeing Nerves: concerning which we
have shown already, in the Anatomy of the Brain, after what manner they arise
from behind the chamsered bodies out of the second section of the medullar
shanks (which Galen calls the Chamber of the Optic Nerve) and descending from
thence with a certain compass are united, and being again separated and carried
into the Ball of the Eyes, constitute with diffused Fibers the hard Coat.
Moreover, in those Observations we did but now take notice, that the Trunk of
this Nerve growing a little hard without the Skull, was as it were a little
bundle of very many Fibers or small strings growing together into one, and of
produced Parallels, as it should seem for that end, that the animal Spirits,
flowing in the whole Nerve, might be moved in so many lines or direct rays; to
wit, whereby they may carry the visible Species, sufficiently refracted in the
Eye, thence to the common Senfory by a direct beam, and not intorted or rolled
about.

As often as in the distempers of the Eyes blackish pricks or concatenated
pieces of any thing seem to be rolled before the Eyes, it is likely that this
apparition is so made, because certain filaments or small strings of the Optic
Nerve are shut up, which when the light cannot pass through rightly, as through
the rest, so many as it were shadowy spaces appear in the middle of the
clearness. These Nerves, because they only serve for the sense, are therefore
more soft within the Skull: but because there may be need perhaps, that the
Trunk of this Nerve ought to be sometimes dilated or spread abroad, sometimes
bound close together or contracted according to the diverse appearance and
incourse of the objects; therefore very many Fibers, being sent out from the
motory or moving Nerves of the Eyes, do every where compass and bind it about,
and entering with it into the Ball of the Eye, are inserted partly near the root
of the Optic Nerve, and partly penetrate more deeply the Sclerotick or hard
Coat it self.

Further, the Optic Nerves are not only bound or environed with nervous Fibers
sent from the third pair, but (as we have shown above) with sanguiferous
Vessels in their whole process. The office of which certainly is, both that
there might be every where about the greater Trunk of this Nerve as it were a
continual heat or sufficient fireplace; also perhaps, that the food of the
bloody humor might be supplied to the Spirits, living there within the trunks
of the nerves, far from the fountain, as is wont to be in other places.

Concerning the Fabric of the Eye it self, and manner of seeing, also
concerning the whole dioptrick provision, here seems a fit opportunity of
discoursing: but this were to digress too far from our purpose, to wit, the
mere or naked Doctrine of the Nerves; and I may the better pass by this
addition, because this Province has been sufficiently and accurately adorned
by others. In the mean time we shall take notice, that as in the smelling, so
also in seeing, the sense is performed, not so much by the help of the nerve,
as of the fibers, which are interwoven with the organ: to wit, the little
fibers in the Membranes of the Eyes, and especially those inserted into the
Sclerotick Coat, and disposed after the manner of a net, do receive the
impression of the visible Species, and by representing the image of the thing,
so as it is offered without, causes sight. But it is the office of the nerve it
self to transmit inwardly, as it were by the passage of the Optic Pipe, that
image or sensible Species, and to carry it to the common Sensory.

The third Conjugation of Nerves are the moving nerves of the Eyes, which arise
in the Basis of the medullar Stem behind the Tunnel; from whence going forwards
nigh the pair of seeing nerves, and going out of the Skull with the other
nerves destinated to the Eye, they are carried toward the Globe of the Eye;
where, being presently divided into many branches, they provide it with moving
Muscles; but with various difference in diverse living Creatures. For in an Ox,
who has got a larger eye, the moving nerve of the eye imparts a branch to
every one of the six common Muscles; and besides, from the nerves of the
fourth, fifth, and sixth pair certain branches are distributed to some of the
same Muscles: so that, as often as any Animal intends or applies the sense for
the perceiving of this or that object, these nerves turn about the Eye, and
compose it at their pleasure for the spontaneous beholding of the same. Besides
we take notice, that the Eyes do get a diverse kind of involuntary motion;
because in Fear, Shame, Anger, Sadness, yea and in all Affections of the Head
and Heart, whether we will or no, the Eyes are respectively figured. Wherefore
it is highly probable, that these kind of pathetick motions of the Eyes, whereof
the living Creature is scarce knowing, are performed by the help of the other
nerves, to wit, of those coming from the fourth, fifth and sixth pair: and that
more manifestly appears, because the same nerves which lend their branches to
the Eye, take their origines from the Cerebel, the office of which we have
often shown to be, to dispense the Spirits for the exercise of the involuntary
Function.

But concerning these Nerves of the third pair, which are properly called the
Moving nerves of the Eyes, we observe, that in Man, a Dog, and in some other
living Creatures they are found to be somewhat otherwise than in an Ox: for
either nerve in these, as in the rest, is carried out of the Skull, divided
into four branches, three of which are carried from thence into three straight
distinct Muscles, to wit, one lifting up, the other bringing together, the
third pressing close the Eye; the other branch of it goes forwards further with
a single trunk, and is implanted in the middle of the Muscle going about the
Eye, turning obliquely to the inward corner downwards. From these it appears,
that these Muscles, to which this nerve belongs in all, are sufficient almost
of themselves to perform most spontaneous motions of the Eye: but where the
aforesaid nerve is divided into four shoots, it constitutes a small and round
enfolding, out of which many small shoots creep through, and variously compass
about the trunk of the Optic nerve; for what use it is so made, we have
already intimated.

The fourth Conjugation of Nerves (which we call rightly the Fourth by order
and succession, although it is accounted the eighth and last by Fallopius) has
a diverse origin from all the rest. For whereas most of the others proceed
from the foot or sides of the oblong Marrow, this has its root in the top of
it behind the round Protuberances, called Nates and Testes: From whenc, bending
more forward nigh the sides of the oblong Marrow, it is presently hid under the
Dura Matter; under which going along for some space, and passing through the
Skull at the same hole with the rest destinated to the Eye, it is bestowed with
a single trunk, not communicating with any of the other nerves, wholly on the
Muscle called the Trochlear Muscle. Above we called these nerves the Patheiick
nerves of the Eyes: for although some besides may deserve this name, (as shall
be shown by and by) yet it is most likely, that the proper office of these is to
move the Eyes pathetically, according to the force of the Passions and instinct
of Nature, delivered and remanded from the Brain to the Cerebel, and so on the
contrary, from this to that through the Nates and Testes, and their medullar
Processes. For, as we have shown, that by the diverse impulse and waving of the
animal Spirits dwelling in this by-path, there are instituted certain mutual
commerces between the Brain and the Praecordia, (the Cerebel mediating between
either) it will be of necessity, that these nerves, rooted in the middle way,
should be struck by every tending downwards or remove of the Spirits, going
this way or that way, and so the motions of the Eyes to follow the affections
of those parts. All perfect Animals are furnished with these nerves; and in
truth, as none of them but are obnoxious to Anger, Love, Hatred, and other
Affections, so every little Creature show these by the mere aspect and by the
gesture it self of the Eyes. We see sometimes the greater Pike gaping for his
prey first of all to roll about his eyes, and to look sour; then with a swist
shooting out of his body to invade the lesser fry of fish.

CHAP. XXII.
The fifth, sixth, and seventh Pair of Nerves are unfolded.

OF the aforesaid four Pair of Nerves, the two former seem chiefly to serve for
the Sense only, but the two latter for Motion; and every single nerve of them
destinated to a peculiar Province: but this which follows next, to wit, the
fifth Conjugation of Nerves serves for the exercise of either Faculty, to wit,
both of Sense and Motion; nor is its Province so strictly bounded, that it
should belong only to one member, for it is distributed to the Eyes, Nose, and
Palate, and the rest of the parts of the Face; and besides, helps in its part
in some sort the offices and actions of the Praecordia and almost of all the
Viscera.

This pair (which by the Ancients was accounted the third, by us the fifth
pair, and that by right of order or position) below the former nerves, proceeds
with a broad and large trunk from the sides of the annular Protuberance or
Process sent out from the Cerebel. It consists of very many Fibers gathered
together, some of which are soft, others hard; so that the great trunk of it
near its beginning, is nothing else than a little bundle of very many nerves,
some of which are bestowed on these parts, and others on other parts, and in
some they perform the offices of motion, in others of sense. But that so many
nerves being destinated to so many several members, and remote one from
another, yet arising together, are collected as it were into one bundle, the
reason is, that in all the parts to which those nerves belong, a certain
Sympathy and consent of actions might be conserved: to wit, the communion of
those nerves is the cause why the sight and smell move spittle and please the
Palate; nor by any other means are the Praecordia affected, according to the
various conceptions of the Brain, and transmit their affections o he several
parts of the Face; from whence the aspect or countenance of the whole Animal is
pathetically figured, as shall be showed more particularly below.

In the mean time, let us deliver a short Hypotype or figure of this Nerve; its
trunk going out of the sides of the greater Ring, sometimes near its beginning,
but oftener the Dura Matter being first perforated or passed through, is divided
into two noted branches. The first of these tending straight downward, going
out of the Skull at a proper hole, in its descent toward the lower Jaw, (to
whose parts it is chiefly destinated) is divided into more branches, with which
it furnishes the Temple-muscle, also the Muscles of the Face and Cheeks.
Moreover from them shoots and branches are distributed into the Lips, Gums,
roots of the Teeth, Jaws, Throat, the farther end of the Palate, yea and the
Tongue; for this reason chiefly, that the nerves going out of the lower branch
of the fifth pair, might effect, besides sense, the diverse offices of Taste and
Touch or Feeling, and motions of a various kind in the aforesaid members and
parts; most of which, as the chewing of the aliment, also those which have
respect to configuration or framing of the mouth and face in laughing or
weeping (as we have already noted) are performed unknown to the Brain, that is
involuntarily, and by the help of the Cerebel only, from which these Nerves are
derived.

The other superior, and also the greater branch of the fifth pair under the
Dura Matter nigh the side of the Turkey Chair goes straight forward for a little
space, and is enlarged into some shoots over against the pituitary Glandula to
the trunk of the Carotick Artery or the wonderful Net, (where it is present)
then it is inoculated into the nerve of the sixth pair, and from thence sends
back sometimes one, sometimes two shoots; which being united with another
shoot, turned back from the nerve of the sixth pair, constitute the root or
first trunk of the intercostal Nerve. Concerning this intercostal nerve, which
is made of the lower ramification or branching out of the nerves of the fifth
and sixth pair, it shall be spoken of particularly hereafter.

Presently after the branches or shoots reflected or bent back for the root of
the intercostal nerve, that greater nerve of the fifth pair is divided into two
noted branches. The lesser and uppermost of these tending toward the globe of
the Eye, and becoming again twofold, sends forth two branches from it self; one
of which turning toward the inward side of the Bone, containing the ball or
angle of the Eye, is divided into two shoots. The other of these having passed
through the Bone nigh the mammillary Processes, is carried into the nostrils:
the office of this nerve is to keep a Sympathy and consent of action between
the nostrils and some other parts: but the other branch of this division is
bestowed on the Muscle by which Brutes wink.

The second Ophthalmick branch of the fifth pair is divided into four or five
shoots, all which going forward above the Muscles of the Eye, and in some part
passing through its Glandula's, are almost all lost in the Eyebrows, unless
that in the passage they send down two small shoots which enter the Sclerotick
Coat a little below the Tendons of the Mulcles, and reach to the Wea, or the
fourth thin Membrane that clothes the Optic nerve; yea and also send in the
passage small shoots to the Glandula's of the Eye. It seems that these nerves
of the fifth pair, being distributed into the Glandula's of the Eyes and
Eyebrows, serve chiefly to the involuntary and pathetick actions of those
parts; the chief of which are, the languishing and mournful aspect of the Eyes
in weeping, and the unwilling pouring out of tears. For as the lower branching
of the fifth pair, to wit, the intercostal nerve, provideth in man for the
Praecordia, it easily happens, that from the fad affection of these, the
Cardiack branches of this nerve being forced and wrinkled into Convulsions, the
aforesaid Ophthalmick branches also so correspond, and by wrinkling the
Eyebrows, and by compressing the Glandula's, produce those kind of looks of
the Eyes, and marks of sorrow and grief. Further it is observed, that from the
Ophthalmick branch of the fifth pair a certain shoot is sent back higher nigh
the heads of the Musoles; which when it has passed through at a proper hole,
the Bone containing the ball of the Eye, is carried straight into the caverns
of the Nostrils. Hence, as I think, a reason may be given, wherefore passing
out of a dark place into the light, at the first beholding of the Sun,
presently whether we will or no we shall sneez; to wit, the eyes being too
strongly struck by the object, and being suddenly and disorderly moved, that
they might turn themselves aside, the same affection is immediately
communicated through the aforesaid Nerve to the Membrane covering the hollow
caverns of the Nostrils, which being thence contracted and wrinkled, (as it is
wont by some sharp thing pulling it) provokes sneezing.

The second or greater branch of the second division of the Nerve of the fifth
pair being carried nigh the ball of the Eye, is again divided into two
branches. The lower of these being bent downwards, cleaving into many shoots,
is bestowed on the Palate and upper region of the Jaws: The other and higher
branch of this second division stretching beyond the ball of the Eye, passes
through, together with the Vein and Artery, a proper hole made in the bone of
the upper Jaw; which Vessels this Nerve climbs and variously compasses about
with many shoots sent forth; then arising out of the bone, it imparts little
branches to the Muscles of the Cheeks, Lips, Nose, and to the roots of the
upper Teeth. Therefore forasmuch as this Nerve embraces and binds about the
sanguiferous Vessels destinated to the Cheeks and the other parts of the Face;
from hence a reason may be given, why the face is covered with blushing by
shame: for the animal Spirits being disturbed by the imagination of an unseemly
thing, by and by endeavoring as it were to hide the face, their irregularities
enter this Nerve, so that the shoots of the same Nerve embracing the blood
carrying Vessels, by compressing and pulling the same, cause the blood to be
more forced into the Cheeks and Face, and the Veins being bound hard to be
there for some time staid and detained. But forasmuch as many shoots and fibers
of the same maxillar Nerve, derived from the fifth pair, interweave themselves
with the flesh and skin of the Lips, hence the reason is plain, why these parts
are so very sensible, and besides, why the mutual kisses of Lovers, impressed
on the Lips, so easily irritate love and lust by affecting both the Praecordia
and Genitals; to wit, because the lower branching of the same fifth pair
actuates these parts constituted in the middle and lower Belly, and draws them
into the like affection with the Lips. The same reason holds of Love presently
admitted by the eyes, that as the Poet says, Mars videt hanc, visamque cupit.
As soon as Mars saw her, he desired her.


We have but now intimated, that many shoots of this Nerve were destinated for
the business of chewing; and therefore, because the aliments to be taken ought
to undergo not only the examination of the taste, but also of the smell and
sight, from the same Nerve, whose branches being sent to the Palate and Jaws,
perform the business of chewing, other shoots, as it were forerunners, are
carried to the Nostrils and Eyes, to wit, that these Organs of the other Senses
might be furnished with some helps of probation also, for the better knowing or
distinguishing the objects of taste. Certainly from the nearness of kindred and
manifold affinity of this Nerve, being also much diffused in the Head, the
mutual dependencies and confederations of very many of its parts, proceed. But
how this Nerve in other Provinces, to wit, in the Thorax and lower belly, and
there about the motions and sensions of the Praecordia and Viscera, does cause
various Sympathies of them among themselves and with other parts, shall
afterward be more largely shown, when we shall speak particularly of the
intercostal Nerve, which is rooted in this nerve of the fifth pair; where, from
the manifold communication of this nerve, may be easily drawn the reasons of
sneezing, yawning, laughing, crying, and of other actions merely natural. In
the mean time, the superior branching of the nerve of the fifth pair shows it
self after this manner in the Head, and almost after the same manner is
divaricated in most living Creatures; except however, that in some, presently
after its rise, it is divided into t^ree great branches; one of which is
destinated to the lower Jaw, the other to the Eye and Nose, and the third to
the Cheek.

The Nerve of the sixth Conjugation follows, which arising out of the lowest
foot of the annular Protuberance, and being hid under the Dura Matter, presently
goes out of the Skull at the same hole with the nerves of the third and fourth
pair, and is carried with a single trunk into the ball of the Eye; but so, that
near the side of the Turkey Chair it is inoculated with the second branch, or
the greater of the fifth pair; from whence it turns back, sometimes one little
branch, sometimes two; which being united with the branches of the fifth pair
running back, constitute the beginning of the intercostal nerve. Then this
nerve going forwards, is divided into two branches near the ball of the Eye;
one of which is inserted into the Muscle drawing back the Eye planted in its
outward angle; and the other being torn into various fibers, is bestowed on the
seventh Muscle proper to Brutes; so that this nerve also seems to serve to
those motions of the Eye that are almost only pathetick, or excited by natural
Instinct. For, as to the use of the former shoot, it plainly appears, that it
is innate to every Animal in a sudden fear to draw the eyes backward, and to
look for what is to be feared on either side and behind: then as to its other
shoot, whereby Brutes wink or twinkle the eye, it is obvious that this same
motion is sudden and extemporary, without any previous intention, whereby the
eye endeavors to shun the injuries of outward things that occur.

The seventh Conjugation of Nerves, accounted for the fifth by the Ancients, is
employed about the sense of hearing. Of this pair commonly are noted two
Processes, the one soft, the other hard; which indeed seem to be two distinct
nerves, for that although they have their beginnings nigh one another, yet are
somewhat distinct, and are carried to diverse Organs; in the mean time, either
agreeing in a certain common respect of use or action. For whilst one nerve
perform the act of hearing, the other supplies some requisites whereby that act
may be the better performed: wherefore we shall not much strive against the
common description of this pair, by which it is taken for one. The process of
this pair, or the auditory nerve properly, which is called the soft Branch,
seems to arise in man out of the lower side of the ringy Protuberance, and in
beasts out of the midst of the lesser Ring. In some Dissections I plainly
sound, that this softer nerve, having its beginning lower, seemed to ascend a
little before it went out of the medullar stock; and the other more hard nerve
seeming to arise higher ( viz. out of the medullar whitish line leading about
the bottom of the fourth Ventricle) did descend a little, and arose near the
meeting with the other. This softer nerve is carried into the passage of the
stony Bone, where entering into the den destinated for the receiving the found,
which is on this side the Snail-like winding and the Drum, it so infolds it
self into the most thin Membrane wherewith that den is covered, that as often
as the Air implanted in that cavern is moved by the stroke of the external Air
made upon the Drum, this impression striking this Membrane, and stirring up as
it were an undulation of the animal Spirits, is forthwith carried toward the
common Sensory by the passage of the nerve there implanted. There will be a
more opportune place of discoursing, after what manner, and by what sort of
Organs Hearing is performed, when we shall speak of the Senses.

The other Nerve of this pair, or the more hard process, which conduces rather
to motion than sense, passing through the stony Bone at an hole proper to it
self, arises near the auditory passage, where it presently receives into its
trunk a branch from the wandering pair brought thither; then immediately after
that joining together or coalition, it is divided into two branches: The first
of these tending downwards, is bestowed upon the Muscles of the Tongue and the
Bone Hyoides; the other going about the auditory passage, and bending more
upwards, is divided into three shoots; the first of which, answering to the
nerve of the former division, bestows some shoots on the Muscles of the Lips,
Mouth, Face, and Nostrils, and so actuates some exterior Organs for the forming
the voice, as the former does some interior Organs. The second shoot of this
division distributes its shoots into the Muscles of the Eyebrows and Forehead;
and the third into the Muscles of the Ear it self. The offices and uses of all
these have been already shown, the sum of which is, that as often as the sound
is admitted in, especially if it be any ways unusual, new, or to be wondered at,
presently by a certain natural instinct the Ears and Eyes erect and open
themselves: to wit, for that end shoots from this nerve are inserted into the
Muscles of the Eyelids and Ears, that by the passage of these, the Spirits
inhabiting either Region, might be called out as it were to watch. For a like
reason shoots from the same hard process of this nerve are distributed both
into the Muscles of the Tongue and of the Bone Hyoides; as also into those of
the Lips and the outward parts of the Mouth, that by their passage, the sound
being transmitted further to these Organs of the voice, it being equal or like
the same, might officiously answer it as were an Echo. That the descriptions of
the aforesaid nerves might be better understood, I have thought good here to
represent in the following Figure the branchings of the fifth and sixth pair.
The seventh pair is fitly delineated in the ninth Figure.

This Figure shows the Branchings of the fifth and sixth pair of Nerves.
A. The Nerve of the sixth pair (which we place first, because it is outmost in
the Scheme) from whose trunk two shoots a. a. are carried into the two Muscles
of the Eye. A. A shoot from the Nerve of the sixth pair bent back for the root
of the intercostal Nerve. B. The trunk of the fifth pair being presently
divided into two great branches. bb. Two shoots from this branch bent back for
the root of the intercostal Nerve. C. The division of the upper part of the
trunk into four lesser branches, the uppermost of which c. being the
Ophthalmick or belonging to the Eye, and entering the orb of the Eye, sends
forth four shoots. c. The first being carried nigh to the ball of the Eye, is
bent back into the Nostrils. d. The second passing by the outward orb of the
Eye, is carried into the Muscles of the Forehead. ee. The third and fourth are
distributed into the Eyelids and interior Glaendula's of the Eye. D. The
second branch of the second division is also Ophthalmick, which entering the
ball of the Eye, and carried toward the outward corner of the Eye, is
distributed into the Eye lids and outward Kernels. E. The third branch of the
second division, or the maxillar, which passing by the orb of the Eye, enters
an hole proper to the bone of the Jaw, in which passage it sends branching of
5th and 6th pair of nerves Fig: I.
all nerves Fig: II.
forth a shoot e. through another hole into the chewing Muscle, then arising
up, it is carried out at the hole. f. A shoot into the Muscles of the Nose.
ggg. It sends forth many shoots into the upper Lip. F. The lower branch or the
fourth of the second division, which descending right toward the hollowness of
the Mouth, is divided into two branches. h. The first is distributed into the
Gums. l. The second is bestowed with many shoots upon the Palate. G. The second
branch of the first division of the fifth pair, which tending straight
downwards toward the lower Jaw, sends forth in its passage many shoots. k. A
shoot of it into the Parotid Glandula's, or those near the Jaws. l. A shoot to
the inward Mandible. m. A shoot which compassing about the process of the lower
Jaw, is carried to the outward part of the exterior Masticator. n. Another
shoot tending opposite to the former, having compassed the same process, is
distributed into the inward part of the same Masticator. H. The trunk of the
same greater branch carried further, is cleft into many shoots, of which o.
Tends into the root of the Tongue. pp. Is carried with many shoots into the
substance of the whole Tongue. q. Into the parts under the Tongue. r. Passing
through the bone of the Jaw, is divided into many shoots which are dispersed,
partly into the lower Lip s s.s. and partly into the Chin t.t.t.
The Second Figure shows all the Nerves, which being carried from the Nerves of
the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth Pair, are bestowed upon the Muscles and
other parts of the Eye.
A. The Nerve of the third pair carried to the three straight Muscles, and into
the outward oblique one. B. The Nerve of the fifth pair, or the pathetick
Nerve, goes whole into the trochlour Muscle. C. The Nerve of the sixth pair
into the drawing back Muscle, and the seventh proper to Beasts. D. The Nerve of
the fifth pair whose Ophthalmick branch E. is divided into two branches. F. The
upper branch, being presently torn into many shoots, tends directly toward the
inner corner, where it is bestowed on the Glandula's and Eyelids. G. The lower
Ophthalmick branch, which being divided into shoots, respects after a like
manner the Glandula's and Eyelids toward the outward corner of the Eye. a.
The Nerve of the fourth pair for the trochlear Muscle. b. A branch of the Nerve
of the third pair for the Muscle lifting up the Eyelids. c. A branch of the
same pair for the Muscle shutting the Eyelids. d. A branch of the same Nerve
for the Muscle pressing close the Eyelid. f. A branch of the same of the
outward oblique Muscle. g. Lesser Nerves out of the enfolding of the third
pair, tending through the Sclerotick Coat into the Uvea. e. The Nerve of the
sixth pair for the drawing-back Muscle. *** Fibers or lesser branches from the
fifth and sixth pair for the seventh Muscle, proper to Brutes. h. A Nerve
coming from the upper Ophthalmick branch into the Nostrils. i. A Nerve from the
same branch into the Eyebrows and Forehead. H. The trunk of the fifth pair cut
off, which tends to the lower Jaw. I. A branch of the same cut off, which is
carried to the Palate. K. Its upper maxillar branch.
CHAP. XXIII.
The Description of the eighth Pair of Nerves.

THE Conjugation of the Nerves of the eighth pair, accounted by the Ancients
for the sixth, is called the Wandering pair; to wit, for that its Nerve, not
content with one member or region of the Body, is thought to respect diverse
parts, and those different, and situate at a great distance one from another,
and to reach forth its branchings, not only in the neighborhood about the Head
and Neck, but through the whole cavity of the middle and lowest Belly, and to
most of the Bowels in either. But indeed this nerve has a province large
enough, yet not so diffuse as is commonly thought: for many other nerves,
inoculated into this, join themselves with it, and are accounted a part of it,
although they have distinct beginnings, and going away again from the nerve of
the eighth pair, have peculiar divarications, and different from it. Wherefore,
that we may give to each its own, we shall endeavor to prosecute this nerve of
the wandering pair from the beginning to the end; and also show the
confederations and coincidences or joynings together of others with it.

The eighth Conjugation therefore of the Nerves arises below the auditory or
hearing nerves out of the sides of the oblong Marrow, its root consisting of
numerous Fibers. In a man there are at least twelve, some of which are greater,
others smaller, to which is added a noted Fiber, or rather Nerve, much greater
than the rest, from the spinal Marrow, which being joined with them, and
wrapped about with the same Coat, taken from the Dura Matter, goes forth
together out of the Skull, as if they all grew into one Trunk: but that
accessory nerve, yea and many other Fibers, do still remain distinct under that
covering, and afterward departing asunder, are carried into peculiar provinces.

Because this spinal Nerve having passed the Skull, leaving its Conjugation, is
carried to the muscles of the Neck and Shoulders; besides, the noted Fiber, out
of the beginning of the wandering pair, is presently carried into the hard
process of the seventh Conjugation; and two other Fibers, having presently left
the company of the rest, go into the muscles of the Throat and Neck: but the
rest of the Fibers, being collected together, go forward still as Companions,
and instead of their other Companions which departed from them, they presently
get new in their places; to wit, sometimes the whole trunk of the intercostal
nerve it self, as is seen in most fourfooted Beasts, sometimes only a branch of
it comes to them, as is observed in Man and some other living Creatures.

In this place where the trunk or branch of the intercostal Nerve is inoculated
into the trunk of the wandering pair, a noted enfolding is constituted, to wit,
the trunk of the nerve being there made greater, seems to he listed up, and to
grow out into a certain Tumor like to a callous or sinewy swelled body: here,
for that it is somewhat long, it is called by Fallopius the Olive body; of
which sort the same Author affirms, there comes to this nerve sometimes one,
sometimes two; but in truth, one is constantly found in the trunk of the
wandering pair, but the other in the neighboring intercostal.

Of these sort of infoldings in general we shall take notice, that they are
made in the Nerves, as joints in a Cane, or knots in the stem of a Tree, viz.
as often as a branch goes out of the trunk, or sliding into another place, is
received into the same; and when oftentimes some shoots go away from the same
place, and others come to it, the enfolding there becomes greater; and so the
more branches and shoots do happen to come together any where, or to go out of
a nerve, the greater the bulk and magnitude of the enfolding is increased: but
if at any time a branch seems to proceed from any nerve without constituting an
enfolding, in truth, being included only in the same Coat, it is not accounted
so much a branch as a companion, which by a passage long before, had gone
together forwards, as a single nerve it self, and distinct enough, nor was it
at all inoculated before its departure. But the use of these same infoldings
seems to be the same with the knots in the stem of a Tree, or such as the
turnings aside or bypath that lie near cross-ways; to wit, that when the
animal Spirits, together with the nervous Juice, institute diverse journies,
lest mutually meeting, they should be confounded, they may be able to turn
aside a little, and depart one from another till they may recover their orders
and just method.

In the Dissection of the Nerves, which are distributed to the Praecordia and
Viscera, the two Ganglioform infoldings, to wit, the aforesaid in the trunk of
the wandering pair, and the other near growing in the intercostal nerve, are as
it were two bounding stones, which being first diligently traced, the other
threads of the Anatomical task, both on this and that side, are easily handled.
But that these infoldings may be sound, the trunk of the Carotidick. Artery is
laid open on both sides between the Muscles of the Neck; then by following its
tract, the aforesaid Olive bodies come into view about the insertion of the
lower Mandible; out of which, both the upper beginnings and the lower
branchings of either nerve, may be designed or drawn. But because about this
place the nerves begin to be figured otherwise in a Man than in Brutes; that
the reason of the difference may be known, we will here prosecute apart and
distinctly the Neurologie or Doctrine of the Nerves of either; and first we
shall deliver the Hypothesis of the wandering pair, and its confederations with
the intercostal and other nerves, as they are found in Man.

The Ganglioform enfolding therefore being constituted upon the Trunk of the
wandering pair, receives one Nerve sent into it elsewhere, and sends forth
another from it self. To this is brought a shoot from the intercostal nerve
different from most brute beasts, where the whole trunk of the intercostal
nerve comes, and seems to be united to the wandering pair. But from the
aforesaid enfolding, a noted branch being sent forth, is carried toward the
Larynx, which when it is divided into three shoots, the first of them is
stretched out into the Sphincter of the Throat; the second being hid under the
Scutiform or Shield-like Cartilage, distributes its shoots to the upper Muscles
of the Larynx, and to the Muscles by which the chink of the Larynx is shut up;
and the third also entering the Shield-like Cartilage, meets the top of the
returning nerve, and is united to the same. Such an inoculating of this nerve,
with the returning nerve, is constantly found in man and in all other perfect
Animals; the reason of which is delivered anon.

Below the aforesaid enfolding of the wandering pair, its stem, near the side of
the ascending Caroditick Artery, goes forward straight downwards, and in its
journey imparts some small shoots to the same, which sometimes compass about
the trunk of its Vessel, sometimes are inserted into its Coats. In the lower
part of the Neck this trunk of the wandering pair admits a branch of the
intercostal nerve from its neighboring enfolding, and in the left side about
that place sends forth another nerve from it self into the returning nerve;
which cross branch, being stretched out only in the lest side, is found in man
and all brute beasts: but from thence the trunk of the wandering pair descends
without any noted branchings till it comes over against the first or second
Rib; where another enfolding being made, many shoots and numerous fibers are
sent forth toward the Heart and its Appendix. But this divarication of the
Cardiack nerves is not after the same manner altogether in either side.

For in the left side one or two noted shoots being sent forth, together with
other shoots arising from the intercostal Nerve, are inferted into the Cardiack
enfolding; but many fibers going out at the same place, are distributed to the
Vessels hanging to the Heart, and to its little Ears and Pericardium. In the
right side a noted shoot going into the greater Cardiack enfolding, another
into the less, and two other shoots from the middle enfolding of the
intercostal Trunk toward the Cardiack enfolding, associate themselves and are
united. Besides, numerous Fibers in like manner descend into the Vessels of the
Heart and the Pericardium. Also the returning Nerve in this side arising
higher, is turned back about the axillary Artery, when in the left side the
same going away much lower than this enfolding, from the Trunk of the wandering
pair, compasses about the descending Trunk of the Aorta, and from thence it is
turned back upwards.

The returning Nerve, although it seems a branch sent forth from the Trunk of
the wandering pair, being indeed a distinct and singular nerve, comes even from
the beginning of the wandering pair; yet for better conducts sake it is
contained under the same Coat with the rest of the Trunk of the wandering pair.
In either side about the knots of reflection or turning back, it sends forth
shoots and fibers which are distributed into the Vessels of the Heart. The
reflected Nerve in its ascent receives in the left side a branch from the
middle enfolding of the Intercostal, and another from the wandering pair; but
either running back, distributes many shoots to the rough Artery; then its
extremity meeting with the shoot, which is sent out of the Ganglioform
enfolding of the wandering pair, is united to it.

A little below the coming away of the returning Nerve on the left side from
the Trunk of the wandering pair, another noted branch is sent forth on both
sides; which being carried toward the Heart, covering its Basis in the hinder
Region, meets it on both sides, and disperses in all its process branches
through the whole Superficies of the Heart. As shoots go from these branches
into the hinder part of the Heart, so many branches and shoots go from the
Cardiack infoldings which are divaricated into its forepart.

But there are two Infoldings from which the Nerves are distributed into the
Heart. The upper and greater is between the Aorta and the Pneumonick Artery.
The nerves constituting this are one or two noted branches that descend hither
from either side the Trunk of the wandering pair; but chiefly many nerves from
either intercostal nerve, to wit, from the midst of its enfolding. From this
enfolding two or three noted nerves are carried under the Aorta into the left
side of the Heart. But from this enfolding, a shoot being sent forth, making as
it were an handle, compasses about the pneumonick Artery; and a branch
descending from the right Trunk of the wandering pair to the exterior part of
this handle, and another, which being carried from the nerve which is
destinated to the hinder region of the Heart, meet together and make the lesser
enfolding; from which nerves are sent into the right side of the forepart of
the Heart.

We are to take notice, That in brute Animals many more and far greater Nerves
are carried from the Trunk of the wandering pair into the Heart and its Appendix
than in Man, to wit, in whom the chief Cardiack nerves or belonging to the
Heart proceed from the intercostal pair, as is showed below; wherefore in
Brutes, for that reason, the wandering pair affords greater supplies or
subsidies to the Heart, because the intercostal nerve scarcely contributes any
to it. Further, through the whole tract of the wandering pair, from whence the
Cardiack nerves proceed, very many small shoots, being sent forth on both
sides, are inserted into the Oesophagus and the Glandula's implanted without
the Pericardium.

From the Region of the Heart, the Trunk of the wandering pair sends forth many
noted shoots on both sides, which being carried into the Lungs, are
distributed, together with the blood-carrying Vessels, through their whole
substance, and in their passage step by step they follow the Pipes of the
Bronchia, both the Arteries and the Veins, and many shoots being sent forth on
every side, the climb upon and compass about these Vessels; then the Trunk of
the same wandering pair, descending on both sides, nigh the sides of the
Trachea, distributes many shoots also into the Coats of the Oesophagus.

Below the Pneumonick branches, either Trunk of the wandering pair going
forwards downwards nigh the sides of the Oesophagus, is divided into two
branches, viz. into the exterior or more outward, and the interior or more
inward. Both the inward branches inclining toward one another mutually, do
again grow into the same Nerve, which being sent straight down toward the
Oesophagus, and being carried nigh the inward part of its Orifice, is bent back
from thence, and creeps through its upper part. From both branches, being
carried nigh the opposite parts of the superior Orifice, many shoots are
produced, which being mutually inoculated, do constitute the nervous enfolding
like a little net. The Stomachical lower branch sends forth very many fibers
and shoots nigh the left part of the bottom of the Ventricle, which are united
with others, sent forth from the Mesenterick and Splenetick enfolding. Further,
in the right part of the same bottom of the Ventricle, shoots being sent forth
from either Stomachical branch, are united with other shoots sent upwards from
the Hepatick enfolding; and about this place either Trunk of the Nerves of the
eighth pair seems to be terminated, for that the last that may be perceived of
it are some shoots sent forth from the Stomachical branches, which are
inoculated or ingrassed with the little branches or fibers sent upwards from
the Mesenterick infoldings.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Actions and Uses of the Nerves of the eighth Pair, described in the
foregoing Chapter, are unfolded.

AFter this manner the beginning and branchings out of the Nerves of the eighth
pair are disposed in Man: and they are almost after the same manner in Brutes,
unless the Cardiack branches be more, because in these they go out only from
this one Conjugation. The Figure or Type of all these is well designed or drawn
in the ninth Table or Figure. It now remains, recollecting the Tracts of this
Description, or at least the things chiefly to be noted, that we inquire into
the Reasons of their Phenomenon or Appearances.

This Nerve, presently after its rise, appears with numerous Fibers, as may be
discerned in the ninth Figure E: the reason of which is, because many nerves
here arising together, and deriving plenty of animal Spirits from the same
stock or provision, ought to carry the same to diverse parts, and remote one
from another; and therefore they assume their Latex or Juice, not at one Trunk,
as the blood-carrying Vessels, and afterward distribute it equally by branches
and shoots here and there stretched out; because the Spirits, derived from the
same Fountain, have need to flow into these parts separate from them, and
variously to transpose and change their influence: wherefore for this business
it is required (that we may not suppose little doors in the middle of the
branchings out of the nerves, as are in the Pipes of a musical Organ) that the
nerves, which are destinated for the performing of diverse offices respectively
in distinct parts, should be single in their whole passage, and of themselves
distinct channels of Spirits; for the sake of a better conduct many of them are
collected together, and seem to grow together into one Trunk; but they are
parted both in their beginning, and also in their whole journey, and
distinguished, though involved in the same Coat, and so are carried to the
respective parts. Otherwise how should it come to pass, that the Spirits to be
carried for the performing the instinct of motion toward the Stomach, do not
enter at the same time the Lungs or Praecordia, and actuate them with an
inordinate influence? For indeed the shoots of the nerves of the wandering pair
may be followed by the eyes and hand backwards toward the beginning, from the
parts into which they are inserted, and where they seem to be united into the
same Trunk, so separated with the singer, that it may appear they are single.
After the same manner we have plainly separated one from another the returning
nerve also, and others, their common Coat being dissected. Yet in the mean time
we deny not, that in their progress they do communicate one with another by
Fibers meeting mutually, if it be granted, that the same, although they arise
together, in their very rise it self are in a manner distinct. For by reason of
the nearness of the beginning and progress, though all the nerves of the
wandering pair have a certain Sympathy and consent in their actions; yet for
that they consist of parted strings, they perform their actions successively,
and convey the influences of the Spirits to these parts separate from those.

We have already shown, that the Nerve of the wandering pair, and others
belonging to its family, do serve almost only to the involuntary Function.
Wherefore it may be thought, that as there are many shoots and fibers, which
going out distinctly from the same origin, are carried to diverse parts, that
indeed those Bowels and Members, into which these nerves are inserted, do
perform their particular actions, stirred up either by the instinct of Nature,
or by the force of the Passions, the Animal in the mean time scarce knowing it:
yea also, that when certain other nerves, arising afar off, are joined to this
Trunk of the wandering pair, and communicate with it near the very origin of
it; this seems to be therefore done, that those nerves, an affinity with the
wandering pair being begun, may be drawn into Sympathy with it, and into an
unity of action of the involuntary Function. This appears clearly by the
accessory nerve from the Back bone, and some others, as shall be manifested
anon.

In the mean time, we shall observe concerning the Fibers of the wandering pair,
first that a noted shoot, inclining toward the vocal process of the seventh
pair, is united with the same, as in the ninth Figure e. Hence a reason may be
taken, wherefore in every violent Passion, as of Anger, Fear, Joy, and the
like, without the will or intention of the Animal, the Tongue sends forth a
voice, as an index of the excited affection; so that not only men, but some
brute beasts, in their fleeing or rejoicing, wail, cry out, and make a noise.

Secondly, From the beginning of the wandering pair very many Fibers are
distributed into the Muscles of the Neck, Figure the ninth FFF. in which there
seems little need of the stirring up of spontaneous motions in that part; for
to this task the Vertebral nerves serve sufficiently. Notwithstanding the
aforesaid Fibers of the wandering pair are the cause why the Neck is moved about
in fear, or at any noise or suspicion of danger; and also, why in some Animals,
from indignation or pride, the Muscles into which these nerves are inserted,
being inflated very much, their necks swell up, and the Crests of many are
erected, Of how great use the accessory nerve, coming from the Spine to the
wandering pair, is for the pathetick motions of the Arms, shall be showed
presently.

Thirdly, The other Fibers of the wandering pair, being gathered together, seem
to grow together into the same Trunk, which presently constitures the
Ganglioform enfolding from a shoot coming from the intercostal nerve, as in
Figure the ninth G.H. And indeed it is very likely, that of these Fibers, which
are complicated together in the Trunk of the wandering pair, one is destinated
to the returning nerve, another to the Praecordia, a third to the Lungs, and
lastly, another to the Ventricle; all which, although they have communication
among themselves, and for the sake of a better conduct are gathered together in
one, yet they are still distinct from their very original, and constitute
diverse passages of the animal Spirits.

But that a shoot is carried from the intercostal Nerve into the upper
enfolding of the wandering pair, as in the ninth Figure h; the reason is, that
between these nerves a certain strict affinity and kindred might be, and that
either of them might be affected with the others offices. For as the nerve of
the wandering pair distributes shoots chiefly to the Pracordia, and the Stomach,
and the intercostal Nerve to the rest of the Viscera of the lower Belly; we may
observe, that between all these there are not only some commerces, but
Sympathies, and a consent of Actions and Passions; wherefore there is a
necessity, that the nerves designed to either parts, should communicate among
themselves. Further, in Man the intercostal nerve imparts to the Heart and its
Appendix more shoots and fibers than the nerve of the wandering pair: where fore
these nerves do not only communicate by these superior infoldings, but also
again a little lower by a shoot sent out from the cervical enfolding, or that
of the Neck.

From the aforesaid enfolding a noted branch of the wandering pair is sent forth
into the Muscles of the Larynx, a certain branch of which, entering the
Shield-like Cartilage, meets with the returning nerve, and is united to it Fig.
9. h. It will not be difficult to collect what the use of this nerve may be;
for seeing the Larynx or the rough Artery serves both for the drawning in and
putting out of the breath, and also for the modulating the voice; for either
office that its Trunk, like the folds in a pair of Bellows, may become
sometimes more short, sometimes more at length, these same ringy Cartilages
ought to be pulled together, or contracted sometimes upward, and sometimes
downward. That a flat voice or sound might be formed, they ought to be pressed
down as much as may be to the bottom; but if you would form a more shrill or
sharp sound or voice, the superior Rings are lifted up; to wit, that the sound
might be broken but only in the very passage of the Jaws. For the performing of
this double motion of the Larynx two nerves are constituted like the hands of a
Piper, one of which stops the lower holes, the other the upper of the Pipe: to
wit, the shoots and branches of the returning nerve being lifted up from below,
move the ringy Cartilages downwards; and the nerve sent out from above from
this enfolding; presently draws the more superior upwards. Further, because a
certain consent and joint action is required in both nerves, therefore they are
mutually inoculated or ingraffed: yea, whenas either of them returning,
distributes frequent shoots into either side of the Trachea; it seems that
those that are sent out into the right part, move its Rings downwards for
inspiration and a strong Voice; and the others, going out on both sides into
the left part, carry the Rings upward for Expiration and for an acute or sharp
Voice. Moreover, as the instinct for the motion of depression or pressing down
is delivered from the knots of the recourse or reflections; so the impression,
for the elation or lifting up of those parts, is received from this nerve of
the Ganglioform enfolding.

A noted branch from the middle enfolding of the intercostal Nerve is carried
into the Trunk of the wandering pair, Fig. 9. i. For what end that is so, we
have shown already; to wit, that the commerces of the Spirits dwelling in both
nerves, might be strengthened: but it should be noted, that it is only so in
the left side where the Trunk of the wandering pair shows it self single for a
long space; but in the right side, where the returning nerve goes from it much
higher, here the other nerve from the intercostal enfolding is plainly wanting.

About the Region of the first or second Rib, another noted enfolding appears
in the Trunk of the wandering pair, from which many shoots and fibers are sent
toward the Heart and its Appendix, Fig. 9. k. Further, in brute Animals, about
this place, the intercostal nerve leaves the Trunk of the wandering pair.
Without doubt, some animal Spirits go apart in this enfolding, which are
destinated to the anterior region of the Heart, also to the Pericardium and
some of its Vessels, whilst other Spirits pass through, which a little lower
are derived into the hinder region of the Heart; and which being yet carried
further, go to the Lungs, and lastly to the Ventricle.

We may observe, that from the aforesaid enfolding of the wandering pair
numerous shoots and fibers are sent forth, which are distributed into the
little ears of the Heart and all the sanguiferous Vessels belonging to the
Heart, Fig. 9. l. m. which fibers and nervous shoots creeping along like Ivy,
thickly cover over the Coats of the Vessels, and enter them in very many
places, and variously bind them about. Truly this copious distribution of the
nerves does effect the pulsisick force in the little ears of the Heart and in
the Arteries, or at least seems to excite it; and so to erect and strengthen
those parts by a continual influx of the animal Spirits through these nerves,
that they may be able to sustain an undiscontinued reciprocation of Systole and
Diastole. Moreover, that the thick fibers and shoots of the nerves are inserted
both into the Veins and Arteries, and bind both those kind of Vessels, and
variously compass them about, we may lawfully suppose, that these nerves, as it
were Reins put upon these blood-carrying Vessels, do sometimes dilate, and
sometimes bind them hard together for the determining the motion of the Blood
according to the various force of the Passions, or to deduce it here and there
after a manifold manner; for by this means it comes to pass, that in fear the
excursion of the blood is hindered, and in other Affections its motion is
respectively altered.

But that many shoots and branches are inserted into the Pericardium, it seems
to be for this use; to wit, that that little Chest which is made like a Fort
for the defending the Heart from injuries, as often as any troublesome matter
assaults or besieges it, might be able to draw it self together, and to shake
off the enemy. For it seems, that the inordinate tremblings and shakings of the
Heart, which are manifestly different from its natural Pulse, proceed from the
violent shaking of this Membrane.

As to the Cardiack branches sent from this insolding we observe, that they,
because destinated to a public office, do therefore communicate and enter into
the pairs of either side before they are inserted into the Heart; for which end
the enfolding is made before the Basis of the Heart, where the aforesaid
shoots, from the wandering pair and many others, going out from either
intercostal nerve, meet together. From that enfolding, placed between the Aorta
and the pneumonick-Artery, very many branches being sent forth above, cover
over the Hemisphere of the Heart: but yet from these certain branches, carried
under the Aorta, are brought into the left side of the said Hemisphere; and as
other pairs tend toward the right side, one of the first of them, making a
little handle, binds about the pneumonick Artery; then meeting with other
Cardiack shoots, makes the lesser enfolding, out of which branches are sent
forth into the right and anterior side of the Heart. That from the greater
Cardiack enfolding, nerves departing one from another, do institute contrary
journies toward the Heart, it is indeed, that they might come to diverse
regions of the Heart without meeting one another, and might affect its Vessels
respectively in their passage; to wit, the branches carried this way, insert
their shoots into the Aorta, and from the others going that way, one compasses
about the pneumonick Artery. The reason of both seems to be, that the blood
might be either sooner or slower drawn from the bosoms of the Heart for its
various need or necessity. For whilst the aforesaid nerves do both sustain its
motion by their influx, and also moderate and temper it by their instinct, it
so comes to pass from thence, that those Vessels also, being affected by the
same nerves, do further compose themselves to the requisite Analogies and
proportions of the Pulses.

Indeed there are many Nerves, and those conspicuous enough, which are inserted
into the Heart, and cover its outward substance with shoots sent forth from all
sides; yet it is not to be thought, that these nerves alone perform and sustain
the undiscontinued motion of the Heart: because so small little ropes seem too
unequal for the perpetual agitation of such a Machine. Yea it may be observed,
that more shoots and fibers of nerves are distributed into the little ears of
the Heart and the depending Vessels, than into its frame or substance. Further,
it is obvious to any that will behold it, that there is a greater plenty of
nerves destinated to the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Ventricle, or Reins, than to the
Heart it self; so that some Anatomists (as Fallopius says) were doubtful,
whether there were any nerves that belonged to the Heart or not. But this being
clear enough, that we may describe the motive power of this Clock or Machine
stirred up by the help of some small nerves, as it were an explosive motion, we
say that the substance of the Heart it self consists of a very fibrous flesh,
and may rather be called a Muscle than Parenchyma or congealed substance:
wherefore in this, as in other Muscles, the implanted and proper fibers cause
the local motion and constant shaking; but by the inserted nerves is only
conveyed the instinct of the motion or action; for the performing of which
office, both fewer Nerves and fewer animal Spirits flowing in through their
passages, do suffice. But indeed we suppose, that the animal Spirits implanted
in the Heart, and abiding within its Fibers, did at first flow thither through
the nerves, and that by this way their expenses or loss are made up or
supplied; yet that the animal Spirits, which seem to be dispensed to the Heart
by so sparing an hand, may suffice for the actuating this perpetual motion,
they receive continually subsidiary Forces from the arterious blood. For
elsewhere we have showed, that in the Heart, as in the whole musculous stock
besides, a sulphurous Copula, from the suggested blood, is joined to the
spirituous saline Particles of the implanted Spirits; which matter, whilst the
Spirits are agitated, being at length struck off, and as it were exploded (just
like the rarefied and inkindled Particles of Gunpowder) for the effecting the
motive endeavor, do blow up or intumifie the Muscle or the Heart it self; and
so from the indiscontinued action of the Heart much of this sulphurous Copula,
which is easily supplied from the blood, and less of the Spirits, which are
brought by the passage of the nerves, is bestowed.

And here it may be rightly inquired into, whether the Pulse of the Heart so
necessarily depends on the influence of the animal Spirits through the Nerves,
that it being hindered, the action of the Heart should wholly cease? For the
decision of this, we once made a trial of the following Experiment upon a
living Dog. The skin about the Throat being cut long-ways, and the Trunk of
both the wandering pair being separated apart, we made a very strict Ligature;
which being done, the Dog was presently silent, and seemed stunned, and
suffered about the Hypochondria convulfive motions, with a great trembling of
the Heart. But this affection quickly ceasing, afterward he lay without any
strength or lively aspect, as if dying, slow and impotent to any motion, and
vomiting up any food that was given him: nevertheless his life as yet
continued, neither was it presently extinguished after those nerves were wholly
cut asunder; but this Animal lived for many days, and so long, till through
long fasting, his strength and spirits being worn out, he died. The carcass
being opened, the blood within the Ventricles of the Heart, and the Vessels on
every side reaching from thence, to wit, both the Veins and Arteries, being
greatly coagulated, was gathered into clotters; to wit, for this cause, because
the blood, though for the sustaining of life, it was in some measure
circulated, yet for the most part it stagnated both in the Heart, and in the
Vessels. The cause of which stagnation I can assign to no other thing, than
that the Praecordia, the in^ence of the animal Spirits being hindered, wanted
its usual motions.

If it should be further demanded, from whence the animal Spirits (the passage
of both the wandering pair being shut up) should be supplied to the Heart
continuing still its motion; I say, that this may be done by the returning
Nerves, as from the knots of which many Cardiack shoots and fibers proceed; and
besides, the end of either nerve meeting with the nerve sent from the upper
enfolding, is united. But we showed already, that the animal Spirits may be
carried either this way or that way within the passages of the nerves;
wherefore when the necessity of life urges, the provision of the Spirits,
though lesser, being sent from the aforesaid enfolding, is received by the tail
of the returning nerve, and from thence by a retrograde passage it was derived
into the Cardiack branches, and at length into the Heart it self. Further,
there lies open also another passage, and that perhaps more obvious, through
the passage of the intercostal nerve: by this way in a man, as well as by the
passage of the wandering pair, the Spirits are conveyed from the Brain to the
Praecordia; yea also in Brutes a branch is carried into the Trunk of the
wandering pair from the intercostal enfolding; so that by this by-path some
little rills of the animal Spirits (if by chance their influence should be
hindered through their wonted channels) might be carried to the Heart. However
that Experiment seems to conclude, that the motion of the Heart depends no less
upon the inflowing of the blood, than upon that of the animal Spirit: the total
privation of either takes away life; an Eclipse of the Spirits wholly takes
away from the Heart its motive power; and by the defect of the blood (forasmuch
as the sulphurous Copula is denied to the Spirit implanted in the Heart) the
vigor and elastick force of the Heart is suppressed, so that the Pulse being by
degrees weakened, life is by little and little extinguished. Without doubt, in
the finding out the tenor of the Pulse, we ought always to mind what the
alteration of the animal Spirits, and what the fault of the blood may bring to
it.

There is yet another consideration concerning the Nerves reaching from the
Trunk of the wandering pair to the Heart, to wit, that by their passage, not
only the solemn influence and state of the Spirits, for the equally performing
of the vital Function, is conveyed; but also the instinct of every irregular
motion, stirred up in the Praecordia by the force of the Passions, is in some
measure transferred this way. I say, as to these, we ought to discourse and to
show by what means, as often as the impression of any Affection exercises the
Imagination, or rather the Appetite, presently the Praecordia are disturbed by
the passage of the Nerves, and by reason of their various Affections the motion
of the blood is diversely altered. But because in a man the irregular and
extraordinary motions of the Praecordia depend on the intercostal Nerve as much
as and perhaps more than on the wandering pair; therefore we think good to defer
this Speculation till the Theory of that Nerve is proposed. In the mean time,
we will proceed to the other branches of the wandering pair; and what next
follows, we will inquire into the offices and uses of the returning Nerves.

The returning Nerve in the left side, going away from the wandering pair below
the aforesaid enfolding, and sent toward the Aorta, is reflected or turned
back about its descending Trunk, from whence being carried upwards, it imparts
shoots to the Muscles of the Trachea and the Larynx sent forth by a long tract
from either side of the Nerve; then its top or height is united with a shoot
meeting it out of the Ganglioform enfolding, Fig. 9. n. *** h. But the
returning Nerve on the right side is reflected much higher about the axillar
Artery, to wit, proceeding from the lower enfolding of the wandering pair, and
after the same manner is bestowed on the other side of the Trachea, Fig. 9. L.
But either returning back about the knots of reflection, sends forth toward
the Heart very many shoots and fibers, which are inserted into its little ears,
the appending Vessels or its Infoldings.

What the chief use of this Nerve is, we have already shown; to wit, being
rolled about on both sides the Artery, as it were a Windlace, it causes the
little rings of the Trachea or Weasand to be drawn hither and thither, like the
folds of a pair of Bellows, both for breathing and making a sound. But indeed
either Nerve, forasmuch as it being reflected about the Artery, is carried
upward into the part to be moved, does move downwards the little rings of the
Trachea or Windpipe by certain shoots of it; also forasmuch as either is
terminated in the Nerve, sent from the Ganglioform enfolding, it carries
upwards the folds of the Trachea by other shoots of it. Hence a reason may be
given, why the returning Nerves being cut off, every Animal is presently dumb;
to wit, because, unless the Trachea be moved, the breath being blown out,
passing without any refraction through its cavity, as it were through a Pipe
alike hollow in its whole passage, gives no sound.

Concerning these Nerves we ought to inquire, what is the reason of the
difference, that the knots of reflection are not alike on both sides; also for
what end the Cardiack branches proceed from both knots. As to the first, that
the left returning Nerve, not as its pair, binds about the axillary Artery,
some reason seems to be, because the left axillary Artery, arising below, is
carried as the right, by a bending, and not a straight passage, into the Arm;
wherefore the little cord of the Nerve, compassing about its Trunk, has no
fixed, but a very moveable knot of reflection, for that it might easily slide
from its place. But it may rather be said, that it is for other uses, and those
more necessary, that these Nerves compass about those Vessels after that
manner. For when they, as it were Reins or Bridles cast on the bloodcarrying
Vessels, by pulling them hither and thither, variously determine the course of
the blood, it seems to be required, that one returning Nerve should bind
together or constringe the axillary Artery, and the other the descending Trunk
of the Aorta: for as often as there is need for the blood to flow forwards
toward the Head more plentifully, the returning Nerves perform it easily, by
pulling upwards the aforesaid Arteries: But the blood, after a sort, ought to
be continually urged into the higher parts, lest otherwise by its weight it
should turn too much downwards; wherefore in all Expiration or breathing forth,
when the Trachea, drawing nearer together its solds, is contracted upwards, the
blood about to descend through the Aorta, is snatched upwards by one tract of
the nervous little cord, and in like manner, the axillary Artery in the right
side being shaken with it, the blood flowing in the whole ascending Trunk of
the Aorta, is driven upwards a little swifter.

But besides this continual and equal snatching up of the blood toward the
upper parts, it is sometimes occasionally urged toward the Head by a more
intense and quick motion of the Trachea, and also by a more full and swift
course. For as often as any Animal grows angry, the voice presently shows signs
of such an Affection, and oftentimes by chiding, they make it sharp; as men,
when they are angry, chide or brawl, and Dogs bark: Now from such an intension
of the voice and chiding, as the upper rings of the Trachea, a reciprocation
being there made, are often struck together; so the blood also (the A^^ta being
strongly drawn) is urged upwards by a copious afflux, so that it presently dies
the countenance and eyes of angry people with a redness, and induces to the
Brain it self a greater heat and provocatives to anger, and a greater glowing
or infiring to the Spirits by stirring them up. For the same reason, in Joy and
Gladness, forasmuch as the Trachea is exercised by singing or laughing, the
blood also is poured out more plentifully toward the exterior, and especially
the upper parts.

And from hence the cause is plain, wherefore either returning Nerve sends
forth Cardiack branches from the knot of reflection or turning back; to wit,
that in those kind of affections, the notice of which the Trachea in sounds or
voices gives by the help of the Nerves, the Heart it self by its means also
might be affected. For so, as often as we wrangle or brawl, the Heart being
irritated, presently inkindles the blood more, and drives it forward more
plentifully, as food for those Affections, toward the Brain. Also in laughter,
great rejoicing, or singing, by the passage of those Nerves, the Heart being
brought into a consent or Sympathy, or joint action, presently explodes or
drives out the blood by a swifter pulse, and casts it hastily out, which
otherwise would be heavy and troublesome by a slower motion or stagnation;
wherefore those sort of actions, to wit, laughing and singing, are said to
alleviate the Heart, because they make the blood more freely and readily to be
poured out of the bosoms of the Heart, and also, by the supplying help of the
Lungs, to be emptied into the same.

Below the production of the left returning Nerve another noted Nerve is
carried toward the hindermost region of the Heart, which being carried with a
certain compass about its Basis, sends forth frequent shoots, which cover the
left side of the hinder Hemisphere, Fig. 9. ^. Then this branch meeting with
another pair sent from the opposite side toward the Heart, and distributing
shoots into the right side of the binder Hemisphere, is united with it, Fig. 9.
q.

This Cardiack branch, destinated to the hinder region of the Heart, is
produced aparo below the rest, that it might be carried by it self to its
Province without the meeting with or implication of others; the pairs are
ingraffed on either side, that they might acoompany one another, and be
together drawn in the same action of the Heart. It appears not plain, whether
these nerves conspire with the other Cardiack nerves, arising above, reaching
forth to the anterior Hemisphere of the Heart; or whether this pair effect not
the Systole of the Heart, and the upper its Diastole. However it is, certain
shoots of the kindred or steck of either, being ingraffed with others of
another stock, communicate one with the other.

The Trunk of the wandering pair sends forth on both sides very many noted
branches from the region of the Heart, which are spread on every side into all
the Lobes of the Lungs, the Branchia of the Trachea, and the Coat of the
Oesophagus hard by descending, Fig. 9. s.s.s. Those which go into the Lungs
pass every where through their whole substance, following the ramifications of
the Veins and Arteries, and the Pipes of the Bronchia, which channels of blood
and air they variously elimb over, and bind about through their whole tract.

When that so many noted branchings of the Nerves are bestowed on the Lungs, it
is a wonder, that by some they should be thought to be insensible and
immovable of themselves. Yea it is doubted by many, whether these Bowels do
cause the motions of the Systole and Diastole of themselves by their own
endeavor. For that it is a received Opinion, That this reciprocation of the
Lungs does proceed wholly from the motion of the Thorax, and does obey or
observe its dilatation or constriction with a certain necessary dependency;
viz. that the Breast being dilated or spread open after the manner of a pair of
Bellows does compel the ambient Air into the Trachea, which rushing into the
Lungs, blows up and distends them; then the same Breast subsiding or sinking of
it self, that the Lungs being pressed together with the weight of it, do breath
forth the Air before intruded. In truth, however that I might judge, that the
Diaphragma and the Muscles of the Breast do conduce much to Respiration; yet
that these patts should perform this office alone, and that the Lungs are
merely passive, I cannot grant. For Respiration is chiefly instituted for the
sake of the blood and the Heart, and its act is wont to be determined according
to the various disposition of these, and to be altered every minute of an hour
almost according to the manifold necessity of the Pulse. But indeed the Lungs
themselves are they (and not the Diaphragma or the Muscles of the Thorax) which
the blood, boiling out of the Heart, passes through, and continually affects
according to its temper, and the tenor of the Pulse: wherefore from hence it
may be concluded, That the Lungs themselves do conceive the first instincts of
their motions, and by the help of the aforesaid Nerves, do in some measure
exercise themselves, and endeavor the Systole and Diastole, and design them
according to the sense of its proper necessity; but when in these, Fibers
requisite for local motion are wanting, therefore the Diaphragma and the
Muscles of the Thorax help continually the endeavors of the Lungs, and by the
cooperation of these, complete breathing is effected. And so when Nerves of a
twofold kind, to wit, some from the Spine being inserted into the Muscles of
the Diaphragma and the Thorax, and others from the wandering pair distributed
into the Lungs, actuate the Organs of Respiration; for that reason it comes to
pass, that the act it self of Respiration, of it self unforced and involuntary,
may be at our pleasure somewhat restrained, interrupted, and diversely altered.
The Sympraxis or joint action of the Nerves of either kind, in the work of
Respiration, shall be showed hereafter, when we shall speak particularly of the
Nerve of the Diaphragma.

It yet appears more plain, that the Lungs are oftentimes the chief in the act
of Respiration, because they being irritated from strange and improportionate
objects, presently conceive irregular and violent motions; as when a vehement
Cough is stirred up for the exclusion of any troublesome thing; to which motion
the Diaphragma and the Muscles of the Thorax presently obey. In like manner, in
difficult and sighing breathing, or any other ways unequal, its first instinct
for the most part is begun by the Lungs; yet sometimes when the exterior Organs
of Respiration are excited into irregular motions, the Lungs also are compelled
to follow their irregularities; so when the Diaphragma after a manner begins
laughter, the Lungs perform the same with a following cackling sound: so all
the Organs of Respiration intimately conspire and agree among themselves, that
although one of them do a thing inordinately, rather than there shall be a
Schism, the rest do imitate or follow its irregularity.

But that the Nerves, following the Arteries and Veins through the whole frame
of the Lungs, do variously bind about and cloth their Trunks with a thick
series of shoots, the reason seems to be, both that the Coats of the Vessels
being gifted with a constant influx of animal Spirits, might imitate the motion
of the Heart; and by that means, by a continual pulsation of the Arteries and
the constriction of the Veins, they might easily carry the blood in this its
more short lustration through the Lungs; and the rather, that the pneumonick
Vessels, being bound about with such Reins of Nerves, might moderate the course
of the blood according to the forces and instincts of the Passions. For whenas
the exterior circulation of the blood depends upon this interior; as the blood
is commanded to pass sooner or slower through the Lungs, or to stay there and
be hindered, the excursion and return of it also from or toward the Heart is
wholly performed. In Joy or Anger, because the Lungs rapidly transfer the blood
out of one bosom of the Heart to the other; therefore its swifter and more
plentiful flowing out into the outward parts, follows. In like manner, in Fear
and Sadness, for that the Lungs (its Vessels being strained together) deliver
the blood to the Heart by the Veins, and do not then presently carry it back by
the Arteries, the outmost region of the Body is destitute of its due influx.
Notwithstanding these kind of pathetick snatches of the blood are in some
measure performed, because its Vessels are bound about in other places in like
manner with the Nerves. If at any time Spasmodick Affections should afflict the
pneumonick Nerves from a morbific cause, so that being twitcht with inordinate
motions, they should pull or draw together here and there the Arteries and
Veins which they embrace; for that cause, the blood either too much flowing out
of the Lungs, makes them to flag, and to fall together into themselves, so that
drawing to them copiously the Air, they do not easily render it back again; or,
which frequently happens, the blood being detained within the Lungs, and there
stagnating, stuffs them up, and holds them a long while stiff, that they cannot
inspire or drawn in the Air. The Symptoms of either kind ordinarily happen in
the Hysteric distempers, and in some Hypochondracal. Yea sometimes the
Bronchia themselves are pulled together by the like Convulsion of the Nerves,
and are hindered in their motion, so that they cannot take in and send forth the
Air after its due manner, as may be seen in Asthmatical Fits. The distempers of
which sort are oftentimes produced by the fault of the Nerves, without any
implanted Dyscrasie or evil disposition of the Lungs. I have sometimes observed
some Cases of sick people, in which, when at one time the morbifick matter
besieging the Brain, had induced Lethargick or Vertiginous Symptoms, a little
after the same matter occupying or possessing the origines or middle processes
of the nerves belonging to the Lungs, has suddenly excited a most horrid Asthma
without any previous Cough or Catarrh.

But that out of the same tract of the wandering pair many shoots are
distributed into the Lungs, and also many others into the Coats of the
Oesophagus; from hence a reason may be given, why a troublesome Cough oftentimes
causes Vomiting and a subversion of the Ventricle; why also on the other side a
perturbation of the Ventricle so frequently induces a troublesome endeavor of
Coughing. I have known in Hypochondriacks, that aliments of ill digestion,
taken into the Stomach, have presently excited a vain and very pertinacious
Cough; in the mean time, that the Lungs were free from any consumptive
disposition. The cause of either distemper seems to be, that when the nerves,
disseminated in either part, are taken with a Convulsion, oftentimes those
which are of the other part, are drawn into a consent of the same distemper.
Perhaps from hence it happens, that sometimes an Asthma is induced by reason of
the evil of the Ventricle, and that that distemper (as Riverius observes) is
often wont to be cured by an emetick Medicine.

After so many branches and shoots have been sent from both sides the wandering
pair, at length its Trunk is divided below the Lungs into two branches, viz.
the exterior and interior; either of which inclining toward the pair of
branches on the other side, are united to them, and after a mutual
communication they constitute the two Stomachical branches, viz. the superior
and the inferior, Fig. 9. t. u. w. x.

It is worth observing, with what wonderful artifice either Trunk of the
wandering pair do communicate one with the other with two branches, as it were
two hands meeting one the other, that the influence of either nerve might
equally reach to every region and part of the Stomach. For whenas either
Stomachical branch, to wit, both the upper and the lower, is carried together
from the two branches coming out from either side of the wandering pair; it is
provided, that the Tributes of the Spirits destinated to the Ventricle, should
be at once certain and very plentiful. For what appertains to the performing
the action of this Bowel or Chylification, the Spirits flowing in from either
side, are abundantly distributed into the Orifice, and from thence into all its
parts and private places; and by that means it comes to pass, that the Stomach
dissolves bodies beyond the force of any Chemical Menstruum. Then besides, as
to the feeling or sense of the Ventricle, or the affection of it from things
ingested; it is carried also toward the Head by a double way (whereby the
passage may be the more certain) to wit, by either Trunk of the wandering pair;
that for that reason being endued with a most exquisite sense, it might not be
deceived concerning its objects; and if that any thing inimical or contrary to
it, should lie hid among what is eaten, it might discern it and thrust it out
of its own accord, or at least by the knowledge only of the Cerebel.

That from the same double Trunk of the wandering pair, from whence the Cardiack
Nerves arise a little above, the Stomachical branches also proceed, the cause
is plain wherefore the Heart it self has such a Sympathy with the Stomach, so
that its Deliquium or Swooning follows upon any great pulling or hawling of
this.

Either Nerve of the wandering pair is terminated in the Ventricle it self: for
after the eighth Conjugation has made as it were an high road for the passage
of the animal Spirits to the Praecordia and to this noble Bowel, it puts a
bound to it self; nor indeed does it seem meet to have its branches stretched
out any further to the Viscera of the lower Belly: because it seems an unworthy
thing, that the same path which leads to the chief office of nutrition and to
the Palaces of life it self, should lie open to the more vile Intestines also,
and the sink of the whole body. And truly, although the ample path and broad
way of the wandering pair is not produced beyond the Ventricle, yet because a
frequent commerce happens between this and the Praecordia and the other
inferior parts; therefore between the Stomach and the other Bowels, though of a
more base use, certain Fibers, as it were smaller paths, are reached forth, in
which, at least little bands of Spirits, like Discoverers or Messengers, run to
and fro.

CHAP. XXV.
A Description of the Intercostal Nerve.

AFter the unfolding of the Nerve reaching forth to the Praecordia and the
Ventricle, we are led by the series or order of the inward parts to the
describing a Nerve akin to this, and which reaches forth its branches to the
furthermost Province, to wit, to all the Viscera or Inwards of the lower Belly
contained below the Ventricle. This is commonly called the Intercostal, because
that going near the roots of the Ribs, it receives in every one of their
Interstices a branch from the spinal Marrow. Its beginning is not yet
sufficiently detected; for by most Anatomists it is wrongfully taken for a
branch of the wandering pair, though indeed the wandering and the intercostal
pair do communicate among themselves by branches sent forth one to the other;
yet as to both their beginnings, Trunks and wanderings up and down, they are
plainly distinguished. If that this latter Conjugation, being denied the title
of a peculiar nerve, ought to confess it self of another stock, certainly it
owes nothing to the wandering pair, but should borrow its original from the
Nerves of the fifth and sixth pairs; for two or three shoots being sent back
from those nerves going out toward the Eyes and Face, go into the same stock
or Trunk, which is the Trunk of the intercostal nerve, as we have intimated
before.

The intercostal Nerve being constituted after that manner, and going out of
the Skull at a proper hole, presently contains the Gangliosorm enfolding, near
to another the like enfolding of the wandering pair; into which two nervous
Processes are carried from the last pair within the Skull, or the first
Vertebral. From that enfolding one shoot is sent forth into the Sphincter of
the Throat, and another noted one into the Ganglioform enfolding of the
wandering pair. Then this nerve descending toward the Vertebrae, has in the
middle of the Neck another far greater enfolding, into which an ample nerve,
from the neighboring Vertebral pair, is inserted; but from the same many
nerves, which respect the Pracordia, are distributed on every side: For two or
three shoots are sent forth into the nerve of the Diaphragma, and one shoot
into the returning nerve; besides, numerous fibers and shoots are carried both
into the returning nerve, and toward the Trachea, which are inserted into its
Coats, and into those of the Oesophagus, and into the blood-carrying Vessels.
Further, one branch descends into the Trunk of the wandering pair, and two noted
nerves into the Cardiack enfolding; then a little lower another nerve by it
self, proceeding out of the intercostal Trunk, is inserted also into the
Cardiack enfolding: which noted branches sent down on both sides from the
intercostal nerve, for that they join together with others derived from either
Trunk of the wandering pair, make the Cardiack enfolding it self. But these
Cardiack branches from the intercostal nerve, as also the Cervical enfolding,
or that in the hinder part of the Neck, whence they proceed, are peculiar to
men, and are wholly wanting in brute beasts.

The intercostal Trunk descends from the cervical enfolding toward the
chanelbone, where being about to enter the cavity of the Breast, it falls upon
the axillary Artery, as it were in right Angles, and strains or binds it; from
whence it is drowned or hidden in the Thorax near the roots of the first and
second Ribs; and there receiving three or four branches from the Vertebral
nerves next to those uppermost, constitutes another enfolding, which is
commonly called the Intercostal enfolding. The uppermost of these Vertebral
nerves coming to this enfolding in its journey binds the Vertebral Artery, and
almost compasses it about. In Brutes by this nerve which comes upon the
Vertebral Artery, the intercostal enfolding communicates with the root of the
nerve of the Diaphragma, and not by any other means, unless by small fibers
sent forth from the lower part of the enfolding into the Vertebral nerves.
Further, in Brutes a noted branch is carried from this enfolding into the Trunk
of the wandering pair. But in Man the intercostal Trunk passes through the
cavity of the Thorax without any communication had with the other parts; unless
that from hence in its whole descent, running near the roots of the Ribs, it
admits in every one of their interspaces, and from thence even to the Os sacrum
from between the knots of the Vertebrae, a Vertebral branch.

The intercostal pair sends forth a noted branch on either side, where having
gone through the cavity of the Thorax or Breast, it comes over against the
bottom of the Ventricle, which tending toward the Mesentery, constitutes the
chief infoldings of it. But there are seven Mesenterick infoldings, viz. five
great superior, and two less inferior: out of all which, numerous shoots and
fibers are sent forth together into the parts which they respect, and into the
neighboring infoldings. The Mesenterick nerves, which are carried into these
infoldings, and the infoldings themselves, and also the fibers and shoots,
which flow out from them on every side, like rays of light, are disposed
according to the following manner both in Man and in the more perfect Brutes.

The Mesenterick branch therefore in the left side going from the intercostal
Nerve, and bending downwards, is parted into two noted shoots: the greater of
these bending back upwards toward the Stomach, diffuseth it self presently
into an enfolding, as a narrow rivulet into a spacious Pool. From this
enfolding numerous fibers and shoots go forth as it were in four bands. The
first of these, and which is the greatest bundle of its fibers, being carried
into the Ventricle, is bestowed partly in the bottom of it, and partly these
fibers are met, and ingraffed with others sent from the-Stomachical branch. The
other maniple or band of nervous Fibers goes forth from this enfolding to the
Spleen, where the nerves accompanying the sanguiferous Vessels, and variously
binding them about, are dispersed into the more inward frame or substance of
the Spleen; yet out of which going toward the Spleen, some shoots following
the short Vessels, are carried into the Stomach. The third Company of nervous
Fibers is inserted between this enfolding and the Hepatick or that belonging to
the Liver, placed in the right side over against it. Lastly, the fourth
Conjugation of Fibers knits together this and the greatest enfolding of the
Mesentery lying under it.

The lower shoot of the Mesenterick branch, which is on the left side,
increases into an enfolding, to which the next Vertebral branch, destinated to
the intercostal Nerve, is carried. From this enfolding the chief bundle of
nervous Fibers is carried into the left Kidney, and before the Fibers enter the
Reins, they bind and variously compass about the emulgent Vessels. Further,
between this enfolding and the greatest of the Mesentery many Fibers are
stretched out; from hence also many shoots are distributed into the atrabilary
Chest, or the Receptacle of the Spleens excrements.

In the right side the Mesenterick branch being sent from the intercostal
Trunk, and being in like manner twofold, contains in its upper shoot the
Hepatick enfolding; out of which the greatest bundle of nervous Fibers is
carried toward the Liver; numerous shoots of which accompanying the
blood-carrying Vessels, greatly beset, and as it were cloth with a little net
the Trunk of the Hepatick Artery: which fibers and shoots, being carried
higher, are distributed into the Liver, the Gall-chest or bag, the passage of
the Gall, the Pylorus, and the Pancreas. Further, many Fibers, which are of
this Conjugation, meet with Fibers sent from either Stomachical nerve, and are
ingraffed into them. Another handful of nervous Fibers is stretched out between
this enfolding and the opposite enfolding belonging to the Spleen, and another
between this and the greatest enfolding of the Mesentery; yea, there is some
communication had between this and that belonging to the Kidney lying under the
same side by a large shoot sent down.

The lower shoot of the right Mesenterick branch, like as it is in the opposite
side, contains a sufficiently noted enfolding nigh the atrabilary Chest; to
which presently the intercostal Nerve imparts its Vertebral branch received
below. From this enfolding the chief bundle of nervous Fibers destinated to the
Reins, embraces the blood-carrying Vessels in like manner as in the opposite
side; also many fibers and shoots are stretched out from this enfolding to
those near, viz. the Hepatick and the greatest of the Mesentery; yea, certain
Fibers are dispersed from the same into the atrabilary Chest.

After this manner either Mesenterick branch being carried from the Intercostal
pair, and being presently twofold, immediately constitutes two infoldings in
either side. In the midst of these the greatest enfolding of all stands like
the Sun in the midst of the Planets; from which numerous shoots and fibers are
dispersed into all the parts of the Mesentery; which indeed following the
blood-carrying Vessels in their whole process, climb over and bind about the
same. Moreover, between this enfolding and every one of the four aforesaid is
produced a peculiar little bundle of Fibers. Besides, in the female Sex, from
hence some shoots are carried into the Glandula's of the Womb, commonly called
the Stones. But from the Mesenterick branches, which constitute the former
infoldings, no noted branches, but only little shoots, are sent into this
enfolding. Yea the chief Nerve which is inserted to this, and seems to be the
primary for the conveying of plenty of Spirits into it, and a broad way, is
carried from a certain small enfolding far lower nigh the straight Intestine;
which enfolding, together with the other neighboring one, that we call the
lesser infoldings of the Mesentery, shall be described presently. In the mean
time, that we may proceed to them in order, we will follow the passage of the
intercostal Nerve.

Below the Mesenterick branches, from which the aforesaid superior infoldings
are constituted, the intercostal Trunk descends between the Muscles of the
Loins, and bestows every Vertebral branch, admitted in its descent, upon some
internal parts.

For the Vertebral branch brought to the intercostal Trunk nigh both Kidneys,
is carried into the Women's Testicles, then some following into the Ureters.
From the Region of the twenty seventh Vertebra one Vertebral branch and two
others, going from the intercostal Trunk, tend toward the straight Intestine,
and there they meet with three pairs sent from the other side; all which being
united, constitute the enfolding, which is the lowest of the Abdomen. From this
enfolding a noted Nerve, being carried upwards, is brought into the greatest
enfolding of the Mesentery, which in its journey receives one and then another
shoot sent down on both sides from the intercostal Nerve; and there, near its
bounds, distributes some shoots into the Glandula's of the Womb.

But from the lowest aforesaid Enfolding, a Nerve going toward the upper
Infoldings, about the space of an inch, constitutes another lesser enfolding in
the neighborhood; out of which one Nerve tends upwards, and another opposite
straight downwards. The former of these is carried into the greatest enfolding
of the Mesentery, and in its whole passage stretches under the straight
Intestine, and part of the Colon, and inserts into them many small shoots. But
the other Nerve descending from this enfolding toward the Anus under the
inferior part of the straight Intestine, imparts to it also frequent shoots; so
that this enfolding, the least of all those which are within the Abdomen, seems
to be constituted for the sake of this Nerve only, to wit, which lying under
the straight Intestine and part of the Colon, is inserted into the greatest
enfolding of the Mesentery.

From the lowest neighboring Enfolding, to which this least owes its original,
two Nerves going out, and being sent down into the Pelvis, cause there two
infoldings, viz. one in either side, in which the Nerves coming from the Os
sacrum, and ingraffed with the former, meet; from which also the Nerves
distributed into the adjacent parts, serve unto the several Excretions, viz. of
the Urine, Dung, and Seed made in that place: for two Nerves enter into the end
of the straight Intestine, and as many into the Womb or Prostates; but one, and
that a noted one, is carried into the Bladder.

But that we may return to the Intercostal pair, after either Trunk of it had
sent forth three branches, out of which the aforesaid lower infoldings of the
Abdomen are mediately or immediately made, it descends straight toward the Os
sacrum, and in its journey sends forth yet one or two branches into the
Ureters: but as soon as it is come to the beginning of the Os sacrum, both
nerves mutually inclining themselves to one another, are demerged within the
bending of the same bone, and there nigh its declining, and then in its
descent, they seem to be knit together upon it by two or three processes; and
so at length either nerve ends in very small fibers, which are distributed into
the Sphincter of the Anus. But sometimes either nerve join together into a
round enfolding nigh one transverse process, out of which single enfolding the
like very small Fibers are produced. Further, many others from the last
Vertebral Nerve meet with, and are ingrassed with these Fibers from the
intercostal pair inserted into the Anus.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Explication of the Intercostal Pair of Nerves which are described in the
former Chapter as to their Offices and Uses: and first the upper Branching of
them is considered.

THE beginning of the Intercostal Nerve are two or three shoots reflected or
turned back from the Nerves of the fifth and sixth pair, and united into the
same Trunk, Fig. 9. D. a. a. b. Here we may wonder at the birth of this Nerve,
as it were borrowed; for it grows as a shrub upon another tree or shrub; and
therefore dispenses the common virtues and influences of either with a double
branching, viz. both its own and that of its parent: by which ramification or
branching it comes to pass, that there are very quick commerces and consent
between the conceptions of the Brain and the affections of the Praecordia, also
between the Actions and Passions almost of all the parts of the whole Body,
which belong to the involuntary Function. For in that the Trunk of the
intercostal Nerve proceeds from the Nerves of the fifth and sixth pair nigh
their beginnings, that is a sign that both the influence of the animal Spirits,
and the instincts for the performing of motions, are derived chiefly into it
from the Cerebel; to wit, from whose annular process the aforesaid pairs of
Nerves arise. But forasmuch as the same intercostal Nerve is rooted in their
Trunks, and not immediately in the Cerebel; this is the reason why the Eyes, as
also the parts of the Mouth and Face, to which the fifth and sixth pairs have
regard, do answer so readily and unknown to the Cerebel, as it were by the same
act, to the motions of the Praecordia and Viscera, which the intercostal Nerve
effects; and on the contrary, the motions of these presently follow the action
of those. As for example, in Sneezing as soon as the nervous Fibers besmearing
the Nostrils, are wrinkled together by the pulling, presently by the passage of
the intercostal nerve the Diaphragma, by reason of a more deep inspiration or
drawing in the breath, is for some time depressed; then the Cramp of the
Nostrils remitting, the Midriff also being violently drawn back, causes a more
strong breathing forth with a vehement blowing of the Air. In like manner on
the contrary, when by a tickling made upon the Ribs, the Diaphragma being
affected with a Spasm, moves to a cackling noise, the Face and Mouth are
pathetically figured with it into laughter.

The intercostal Nerve being slid out of the Skull, presently constitutes the
Ganglioform enfolding, Fig. 9. G. it being after the same manner in the Trunk
of the wandering pair. What the use of these infoldings is in general, we have
already shown; and clearly for the same reason in this place in the intercostal
Trunk, where it receives into it self some nerves from elsewhere, and sends
forth others from it self into the neighboring parts, this enfolding, as it
were a knot in the stem of a flourishing Tree, is made, that it may be as it
were a diverting place for the manifold tendency of the Spirits. As to the
adventitious Nerves it is observed, That by them plenty of subsidiary Spirits
are transmitted hither, only from the spinal Marrow, but by a manifold and
frequent passage; wherefore in this enfolding, and again in the following, then
a little lower, nigh the several junctures of the Vertebrae, the Vertebral
branch comes to either Trunk of the intercostal pair: this seems to be so
constituted for many uses. First, That the intercostal Nerve, by the reiterated
fastening to the solid parts, as it were by a frequent stay, might become the
more firm for the making of a long journey, when otherwise its little rope, by
too much stretching out, might be easily broken. Secondly, By this means it
comes to pass, that the nerves which are the Executors of the spontaneous, and
those of the involuntary Function, might have both a more certain commerce
together, and might be sometimes excited into mutual succors. Hence Respiration
and some other Acts, especially what concerns the Act of Venus, participate of
either Regiment, so that sometimes they follow the will, and sometimes draw it
even by force or unwilling. Further, when at any time the stock of animal
Spirits is deficient in either Province, supplies of them are sought from the
other: to wit, (as we hinted above) if the influence toward the Praecordia be
shut up through the ordinary passages, viz. the internal nerves, their passages
requisite for the sustaining of life, might be supplied by the Vertebral
branches: yea it is probable in the partial Apoplexy, and in the Incubus or
Night mare, when the Cerebel being affected, the Spirits destinated for the
Heart, suffer an Eclipse in the Fountain it self, that through these
Emissaries, to wit, the Vertebral branches inserted into the intercostal pair,
some extemporary Subsidies are carried for the actuating the Heart. Thirdly,
The Vertebral branches by so frequent an insertion, are added to the
intercostal nerve, perchance in some respect for this end also, that the
superfluous or excrementitious humidities, heaped together about the spinal
Marrow, might be sent away by these Processes: for indeed we have already
shown, that a certain humor does abound within the Head, the medullar Appendix,
and nervous System; which oftentimes (when it becomes watery, or abounds above
measure) begets a serous heap in those parts: wherefore when the branches of
the intercostal nerve are terminated into the Mesentery, Kidneys, Intestines,
and some Genital parts, it is probable they do transfer into these sinks
superfluous humidities, not only their own, but also of another sort, to wit,
those received from the spinal Nerves.

As to the Nerves, which as Emissaries, are carried from the aforesaid
Ganglioform enfolding into other parts, we observe; first, that a noted shoot
is carried from hence into the Sphincter of the Throat, Fig. 9. ^. This nerve
in the Sphincter of the Throat corresponds with others akin, arising higher
from the fifth pair, and distributed into the parts of the Palate and Mouth,
and is helpful to them in the business of chewing: for when the maxillar
branches of the fifth pair should perform their work for the chewing of the
food taken in, the task of this nerve mediately arising also from the fifth
pair, follows, to wit, whereby the Throat being opened, the chewed meats may be
thrust forward into its passage.

Another shoot is stretched out from this enfolding into a like enfolding of
the wandering pair placed near, Fig. 9. a. The reason of this insertion is
delivered above, where we treat of the wandering Pair. But it may be observed
further concerning this; when so nigh a communication happens between these
infoldings, and when shoots are sent from one of them into the Muscles of the
Larynx, and from another into the Muscles of the Throat, from hence we may give
a reason, why in Hysteric distempers and in some Hypochondriacal there is so
frequent and familiar a Symptom of the sense of choking in the Throat. For a
Cramp or Convulsion being begun in any nerve, it is wont to creep forward
further by the passage of the same, and so to invade sometimes these parts,
sometimes those successively. If therefore at any time a Spasm arises any where
in any nerve of the wandering or intercostal pair, and from thence tending
upwards or downwards, shall come to either enfolding, presently both being
affected, and the Muscles of the whole neighborhood being contracted, a bulk
or Tumor like a Globe or round thing in the Throat is excited with a sense of
choking.

The intercostal Nerve descending a little lower, contains in the neck another
greater enfolding proper to man, to which a noted Vertebral nerve is inserted
also, out of which many nerves destinated to the Praecordia, are sent forth on
either side, Fig. 9. T. As to the principal parts, to wit, the Brain and Heart,
there is no such great difference between a Man and a Brute, as there is about
the passage of one to the other, or the commerce that those parts have mutually
among themselves. In either kind, for the exercise of the vital Function, the
animal Spirits are derived from the Head, with a constant emanation into the
Heart; to which sort of influence of theirs the passage of the wandering pair of
nerves seems sufficient: wherefore in most Brutes the passage to the Heart and
its Appendix lies open only by this way, and scarce at all by any nerves of the
intercostal pair. But in Man the intercostal nerve, besides its offices in the
lower Belly, common to him with other Animals, serves in the place of a special
Internuncius also before the Cloister of the Breast, which bears the mutual
senses of the Brain and Heart this way and that way, or to and fro. For when,
besides the nerves of the wandering pair, stretched out also into the humane
Praecordia, (which certainly seem sufficient for the executing of the offices
of the Function merely vital) so many noted branches are sent forth from the
aforesaid intercostal enfolding, what kind of office should be attributed to
these, unless that they should contain the animal Spirits, by whose work and
ministry the mutual respects and affections of the Brain and Heart should be
communicated to one another? Whilst I consider this difference of either kind,
it comes into my mind, that Brutes are like Machines framed with a more simple
furniture and with less workmanship, and therefore furnished with a motion of
one kind only, or determined for the doing still the same thing. But in Man
diverse series of motions, and as it were complications of wheels within wheels,
appear. For indeed, by the passage of the aforesaid enfolding, the conceptions
of the Brain presently affect the Heart and its Vessels, and cause the rest of
the Appendix, together with the Diaphragma, to be moved. Hence the motion of
the blood and its inkindling in the Heart, together with the Pulse and
Respiration, are altered: and for that cause, from the Heart being altered, not
only impressions are retorted upon the Brain by the passage of the same nerves,
but also the blood it self, its course being changed, drives to the Brain with
a different or unaccustomed fluctuation, and so by moving the animal Spirits
with various impulses, causes first one sort of conceptions, and then others to
be produced: and so by reason of these reciprocal affections of the Heart and
Brain, which are wont by a long series to be propagated vicissively, a
multiplicity of thoughts and Phantasms arises. Hence both the ancient Divines
and Philosophers placed wisdom in the Heart. Certainly the Works of Prudence
and Virtue depend very much on the mutual commerce which happens to the Heart
with the Brain: because, that cogitations about the acts of the Appetite or
Judgment may be rightly described, it is behoveful for the hood of the blood to
be restrained in the Breast, and the inordinations of it and of the Heart it
self to be governed by the Nerves, as it were by Reins, and to be composed into
requisite and apt motions. We might say more concerning this, but that this
Speculation is from our purpose, and belongs more properly to Pathology or the
Doctrine of the Passions of the Soul. In the mean time, we may refer hither one
or two Observations taken from Anatomy.

When of late we had dissected the Carcass of a man that was a Fool from his
birth, we could find no defect or fault in the Brain, unless that its substance
or bulk was very small. But the chief note of difference which we observed
between the parts of this man and of a man of judgment, was this, That the
aforesaid enfolding of the intercostal Nerve, which we call the Internuncius of
the Brain and Heart, proper to man, was very small in this Fool, and beset with
a weaker guard of Nerves.

Whilst we were writing these, we made an Anatomy of a Monkey, whose Brain
differed little from that which is seen in a Dog or a Fox, unless that it was
much more capacious in the proportion to the bulk of his Body, and the turnings
and windings of it were larger. The orbicular Prominences called Nates and
Testes, also the ringy Protuberance, sent down from the Cerebel, came nearer
the figure and magnitude of those parts in a man. But what occurred chiefly
worthy noting, was this, viz. That the intercostal Nerve, although even as it
is wont to be in other Brutes, being included in the same sheath with the Trunk
of the eighth pair, was carried through the Neck, yet departing from this Nerve
near the Chanel bone, before it was inserted into the enfolding, placed nigh
the roots of the upper Ribs, did send forth some shoots into the Heart and its
Appendix, and certain Fibers into the nerve of the Diaphragma: which perhaps
partly is the reason, why this Animal is so crafty and mimical above other
Beasts, and can so aptly show and imitate, not only the gestures, but the
passions and some manners of a Man. But we will proceed to the explication of
the intercostal Nerve from whence we have digressed.

We have already intimated for what use the Vertebral branch is inserted into
its cervical enfolding. There is the same reason for this as for the other
Vertebrals, which communicate with the intercostal Nerve almost in its whole
passage. But for that the nerve of the Diaphragma is radicated in the same
Vertebral nerve, from whence a branch comes into this enfolding, I say from
that a reason may be taken, why the motion of the Diaphragma intimately
conspires with the Praecordia, yea and with the conceptions of the Brain: which
kind of Sympathy of the Diaphragma with the other parts, because it is
requisite to be more strict and noted in man, it is observed, That not only the
Vertebral branch comes between the enfolding and the root of the nerve of the
Diaphragma, but two and sometimes three nerves are sent from this enfolding
into the trunk it self of the nerve of the Diaphragma, Fig. 9 ^.^. Truly from
hence not only the joint action or Sympraxis of the Diaphragma with the
Praecordia may be derived; but also the genuine cause is here manifest, why
Risibility is a proper Affection of a man. For as often as the Imagination is
affected by any pleasant or wonderful conception, presently the Heart desires
to rejoice, and as it were by shaking off its load to be eased: wherefore that
the blood might be more swiftly emptied out of its right bosom into the Lungs,
and consequently out of the left into the Aorta, the Diaphragma, instigated by
the passage of the nerves going out of this enfolding, is drawn upward by a
more rapid Systole, and raises up the Lungs, as it were making iterated leaps,
and causes them, by their more frequent striking together, to drive out both
the Air and the blood. Then forasmuch a; the same intercostal Nerve, which
communicates lower with the nerve of the Diaphragma, is continued also higher
with the maxillary Nerves, a cackling being made in the Breast, with it the
gesture of the Mouth and Face pathetically answers.

One or two noted shoots and many nervous Fibers are carried from this
enfolding into the returning Nerve, Fig. 9. z. Certainly the reason of this
communication seems to be, that the Diaphragma and the Heart it self (into
which nerves are sent from this enfolding) might yet more conspire with the
rough Artery (which the returning nerve affects) in its various actions, and
especially in laughing, weeping, and singing. Moreover, when the returning
Nerves, by pulling upwards the Trunks of the Aorta, cause the blood, for the
stirring up some Affections, to creep more swiftly toward the Head, they may
in the performing that office be much helped by the associate labor of the
Nerves sent from this enfolding.

From this enfolding in the Neck many small fibers and shoots are spread into
the sanguiferous Vessels, as also into the Coats of the Trachea and the
Oesophagus, Fig. 9. ibid. As to what belongs to the former that respect the
Trachea and the blood-carrying Vessels; their office is, that they may
respectively draw together and spread abroad those channels of inspired and
exspired blood and Air, according to the way and manner wherewith the Pulse and
Breathing ought to be performed; whereby the motions of either might be the
better retarded or accelerated, according to the necessities or requirings of
the Heart. Then numerous Fibers are stretched out from this enfolding into the
Coats of the Oesophagus placed near, that by this means the admirable consent
between the Heart and the Stomach, by reason of the Nerves being reached forth
from this enfolding and from the wandering pair to both, may be produced.

Concerning the Cardia^ branches sent from this enfolding, we need not
discourse any more: after having but now intimated, that these were as it were
Internuncii peculiar to men, which carrying to and fro the reciprocal
impressions of the Brain and Heart, cause Commerces in both Kingdoms. But
forasmuch as Nerves of a double kind, viz. of the wandering and intercostal
^air, respect the humane Praecordia, lest the gestures of one should be
different from those of the other, therefore the Cardiack branches, which are
of either family, partly communicate in the same enfolding, and are partly
inoculated mutually by shoots sent forth before they are distributed into the
Heart it self.

Below the Cervical enfolding, the intercostal Trunk being demersed within the
Thorax, admits three Vertebral Nerves arising higher, and constitutes the other
enfolding, which is commonly called the Intercostal, but more properly the
Thoracical enfolding, Fig. 9. TH. In this place the intercostal Nerve being
about to pass into its last and more large Province, viz. the Viscera of the
lower Belly, and therefore seeking aid for the journey, and as it were a
Viaticum for it self, it gets together in this enfolding an increase or aiding
forces from the Vertebral nerves, and afterward receives lower others fresh
nigh the several knots of the Vertebrae; because it will have need of a great
stock of Spirits, which it must bestow on the Mesenterick infoldings, and on
other parts of the Abdomen.

That this Nerve about to enter the Thoracical enfolding, does bind the
Chanelbone Artery, Fig. 9. l. and that the superior branch of the Vertebral,
being sent into the same enfolding, does bind about the Vertebral Artery, Fig.
9. ^. the reason of both seems, that the blood, for the uses and necessities of
the lower Viscera (to which the intercostal Nerve from thence serves) may be
driven forward with a more plentiful afflux downwards: which thing those Nerves
easily do by pulling together the blood-carrying Vessels toward their
enfolding; so that they attempt this snatching of the blood in opposition to
that which the returning Nerves perform. And indeed when the blood, tending
upwards and downwards, is wont sometimes to flow too much toward either bound,
sometimes to be wanting; therefore the nerves, as it were an incitement or
remora, are variously disposed both in the upper and lower region of the
Circuit about the sanguiferous Vessels. After what manner this Thoracical
enfolding is in brute Beasts, shall be particularly shown hereaster. The
intercostal Nerve in a Man, both in this enfolding and in the whole descent
through the Thorax, receives many Vertebral nerves, as if sparing of its own
stock, and greedy of another, but sends forth from it self not a shoot:
whatever of Spirits is remaining either from the influence above, or comes to
it by the by, is reserved wholly for a largess to be bestowed on the Viscera of
the lower Belly. But after what manner, and by what passages of nerves that is
dispensed into the several parts, we will unfold in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XXVII.
The lower Branching of the Intercostal Nerve belonging to the Parts and
Viscera of the lower Belly is unfolded.

AFter the intercostal Pair has past through the hollowness of the Thorax
without any expense of Spirits, unless in the Neck-infolding, at length it
sends down from the region of the Ventricle on both sides, a noted Branch;
either of which presently becoming divided into two, constitute two peculiar
Infoldings on either side; but one enfolding arises in the midst of them, as if
common to either side. Of the infoldings which are on the left side, one
respects the Kidney, and the other the Ventricle with the Spleen; but of those
which are on the opposite side, one respects the right Kidney, and the other
the Liver and its neighboring part. In the midst of these, the enfolding
proper to the Mesentery and the biggest, is placed as the Sun among the other
Planets. Further, from these are sent forth one to another and into the
neighboring parts numerous Fibers very thickly, as it were dartings of rays.
Fig. 11. plainly shows all these.

Concerning these, in the first place, it shall be inquire into in general, For
what end so many nervous infoldings, with almost innumerable fibers and shoots,
are distributed about the Mesentery and the Viscera of the Abdomen. For when in
these parts the fibers and nervous shoots are carried on every side with so
thick a series, that they are variously infolded with th^r manifold meeting, it
may seem wonderful, if every one of these be destinated to some uses, and are
not rather sprinkled here and there by chance, and as it were by the
inconsiderate sporting of Nature. And indeed any one can scarce think, that so
many Vessels should be prepared for the performing the offices of motion or
sense in that place. For those Viscera, unless highly pulled and affected with
a Convulsion, are sensible of little or nothing that we know of; and their
motions are almost no other thing than obscure Vermiculations or light
Corrugations, so that for the effecting them there is required no greater
preparation than for the slow progress of a Snail. Wherefore from hence it has
come into the mind of some, that a certain Juice, and that perhaps nutritious,
was dispensed by this manifold passage of the nervous Pipes: which sort of
office however if assigned to these Fibers dispersed about the Mesentery, why
should not the same office either of receiving or of carrying of nourishment,
be granted to those in like manner divaricated about the Lungs and the
Praecordia, and especially about the rough Artery? But truly it is highly
improbable, that a nutritious Juice should be contained in the Coats of the
Trachea or of the Bronchia, which the nerves may suck out; nor does it more
clearly appear, why more nerves should be destinated for the carrying of the
alible Juice to these parts of the Abdomen, or those of the Breast, than is
needful for the musculous stock. But in the mean time, though we deny, that the
whole nutritious matter is carried this way and that way by those or the other
nerves; yet we think; that within those nervous passages an humor does
perpetually abound, which may be for a Vehicle of the animal Spirits, and a
Ferment for the nutritious matter: with which going with the nervous humor
toward the Intestines and to the other sinks of the Body, it is likely, that
the superfluous and excrementitious serosities do often slide down together,
and so are carried out.

But it may be well thought, as to the Mesenterick Nerves, and Infoldings in
which they are terminated, and the Fibers most thickly going out of these, that
these different manner of Vessels are first Channels, then Storehouses, and
lastly the last Emissaries of the animal Spirits. If it should be demanded, for
what end so great plenty of Spirits should be designed for these ignobler
parts; I say, that this is done for the performing the acts of Motion and Sense
there, which are highly necessary for the preserving of life it self. For
although local motion, which is always performed by the help of a Muscle, as of
a Spring, is not convenient for the Viscera of the lower Belly; yet intestine
motions are brought forth by them almost continually, and after many fashions:
viz. for the subduing the Chyle, also for the separation of some parts and
particles from others, both of that, and also of the bloody Liquor, and the
protrusion of every one toward their designed bounds, the Fibers and nervous
shoots reaching into the Membranes of the Viscera and the Coats of the Vessels,
yea and into the textures of the Parenchyma, are variously drawn together, to
wit, these are pulled upwards, those downwards; sometimes many together,
sometimes apart or successively, are wont to be drawn hither and thither. In
truth, it is a sign of the in discontinued action of these Viscera, that as
well in sleep, and perhaps more than in waking, the Culinary work of Nutrition
is performed; and whilst the Organs of the other Faculties are at rest, there
is no quiet granted to these: but that the Mesenterick nerves perpetually
grinding in the Mill, are always busied for the preparing the alible humor and
the exporting the same toward all parts.

Moreover in these parts, to which the aforesaid Nerves belong, there is found
an exquisite feeling no less than a motive Faculty; for whatsoever
heterogeneous or hurtful thing, mixed with the Chyle or blood, is brought to
any Viscera, presently the Spirits, inhabiting those parts, being warned of the
evil, do greatly tumultuate as it were by entering into a Conspiracy, that what
is hostile or troublesome they might shut out. But indeed, because the animal
Spirits, flowing by the passage of the intercostal nerve to the Intestines and
Viscera akin to them, proceed from the Cerebel; therefore the businesses of
either Faculty, to wit, both the sensitive and locomotive, forasmuch as they
are performed the Brain unconsulted, and the animal scarce knowing it, are not
so openly taken notice of, and for that reason they are accounted of less than
the spontaneous acts of the other parts.

But as to the manner it self or way of the economy, whereby the animal
Spirits, destinated to the Viscera of the lower Belly, are exercised, we
affirm, That plenty of them flow into all the Mesentetick infoldings by the
passage of the nerves sent from the intercostal pair; where being heaped up to
a fullness, as it were in so many Storehouses or places of Receipt, they are
kept to be distributed from thence into several parts, as occasion requires.
But that the Spirits flow out of these infoldings, not through singular and
larger branches, (as is done in the Muscles) but as it were by Troops of
Fibers, into their proper tasks, the reason is, because here the business is
performed otherwise than in the musculous stock. For where a Muicle is fixed to
the part to be moved, its implanted Fibers perform the whole work of
Contraction, or of the motive endeavor; but it suffices for the nerve still to
convey new supplements of Spirits, and as occasion serves, the Instincts of the
Motion to be performed: but in the Membranes and the Viscera, where Muscles are
wanting, the nervous Fibers themselves most thickly implanted, and distributed
as it were so many little ropes, almost into every part of the subject, perform
the business of Traction or drawing by themselves and their own proper
endeavor or force partly; and partly solicit or stir up into motion the
Fibers implanted in the Viscera disposed after an uncertain order; which they
determinate in their action, and moderate or govern them, as it were so many
fingers laid upon the strings of a musical Instrument. For although the
Membranes and the Viscera themselves are endued with some implanted Fibers; yet
these are not, as it is in the Muscles, of one kind and position; but in the
same part some are straight, and others oblique or crooked, these tend upwards,
those downwards, and others are carried round; so that diverse sorts of motions
ought to be performed in the same Membrane or Inward, sometimes together,
sometimes successively or by turns: wherefore distinct nerves are required, not
only for the several series of Fibers, but for all the parts of the subject, to
wit, which may stop here a motion begun in that place, and may begin another
anew, or may unite one with another. Truly the motion which is performed in the
musculous stock seems like the rude and more simple work of some Weaver, where
the shuttle being always cast after the same manner, the Woof is laid under the
Thread or Yarn: but the motions of the Intestines and Viscera may be aptly
compared to a Texture very much variegated or flourished, for the weaving of
whose more artificial substance or making there is made use of many hands
together, or of a Machine diversely turning about, and furnished with more than
a thousand sorts of motions.

Concerning the many Mesenterick Nerves, and Shoots, and nervous Fibers which
go out of them by bands, we must consider chiefly these two things: to wit,
what may be the office of each of them for the stirring up of motion or sense,
either of them, or both together in any part: then secondly, what the
communication of either of them may be with other nerves, infoldings or bundles
of nerves, by reason of which a Sympathy or consent of actions arises at once
in diverse parts. According to these two respects we will particularly weigh now
the several nervous Vessels belonging to the Viscera of the lower Belly.

Therefore in the left side the supreme Mesenterick branch being presently
forked like the figure of the Letter Y, contains in its upper shoot the
Stomachical enfolding, which is also the Splenetick, and in the other lower the
Renal enfolding or that belonging to the Reins. Moreover, about the knot of
division it sends forth some shoots to the greatest enfolding of the Mesentery,
Fig. 11. F. G. Hence a reason is plain, wherefore there happens such affinity
between the Ventricle and the Spleen, and between the Mesentery and the Reins,
so that the very often and familiar Symptom of Vomiting is both in Splenetick,
Colical, and Nephritick people: because when a Convulsion is begun in any part
or Inward, which the Mesenterick nerve respects, presently other parts, to
which the infoldings or shoots of the same nerve belong, are drawn into consent.

From this lower enfolding a little bundle of Nerves being carried toward the
Stomach, inserts its Fibers partly in its bottom, and partly sends them to meet
with other Fibers sent down from the nerve of the Stomach, Fig. 11. n. The
reason of the former is, That whereas there are many Coats of the Ventricle,
and diverse series of Fibers are disposed in them, for the actuating all of
which with a due influx of animal Spirits, the Stomachical nerves, derived from
the wandering pair, are not sufficient; it was fit, that for the outward Court
as it were or Precinct of this Inward, to wit, for the outmost bottom of it,
some forces of Spirits might be supplied from some strange Kingdom, to wit,
from the aforesaid nervous enfolding of the Abdomen. Instead of this, Spirits
also may slide downwards from the same Stomachical branch through other Fibers
sent down, and be sent into this Splenetick enfolding. Besides also it is
observed, That the adventitious nerves aptly conspire with the former, being of
the proper dominion of the Ventricle, and that either are not only inoculated
within the confines of the Inward it self, but they run into mutual embraces
without it, and as it were join hands together.

It seems plain, that the nervous Filaments being carried from the aforesaid
enfolding to the bottom of the Ventricle, may serve there for the performing
the acts of Motion and Sensation: but it does not so easily appear with what
office the other handful of Fibers reaching out from hence into the Spleen is
charged ( Fig. 11. z.) because this Inward is said to be destitute wholly of
every animal Faculty. When we did elsewhere inquire into the use of the Spleen,
we thought good to affirm, That its office was to separate the dregs of the
Blood and the acid-saline Particles, and whatsoever were of a more fixed
nature, and to concoct them more being received into its own bosom, and to
convert them into an acid Ferment; by which being again delivered to the blood
through the Veins, a sharpness and an asperity, as also an active or
fermentative virtue are gotten forits Latex. Wherefore the whole substance of
the Spleen consists of a texture of Fibers in the form of a net; to wit, that
the Feculencies of the blood might be more plentifully received, and contained
within its spongy cavities and thick passages. I say therefore, that for the
fit preserving and dispensing of the Splenetick Ferment, besides the Arteries
which carry matter, and the Veins which continually sup back some portion of
the same fermented, there seems to be need of many nerves also, which both by
pulling the fibrous texture of the Spleen, might cause the melancholic and
dark Faces, laid up in it, to be shaken together, and so by defending it from
putrefaction and coagulation, cause it to be imbued with an acid and
fermentative nature; and also that those nerves may sometimes draw together and
constrain the blood carrying Vessels, sometimes open and enlarge them; that as
occasion serves, the Feculencies of the blood may be sometimes more
plentifully, sometimes more sparingly laid aside out of the Arteries into the
Spleen; also that more or less of the Ferment, preserved in the Spleen, may be
poured out on the blood according to the requirings of the Passions or of the
natural Instinct. No Hypochondriack but does abundantly perceive, that some
Splenetick nerves do perform motions; for those great perturbations which are
wont to be excited in the left side, as when sometimes Inflations, sometimes
constrictions of the inward parts, and sometimes various concussions are
perceived with a wandering pain running here and there, they are only Spasms or
Convulsions or wrinklings t^^^ther, with which the nerves of the Spleen are
ordinarily affected. Nor do its nerves, taken with a Convulsion, stir up
tumults only in the neighborhood of the Spleen, but oftentimes further into
the Heart it self, yea into the whole Body the effects of their inordinations
are carried. I have known an Hypochondriack, who presently upon the Spleen
being disturbed, seemed to have his Pracordia, being drawn downwards, to be
cruelly pressed and bound together; so that being very sad and dejected in his
mind, also complaining of an exceeding great straitness and constriction of his
Breast, he thought himself almost dead. The cause of which kind of distemper
was without doubt, that when many Fibers going out of the Splenetick enfolding
are united with other Fibers sent from the farthest end of the wandering pair,
it easily happens, that the former, being distempered with the Convulsion, do
draw together and pull downwards their yoke-fellows, and by consequence the
Trunk it self of the wandering pair, from which the nerves are sent into the
Praecordia: certainly by the Sympraxis or joint action of either kind of the
aforesaid nerves, viz. whereof these respect the Spleen, those the Praecordia,
it is effected, that the Trembling, Oppression, and other grievous Distempers
of the Heart, as also of the Spleen, so ordinarily happen. Further, forasmuch
as the Fermentation of the blood depends on the Spleen, according to the
influence of this, that performs its Circulation, sometimes pleasantly,
sometimes disturbedly. Whilst the Spleen is at quiet, and free from any
perturbation, the blood also is quietly moved in Hypochondriacal persons; but
if the same be moved and exercised, (as it is wont to be in any passion or
violent motion of the Body, or by a Medicine) presently its nerves being
distempered with a Convulsion, shake it more with reiterated contractions; so
that the fermentative Feculencies, being shaken out of its bosom, flow back
more plentifully into the blood, which cause its Latex presently to be
troubled, and as it were muddy, and sharpen it with so great acrimony and
mordacity, that it burns and pricks the Brain and Heart like needles; from
whence in Splenetick people, besides that the Reason is obscured, the
affections of the Mind, especially Sadness, Hatred, and Anger are very much
increased.

Concerning the Splenetick Nerves, by another conjecture, we are yet brought to
believe, that they, besides the exercise of the motive Faculty, do both instill
into the Spleen its own humor, which promotes the fermentative virtue of that
Inward; and also (because the nerves, as was shown already, convey the Spirits,
and sometimes the humors by either way, viz. forward and backward) the same
implanted in the Spleen, do often imbibe from it an acetous or Vinegar-like
humor, and as it were Vitriolick, from whose acrimony and notable twitching,
they are forced into Convulsions.

But forasmuch as the nervous Enfolding respecting the Spleen, communicates
more nearly with the Ventricle, Mesentery, Liver, and Kidneys, and more
remotely with the Praecordia and other parts placed at a distance; from hence
the cause is plain, wherefore not only these several Viscera and parts, by
reason of the fault of the Spleen, are folded together; but also on the
contrary, why the Spleen being indisposed by any Disease, or trouble raised up
in any of those parts, is wont to be disturbed: so it is not altogether for
nothing, that the Symptoms every where infesting, the cause of them being
unknown, are ascribed ordinarily to the Spleen; because it fixes not only its
own inordinations in other parts, but also suffers for their peculiar faults:
which notwithstanding is wrongfully ascribed to Vapors transmitted from this
or that part, when the formal reason of every Distemper of this kind for the
most part consists in the communication made through the Nerves.

The lower Enfolding of the left side seems to be made for the Kidney placed
near, into which chiefly the bundle of its Fibers is carried, Fig. 11.. Y. Y.
Certainly that these nerves, following the emulgent Vessels, do embrace the
same, and bind them about with a various and frequent complication; that is so
made for that end, that by reason of the Artery being so strained and
frequently shaken by the drawings of the nerves, the Serum may the more easily
be precipitated from the blood: wherefore it is observed in very great
difficulty or danger, when the mind and all the nerves are strained for fear,
that a frequent and more plentiful making of water, and that often painful, is
wont to be provoked.

The Renal Enfolding receives, besides the Nerve common to it with the upper
enfolding, another new and peculiar one from the intercostal nerve, or rather
that coming between from the spinal Marrow, Fig. 11. b. Hence it is, that the
Loins have a great consent with (...) Reins, and suffer so ordinarily for their
Distempers with a grievous and largely diffusive pain. Forasmuch as this
enfolding communicates with the greatest of the Mesentery, the Colic distemper
and the Nephritick are much akin, and it is often difficult to distinguish
their fits one from the other.

The Mesenterick branch in the right side, as well as the left, being forked,
contains two infoldings: the upper of these (which we call the Hepatick) sends
forth from it self many little bundles of nervous Fibers; the greatest of which
being carried toward the Liver, clothes the Hepatick Artery as it were with a
Net made of Fibers, Fig. 11.. o. The most Learned Glisson observes, That the
Hepatick Artery is bestowed on the Trunks of the Vessels, to wit, of the common
Chest, of the bilary Pore, and of the Vena Porta; for the watering of which,
and for the actuating them with heat and nourishing Juice, it carries the
arterious Blood; to which notwithstanding for the recarrying, an associate Vein
is wholly wanting: wherefore that ought to carry the blood, not with a full and
free influx, but by little and little, and always in a constant measure to
those membranaceous parts: for otherwise there had been danger, lest from the
bloody Latex plentifully rushing forward, for that it could not be still
remanded presently through the Veins, an Inflammation should be excited, or
lest from its torrent being transfused beyond its banks, the courses of the
other rivers in the Liver should be disturbed. But for that the nerves, like
Reins, do bind about the Trunk of the Artery, the inflowing of the blood it
self is moderated, and they cause it variously to be dispensed according to the
wants of those parts to which it is destinated.

From the Troop of Nerves going out toward the Liver, some bend down into the
Pancreas, and others into the Cholidock Vessels, Duodenum, and Pylorus, and sow
into them thick series of shoots, Fig. 11. p. p. The office of these seems to
be, to pull together the excretory passages of those parts, and to shake them
for the causing Evacuations of the boiling or turging humors upon occasion.
Further, from these Fibers being carried upwards, when many others sent from
either Stomachical nerve are united, the reason is plain, why from an hawling
or pulling made about the Ventricle, the yellow Bile is drawn out of the
Gall-chest into the Duodenum, which being carried from thence into the
Ventricle, by reason of a Convulsion of that same Intestine, is cast up by
Vomit: because the Stomachical nerves being irritated by a Medicine, or by any
troublesome thing, for the making an Evacuation above, and for that cause drawn
from thence upwards, they draw together the nerves belonging to the Liver and
the Cholidock Vessels, for that they are tied to them, and bring them into
consent with the superior Spasm or Convulsion. Hence it happens, that not only
the Stomach being first tired, draws to it self the Bile by its Convulsion, and
allures it into its own bosom; but the Bile also of its own accord growing
turgid, and so being poured out into the Duodenum, forasmuch as it irritates
the nerves of this Intestine, and then by their consent, provokes the nervous
Vessels of the Ventricle, it presently induces a choleric Vomiting.

The Hepatick Enfolding communicates with the Splenetick by Fibers going
between either, Fig. 11. th. The reason of which seems to be, That when one
enfolding respects the end or the right extremity of the Ventricle, and another
the left; that a consent in either and a joint action may be made toward the
Stomach, both communicate between themselves by nerves, as if Internuntii.
Truly it seems to come to pass by the passage of these nerves, that the
Hypochondriacal pains oftentimes run from the left side into the right; to wit,
for that a Spasm or Convulsion begun in the Splenetick enfolding, is wont to be
carried to the Hepatick.

Between the Hepatick Enfolding and the greatest of the Mesentery, many Fibers
reaching out by bands, are cast out in the midst, Fig. 11. p. p. the office of
which is to sustain a certain commerce and Sympathy; to wit, such an one is
required, both that the Chyle may be ministered from the Intestines toward the
Liver still in due proportion, also that the Bible may opportunely slide out
from the Gallbladder into the Intestines for the provoking of Excretion. For
we are of this Opinion, That the Meseraick Veins sucking out a certain portion
of the Chyle from the Intestines, immediately transfer it through the region of
the Liver into the Vena Cava, whereby the blood in the ascending Trunk of the
hollow Vein or Vena Cava, might be freshly imbued with nourishing Juice; even
as in its descending Trunk it is refreshed, the same being poured out through
the Thoracical Vessels or those belonging to the Thorax. Wherefore it is
needful, that there should be a very strict affinity between these Viscera; and
the rather, because the Bile ought to be poured out from the Gall chest to the
Intestines, not continually, but for some uses, by occasions and intervals. For
the Nerves knowing best the wants of either part, warn them both of their
mutual duty, and as occasion serves, stir them into action.

It is observed, That in the right side an ample Nerve is stretched out between
the Hepatick and Renal enfolding, Fig. 11. m. So that between these infoldings
a greater and more immediate consent is had, than between those pairs of the
other side. The reason of which does not easily appear, unless perhaps it
should be so made for this end, that when from the Reins, in making of water,
there is an endeavor of the serous Excretion, the Pylorus and the Cholidock
Vessels being at once drawn downwards, a protrusion of the Chyle and Faeces
might be provoked toward the lower parts of the Belly. Certainly this
connection of these infoldings is chiefly the cause, why oftentimes most cruel
Vomiting uses to come upon a Fit of the Stone; and that from such a Vomiting
the Cholidock Vessels are very much emptied, as if provoked by taking an
Emetick.

The greatest Enfolding of the Mesentery being placed in the midst of the rest,
like the Sun, disperses every where round about nervous Fibers like rays, Fig.
11.. and casts them not only on every one of those infoldings, as if so many
Planets with a peculiar Aspect, or Actinobolism or Irradiation, but also it
distributes them into many Intestines, sanguiferous Vessels, and other parts
lying round about: without doubt upon these nervous Filaments, which are
carried from this enfolding to the Intestines, as Lines from the Center to the
Circumference, every action of the Intestines, and especially the Peristaltick
motion of the Vermiculation, depends; namely for that these Fibers do move
successively, and still move further every begun action, as it were with a
spiral or Screw-like progress.

That from this Enfolding many Fibers and shoots going forth, are inserted into
the Trunk of the Aorta nigh its descending, and that these reaching toward the
Intestines, accompany the Blood carrying Vessels, and in several places climb
over them; from hence it may be inferred, That nerves also in the Abdomen are
like Bridles and Reins cast on the sanguiferous Vessels, which either by
straining or pulling them together, may sometimes retard, sometimes incite the
course of the blood according to the needs of the lower Viscera.

From the greatest Enfolding of the Mesentery some noted Fibers and shoots are
sent out into the Glandula's of the Womb or the Women's Testicles, Fig. 11. t.
t. Into which also other shoots from the Trunk of the intercostal Nerve, ibid.
v.v. and others going out of the nerve which comes between this enfolding and
the lowest of the Abdomen, do come together, ibid. ps. ps. So that a provision
of Spirits is carried into those parts from a threefold Storehouse; which
indeed is much larger than is done in the other Sex, when we find scarce any
nerve to belong to men's Testicles. Indeed the Womb, besides that it is a very
sensible part, ought also to be moved diversely, and in bringing forth a child
very strongly: wherefore there are granted to this both more strong implanted
Fibers, and also Nerves of a various kind and original.

Most of the Infoldings of the Abdomen, but especially the lowest, and that
related to it the greatest of the Mesentery, are oftentimes affected in the
Passions commonly called Hysterical, as shall be presently declared. Therefore
if at any time such distempers proceed from the Womb, the cause is manifest
wherefore the aforesaid infoldings are drawn into consent. But we have
elsewhere shown, That those Pasfions are merely convulsive, and not seldom
excited without any fault in the Womb. Further, that Symptom very frequent in
those kind of Fits, to wit, in which as it were a Globe is perceived to be
carried from the bottom of the Belly, and about the Navel to leap out
impetuously, which therefore is thought to be an ascent of the Womb; I say,
that it is nothing else than most cruel Convulsions of these infoldings. Indeed
oftentimes in Women, and sometimes also in Men, I have known when the
convulsive Affection has invaded, that a bulk in the Hypogastrium has been
seen to arise, then about the midst of the Abdomen so great a swelling to
follow, that it could not be hindered or pressed down, though strongly attempted
by the hands of a strong man. Without doubt, the cause of this admirable
distemper is, that within the nerves of the intercostal pair the inflowing
animal Spirits, as often as they begin disorders or convulsive motions, first
(as it is wont to be) begin to grow hot or to be exploded about the extremities
of the nerve, to wit, in the lowest enfolding of the Abdomen; which affection
of theirs, when creeping upwards it is carried to the greatest enfolding of the
Mesentery, so that the Spirits inhabiting it are taken with the like
inordination, it is no wonder, if that swelling up of the middle of the
Abdomen, and as it were an explosion of a certain nitrosulphureous matter,
should be stirred up. For truly it is not probable, that that Symptom should be
excited from the Womb ascending and being removed from its place, because,
besides this part being fixed in its place and firmly established with
Ligaments, the bulk of it also in Virgins is so small, scarce exceeding the
bigness of a Walnut, that although it should be carried up into the Belly, it
could not produce such a swelling. Not is it more likely, that this sort of
distemper is stirred up from the Muscles of the Abdomen taken with a
Convulsion: for they, however convulsive, draw together themselves and
subjected parts upwards or downwards, or of one side, but they are not able by
any means to bear themselves alost, and to lift up on high, with a force, the
region of the Navel. But, as we suppose, the animal Spirits in the greatest
enfolding of the Mesentery growing fierce, and becoming apt to be exploded, (as
such indeed they are whenever they enter into convulsive motions) they being
there gathered round thickly into a Globe, do mainly blow up and lift on high
with their effervescency and notable rarefaction that enfolding with its whole
neighborhood, and at once drive upward the Viscera lying upon it with a
certain vibration or shaking. A more full explication of this Symptom belongs
to the Pathology of the Brain and Nerves.

In the mean time we shall take notice, that another certain Distemper, viz.
the Colical grief does belong to the infoldings of the Abdomen, and especially
to this greatest of the Mesentery. For it may be thought, that the most cruel
torments that are wont to be excited in this disease do come, not from an
excrementitions matter shut up in the cavities of the Intestines, nor always
from a sharp humor impacted in their Coats, but oftener from the nervous Juice
imbued with a certain acrimony, and stagnating within this enfolding; from
whence, by reason of a consent of this with the infoldings both Hepatick and
Splenetick, a frequent and cruel Vomiting comes upon these pains. But these
Pathologick Speculations being referred to their places, we will follow what we
first of all instituted, the further passage of the intercostal Nerve, by which
we are led to the two lesser and lowest Infoldings of the Abdomen.

Below the Mesenterick Nerves, out of which the superior Infoldings are made,
either descending intercostal Trunk sends forth three or four singular shoots,
which are carried into the Ureters, Fig. 11. v.v. The use of these seems to be,
to pull together, and to jog or shake those urinary Channels, that the Serum
separated in the Reins, may be the more readily drawn out toward the Bladder.
Moreover, if at any time a viscous or muddy matter does stick to the passages
of the Ureters, or a more fixed stone does obstruct their Cavities, they, by
the help of the Nerves inserted here and there in their whole tract, being
pulled together and wrinkled, may press down and always move for ward any bulk
or substance staying in the passage.

Nigh the Vertebra, out of which the Crural Nerves begin to go forward, three
distinct branches brought to either intercostal Nerve, are carried from thence
into the lowest hollowness of the Belly, where they make the enfolding which is
the lowest of the Abdomen, Fig. 11. ph. ph. ph. That here so many nerves, to
wit, six large ones joining together do make but a small enfolding, viz. a
lesser than is raised higher in a single branch of the nerve; the reason is,
because this enfolding is like an Inn, where the inflowing Spirits dwell no
long time, but it receiving them only in their passage, presently commits them
to other infoldings placed here and there above, below, and of one side, and
made for diverse offices; for from hence the chief passage, and as it were a
broad way, leads to the greatest enfolding of the Mesentery; moreover, from
hence nerves, diversely going out, make three other infoldings, which respect
the parts and ways by which the several Excretions, to wit, of the Dung, Urine,
and Seed, are made in the lower Belly.

The first Nerve therefore sent out of this lowest Enfolding into the greatest
of the Mesentery, a little before it reaches to it, imparts two noted shoots to
the Glandula's of the Womb; but in its ascent it admits four other branches, as
it were subsidiary, viz. two on either side from the intercostal pair, Fig. 11.
chapter so that the nerve here seems to be the chief means of passage of the animal
Spirits destinated to the greatest enfolding of the Mesentery and to the
uterine Glandula's; which passage however is carried into the designed parts,
not immediately, but a compass being made, it first goes forward beyond its
bound, and at length with a certain going back. The reason of which is, that
the motions of all the Intestines, viz. the Vermiculations should be directed
downwards toward the straight Intestine, and also that the actions of the Womb
should tend thither; therefore 'twas fit, that the animal Spirits should be
supplied from below whither the motion inclined. For by the like means, this
Mesenterick nerve and the two returning nerves, being first carried lower,
ascend into their Provinces; to wit, that they may pull together the respective
parts toward that bound placed below, as it were to a Pully.

Further, for this end, to wit, that the influence of the Spirits actuating
some Intestines, might be derived lower; the other enfolding of the Abdomen, to
wit, the least, is added immediately to this. Because upon the Nerves being
carried from hence about an inch, there grows a small enfolding; out of which,
one nerve being sent out into the greatest enfolding of the Mesentery,
stretches it self under the top of the straight Intestine and part of the
Colon, Fig. 11.. a. And another nerve, descending from this enfolding, is
carried under the lowest part of the same straight Intestine, Fig. 11. b. which
also, two shoots carried from the infoldings placed in the Pelvis or Basin,
meet, Fig. 11. d. d. It will not be hard to declare the uses of this enfolding
and its nerves: because all those nervous passages are emptied about the
offices and motions of the straight Intestine. The ascending nerve directs the
Vermiculations of the same straight Intestine, as also of the lower part of the
Colon, and then (the greatest enfolding of the Mesentery mediating) of some
other Intestines to be made downwards; but the descending nerve, in opposition
to the other, drawing the lowest part of the straight Intestine upwards, takes
care that the Excrements being carried toward the Arse-hole, may not slide out
suddenly and unexpectedly. Then forasmuch as two nerves from the two infoldings
placed within the Basin or Tunnel, (which infoldings immediately admitting a
noted Vertebral branch, are partakers of the spontaneous Function) meet with
this descending nerve, and are ingraffed into it; it comes to pass from all of
them together, that the Excrements being detained at the doors, when it shall
be convenient, the Appetite commanding, are cast out. Nature, that it might
shun filthiness, is so careful, that for the carrying out of the Excrements it
constitutes nervous Vessels, with as noted a provision, as for the performing
any where of the most splendid offices.

From the lowest Enfolding of the Abdomen, two nerves being sent into the
Tunnel, receive there on both sides a noted Vertebral Nerve; and so constitute
two infoldings, to wit, one in either side, Fig. 11. C.C. K.K. These infoldings
near the doors, placed before the chief excretory passages, serve for the
opening and shutting them: a Vertebral branch comes to either as a supply; by
which it comes to pass, that besides the increasing the forces of the Spirits,
their acts flowing from these infoldings, become in some measure spontaneous.
By what means and for what end, the nerve ascending from either enfolding, is
bestowed on the straight Intestine, was shown but now. Moreover, two descending
on both sides, are carried into the neck or porch of the Womb, Fig. 11. e.g.
Without doubt, whatever of sense or motion is made about the Venereal acts, is
owed to the influence of the Spirits through these Nerves. In Men the
delightful profusion of the Genital humor, and in Women the no less pleasant
reception of the same depends on the action of those nerves. Lastly, from the
same enfolding another nerve descending and broken into certain shoots, is
distributed on both sides into the Bladder and its Sphincter, Fig. 11. f.
Certainly by these nerves the business of making water is performed, and when
at any time the same is painful, the troublesome sense is impressed on them. But
forasmuch as the nerves dedicated to the several Excretions proceed on both
sides from the same enfolding, therefore the acts of them all are in some
measure alike among themselves, so indeed, that if any excretory passage should
be weak or ill affected, it sends forth its charge which it should keep,
whether it will or no. This is so well known, that there is no need to
illustrate the matter with instances.

These Nerves and Infoldings being so made, there is not much business besides
left for the intercostal pair. About the beginning of the Os Sacrum, both
Trunks inclining mutually one to the other, communicate among themselves by a
cross shoot or two, then they end in very small Fibers, which are distributed
into the Sphincter of the Anus, Fig. 11. q. r. s. Here the intercoast pair is
after the same manner, as we have observed concerning the wandering pair; to
wit, either nerve being brought to the end of its course, before they enter
upon their last task, incline themselves to mutual embraces. Concerning the
last offices of either pair, this Conformity may be also noted; that whenas the
Viscera dedicated to Chylification, to wit, the Ventricle and Intestines, are
still continued to the last by the same passage and the same perpetual cavity
or hollowness; the first doors of this Cavity, to wit, the Orifices of the
Ventricle, are kept by the lowest branches of the wandering pair joined among
themselves; but before the last door of the same, to wit, the Sphincter of the
Anus, the extremities of the intercostal pair, also before joined among
themselves, are placed. But to this part, as if it had never provided enough
for it, besides the nerves sent hither from either enfolding next above, and
these extreme productions of the intercostal pair bestowed on it, a branch also
and certain fibers from the Vertebral nerve are inserted, Fig. 11. i. k. By the
access of which it comes to pass, that the shutting and opening of this
door-keeping Muscle becomes spontaneous. Truly many nerves, and those of a
diverse kind, are distributed into the Sphincter of the Anus, to wit, because
the nutritious Juice and its stinking recrements, like a certain Chemical
matter, are digested within the Intestines, as it were within a Matrace;
therefore Nature, which best understands Chemistry, is very careful about the
well-stopping the mouths of the Vessels.

From the same Nerve, viz. the last Vertebral, out of which a branch disperses
fibers into the Sphincter of the Anus, two other Nerves proceed, which are
carried into the Yard, Fig. 11. l. m. The greater of these, which is very large
and long, is distributed into the nervous Body of it; the other lesser, into
its Muscles. This member, because it receives nerves only from the spinal
Marrow, according to our Hypothesis, ought to swell up and to be moved only at
the spontaneous pleasure of the will: but that oftentimes, by reason of the
swelling up of the Genital seed or humor, it is erected and blown up with
Spirit, whether one will or no, that is caused chiefly for this reason, Because
from this Vertebral pair, from whence the nerves of the Yard arise, a nervous
process is stretched out into the Vertebral pair next above it: in which the
enfolding, placed in the Tunnel, imparting nerves to the Prostatae, is
radicated, Fig. 11. I. K. into which enfolding also a noted nerve from the
intercostal pair is implanted. When therefore a communication is had between
the Prostatae, which depend much on the intercostal Nerves and the Yard, (by
reason of the roots of either being joined together by the nervous process) it
comes to pass, that the action of this follows the affection of those parts:
but those parts, viz. the Prostatae, are apt to be moved not only by the
turgescency of the Seed, but also by the passage of the intercostal Nerve are
wont to be irritated with too unseasonable an action, according to the
impressions made by the Senses or the Brain; into the consent of which
presently the Yard is excited.

Concerning the Nerves which belong to the Testicles, here is not much to be
spoken; for we have often sought in vain for a great company of nervous
passages in them: I have very diligently searched sometimes in Man, also in a
Fox, Dog, Calf, and likewise in a Boar and Monkey, but could never find
belonging to them but one nerve carried from the Vertebral pair, which also for
the most part is bestowed on the Cremasteral Muscle, Fig. 11. M. so that,
although an excellent humor is prepared within those parts, yet it does not
easily appear, that its matter is derived thither through the nerves; for we
think the Genital humor is no more dispensed by the nerves than the nutritious.
For truly it seems, that the Arteries instill a spirituous liquor into the
Testicles after the same manner as in the Brain; wherefore in their
neighborhood these sanguiferous Vessels being very much divaricated or spread
abroad, are turned about into little serpentine channels, whereby they subtilize
the humor destinated to the Testicles, and insinnate it, having put off all
thickness and Feculency, and being truly sublimated, into their substance;
because there, as within the Cortex of the Brain, the spirituous liquor being
imbued with a volatile Salt implanted in the part, passes into the most noble
Clyssus, viz. the Genital humor. But here is not a place to discourse more
largely of the nature and origin of the Seed: yet because it is commonly
objected, That the Seed is made of the nervous Juice and plenty of Spirits
fetched from the Brain, and therefore a large expense of it does induce quickly
on the Brain and Nerves a great debility and enervation; I say, this comes to
pass, because after great profusions of the Seed, for the restoration of the
same humor, (of which Nature is more solicitous than for the benefit of the
individual) presently greater Tributes of the spirituous Liquor are required
from the blood to be laid up into the Testicles: wherefore the Brain is made
languid, being defrauded of its due stock and afflux of the same spirituous
liquor; and the Spirits influencing it and the nervous System, because they are
deficient in the Fountain it self, are very much depauperated and become
flagging. Besides we may add, That the animal Spirits also which actuate the
Prostatae coming from the spinal Marrow, are consumed about the Venereal acts
very much; so that the Loins are also enervated for this reason.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Spinal Nerve an Accessory to the wandering Pair; also of the Nerve of
the Diaphragma.

AFter we have unfolded the Nerves of the wandering and intercostal pair, which
being Executers of the involuntary Function, are stretched out to the
Praecordia and all the Viscera of the middle and lower Belly, and also to some
other parts: Next to these follow some other Nerves communicating with the
aforesaid in their beginning, or in the exercise of the same office, viz. the
spinal Nerve and the Nerve of the Diaphragma; of which we will speak in order.

We have already shown, that the Nerve of the wandering pair in the beginning is
made up of numerous Fibers: to which is joined another noted Nerve arising from
afar, and being ingraffed with them, goes forth together with them out of the
Skull. Concerning this Nerve, because the beginning and distribution of it
being very irregular, have not as yet been noted by other Anatomists, it may
seem worth our labor to make a little more diligent inquiry. Therefore if we
would search into the beginning of this nerve, that is found beginning with a
sharp point in the side of the spinal Marrow nigh the sixth or seventh Vertebra
of the Neck, Fig. 12. C. C. But being increased in its ascent, is no where
inserted into the medullar Trunk, but in its whole tract on both sides leans on
its side, to which it is knit by certain admitted Fibers toward the
superficies. This arising up from the Neck after this manner, and being carried
within the Skull, is joined to the Fibers of the wandering pair, and is
ingraffed with them seeming to grow together into one Trunk, and goes out with
them at the same hole from the Skull; which being passed through, the spinal
Nerve presently departing from the Trunk of the wandering pair, is at length
reflected outward, Fig. 9... This stranger or traveling nerve after a short
commerce having left his companion, is carried upon the Muscles of the Neck, to
which it imparts some shoots, and is inoculated with a certain shoot of the
tenth pair; but from thence being carried on further, it goes alone by a long
passage, till it comes to the Scapular Muscle, on which it is almost wholly
bestowed, Fig. 9.. This nerve is found constantly, not only in Man and
four-footed Beasts, but also in Fowls and Fishes; and in these it seems to be
destinated instead of Arms, and for the moving of their wings and fins.

Concerning the use of this Nerve, and the reason of its irregular beginning,
we shall conjecture after this manner: Forasmuch as that is destinated for the
performing the motions of the Muscles belonging to the Arms and Neck, therefore
it ought to arise out of the spinal Marrow: but that it is not carried by a
direct and near way into its Province, but being carried about by a long
compass before it enters upon its task, communicates in its beginning with the
nerve of the wandering pair; certainly this seems to be done, to the end that
this Spinal nerve, being carried into the parts of the wandering pair, might
perform the acts of the Function only involuntary. And indeed it may be
observed, That besides the spontaneous motions wherewith the Neck and Arms are
wont to be employed with the previous intention of doing this or that thing,
those parts also, before any other member, are affected with pathetick and
sudden motions, according to the force of the Passions, the animal not being
conscious of it. For almost all living Creatures do not only turn about their
necks at any noise to behold whatever might cause fear; but they being any ways
affrighted in the twinkling of an eye fly away, their feet, wings, fins, or
other part answerable to them, being set into a rapid motion. The Neck and the
Arms are pliable or observant, not only to fear, but in like manner to the
other Passions. For brute Animals, as well as Man, being puffed up with pride
or anger, (as we have elsewhere intimated) have their Necks swollen, and their
Crests lifted up: But as to Man, his hands and arms are so obsequious to the
Passions, and almost to all the conceptions of the Brain, that they are
continually agitated in the doing of any other thing with various gestures,
whereof we are ignorant or not willing them: we scarcely think or speak any
thing but at the same time the hands are flung out here and there; and whilst
the Tongue hesitates or sticks, or the words at it were stick between the Jaws,
the right hand is exercised, as if by its gesture it were endeavoring to draw
out more swiftly the sense of the mind. Truly that these parts, to wit, the
Hands and Arms, do so nearly conspire with the Affections of the Brain and
Heart in their motions in some measure in all living Creatures, but more
eminently in Man, the cause seems to be this nerve's coming from the spinal
Marrow to the beginning of the wandering pair, and communicating with its
nerves, and receiving from them as it were the note or private mark of the
involuntary Function.

So much for the spinal Nerve, which also like a shrub, growing from other
snrubs, has no peculiar origin, but having received various fibers, is
radicated for the greatest part in the spinal Marrow, and (as has been shown)
partly in the nerve of the wandering pair. Concerning the nerve of the
Diaphragma, (of which we shall speak next) many things occur no less worthy
remarking. As to its beginning, it may be observed, That it arises from the
brachial nerves with a double or triple root; to wit, two or three shoots going
out of the aforesaid nerves, grow together into the same Trunk, which is the
nerve of the Diaphragma. In man its first shoot, which is also the greatest, is
produced out of the second Vertebral nerve; and when the first brachial nerve
arises from the same handful of Vertebral nerves going out at this place, the
aforesaid shoot is rooted in its origin: wherefore, when in Brutes the first
brachial nerve arises from the fourth or fifth Vertebral, the nerve of the
Diaphragma also begins its rise far lower: two other shoots arise out of the
same stocks of the brachial nerves which follow next, Fig. 9. Y. g. ph. But the
Trunk which is made out of these shoots goes forward single through the passage
of the Neck and the cavity of the Thorax without any branching forth, even to
the Diaphragma, Fig. 9 chapter where being at last stretched out into three or four
shoots, it is inserted on either side to the fleshy or musculous part of it: so
that, because the Diaphragma is a Muscle, and performs both its motions, to
wit, Systole and Diastole by its own Fibers, the office of either nerve is only
to carry bands or forces of animal Spirits requisite for the indiscontinued
action of that part, and also to convey thither the Instincts of the Motions
variously to be performed.

As to the first use of this Nerve, viz. for the passage of the animal Spirits,
the business is performed in this Muscle, as it is in the Heart. The Spirits
flowing into the Diaphragma by the nerves, receive subsidiary Forces, to wit, a
sulphurous Copula from the blood, upon whose explosion being still iterated by
turns, and the receiving of new, the action of this perpetual moveable depends.
Concerning the Instincts of the Motions transmitted by the passage of this
double nerve, we may observe, That they are, especially in man, of a double
kind: viz. either the action of the Diaphragma merely natural for the
performing of Respiration, is continually reciprocated according to the uses of
the Heart and Lungs, and altered many ways in their tenor according to their
needs, or secondly, a certain irregular and unusual motion of the Diaphragma is
wont to be excited at the beck of the Appetite, or from the instigations of
other parts; for the which, whilst the rest of the Organs of Respiration are
compelled to conspire, the act it self of Respiration becomes after a various
manner interrupted or unequal.

1. As to the first of these, viz. the unforced motion of this Muscle, it may
be observed, That the Diaphragma, with the Muscles of the Thorax and the parts
of either, conspire in their motion with the action of the Lungs and Heart: and
that between all these such a joint action may be sustained, it is observed,
That three or four branches are sent out from the Vertebral nerves, in the
branches of which the nerve of the Diaphragma is rooted, into the intercostal
enfolding, Fig. 9. TH. and whereas from this enfolding the nerves are carried
into the Muscles of the Thorax, by this means a communication and consent of
action is effected between these and the Diaphragma. Therefore the Diaphragma
drawing with it self the Muscles of the Thorax, by reason of other nerves,
conspires with the Praecordia. These in man going from the intercostal nerve,
are already described; and in Brutes from the lower enfolding of the wandering
pair a nerve is sent down into the enfolding of the Thorax, to which besides so
many shoots and certain fibers reaching forth into the nerve of the Diaphragma,
are instead of such a commerce.

2. The Anomal and irregular motions of the Diaphragma proceed from various
causes and from the diverse instigation of other parts, which also in man become
much more signal than in brute Animals; because in him the communication is
notable by the nerves reaching out from the Cervical enfolding of the
intercostal pair into the nerve of the Diaphragma; which kind of enfolding and
nerves are wanting in Brutes.

As to the Species themselves of irregular motions into which the motion of the
Diaphragma is wont to be perverted, it may be observed, That we are able at our
pleasure to stop breathing or respiration for some space, and presently to take
it or draw it out. In laughing, weeping, and singing sometimes the Systole,
sometimes the Diastole becomes stronger, and is made frequenter upward or
downward with a repeated shaking; which sort of actions of it are made by
reason of those near commerces had between the nerve of the Diaphragma and
other respective parts of the Breast and Face: yea indeed from hence it is
effected, (as we have already shown) that man is peculiarly a laughing
Creature. Further, (which we have shown elsewhere) from the Sympathy which
happens between the parts of the Mouth and Face with the Diaphragma by those
nerves, a good reason of sneezing may be given, and that Problem of Aristotle's
easily solved, to wit, why men alone, or chiefly before other Creatures,
sneeze: For the act of sneezing seems to be made for this end, that man may not
only clear his Nose, but that all Torpor or heaviness may be shook off for him
from the neighboring Organs of the Senses, yea and from all the forepart of
the Brain: which thing easily succeeds, if the Membranes and nervous passages
besmearing the Nostrils and the Sieve-like Bone, like the holes of a Sponge,
being strongly wrung forth or squeezed together, be forced to shed forth their
moistures; for these parts so emptied, presently like a pressed Sponge, receive
other humors, to wit, those coming from the neighboring parts. In the mean
time, that the watery heap so laid up about the caverns of the Nostrils, may be
emptied, it ought to be carried away, or wiped out from thence by a vehement
blowing of the Air or breath. Wherefore it is observed, That whilst the inward
parts of the Nostrils being very sensible, begin to be wrinkled together from
some sharp thing pulling or pricking them, and by that means to draw out the
watery humor presently by reason of the passage from thence by the branches of
the fifth pair into the intercostal Trunk, and from thence by the passage of
the nerves which are extended from its Cervical enfolding into the nerve of the
Diaphragma, the consent of the same Action or Convulsion is produced even into
the cross bound or Midriff; so that by the same Act as it were with which the
Nostrils are wrinkled, the Diaphragma also with the Diastole being stronger and
longer draw out, is depressed, that the Breast being dilated as much as may be,
the Air may be the more copiously inspired. Then as soon as the Spasm or
Convulsion of the Membranes, drawn together within the Nostrils and forepart
of the Head, begins to remit, presently the Midriff leaping back with a force,
causes the inspired Air to be violently exploded or driven out, which strongly
wipes away and carries forth with it the humor pressed out within the caverns
of the Nostrils.

We yet ought to inquire concerning the Nerve of the Diaphragma, what is the
reason, that it always proceeds from the Brachial nerves, and why it does not
rather arise immedisitely from the spinal Marrow. Truly from hence it seems to
follow, that the motion of the Arms in some sort respects the action of the
Diaphragma; or on the contrary, that this depends on that. Indeed between these
two a certain respect or habitude happens; which easily appears by this
Argument: The Arms or fore Legs in all Creatures are made for labor and hard
exercise; because by the force of these men fight, and perform the most hard
and laborious things, and Brutes run and ascend the most steep places with
great pains. But it is very well known, that by too much labor and over
vehement motion of body, the act of Respiration is very much increased, so that
the breath almost fails, and is oftentimes in danger to be lost. The reason of
this is, because by great exercise the blood is too much forced into the bosom
of the Heart, which, lest it should suffocate it, that it might be emptied into
the Lungs, very frequent and difficult Respiration is instituted. Therefore
from hence may be inferred, That the exercises of the Body ought to be
regulated according to the state of the Praecordia; or that the motion of the
Arms should observe the action of the Diaphragma, viz. lest they being stirred
by a violent motion, cause the blood to be driven more into the bosoms of the
Heart, than the Diaphragma instituting a most frequent Respiration, can draw
from thence into the Lungs. That this Rule may be perpetually observed of all
living Creatures it is so provided, that the nerve of the Diaphragma, chiefly
conducing to Respiration, should be tied, as it were a bridle, to the Brachial
nerves, which are the principal in the motion of the Body, and so might timely
warn these, if unmindful of their duty, and as soon as breath fails, should
command them to desist from further moving the Body. Wherefore we observe, when
at any time laboring Cattle are urged beyond their strength in labor or
motion, oftentimes either some deadly hurt of the heart follows, or else some
uncurable disease of the Diaphragma; for by such immoderate labor, either the
Beast languishing quickly dies, when it is commonly said, that his heart is
broke; or else the tone of the Diaphragma being wholly broken, Respiration ever
after becomes painful and difficult: which is wont to happen ordinarily to
Horses, who are driven into too rapid a course with a full Belly.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Reason of the difference that happens between the Nerves of the
wandering and Intercostal Pair in Man and brute Beasts; also of the other Pairs
of the Nerves arising both within the Skull, and from the Spinal Marrow: also
something of the Blood-carrying Vessels which belong to the Spinal Marrow.

THus far we have described all the Nerves stretching out to the Praecordia and
Viscera, also to most of the other parts, which are the Organs o^ the
involuntary Function, according to the manner by which they are wrought in man;
and we have shown their Offices and Uses, and the Reasons of the most noted
appearances in all. Before we proceed to the other Conjugations of the Nerves,
it behooves us to show with what difference the aforesaid Nerves are found in
brute Beasts, and for what end such a difference is ordained.

It was already intimated, That the Trunk of the wandering pair in four footed
Beasts does send forth to the Heart and its Appendix more nervous Vessels than
in Man. The reason of which is obvious; because the Cardiack nerves in Brutes
proceed almost only from this pair, and scarce at all from the intercostal;
wherefore when they are only of one origination, therefore more are required,
all which notnotwithstanding are much fewer than the same are in Man from a
double stock, viz. being carried from both the Nerves: forasmuch as Beasts want
prudence, and are not much obnoxious to various and diverse Passions, therefore
there was no need that the Spirits should be derived from the Head into the
Praecordia by a double passage, viz. that one should be required for the
exercise of the vital Function, and the other for the reciprocating impressions
of the Affections; but that it may suffice, that all those destinated to every
one of their offices, may be carried still in the same path.

In most Brutes the intercostal Nerve goes alone from the Ganglioform enfolding
of it almost without any branching to its enfolding of the Thorax: in which
passage however it is not always after the same manner in all; for in some it
is carried single and apart from the Trunk of the wandering pair, nor does it
communicate with it in its whole journey, unless a little higher by a shoot
sent down from the Ganglioform enfolding: but in many the intercostal Nerve
passes presently from its Ganglioform enfolding into the neighboring enfolding
of the wandering pair, Fig. 10. C. where, when both the nerves seem to close
together, from thence both being involved under the same common enclosure, as
it were one Trunk, they are carried together till it comes over against the
first Rib, and there an enfolding being made, the intercostal nerve, departing
from the wandering pair, is carried into the enfolding of the Thorax; and the
other nerve also is stretched between this and that enfolding: which nerves,
when one is carried under the other above the Artery of the Chanel-bone, making
as it were an handle, straiten its Trunk, Fig. 10. g.

Although the intercostal Nerve is carried from the Throat to the top of the
Thorax under the same sheath with the Trunk of the wandering pair, yet it is not
united to it; but they remain distinct still both of them in the whole tract,
and the Membrane being dissected, they easily separate one from the other,
unless they be knit together by some fibrils sent from one another in some
places: but forasmuch as by this means the intercostal nerve being joined to
the Trunk of the wandering pair, goes under its cover, it seems to be so made
only for its safety and better passage: wherefore in some perhaps where the
intercostal Trunk is greater, or the course of its passage shorter, where such
a safeguard is not needful, it descends alone. We have seen this Nerve covered
with the safeguard of the wandering pair of one side, and in the other to have
gone out by it self alone.

Whether the intercostal Nerve departs from the lower Enfolding of the wandering
pair or not, however a branch is stretched out between this enfolding and that
of the Thorax in many, perhaps in all brute Beasts, which in its passage binds
about the Vertebral Artery, whereby the Sympraxis or joint Action between the
Praecordia and the exterior Organs of Respiration is sustained: yea from this
lower enfolding of the wandering pair sometimes we have observed a shoot and
fibers to be carried to the beginning of the Brachial branch, in which the
nerve of the Diaphragma is rooted; also sometimes, though rarely, we have seen
some shoots sent from the enfolding of the Thorax toward the Heart and its
Appendix. In a Monkey above this enfolding of the Thorax, as we have intimated
before, were some shoots and small branches reaching from the intercostal nerve
toward the Praecordia.

We may take notice concerning those Nerves below the Praecordia, distributed
every where into the Ventricle and the lower Viscera, that there is scarce any
difference of them in Man and Beasts. The nerve of the Diaphragma is placed
lower in fourfooted beasts: the reason of which is, because the Brachial
nerves, out of which that ought to proceed, arise lower; to wit, because Brutes
have longer necks, as if destinated to the yoke. These things being thus
premised concerning the difference of the Nerves in either Species, it remains
that we pass on to the unfolding the remaining pairs of them.

Therefore of those arising within the Skull, the ninth pair is made up of many
Fibers also in its beginning, (as was showed before) out of which being
gathered together one Trunk being made is carried toward the Tongue, through
whose whole substance, to wit, from the bottom to the top, having passed, it
disperses in its whole passage small shoots on either side, Fig. 9. (...). So
that nothing is more obvious than that this nerve performs the motions of the
Tongue requisite for the articulation of Sounds, as the nerves of the fifth
pair spread into this member, serve for the distinguishing of Tastes; for the
exercise of either Faculty, viz. both motive and sensitive, the texture of the
Tongue being notedly fibrous, has the virtue of a double Organ; therefore by
the two nerves, besides the supplements of Spirits, are carried both the
Instincts of the Motion and the sensible Impressions.

That the aforesaid Nerves of the ninth pair may more easily perform the
motions of the Tongue, it sends forth downwards one shoot before the entrance
of the Tongue, which is united with a shoot from the tenth pair meeting it
destinated to the Sternothyroeidal Muscle; and the other little branch of the
ninth Conjugation is distributed into the Muscles of the Bone Hyoides, Fig. 9.
TH.. In truth these shoots being sent down as so many little ropes, conduce to
the moving of the Muscles, which are fixed to the bottom of the Tongue, which
Muscles being placed as so many Props to the Tongue, do facilitate its motion.

The Nerve of the tenth pair, although it may seem to arise within the Skull
with many little Fibers also, yet being sent down from thence into the bony
Cloisters of the Spine, not arising but within the first and second Vertebrae,
it is carried without. Presently after its entrance it sends forth two nerves
into the enfolding of the intercostal nerve; for what end has been already
shown: But its chief Trunk spreading downwards, and receiving a shoot produced
from the ninth pair, is bestowed on the Sternothyroeidal Muscle. Moreover, this
nerve reflects branches outward, which are distributed into the Muscles of the
Neck reaching out toward the hinder part of the Head; so this pair, as if it
were only of the number or rank of the Vertebral nerves, imparts some branches
to the intercostal nerve, and all the other shoots and branches of it serve for
the performing of the motions of the Muscles of the Neck, Fig. 9. H. *.. D

So much for the Nerves arising within the Skull, which (as was shown) having
their being from the parts of the Brain or Cerebel, are destinated to the
offices of the spontaneous or the involuntary Function, and are chiefly
distributed into the Organs of the Senses or the Viscera of the vital and
natural Faculty. There remain many other Conjugations of Nerves, the roots or
beginnings of which consist in the spinal Marrow, which is only the exterior
production of the oblong Marrow. These spinal Nerves, besides some branches
that they bestow on the intercostal pair, are employed almost wholly on the
musculous stock, and the office of them is to carry outwardly the forces of the
Spirits and the Instincts of the Motions to be performed, and to convey
inwardly the impressions of sensible things. Forasmuch as the spinal Marrow
seems to be derived from the Brain, and is as it were a broad and high road
produced or leading from the same, without any paths or tracts inserted to it
from the Cerebel, therefore the animal Spirits flowing within its nerves, do
almost wholly execute the Acts of the spontaneous Function.

To describe all the several pairs of the spinal Nerves, and to rehearse all
their branchings, and to unfold the uses and actions of them, would be a work
of an immense labor and trouble: and as this Neurologie cannot be learned nor
understood without an exact knowledge of the Muscles, we may justly here
forbear entering upon its particular institution: but it may suffice concerning
these nerves and their medullar beginning, that we advertise only in general
what things may occur most notable and chiefly worth taking notice of.

As to the Nerves therefore produced out of the spinal Marrow, it may be
observed, That in both sides of it, nigh the outward margin or brim, four or
five Fibers arise in the superior brim, and as many in the inferior: either
maniple or handful pass through with distinct Fibers the Pia Matter, or the
lowest Coat of the spinal Marrow, which is as it were the common sheath of them
all; but afterward the Fibers passing through the third Membrane of either
margin, (for three cloth the spinal Marrow) they join together, and having
clothed themselves with a Coat gotten from the second Membrane, they become as
it were one Trunk; which Trunk going out at the space between the knot of the
Vertebrae, is again divided into many nerves destinated to several parts. After
this manner in the whole tract of the spinal Marrow, the Vertebral nerves have
their birth; but in those places where the Brachial and the Crural nerves go
out, both the thickness and the breadth of the spinal Marrow are increased, and
also the handfuls or bands of the Fibers are larger. All these are well
represented in Fig. 12.

The Brachial Nerves are not only far greater than the Vertebrals, so that they
appear as it were large and broad nervous chords; but that they may conspire
together, and serve for the strong motions of the Arms, or the fore Legs of
Beasts, it is observed. That very many of them are knit together by the cross
nervous Processes. These Processes in four-footed Beasts (the fore Legs of whom
are destinated for unweariable pains and difficult lobour) are produced cross
ways after a curious manner, as may be discerned, Fig. 10. l. l. The use of
these seems to sustain not only the consent of action in many nerves together,
but also their mutual strength; that some bands of Spirits might awaken or stir
up others, and for the exercising strongly the locomotive force, they might
mutually support and relieve one another. And not much unlike this, the
business is about the Crural Nerves, where nervous cords signally large, being
produced from the Junctures of the Vertebrae, whilst they descend toward the
Thigh, they which are above receive in their whole tract the nervous Processes
which are sent out still from those below, Fig. 11. p. p. p.

We may yet take notice farther concerning the spinal Marrow, that as it sends
out Nerves by bands, and as it were by troops, in an orderly series and
military order; so its sanguiferous Vessels are disposed with no less signal
artifice. For those which are carried in the superficies of the spinal Marrow,
and the Arteries, Veins, and other Sanguiducts, which are nigh its compass, do
contain some things more rare and highly worth the noting.

In the first place we may observe, That the blood-carrying Vessels do cloth
the whole substance or frame of the spinal Marrow, as well as the oblong Marrow
with a thick series of shoots; which may be made more manifest to any one, if
first of all Ink were injected into the Vertebral Artery; for from such an
injection often repeated, it will easily appear, that the infoldings of the
Vessels do cover as it were in the shape of a Net, the upper tract of the
Marrow. But by what means these Vessels proceed on both sides from the Trunk of
the Vertebral Artery, and also the blood-carrying Veins, which are destinated
to the whole spinal Marrow, and the inferior portion of its arterious passages,
does not so plainly appear; because the bony Cloisters of the Vertebrae are not
broken through without much labor, especially in grown up living Creatures;
and in that work the beginnings and branchings out of very many Vessels are
wont to be blotted out: But that we might more accurately search into these hid
things, we made the Dissections of several Embryons, in which we were able to
dissect the Vertebrae as yet soft, and to take out of them the Marrow whole,
and to look more narrowly into all the recesses of the Bones: further, that all
the tracts and branchings out of them might be the better perceived in all the
Vessels, we did cast in diverse colored Liquors. And we had our desired wish:
for presently we found with much admiration, that those kind of Vessels, viz.
Arteries, Bosoms, and Veins, which respect the Head, belong also to the spinal
Marrow with no less a noted disposition of provision.

When we did dissect the Heads apart from the Spine, we did think, according to
the Opinion of the Vulgar, that the Vertebral Arteries did belong only to the
Head: and when there did appear in the cut off Trunk of the oblong Marrow three
arterious branches (as they are described above in the first and second Table)
therefore in the Explication of either Figure we have affirmed the Vertebral
Artery to be carried with a triple branch into the hinder part of the Head. But
the Vertebral Artery pays to the superior part of the Spine as great Tributes
of Blood as to the Head it self; and that middle arterious branch, which is
marked in the first Figure with the Letter T, in the second with S, does not
ascend into the Head, but descends from that concourse of Vertebral Arteries
toward the Spine, and conveys downward from the common flowing together of the
blood there made by many Arteries, the Latex for the watring the top of the
spinal Marrow. Wherefore in this place it seems convenient, that we do not only
correct that error of ours, but that we deliver an exact Description of all
the Vessels which are destinated to the Spine, viz. which contain many
wonderful things. As therefore these Vessels are of a threefold kind, viz.
Arteries, Bosoms, and Veins, we will expose each of them particularly; and
first concerning the Arteries we say,

The Arteries which carry the Blood toward the Spine, are disposed after one
manner above the Heart, and after another below it. As to the first, whereas
the Trunk of the Aorta being there cleft presently into many branches, departs
from the Region of the Spine, therefore the Vertebral Artery is produced on
both sides from its axillary branches, which ascending straight into the hinder
part of the Head, sends forth a branch into the meeting together of every
Vertebra: But below the Heart, forasmuch as the Aorta, in its whole descent,
lies on the Spine, two Arteries are received into the Spine from its bottom
nigh its Internodia or spaces between the knots of the Vertebra; so that if the
Trunk of the Aorta be cut open long-ways, there will appear a series of double
holes through its whole tract, after a most curious manner, as in the head of a
Lamprey.

The arterious Branches which are carried both above and below the Heart
toward the Spine, becoming presently forked, bestow one shoot on the
neighboring Muscles, and another they insert into the Junctures of the
Vertebrae; which being carried within the bony Den, is cleft presently into
three branches, two of which are bestowed on the medullar Trunk, and the other
on the Membrane compassing about the bony Den before, Tab. 13. Fig. 3. a. b. c.
d. e.

As to the shoots destinated to the medullar Trunk, they presently tending two
ways, and meeting with either maniple or band of nervous Fibers, ascend toward
their beginnings; and so one little Artery having got to the superficies of the
hinder Marrow, distributes into it hairy Vessels: but the other arterious
shoot, which is the greater and chiefest, as soon as it attains the margin of
the former Marrow, is carried from thence by an oblique passage into the middle
fissure or cleft of it, where meeting with a shoot of the pair of the other
side, it is united to the same, and from that joining together the arterious
Trunk, as it were a common passage, and made up of either Vertebral shoot,
descends into that cleft by the open space of one of the Vertebrae, and in that
short passage both dispenses little Arteries on either side, and also inserts
them leaning on the Pia Matter more deeply betwixt the sides of the Marrow: and
so whereas in the whole tract of the Marrow, the chief Trunk of every Artery is
carried into the middle cleft, it seems at first sight, as if the same
arterious Trunk were carried under the whole substance of the Marrow from the
head to the tail, Tab. 13. Fig. 1. Further, as by a concourse of several shoots
of either side, the spinal Artery descends above the clest of the Marrow; so
where the Trunks of the Vertebral Arteries join together (which happens to be
done sometimes in the hinder part of the Head above the oblong Marrow, and
often in the Neck above the spinal) an arterious branch somewhat bigger than
the rest is stretched out downwards. This formerly (as we mentioned but now) we
mistook for the third ascending branch of the Vertebral Artery. But I have
often taken notice, that in Brutes, where the Vertebral Arteries have met
together with an acute Angle above the medullar Trunk, they are presently,
departing one from another, stretched out directly to either brim of the
Marrow, from whence immediately being bent back, they are carried again into a
mutual meeting, so that between their two joynings together is made the figure
Rhomboides, as it is in Tab. 13. Fig. 1. C. The reason of which without doubt
is this; to wit, that the more rapid course of the blood going toward the Head
might be hindered by its flood being a little space divided.

The third Branch of either Vertebral Artery being carried into the anterior
Cavity of the bony Den, and being presently made forked, tends to the right and
left, and is on both sides inoculated to the next shoot of the same side and by
the cross process, they of either side are united after the same manner; and so
all the Arteries of this cense or rank receive one another mutually, as it were
links of a chain, in the whole tract of the Spine, and are continued in the
same bending passage. If Ink be cast into the Trunk of the Vertebral Artery and
most of the hollownesses of the Aorta, all these Arteries, dyed with the same,
will appear a pleasant spectacle, like Network, as may be seen Tab. 13. Fig. 3.

The top of this arterious Enfolding being carried into the Skull, inserts two
shoots sent forth straight into the wonderful Net, and imparts two others going
out sideways on both sides to the Dura Matter: the lower end of the same
reaching to the Os Sacrum, ends in very small Vessels which serve for the
Membrane of the Bones.

If it should be asked, For what end these Arteries being concatenated with
such frequent ingraffings are disposed within the Backbone: This seems to be
so ordained for three uses: viz. First, These Vessels (as also the passages of
the Bosoms) are divaricated after this manner with repeated compassing about,
that a constant heat from the blood being so turned about, as it were into
frequent Whirlpools, might be supplied about the compass of the spinal Marrow,
as it were by a Balneum Maria; even such a manner of office as the Choroeidal
enfolding performs within the enfolding of the Brain. Secondly. Care is taken
by this means, lest the blood destinated for the spinal Marrow, might flow
thither too plentifully, or might be defective in its due influx; for the blood
being about to flow into the medullar stock plentifully, is diverted from the
little branches c. d. into these Emissaries e. f. and in its defect the
subsidiary provision being called out of the middle enfolding through the
chanel e. into the Vessels c. d. is derived into the same medullar Trunk.
Thirdly, The use of this arterious enfolding seems to be, that the blood may be
distributed from its passages into the Membranes, viz. which is carried every
where from them through the Capillary Vessels; the relics of which also are
supped back by the little channels sent out of the bosoms. Further, from this
Storehouse, if necessity urges, a certain provision is had for the wants of
the Brain; wherefore from hence the small Vessels end in the wonderful Net.

So much for the Arteries distributed about the Spine or Backbone: the Vessels
of the second sort are the Bosoms which come between the Arteries and the Veins
for the use of the spinal Marrow no less than of the Head it self, and are here
ordained with a more curious implication. But the reason why bosoms are
required to these more noble parts, and scarce to any in the whole Body
besides, is this; to wit, that about these bodies all manner of extravasation,
or any stagnation of the blood, might be hindered: but sometimes the Veins are
not sufficiently emptied, that they may presently receive from the Arteries the
deposited blood, and so may prohibit any flowing out of it; wherefore the
bosoms, as more fit receivers, are destinated to that office, for that their
receptacles are larger and soon emptied; and for that reason they may more
conveniently derive the blood from either medullar substance, lest it should
overflow it in the Head or Spine.

As to the Figure of the Vertebral Bosom, its passages being conform to the
arterious enfolding, are put under it in the whole tract of the Spine: for
after a like manner, in either bosom, which is extended within the cavity of
the bony Den, from the hinder part of the Head to the Os Sacrum, there is one
receiving Vessel, by whose twofold channels presently the blood is brought back
from either superficies of the Marrow into the bosom, and another carrying
back, by whose passage the same is exported into the Veins. Moreover, in many
Animals (though not in all) the bosoms on either side seem to be knit together
upon the knots between the Vertebrae by the cross processes, and so communicate
between themselves: either bosom in its top is continued into the lateral
bosoms of the Head; further, from it on both sides a passage lies open into the
Jugular Vein and into the Vertebral, Tab. 13. Fig. 4.

What the use of the aforesaid Bosom is in general was but now intimated; to
wit, that the blood deposited from the Arteries in the spinal Marrow, might be
presently emptied from thence, and be retained within the more large Cavities
of the Bosoms, till it may be transferred into the Veins being made more empty:
But the reason of the diverse sorts of implications, and the frequent
ingraffings which is found about their little channels, seems to be, that the
blood, if by chance it being plentifully heaped up within some part of the
^osom, should there stagnate, or be apt to regurgitate into the Marrow, it
might be drawn out by those frequent Emissaries here or there into the middle
or opposite side: after a like manner it is with the bosoms about the Spine, as
when a Countryman digs in his ground frequent cross Furrows for the draining
away any superfluous moisture.

There remains another use of the Vertebral Bosoms, of which we made mention
before, to wit, that the blood nigh the medullar Body, being brought through
their variously intorted Meanders, (like the arterious infoldings) might yield
heat requisite for the swift passage of the animal Spirits, as it were a
Balneum Mariae. That the bending tracts and complications of the Bosoms may be
the better seen, a certain tincture may be cast into the Vertebral Veins; and
presently that invading the passages of the bosoms and marking them, will
exhibit the appearance of a long Ladder with many little labels hanging to it.

Yea at length by those little roundles we are led to the third kind of Spinal
Vessels, which are the Veins, into which all the bosoms immediately convey
their burden, whereby they being continually emptied, may be still able to
receive fresh blood: wherefore the venous branch is stretched out by the
several joyntings of the Vertebrae into the bosom, which presently carries away
the blood laid up in it, and to be reduced toward the Heart. The Veins
designed to this office, after the example of the Arteries, are disposed after
one manner above the Heart, and after another below it. As to the first, a
branch going from the Trunk of the Vena Cava below the Chanel-bone, or the
first little Rib of the Breast, accompanies the Vertebral Artery, and ascending
by the holes of the Processes between the several Vertebrae, inserts a little
branch to the Bosom, Tab. 13. Fig. 2. h. h. h. Then the top of this Vein being
carried toward the hinder part of the Head, is continued into the Trunk of the
Bosom, and opened by the other passage into the Jugular Vein. But further, as
if these communications were not yet sufficient for the draining away the
blood, transverse branches also are stretched out between both Veins, Tab. 13.
Fig. 2. i. i. i. So manifold diverting places appear, by which it is enough and
more than enough provided, lest the blood might flow back toward the medullar
Trunk upon any occasion. Below the Heart, because the Trunk of the Vena Cava
cannot, as the Aorta, immediately lean upon the Spine, and carry shoots
straight to the same, therefore it sends forth a Vein without a Companion, out
of whose Trunk forked or twofold branches being sent forth, go forwards both to
the Muscles of both sides and to the Spine it self. Below the Kidneys, seeing
there is a space granted for the Vena Cava to be carried nigh the Spine, the
Azygos Vein ends, and from the Trunk of the greater Vein, as from that of the
Artery, the Vessels belonging to the Loins immediately proceed.

These things being lately observed concerning the blood carrying Vessels
belonging to the Spine and the hinder part of the Head, and here inserted in
the place of an Appendix, ought to be referred to the other Doctrine of this
kind, delivered above in the eighth Chapter. In the mean time, that we may
return to our purpose, to wit, what remains of Neurologie, there is not much
more to be met with worthy note concerning the Nerves: For they, as to the
greater and chief Ramifications, are almost constantly both in Man and brute
Beasts, after the manner we have described them. Sometimes it happens, although
very rarely, concerning the divarications of the smallest Shoots and Fibers,
that there is some variety: but as to the primary Vessels, and those drawn from
them, the Configuration of every pair of Nerves is still the same or alike in
all. It now remains, that the Theory of the Nerves, hitherto drawn in words,
and so only objected to the Understanding, may also be shown to the Sense,
which will make it clearer. Wherefore we have taken care, that the engraven
Delineations of the wandering and intercostal pair of Nerves, and also of others
which are of chief note, and of the Spinal Marrow it self be plainly exhibited.
The Figures of these, although taken from a dead Example, yet after many
Dissections and a frequent comparing them together according to their several
parts, they are described as if from the life; the Lineaments of which with
Characteristical Notes, that they may be the better and more distinctly
perceived, and a large draught of every Figure, equal almost to the Scheme of
Nerves in their animated Body, we have caused to be cut: further, because the
Contents of either side and of the Cavity between, cannot be at once described
in their proper situation; therefore here it is supposed, That the Spine, with
the oblong Marrow, or the whole medullar Stock, cut in the midst is rolled out,
and both sides of it, with the pairs of the Nerves arising in the whole Tract,
is turned outward.

5th and 6th pair of nerves, roots of the intercostal nerve

The Ninth Table
Shows the beginnings of the fifth and sixth pair of Nerves, and the Roots of
the Intercostal Nerve proceeding from them; moreover, the Origines and
Branchings out of the same Intercostal Nerve and the wandering Pair, and of the
accessory Nerve produced out of the Spine to the wandering Pair carried to the
Region of the Ventricle. Besides, here are represented the beginnings and
distributions of the seventh, ninth, tenth Pair of Nerves, and of the Nerve of
the Diaphragma; also the beginnings of the Vertebral Nerves in their whole
Tract from the Region of the Nerves inserted in the Praecordia and Viscera are
described, and their Communications with the former. All this whole following
Table shows how it is found in Man different from other living Creatures.

A. The Nerve of the fifth Pair with its two Branches A. A. the upper of which
tending straight forwards, distributes shoots into the muscles of the Eyes and
Face, into the Nose, Palate, and the upper part of the whole Mouth; moreover,
it reflects two shoots a. a. which are the two roots of the intercostal Nerve:
the other lower Branch of the fifth Pair tending downwards, is dispersed into
the lower Jaw and all its parts. a. a. Two shoots sent down from the upper
Branch of the fifth Pair, which meeting together with the other shoot b.
reflected from the Nerve of the sixth pair, constitute the trunk of the
Intercostal trunk D. B. The Nerve of the sixth pair tending straight forwards
into the muscles of the Eyes, out of whose trunk a shoot b. which is the third
root of the intercostal Nerve, is reflected. b. The third root of the
intercostal Nerve. C. The Original of the hearing Nerves or of the seventh pair
with its double Process, viz. soft and hard. c. The softer Branch of it which
is wholly distributed into the inward part of the Ear, viz. into the muscle
listing up the hammer, and into the shell. c. The harder Branch of it, which
arising whole without the Skull, and being inoculated with the shoot of the
eighth pair e. constitutes with it a single Nerve, which presently is divided
into many shoots: of which 1. is bestowed on the muscles of the tongue and of
the bone Hyoides. 2. Again into more shoots, the upper of which 3. Into the
muscles of the Face and Mouth. 4. Into the muscles of the Eyelids and
Forehead. 5. Into the muscles of the Ear.
D. The trunk of the intercostal Nerve consisting of the three aforesaid Roots
about to pass into the Ganglioform enfolding: which enfolding of the
intercostal Nerve, brought without the Skull, seems to be the highest knot. E.
The Original of the Nerve of the wandering or eighth pair consisting of many
Fibers, with which the Nerve. arising out of the Spine, joins, and being
inoculated with them, passes together through the Skull, which being passed, it
departs again, and having made a communication with some neighboring Nerves,
is bestowed on the muscles of the Shoulders and Back. e. A shoot of the eighth
Pair meeting with the auditory Nerve. f.f.f. Other shoots of the wandering Pair
going into the muscles of the Neck. G. The principal Branch of the same Pair
being lost or drowned in the Ganglioform enfolding being near. H. The upper
Ganglioform enfolding of the wandering Pair which admits a shoot k. out of
another near enfolding of the intercostal Nerve. h. A Branch out of the
aforesaid enfolding of the wandering Pair going into the muscles of the Larynx,
a noted shoot of which entering into the Shield-like Cartilage, meets with the
returning Nerve, and is united to the same. i. A shoot sent from the cervical
Enfolding of the intercostal Nerve into the trunk of the wandering Pair. K. The
lower enfolding of the wandering Pair from which many Nerves proceed for the
Heart and its Appendix. l. A noted shoot sent to the Cardiack enfolding. m.
Nervous Fibers distributed into the Pericardium and the Vessels hanging to the
Heart. n. The left returning Nerve, which being reflected from compassing about
the descending trunk of the Aorta upwards toward the Scutiform Cartilage,
imparts in its ascent many shoot's **** to the rough Artery, and at length
meets with a shoot h. sent from the Ganglioform enfolding. This returning back
from the knot of reflection, sends some shoots toward the Heart. L. The
returning Nerve in the right side, which being reflected much higher, binds
about the axillary Artery. O. Anoted branch sent down from the trunk of the
wandering pair in the left side toward the Heart, one shoot of which presently
becoming forked, compasses about the trunk of the Pneumonick Vein; the other
attaining the hinder region of the Heart, is dispersed into many shoots which
cover over its superficies: a like Cardiack branch sent out of the trunk of the
other side, meets with this. p. The shoot of the aforesaid branch going about
the Pneumonick Vein. q. Another branch of the same imparting to the Heart many
shoots which cover over its hinder superficies, turned back beyond their proper
situation. r.r.r. Small shoots sent out of the trunk of the wandering pair which
are inserted by a long tract to the Oesophagus. S.S.S. Many shoots cut off, the
branchings of which being distributed into the substance of the Lungs,
variously straiten and bind about the blood carrying Vessels. T.T.T. The trunk
of the wandering pair divided into two branches, viz. the exterior and the
interior, either of which inclining toward the like branches on the other
side, are united to the same, and after a mutual communication constitute the
two Stomachical branches, viz. the upper and the lower. V.V. The inward
branches, which being united in X, constitute the beginning of the lower
Stomachical branch. W.W. The outward branches, which being united in the Figure
to be added to this, make the upper Stomachical branch. X. The joining together
of the inward branches. F. The beginning of the Nerve of the ninth pair with
many fibers, out of which being united, a trunk being made is carried toward
the tongue; but in its progress sends out two shoots. TH.TH. The first shoot
tending downward, and united to a branch of the tenth pair, is bestowed on the
Sternothyroeidal Muscle. (...) The second shoot on the muscles of the Bone
Hyoides. (...) The trunk of this Nerve passing into the body of the tongue. G.
The upper Ganglioform enfolding of the intercostal Nerve, which is the highest
knot of this Nerve, being come out of the Skull. a. A shoot out of this
enfolding sent into the neighboring enfolding of the wandering pair. b.b. Two
nervous Processes by which this enfolding communicates with the Nerve of the
tenth pair. g. A shoot sent down into the Sphincter of the throat. G. The
middle or Cervical enfolding, which being proper to man, is placed nigh the
middle of the neck in the trunk of the intercostal Nerve. d. A noted branch out
of the second Vertebral pair going into this enfolding, whereby this
communicates with the Nerve of the Diaphragma in its first root. e.e. Two
branches from the same enfolding into the trunk of the Nerve of the Diaphragma.
z.z. Many nervous fibers coming from the Cervical enfolding into the returning
Nerve and into the Blood carring Vessels, and are also sowed into the trunks of
the Trachea and the Oesophagus. th. A shoot from the same into the trunk of the
wandering pair.. Another signal shoot into the returning Nerve. chapterchapter Two
signal shoots sent down toward the Heart, which another branch l. follows,
arising a little lower: those being carried downwards between the Aorta and the
Pneumonick Artery, meeting with the like branches of the other side, constitute
the Cardiack enfolding D. out of which the chief Nerves proceed which are
bestowed on the Heart. l. A branch proceeding a little lower from the
intercostal trunk, which is destinated with the former to the Cardiack
enfolding. D. The aforesaid Cardiack enfolding. m. The handle going from the
same, which binds about the Pneumonick Artery. v. The lower handle binding the
pneumonick Vein. E. The intercostal Nerve domersed into the cavity of the
Thorax, where it binds the axillary Artery. x.x.x.x. The four Vertebral Nerves
sent down into the enfolding of the Thorax, the upper of which binds the
Vertebral Artery. o.o.o. Three noted branches sent down from the Cardiack
enfolding, which cover the anterior region of the Heart, as the Nerves p.q.
going from the trunk of the wandering pair, impart branchings to its hinder
part. p. The Vertebral Artery bound about by the Vertebral Nerve.... Nervous
shoots covering the anterior region of the Heart. t.t.t. Shoots and nervous
Fibers distributed to its hinder part. TH. The lower Enfolding, called properly
the Intercostal or Thoracical, into which, besides the intercostal Nerve, four
Vertebrals are inserted: the uppermost of these in its descent binds about the
Vertebral Artery. I. The intercostal Nerve descending nigh the roots of the
sides through the cavity of the Thorax, where in its whole progress it admits a
branch from between the several knots of the Vertebrae. H. The Nerve of the
tenth pair, consisting of many fibers in the beginning, arises between the
first and second Vertebrae, where presently it sends forth two nervous
processes b. b. into the upper enfolding of the intercostal Nerve. * A branch
of it, which being united to a shoot of the ninth pair, is bestowed into the
Sternothyroeidal Muscle immediately lying on the rough Artery.. A shoot
reflected into the posterior muscles of the Neck.. A shoot into the pathetick
Spinal Nerve. ^ Shoots from the chief branch of the same Nerve into the
Sternothyroeidal Muscle. L. The original of the chief Vertebral Nerve, which in
this, as in all other Vertebrals, consists of many Fibers, one band of which
going out of the lower margin of the Spinal Marrow, and another from the
upper, meeting, go together into one trunk, which is presently divided into
nerves distributed many ways. f. A shoot from this Nerve into the branch of the
tenth pair. e. Another shoot into the Spinal Pathetick. c. A noted shoot sent
forth upwards into the muscles of the Neck and Ears. T. A shoot from the
crooked Nerve into the muscles of the Neck. 7. A Nerve from this pair into the
first brachial nerve, out of which the nerve of the Diaphragma has its highest
root. M. The beginning of the second Vertebral, out of which the upper Brachial
branch proceeds, and in which the nerve of the Diaphragma is first rooted. This
Brachial nerve in four-footed Beasts arises near the fourth or fifth Vertebrae,
and so the root of the Diaphragma is placed lower. v. The Vertebral branch
destinated to the Arm. Y. The Nerve of the Diaphragma, a shoot of whose root d.
comes to the Cervical enfolding, and a little lower two other branches from the
same enfolding ^.^. are reached out into its trunk. This communication i^
proper to man. ^. The other root of the Diaphragma from the second and third
Brachial nerve.. The lower trunk of the nerve of the Diaphragma being removed
out of its place, which in its proper situation, passing through the cavity of
the Thorax without any communication, goes straight forward to the Diaphragma,
where being stretched out into three shoots, it is inserted into its musculous
part. ps.ps.ps.ps. The other Brachial nerves, out of whose roots nerves go into
the intercostal Enfolding. o.o.o.o. The beginnings of the Vertebral nerves,
from the several roots of which a branch is carried into the intercostal
nerve.. The last beginning of the Spinal accessory Nerve, going to the wandering
pair, beginning with a sharp point.. The trunk of the same Nerve ascending,
which in its whole ascent, going through the side of the Spinal Marrow, passes
through the midst of the beginnings of the Vertebral nerves, and receives
Fibers from the stock of the Marrow.. The trunk of the same Nerve descending,
which departing from the wandering pair, is reflected outward, and after having
had communications with the nerves of the ninth and tenth pairs, it is bestowed
wholly on the muscles of the Shoulder.. The lower process of the same Nerve.
The Tenth Table
Shows the beginnings and Branchings out of the same Nerves which were
described in the former Table, as some of them are found in brute Beasts
otherwise than in Man.

A. The trunk of the intercostal Nerve going out of the Skull. B. The upper
Ganglioform enfolding springing out of the trunk of the intercostal nerve. C.
The intercostal nerve arising out of the aforesaid proper enfolding, and sent
down into the other neighboring enfolding of the wandering pair. D. A shoot
from the upper enfolding into the Sphincter of the throat. E. Both the Nerves
included in the same sheath, as if they were the same trunk, descend toward
the Thorax: out of which trunk appearing in this place, a branch is sent out
into the returning nerve. F. The lower enfolding in the trunk of the wandering
pair, or rather consisting in the common sheath of either nerve. f. A shoot out
of this enfolding into the Brachial branch coming between, in which branch the
nerve of the Diaphragma has its root. G. The intercostal Nerve departing from
the same enfolding, and going under the axillar Artery, is inserted into the
enfolding of the Thorax. g. Another Branch going between the two infoldings,
and going above the axillary Artery, so that these two nerves having made an
handle, bind about the Artery. H. A noted shoot out of the aforesaid enfolding
of the wandering pair into the Cardiack enfolding. i.i.i.i. From thence many
nervous Fibers are sent down into the Vessels belonging to the Heart, and into
the Pericardium. k.k.k.k. The greater Brachial nerves which are produced a
little lower in Brute animals, than in Man: and therefore the nerve of the
Diaphragma arises lower. L.L.L. The Brachial nerves mutually cutting one
another by the cross processes, communicate among themselves. M. The Nerve of
the Diaphragma consisting of three roots, when in Man they are only two. 1. The
first root of the same Nerve. 2. Its second Root. 3. Its third Root, which
communicates mediately with the enfolding of the wandering pair, viz. by the
trunk of the Brachial branch, to which it is fixed. n. A Nerve carried from the
second Brachial branch into the intercostal enfolding, which binds about in its
passage the Vertebral Artery.
N. Shoots and suckers sent down from both knots of the returning nerve toward
the Heart and its Appendix.
The other Nerves and their Branchings out are as in the other Figure, which
shows the pattern of them in Man.

beginnings and branchings out of nerves

lower branchings distributed to the abdomen

The Eleventh Table
Shows the lower Branchings out of the wandering and the Intercostal Pair
distributed to the Ventricle and the Viscera of the Abdomen; also the
beginnings of the Vertebral Nerves, which are placed over against the former,
and are ingraffed into some of them. The Figure of these in Man and in
four-footed Beasts is almost alike, so that this Table may be common for both.

A. The lower Stomachical Branch which is made up out of the internal branches
of each wandering pair, being united together, and covering the bottom of the
Ventricle, disperses shoots on every side in the whole tract. B. The upper
Stomachical Branch which is made out of the external branches of the wandering
pair, on either side united together, and creeps through the top of the
Ventricle. C. The Coalition or joining together of the Branches. D. The nervous
Enfolding out of the Fibers of both the Stomachical nerves, being united
together nigh the Orifice, and as it were woven into a Net. a.a. The ends of
both the Stomachical nerves which there meet with the nerves of the Liver, and
communicate with them. E.E. The Intercostal nerve descending on either side
nigh the roots of the Ribs, and in its whole descent receiving a branch from
the several Vertebral nerves e.e. F. A branch going out of the Nerve of the
left intercostal side, and sent down toward the Mesenterick infoldings. G. The
same Mesenterick nerve becoming forked, sends out the greater branch into the
enfolding, which is the Stomachical and Splenetick, and the lesser into that
belonging to the Reins. H. The like Mesenterick branch going out of the
intercostal nerve on the right side, and inclining toward the Mesenterick
enfolding. I. The greater Branch of this nerve becoming in like manner twofold,
the greater branch going into the Hepatick, and the lesser into the Renal
enfolding, or that belonging to the Kidneys.. The chief Mesenterick Enfolding
of the left side, which is also the Stomachical and Lienary, or belonging to
the Spleen; out of which many little bundles of Nerves or numerous Conjugations
are sent out many ways.. The Renal Mesenterick Enfolding of the left side, into
which, besides the Mesenterick shoot, b.b. two other Nerves are carried
immediately out of the Intercostal nerve. YYY. From this Enfolding, planted
near the Bilary Chest, many Nerves and Fibers are sent into the Kidney. d.d.
Nerves and Fibers by which this enfolding communicates with the greatest
enfolding of the Mesentery. z. The chief bundle of Nerves tending out of the
former enfolding. into the Spleen, which it having reached, reflects from
thence certain Fibers into the bottom of the Ventricle. n. The second
Conjugation of the Nerves from the aforesaid enfolding into the bottom of the
Belly, whose Fibers communicate with the shoots and fibers of the lower
Stomachical nerve. th. The third Conjugation of Nerves between this enfolding
and the neighboring Hepatick. i. The fourth Conjugation of the Nerves between
this and the greatest enfolding of the Mesentery.. The Renal Mesenterick
Enfolding of the right side, into which (as in its fellow) besides the
Mesenterick branch, K.K. two nerves are produced from the intercostal nerve. l.
The Nerves and Fibers between this enfolding and the greatest of the Mesentery.
m. A noted Branch between this enfolding and the neighboring Hepatick. V. A
noted Company of Nerves and Fibers from this enfolding into the Kidney, which
climb over the emulgent Vessels, and variously bind them about.. The superior
Mesenterick Enfolding of the right side. o. A great Conjugation of Nerves out
of this Enfolding into the Liver and Gall-Chest, out of which also many shoots
are distributed into the Pylorus and Pancreas. The Nerves and Fibers of this,
in its ascent toward the Liver, cover the Hepatick Artery, by making as it
were a little Net, and almost hide its trunk. The shoots of these meet with the
tops of the Stomachical nerve. aa. p.p. Shoots distributed about the Pylorus. p
p. Other shoots dispersed into the Pancreas.. Nerves reaching out between this
Enfolding and the greatest of the Mesentery. This enfolding communicates with
the neighboring Renal by m. and with the Stomachical by th.. The greatest
Mesenterick enfolding out of which a mighty bundle of Nerves...... arising
under the great Glandula of the Mesentery, from thence is dispersed on every
side about into many shoots and branches, and they are distributed into all the
Intestines, except the straight Intestine. The Nerves and Fibers reaching out
on every side, are knit to the Mesenterick Arteries and Veins in its whole
compass, and variously strain and bind them about. tt. Nervous shoots from this
Enfolding into the Women's testicles, or the uterine Glandula's, which meet with
the branches of the Vertebral nerves of the twentieth and one and twentieth
pair sent into the same parts, and are inoculated with them. v.v. The Vertebral
branches into the Women's testicles.. The lowest Enfolding of the Mesentery
placed much below the former, and having for its beginning three nerves on
either side arising lower from the Intercostals. ph.ph.ph. Three Nerves on
either side sent down from the intercostal nerve into the lowest enfolding of
the Mesentery. chapterchapter A Nerve stretching out of that Enfolding directly into
the greatest enfolding of the Mesentery, which in its passage receives on both
sides some shoots from the intercostal nerve, viz. 4. 4. 5. 5. 5. and it self
sends two shoots into the Women's testicles. psps. Two branches from the
aforesaid Nerve into the Women's testicles.. Another small Enfolding standing a
little above this lowest. ^. A nervous Process reaching out of the aforesaid
lowest Enfolding into the neighboring very little enfolding. a. From the least
Enfolding. a noted nerve being carried into the greatest enfolding of the
Mesentery, which in its whole ascent stretches under the straight Intestine and
part of the Colon, and inserts frequent shoots into them. b. Another Branch
sent from the same Enfolding downward, which stretches under the lower part of
the same straight Intestine, and imparts to it frequent shoots. C.C. Two Nerves
sent downward from the lowest enfolding of the Mesentery, which being sent down
into the Basin about the lowest cavity of the Belly, enter the two infoldings
there K.K. viz. one placed in either side. K K. A double Enfolding placed
within the Basin, whose nerves provide for the several excretions there made,
viz. of the Urine, Dung, and Seed; these send out nerves d.d. toward the
lowest Mesenterick enfolding. d.d. A nerve ascending from the aforesaid
Enfolding on either side, nigh the sides of the straight Intestine, inserts
shoots into it; which double enfolding, another nerve descending (b) from the
least enfolding, meets with. ee. Two Nerves from the same Enfolding into the
Womb. f. A nerve from the same Enfolding into the Bladder. g. A nerve into the
Glandules Prostatae. h. A nerve out of the Root of the eighth and twentieth
Vertebral pair into the muscles of the Anus. i. The nine and twentieth
Vertebral pair, from which k. goes a Nerve into the Sphincter, and the other
muscles of the Anus. l. A noted nerve on both sides from that pair into the
Yard. m. Another shorter Branch into the muscles of the Yard. L.L. The
intercostal nerve below the Reins. m. A little nerve from the Vertebral branch
into the Cremasteral muscle of a Man's Testicles. n. The one and twentieth
Vertebral pair; the beginning of which being placed behind the Kidneys, lies
hid. From this Nerve very many shoots are sent out on both sides into the
testicles of the female Sex, which meet with other Mesenterick shoots,
distributed to the same part. o. A Nerve from the two and twentieth Vertebral
pair, out of which also are some shoots sent into the Woman's testicles.
p.p.p.p.p.p.p.p.p. Nerves destinated for the thigh, of which those that arise
higher, receive in their descent branches from the nerves arising lower. q. The
intercostal Nerves inclining mutually one to the other, near the beginning of
the Os Sacrum, communicate by the cross Process ^. r. Another cross Process
within the crookedness of the Os Sacrum knitting together the two intercostal
nerves. s. Both the intercostal Nerves ending in most small fibers, which
fibers are distributed into the very Sphincter of the Anus. t. A Nerve from the
twenty fourth Vertebral pair, which is carried into the inguinal Glandula's or
of the Groyn. v.v.v.etc. Shoots sent down from the intercostal Nerve on both
sides into the body of the Vreters. x. A Nerve which is destinated to the
Testicles and the Cremasteral Muscle, cut off where it goes out of the Abdomen.
spinal marrow

The Twelfth Table
Shows the Spinal Marrow whole taken out of its bony Den, and half taken from
the Membrane clothing it, being dissected, that the beginnings and productions
of all the Vertebral Nerves might be seen together.

A.A. The top of the Spinal Marrow, where it is cut off from its cleaving to
the oblong Marrow. B. The Spinal Artery seen to descend through the whole
Marrow, which however is made up of Arteries, brought into it from between the
several joyntings of the Vertebrae. C.C. The Spinal Nerve coming from the fifth
or sixth Vertebra of the Neck to the beginning of the wandering pair. D.D.
Portions of the Membrane clothing the Marrow dissected and rolled off. E.E.E.
The Spinal Nerves sent out of the upper margin of the Marrow by bands, with
which the like bundles also being carried from the lower margin, meet and join
together all into one trunk within the junctures of the Vertebrae: then being
separated again without them, they are carried into their respective Provinces.
F.f. Nerves brought forth within the region of the Neck. G.g. Nerves destinated
for the Shoulder and Arm, where both the Marrow is larger, and the bundles of
the nerves are greater. H.h. Nerves going out about the Back and Loins: where
both the body of the Marrow is again smaller, and the little bundles of the
nerves are a little slenderer. I.i. Nerves destinated for the thighs, where
also the medullar body and the little bundles of the nerves are again larger.
K. Nerves going out of the Os Sacrum.
The Thirteenth Table.
FIGURE I.
Shows the branchings forth of the Vertebral Artery reaching out on both sides
into the superior part of the Spinal Marrow, and into the hinder Region of the
oblong Marrow.

A.A. The Region of the posterior oblong Marrow. B. The common passage made
from both the Vertebral Arteries united together. C. The Rhomboidal Figure,
which in Brutes a double coalition of the Vertebral Arteries describes. D. The
first joining together of the Vertebral Arteries above the Spinal Marrow, from
which place the Spinal Artery descends. E. The Spinal Artery. F.F. Two
Vertebral Arteries carried from the axillary branches. G. The Spinal Marrow.
f.f.f.f.etc. Arterious shoots into the muscles of the Neck. g.g.g.g. Shoots
sent in the Spinal Marrow which join together from either side in the Spinal
Marrow nigh the several joynings of the Vertebrae. h.h.h.h. Arterious shoots,
which following the channels of the Bosoms, make the arterious Enfolding, as it
is described in the third Figure. f.f. Two Arteries sent down from the Aorta
into the Spine.
FIGURE II.
Shows the Vertebral Veins which are Companions to the abovesaid Arteries; also
the upper portion of the Vertebral Bosom and the communications of either among
themselves and lateral Bosoms of the Head, and between the Jugular Veins.

A. The third Bosom of the Head cut off, where it passes into its lateral
Bosoms. B.B. The lateral Bosoms of the Head. C.C. The round Den where the
lateral Bosom goes on both sides into the Jugular Vein. D.D. The Jugular Vein.
E. The upper joynting of the Vertebral Bosoms. F.F. The Vertebral Bosom on
either side within the Skull brought through, and there passing into the
lateral Bosom. G.G. The trunk of either Vertebral Vein brought from the Vena
Cava, and there beginning. H.H. Either trunk of the Vertebral Bosom there cut
off, which lower is continued through the whole passage of the Spine.
h.h.h.h.h.h. The joynings together on both sides within the Commissures of the
Vertebrae between the Vertebral Vein and Vertebral Bosom. i.i.i.i. The Veinous
passages, which reaching out before without the Vertebrae, are carried from the
Vein of one side to its fellow of the other side. i.i. The communication of all
the Bosoms and Veins in the top of the Spine. k.k. The Veinous passage from the
concourse of the Bosoms and Veins on both sides into the Jugular Vein.
l.l.l.l.etc. The joynings together of the Bosoms of either side near the
Internodia of the Vertebrae. m.m.m.m.etc. The passages of the Veins carrying
back the Blood from the Spinal Marrow into the Bosoms. n.n.n.n.etc. The Channels
of the Veins carrying back the Blood from the muscles of the Neck.
13th table TABVL. XIII
spinal artery fig 3.tia.
vertebral artery fig: 1: ^^^
vertebral veins fig. 2da
spinal bosom fig 4th
spinal bosom in a dog fig: 5.ta


FIGURE III.
Shows the Spinal Artery which is produced within the bony Den nigh the more
inward Superficies of the Marrow, from the hinder part of the Head to the Os
Sacrum, in the shape of a Network purl.

a.a.a.a. Arterious shoots sent toward the Spine from the Vertebral Artery
ascending between the holes of the Spinal Processes. b.b.b.b.etc. Arterious
shoots sent from the Aorta toward the Spine. c.c.c.c.etc. An arterious shoot
reaching out of every of the aforesaid shoots into the posterior Marrow.
d.d.d.d.etc. Another shoot reaching out of every of the aforesaid shoots into
the anterior Marrow. e.e.e.e.etc. Every the aforesaid arterious shoots, as soon
as carried into the bony den becoming forked, send forth a little branch into
either part, which on both sides communicates with the next branch of the same
side, and by the cross Process with the fellow branch of the other side.
f.f.f.f. The joynings together of the Arteries of either side by the cross
shoot. g.g. The arterious shoots going out of the Os Sacrum. h.h. Arterious
shoots into the Meningae of the hinder part of the Head. i.i. Arterious shoots
going out of the Skull with the Nerves of the seventh pair. k.k. Shoots
reaching out into the wonderful Net, which in their progress are ingraffed
mutually among themselves, and also with the Arteries Carotides.
FIGURE IV.
Shows the Branchings out of the Spinal Bosom in its whole passage.

A. The uppermost joining of the Bosoms of either side. B.B. Channels reaching
out of either Vertebral Bosom into the lateral Bosoms of the Head. C.C. Channels
brought from the common concourse of the Bosoms, and the Vertebral Veins into
the Jugular Veins. D.D. The Vertebral Veins. e.e. A communication between the
Spinal Bosom and the Vertebral Vein. f.f.f.f. The passages of the Veins from
either Bosom into the trunk of the Vertebral Vein. g.g.g.g.etc. The like Venous
passages which are continued lower into the branches of the Vein Azygos, and
lastly into the lumbary shoots of the Vena Cava. h.h.h.h.etc. The Pipes of the
Veins, which receiving the blood from the Spinal Marrow carry it back into the
Bosoms. i.i.i.i.etc. The Commissures or joynings of the Bosoms of either side
nigh the several joyntings of the Vertebrae.
FIGURE V.
Shows the Image of the Spinal Bosom in a Dog, which has not joynings together
in its whole passage, as it is in a Calf, Sheep, Hog, and many others, but only
in the lowest and uppermost part, where it communicates with it self by three
or four cross Processes.

THE CONCLUSION.
THUS much for the Anatomy of the Brain and Cerebel, and of their Appendix,
both Medullar and Nervous, and of the Uses and Offices of all the several
Parts, of which we have largely treated. There yet remains, after we have
viewed, not only the outward Courts and Porches of this Fabric, as it were of
a certain Kingly Palace, but also its intimate Recesses and private Chambers,
that we next inquire into, what the Lady or Inhabitant of this Princely place
may be, in what part she does chiefly reside, and by what Rule and Government
she disposes and orders her Family. Then we ought to take notice, what defects
and irregularities happen to it, or to its parts and powers; then to what
injuries of changes or diseases this Building or House, to wit, the Brain and
nervous Stock, may be obnoxious. For indeed I am as it were bound, by reason of
the Work it self, and the promise I made before, that for the Crown of the
Work, a certain Theory of the Soul of Brutes should be added after the naked
Anatomical Observations and Histories of Living Creatures, and of their
animated Parts. Truly it is but just and equal, that we enter upon this
Discourse of the Soul, and that other task of Pathologie, to wit, that the
Asperities and hard sense of our already instituted Anatomy may be sweetened
with those kind of more pleasant Speculations, as it were clothing the
Skeleton with flesh; and that the Reader being wearied by a long and troublesome
Journey, may be a little refreshed and recreated. For in truth, whatsoever of
our Work is performed without form or beauty, may seem as the Foundation of a
Building only placed on the ground, in which no elegancy or neatness does yet
shine, but that all things appear rude, and as yet built of rough and
unpolished stones. A Superstructure indeed may be promised to be put upon this
Foundation, perhaps fair and beautiful, whereby the minds of the Beholders may
be pleased and instructed. But truly this kind of work may be too hard and
great to be performed by our weakness: neither does it become me to proceed in
my undertakings, before these have undergone the Censure and chance to which
they are subject. For I fear, lest this Foundation, but now laid, should become
too weak and feeble for the sustaining an higher Fabric, at least until this
has for some time undergone the trial, by lying open to winds and storms.

FINIS.

