THE CONFESSION Of the Four High-Way-Men;

As it was Written by One of them, and Allowed by the Rest the 14th. of this
Instant April (being the Day before their Appointed Execution).

VIZ. JOHN WILLIAMS, alias Tho. Matchet. FRANCIS JACKSON, alias Dixie. JOHN
WHITE, alias Fowler. WALTER PARKHURST.


This being desired to be made Public by the Persons themselves, to prevent
false Reports of them when they are Dead.

With Allowance.

London, Printed for D. M. 1674.

THE CONFESSION Of the Four High-Way-Men.
UPon the request of a Friend, but chiefly to prevent false Pamphlets which may
a^ise of our Deaths, as it did at our Taking; We have given this Truth under
our Hands, the Day before Execution, That on Monday the 16th of March, Walter
Parkhurst, James Slader, and John Williams: committed a Robbery upon
Windsor-Coach near Hounslow-Heath, being in sight of about a dozen Gentlemen,
well Armed and mounted, who pursued us for five or six miles before we could
lose sight of them.

That on the 18th of the same Month, we the forementioned Parties took John
White, and Francis Jaekson along with us, and beyond Hounslow in Bedfond-Lane
near Stains, Robbed two Coaches. We struck off from thence into Acton Road
supposing our selves discovered by a Gentle man's Man in a Green-Livery, who was
a hunting; Who upon the sight of us, made haste the nearest way over the F^elds
to Acton; we thought it o^r best course to make Harrow on the Hill, and did
suppose our selves pursued all the Way, though we never saw any certain
Evidence of it until we came there, where in the Town we found about Fo^ty or
Fifty Men ready to receive us with Guns, P^^chforks and all sorts of Weapons,
so that we rode down the Hill by the side of the Town, at the bottom of which
we found a great number of Horse and Foot ready to receive us; Which we soon
made run in^o the Houses for shelter, and so rode on toward Paddington, and
from thence toward Kilburn and Hendon, and from thence to Hampstead-Heath; but
was so hotly engaged all the way by our Pursuers, that it was about ten or
eleven a Clock, when we were at Harrow on the the Hill, and it was six of the
clock when we recovered Hampstead-Heath, our Powder and Shot being all gone,
and some of our Swords, and most of us sorely Wounded and Bruised about two of
the clock.

There was a Lifeguard Man that fought with a great deal of Courage most part
of that day. There was about two hundred Men upon Hampstead-Heath, which was
near about an hour before they could take us; having nothing but our Swords,
and some of us not them: from thence to Newgate; from thence to the Sessions
House, where Parkhurst and Williams pleaded guilty to their Indictments; the
others the contrary; but all Cast.

We write not this as if we glorified in the Action, the Cause being so
Criminal and Bad; and yet if the Cause had been good there could not have been
a Nobler Defense. And we Wish that all People may take Warning by our Miserable
End, which shall be the substance of our Discourse at the Place of Execution:
Concluding with a Prayer.

John Williams. Francis Jackson. John White. Walter Parkhurst.

A RELATION OF THEIR TRIAL.
A Middlesex Jury being called, the aforesaid Prisoners were set to the Bar,
and were severally arraigned upon no less than 14. Indictments that were
brought against them by several persons whom they had robbed at Hounslow,
Hendon and several other places upon the Road the 16th. and 18th. days of March
last; and taken from them their Horses, Gold, Silver, Watches, Lace, Rings,
Linen and several other things in the said Indictments particularly recited;
Ten of these Indictments were for Felony and Robbery, the four last were for
Murder of two of those honest Country Men that assisted to take them; their
Names were Henry Miller and Edward Kemp; The two first Indictments were taken
upon the Coroners Inquest for the killing of Henry Miller, against Francis
Jackson one of the Prisoners at the Bar, who run him through with his Rapier,
and against the other three as aiding and assisting him in the Murder.

The other two Indictments were upon the Inquest of the Grand Jury of Middlesex
for the Murder of the said Edward Kemp, by James Slader deceased, and against
the other four Prisoners for aiding and assisting him, as in the former
Indictment.

It was held convenient to lay these Indictments several ways, although the
Facts were the same in both.

The first Indictment upon which they were Arraigned was for a Robbery at
Hounslow upon the 16th. of March last, where they Robbed one James Hepper and
several others in a Stage-Coach, and took from them a Watch, Rings, Moneys and
other things of a considerable value; to which Parker and Williams pleaded not
Guilty, but the other two viz. Jackson and White refused to plead.

White insisted that his Wife was taken Prisoner (upon her going upon his
occasions) upon suspicion of Felony, whereas there was no just cause against
her, therefore desired that the Court would call her to a Trial before he
pleaded; that he might vindicate her in that particular.

The Court replied; there was no Indictment as then ready against her, and
therefore could not proceed upon her Trial, but that at her Trial she should
have justice done her, and willed him to plead.

Jackson likewise refused to plead, alleging, That the Country had Robbed him,
instead of his robbing of them, and had taken away 40s, of his own Money from
him, which he desired might be restored before he pleaded.

The Court answered, He should have all Justice done him, but he must plead
first; and that if he should be Convicted, the Moneys ought not to be restored
to him, for it was then forfeited. Notwithstanding neither the said Jackson nor
White would plead to the Indictment.

Hereupon a second Indictment was read against them and the other Two, for the
Robbing of several Persons upon the 18 of March last, to which they all ^leaded
not Guilty.

A Third indictment was read against them for the robing of one Mr. Periant
about the same time. To which again the said Jackson and White refused to
plead, insisting as before.

They were told, They had already pleaded Not Guilty to one Indictment; and if
they refused to plead now, they would be accessory to their own Deaths, and be
convicted as Mutes; and thereupon caused the words of the Statute to be read to
them.

Wherein were set forth the Dreadful Punishments that were to be inflicted upon
such Convicts, by pressing. Notwithstanding which, the many Arguments that were
tried by the Court against such a destructive obstinacy, they wilfully stood it
out till all the Indictments were read over; to which the other Two, viz.
Parker and Williams severally pleaded Not Guilty.

At last, after being urged with the danger of their Refusals, and advised to
consult together for their own safety, they pleaded severally Not Guilty, to
all the Indictments.

Then the Jury being sworn, and the Witnesses called; the First Robbery was
apparently proved by a Watch and other things that were taken from them by the
Countrymen at Hampstead; which were owned by their Owners upon Oath. And so the
Second, Third, Fourth, and the rest of the Robberies were so manifestly clear,
that to most of them they could say nothing; and what they could say, was
overruled by undeniable proofs that were brought against them;

As to the Murder, it was proved by several of the Countrymen that took them,
That Jackson run Henry Miller in at the Left-Side, upon which he immediately
dyed: And that the other, Edward Kemp, was shot by Slader deceased.

It being then urged, That they were all guilty of the Murder, in that they
were all together assisting one another against a Power that was lawfully
raised to take them upon the Hue-and-Cry sent after them. Parker insisted, That
he was altogether Innocent of the Murder, being before his Company as far as
Islington, when the Murder was done at Hampstead; But that was disproved by
Several Witnesses that swore they were all together, or within a little one of
another when the Murders were Committed. Hereupon the Trial having lasted
above Six hours in all, the Jury were sent out to consider of their Verdict;
which after a Quarter of an hours stay, they brought in thus, That they were
all Guilty of the Several Facts laid in their Indictments of Felony and
Robbery; Except in the Two first, which could not be so apparently proved
against two of them.

Upon the Two first Indictments for the Murder of Miller, Jackson, Parker and
Williams were found Guilty; but White was Acquitted, for that he was taken
before that Murder was committed; But upon the Two last Indictments for the
Murder of Kemp* they were all Four found Guilty. And the next day they had
Sentence of Death passed upon them.

FINIS.

