THE Protestant's Answer TO THE Catholic Letter TO THE SEEKER: OR, A
VINDICATION OF THE PROTESTANT's ANSWER, To the SEEKER's Request.

IMPRIMATUR, Liber cui Titulus, [The Protestant's Answer to the Catholic
Letter to the Seeker, etc.]

H. Maurice RR. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris. Maii 22.
1688.

LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
M.DCLXXXVIII.

THE CONTENTS.
THE matter in debate stated p. 2. The Sum of the Protestant Answer p. 4.
Transubstantiation confessed by many of the Church of Rome not to be proved by
Scripture, page 5. Joh. 6. 48. considered, p. 6. Not for Transubstantiation, by
the confession of several in the Church of Rome, Ibid. It Is also proved by
several Arguments. As that place had no special reference to the Sacrament, p.
7. Eating the Flesh then spoken of, may be out of the Sacrament as well as in
it, Ibid. Proved to concern those present as well as others. p. 8. The sense of
eating the Flesh of Christ proved to be Figurative, p. 10. Of Figurative
Speeches, p. 12. Particularly here, p. 13, etc. Of Christ's being a Vine, etc.
p. 17. The words, This is my Body, considered, p. 18. Of the word This, p. 22.
Of Christ's being in the Sacrament after a Spiritual manner, Ibid. The Texts
produced by Protestants for it, p. 24. 1. The Letter of Scripture for the
Protestant Doctrine, p. 26. (1.) Where it is called Bread, and the Fruit of the
Vine. (2.) The Body of Christ had the Natural properties of a Body, p. 29. (3.)
The Body of Christ is in Heaven, and circumscribed, p. 32. (4.) That Christ's
Body is Glorified, and so not a Sacrifice, p. 33. 2. The words which are
Figurative, are for us, such are these, This is my Body, Ibid.
THE PROTESTANT's ANSWER TO THE CATHOLIC LETTER TO THE SEEKER, etc.
Here Is a Catholic Letter to the Seeker, or a Reply to the Protestant Answer
to the Seeker. But what is become of the Seeker himself, for this four Months
past? What of the Declaration he was in the Conclusion to make for the
Catholic Faith of Rome, Cath. Letter to a Seeker, p. 1. and 34.
which we are now told of? That according to the method, it seems agreed on, he
may, after Sentence passed in this case, proceed to the Infallibility of the
Church, or other Points of Faith in difference betwixt them and the Church of
England; as our Author intimates there a little too early. The Seeker had
indeed given reason enough to judge on which side he was to be satisfied: That
tho seemingly he was sent out like the Dove, to try where he might find rest
for the Sole of his Foot, yet we may see beforehand, what was the Ark he was to
return to; and that they were as sure of him, as they are of a Convert before
they offer a Conference. Where Is now the Resolution he was to come to? Has the
Protestant Answer to the Seekers Request, broke these Measures, and forced them
to think of another Expedient? Our Author cannot altogether dissemble it. It
seems the Seeker was to put certain Ties upon his Answerers, to which his
Friend on the side of the Church of Rome submitted, and it was humbly conceived
the Protestant Answerer would have done so too, as our Author signifies, p. 1.
But he being a lover of Liberty more than Courtship; and of Truth, and Reason
more than both, took upon himself, as its thought, too much Authority, when
together with his Answer to the Seekers Request, he wrote a Reply to the
Catholic Answer to the Seekers Request. This is a course our Author complains
of, and perhaps he has some reason for it. But what has he to accuse the
Protestant Answerer of? That he has evaded the Question. As how? Of this he
gives a threefold Instance.

1. That he has used the Word Transubstantiation. Of this our Author thus
complains, p. 2. and 5. I do not find the word Transubstantiation, so much as
mentioned in either your Request, or my Answer. Wherefore, how sincere the
Gentleman has been in this particular, let the World judge. A material Point!
who would not think now, that the word Transubstantiation was abominated by
him, and as little used in their Church, as it is in ours? It Is fit therefore
to know our Authors mind in it. Of this he says, It Is a word devised by the
Church to express the Conversion that is made in the Sacrauent, -- and which
mysterious change the Holy Catholic [the Roman] Church does properly call
Transubstantiation, p. 2, and 5. Now, where is the fault? Where the
insincerity? The insincerity they may take to themselves; but the fault is,
that when they thought by the use of the Phrase, Real Presence, common to both
them and us, and by the forbearance of the word Transubstantiation, which is
peculiar to themselves, that they might have imposed upon the unwary Reader,
the Protestant Answerer used the word Transubstantiation for their Real
Presence, and so their design is discovered, and in part defeated.

2. He says, The Protestant Answerer evaded the Question, when instead of
speaking to the Real Presence, he betook himself to Transubstantiation, p. 2.
Now, who would not think upon this charge, that his Real Presence and
Transubstantiation, are as inconsistent as Truth and Falsehood? Here indeed he
has put a Question, which I confess I should have been ready to ask; What Is
this to the purpose? Is not the Real Presence and Transubstantiation all as
one? p. 5. And I should be as ready to ask again, If they are all as one, how
was the Question evaded, when instead of speaking to the Real Presence, the
Answerer betook himself to Transubstantiation? In this, he thus acutely
Answers. No truly, they are not all as one, as you may think. For there is a
great deal of difference betwixt a Man, and the Name by which he is
distinguished. -- It Is one thing to prove the Real Presence, and being of
Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament; and another to show, why this change
is by the Church called Transubstantiation; tho whoever believes the one, cannot
in Truth deny the other. That is, the Real Presence and Transubstantiation, are
not all as one, because they are all as one: And the Answerer has evaded the
Question, by using the one for the other, because whoever believes the one,
cannot in Truth deny the other.

3. But he has not yet concluded the Charge. For says he, Whereas the
Controversy is not about the word, the Answerer has altogether banter'd at the
word Transubstantiation, and not spoken to the Substance, p. 5. So before, The
Arians with as much reason might have objected against the word Consubstantial
(which was devised against them) as the Protestant Answerer has done, where p.
3. he says, That it is enough for them to show that Transubstantiation is not
taught in Scripture, tho the Being of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament
is, -- p. 2. If our Author's skill in reasoning be no better than it appears to
be in Ecclesiastical History, his Adversary has no great reason to fear him.
That the word Consubstantial was used against the Arians, I acknowledge; but
that it was devised against them (as our Author says) is spoken at adventure.
For the contrary is evident that it was in use long before in the Christian
Church. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
So says Eusebius, We have known certain Learned and Famous Bishops and
Writers among the Ancients, who reasoning upon the Divinity of the Father and
Son, have used the word Consubstantial, or (...). But to return to the Charge;
where is this Controversy managed in the Answer about this unscriptural word
Transubstantiation, which the Protestant Answerer altogether banter'd at? He
has found it out in somewhat that is not there; I shall here set down the Words
of the Answer, with his, and let us see how they agree, Cath. Letter, p. 2.
Protestant Answerer, p. 3. He [the Protestant Answerer] says, That it is enough
for them to show that Transubstantiation is not taught in Scripture, tho the
Being of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament is. It Is enough for us to
show, that Transubstantiation is not taught in Scripture, and that those that
pretend it is there, cannot show it; nay, that the literal Sense concludes not
for it; and that our notion of the Real Presence, is agreeable to it.

Where this Author is guilty of a double Perversion. First, That he translates
what is spoken of Transubstantiation in the notion, to the Word (when there is
not a Syllable that looks, that way) and then, that he would represent the Real
Presence in the Protestant, that is a spiritual, Sense, to be an acknowledgment
of the Being of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, in their way.

But after our Author has for some Pages entertained himself in managing this
imaginary dispute against his Adversary, yet in Confutation of himself he finds
out another sort of matter that he is obliged to consider, and if he can, to
confute.

The Protestant Answer consists of two Parts.

In the first, are considered the Texts produced in the Catholic Answer to the
Seeker, to prove their Real Presence, which I hope I may now call
Transubstantiation.

In the second, There is given a Catalogue of such Texts, as maintain the
Protestant Doctrine of Christ's Spiritual Presence, and in Confutation of the
Corporal Presence held in the Church of Rome. And now let us view our Author's
Undertaking, and see how he has quitted himself in both of these.

PART I. Sect. 1
WE are to consider in the first place, Part. 1. Sect. 1.
how our Author has Vindicated his own Answer to the Seekers Request, and what
Reply there is made to the Objections and Arguments directed against his
pretended Proofs from Scripture.

In the entrance upon this matter, the Protestant Answerer suggested, that the
Seeker had put an unreasonable Task upon his Catholic Priests, to prove their
Real Presence, or Transubstantiation, by the express Text, and plain Word of
God; since Persons of the greatest Note; for Quality and Learning, in their
Church, have freely given it up, and granted it to be a vain attempt. Such as
Scotus and Biel, among the Schoolmen, and the Cardinals, Alliaco, Fisher,
Cajetan and Bellarmin. What says our Author to this?

First, says he, Supposing it was so as these Authors say, That there is not
one place of Scripture so express, that without the Determination of the
Church, it would evidently compel a Man to receive Transubstantiation. -- Yet
the same might as well be said of the Consubstantiality of the Son, p. 3. Will
our Author venture to say, there is no more from Scripture to prove the
Consubstantiality of the Son, than there is to prove Transubstantiation? Or
has he any heart to say it, after the publishing the Doctrine of the Trinity
and Transubstantiation compared, and as long as that Book lies unanswered? But
let that be as it will. What, says he, is this to the Being, or not Being of
the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament? Had be produced Scotus,
Bellarmin, etc. to disprove the Real Presence, it had been something, tho not
to your purpose. For the Request was to satisfy you by Scripture only, and not
by citing our Modern Divines, etc. but by the express Text, etc. But I think it
was to the purpose to show that some of the most Eminent in their Church
declare it is not to be proved in that way, and I think to declare it cannot be
proved, is little better than to disprove it.

At last our Author is content to yield up Scotus, one of his Modern Divines,
and Bellarmin; and he adds, if what they have said in that matter, will do the
Gentleman a kindness, he shall have it not only from them, but all the
Faithful. If so, I fear our Author then will be left alone; for if all the
Faithful are of the same mind with Scotus and Bellarmin; then his Undertaking
to prove Transubstantiation by the express Texts of Scripture, will be a
fruitless Attempt. But we go too far, for that is to be understood with a
reserve, viz. Scripture without the Determination of the Church is not so
express, etc. This premised, our Author cheerfully proceeds, That although the
Scripture were never so plain, we would yet submit to the Determination of the
Church, for the true Sense and Meaning thereof. So that tho he pleads
Scripture, and would fain find out somewhat that looks like an express Text;
yet he does it not, nor would be understood, that he thereby renounced the
Determination of the Church. For whether the Scripture be plain for it or not,
is not the Foot this matter rests upon; and although it were never so plain, yet
the Church is to give it the true meaning; and whatever meaning the Church
gives it, that is the true meaning; and so, if the Church had determined
against Transubstantiation, as it has determined for it, there would have been
still express Texts, and the case had been alike resolved.

SECT. II.
AT last we are come to the main seat of the Controversy, Sect. 2.
p. 6. The Catholic Answerer had produced two places of Scripture as his plain
Texts for Transubstantiation; the first is, Joh. 6. 48. Here the Protestant
Answerer interposed, and first directed the Seeker, where he might find about
thirty Writers of the Roman Church, who reject that Text as not serving to our
Author's purpose, Page 4. and then proceeds to show for what reasons they and
we do so reject it.

Arg. 1. As it had no special reference to the Sacrament; and that for two
Reasons: 1. Because this Discourse of our Savior was delivered above a year
before, ver. 4.

To this first our Author replies,

That the fourth Verse, [The Passover, a Feast of the Jews, was nigh] is no
Rule to show the Sacrament was not instituted above a year after. For, says
he, that this word Nigh should signify above a year after, is such a Figure as
never was: And so gravely repairs to his Concordance to prove the word Nigh is
not by express and plain Scripture to be taken for above a year after.
Certainly there was never more need of express and plain Scripture, when men
cannot look a Chapter or two before them. For would any one that was conversant
in the Gospels, think that St. John here, and St. Luke 22. 1. must needs speak
of the same Passover, because St. Luke has the same word, Now the Feast of
unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the Passover. I see our Author
wants here a little information. Let him therefore turn to Chap. 7. v. 2, and
14. and he will find a Feast of Tabernacles; and go on to Chap. 13. 1. and he
will find another Passover. Now I hope I need not acquaint him that these two
Feasts of the Tabernacles and Passover were kept in different Months, and that
the same Passover could not be before and after the Feast of Tabernacles; and
consequently, it must be a year betwixt the Passover, Joh. 6. 4. and that Joh.
13. 1. and as much above a year betwixt our Savior's Discourse, Joh. 6. and
the Passover, as that was before the approaching Passover that was said to be
Nigh.

2. The Protestant Answerer proceeded to show that this Discourse of our
Savior had no special reference to the Sacrament, because the eating the
Flesh, and drinking the Blood here spoken of, might be out of the Sacrament as
well as in it, and at that present as well as a year after. This he proved from
Verse. 53, 54, 56, 57. In all which the present time is still spoken of, Except
ye eat. He that eats. -- My flesh is meat.

To this our Author replies:

To say, That the flesh of Christ may be eaten out of the Sacrament, and even
before it was instituted, etc. is indeed such a Figure, as none but himself can
unriddle, p. 8.

I answer, But to say (as he does) that Christ would give us bread to eat in
the Sacrament, which should be the very same flesh which he would, and
afterward did give for the life of the world, that is, that he should give it
before it was given, is a Figure I doubt our Author himself cannot unriddle;
who says again, that before he gave it, 'twas impossible for them to eat it;
but he gave it not, till he gave it on the Cross.

(2) But to say that the Flesh of Christ here spoken of (an Exposition our
Author left out) might be eaten out of the Sacrament, as well as in it, is no
Riddle, if it be true. And it is true if our Savior spoke here of his Flesh
that might be, and was then to be eaten, at the same time as he spoke it, by
all those that were then his present Auditors; as the Answerer proved from
verses 53, 54, etc.

To this our Author opposes verse. 5. The Bread which I will give is my flesh,
etc. Where, says he, Christ promised, and told them before that be would (in
the Future Tense) give them bread to eat, which should be the very same flesh,
which he would, and afterward did, give for the life of the world. Whence he
infers, If the bread which he in the Sacrament gives us to eat, saying, Take,
Eat, This is my Body, be not that Bread which he promised he would give us to
eat, pray ask your Protestant Answerer, where, when, and how did Christ give us
Bread to eat, which should be his flesh, if this be not? Page 7. What is a
little out of its place, in our Author, I have here laid together, that I may
give it its full force:

To this I answer:

1. I readily own with our Author, that the words, I will give, contain a
promise, but then we differ about the time when they were fulfilled. He says,
they refer to his last Supper, when he took Bread, etc. under the Forms of
Bread and Wine. But now if I am examined upon the Where, the When, and the How,
I should refer it to the Cross; and that because of the following words, The
Bread which I will give is my Flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. For he gave not his Flesh for the life of the world in the Sacrament*
but after the institution of that, on the Cross; not under the Forms of Bread
and Wine, but in his own proper Form, and visible to the Spectators. The reason
of his mistake seems to be, that he reads the Future Tense after this manner,
our Savior told them that he would give them Bread to eat, which should be his
Flesh. Where he is guilty of two over-sights. First, that he applies that to
the Future which is spoken of the Present, for he reads it should be his Flesh,
as if it was first Bread, and then was to be Flesh, to put the better color
upon their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; whereas our Savior says, the Bread
is my Flesh, which is directly against it; and if it signifies any thing of
that nature, would rather prove that his Flesh should be Bread. For it is not
said, the Bread which I will give shall be my Flesh, but rather that which is
my Flesh, I will give to be Bread.

2. He alters the Terms of the Text, for the words are, Which I will give for
the life of the world; and he reads them, Which I will give them to Eat: as if
the promise referred only to the Bread which they should eat; and not to the
Flesh which was to be given for the world. So that we see what is like to become
of his Question, he prays his Seeker to ask his Protestant Answerer, viz.
Where, When and How did Christ give us Bread to eat which should be his Flesh,
if this be it not in the Sacrament? For he must frame his Question anew, if he
would have it to the purpose; and must read St. John again (notwithstanding
what he says he has done on this occasion, Page 8.) and whatever he found
before, I am apt to think after this little light given to him, he will not
find those words in this Chapter, He would give them Bread to eat, which should
be his Flesh. And if he reads the Protestant Answer again, he will find no
occasion for those words, Where, etc. if this be it not? For the Answerer did
not except the Sacrament, and say the eating the Flesh, and drinking the Blood
here spoken of, could not be in the Sacrament, but that it might be out of the
Sacrament as well as in it; intimating thereby that it was not to be understood
in a sense peculiar to the Sacrament, but in a sense common to that and other
Offices of Religion; and that eating and drinking were (as he showed) but other
words for coming and believing.

3. But our Author has a further reserve, and offers at a peculiar Exposition
of those Phrases, I suppose it is (in his phrase. p. 2.) his private meaning ^
v. 53, etc. Except ye eat, -- he that eats. Not, says he, that he did then
give, or that they did then eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, which they
could not do before he took it, blessed it, brake it, and gave it. For at that
time when he spoke this, he only told them he would give it, and the Eve before
his Passion, he performed it. And from that time I suppose the Obligation bears
force, ver. 53. Except ye eat, etc.

I will suppose that the Present does not here exclude the Future, and that he
that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood has Eternal life, will always hold
true, and what all ages as well as those then present would partake of; but
methinks it is very hard to make the present exclude it self, and to tell us
that they did not, and could not then eat the Flesh of Christ, when our Savior
says they might and ought, as is evident from what follows.

Let us go to the thing to be eaten, and it is represented in the Present Tense,
v. 51. This is the Bread. v. 51. I am the Bread. v. 52. Is my Flesh. v. 55. My
Flesh is meat.

Let us go to the act, and in correspondence to the object, it is also in the
present, v. 51. If any man eat. Thus the Jews understood it, v. 52. How can
this man give us his Flesh to eat? And accordingly our Savior answers, v. 53.
Except ye eat, etc. ye have no life in you. He speaks it to those present, ye;
and then applies it universally, v. 54. Whosoever eats my Flesh, etc.

Let us go to the thing signified by Eating and Drinking, and it is after the
same manner, v. 35. He that comes, and he that believes, v. 38, 40, 45, 47.

I shall conclude this with what was said in the Protestant Answer. If Christ's
Flesh here spoken of, might be eaten, and his Blood drank out of the Sacrament,
then it could not here be understood of that Flesh and Blood which our Author
says the Bread and Wine are converted into in the Sacrament; nor, I may add,
of carnal eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood.

Our Author resents this ill, for he says, As to his carnal eating, we beg his
pardon, if he means as we eat Beef, and other Meats. For that we truly and
really receive the Body and Blood of Christ (to use his own words) after an
Heavenly and Spiritual manner; We should agree, did we not differ in this, that
they receive it in Figure and Fancy only, and we receive it in Substance and
Truth, Page 8.

Here I acknowledge I intended no hurt in the world, but thought I had expressed
my self innocently enough. For when I had read in the Catholic Answer, that in
the* Eucharist is Truly, Really, and Substantially contained under the Forms of
Bread and Wine, the True Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus in the very Substance
wherein he was born of the Virgin, and wherein he lived and died for us, with
this difference only, that he was visible to the eye of Flesh then, and
invisible to the same now. I thought the word carnal was expressive of the
thing, and indeed I find no great reason to alter it: For, 1. had I said
Metaphorically and Figuratively, that by no means would suit what is corporal.
And besides, I learn too from our Author, Page 17. that that is a deceitful,
fictious manner. 2. Had I said corporal, I see little distance betwixt that and
carnal; for as Body and Flesh is all one, so is corporal and carnal. 3. Had I
chosen the word Spiritual, that is a kind of contradiction, if applied to a
Body; for Spiritual eating of a Body is little better than bodily eating of a
spirit. And when a Real Presence by Faith would not content them, if we deny a
Real Presence by sense, Seeker, Page 6. I had as much reason to believe a
Spiritual eating would be no more allowed than a Spiritual Presence. 4. Had I
expressed it by Heavenly, when it was somewhat eaten and drank corporally, and
that what we took with the mouth was the very Body of Christ, it could not be
sufficiently expressive of it.

It was further urged,

Arg. 2. Upon mature Consideration of the whole, it appeared to the Protestant
Answerer, that the sense of Eating the Flesh of Christ in this place must be
Figurative, and signifies no other than coming to Christ, and Believing in him;
which sure is out of the Sacrament, as well as in it. And this indeed he proved
from the promiscuous use of the words in that Chapter; but this our Author
conceals from his Reader, that he might not too apparently contradict what he
had said, Page 2. That he says (by no Authority but his own) that the sense of
Eating the Flesh, must be Figurative; and right or wrong they are Figurative,
upon his own bare word, without Scripture.

But as the Protestant Answerer argued from the words and phrases of the
Chapter, so from the current of our Savior's Discourse, that it could not be
properly and literally understood.

(1.) Because then all that properly Eat the Flesh of Christ, would according
to our Savior's promise, v. 54. Have Eternal Life; Whosoever Eats, etc.

To this our Author answers, Very truel but with a qualification that recalls
what he had granted. For it is to be understood, says he, of Worthy Receivers.
But this is by no means consistent with our Savior's Reasoning, which if the
Flesh to be eat, and the Eating of it were to be understood properly, will
necessarily infer the Salvation of all such as thus Eat after this manner; as
well unworthy as ^^worthy. Since all that Eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood,
in the sense there meant, are the persons to whom Eternal Life is promised; but
if properly Eating his Flesh be the sense of our Savior's Expressions there
used, then we know what follows.

2. The Protestant Answerer urged further, That if the words Eating the Flesh,
and Drinking the Blood, be properly to be understood, then the Receiving the
Sacrament in both Kinds will be necessary to Salvation; it being affirmed, v.
53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
life in you; and he showed that for this reason, amongst others, Cardinal
Cajetan would not admit that this Discourse of our Savior belonged to the
Eucharist.

What says our Author to this? Truly nothing. As to this, says he, of both
kinds, it does not properly relate either to your request, or my Answer. A
Reply that may be made in any case.

He goes on, And besides, I do not see where the necessity lies of defining the
Sacrament in both Kinds to one that believes* it in neither. That is, as much
as to say, I beg his pardon, I will not vouchsafe an Answer to such an one as
he is; but however, methinks he might have said somewhat, if it had been only
for the satisfaction of the distressed Seeker, to whom he writes his Letter; to
let him see that there is no consequence in this Argument. It puzzled Cardinal
Cajetan, a man of sense and sagacity; and surely the Seeker may then be led
away by the error of it, and it may put off his Declaration for the Catholic
Faith four Months longer. But there is no danger, it was not necessary to one
that does not believe; but he declares he is ready to satisfy his Seeker, that
is, one that does believe, as we may conceive.

I know not whether this may not have put our Author a little out of humor,
for he cannot but abhor, he says, to see men mould Gods Word into what Form
they please, and make every thing a Figure, that does not square with their
Fancy. Is it because our Savior spoke some things by way of Parable, that all
he said was such? Or that he never spoke otherwise? How comes it that mean
Capacities are (by the Church of St. Martin's) left to themselves, to judge of
the true sense of Scripture, according to D. T. who tells you in his True
Account of a Conference, That a man after using all Christian Means, and the
help of all Ministerial Guides possible, must at last judge for himself. -- A
special Assertion indeed! Which if true, what need of Teachers? etc. Page 10*

But how does he mould the Word of God into what Form he pleases, that
understands that Figuratively which was Figuratively spoken? And to whom does
our Author speak when he thus Expostulates, Is it because our Savior spoke
some things by way of Parable, that all he said was such? Had he no other way
to get clear of his Adversary, but to fix this upon him? And had he no other
way to meet with those that plead for the perspicuity of Scripture, but to tell
the world, that they own our Savior never spoke otherwise than in Parables?
How mean and ridiculous is this? But however this was a fair occasion as he
thought to make a special Remarque upon the Doctrine taught by the Church of
St. Martin's. Now here the Protestant Answerer is more immediately concerned as
a Parishioner (though one of the Mean Capacities there taught) and would fain
see how our Author would manage himself in a debate upon that Argument;
especially when after his Exclamation against it, he himself is forced to
acknowledge the reasonableness of it. For if a man must not at last judge for
himself; or if so, that there will be no need of Teachers; then it is in vain to
send Answers and Letters to a Seeker, and to propose Texts to his Examination:
And yet in this special way does our Author proceed from the beginning to the
end of his Letter. He leaves it to his Seeker to pass sentence upon what has
been said by either party, Page 1. Whether, says he, this has any reference,
be you the Judge. Page 7, 13. He desires him to consult the words, and see
whether those Texts do imply, etc. Page 8. Seriously to distinguish and peruse
the Texts, Page 33. So that it seems this special Assertion ought to be one of
his own, who teaches his Seeker so far, after the same way as mean Capacities
are taught by the Church at St. Martin 's.

To come to a close of this Argument; the Protestant Answerer the better to
represent his Adversaries weakness in decrying Figures and Parables, showed him
how this Discourse of our Savior so abounded in them, that there were no less
than twenty expressions of that kind in it; and accordingly drew out several of
them for our Author to try his skill upon, and to resolve them without a
Figure, Page 8. First, says he, Let the Catholic Answerer tell me without a
Figure, what is that meat which endures to Everlasting Life? Here our Author
labors hard to prove that the meat in v. 27. is the Bread and Flesh, v. 51.
and concludes, which Flesh, without a Figure, I humbly conceive is that meat
which endures unto Everlasting Life. But I as humbly conceive he has not
reached the point; for granting the Meat, the Bread, and the Flesh to be one
and the same, yet how is the Flesh of Christ Bread and Meat without a Metaphor,
when it is only spiritually and not Corporally Eaten, as he says, and when
neither capable of digestion, nor we of nourishment by it? Again, if this be
Eaten only in the Sacrament, how can it under the Form of Bread endure to
Everlasting Life, or how can it be Meat that thus endures, when it is not to be
Eaten in Heaven, and all Sacraments and Institutions cease?

The other Questions were. How the Son was sealed by the Father? How Jesus is
Bread, and the Bread that came down from Heaven? How the Bread and the Flesh of
Christ could be the same? v. 57. And if the same, how it could come from
Heaven, when he was of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh? How one of
his Church can talk of a literal Sense of, [except ye drink his Blood], which
denies the Cup to the Laity?

To all these our Author returns a general Answer, As to his, How the Son was
sealed by the Father, and the rest of his How Is? they are such Jewish
Expressions, as that all Christian pretenders ought to be ashamed of them. So
the Jews said, v. 52. How can this man give us his Flesh to eat? So Jewish it
is to question God, how he could do it? How this? How that? And so he runs on
to the Creation, and Incarnation, etc. I am a little at a loss here, to what
cause our Authors mistake is to be assigned? Surely he could not but understand
that the How relates not to the manner, How these things be? But, how these
things could be thus applied to our Savior without a Figure? I am afraid that
he saw the difficulty, and so slipped away from it; for else, why should he
answer directly to the first Query, which would more plausibly bear it; and
indirectly and fraudulently to the rest? And yet, as if he had to a
Demonstration proved what he had undertaken, and effectually confuted his
Adversary, he will still have the words express and plain, without a Figure.
For thus he concludes, p. 11. If these express and plain words of Christ be a
Figure, where he says as plain, as plain can be, that he would give us Bread to
eat, which should be his Flesh, [but which I have showed before, he did not
say.] I say, if these words are Figurative, and must not be properly
understood, I see no Reasen, why the whole Bible should not be a Figure too.
For if ever Christ was plain in any thing, 'twas in this; especially in a
Point, wherein there was never more occasion to expound, if a Figure, than when
the Jews (to whom he came) murmured and said, How can this man give us his
Flesh to eat? And when some of the Disciples said it was an hard saying, and
thereupon walked no more with him. He that, in cases of less moment always
explained his Parables, should yet be Dark and Figurative in this of that
Importance, and which he well foresaw, occasions our differences at this day;
it would be contrary to his Wisdom and Goodness. But so far was Christ from
this, that he confirms it, v. 53. With a verily, verily, except ye eat the
Flesh, etc.

I have transcribed this the more at large, because it contains some things
very peculiar, and is indeed the utmost force of what he has for his Defense.

I Answer to this.

1. In General, it is manifest, That our Savior is not literally plain; since
it is acknowledged that his Discourse is Figurative, from ver. 32. to ver. 51.
And is it not strange, that when he had so long discoursed after that manner,
that yet in one verse, he should mean literally, and which if literally
understood, would be so manifest a Contradiction to the Sense and Reason of
Mankind, that if he had literally said he was Bread, he could not have more
astonished them, than when he said, except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man,
etc. if properly and literally to be understood.

2. Whereas he says our Savior always explained his Parables; that is too
largely spoken. For even those, which he chooses out of Mark 3. 10, 13, 31, were
not expounded to the Multitude; and if his Argument signify any thing, must
therefore be properly understood by them. But why did not he propound the case
in Dispute, and give us a like instance in figurative and metaphorical
Expressions; Such as our Savior uses in this Chapter? For, are Sealing,
Hungring, etc. to be understood properly, because it is not said, that they are
to be understood Figuratively* Nay, are eating his Flesh, and drinking his
Blood, to be understood properly? Then certainly, the Capernaits were in the
right, that thought our Savior spoke of carnal Eating, which yet our Author
will not allow.

3. He says, There was never more occasion to expound, if a Figure, than when
the Jews murmured, and some of his Disciples went away; and what he saw,
occasions our Differences.

(1.) As for the murmuring of the Jews, there was no such occasion for our
Savior's expounding it; For thus also they murmured, because that Christ said,
I am the Bread that came down from Heaven, v. 41. And yet, tho he took notice
of it, ver. 43. he thought not himself concerned to explain his meaning, where
there might be more reason for their mistake, than there could be in this.
Indeed our Savior looked upon them as an obstinate and intractable sort of
People, and so did purposely conceal himself often, as was observed before,
Mark 13. And this we are not without some light in, in the case before us. For
this Discourse of his, was in the Synagogue, v. 59. and they were the same
People that before were offended and cavilled, ver. 41, 52. And therefore our
Savior left them in the Dark, tho afterward, when his Disciples murmured, v.
60, 61, 63. he tells them, it was spiritually to be understood.

(2.) As for those Disciples, it does not appear, that they walked no more with
him, because they were offended at his saying, (for that he explained it to
them) but because he gave an Intimation that he discovered their insincerity,
v. 64. There are some of you that believe not; and it follows, From that time
many of his Disciples went back, etc.

(3.) Neither was there any such occasion for our Savior's expounding himself
from our differences; If he had meant it properly, I grant there could never be
more occasion, because it is a Doctrine so contrary to the Sense and Reason of
Mankind; but when it is not so explained, the Sense and Reason of Mankind may be
thought a sufficient Security against mistake. And there might be as much
reason for our Savior to expound himself, when he says, he is Bread, a Door,
a Vine, a Rock.

But all this while, our Author supposes our Savior not to have explained
himself. I grant it, he did not do it on their side; but I think he has done it
to all attentive and unprejudiced minds; if they will either consult the
foregoing part of this discourse, where he speaks of himself, under the
Allusions of Bread and Flesh, v. 33, 35, 48, 51. and of believing in him under
the the Metaphors of Coming and Eating, v. 35, 36, 47, 51, 60, 61, 62. or if
they consult the Conclusion, v. 63. where he tells his offended Disciples, It Is
the Spirit that quickneth, etc. As if he had said, The eating my Flesh, and
drinking my Blood, which I propound to you, is not as those cavilling Jews did
misconstrue it; and as you, I perceive, mistake; for in that Flesh, I am to
ascend into Heaven; but it is the heeding and obeying my Precepts, the receiving
my Doctrine, and believing in me as your Redeemer, that I require, and you are
to regard. And indeed, thus St. Peter understood him, who concludes almost in
the same words, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of Eternal Life.
And we believe, etc. v. 68, 69.

4. He says, That Christ was so far from meaning otherwise than plainly, as he
spoke, that to the murmuring Jews he confirms it, v. 53. with a Verily, verily,
I say unto you, Except, etc. Whereas in Parables be explained himself to them.
That is, our Savior meant plainly, because he did not explain himself. But,
says he, he confirmed it. What did he confirm? Did he confirm the Literal
sense? That he did not before give, and so could not confirm. Or does the
Repetition of it without Explication show it to be the Literal sense? That he
contends for. But then by parity of reason our Savior meant properly, when he
said, I am the Door. For it is there said in confirmation of what was before:
Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the Door, Joh. 10. 1, 7. But why did our
Savior repeat it? Without doubt to show that he spoke it not inconsiderately;
and if I add, to explain what he before said, it is not without somewhat in the
Text to countenance it. For before he spoke of himself under the notion of
Flesh, v. 51, 52. but then of Flesh and Blood, to intimate both the violence
and manner of his Death; which he did usually speak with more caution and
reserve about.

If we reflect upon what has been said, we see how unwarily (I am loath to add
more) our Author delivers himself, when he says, If these words are
Figurative, I see no reason why the whole Bible should not be a Figure too. And
if ever Christ was plain in any thing, it was in this. And, which I cannot
recite without some indignation; Should he explain himself in matters of less
weight, and yet be dark in this great concern, is what would be contrary to his
wisdom and goodness, p. 10, 11. So that there shall be no sense or perspicuity
in Scripture, nor wisdom and goodness in our Savior, if their Doctrine be not
his, and he be not of the same mind with them.

Indeed after all our Author's confidence in this matter, and his questioning
all things, if this be questioned: he determines that which the greatest
Authority in his Church, the Council of Trent, would not determine. For when it
had been sharply debated for and against these words being understood of the
Eucharist, it was at last agreed for the satisfaction of both sides, neither to
affirm nor deny it, and to yield to those that denied it, that they had Fathers
and Doctors on their side. And thus the Council concludes; However that
Discourse (of our Savior's, Joh. 6.) be understood according to the diverse
Interpretations of the Holy Fathers and Doctors, Sess 21. c. 1.

Here our Author takes a great leap from Page 9. of the Answer, to Page 22. but
because it is not amiss, I shall follow him: The Protestant Answerer put it to
them to give as plain Letter of Scripture to prove Christ was neither a Door,
Rock, nor Vine, as he could that he was all Three: Or that all Christians are
not turned into Christ's Natural Body, when it is said Ephesians. 5. 20. We are
members of his Body. This he did to show that the Phrases, Eating the Flesh,
and, This is my Body, were not of themselves sufficient to enforce us to take
them in a proper sense; since it is no more plainly said, Except ye eat the
Flesh, etc. and, This is my Body; than it is said, I am the Door, The Vine, etc.

Now what course does our Author take to assoil this? Let Us see, says he,
whether the parity 'twixt I am the Door, The Vine, etc. be the same with, The
Bread is my Flesh, and, This is my Body, without ever explaining a Syllable to
the contrary. Here he is a little too forward. For he is to remember that the
thing required is to give as plain Scripture to prove that Christ was neither a
Door, nor Vine, etc. as there is for it. He knows who said it, I will prove the
Catholic Doctrine of the Real Presence, and I defy the world to prove the
contrary. Cath. Answ. to the Seeker, Page 1. and that declares again, It Is
impossible to bring one Text out of the whole Bible to prove that the Body and
Blood of Christ is not in the Sacrament, Cath. Letter, Page 24. If now he so
expects, then it may be so expected from him, that he should prove the
Negative, and that by as plain a Text he should show Christ is not a Door or
Vine, as we can show that he is. I must confess I put him upon a Ridiculous
Task, but who can help it, it is in his own way. But to leave this trifling, let
us return to see his parity; though I doubt we shall not much better our selves.
As for the Door, he says, The Text tells us it was a Parable, Joh. 10. 6. This
Parable spoke Jesus. Wherefore if the Protestant Answerer would be so kind, as
to produce plain Scripture for this of the Sacrament's being a Figure, as I
have done for the Door's being a Parable, he will certainly gain a Proselyte of
me. As for gaining him a Proselyte by plain Scripture, I have reason to
despair, who declares beforehand that though the Scripture were never so plain,
he would yet submit to thy Determination of the Church, Page 4. But where is
this plain Scripture for the Door's being a Parable? He points to the verse.
But what was the Parable he spoke? It Is in the Verses foregoing about a Door, I
grant; But not of Christ's being the Door; for that follows after, Ver. 7. Then
said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I am the Door. So that if he keeps
to his own way without explaining a Syllable, he is where he was, and Christ
may be as properly a door, as we may properly Eat the Flesh of Christ.

He goes on: In like manner of the Vine, Christ says, Joh. 15. 1. I am the
true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman, as Mat. 20. 1. when he likened the
Kingdom of Heaven to an Householder; and so goes on explaining the same, ver. 4.
As the Branch cannot, etc. Which if you read the Chapter, you will find to be more
plain. I perceive he is very serious, and I am of his mind, if the Seeker read
on, he would find it plain, that Christ is not properly a Vine, and so say I,
if he reads Joh. 6. he would find it as plain, that Eating the Flesh of Christ
is not properly to be understood. But if words will oblige us without attending
the sense, and we must take them as we find them without explaining a Syllable,
then I say still it is as plainly said, I am the true Vine, as my Flesh is meat
indeed; and according to our Author's way of Exposition, this can be no
Parable. For, says he, you will find in all cases Christ spoke not by Parables
without telling them it was so, Page 12. But here it is not so said; for as
before, so after the words, v. 4. As the Branch, etc. he says, v. 5. I am the
Vine.

He goes on: In like manner of the Rcck, That he was the Cornerstone, upon
which the Foundation was laid, etc. But how does he prove Christ was not
properly a Rock according to his own way? Because, says he, he is a
Cornerstone, and a Foundation, which is just as if he had been asked, how he
would prove, without explaining a Syllable, Christ is not properly a
Cornerstone, or a Foundation; and he should say, because he is a Rock. But
what says he to the last Instance, to prove as plainly, Christians are not
turned into Christ's Natural Body, when it is said we are members of his Body,
Ephesians. 5. 20? To this an Answer is to be expected.

Well, after all his windings and turnings, his Parities, and without
explainings, and his reading, and his in like manners, and his Rules for
understanding Parables, the words are as plain and express that Christ is a
Door, a Vine, a Rock, and we are members of Christ's Body, as they are that we
Eat the Flesh of Christ; and if one be properly to be understood, there is as
much reason from the mere words for the like understanding the other.

After this Digression, our Author undertakes the last Argument of the
Protestant Answerer, viz.

Arg. 3. Here is nothing of the Conversion of the Bread into the Body of
Christ; but rather the contrary; for if the words are Literally to be
understood, then they would rather infer the conversion of Christ's Flesh and
Blood into Bread and Wine, when he says, I am the Bread of Life, v. 5. My
Flesh is meat (or Bread) indeed.

As to the first, which is the conversion of the Bread into the Body of Christ,
and the chief thing proposed to him, he has silently past it over; perhaps he
saw here also no necessity of defining or proving it to one that believes it
not. But to make up this defect he gives his Adversary a grave Reprimend, that
when he had just before said, that these words had no special Reference to the
Sacrament, he should now so apply them, by an odd way of shufflng. And why did
he not as sharply admonish him for offering to show that the words might infer
the conversion of Christ's Flesh into Bread? For both alike belonged to him.
Our Author it seems apprehended not all this was Argumentum ad hominem. But how
does he clear the Point, and show they infer no such conversion? First he
says, for proof whereof, [That Christ's Flesh is not turned into Bread] let us
go to the words of Conversion, This is my Body. But, methinks, it would have
better became him to have first proved the Conversion of the Bread into Flesh
from these words. As for St. John, he grants that had the words been, My Flesh
is Bread indeed, as his Adversary would fain have them, then he would have
something on his side. But if that be the sense of it, and the words Bread and
Meat are used by our Savior promiscuously; then it is so far acknowledged. And
for that I shall refer our Author to v. 26, 27. but he will not allow v. 48. to
look that way, nor indeed will I. But yet they will as soon prove Christ turned
into Bread, as the words the Bread that I will give is my Flesh, will prove the
Bread turned into his Flesh; which they so little do, that they rather would
imply the contrary, if understood literally, as I have showed page 8

But he concludes, rather than differ, I Will join in opinion with the Protestant
Answerer, and these other Divines, and with him and them submit to the
Determination of the Church. But where is this the opinion of the Protestant
Answerer? Surely our Author is like him in Aristotle, that where ever he went,
fancied he saw himself. But what need is there to go to the Church in this
case? For I hope he will think sense and reason sufficient to instruct men
whether those words will prove that Christ was turned into Bread: And we think
sense and reason as sufficient to inform them whether the words of our Savior
will prove that Bread was turned into Christ's Flesh.

I now thought this matter had been at an end, when the Protestant Answerer
past from this Argument to the second Text. But our Author has not yet done
with him. For he tells us, There is one Argument yet, on which the Gentleman
seems much to depend (page 9.) When he says, Since if Christ be not, but where
he entirely is, then (says he) he must be eaten entirely, etc. From whence he
concludes the not being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, because (as he
conceives) he is not there entire, for reasons (not Scripture) of his own, p.
14. Bless me! thought I, where am I now? in the land of Oberon? What shall I
say? he quotes page 9. I hastily turned thither, and there I was satisfied my
memory had not yet forsaken me. The case is thus, the Answerer, as is before
observed, to show the absurdity of our Author's appealing to the mere Letter,
put several Queries to him out of this Chapter, which he desired him to resolve
in his own way, without going to Figures. The last of which was this, how he
can literally interpret, ver. 57. [He that eats me] that holds in the
Eucharist is contained the true Body and Blood, together with the Soul and
Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- Since if Christ be not but where he
entirely is, then he must be eaten entirely. This question amongst others was
there dropped by our Author; and the reason is apparent, for he must either have
acknowledged that the words He that eats me, must be understood Figuratively
and Spiritually, and not Corporally: Or else that the Soul and Divinity of
Christ must be Eaten with his Body: Or that the Soul and Divinity of Christ are
not in the Eucharist with his Body. The case, I confess, is hard to one that
has somewhat else to respect than truth; and therefore it became him to be
silent. But why he should now bring it on the Stage under another guise, I
cannot imagine, when thus to resume it, and pervert it, must as much expose his
insincerity as the omission of it before, did his inability to answer it. The
Reader will see that the Argument and the conclusion are none of the
Answerer's; for that Proposition, where ever Christ is, there he entirely is,
is a principle of our Author's, and which is there made use of against him that
professed to believe with the same Faith he believes a God, that in the
Eucharist is truly and substantially contained the true Body and Blood,
together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, Cath. Answ. to
Seeker, p. 4. And where our Author found the Conclusion. I know not, for there
is nothing in the Protestant Answer like to this, that from thence concludes
the not Being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, because he is not there entire.

However it may not be amiss to see how our Author relieves himself: Says he;
To which, I answer and grant, that Christ is not, but where he is entire. And
whether Christ who is perfect God, may not be entire in the Sacrament, and in
many places at one and the same time, is the Query? which if fully resolved,
will overthr^w all his reasoning Ware besides? Well, how will he prove Christ
entirely in the Sacrament? That is, the true Body of Christ with the Soul and
Divinity. That was forgot before, and so is not to be remembered; but if it may
be accepted for a full and entire Answer, he will prove his Body may be entire
in many places at one and the same time. What he says of that, belongs to
another place, and shall there be considered, p. 29. But what is this to his
Soul and Divinity; and to the literal sense of he that eats me, and the
Argument the Answerer pressed upon him? He will be able to answer it, when he can
prove his Proposition, that Christ is not, but where he is entire; for then his
Body must be Omnipresent as well as his Divinity, which after all the may be's,
and his attempts to prove it possible for Christ's Body to be in many places at
one and the same time, I suppose he will have no allowance to publish, if he
should have the imprudence to maintain.

SECT. III.
WE are at length come to his second Text to prove his Real Presence, Sect. 3.
viz. This is my Body. Here the Protestant Answerer showed how absurd the
direction of the Seeker was, that his Answerers should produce their Texts,
without troubling themselves to tell the meaning on it, because he was certain
that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation could never be the literal meaning of
those words. As for example, says he, Where is there one word, that the [This]
whatever it means, is the true Body and Blood, together with the Soul and
Divinity of Christ, in the self-same Substance wherein he was born of the
Virgin? Where that this true Body and Blood is truly, really and substantially
contained under the Forms of Bread and Wine? Where that the Bread and Wine are
upon Consecration turned into the true Body and Blood of Christ? Let us see how
our Author replies to this, p. 17. Let us note his Where Is. Where, says he, is
there one word? Where that this true Body and Blood? Where that the Bread and
Wine are upon Consecration, turned into the True Body and Blood of Christ, etc.
Which truly, are Where Is indeed? But what is become of the Soul and Divinity of
Christ? What of the self-same Substance wherein he was born of the Virgin? What
of the true Body, truly, really, and substantially contained under the Forms of
Bread and Wine? Which are what he professed firmly and truly to believe by the
same Faith he believes a God? And where (to add another Where) will he find
these literally in the words, This is my Body? He tells us one would think that
so many Where Is were not without a Wherefore. And because the Gentleman desires
to know the Where, he shall also know the When. Certainly now to the
Confutation of Scotus and Biel, etc. and the confusion of all Heretics, We
shall have a plain discovery, and that in so many words we shall find the true
Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of Christ, etc. For this go
we to his when Jesus took Bread, etc. and said, This is my Body, Mat. 26. 26.
Then it was, says he, and, Here it is by power of these words of God, This is
my Body, that the Bread is turned into the Body of Christ. This is indeed a
submission to the Seeker 's direction to produce the words without a meaning,
and it is so because it is so; This is my Body, does turn the Bread into the
Body, because there are the words, This is my Body. I hope the Reader is
satisfied, for in truth I am.

The next thing proposed by the Prot. Answerer was, what the meaning is of
This, in, This is my Body? If, says he, it be Bread, then the Bread is in the
literal sense, the substance of Christ's Body, and so overthrows the change to
be made in Transubstantiation. If by This, is not meant the Bread, then the
Bread could never be turned into the Body of Christ by virtue of the words,
This is my Body. Our Author readily answers, Ask the Question, What? and our
Savior will resolve you, Mat. 26. 26. This is (what?) my Body, he did not say,
after he had blessed it, Say, Take, Eat, This is Bread, but my Body; than
which, nothing can be more plain, than that it was his Body. And to make all
sure, he seriously proves it, because it is not hic, but hoc est panis. It Is
well (...) in the Greek is of the same Gender with panis. But let us admit of
this Learned Criticism (though by the way let me observe for our Author's
instruction, when the Article relates to the sentence, it is to be put in the
Neuter Gender) the difficulty put, yet remains; for if the This relates to
Body, then the sense is, This Body is my Body. But says he, let us suppose
This to refer to Bread, It yet follows that it is his Body. But it follows
also, as the Answerer argued, that then the Bread is the Substance of Christ's
Body, according to the Letter; and so could not be turned into it. So that our
Author has left the difficulty as he found it.

But because the Answerer here said, We have not Faith to believe that reason
the Scripture has not taught, he very subtly argues after this manner: From
whence, says he, I gather, that notwithstanding all his Arguments to disprove
the Real Presence, yet he has not Faith (though face) to deny it. For that
page 3. he tells you that besides their positive Articles, they have a great
many Negative ones, [and the Answerer tells you, for which we are beholden to
the Corruptions and Innovations of the Church of Rome] etc. For that he has
not faith to believe, what the Scripture has not taught, that in the Eucharist
is not contained the Body of Christ. The Gentleman therefore can have no Faith
to deny it. A very quaint Argument; which I shall dismiss with a parallel
Instance. He that has not Faith to believe that which the Scripture has not
taught, has not Faith to deny that to be of Faith which the Scripture does not
teach: And therefore because Mahometism is not taught in Scripture, he has not
Faith to deny it. But this spirit of acuteness does not last long, for having
labored to find inconsistencies in the Doctrine of the Church of England as
set down in the Answer, he blunders without end. He allows what our Church
says, That the Body of Christ is eaten in the Sacrament after an Heavenly and
Spiritual manner; but he adds, but this we believe to be a true and real
manner, not a Deceitful, Figurative, or Fictitious manner. -- If you grant it
after a Spiritual manner, you must grant it there after a true manner. If
Christ be there in Spirit, he is also there in Truth; and if there in Spirit
and Truth, all my Arguments are granted. I think not; for the Church of England
says, it is only after an Heavenly and Spiritual manner. So that though they do
agree, where Christ is in Spirit, he is there in Truth; yet I doubt me the word
only alters the case, for he may be there in Spirit and in Truth, and yet not
be Corporally there. And I question whether any thing less will satisfy our
Author; and so it appears; For, says he, Christ is there after such an Entire,
Real and Substantial manner, as we believe, or he is in no manner there at all,
p. 19, 20.

PART II. Sect. 1.
HAving thus considered the Texts produced by the Catholic Answer to the
Seeker, Part 2. Sect. 1.
and showed how little they serve their Cause; I shall proceed to the Second
Part, and that is to vindicate the Texts produced in the Protestant Answer,
from the Exceptions of our Author. Here our Author sets his Texts against those
of the Protestant; but it would have done well if he had first set down what it
is he should prove on his own side, viz. That in the Eucharist is truly, really
and substantially contained, under the Forms of Bread and Wine, the true Body
and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of Christ in the same substance
wherein he was born of the Virgin, and wherein he lived and died for us; and
this by the Conversion of the whole Bread into the Body, and the Wine into the
Blood of Christ. If this had been done, how meanly would it have looked* though
he brought his 24 Texts to prove it? and surely he could not then have had the
confidence to have said, as he now does, I doubt not but it appears that the
Texts brought on the Catholic [Roman] side are abundantly plain and sufficient
for the Being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, as thus set down. And it would
doubtless have been some gratification to his Reader, if he had given us a
Paraphrase as his Adversary had done, according to these his Sentiments.

But here he says that the Answerer pretends not to prove by these Texts that
the Body and Blood of Christ are not in the Sacrament, p. 24 Why so? Because
it is one of their Negative Articles, and to require plain and express words of
Scripture to prove such a thing is not there taught, is, says he, to demand a
proof, the thing is not capable of. -- As if suppose there was not express
words of Scripture to confute Arianism, therefore that could not be confuted by
Scripture. It Is enough that what is not in Scripture is no Article of Faith;
it is enough that there are such Propositions in Scripture as are sufficient to
refute it, though there should not be express words. But however if he will
take it in the words of our Article, and if it may be to his content, we shall
find it positively said that Transubstantiation is repugnant to the plain words
of Scripture. And we have our Author acknowledging that his Adversary
undertakes to show that the Protestants have the Letter of Scripture for them,
meaning (as he says) that in the Sacrament is Not contained the Body of
Christ, p. 30. And now let us try whether the Answerer did not give them more
than his bare word for it; in the use he made of his own Quotations. As he
observed from thence.

SECT. II.
1. THat it is no contradiction to our Savior's manner of speaking, Sect. 2.
to interpret these words Figuratively, since our Author after all his
Exclamations of giving Christ the Lie, is forced (tho here he slips over it)
elsewhere to acknowledge that the Cup, yea and the word Bread, is so used, p. 28.

2. That in many Instances the Letter of Scripture is for us: As,

Arg. 1. That there is no Substantial change in the Elements, but they remain
the same Bread and Wine after Consecration as before. So it is five times called
Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 26, etc. and the whole Solemnity is called Breaking of Bread,
Act. 2. 42.

To this our Author replies several ways, as, By the word Bread, says he, is
meant the Communion of the Body of Christ, as by the word Cup is signified the
Communion of the Blood of Christ, p. 24.

But to this I answer,

1. That if the words Bread and Cup are not to be understood Literally, but
with a thereby is meant, and thereby is signified, then there is no more reason
from the bare words to understand, This is my Body Literally: And that it may
be as well interpreted, This is the Representation, and Sign of my Body, as
this Bread is the Communion of my Body.

2. From hence it follows, That if the Bread be the Communion of the Body of
Christ, as the Cup is the Communion of the Blood of Christ, then the Bread is
no more changed than the Cup; but as the Cup remains the Cup, so the Bread
remains the Bread in the Communion.

3. If the Bread be the Communion of the Body of Christ, then the Communion of
the Body of Christ is in the Communion of the Bread; and so the Bread is still
Bread.

4. Our Author has not touched the Point, which was to show the Letter of
Scripture is for us, when it calls it Bread after Consecration.

But he says, Saint Paul mentions not the words, Cup and Bread, but he
explains them to be the Body and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye
eat this Bread, ye do show the Lords death, which was not shown, but by
offering up his True and Real Body and Blood.

I answer, so we may better say he mentions not the Body of Christ, but he
explains it, when he five times afterward calls it Bread: But how does the
showing of the Death of Christ prove the Bread to be his Body, when it rather
proves it not to be his Body, because his Body is not, according to them,
visible, and to be shown?

He says further, How could they be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord,
v. 27. if the Body and Blood be not there?

I answer, As persons may be guilty of it out of the Sacrament: Thus we read
Heb. 6. 6. Who crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh. And Chap. 10. 29.
Who trod under foot the Blood of the Covenant. And so by unworthy receiving of
the Lords Supper, in which his Death was Commemorated and Represented, they
after the same manner were by Interpretation guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord. And this the next ver. 29. shows, not discerning the Lords Body;
which can be understood only of a Spiritual discerning by Faith. Or rather as
the word (...) signifies, discriminating.

Lastly, he adds, 'Twould be hard a sinner should be damned merely for moderate
eating and drinking Wine; for according to the Protestant Answerer, the
Sacrament is no more, who tells you, p. 11. There is no other Substance
distributed among the Communicants, than that of Bread and Wine.

1. But if our Author had gone three or four Lines further, he would have found
those words, page 11. The Body of Christ is not otherwise present than it is
eaten, that is, after an Heavenly and Spiritual Manner, in the Spiritual
Blessings and effects of his Merits and Sufferings in his Body, to those that
believe. So that he prevaricates, when he says, Sinners are damned merely for
moderate eating and drinking, and that we esteem the Sacrament no more.

2. We look upon it as a Divine Institution, and by virtue of that Institution
a means of Grace; and that by a worthy participation of it, we partake of that
Grace which is thereto promised, therein exhibited, and thereby conveyed, as
it is there declared, p. 17. and consequently the damnation threatened is to the
contempt of God's Ordinance, and of the Sufferings of Christ therein
represented, and of the Grace of God purchased by those Sufferings, and therein
to be obtained.

The Answerer showed, also as the Bread, so the Wine was without alteration,
from Mat. 26. 28. who after he had said, This is my Blood, calls it the Fruit
of the Vine. And from the order in St. Mark 14. 23, 24. where the Apostles are
said to have drank of it, before our Savior said, This is my Blood.

This Branch of the Argument our Author divides from the other, and casts it
forward three or four Pages, Page 28. for it gave too much light to the other,
whilst they were together.

As to the former Text, I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine, he says,
St. Luke gives the plainest order of it, Chap. 22. 14. and that there it has
relation to the Paschal Cup.

I grant, that in St. Luke it more immediately is joined to the Paschal Feast,
but yet in St. Matthew and Mark, Christ is said to have spoke these words after
the delivery of the Cup in the Lord's Supper. And the least that can be observed
from hence is, that it was indifferently to be applied to either; and so it
more strongly argues that it was alike to be understood [that the Wine in the
Eucharistical Cup was the natural fruit of the Vine, as that in the Paschal] as
that the substance of both was one and the same, and no more change in the one
than the other.

But, suppose this, yet, says he, the meaning of these words could in no wise
be applied to the Substance of Wine proceeding from an Earthly Vine; but to the
Substance of his Blood, the fruit of the Heavenly Vine, for that it was to be
drank new with them in his Father's Kingdom, which is Heaven, where they
neither keep Taverns, nor drink Wine, etc.

Some persons while they charge others with irreverence, themselves seem to
have lost all due reverence for holy things.

We will suppose, in favor of our Author, that by the Kingdom of God our
Savior means Heaven, and by the Fruit of the Vine, he means the Substance of
Christ's Blood; yet how will it follow that it is the same Fruit of the Vine
they drink of in Heaven as they drank of in the Sacrament; since the Blood of
Christ is no more drank in Heaven, than Wine; nor is the Sacrament any more
administered there, than the Passover? So that if by the Kingdom of God, Heaven
is to be understood, then the phrase, Till I drink it new, signifies Mystically
and Figuratively according to the manner of Scripture, which sets forth the
happiness of that state by eating, Mat. 8. 11. Luke 14. 15. and the excellency
and perfection of it by the word New, Revel. 14. 13, etc. And so the meaning
is, I shall not henceforth thus eat with you; the next Festival I shall
observe, will be in Heaven; there we that have now thus eat and drank together,
shall partake of the felicity of that state; and this fruit of the Earthly Vine
shall be exchanged for Rivers of Heavenly Pleasures, which we shall there be
entertained with.

The next thing observed by the Answerer in proof of the Substance of the Wine
continuing so after Consecration, was from the order observed in St. Mark 14.
23. where it is said the Disciples drank of the Wine, before our Savior said,
This is my Blood.

Here our Author thinks himself excused from an Answer, because of an Error in
the Press, Body being put for Blood. But if he turned to the Text, he might see
that place was quoted right, and common sense would serve to rectify it.
However he courteously offers somewhat in the mean time, by way of Answer, viz.
Whether St. Mark expresses the words in the same order as they were spoken or
no, it matters not; seeing he has the Substance of what was said, and wherein
they all agree; to wit, that it was his Blood. And it is also apparent that
Christ first gave thanks, and blessed it, before he gave it, etc. page 29. But
does it not matter whether St. Mark expresses the words in order? Certainly if
the order he recites it in, were the order observed by our Savior, and that
the Apostles received the Cup, and drank of the Wine before the words of
Conversion (as they call them) were used, then it follows (as the Answerer
argued) that they only drank of the Substance of the Wine, and that the words,
This is my Blood, could not signify, and much less produce a Conversion of the
Wine into the Blood of Christ. This our-Author was sensible of, and therefore
in his Answer left out the main part of it. For what tho all the Evangelists
agree that the words, This is my Blood; were then used by our Savior? What
though Christ first gave thanks, and blessed it, before he gave it, if he did
not also use the words of Conversion, before he gave it? For all the rest he
might do, and yet the Wine be Wine still (as they own.) But thus it was, if St.
Mark is right in the order, and it seems to be the proper order, because he
only speaks of the particular, that they all drank of it. But we are not to
have any thing to the purpose till (as he says) the Bill be amended, and that
I take for his best Answer.

Arg. 2. The Protestant Answerer showed the Letter of Scripture is for us, that
our Savior's Body had the natural and inseparable Properties of a Body, such
as Extension, Circumscription, etc. p. 15. Here our Author calls in the Faith
of a Christian, and the Almighty Power of God to his Succor; and looks upon
the Answerer as a second Didymus, because he will, like him, not believe except
he sees; and worse than him, who saw but the Humanity, yet believed the
Divinity of Christ, p. 30. But why all this, when he believes all the Scripture
teaches, and reason it self justifies? May not a man believe, unless he
believes contrary to what he himself sees, and the Scripture teaches? Or why is
he worse than Thomas, when Thomas would not believe unless he saw? But the
Answerer is one of those (Thanks be to God) whom our Savior pronounced
Blessed, That have not seen, and yet have believed. What is there he would have
him believe? It is what was never put to Thomas, for our Savior convinced him
by an ocular Demonstration, Joh. 20. 27. Reach hither thy finger, and behold,
etc. As much as if he had said, The Resurrection is real, for it is a real Body
that is before thee; and it is my Body, for reach hither thy finger, etc. It Is
plain our Savior here thought he gave an unquestionable Proof of the Truth of
his Resurrection by showing his Body to Thomas, which could not have been, had
not his Body had the properties of an human body, without which it could not
have been a Body; or which if it had been without, Thomas could not have been
convinced in that way, that it was his Body.

But our Author here undertakes to prove, that this was not the Condition of
our Savior's Body; or, that he could by his power separate these essential
Properties of a Body from his Body. Here I must confess my self indebted to him
for an answer to what he offered to this purpose before, but not to the purpose
of the Argument there, and here repeats. Pray, says he, how was his Body to be
seen, Extended, Finite, and Circumscribed, when he passed through Walls and
Doors that were close? John 20. 17. He entered the room, the Doors being shut.
-- How came he through? Was his Body Entire, Extended, Finite, and
Circumscribed with Limbs, Bones, and Sinews? -- Such is the Infinite Power of
God, that though they were enclosed in walls every where a Mile thick, 'twould
yet be possible for Christ to enter entire through all, p. 15.

Here is one thing omitted, and that is to prove, that as the Doors were shut,
when they assembled, for fear of the Jews (as the Evangelist says) so they
were not opened by Christ, when he came and stood in the midst of them; till
which be proved, we shall say the letter of Scripture is for us, and that
Christ's Body had Flesh and Bones, might be beheld and felt, and did neither
come through the Walls, nor indeed could do, so long as it remains true that
the Penetration of Dimensions is impossible. But I had need to recall this; for
I am for ever silenced if what he says be true, that the Answerer argues
perfidiously of Christ, as if he were not God, not distinguishing betweeen his
Glorious Body and ours; for as God, all things are possible to him. But where
is that perfidiousness, since no more is denied to Christ, than is to God? For
because all things are possible to God, does he think that it is perfidious to
say, that it is not possible for God to be ignorant or unfaithful, or
circumscribed, and so to exist after the manner of a Body? Or does he think
it is perfidious to say, it is impossible to make the Body of Christ to have been
existent in different times, and really to have been existent before it was
existent, and yet not to be existent till it was? Or is it perfidious to say,
it is impossible to make the circumscribed Body of Christ to be Omnipresent? The
last he seems to affirm by his often repeated Maxim, That Christ is not but
where he is entire, and placing therein the Difference between Christ's
Glorious Body and ours. But of that more anon.

Our Author, as he would prove the Body of Christ might lose all the Properties
of a Body, so also that it might be contained under the Forms of Bread and
Wine, that is, to all appearance it might have all the Properties of those
Elements, and yet be none of them, but the Body of Christ alone. And this he
reasons upon, after this manner, Where is the difficulty to believe but this
may be, as the Holy Ghost under the Form of a Dove, with Feather, Beak, Wing,
and all the properties of a Fowl? Or in the Form of Tongues of Fire? Both which
to our eyes were but as a perfect Dove, and as perfect Tongues; yet those
different objects to the eye of Flesh, were but one Holy Ghost to the Eye of
Faith. Therefore nothing can be more plain than that Objects may be one thing
to the Eye of Flesh, and another thing to the Eye of Faith. So in the
Sacrament, to our sight and taste is plain Bread and Wine, but to our Faith (in
Gods word) it is the Real and Entire Body and Blood of Christ.

An instance and inference not at all to the purpose. For the Question is not,
Whether a Spiritual Being may not be under the appearance of a Body? for so it
was with the Angels when they appeared as men, and the Holy Ghost when it
appeared like a Dove. Neither is the Question, whether an Object may be one
thing to the eye of Flesh, and another to the eye of Faith? for so our Savior
appeared to be man, and yet was God as well as man. All which yet is besides
the matter, for in these cases there is an invisible Being under a visible
representation, or an Invisible Being in union to a visible. But here are two
objects visible in their own nature, viz. the Body of Christ, and Bread; and
the one of these so turned into the other, that there are all the Properties of
a visible Being, which is not there, viz. Bread; and none of the properties of
that visible Being which is there, viz. the Body of Christ. So that the
question should be thus proposed, Whether what is an object of sense, may have
all the properties of another sensible object, without being that thing which
they are the properties of; and none of the properties belonging to its own
nature and being?

Arg. 3. The Protestant Answerer showed, that the Letter of Scripture is for
us, that the Body of Christ as it ascended, so is to continue in Heaven till
the conclusion of the world; and so cannot be in Heaven and Earth at the same
time. This our Author calls a barren conceit; but as barren as it is, it is
true, and has Scripture and Reason on its side, notwithstanding what he has
objected to the contrary. The first Argument he offers in Answer to this is,
that he is a perfect and omnipotent-God. And that he may be, and yet not
reconcile contradictions (as has been just before showed.) He confirms it by
Scripture, Mat. 18. 20. c. 28. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them. And if there, he is there entire, or
not at all, p. 15. and 32. But when Christ promised to be in the midst of them,
did he promise to be there Corporally? If bodily, I would fain know under what
Form he is there? And if he be entire where ever he is, and yet he is every
where as God, then the Body of Christ must be as Omnipresent as his Divinity;
and so there would be no need, nor indeed possibility of his Descending.

He adds, Our Savior is not so confined in Heaven, as that he cannot also be
upon Earth; for we read that he Descended and overthrew Saul in the way to
Damascus, and spoke to him, Act. 9. 4. And he may be actually present without
being seen, for the men with Saul saw no man, v. 7. By all which it is plain,
that Christ may be in Earth, and in many places at the same time, as well as in
Heaven.

But to this I answer, (1.) It Is not certain that the Apostle saw, or that
Christ appeared to his Fleshly eye. For elsewhere he is said to see him in a
trance, Act. 22. 17. and here v. 4. to fall on the Earth; and so God is said to
be seen, when yet there was no similitude, Exodus 24. 10. Deuteronomy. 4. 12.

(2.) If he was seen bodily, yet it is not said, as our Author would have it,
that he Descended, and was bodily present.

But it might be as with St. Stephen, who looked up to Heaven, and saw Jesus
standing on the right hand of God, Act. 7. 55. And so here v. 3. it is said,
that there shined round about (St. Paul) a light from Heaven.

(3.) Much less is there so much as any intimation of what our Author says,
that Christ was Bodily in Heaven and the Earth at the same time. For if he was
in in the one, it is certain he was not Bodily in the other. And this our Author
unwittingly acknowledges, when he says Christ descended and overthrew Saul. So
Vigilius Tapsitanus, When the Body of Christ was in the Earth, it was not in
Heaven; and now because it is in Heaven, it is not in the Earth.

Arg. 4. The Answerer argued on, That the Letter is for us, that Christ was but
once offered as a Propitiatory Sacrifice, etc. that his Body is Glorified and
so not to be offered, Heb. 9. 28, etc. But to this our Author has made no Reply.

SECT. III.
FRom hence the Prot. Answerer proceeded to show, that as the Letter of
Scripture is for us, so are the words which are Figurative, as in those, This
is my Body, p. 16. The method was here orderly and distinct, but our Author
runs one into another. I shall gather up what he says as well as I can. The
Arguments by which the Answerer proved those words to be Figurative, are as
follows.

Arg. 1. From the word This, which if to be understood of the Bread, Bellarmine
grants, then the word Body must be Figuratively understood. And that it was the
Bread, at least in conjunction with the other acts relating to it, the Answerer
showed, which our Author lets pass.

Arg. 2. The Answerer argues, if the words are to be understood literally and
properly, when these words were said by our Savior, then the Body would be
broken, before it was broken.

To this our Author answers, (1.) P. 26. Though his Natural Body be there, yet
the manner of it is Being is Spiritual and Sacramental, and the manner of its
Breaking follows the manner of its Being; his Body is there Broken in the Sign,
not the Substance.

I answer, That to speak of a Body's being after the manner of a Spirit, is as
much as to say on the contrary, A Spirit exists after the manner of a Body:
that is, That Body may be a Spirit, and a Spirit a Body.

2. If the Body be in the manner of its Being only Spiritual and Sacramental,
and the breaking in the manner of its breaking be only Spiritually, then why
not the Body be only Spiritual and Sacramental? Or why should we any more
profess our selves Jews or Infidels (as he would have it) to doubt, whether,
nay to affirm, what Christ said was improper and Metaphorical, when we say,
This is my Body is to be understood Figuratively and Spiritually, than it is to
say (as he does) it is broken spiritually; since, as the Answerer observed it is
as well said, This is broken, as This is my Body: And our Author says, the
manner of its being and breaking, are Spiritual and Sacramental, Mystical and
Representative?

3. But this is besides the case; for the Question is not about the manner of
Breaking, but how Christ could say, This is Broken (if not Figuratively
understood) before it was broken. But to this we are to expect an Answer.

But he adds* (2.) Moreover these words [which is broken] do prove (as the Holy
Catholic Church always did, and ever will hold) it to be a true, proper
Sacrifice; for the being broken, explains the Nature of a Sacrifice, which
imports the destruction of the thing offered, if corruptible and liable to
destruction: But the Body of Christ being Incorruptible and Immortal, cannot be
really hurt, therefore the manner of breaking, is only Mystical and
Representative.

Setting aside that what he says concerning the Catholic Church, is spoken
Gratis, I answer, If the nature of a Sacrifice imports the destruction of the
thing offered, if corruptible and liable to destruction, then the Body of
Christ must have been destroyed (if a proper Sacrifice) before it was
destroyed; for the Body of Christ (when Christ spoke these words, This is my
Body) was certainly liable to destruction. And so he has fastened the Objection,
instead of answering it.

(3.) He concludes, If this manner of Breaking, pleases not the Gentleman (as
in truth it does not, and he has now given his Reasons for it) let us see
whether the Body of Christ were not otherwise Broke before he instituted the
Sacrament. Now his Body was pierced, and Blood spilt at his Circumcision,
followed by unspeakable Pains, restless Labors, etc. What his Agony in the
Garden? What his being crowned with Thorns and Bloody Whipping at the Pillar?
-- Wherefore with Truth our Savior might have said of his Body [which is
broke] without supposing any thing improper or untrue.

1. What does our Author mean when he says he would see, Whether the Body of
Christ were not otherwise broken before he instituted the Sacrament: And
instances in his Agony in the Garden, his crowning with Thorns, and whipping?
Does he think these were before the Sacrament?

2. If this was the meaning of our Savior, when he said, This is my Body which
is broken, that he was Circumcised, and in an Agony, etc. then where is the
Sacrifice, which he says, imparts the destruction of the thing? Which these
things were neither literally nor mystically.

Arg. 3. The Answerer urged, that Jesus himself then took the Bread, etc. when
he said, This is my Body, and yet Jesus had at that time a Body which was not
broken, etc. no not so much as mystically. So that the same Body was whole and
broken. Here our Author is silent.

Arg. 4. He argued from the words, Do this in Remembrance of me, which supposes
absence; and therefore an Institution set up in remembrance, and yet in which
the Body was to be actually present, is to suppose the Body to be absent and
present at the same time.

To this he answers.

1. That those words no way relate to the Laity, who only receive the
Sacrament, but to the Priests, who consecrate and administer, for it is no where
said, This Eat, This Take, This Receive, but, This Do.

A. 1. If this be so, then there is no command to the People to receive.

2. To whom did the Apostle write his Epistle, but to Laity as well as Priests.

3. Surely he did not read 1 Cor. 11. 24. where the Apostle says, Take, Eat,
This is my Body. This do; What? but, Take, Eat; so v. 25. This do ye, as often as
ye drink it in remembrance of me. This do: What? but, Drink this.

But after all, what is this to the Argument? For whether these Words were
spoke to the Laity or Priests, relates not to the Case; but the Question is,
Whether Remembrance of Persons, is in its true Notion consistent with Presence?

To this he answers,

The Seeker unanswerably observed, that the Remembrance of its Being, does no
way make it cease to be. A wise Observation! But what then? Does it not suppose
the Absence of the thing?

This he says is a weak piece of Sophistry, as if, says he, my Remembrance of
your being with me, when Present, did any wise suppose your Absence from me.

But I thought, with the rest of Mankind, that Remembrance and Sight are as
distinct in their notion, as Absence and Presence; and that I may as well see
what is Absent, as remember what is Present: What is Present we see and know,
but what is Unseen and Absent, we remember.

After all, we see that the Author has left no Rule to direct a true Seeker to,
no Guide to direct him, no Arguments to settle his wavering mind; and if there
be not a better Rule, Guide, or Arguments than he has offered toward his
Conviction, there is no help for it, but the Seeker must live and dye a Seeker.

It Is impossible to convince a man that has Sense and Reason, that he must not
use them, and that whatever use they may be of in Temporal Matters, they ought
to be of none in Religion: and he that will undertake this difficult task, must
either prove he does not contradict himself when he will show and refer him to
the Letter of Scripture, and wish him to use his Eyes to see it, And his reason
to judge of it; or else he must prove that both parts of a Contradiction may be
true. And having brought our Author hither, I may safely leave him, and
conclude his Argument, together.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 10. lin. 21. for Seeker page 6. [Seeker page 6.] with Braces. P. 27. l.
32. for when r. where.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Transubstantiation contrary to Scripture; or the Protestant's Answer to the
Seeker's Request.

An Apology for the Pulpits; being in Answer to a late Book, Entitled, Good
Advice to the Pulpits. Together with an Appendix, containing a Defense of Dr.
Tenison's Sermon about Alms; in a Letter to the Author of this Apology.


