A SERMON Preached July 26. 1685.

Being the DAY of Public Thanksgiving Appointed by His MAJESTY for the Late
VICTORY over the REBELS.

In the Parish-Churches of St. Mildred's Poultrey, and St. Ann's Aldersgate.

Published in Vindication of That, and the Author.

By JOHN WILLIAMS, Rector of St. MILDRED's POULTREY.

LONDON: Printed by R. R. and are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen Corner.
1685.

To the Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY Lord Bishop of
London.
MY LORD,
IT is to Your Lordship, that we of the Clergy within your Diocese, are
immediately (under his Majesty) accountable for our Doctrine and Behavior; in
which, if any of us are known to offend, it becomes such as know it, and are
aggrieved, to complain to you, as our Ordinary, for the Reformation and
redressing of it. But it is of late grown too much a practice amongst some,
that would be thought not a little concerned for our Church, to be the first
that censure us, and without Examination of the Case, or enquiring into the
Truth and Certainty of what they report, make the wide World the Judge, and
proclaim our Faults, whatever they are, or are said to be, in the chief Places
of Concourse; and which your Lordship (and perhaps the Party himself) knows
nothing of, till every body knows it, and common Fame brings it to your Ears.

My Lord, it has happened thus with me, as with others (who am not the first,
nor it is likely shall be the last that is to be thus served.) For having
Preached July 26. the Day appointed by his Majesty for a Public Thanksgiving
for the late Victory over the Rebels, there want not some who have reported
that I only entertained my Auditory with a General Discourse that was not to
the purpose of the Day and Occasion. A Calumny I for a while slighted, and
contented my self to give my Friend satisfaction, that first acquainted me with
it: But when, from a deep Design in some to asperse the Clergy of the City,
from a Credulity in others to believe ill of them, and from the humor of an
Age (from what reason it proceeds, God knows) given to believe a Lie, it came
to be a public Talk: It became me, if I had no regard to my own Reputation,
yet from the regard I ought to have to our Clergy (which too much suffers by
such aspersions) and to your Lordship (under whose Cognizance it falls) to take
the most effectual course for the refuting of it, by publishing my Sermon, how
defective soever it may otherwise be. This therefore I do, without adding any
new matter, saving what may serve to render it the more intelligible, useful,
and entire (which is therefore distinguished from the other, and set forth by
marks) and without making any Alteration, so much as in the Words relating to
the Day, forbearing even those Things that I said more of it, as they then
offered themselves to my thoughts, because I cannot now exactly recollect it,
though I am sensible it would have been not a little to the Advantage of it.

I must acknowledge, there is not that bitterness and severity, with which some
eager spirits are gratified; having learned from the behavior of St. Michael,
not to bring even against an Adversary a railing accusation: But if I mistake
not, the Doctrine I teach, does overthrow the main Principle by which Rebellion
is supported; a way indeed that may not make so much noise, but if prudently
and effectually managed, strikes it to the Heart; and differs as much from the
former, as fighting and vanquishing an Enemy does from railing at him. And
therefore, tho I am not able to answer for the order and dress of it (which had
the Printing been a mere voluntary act of mine, I should be obliged to) yet for
the Truth and Loyalty, I may safely challenge those that have adventured either
spightfully or ignorantly to revile it, the worst of mine or our Churches
Adversaries, to question it. In Confidence of which, I do present it to your
Lordship, and desire to stand or fall, as your Lordship shall judge of it: Who
as in this, so upon all other occasions, shall approve my self,

Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant, JOHN WILLIAMS.


To the Parishioners of St. Mildred's Poultrey, and St. Mary Cole; and of St.
Ann's Aldersgate, and St. John Zachary.
HAVING Preached the ensuing Sermon to both Auditories the same day, I now
present it to you from the Press; not of mine own accord (for then it had been
better fitted for that purpose) but as compelled thereunto for my own (not to
say your) Vindication. I have already appealed to my Superiors as my Judge; to
you I appeal as my Witnesses: To them, Whether the Matter be either true in it
self, or fitted to the Occasion: To you, Whether it be the Sermon I Preached. I
cannot expect, that even the most attentive should remember every Particular
then delivered; but I am confident, that you will be able generally to say,
that this was the Sermon I at that time entertained you with. And if this be
so, (as so it is) then I need say no more, to answer those that have too rashly
censured and traduced it as not at all suitable to the occasion it was Preached
upon. Certainly if the Doctrine therein contained be true, viz. that We must
not do Evil that Good may come; those that first invented, and so industriously
spread the Calumny, are not the best of men (whatever end they think to serve
by it) nor a credit to that Religion and Church they profess to be of. I leave
such to the Sermon; and recommend that, you, and my Labors amongst you, to the
Blessing of Almighty God, beseeching him to lead us into all Truth.

Your Servant in Christ Jesus, JOHN WILLIAMS.

The Reader is to take Notice, That so much of the Sermon as is thus marked "
was, through want of Time, not Preached, or else not so fully as it is now
Printed.

A SERMON Preached July 26. Being the Day set apart for a Public THANKSGIVING
for the Late VICTORY over the REBELS.
ROMANS III. 7, 8. If the Truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his
Glory, why yet am I also judged as a sinner? And not rather, as we be
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil that good
may come, whose damnation is just?


IN the Former Chapters of this Epistle, the Apostle had considered the sad
Condition which the whole Mass of Mankind was in, whether Jews or Gentiles; and
showed that the Jews, whatever Pre-eminence they had of the Gentiles, as God's
peculiar People, and invested with many Eminent Privileges and Marks of the
Divine Favor; yet in case of Unbelief and Disobedience, they could not be
thereby secured against the Wrath of God which is revealed from Heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness [ch. 1.18.] For there is no respect of persons with God [ch.
2.28.] From whence he concludes, [ver. 28.] He is not a Jew which is one
outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he
is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the
spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.

Against this, the Apostle does suppose it will probably be objected, What
advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? chap.
3.1. To this he replies, v. 2. Much every way; chiefly, because that unto them
were committed the Oracles of God; by which they had the best means in
possession, of knowing what the Will of God is, and the best Encouragements in
many Excellent Promises for obeying it.

But if in the mean while, with all these Advantages, they do not believe nor
obey, is it reasonable to suppose that they should yet stand in the same
condition as if they believed and obeyed? And that God could not withdraw his
Favor, and disfranchise them of those Privileges, without being false to his
Word? For what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the Faith, or
Faithfulness, of God without effect? God forbid. v. 3.

Against which the Apostle considers it may be further objected, But if it
happen that our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, v. 5. And
that by the unbelief of the Jews and their rejection upon it, God does enlarge
his Church, and make the Gentiles Partakers of the same Privilege, is God
unrighteous that takes vengeance? To this he replies with great Indignation,
God forbid; for then how shall God judge the world? And then what an horrid
consequence would follow from it, viz. Let us do evil that good may come: For,
says he, if the truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his Glory,
why yet am I also judged as a sinner? And not rather, as we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil that good may come?

Which Words, and the Coherence, will be better understood, if it be
considered, that the 7 th verse is but the Repetition of the Objection made
verse 5. And the 8 th verse is a continuation of the objection in verse 7. As
will appear more evidently, 1. If the Word rather, which is not in the
Original, be left out. And 2. If the following words, as we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say, be read by way of Parenthesis. And 3.
That the word [ why] be repeated after this manner, If the truth of God has
more abounded through my lie unto his Glory; why yet am I also judged as a
sinner? And why not (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we
say,) Let us do evil that good may come, whose damnation is just. So that the
words, let us do evil that good may come, are an Inference from the objection
contained in the Words, If the truth of God has more abounded, etc. And which
it seems some maliciously reported, that the Apostle held; and charged upon him
as his Principle and Doctrine: But he protests it is a notorious calumny, and a
Doctrine he abhors, and so can be none of his; that it is a Doctrine of
pernicious Consequence, and what no man can hold without apparent hazard of his
Salvation, whose damnation is just. Which censure, tho it immediately refers to
the Authors of that slander cast upon him, yet has also a respect to the
impiety of the Doctrine he disavows, and the danger such are in that do
maintain it. This is at least employed; for if the Damnation of such as invented
the Calumny, and threw it upon him, be just, then no less certainly is it true
of such as do hold the Doctrine it self, they calumniated him with.

In Treating upon these Words,

1. I shall consider what evil it is which Persons may pretend to do for the
sake of what is Good; and what Good it is that they may respect in doing Evil.
And,

2. I shall show the unreasonableness and unlawfulness of doing evil that good
may come.

3. I shall show the danger in so doing, from the event of it, whose damnation
is just.

4. I shall show the prevalency of this Principle in the Christian World: Of
these as the time will permit.

1. What Evil it is that Persons may pretend to do for the sake of some Good,
etc.

By Evil, all Sins are to be understood, whether they be a Transgression of the
Law of Nature, or of Divine Revelation; whether they be Sins of Omission, or
Commission.

1. When I say, Sins against the Law of Nature and Revelation are hereby
forbid, I understand thereby what is intrinsecally and of its own nature evil,
and not what is so upon mutable Reasons, such as that which is forbid by
Temporary and Arbitrary Laws, depending upon the mere will of the Lawgiver, or
some present Reasons. For in this case, that which is evil by such
circumstance, may not only be done when that circumstance cease, but also
where there is an absolute necessity for it, tho the general Reason for the
observation of that Law continue. Thus it was in the case put by our Savior,
when the Law forbad the People to eat the Shewbread, and yet David with his
Company entered into the house of God when he was an hungered, and did eat it,
Matthew. 12.3, 4. But if the Matter forbidden be intrinsecally evil, the case is
otherwise, and no circumstance of things can alter it, as it is in violation of
Oaths, Blaspheming of God, etc.

2. When I say Sins of Omission and Commission are forbidden to be done for a
good end; we are to understand, that the Omission of a Duty is not concerned in
it, when two duties do interfere, so that both cannot be performed together,
and one must be omitted for the other; for then the more necessary takes place
of the less; and the omission of the less, is so far then from being an evil,
that it is a Duty. So our Savior did when he healed on the Sabbath day, Luke
13.15. and so he determined the case, when he says, God will have mercy and
not sacrifice, Matthew. 12.7.

The Good which will not warrant any evil to be done for it, may be of Two
Sorts.

1. Positive Privative: The preventing, avoiding, or removing any Evil which we
fear, foresee, or suffer by.

2. Positive: The procuring, promoting, or establishing any Good, whether
Public or Private, whether Civil or Religious.

The thing called Good, and especially that kind of Good which is evidently
known and owned so to be (such as the Cause of God and Religion, the good of
the Church, and Salvation of Mankind) is so Excellent, that he that does most
of all employ himself in it, and takes the most effectual course for preserving
or obtaining it, is justly to be esteemed one of the best of men: And since
this is so eminent and useful a Good, it is hard to think he can err that in any
Action or undertaking, has and keeps this in his Eye, and does steer his course
according as that shall require and need.

And therefore it is both a Temptation to mankind frequently to commit
unwarrantable Actions, and engage in unlawful Designs for such an end, and a
Temptation to others to think well of it: But now if evil be evil in its
nature, and is not to be changed, then evil is not to be done upon any reason
whatsoever; and the goodness of the End, as long as it cannot change the Nature
of the Action, cannot make that to be no fault which was so before, and will be
so after, and wherever that good End is not. So that whether there be a good
End or not, evil is not to be done, since the evil is as well evil where this
End is, as where it is not: And I may safely say, it is as lawful to do evil
for evil's sake, as to do evil for the sake of what is good.

And this I shall represent from the following Considerations.

1. If Evil may be done that good may come of it, it will in Effect confound
all difference betwixt Good and Evil; since Evil in such Circumstances where ^t
may serve a good End, is as Eligible and fit to be done, as what is really
good. Now if what is evil in such case, is lawful, then that which is unlawful
becomes lawful; and where is then the difference betwixt Good and Evil, Virtue
and Vice, lawful and unlawful, betwixt what is commanded, and what is
forbidden? That there is as vast a difference betwixt these two, as between
Light and Darkness, all do acknowledge; and setting aside the good End, evil
will be evil, and what is evil will be unlawful to the World's end: But though
these are never so contrary in Notion and Speculation, yet if they unite in
Practice, and that where good is the End, Evil may be used as a means, there
will be as much confusion, as if the difference had not been observed and
determined in the Notion: And there being no case in which there may not be
some good, real or imaginary, pretended, there will be no case in which Evil
will not, or may not be done: And then if Evil may be thus done, and allowably
too, and lose its Name, and for the present its Nature; then what Evil is there
which will not be legitimate? For let but a good End, such as the Glory of God,
the Advantage of the Church, be placed in the Van, and presently Injustice and
Extortion, Rapine and Violence, Oppression and Tyranny, Usurpation and
Disloyalty, and all the Evils of the World may come in the Rear; and men need
not boggle at whatever such a cause may need or require, when they have this to
justify them. So that by this means, Evil shall be as securely and lawfully
practiced, as if it had nothing of that Nature in it; and by being in such good
Company, comes to lose its malignity, and become venial, say I, nay,
praiseworthy and meritorious; and what without that End was the worst of
Villainies, shall by it, become an Heroical Virtue, and Divine Quality.

2. It takes away all security and trust amongst men, and puts them into a
posture of War. If there be no Essential Difference between Good and Evil, but
that all Actions are equally lawful in themselves, then no man is safe, further
than the Laws of the Land, the Authority of the Magistrate, or his own Power
can make him: And though there be this Difference, yet if it be not observed,
but that a good End may throw it down, and make the Evil to be Good, and the
unlawful to be lawful, then we are no longer quiet or safe than our neighbor
has no good end of his own to serve; for if that comes into play, of a Friend
he may be an Enemy, of a Confident he may be a Deceiver, a Robber, or a Traitor.

And our Security depending upon a great uncertainty, and what a Person does
not now understand, he may in a little Time perceive to be his Interest; we
must be always upon our Guard, and every man is bound, as far as his safety is
concerned, to look upon the best of his Friends as in a possibility of being
his most dangerous Enemy, and to converse and treat with all mankind with
Distrust, Jealousy and Fear. Grant this, that Evil becomes lawful by a good
End, and we that live in Amity and good Correspondence, may be in as much
Danger as those that live at the Foot of Aetna or Vesuvius, which in a Moment
do shake and tremble, and vomit forth their Flames, and discharge them upon the
Neighborhood, to their utter Ruin and Devastation; and when we think our
selves secure, may have all compacts broken, Oaths dissolved, all difference
betwixt Superiors and Inferiors confounded. It exposes the Church and State to
every Pretender, and any one that has a mind, will never want a Reason for
Insurrection and Rebellion. For it is but setting up a good End, and it gives
him a Right, as much (if not more) to assault, as the other to defend himself.
So that this Principle of doing Evil that Good may come, is as uncomfortable,
as it is unsafe; and cannot be true if the Peace and good Order of the World be
to be minded and secured, and if it be possible for it so to be.

3. If this Principle be true, it would be a disparagement to the Wisdom and
Power of Divine Providence, or argue a Distrust in it. The Providence of God
does govern the World, and as the Glory of God, and the Good of Mankind are the
Ends it does respect and prosecute, so it is above all Temptation to use such
means for the accomplishing those Ends, as are Dishonorable and Inglorious,
Base and Infamous: But if this be allowed, that we may do evil that Good may
come, it would represent the Divine Providence as a Friend to such Courses; or
that it as much needed our help in order to the attaining those Ends, as an
evil Course is supposed necessary for those that would attain it.

But now if the Divine Providence is a displaying the Wisdom and Power, the
Justice and Goodness of God, then it neither needs nor uses any such Arts as
will debase his Authority, and be a diminution to his Divine Perfections: And
consequently, if such are used, it shows a distrust of Divine Providence in
those that use them: And so what was unlawful without that good End pretended
to be respected, is for that reason unlawful with it. If therefore Persons do
pass the Bounds prescribed them by the Divine Law (whatever cause they do it
for) it is to betake themselves to diabolical Arts, and to call in the Devil to
their Assistance. They do like Saul, who went to the Witch when God had
forsaken him: Or as Ahaziah, that in his Sickness sent to Baalzebub the God of
Ekron, when there was a God in Israel, 2 Kings 1.2, 6. Such do in effect disown
the Presence of God in the World, or the Concernment he has for the managing
of things in it. For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God,
Jam. 1.20. And his cause does not need any unjust Arts to defend and support
it: And if by all that men can lawfully do, they are not able to maintain or
promote it, they are to proceed no farther, but to leave it to the Wisdom and
Power of God to contrive and prosecute what may serve for the accomplishing so
excellent an end. We are always to resign up our Wills and Understandings and
Devices to him, and to believe that when we have done all we lawfully can, he
will in his good time, and by ways of his own, do what we cannot; and we cannot
do what is unlawful and Evil. As long as we thus do, and contain our selves
within the Bounds of our Religion, we give a due respect to Divine Providence;
but if we once venture to pass them, we must either suspect our cause, or God's
Concernment in it; and so disparage our selves, or the Protection we profess to
depend upon. I shall close this with the Observation of the Son of Syrach,
Ecclus. 15.11, 12, 13. Say not thou it is through the Lord that I turn back [or
aside] for thou ought not to do the things that he hates. Say not thou he
has caused me to err; for he has no need of the sinful man. The Lord hates
all the abomination of Error, and they that fear God love it not. Ver. 20. He
has commanded no man to do ungodly, neither has he given any man license to
sin.

4. The Principle of doing Evil that Good may come, does evacuate and disannull
the Authority of God's Commands, as if we were no further to respect them, than
may be for our own private Convenience and Interest, or the Convenience and
Interest of the Church or State. For if the Goodness of the End may make the
Means to be Good, how wicked and unjust soever they otherwise are; then the Law
of God, which forbids that Evil, is of no Obligation, when that End comes
between; and so what the Law does condemn, it would allow; and what it does
forbid, it would set us again loose from; it would leave it wholly in our own
Power, whether we would keep or break it, and to break it would be as much to
obey, as to keep it. By this Means, the Commands of God would be contrived
rather to serve our ends than his, and be made more to provide for our ease and
security, than his Honor and Glory. How would this overthrow the Authority,
and disparage the Excellency of Gods Law, and render the Threatening of our
Savior insignificant? Matthew. 5.19. Whosoever shall break one of the least
commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in, and be
utterly excluded the Kingdom of Heaven.

5. If this were true, it would change the very Notion and Character of a Good
Man, who is described, with Job, to be an upright man, one that fears God, and
eschews evil. With David, to be a man after God's own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. With
Nathaneel, to be an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile, Joh. 1.47.
Christians are to be wise as serpents, but harmless as doves, Matthew. 10.16.
They are to be Free and Ingenuous, Candid and Open, Plain and Sincere; they are
to love, and their Love is to be without dissimulation, Romans 12.9.

But to allow the doing evil that Good may come, would be to be wise without
Innocence; to fear God, and not to eschew evil; to be an Israelite, and yet
full of Guile; that is, to be a Christian, and to be none; to pretend one
thing, and be another.

6. If this Doctrine be true, it would be a great disparagement to Religion,
and make that in Conclusion to be a Patron of Vice, which in its Precepts and
Directions, it is a declared enemy unto. It was to little purpose that the
Heathens had a Religion, and gods, when their gods were supposed to be
inclinable to, and enslaved by the same Passions which ruled amongst men: And
what Veneration could such Persons give to those kind of Deities, who abhorred
those Vices which reigned amongst the Objects of their Adoration. And tho our
Religion is never so pious in its Institution, yet if by some collateral Ways
it permits Men to be impious, it would be as contemptible as the gods among the
Heathens. It Is the Excellency of the Christian Religion, that by its Precepts
and Commands, its Arguments and Motives, its Considerations and Rewards, it
does drive at the Perfection of Humane Nature, and bring men into a propinquity
to God, and a Capacity of conversing with him here, and enjoying him hereafter.
It purifies the Heart, rectifies the Intentions, governs the Actions of Men. It
makes them humble and lowly, gentle and meek, contented and satisfied. It Is a
Religion contrived for the good of Mankind in every Capacity and State. But if
this should be tolerated and maintained by it, That men might do evil for a
good end, it would take in again all the Mischief it did discountenance and
control, threaten and condemn; and the World would be filled with the spawn of
all manner of wickedness whatsoever, under the profession of Religion. This
would effectually destroy the Honor, and put a stop to the success of it. It
would turn the minds of all good and virtuous men against it, and induce them
to think it no more worthy of their respect, than Mahomet's Paradise would be
of their choice; nay, than the Sands and Deserts of Africa, where each Creature
preys upon its Fellow, as it has an opportunity for it.

And therefore from these and the like Reasons, it is no wonder that the
Apostle did with Indignation cast off the Aspersion charged upon him by the
false Apostles, that he declared against it with all his might, and doomed it
to the Pit of Hell: And which again we find him defying, Romans 6.1, 2. What
shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid.

Which Leads us to the next General.

III. This Principle of doing evil that good may come, is not only thus evil in
its Nature, and mischievous in the direful Consequences of it in this World;
but is also as pernicious to the souls of Men in the other. For, says the
Apostle, their damnation is just: that is, those that hold it, and act
according to it, are in such a dangerous condition; that nothing less than a
full, sincere, and speedy Repentance, can prevent their final and Eternal
Destruction: it being not only the Will of God so resolving, and the Word of
God so declaring, that damnation belongs to them; but there is the reason of
the Thing for it, implied in the Phrase, whose damnation is just. For if we
reflect upon the Principle (to sum up what I have said) it leads to such
manifold and desperate mischiefs; does so evidently tend to, and most commonly
conclude in the overthrow of all good Order and Government, Peace and Unity in
the World; does so much derogate from the Honor of Gods Providence, and his
Religion; does so much pervert the Tempers of men, that it must needs be very
hateful to him, who is a God of Truth, Equity, and Order; and so can no more
like, than he can need such Conclusions and Practices. And consequently, the
Persons holding such Principles, and engaging in Practices issuing from, and
conformable to them, must also be the Objects of his heavy Displeasure.

But it may be said, Where is this Principle to be met with, and where are the
Persons that do hold and defend this Principle?

This is to be resolved in the last General. Which is,

IV. To show the Prevalency of this in the Christian World. And here I could
wish I had nothing further to say, but that as no Religion has more
discountenanced such Prineiples and Proceedings than the Christian, so no
Nations nor Persons had more discountenanced the thing than those that have
professed it; but it is too notorious to be dissembled: For that there have
been Rebellions against, and Depositions of Princes, Dissolutions of
Governments; taking and breaking of Oaths; and other things apparently evil, of
that and the like kind done, to serve a Cause, a Party, or a Church, is no
Mystery nowadays: And if any one lacks to be informed, I had rather, at the
present, he should receive it from the Public Records, in which those things
are deposited, than from me. All I pray is, That at length the Christian World
may understand their Religion better, and their secular Interest less; or that
they would see it to be their best and truest Interest to be guided by their
Religion; which teaches the wholesome Doctrine of being subject to the higher
powers, and that they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans
13.2. And as in the Text, That we must not do evil that good may come.

And according to this Principle of the Apostle (that it was unlawful and
damnable to do evil that good may come) did our Savior Christ, and the
Christians of the Primitive Church proceed. None ever had a Power greater than
our Savior to confound and destroy his Enemies, nor a better end to serve, and
which he died to accomplish; and yet he did not use that power when urged by
the Apostles to command Fire from Heaven to consume those that would not
receive him; but rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what spirit ye are of,
Luke 9.54, 55. And the Primitive Christians, though so desirous of professing
and propagating their Religion, that they cheerfully laid down their Lives to
bear witness to it, and that the World might see they followed not cunningly
devised Fables; yet never made use of any Secular Power to defend it or
themselves (when not without it); but, like Moses, endured all things, as
seeing him who is invisible; and that knew when God thought fit, and the
fullness of his time was come, that Truth should overpower all manner of
opposition whatsoever.

And in Conformity to this, are the Confessions of Faith in all the Protestant
and Reformed Church^s, from which there can nothing be drawn, that will
justify Opposition or Rebellion against Civil Authority; but they expressly
declare against it. And if any particular Persons amongst them, (as there are)
have defended it, we know from whence they fetched their Artillery, I mean
their Arguments, and whither they went to sharpen their Weapons.

And I may say, That generally speaking, they have acted according to those
Principles of Submission in all lawful Things to Superiors, and of making no
hostile opposition to them.

So it was in our Nation, when Queen Mary was a known Member of the Roman
Church, yet the Protestants first joined with her against the Lady Jane Gray,
who was invested with the Title of Queen, and was a Protestant.

And in France, the Protestants joined with Henry the 3 d, of another Religion,
and supported him against the League of those that were of his own Persuasion.

And this particularly is the avowed Doctrine of the Church of England, in all
its Articles and Homilies at large, Three It should be six, or six parts of the
Homily.
of which are against Rebellion.

From all which, we may understand what Enemies they are to our Religion, as
well as the Public Peace, that do proceed upon the Principle of doing evil
that good may come; and that so they set up Religion, care not what they do,
nor what disparagement they bring upon that, as well as Injury to the Public.

And what to think of those that were animated to the late Rebellion amongst us
(so happily quelled) by this pretense.

It is evident, I think, that the chief of them had other Things in their Eye,
and that it was not so much Religion, as Ambition, or Revenge, or the avoiding
punishment for other Crimes, etc. that instigated them hereunto. But if we
allow the Reason to be true, and not fictitious, yet it is not good nor
sufficient, as I have showed.

And we have therefore Reason to bless God, that he has prevented, as well the
propagating this principle (by their success) as the Bloodshed and Confusion
that would have ensued; and the Rebellion and Contention that would otherwise
have prevailed with it, if not been entailed upon these Nations.

We have indeed deserved that God should thus punish us, whom Plague and Fire,
and other Judgments, have left, for the most part, unreformed.

And therefore so much the greater Reason have we for the Blessing of God that
he has yet had Mercy for us, and that he has rather taken up the Rod to
affright us, than to destroy us; that we may yet sit under our own Vines and
Fig Trees, and enjoy our selves, and the Fruit of our honest Labors and
Industry; and what is more, the Gospel, in Peace.

The Lord grant that we be truly sensible of his undeserved Favors, and may
show our Thankfulness, by our Loyalty to our Prince, Stedfastness to our
Religion, and the Holiness of our Lives; that by our Submission to Authority,
the Peaceableness and Piety of our Conversations, we may bring Honor to God
and our Religion.

If we thus do good, we are sure that Good will come of it; for the fruit of
Righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace.

FINIS.

