ORDERS and RULES to be Humbly Proposed To His Majesty, To be by him
Established for restraining the great Expense and length of Suites, and for
rectifying some of the Proceedings in the High Court of Chauncery, and other
Courts of Equity, with Reasons for the same.
Composed by Walter Williams of the Middle Temple Barister at Law, 1st of May,
1700.
BY our Magna Charta, (upon which we much value our selves) cap. 29th. it is
ordein'd that Justice or Right should not be sold, or denied, or delayed by the
King to any Man. But if by the subtle contriveance of the Officers and Clerks
in Couts of Equity the proceedings are extended to an Extravagant and
unnecessary length, and thereby the charge of prosecuting or defending Men's
Rights is ^vagantly increased, and the determination of Causes is unnecessarily
and unreasonably delayed, I take ^o be a selling of Justice and Right at too
deer a rate, and it is manifest to all that have had any expe^e of Chauncery
Suites, that the charge and delay in proceedings there are grown to be such,
that (...) Causes of great wrong and oppression the Remedy is worse than the
disease, and most Men of small (...) indifferent Estates that come thither for
Releif often meet with ruin by the very charge of the pro^dings, therefore for
preventing the like for the future, the following Orders and Rules are proposed
(...) fit to be Established in Chauncery and other Courts of Equity, whereby
both the expense and delay ^ll be considerably lessened, and yet Officers and
Clerks sufficiently rewarded for their labor.

First, That there shall be no Copy or Abstract of any Bill sent with or annexed
to the Dedimus, or ^ommission to take an Answer, Plea or Demurrer.

For such a Copy or Abstract is needless, the Defendant being obliged to take
a Copy of the Bill to know what is thereby charged against him, and to be
advised by Counsel what to do before he takes a Dedimus, therefore it is
superfluous and needless to have another Copy or Abstract of the same Bill
annexed to the Dedimus.

2dly. That all matters alleged in a Bill, and not directly and fully
Answered, by the first or second ^swer, shall be taken for confessed, and
admitted by the Defendant to be true as in the Bill alleged.

For hitherto every Defendant that has a mind to delay the Plaintiff is
admitted to put in four insufficient Answers before what is not Answered
thereby is to be taken for truth, and the Proceedings in such a Case is very
tedious and chargeable, for upon the first insufficient Answer there must be
Exceptions drawn and filed, and then a Motion to refer those Exceptions to a
Master, and an Order drawn up and passed upon that Motion, and after that a
Summons, or two, or three, or more to attend the Master, and perhaps three or
four attendances before him with Counsel and Solicitors on both sides before
he will make his Report, and after that if the Report be that the Answer is
insufficient the Defendant may put exceptions to that Report, and those
exceptions must be argued in Court, and if overrul'd, then there must be a
Subpoena, or a Rule given for a better Answer, and process of contempt till the
second Answer, and when that is come in and proves insufficient there must be
another Motion for a Reference to a Master upon that Answer, and the ^e Dance
over again as on the first Answer, and so, if the third Answer prove
insufficient, and he like if the fourth prove insufficient, and when that is
found insufficient the Defendant is to be ^mmitted to the Prison of the Fleet
if he can be caught and examined on Interogatories, and then what is not
Answered by any of those four Answers, nor by the examination on the
Interogatories, shall be taken for truth, all which proceeding after the first
or second Answer is needless, for with good heed taken all matters aleadg'd in
a Bill may be Answered to by the first Answer, or at least by the second as
well as by ever so many more.

3dly. That a Commission or Commissions for Examining such Witnesses as live in
England or W^ both for Plaintiff and Defendant, shall be taken out and Executed
in the next Lent or Autum Vacat^ after Issue joined: and returned before the
end of the Term next following, and that no Commission for Examining such
Witnesses be afterward granted in that Cause upon any pretense whatsoever,
and the there be no Commission for Examining Witnesses into Scotland, Ireland,
or other parts beyond the Sea^ till the Names of such Witnesses are left with
the Clerk of the other side, with the parties Affidavit praying such
Commission, that he beleives them to be material Witnesses, with his Reasons
for such his belief.

For the practice has been, and I believe is so yet, that a Defendant that
affects dalay often lies still while the Plaintiff Examines his Witnesses, and
after the Plaintiff has done Examining then comes the Defendant and prays a
Commission, as a thing of Right, to Examine his VVitnesses in doing of which he
spins out the time as long as he can, whenas both sides with ordinary diligence
may Examine all such VVitnesses as live in England or Wales in a Lent or Autumn
Vacation and for that Commissions to Examine VVitnesses are often sent beyond
Sea merely for delay which ought to be prevented as much as may be, nothing but
such an Affidavit as above mentioned can prevent it.

4thly. That no Man be obliged to take Coppies of any Interrogatories with the
Coppyes of the Depositions unless he will.

For the Interrogatories are for the most part needless after the VVitnesses
are Examined, and both Plaintiff and Defendant keep Coppies of their own
Interrogatories, and to force them to take and pay for Coppyes of what they
have by them, is very unreasonable, and Coppies of Depositions come sometimes
to three, or four, or ten Pounds of a side.

5thly That there be 15 lines written in every Sheet, in all Coppies of Bills,
Answers, Pleas, Demurrers, Interrogatories and Depositions, and of Records and
other proceedings in Chauncery and other Courts of Equity, and as many words in
every Line as will make 18 Syllables at the least.

L: Clarendon's Order.
For, though by the established Rules of the Court of Chauncery, there ought to
be 15 Lines at the least in every Sheet of Coppies; written fairly, orderly and
unwastfully, and though the Clerks do for the most part write 15 Lines in a
Sheet, they write their Letters and Words so straglingly, disorderly and
wastfully, and so far asunder, that there is seldom above 5 or 6 words in a
Line, or 13 words in a Line, so that by that Irregular way of writing Coppies
of late used there is almost double of what ought to be Exacted from the
Subject in that particular, and therefore the words and syllables in each line,
as well as the lines in each Sheet, ought to be ascertained. But now to
Justify that wastful way of writing but 5 or 6 words in a Line, they say they
are obliged to it by a Clause in the Act of Parliament. 5. and 6. Will. and
Mariae cap 15, which Enacts, that all Records, Writs, Pleadings, and other
Proceedings in Courts of Law and Equity, and all Deeds, Instruements, and other
VVritings by that Act charged with the duty shall be Ingrosed and written in
such manner as they have been usually accustomed to be written or were written
at the time of making the Act, and because at that time they usueally wrote but
5 or 6 words in a Line, they think they ought never to write any more, but I
Conceive that the Statute intended no such thing, and that there ought to be no
such Construction put upon any Act of Parliament as might Establish iniquity by
a Law if it will bear any other Construction, and it may very well be under
stood that the intent of the makers of that Clause intended it should extend
only to Original Records, Writs, Pleadings and other VVritings, and not to
Coppies of them, because Coppies are not mentioned, and morecover if Coppies
had been mentioned, or can be intended to be within the meaning of the Act, I
think it ought to be intended to mean and extend to such manner of VVriting of
Coppyes as was usually and Lawful, and not usual and Extorting, as all loose
disorderly and wastfull writing of Coppyes was then

6thly. That all Causes shall be heard in order and in course as they shall be
at first ordered and set down for hearing, and that no Cause be preferred or
post-poned in the paper of Causes by any Register or other without special
order of the Court, on pain that such Register or other that shall so do,
shall be displaced for ever.

For great inconvenincies, charge and trouble do happen to Suitors by the
Registers Removing Causes backwards and forwards in the paper of Causes at
their pleasure, as if this Day at the Rising of the Court a Man's Cause stands
in the Paper the 3d or 4th. from the Cause last heard, so that he removed a
dozen or twenty Causes off by the Register without any order of Court for so
doing, and by such means the Cause may not come to be heard in a Week or a
Month after, and in such Cases the Counsel expect refreshing Fees, and for all
that, it is ten to one if they have not forgot their instructions by that time
the Cause comes to be heard, and so a good Cause may be lost, and the party and
his Family ruined and undone.

7thly. That at the making or pronouncing every special Order that is not a
mere order (...) the Register shall write down in a Book for that purpose the
very words of the Court, and immediately read the same in Court with an audible
voice before any other matter be proceeded upon, that if there be any mistake
it may be then rectified, and that in drawing the Order he incert the very
words pronounced by the Court and no other in the ordering part, upon pain of
being displaced for ever.

For the charge and trouble has oftentimes been very great by reason of the
Registers willful or or negligent mistake, the party grieved in such Cases,
being forced again to have recourse to the Court to have the Order settled,
which, by this means, may be prevented.

8thly. That there shall be no Recital of any Allegation of Counsel, or of the
Bill or Answer, or other inducements in any Order whatsoever, either
Interlocutory or Decretall.

For those Recitals are not material in any Order, only to make it so much the
longer which it does oftentimes to a very great Degree, and makes the charge of
an Order for the most part four or five, or ten times more then otherwise it
would be.

9thly. That after an Order is made, on hearing Counsel on both sides, such
Order shall not be moved against or discharged, nor any Order made contrary
thereto, unless for new matter arising after such Order made, or upon an Appeal.

For some Spirits are so Restless, and others so purseproud, that when an Order
is made that is not to their liking though ever so Reasonable, they well be
moveing again and again against it, and so one Order begets another, 'ad
infinitum, which as I have heard occasioned a Merry Fellow once to move for a
gelt Order, meaning an Order that would get no more Orders.

10thly. That every one that obtains a Decree or Dismission of a Bill, or an
Order for allowing or overruling any Plea or Demurrer shall have his full cost
with lawful Interest for all Money or other due detein'd for the time of the
deteiner.

For it has been usual in Chauncery (though not at Common Law) that where the
party has a probable Cause of Suite, as they call it, and a Decree be made
against him, he shall pay no cost to the other side, which I conceive
unreasonable, though in ever so doubtful a Case, for by that means one Man
shall make experiments at another Man's Charge, but it is fitter that he that
the Court shall adjudge to be in the wrong shall in all Suits suffer, rather
then he that is in the right, and by the Statute 15 H. 6. cap. 4. which Enacts,
that no Subpoena should be granted until securety be given to satisfy the
party greived, his damages and expenses, if the matter be not made good that is
contained in the Bill, though the Chauncery regard not that Statute, it was
intended, that in Case of false suggestions, Costs should be paid to the party
greived thereby, and the greiveance is the same to be forced into Chauncury
upon a matter that will not hold water as upon a false suggestion. Also, if a
Man be forced to come into Chauncery for a just demand, there is as much good
Conscience for his having his necessary Costs and Charges as is for his having
the thing demanded, yet oftentimes in Chancery, after one has been forced to
spend as much as the thing sued for amounts to, and has got a Decree for it,
yet the Court has denied him his Cost of Suite, so that he had as good never
have Sued as to have recovered. And if a Man recovers a due in Chansery, I
think he ought in good Conscience to have lawful Interest for the time of the
deteiner of the due, for he, from whom the due is detein'd, cannot borrow Money
to supply his occasions pending the Suite without paying Interest for it.

11thly. That there shall be no re-hearings after one Kallender Month after the
first hearing, nor without paying to the other party or his Clerk or Solicitor
Tenn Pounds six days before the Day of rehearing toward seeing Counsel and
defraying other incident Charges.

For when a Decree is made, it is to be presumed a just Decree till the
contrary appear, and therefore it is but reasonable the Rehearing should be at
the Charge of them that desire it, and that the time for Re-hearing be
limmitted to prevent a long affected delay, Re-hearings being often desired,
when nothing but delay can be expected thereby.

12thly. That upon Bills of Review, the Depositions taken, and the Deeds proved
and confessed in the Originial Cause may be made use of to make out the Justice
or Injustice of the Decree to be reviewed.

For it is Reasonable it should be so, for without that an unjust Decree cannot
be made appear to be so, and so was the practice heretofore, if we believe
Roll's Abridgement, 1st. part, page 382. Nu. 4. but of late, if a Decree be
made without any proof to warrant it, or contrary to the proofs, there is no
help by Bill of Review according to the late practice, for it is said, it is
not to be presumed that the Chauncery would make a Decree contrary to the
proofs in the Cause, but it may happen that through the Knavery or negligence
of a Solicitor or Counsel, a material Deed or deposition may be omitted at the
hearing of a Cause, and the Decree may be Enrolled before the Clyent finds it
out, and if it be not to be made use of on the Bill of Review, the party may be
without Remedy, for upon an Appeal to the Lords, nothing has been of late
admitted to be made use of there that was not made use of at the hearing, when
the Decree Appeald from was made, so that if the Deeds and depositions in a
Cause be not to be the measure of Equity on a Bill of Review, a Corrupt
Solicitor or Counsel has a great opportunity irrecoverably to betray his
Clients Cause, which I hope none will say ought to be allowed.

13thly. That all Counsel in Chauncery and other Courts of Equity shall be
heard to make their Motions in Order and course as they are at the Bar, and
that all of them (the Kings Council excepted) shall take their places according
to their Degree and Seniority.

For it is the right of the Profession to have it so, and at the Common Pleas
Bar the Serjants at Law do take their Places and are heard their motions
according to their Seniority, and so do the Counsel in the Courts of Great
Sessions in Wales, but the manner in Chauncery has been hitherto for the Court
to call to and cull out the Counsel as the Court likes their Faces, which
begets an opinion in the People, that one Counsel may obtein that for his
Client which another cannot, w^ ought not to be.

It is objected by some, That the King cannot prescribe Rules for the Chauncery
without an Act of Parliament. But in Answer to that, it is to be noted that in
the Lord Hobarts Reports page 36. it is affirmed, that all Kingdoms in their
Constitution are furnished with the power of Justice both according to the Rule
of Law, and according to Equity, both which being in the King as Sovereign were
after settled in the several Courts. But that part of Equity being opposite to
regular Law, and in a manner an Arbitrary disposition, is still Administered by
the King himself and his Chauncellor in his name from the beginning, as a
special trust committed to the King, and not by him to be committed to any
other, and though out of discretion they entertain some forms, yet they may
justly leave them in special Cases, and that this power of Judging according to
Equity was lodged in the King by Act of Parliament before the Conquest and
confirmed to him since, appears by Lamberts Book de Priscis Anglorum legibus,
pa. 62, 63. Archeion 58. 1st R. 2. Rot. Parl. Nu. 87. not in Print, which, who
list may look into.

The Writ of Subpoena, which is the groundwork and foundation of proceeding in
Equity, was invented by John of Waltham Master of the Rolls in the beginning of
R. 2. as appears Rot. Parl. 3 H. 5. Nu. 49. and it was used and continued since
without any Act of Parliament for it, and the Lord Chauncellor Bacon and the
Lord Chauncellor Clarendon, etc. made Orders and Rules for the Court of
Chauncery without any Act of Parliament, and if a Chauncellor can make Orders
and Rules at his own pleasure, why should not the King that makes the
Chauncellor make him observe such Rules as he thinks just and reasonable to
prevent oppression and extortion.

In the Rolls Chapel among the Rolls of the 14. of K. J. 1. part 6. N. 25. is
the Enrollment of an Order made by the King himself for the Court of Chauncery
to give Releif in Equity after a Judgment at Law, which the Judges of the
Common Law Courts then opposed, and that Order has been observed hitherto, and
if the King can make an Order as to the Jurisdiction of the Chauncery, why not
for amendment of the proceedings to prevent delay and Extortion? and if he can
make one Order, why not a hundred if there be occasion.


