A VINDICATION OF THE ANSWER TO THE POPISH ADDRESS Presented to the Ministers
of the Church of England.

In Reply to a Pamphlet abusively Entitled, A Clear Proof of the Certainty and
Usefulness of the Protestant Rule of Faith, etc.

IMPRIMATUR,

Liber cui Titulus, [A Vindication of the Answer to the Address, etc.]

Guil. Needham RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.
Domest.

April 26. 1688.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC LXXXVIII

A VINDICATION OF THE ANSWER To the POPISH ADDRESS, etc.
Clear Proof.
A Clear Proof of the Certainty and Usefulness of the Protestant Rule of Faith,
Scripture, after the Help of Ministerial Guides, finally Interpreted by each
Man's private Sense.
Vindication.
A Title seemingly belonging to a Protestant Book, and a Book wrote by a
Protestant, if the Title and Book do agree: But that they are so far from, that
if Truth and Ability had been on the Author's side, it might have been more
truly called, with respect to his Design, A clear Disproof of the Certainty,
etc.

But why so much Caution? Why is not the Address or Answer to it, so much as
named in the Title? We are left to guess; and because every man may in such a
case use his liberty, I could upon Perusal of his Book, guess at no reason
sooner, than that the Prover was not very confident of the sufficiency of his
Defense, and might by such a clandestine Title, secure himself against a
further Reply; unless his Adversary had nothing else to do than to read all the
Pamphlets printed by H. H.; or some unlucky Chance should make the Discovery.
And to say the truth, the Prover might have succeeded in his Design, and have
triumphed in the Victory he had thus secretly stolen, had not a little
Accident, though somewhat late first, brought it under his Adversary's eye.

Clear Proof.
This proof is drawn from the Answer to the Address presented to the Ministers
of the Church of England. The Author thereof had required that clear and plain
Texts of Scripture be offered, which interpreted in the Protestant way, by
those who receive it thus expounded for their whole Rule of Faith, should so
prove the two principal Articles of Christian Belief, the Trinity and the
Incarnation of Christ; as also the Obligation of keeping holy the Sunday, and
not Saturday, as one of the Commandments seems to require; and that so
convincingly, that a Christian might ground on them his Faith. Interpreted, I
say, in the Protestant-way, without any deciding Church Authority when doubts
arise about the sense of the Letter.

Vindication.
The Prover's Design is to expose the Protestant Rule of Faith, and to that
end, because he had no better way, is forced to Misrepresent it. For thus he
says, Scripture interpreted in the Protestant way, is received by them, thus
expounded, for their whole Rule of Faith. But he well knew, or should know,
that the Scripture is with Protestants, a Rule of Faith as it is the Word of
God, and their whole Rule of Faith, as it is the only Word of God, and so is as
incapable of taking in any humane Exposition to be a part of that Rule, as it
is of any new Revelation. That is, the Scripture depends not upon the sense
given it by any man, or Order of men for its being thus a Rule, but upon its
own Authority.

But he ventures a little further by way of Explication. Scripture, says he,
interpreted in the Protestant way, without any deciding Church Authority, when
doubts arise about the Sense of the Letter.

But supposing there are no doubts about the sense of the Letter; then it seems
there is in that case no use of any such deciding Authority, and that we may be
certain of the sense of the Letter without such Authority. If so, then it would
be known of what kind that Certainty is, which may be attained without such
Authority, and whether it be not attained by the use of Reason and
Understanding; and so is at last resolved into what he decries, Private Sense.

But put the case as he would have it, and supposing there be a doubt about the
sense of the Letter, I demand whether we may not by the like use of our Reason,
arrive to the same sort of certainty in the things we now doubt of, as we have
arrived to in the things we are at present certain of, without any deciding
Church Authority? As for example: Suppose a doubt arises about this deciding
Church Authority it self, how shall the doubt be decided? If we seek to the
deciding Church Authority, that is the thing in question; if we repair to the
Scripture, the Sense of that is to be declared and determined by the deciding
Church Authority; and if we take any other measures for understanding it, we
fall into the dangerous and abhorred extreme, of finally interpreting it by
private Sense: So that either the matter is incapable of proof, and must be
taken for granted; and there is a deciding Church Authority because there is
so: or else if it be to be proved, it must be by the same way that other things
are proved in, and that is by producing the Reasons for it, and according to
the Judgment made upon it thereby, it is ultimately to be decided. And then
farewell to the deciding Church Authority, when in a matter of so great
Consequence, and the first Point to be resolved in, it must be submitted to
each man's private Sense.

Clear Proof.
The Addresser holds, (if he be a Catholic) That Scripture, rightly
understood, is a Rule of Faith; That the Gospel revealed by Christ, preached by
the Apostles, and preserved by the Catholic Church, is so much our whole Rule
of Faith, that we own with Tertullian, we need not be De Praesc.
curiously searching since Christ, nor further inquisitive since the Gospel was
preached. No new Revelations, no new Articles, being received as of Catholic
Faith; but those Truths only retained, which the Church proposes as delivered
to her by the Apostles, her whole authority being ever employed, as Pope
Celestine delivers it to the Council of Ephesus, in providing Ep. 7.
that what was delivered, and preserved in a continual Succession from the
Apostles, be retained; so that nothing is of Faith, but what God revealed by
the Prophets and the Apostles, or what evidently follows from it; the Catholic
Church ever handing it to us, and declaring it to be so.

Vindication.
The Gospel revealed by Christ, preached by the Apostles, and preserved by the
Catholic Church, is their whole Rule of Faith. -- No new Revelations, no new
Articles being received as of Catholic Faith. What seemingly more Orthodox,
and spoken more like a Protestant? But our Author for fear of Correction,
tempers it immediately with some of their own Ingredients, here and there
cautiously applied. As for example; if we ask, Whether the Scripture be their
whole Rule of Faith? He answers, Scripture rightly understood, is a Rule of
Faith; the Gospel revealed by Christ, and preserved by the Catholic Church, is
their whole Rule of Faith. Is it asked again, Whether there are no new
Revelations, no new Articles received as of Catholic Faith? He answers, These
Truths are only received which the Church proposes as delivered to her by the
Apostles. The meaning of which Phrases, the Gospel rightly understood, and
preserved by the Church, and the Truths which the Church proposes as De verbo
non Scripto l. 4. c. 12. SS. dico secundo Script.
delivered, is, that which is thus preserved, proposed, delivered, and
interpreted by the Church, is as much the Rule as the Scripture, and that
without this Tradition and Exposition of the Church, the Scripture is in
Bellarmine's Phrase, but a partial Rule.

Clear Proof.
Scripture thus interpreted is a Catholic Rule of Faith; the Addresser
therefore meant nothing less than to diminish its Divine Authority; his design
was to preserve it, and that each man's private sense might not sacrilegiously
pretend to be that Word of God, which, as St. Peter minds us, is not of private
Interpretation; It Is not against the Authority or Use of Scripture he writ, but
against the Protestants unjust and insignificant method of using it. I will
here make good the Charge, (hoping, that when he thinks fit, he will much more
fully perform it) by the very answers given to his Questions, which I shall set
down in that Order and Sense in which the Answerer construed them.

Vindication.
Here he tells us, It Is not against the Authority or use of Scripture the
Addresser writ. The Divine Authority of Scripture consists in its being of
Divine Revelation, and the reason for which it was revealed, is for the use,
instruction, and salvation of mankind. But if it be insufficient for attaining
that end, and either is wanting in what is neeessary, or is writ in a way so
obscure and dubious that it is not to be understood by those for whom it was
written, it is certainly a Revelation unworthy of God, and a considerable
argument against its Divine Authority. And therefore he that undertakes to
prove this, must, if he be in earnest, have a very mean opinion of that Divine
Book, and designs to bring others to the like opinion of it. But this is the
apparent design of the Addresser, who argues all along against the sufficiency
and perspicuity of Scripture, even in those points which our Author owns to be
the two principal Articles of Christian Belief, the Trinity and the Incarnation
of Christ; clearly giving away the Cause to the Arians and Nestorians, and
frankly acknowledging, nay venturing in his way to prove, that the Texts
usually insisted on by the Orthodox in proof of those Articles, are not
sufficient for it. So that in conclusion, if the Scripture be so perplexed and
obscure, so doubtful and ambiguous, so unintelligible and insufficient a Rule,
they may as well lay aside the Scripture, as that Father did the obscure Poet,
with an, If thou art not to be understood, thou art not fit to be read. And yet
after all this charge insinuated all along in the Address against the
Scripture, It Is not yet against the Authority or Use of it he writ. What then
did he write against? It was against the Protestants unjust and insignificant
method of using it; and that each man's private sense might not sacrilegiously
pretend to be that word of God, which, as St. Peter minds us, is not of private
Interpretation. I must confess if each or any man's private sense be pretended
to be the Word of God, it is both Unjust and Sacrilegious, since nothing can be
the Word of God, but what is by his immediate Inspiration. But where are they
that thus pretend? What reason is there for this charge? These are things he
takes for granted, but insinuates that this is done by the Protestants, who
interpret Scripture by their own private sense. But why will this any more
prove that because they interpret Scripture by their own sense, they pretend
their sense to be the Word of God; than it follows that those that resolve all
into a deciding Church Authority, do therefore pretend that the sense given by
that Authority is the Word of God? For I presume after all, that they will not
dare to say such their Interpretations are as much the Word of God, as the Word
is, which they are the Interpretations of. However, he intimates, it is
Sacrilegious to interpret Scripture by each man's private sense, when St. Peter
minds us the Word of God is not of private Interpretation. But surely the
Apostle does not therein include the using and understanding of Scripture by
private persons, as if that was forbidden, when he tells them they did well to
give heed to it, ver. 19. Neither did he suppose they were incapable of
understanding it, when he calls it a light, and unto which they were to give
heed till the day dawn, etc. Nor farther will the Apostles Argument admit of
any such Exposition, which is thus, Ye ought to give heed to the Scripture, for
it is not of private Interpretation; for holy men of God spoke as they were
moved; that is, Scripture is the Interpretation of God's will, the Inspiration
of the Holy Ghost; and though wrote by men, is not of humane invention, nor was
(...), of their own motion, nor an explication of their own mind, but of God's.
Of this see a late Book called, Texts of Scripture cited by Papists, etc. Page
35.

The Prover now falls on in earnest, and with great resolution says, he will
make good the charge of the Protestants unjust and insignificant Interpretation
of Scripture, by the very Answers given to the Addresser's Questions, and that
he will set them down in that order and sense in which the Answerer construed
them. I wish he had added too, in his own words (as the Answerer did by him.)
For I find no great reason to trust him either as to order or sense.

Clear Proof.
Qu. 1. Whether all things necessary to Salvation are contained in Scripture?

Ans. Scripture must contain these Necessaries.

De Doctr. Chapter l. 2. c. 9.
All Catholics ever owned what St. Augustine teaches, That all things which
concern Faith and Manners of Life are found in those things which are plainly
contained in Scripture; So that, as St. Gregory expresses it, God needs speak
to us* no more by any new Revelation. For, as the same St. Augustine observes in
the Question betwixt Him and the Donatists, about true Baptism, which he held
absolutely necessary to Salvation, Tho we have no proof in this case from holy
Scripture, yet we follow the truth of holy Scripture even in this case, when we
do what the Universal present Church approves of, which Church is commended by
the Authority of the very Scripture.

Vindication.
All true Catholics without doubt ever owned what St. Austin teaches, and that
not so much because St. Austin teaches it, as that what he herein taught, is
true. But (to use our Authors words, page 7.) I wonder how this man was so
confident as to name St. Austin, and quote this place, after the Answerer, and
then to declare all Catholics ever owned what he teaches. Since I have good
reason to question, whether our Author be of that number. And that,

1. Because all true Catholics ever held the Doctrines of the Trinity, and the
Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, to be things which concern Faith, and as
such, to be plainly contained in Scripture. But our Author on the contrary,
says these are not plainly contained in Scripture; and then either according
to St. Austin, they should not concern Faith, or our Author is none of those
Catholics that own what St. Austin teaches.

2. The Church of Rome (which whatever others think, I question not but the
Prover holds to be Catholic) owns not what St. Austin teaches; for she affirms
there is a Word Unwritten as well as Written, and that this Unwritten Word is
as necessary as the Written: Forasmuch as there are things relating to Faith
and Manners in the Unwritten Word that are not contained in the Written. But
here our Author has prevented me, for he will prove this also to be the sense
of St. Austin, and both consistent; as thus, All Catholics own what St.
Augustine teaches, that all things which concern Faith and Manners are plainly
contained in Scripture. -- For as the same St. Augustine observes about true
Baptism, which he held absolutely necessary to Salvation, that we have no proof
in this case from Scripture; Yet, etc. That is, the Scripture contains all
things necessary relating to Faith and Manners; for we have no proof from
Scripture for a point absolutely necessary to Salvation: which is, as if he
should say, England is a Country that abounds in all things necessary to Life;
for it wants Bread which is absolutely necessary to it. This is in our Author's
phrase, Page 5. a special piece of Logic. I will for the honor of St. Austin,
and in charity to our Author, suppose he turned not to the place in that
Father, when besides this impertinence he charges upon that Learned Writer, he
reads, we have no proof, for we have no example; and speaks so darkly of the
case it self. I will direct him to it, it is Contr. Crescon. l. 1. c. 32. let
him read it at his leisure, and compare it with Chapter 33. And in the mean time I
shall furnish him with another saying of the same Father, Whether Contr. Liter.
Petiliani. l. 3. c. 6.
concerning Christ, or his Church, or any other thing which belongs to Faith
and Life, I will not say, If we, who are not to be compared with him that said,
Though We; but if an Angel from heaven shall teach besides what ye have
received in the Prophetical or Evangelical Writings, let him be accursed.

Clear Proof.
But the case in this first Question, as it appears stated by the Addresser,
is, Whether all things necessary to Salvation are immediately and expressly
contain`d in Scripture, or drawn thence by an evident Consequence? Our Answerer
proves they are so, by the three following Texts; his Proofs I will set in a
due form, that their force may lie open to all.

The first Text is taken out of Joh. 20. 31. where the Evangelist having
premised, (v. 30.) Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of his
Disciples, which are not written in this Book; says, v. 31. These (which he had
set down) are written that you may believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
and that believing you may have Life in his Name. Now what Conclusion can be
drawn from this Text to our present purpose, but one, in one of these two
forms? First thus: The signs set down by St. John, Ch* 20. are sufficient to
make us believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God; but precisely to believe
that Jesus is Christ the Son of God, is all that is necessary to have Life in
his name, or to Salvation; therefore the 20th. Chapter of St. John contains all
things necessary to Salvation. Or else thus, in the Answerer's words: All that
is as sufficient in its kind to beget Faith in us, as Faith is to save us,
contains all things necessary to Salvation; But the 20th Chapter of St. John`s
Gospel, as it appears by ver. 31. is as sufficient to beget Faith in us;
therefore that 20th Chapter contains all things necessary to Salvation. A
special piece of Logic! However his Conclusion eases the Members of his
Congregation from the Obligation of reading any part of Scripture besides the
20th Chapter of St. John 's Gospel.

Vindication.
Our Author from his love to Logic, and his Skill in it, undertakes to set the
Answerer's Proofs in a due form. But by his leave, I shall put in a small
Charge or two against it. As

The first Charge I have against what he calls a setting the Proofs in a due
form, is, that his Conclusion is false in its form, as his Syllogism has four
Terms in it: For says he, The signs set down by St. John 20. are sufficient to
make us believe Jesus Christ is the Son of God; but Precisely, to believe that
Jesus is Christ the Son of God, is all that is necessary, etc. For precisely to
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, is to believe that and no more.
Whereas, by that Phrase, the Scripture implies the believing the whole Gospel.
So Joh. 11. 27. I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God. Acts 8. 37.
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. 1 John 5. 5. Who is he that
overcomes the World, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

2. He puts his Query too extravagantly. Now what Conclusion can be drawn from
this Text to our present purpose, but one -- therefore the 20 th Chapter of St.
John contains all things necessary. This is a Conclusion of his own forming,
and before he can infer it, must ask two or three things, which he may be sure
will never be granted him.

1. He takes it for granted, that by these in St. John, are to be understood
only the Signs set down in that Chapter.

Whereas (1.) St. John in the former Verse, speaking of the Signs done by
Jesus, says they are not written in this Book, but these are written. Where?
Not in that Chapter, (for to say the truth on it, whatever our Author thinks,
St. John did not divide De Verbo l. 4. c. 10. ss. Respondeo ad primum.
his Gospel into Chapters) but in that Book. And thus inded Bellarmin
understands it.

But (2.) The Apostle further enlarges this Phrase, Chap. 21. 24, 25. This is
the Disciple which testifies of these things, and wrote these things -- And
there are also many other things which Jesus did. And so what is true of the
Signs, is also true of the other things wrote by that Evangelist.

(3.) Tho St. John spoke this more especially of the things writ by himself,
yet the same is applicable to what was wrote by the rest of the Divine Writers:
And it might be said of what was written by them, as well as of what was
written by him, These are written that ye might believe. And this was the use
made of this place of St. John in the Answer, viz. to show what was the end the
Scripture was written for, and the sufficiency of Scripture in order to that
end; and this that Quotation proves; for if any part, and much more the whole
of Scripture was written that they might believe; Surely then they might
believe by reading what was written. Thus it was argued in the Answer, p. 3.
The Scripture must fail of its end, and we of the Salvation therein revealed,
if that be not as sufficient in its kind to beget Faith in us, as Faith is to
save us. For says St. John, These things are written, etc. So that instead of
our Author's Conclusion, I shall give him two other, which contain the force of
what was there said; they are these. The end for which the things are written
in Scripture, is that we might believe; but the things written would fail of
the end for which they were written, if they are not sufficient to beget that
Faith in us, which they were intended to be the means of. Again, If by the
belief of what is contained in Scripture, we come to be saved (as St. John
says) then the Scripture must contain all those things which are necessary to
be believed. But says the Prover, St. John says all this of the Signs written
in that Chapter: But that I have already prevented; or, if I should say so,
it is as tolerable, as it is for Bellarmin to affirm, that all the useful ends
for which Scripture was wrote, are to be found in the 2 d Epistle of St. John,
the shortest Book De Verbo, l. 4. c. 10. ss. Neque.
of Scripture. But however, here is a dreadful Charge at the heels of it. For,
says the Prover, The Conclusion eases the Members of his Congregation from the
Obligation of reading any part of Scripture, besides the 20 th Chapter of St.
John 's Gospel. We may guess to what Church our Author belongs, when he will
have it an ease to the People, to be discharged from reading the Scripture. Tho
at the same time, I wonder how he came to stumble upon the word Obligation: For
how is this to be reconciled to the Practice of that Church, which eases the
People of the whole, and permits them not to read the 20 th Chapter of St.
John, nor any other part of Scripture, tho they are under a Divine Obligation
so to do?

But in the Name of Logic and the University our Author was of, how comes this
Conclusion on, That if all things necessary to Salvation are contained in the
20 th Chapter of St. John, That therefore the People are eased from the
Obligation of reading more? Ut supra.
I remember Bellarmin at this place argues much at this rate, If St. John 's
Gospel contains all things necessary, then the rest of Scripture C. 12. ss.
Respondeo ad.
is Superfluous. But the same Bellarmin, when pressed another way, asserts,
There are many things in Scripture, which of themselves do not pertain to
Faith, that is, which are not therefore written, because C. 11. ss. Septimo.
they are necessary to be believed. And again, There may be things sufficient
for Baptism, but which suffice not absolutely for the Church. So that it seems
there are things necessary and sufficient in one respect, and not in another;
some necessary for Salvation absolutely, some for Edification. And therefore it
follows not, that because all things absolutely necessary, are contained in
some part of Scripture, therefore the others are Superfluous, and there is no
Obligation to read them. For then it would also follow, that because all things
necessary are contained in the New Testament, therefore the Church in our
Author's Phrase, is eased from the Obligation of reading the old. And because
three thousand were converted by one Sermon, Acts 2. therefore all besides what
was contained in that Sermon, would have been Superfluous.

Clear Proof.
The second Text of Scripture is, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16 where the Apostle having
thus warned Timothy immediately before, v. 14. Continue in those things which
thou have learnt, and are committed to thee, knowing of whom thou have learnt;
by which words he renews the commands he had given him, O Timothy! keep the
depositum; have a form of sound words, 1 Timothy 6. 20. 2 Timothy 1. 13.
which thou have heard of me, in Faith; The said Apostle minds him that in his
Infancy he had read the Old Testament, which bears sufficiently witness that
Christ was the Messiah, v. 15, 16. Because from thine infancy thou have known
the holy Scriptures, which can instruct thee (the Protestant Version has, make
thee wise) to Salvation by the Faith that is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture
inspired of God is profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in
Justice, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good work,
Hence the Minister argues thus; The same Apostle that says all Scripture, (i.
e. each part of Scripture) is given by Inspiration of God, says that the
Scriptures are able to make us wise to Salvation; But men cannot be wise to
Salvation, without knowing what is necessary to salvation. Here he leaves us,
but I will make up the Syllogism; Therefere the Old Testament alone, nay every
part of Scripture, contains all things necessary to salvation. Thus you see the
Minister rests satisfied with the first Chapter of Genesis for his whole Rule
of Faith. The truth is, that St. Paul only teaches there, that the Testament,
or any part of Scripture, is of good use, is profitable to instruct any one in
the concerns of his Salvation. What Is this to the containing of all necessaries
to Salvation? Bread is of very good use to preserve Life, and enables a man to
perform all the duties of it; is therefore nothing else necessary? What pitiful
shifts are these?

Vindication.
Here I must take leave to charge our Author with notorious Sophistry, not only
from the false Construction of his Syllogism (whether out of Ignorance or
Design I know not) but also for the falseness of the matter contained in it.
The Answerer indeed undertook to prove the Scripture contains all things
necessary to Salvation; and that we are as sure of its sufficiency in that
kind, as we are of its Divine Authority: forasmuch as the same Apostle that
said all Scripture is of Divine Inspiration, does also immediately before as
positively affirm that the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto Salvation,
2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. This is the whole of what the Answerer said upon this place;
and now with what Conscience could our Author charge this following Consequence
upon him? Hence the Minister argues thus, The same Apostle that says all
Scripture (i. e. each part of Scripture) is given by Inspiration of God, says
that the Scriptures are able to make us wise to Salvation; but men cannot be
wise to Salvation, without knowing what is necessary to Salvation. Is this He
that said he would set down the Answerers Proofs in due Form? Then God deliver
us from such Undertakers. In short, it is very evident that the Argument in the
Answer, reduced into due Form, is this; If the same Apostle says the
Scriptures are able to make us wise unto Salvation, that says they are of
Divine Inspiration, then we are as certain of their Sufficiency as we are of
their Authority; but the same Apostle says the Scriptures are able to make us
wise to Salvation, that says they are of Divine Inspiration: Therefore we are
as certain of their Sufficiency as we are of their Authority. This is the
Argument, and this I will abide by; and if our Author had been a fair
Disputant, he would have showed how either the Premises were false, or the
Conclusion not justly inferred from them; and since the place in which his
Cause was most concerned, is ver. 15. that the Scriptures are able to make us
wise unto Salvation; he should have directed his Answer to it; but he found it
too hard for him, and so shuffles it off to the next verse, All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable, etc. Whereas supposing that all
Scripture there, was after his wild way (which I am not at present concerned to
refute) to be applied to each part of Scripture; yet what is that to ver. 15.
where it is said (...), the holy Scriptures, the same which Timothy had known
from a child, are able to make wise unto Salvation? But though for fear of
being engaged further, he durst not undertake it; yet he insinuates in an
inference of his own, that it was the old Testament only that Timothy had read.

But 1. How does it appear that he read not also the Books of the New that were
then extant, of which there were many? Cap. 10. 8. Quod autem.
For Bellarmin in his Answer to this, only says, When this Epistle was writ, the
Apocalypse was not then extant, nor the Gospel of John, and perhaps some other
Book was wanting, of the Body of the Scripture. Thereby yielding, the rest were
then Written and Published.

2. If the Old Testament was able to make them that then read it wise unto
Salvation; then surely both Old and New is as sufficient now, as the Old alone
was then. Our Author may remember where this was urged upon him, but he
prudently passed over that Paragraph in silence.

I shall still therefore conclude, that the Scripture is not only profitable,
but necessary; and not only necessary, but sufficient to answer that end for
which it was revealed and written; and that is, that we might believe, and be
wise unto Salvation.

Clear Proof.
His third Proof is this, Christ sent the young man who put that Question to
him, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal Life? to the Commandments, Luc.
10. 25. Luc. 16. 29.
thou know the Commandments; and again declared that Moses and the Prophets
were sufficient to dispose a sinner to repent. Behold another Logical Inference
of great credit to the University this Answerer was brought up in! By reading
Moses and the Prophets I am moved to repent from my sins; and if I will know
what I must do to inherit eternal Life, I must know the Commandments; therefore
all things necessary to salvation are contained in Scripture. I may with
Justice return to this man more than what he ungroundedly says to the
Addresser, p. 1. that he takes up with such a sort of Arguments, which, tho not
useful to make any of his Religion, may very well make others of none. If such
use only could be made of Scripture, it would be of no use at all to our
Salvation; no senseless Heresy has appeared this 1600 years, which was not
backed by more seeming Proofs from Scripture than these.

Vindication.
Here our Author again prevaricates. The words in the Answer are these, From
which Consideration (that all things necessary are in Scripture) it was, that
all doubts relating to Salvation were hereby to be resolved, which could not
be, were not all things necessary to Salvation contained in it. In which there
are these Two plain Propositions, 1. That all doubts relating to Salvation
might and were to be resolved by Scripture. 2. That they could not be resolved
by Scripture, unless all things necessary to Salvation were contained in it.
The first of these, which is the chief thing to be proved, the Answerer showed
from Luke 10. 25, 26. and Mark 10. 17, 19. Luke 16. 29. In the first of these
places, our Savior upon the Question put to him, Master, What shall I do to
inherit eternal life? Replies, What is written in the Law? how read thou?
And he answcring, said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
etc. To which our Savior replies, v. 28. Thou have answered right, this do,
and thou shall live.

What says the Prover to this? His Answer from Bays, p. 7. might well be
returned, were it seemly in so serious an Argument as we are upon. He is indeed
silent, and (in his words elsewhere) one may guess at the reason without
casting a Figure. The same Question is again put to our Savior, Mark 10. 17.
and our Savior answers, v. 19. Thou know the commandments, etc. implying,
That in the Law, of which the Decalogue was a part, there was the way
prescribed, by which Eternal Life was to be obtained.

The Third place in the Answer is, Luke 16. 29. where the Rich man in Hell
entreating that Lazarus might be sent to his Five brethren, lest they come into
that place of torment; he was answered, They have Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them. And when he supposed that was not sufficient, but if one went
from the dead, they would repent; Abraham answers again, If they hear not Moses
and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, etc. In which there are these
things: First it is supposed, That if they did repent, they would not come into
that place of Torment. 2. That if they hearkened to Moses and the Prophers, they
would repent. 3. That whatever was necessary to their Repentance, they might
find, and was contained in Moses and the Prophets. What says the Prover to
this? Why, instead of an Answer, he will be at his Logic, and putting the
Answerer's Proof in a due Form; which he ushers in with great Triumph, Behold
another Logical Inference, of great Credit to the Vuniversity this Answerer was
brought up in! Well, what is this Logical Inference? It Is this, By reading
Moses and the Prophets, I am moved to repent of my sins; and if I will know
what I must do to inherit Eternal Life, I must know the Commandments; therefore
all things necessary to Salvation, are contained in Scripture. If our Prover's
Sincerity be no better than his Logic, he is no more a Credit to his Religion,
than he is to his University, if ever he was of one. Here Is a defect in both,
but which prevails is not easy to determine. I can relieve him by no other
way, but by supposing the Argument in the Answer gave him a Shock, and his
Brain was out of order before his Inference. But without exposing his weakness
further, I will set him right, and leave him to his Cell for the rest. The
Answerer's Argument is this, when set in due form, If all questions and doubts
relating to Salvation are to be resolved by Scripture, then all things
necessary to Salvation are contained in Scripture; but all questions and doubts
relating to Salvation are to be resolved by Scripture (as appears from the
Texts quoted above) therefore, etc. I shall here return him my words again,
because in repeating he has perverted them, He takes up with such a sort of
Arguments, which how useful soever they may prove [I will recall it, and say
with him tho not useful] to make some men of their Religion, have a plainer
tendency to (not as he corrupts them, may very well) make others of none.

Clear proof.
Q. 2. Whether all things necessary to Salvation are clearly contained in
Scripture?

Ans. From Scripture, not a word.

However he condescends to deliver His sense, and that of his Church, on this
Qnestion; It is, That all persons cannot immediately learn all the necessaries
to Salvation by mere reading of Scripture; that many other helps are necessary,
to wit, attention, consideration, to be cleared from prejudices and
prepossessions, from pride, love of the world, interest, obstinacy* partiality,
sloth; and besides all this, the assistance of teaching Guides, and a
dependency from God for the Wisdom he has promised, (such promises I find made
to the Church, but not any to particulars that shall refuse to be absolutely
guided by the Church;) So that Scripture is plain in this sense only, that by
these means it may be apprehended. Now by Guides he means Mat. 7. 15.
not false ones, such as Christ bid us beware of, and consequently till a
Protestant has a reasonable conviction that his Church-Teachers, though divided
from the Catholic Church, and condemned by General Councils, though Abettors of a
Religion of not 150 years settlement, tho not in Communion with one Bishop in
the whole World out of His Majesty's Dominions, yet still are true Guides; and
till he be morally sure that he wants not himself any one of the ten other
dispositions requir`d, is to persuade himself that he may very well be one of
those who wrest the Scripture to their perdition, and consequently has no good
ground for any one Act of Faith. This will create but small comfort to any
Protestant. Less yet will he find in St. Cyril's Sentence, The things that are
easy, are yet to Heretics hard to In Jo. l. 1. c. 4. L. 4. de Bapt. cont. Don
c. 16.
understand; especially if all those be Heretics, according to St. Augustine,
who when the Doctrine of Catholic Faith is declared to them, choose to oppose
it, and rather embrace what is their own sense; if the Catholic Faith L 2* con.
Gaud. In Dim. H.
be, according to the same Dr* a Communion with the whole world, so that,
according as his Scholar St. Prosper defines it, a Christian when in Communion
with this General Church, is a Catholic; when separated from her, an Heretic,
I wonder how this man was so confident as to name that word Heretic; which his
Brethren are usually as much afraid to mention, as a murderer to come up to
the murdered Corpse, lest by its bleeding he be betrayed.

Vindication.
He says that as to this second Question, there is from Scripture not a word
in the Answer. And what needed it, when the same Texts that were brought to
prove the Scripture contains all things necessary, do prove that it plainly
contains them? As for instance, Joh. 20. 31. These are written that ye might
believe, and that believing ye might have life. Where the end for which they
were written, which was that they might believe; and the persons for whom they
were written, for all Christians; sufficiently prove, that they were for the
manner so expressed, as well as from the matter so evident, that they might
believe.

So again, 2 Timothy 3. 15. The Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto
Salvation. If they were the Scriptures that Timothy knew from a child, and were
able to make him wise unto Salvation, surely they were plain in those things.

So again, Luke 10 25. What is written in the Law? How read thou? must needs
imply the Law was plain to be read and understood. So Luke 16. 29. They have
Moses and the Prophets. But to what purpose, if Moses and the Prophets were not
to be understood by them?

But, 2. What proof would he have of this? Can he have any plainer proof, than
from the things contained therein? Toll lege, will show there is a God, and
God alone is to be worshipped. That the Soul is immortal. That there is a
future state, and that a state of rewards and punishments. That man is fallen.
That Christ redeemed him. That Christ is the Son of God. That he became man.
That he was Crucified, and died a Sacrifice for us. That he rose from the dead,
ascended into Heaven, is there our Mediator, etc. of which and the like, we may
say as Justin Martyr did to Trypho the Jew, Attend to what I shall rehearse out
of the holy Scriptures, proofs which need not to be explained, but only to be
heard.

But he goes on, However the Answerer delivers his sense on this Question: It
is, That all persons cannot immediately learn all necessaries by mere reading
of Scripture; that many other helps are necessary, to wit, attention,
consideration. And can he say any thing to the contrary? Some things are so
plain, as that with the mere reading of them, they are immediately understood;
Others require attention and consideration, and yet be plain, though not
equally as plain as the former. The Answerer further proceeded to show the mind
ought to be cleared from prejudices. And does this detract any thing from the
perspicuity of Scriptures? For the Propositions may be plain, but yet be
obscure to him that is under prepossessions, as was showed at large in the
Answer. All which were there sum'd up thus, If men come with an honest heart,
and use a competent diligence, with a dependence upon God's assistance for the
wisdom he has promised, I know nothing necessary to Salvation but what is
plainly taught in Scripture, and may be learned from it. What has the Prover
to say to this? Such promises [of obtaining wisdom from God] I find made to the
Church, but not to any particular that shall refuse to be absolutely guided by
the Church. But is not this promise made to particulars without any mention of
the Church, that he is to learn it from? What thinks he of the place the
Answerer had his eye upon? Jam. 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of
God, and it shall be given him. What of Joh. 7. 17. If any man will do his
will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God? Now it should have
been, according to our Author's projection, If any man lack wisdom, or would
know whether the Doctrine be of God, let him go to the infallible Church, to
the Vicar of Christ, or a Council called by him, or to the Guides of that
Church. For unless the Scripture be explained by some one that cannot err, it
cannot be understood; and ye will dangerously err by reading De Verbo l. 4. c.
4. ss. septimo.
it, as Bellarmin argues. And yet whether there be such a Church, or whether the
Church pretending to it, be not a fallible, and what is worse, a deceiving
Church; or whether the Guides be not false ones; a man cannot be so much as
morally sure, without he consult and understand the Scripture; and when all is
done (according to this Author's way of arguing) he may very well be one of
those who wrest the Scripture to his own perdition, and consequently has no
good ground for any one act of Faith; or can be certain that there is a Church,
or this or that is the true Church, etc. This Paragraph of his is a kind of
Jargon. But it affords occasion to put it to him, Who are the false Teachers,
those that with the Pharisees set up Tradition to an equal Authority with
Scripture; or those that maintain Scripture alone to be of Divine Authority?
Those that make Scripture to depend upon the Church; or those that make the
Church to depend upon Scripture? Those that teach we are absolutely to submit
to the Church and the Guides of it; or those that with the Apostle direct us to
follow them only as they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1? Those that say men err by
reading the Scriptures, and so take away from them that Key of Knowledge; or
those that with our Savior teach them they err for not knowing them, Mat. 22.
29? Those that discourage men from reading the Scriptures, because of their
pretended obscurity; or those that with our Savior require that they search
them, and that because they are (as the Psalmist says) a light to their paths?
Those that, with the Fathers, hold the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation, may be clearly proved from Scripture; or those that make them to
depend upon Church Authority? Those that derive theirs down for a thousand
years after Christ, without any proof from Scripture and precedent Antiquity;
or those that Reformed their Church 1500 years after Christ, but can deduce the
Genealogy of their Doctrines from Scripture and Genuine Antiquity for 4, 5, and
600 years after?

I ask him again, Who are the Heretics (in the sense he gives us) those that
with the Donatists in St. Austin's time confine the Church to their own party;
or those that with the Apostle, comprehend in it all that in every place call
upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord both theirs and ours, 1 Cor. 1. 2? Those
that exclude the whole world if not of their corrupt Communion; or those that,
according to his Quotation from St. Austin, maintain a communion with the whole
world? Methinks, after all he might, to return his own words, be as much afraid
to mention that word Heretic, as a Murderer to come up to the murdered Corpse,
considering what havoc and devastation they have made amongst those they have
called by that name. I shall give him Quotation for De Unit. Eccles. c. 18.
Quotation from St. Austin, and so conclude this Question: It suffices us, that
we hold that Church which is demonstrated by most manifest Testimonies of the
holy and Canonical Scripture. And again, C 19.
Show that there is some clear and manifest testimony given from Holy Canonical
Scriptures to this thy Communion, and I do confess we are to go over to thee.

Clear Proof.
Q. 3. What are the necessaries to Salvation?

Here plain and full Scripture will be of great use; we may expect shoals of
Texts: What answer from Scripture is given to this Question, think you? Even
the same as honest Bays returns to a hard one in the Rehearsal, YGad I will not
tell you. No, he gives not one word of answer to it, tho it be so material. Any
one may guess at the reason, without casting a figure.

Vindication.
With what Confidence can the Prover thus impose upon the Reader? Was there not
one word of Answer returned to this Question? Of that let the Answer speak;
Where it is thus put, Q. 3. What are these Necessaries to Salvation? The Answer
begins thus. Our Author offers three Instances of such Necessaries as are not
clearly revealed in Scripture, viz. the Trinity, the Incarnation of our
Savior, and the Observation of the Lords Day. And of these, the Answerer
Discourses for near eight Pages together, to show that the Addresser had to
little purpose objected against them. So that if the Trinity, and Incarnation,
and the Lord's day, are necessaries, and for that reason were singled out as
Instances of the Scriptures insufficiency and obscurity by the Addresser, and
on the contrary were defended by the Answerer; then surely, the 3 d Question no
more wants an Answer, than the Prover wants Confidence that denies it. He
writes indeed, as if the Question was barely proposed in the Answer, and he has
used some art to confirm it, when he has made as many Questions as there are
Instances, viz. of the Trinity, Incarnation, and the Lord's day: So that
Question the 4 th, in the Answer, is Question the 7 th in the Proof. And this
he does, that the Reader, if he has not the Answer before him, may not be aware
of his Falsification, nor suspect that a man that first of all writes for the
Public, and then engaged to set down the Questions in the order of the
Answerer, could be so false to both, as to affirm, there is not one word of
Answer.

Clear Proof.
Q 4 It Is in its whole extent this; By what Text of Scripture are we plainly
taught that God is One in Substance, Three in Person? For as Joh. 10 50. Christ
says, I and my Father are One; so 17. 21. he prays, That all Believers may be
One, as he and his Father are one; This second place may seem to expound the
first, and then Christ and his Father will be One only morally, as all the
Believers be One. Or else, what Texts declares the Three Persons to be One by
identity of substance?

Ans. Not one Text of Scripture to give us the dubious Sense of the two in
Question! And yet these men pretend to clear Scripture for each Fundamental
Point! The Answerer supplies this want of Scripture with two Reasons. The first
is this, Of the Three that bear record in Heaven, `tis said they are One; but
of the Three that bear witness on Earth, they agree in one. (I will admit this
English Translation, tho Apocryphal.) But what then? But if in both were meant
only a moral Union, it would have been as well said of the Three that bear
record in Heaven, they agree in One; therefore they have more than a moral
Union. Is not this special Logic? Would not this way of arguing prove equally
that the Believers are one with more than a moral Union, because otherwise it
might as w^ll have been said, Joh. 17. May they agree in one. The Question is,
Whether this second clear Text concerning the Three that bear Witness on Earth,
and which we know to be only morally One, does not expound what that Unity is,
that is found in the Three which bear record in Heaven? We ask a proof out of
Scripture to decide this doubt; but our Answerer has none to give us, or is
grown Churlish, and will not allow us any. Has he any to expound the other
Text? No, not any; but he offers at some Insinuation from Scripture, and `tis
this: When Christ said, I and my Father are One, the Jews took up stones to
stone him for blasphemy, because that thou being a Man (said they) make thy
self God: The Jews then understood him to have spoken of a Natural Union,
therefore he did so. Well, I will let my good nature work upon me once, and for
quiets sake I will let this Discourse pass as allowable; But in return of
Curtesy I hope each sober Protestant will own this following Argument to be of
at least as good Alloy; When Christ said, Joh. 6. Unless you eat the Flesh of
the Son of Man, you have no Life in you; The Jews, who said, how can this man
give us his Flesh to eat? and his Disciples, who walked no more with him,
understood that he spoke of his natural Body which they should corporally eat;
therefore Christ did really mean they should corporally feed on his natural
Flesh. This Popish Conclusion is in the same Form.

Vindication.
This is the first Instance of Scripture's obscurity in matters necessary,
offered by the Addresser: And here the Answerer showed in general, how
frivolous and absurd the way of arguing used on this matter, by that Author,
was; (to which we have not a word of Reply) and then particularly, that the two
Scriptures, viz. 1 John 5. 7. and John 10. 30. usually insisted on amongst
others in proof of the Doctrine of the Trinity, remain in their full force,
notwithstanding what the Addresser had objected against them. But to this the
Prover now Replies, There is not one Text of Scripture to give us the dubious
Sense of the two in Question. What means he? Would he have Texts to prove the
Father, the Word and Holy Ghost, to be three Divine Persons? That was not the
Answerer's part to prove; or if it was, he De Christo l. 1. c. 4, etc.
might send him to his Friend Bellarmin, who in Proof of the Deity of our
Savior, has collected about 100 Texts of the Old and New Testament. Would he
have some Chapter and Verse, where are these or the like Words, The word One,
in the first Epistle of St. John; Item, in St. John 's Gospel, signifies a
strict Identity; yes by all means, for says the Addresser, This ought to be,
if all necessaries to Salvation are contained in Scripture.

I thought our Author might by this time have been sensible of this weakness;
certainly this Gentleman's Condition calls for some Commiseration; and he would
do well to advise upon it, whether the Scripture was originally divided into
Chapter and Verse; and whether Hugo Cardinalis, and Robert Stephens, were not
very Ignorant, or unadvised to Labor in this Work anew, if so it had been.

But is there no other way to give the Sense of these Texts? Suppose we
consider the Words and Phrases, the Context and Scope of the Places in
question, and compare them with others, and from all draw some good and
substantial Reasons; will not that be as proper, and as much to the purpose, as
if we had Chapter and Verse in his way? And this was the way taken by the
Answerer. As for Example, in 1 John 5. 7.

1. It was there observed, that it is as plainly said the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost, are One, as that they are Three.

2. That the Union betwixt these Three, was not a mere moral Union, or a Union
only of Will and Consent; for the Apostle makes a plain difference betwixt the
Three that bear Record in Heaven, and the Three that bear Witness in Earth: For
of the Three in Heaven, it is said, they are One; but of the Three in Earth,
they agree in one. Of this the Prover says, I will admit this English
Translation [agree in one] tho Apocryphal. Why an English Translation? or why
Apocryphal? Unless it be that it is nor Verbatim, according to what they call
the Authentic Vulgar Translation. For otherwise their own Clarius and
Bellarmin, etc. do thus translate it, Convenient in unum, and conspirant in
unum. But admit this, says he, What then? Then the Answerer thus proceeded in
his Argument, Now if it had been a mere moral Union that was betwixt the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost (who are the Three in Heaven) it would
have been as well said of them as of the Spirit, the Water and the Blood (which
are the Three in Earth) that they agree in one. Here the Prover exults. Is not
this special Logic? Would not this way of arguing prove equally, that the
Believers are one, with more than a moral Union; because, otherwise it might as
well have been said Joh. 17. May they agree in one?

As for the Logic, it is Bellarmin's as well as the Answerer's, who from the
different Phrases (...) and (...), thus argues, Whence De Christo l. 1. c. 4.
ss. Quod autem.
you may plainly see, that the Spirit, Water, and Blood, are not One, (as the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost) but only do agree in one Testimony. And
as for the Inference the Prover makes, Would not this way of Arguing prove,
etc. I answer, the Case is not alike. For,

1. The Force of the Argument does not lie merely upon the difference of Phrase
(for both Bellarmin and the Answerer knew how One is sometimes applied to a
Moral Union, as John 17.) but upon its being used in this place by way of
distinction betwixt things of a different nature; for proof of which it is to be
observed, that the Apostle designing to show the validity of the Testimony
given to the Son of God, v. 5. which was twofold; he further amplifies this,
and distinctly speaks to each of them, ver. 7. and tho both do give Testimony
to the same Truth, yet one in an higher, and the other in a lower degree. As,

(1.) There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, and Three in Earth.

(2.) The Three in Heaven are One, and the Three in Earth agree in One. By
which way of arguing, and the distinction observed betwixt them, the* Apostle
shows, That the Three that bear Record in Heaven, are not more different in
their Nature and Place from the Three in Earth, than in their Union: That they
are both alike Three, and both alike in their Testimony, but that the one are
in Heaven, the other in Earth: The Three in Heaven are One, but the Three in
Earth agree in One: So that the Three in Earth are no more One, as the Three in
Heaven, than the Three that bear Record in Earth, are the Three that bear
Record in Heaven.

2. In confirmation of this, it is observable, that one of these Phrases is more
fit to express a Natural than a Moral Union; that is, they are One, does more
aptly express it, than they agree in One: And therefore whereas they are One,
may sometimes signify a Moral Union, and may then be interpreted by, they
agree in One; yet agree in One cannot be interpreted by, they are One.

3. From hence we have an answer to that Question of his, Whether this second
clear Text concerning the Three that bear witness on Earth, and which we know
to be only Morally One, does not expound what that Unity is that is found in
the Three which bear Record in Heaven:

I answer, No; for tho One sometimes signifies a Moral Union, yet here, if so
understood, it would quite destroy that distinction betwixt the one Three, and
the other, and the Preference that the one Three had above the other Three in
their Union.

4. By this we are prepared also to answer to his other Argument, when he
says, that when our Savior prays, John 17. 21. that all believers may be one,
as he and his Father are one, may seem to expound, John 10. 58. I and my Father
are one: and then Christ and his Father will be one only Morally, as all the
Believers are one. In answer to which,

1. It Is granted that the Father and the Son may be said to be one in a Moral
Sense, as one in consent. But,

2. It does not follow, that because the Father and Son are thus One, that
therefore they are no otherwise One; and that all Believers are as much One, as
the Father and Son are One.

3. It Is evident from what is spoke by way of Explication in that place, that
it is otherwise; for when ver. 22. Christ prays, that they may be one as we are
one, it is added ver. 23. (...), (the same Phrase as 1 John 5. 8.) that they may
be made perfect in one; implying that the Unity betwixt Believers, is of
another nature than the Unity betwixt the Father and the Son.

4. The Union of Believers in John 17. cannot be applied to the Union betwixt
the Father and the Son, in John 10. 50. because this latter is a Union of
Essence, as well as Will: And for confirmation of this, the Answerer offered an
Argument from the Text it self; to take off the force of which, the Prover in
repeating it, leaves out a main branch of it; for thus he frames it for the
Answerer; When Christ said, I and my Father are one, the Jews took up stones to
stone him for blasphemy, because that thou being a man (said they) make thy
self God; The Jews then understood him to have spoken of a Natural Union,
therefore he did so. But the Inference in the Answer was this, It follows that
neither did our Savior speak, nor the Jews understand him to have spoken of a
Moral, but a Natural Union. The first and the main Branch was, That our Savior
himself spoke of a Natural Union; the next was, That the Jews understood him
also to have spoken of it: And for the first, I referred him to the Book,
called, The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared; but it
wants an Answer, and so he cautiously takes no notice of it. But because he is
herein so reserved, let me recommend him to his Friend Bellarmin, who concludes
this Argument with, Constat eos recte intellexisse, It Is evident, De Christo l.
1. c. 6. ss. Secundo probo.
the Jews rightly understood our Savior. But it seems this Advice comes too
late; for faith he, I will let my good nature (I wish he could say sincerity)
work upon me for once; and for quiets sake, I will let this discourse pass as
allowable. Whence is it that all of the sudden he is in so good a humor, and so
forward in his allowances? The good man could not contain himself longer; for
from a small advantage he espied (and which is somewhat rare with them
nowadays, and therefore not to be let slip) he will yield, tho the thing he
yields be never so impertinent and absurd. Let this pass; What then? In return
of Courtesy, says he, I hope each sober Protestant will own this following
Argument to be at least of as good alloy: When Christ said, John 6. Unless you
eat the Flesh, etc. the Jews, etc. understood that he spoke of his Natural
Body, therefore Christ did really mean they should corporally feed on his
Natural Flesh. But surely sober Protestants are for Reason, Pertinence, and
Sincerity; but however, his Argument shall be allowable, if he can make it as
evident the Jews did not mistake when they understood Christ spoke of his
Natural Flesh, and a corporal feeding on it: as it may be made appear, they did
not mistake him, when they thought by his calling himself the Son of God, that
he meant he was essentially of the same Nature, and one with God.

Clear Proof.
Q* 5. Is the mystery of the Incarnation of Christ clearly expressed in
Scripture? Or can it be clearly made out by Scripture, that those words, John
1. The Word was made Flesh, owned by all Christians to be true, are to be
understood in such sense, that Both Natures were in one Person, so that what is
said of the Man Christ Jesus, be truly said of the Son of God; for example,
that the B. Virgin was mother of God; and not as the Nestorians understood
them, to wit, that Christ was indeed a true man, made of the Seed of David; and
that the Eternal Word, true God, was indeed in him, but not by a strict
Personal Union?

Ans. Not one word from Scripture. What indeed all the Nestorians supposed, he
proves; but as to the Unity of One Person uniting these two Natures, not one
word. This man (any one may see) is of those who take the Nestorians to be a
part of the Catholic Church; and no one will grudge their Congregation the
Title of such a part of the Catholic Church, that is, a Member severed from
the One Body of Christ.

Vindication.
The Prover says, What all the Nestorians supposcd he proves, but as to the
Unity of one Person, etc. not one word. Put case the Answerer had proved no
more than what our Author now says Nestorius supposed, if he proved what was
sufficient to confute what the Addresser supposed for Nestorius; and then the
Answerer could, as far as the Addresser then knew, be no Nestorian. Let us then
see how the Addresser represented this Heresy. Nestorius, says he, and others
denied that word (is made Flesh) to signify a strict Incarnation. But what
then did he and others hold? but either a Moral Union, or a mere External
appearance of a man. He tells us not whether both of these, or which of these
was the opinion of Nestorius; but I shall not take this advantage, but suppose
he meant the first, a Moral Union: And what is that? He tells us (p. 3. and as
quoted in the Answer, p. 20.) that is, he was a Man who had the Authority of
God as his Plenipotentiary. Where first, his account of a Moral Union is very
extravagant; as if the being employed by another, would make him, for that
reason, to be Morally one with him that employs him; but that Author is to be
pardoned, who understands not the difference betwixt a Moral and Political
Union. And again, he showed himself not acquainted with the matter of Fact,
when he says the Heresy of Nestorius consisted in this, that he denied Christ
to be united to the Word, otherwise Epist. Imper. Theod. n. 6. Council. Tom. 4.
than Morally; whereas St. Cyril says, he granted that Emanuel, or Christ,
(...), was constituted and compounded of the Word of God, and an Intelligent
Soul and a Body. But then, says he, he divided one Christ into Two; so that he
that is born of the Virgin, is perfect man, and the other the Word of God; the
one mere man, the other true God: The Word, the true and Eternal Son of God;
but that which is born of the Virgin is equivocally the Son of God. Thus that
Father.

But he will say I am now better informed: Thanks to the Answerer, who gently
intimated to him, that he was out of the way; and to his Friend that has since
set him in the right.

But after all, was there not one word in the Answer as to the Unity of one
Person, uniting these two Natures? Let him but cast his eye upon it again, and
he will see this to be the Conclusion of the Argument, Then there must be in
him (Christ) two Natures united, which is the Incarnation. If the Incarnation
be the Union of two Natures in Christ, the Word, and this was rightly inferred
from what went before; then what shall I say? Our Author has not dealt fairly
with his Adversary: And if this be to be a Nestorian, then so was St. Cyril, so
was the Couneil that condemncd him; for so St. Cyril describes the Incarnation,
(...); Ad Monach. Egypt. ss. 12.
when the Word was united to a Body informed by a Rational Soul.

Clear Proof.
Q. 6. The first branch of this Question is, What Scripture has absolved us
from obeying one of the Commandments, which imposes the keeping of Saturday
holy? The second, What Text of Scripture exacts of us the keeping holy (as the
Lords day) the Sunday?

Ans. To the first part, not one word of Scripture; and for excuse he tells us,
That there was no need of an express abrogation, because Sunday being set apart
for the public and solemn Worship of God, the Sabboth-day as well as the
Holy Days and New Mons of the Jews, being a shadow, must surrender to the
Sunday. Here is as little Reason as Scripture; for the Sabbath did appertain to
the Law of Nature, and was not a shadow only of a thing to come, but a memory
of the past, and never-to-be-forgotten benefit of the Creation, from the work
whereof God rested on that day, and blessed the seventh day. Here it is pity at
what a loss the Answerer is Genesis 2. 3.
to find the Chapter and Verse wherein the abrogation of Circumcision is clearly
expressed; It Is a charitable condescendency to instruct him; let him look then in
Gal. 5. 2. where behold Paul tells you, that if you be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing.

For the second part, he produces a Text, Rev. 1. 10. I was in spirit on the
Lords day; then he flourishes to teach us ignorant people, that it is usual in
Scripture, after that Times, Places, Things and Persons were set apart for the
service of God by Divine Institution, to have his Name as a mark of propriety
given to them. But in the name of sense and reason, what means all this? There
is a Lords day, no doubt; St. John was in spirit that day, it is certain; but
the question is, What day of the week was it? or was it only some peculiar day
of the year, as Easter Day, or Goodfriday? Has he Scripture for this? Not one
word. I find forty Texts that call the day of general Judgment, or that of each
man's death, the Lord's day; but not one that mentions Sunday under that name.
I find, Act. 2. 46. how they that believed were daily continuing with one
accord in the Temple, or breaking Bread from house to house, but not a word of
a day appointed for stated Assemblies.

Scripture failing our Adversary, he seeks supplies from Reason; but the
misfortune is, that the first and chiefest he offers at, stands against him;
The Moral Sabbath (says he) in the Patriarchal Church, and the Ceremonial in
the Jewish Church, were on the days following the Creation and Deliverance from
the Slavery of Egypt. True, but what follows? Therefore it is not to be kept by
Christians on the day in which Christ rested after he had accomplish`d our
Redemption on the Cross by a solemn Consummatum est, and his precious Death?
Not on Saturday? Raillery aside, what can be (I will not say more dull, but)
spoken more directly in spite of sense and reason?

Vindication.
Our Author for convenience to himself, has transposed the Questions; so that
the first in the Address, is now the last. Let him quietly enjoy the benefit of
it; I shall begin as he now begins.

Q. 1. What Scripture has absolved us from, etc.

To this I gave, in short, a Threefold answer.

1. He requiring Chapter and Verse, I told him, When he could find out Chapter
and Verse for an express and clear abrogation of Circumcision, I would show him
Chapter and Verse for that of the Sabbath. Here out of his abundant charitable
condescendency he vouchsafes to instruct me, and hands me to Gal. 5. 2. Where
behold Paul tells you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing. And yet I do not find there is a clear and express abrogation of it.
An Abrogation is a total abolition of it; and if it was abrogated so as that
whoever was thereafter Circumcised, could have no profit by Christ; then all so
Circumcised were in a state of Damnation. And here it would be fit to know when
this abrogation did commence? For Act. 16. 3. we find Paul to Circumcise
Timothy; and not long before St. Paul's being a Prisoner, and being carried to
Rome, the solemn Assembly declared that there were many thousands of the Jewish
Christians which were zealous of the Law; and that St. Paul was reputed to be
too forward in teaching the Gentiles ought not to circumcise their children,
Act. 21. 20, 21. So that the Apostle's censure of it is not to be universally
understood; but is only a preventing of their imposing it upon the Gentiles,
and requiring it as necessary to Justification and Salvation. And of these that
held it thus necessary, he says, If ye be circumcised, upon these terms,
Christ shall profit you nothing; if ye are justified, and expect justification
by the Law, ye are fallen from grace, ver. 4.

2. I showed there was no more a need of an express abrogation of the Sabbath,
than there was of the abrogation of Circumcision; because if the Lord's day was
instituted, and which in the order of the Answer was first proved, the Sabbath
must in reason surrender to it.

3. I showed it from Col. 2. 16. where the Sabbath is said to be a shadow of
things to come, and so was to cease by the coming of Christ, as the rest of the
same kind. He says of this, there is as little reason as Scripture; but if
there be as much reason as Scripture, he had no cause to complain: But he first
takes care to leave out the Scripture, and then to exclaim, not one Word of
Scripture. Well! what has he to say to that little Reason that there is? He
says, The Sabbath did appertain to the Law of Nature, and was not a Shadow
only of a thing to come, but a Memory [he would say, a Memorial] of the
Creation. But did it otherwise appertain to the Law of Nature, than as it was
of Divine Institution? Or, was it then so a Memorial of what was past, as not
to be a Shadow of somewhat to come? Let him see how the Apostle applies it,
Heb. 4. 9, 10. But, suppose that it was a Memorial of the Creation (as it was)
and a Shadow to the Jews (as he owns) then being both were but one and the same
day, how could the Observation of the Sabbath be abrogated as a Shadow, and not
also as a Memorial, since the same Day that was for the one, was also for the
other? Thus we find there was a Patriarchal Circumcision, and a Mosaical, as
our Savior shows, John* 7. 22. And the question then is, Whether the
Abrogation of the Mosaical, was not also the Abrogation of the Patriarchal
Circumcision? And, whether what holds in the one, does not hold in the other.

2 d Branch, What Text of Scripture exacts of us the keeping the Sunday holy?
Or what Scripture have we for the Divine Institution of it?

As to this by way of Preparation, I.

1. Gave a general Reason, which our Author for a little Advantage, has set
last, and very unworthily abused.

I shall set them one against the other, before the Reader.

Answer.
There is as much in the reason of the thing for this peculiar day to be
observed in the Christian Church, as there was for the Sabbath in the
Patriarchal and Jewish Church; for what the Moral Sabbath was to Man upon his
Creation; and the Ceremonial Sabbath was to the Jews upon their deliverance out
of Egypt; that is the first day of the Week, or the Lord's day to Christians
upon our Redemption by Christ, which was accomplished and testified in his
Resurrection on that day.

Clear Proof.
The Moral Sabbath in the Patriarchal Church, and the Ceremonial in the Jewish
Church, were on the days following the Creation and Deliverance from Egypt.
Therefore it is not to be kept by Christians on the day in which Christ rested
after he had accomplished our Redemption on the Cross, by a Solemn Consummatum
est, and his precious Death? Not on Saturday?

And then he Triumphs, What can be (I will not say more dull, but) spoken more
directly in spite of Sense and Reason? And I will add, what can be more false,
than what he here puts upon the Answerer (and that is somewhat a worse Charge
than Dullness) when in spite of honesty, he shall thus manifestly pervert that
which lay clear before him, into ridiculous Nonsense?

It Is manifest, he has here nothing to say, unless he will say, there is not as
much reason in the nature of the thing, for the Observation of one day in
seven, in memory of our Redemption, as there was for it in the Creation, or the
Deliverance out of Egypt.

2. I particularly proved it from the Mark of Divine Institution set upon it,
in the Name, the Lord's day, Rev. 1. 10. it being usual in Scripture to have
the Name of the Lord applied to Times, Places, Persons and Things, when set
apart by Divine Institution.

To this he Replies.

The Question is, What day of the Week that was in the Revelation? Or, was it
only some peculiar day of the year, as Easter Day, or Good Friday?

To which I Answer.

1. If the Name of the Lord be not without a reason applied to a Day, then it is
evident that no day of the Week has any Color or Pretense to it, but the First
day.

2. It cannot be reasonably supposed to be some peculiar day of the year, as
Easter Day, or Good Friday.

(1.) Because we are certain, that the first day of the Week was observed in
Apostolical times (as I showed from Scripture) but we are not certain of these;
there being not one word of Scripture, that looks that way. And when St. Austin
says of Epist. 118.
the Anniversary Observation of the days of Christ's Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, and the Descent of the Holy Ghost, that they were observed in the
whole World; he adds, it is to be belived such things so observed, were
commanded and appointed by the Apostles, or General Councils. He says, it is to
be believed they were appointed by one or the other; not being able to
determine which; but we know that there was no General Council till above 300
years after Christ.

(2.) Easter Day (which has the nearest pretense both in Reason and Antiquity)
cannot be the Lord's day, because they were distinguished. So St. Austin, We
(says he) solemnly celebrate the Contr. Adimant. c. 16.
Lord's day, and Easter. And the Eastern Churches, particularly, that of
Ephesus (where St. John more especally was, did observe Easter according to the
Moon, and not the day of the Week; and that so early, as An. 197. when
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, and a Council of Bishops concurring with him,
wrote to Nova Collectio Council. Baluz. p. 10.
Victor Bishop of Rome, who threatened to Excommunicate them for it; that they
feared him not, for it was better to obey God than Man. As for Good-Friday's
being the Lord's day, that I believe is a Nostrum of our Author's, as well as
the Question put by him, is, What day of the Week the Lords day is on?

2. He answers, I find forty Texts that call the day of general Judgment, or
that of each man's death, the Lords day, but not one that mentions Sunday under
that name. What follows? Therefore the Lord's day St. John was in the Spirit
upon, was the day of Judgment or death, and not Sunday. But he will say this is
a little too much; for the use he makes of this Observation, is to show, that
that day, whatever it was, might be called the Lord's day, and yet not be of
Divine Institution. Very well: but yet I find the day of Judgment, (for indeed
the day of death is not, as far as I remember, called the Lord's day in
Scripture) to be of Divine Ordination: So Matthew. 24. 36. and Acts 17. 31. He
has appointed a day; and is therefore a confirmation of what he would confute
by it.

3. I offered further in proof of a Divine Institution, That that day was
consecrated by the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon it. But to this he found
nothing to reply.

4. I proved it from the observation of that day, and the Service celebrated
upon it, Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. What has he here to say? I find, Acts 2. 46.
says he, how they that believed were daily continuing in the Temple; but not a
word of a day appointed for solemn Assemblies. What use can be made of this
accurate Observation, and the stress he lays upon daily; What but this? The
believers daily resorted to the Temple, therefore they had no peculiar day; and
so it follows most admirably, the Jews daily repaired to the Temple, therefore
they had no peculiar day, no Sabbath. But he finds not a word of a day
appointed for stated Assemblies, no not so much as Acts 20. 7. etc. quoted and
insisted on in the Answer.

Having thus dismissed the third question of the Answer, with all the
supernumerary Questions collected out of it by the Prover; I went to look for
Question the fourth, as it is in the Answer, and put by the Addresser; and that
is, Whether it be necessary to salvation for him to believe the Trinity and
Incarnation, that cannot find them clearly expressed in Scripture, though he
reads it sincerely, and with humility. But of this, not a word. We may guess at
the reason without casting a figure. However, it is a little more honest to omit
a Paragraph, than it is to pervert it. The former is an implicit acknowledgment
of Truth, the latter is a renouncing it.

Clear Proof.
Q. 7. Am I bound to believe (the sense given to a doubtful Text) because my
Guides tell me I must do so?

Ans. No, plainly No: And he has two Texts for it; the first, 2 Cor. 1. 24.
Not for that we have dominion over your Faith, but are helpers, says St. Paul;
and Mat. 23. 8. Call no man Master on earth, for one is your Master. Here not
only the Walls of the City of God are broken down, but the very Foundations (of
Prophets and Apostles) are dug up; is it all St. Paul could do, all you
allow him, to give some light, some helps, when his Proselytes had any doubt
about the sense of Scripture? Were they not obliged to believe the Sense and
Interpretation He gave to the Text? Then that Faith is vain which was founded
on the Apostles Preaching, and all Christianity stands on a wrong bottom.

Vindication.
Here our Author is guilty of another omission; For the Answerer exhibited a
five-fold Charge against him of Fallacy and Collusion, which he has taken no
manner of care to clear himself of; but suffers it to remain in its full force
against himself.

He has indeed proceeded otherwise in this last Question; For whereas before in
the Address he set up a Guide that is a Judge, whom it is necessary so to
believe, and to submit to, as to receive from him such Necessaries to Salvation
as are not contained in Scripture, and the sense of such Necessaries as are not
clearly contained in it; he now in the proof softens, and extenuates, and
expounds, and the Question now is reduced to this, Am I bound to believe the
Sense given to doubtful Texts, because my Guide tells me I must do so? This
indeed may better serve his purpose, but after all is neither true in it self,
nor can be accommodated to his former notion of a Guide, and the authority
given to him. For what has doubtful Texts to do with the Case, where there are
no Texts concerned? What has a Sense given to Scripture, to do with a Case
which is to be determined without Scripture; As it is in Necessaries not
contained in Scripture, and which we are to learn from our Guide that we are
bound to follow?

But supposing we take his Exposition, that this is when the Texts be doubtful;
yet the Things those Texts are supposed to be concerned in, are Things
necessary to Salvation; and so to believe a Guide absolutely, as to the sense
of a doubtful Text, is equivalent to the believing him where there is no Text
pretended. Since the Person in doubt is no more assured of the sense of these
Texts in a Point necessary, than he was without a Text. For when there is no
Text for a thing necessary, he absolutely relies upon his Guide, who tells him,
it is necessary: And when there is a sense given to a doubtful Text, he
believes that sense, because his Guide tells him that is the sense of it, and
so he still relies upon his Guide; and his Faith is thus immediately resolved
into the Guide.

And it seems this the Answerer does deny, and that upon the Authority of our
Savior, who disallows it, Mat. 23. 8. and the Apostle who disclaims it, 2 Cor.
1. 24. But here our Author is beside all patience, and answers it with a
dreadful Exclamation. Here, not only the Walls of the City of God are broken
down, but the very Foundations of Prophets and Apostles are dug up. And why
so? because we will not admit a Guide of their own Imposition, in defiance of
our Savior's and St. Paul's prohibition to the contrary. But O, says our
Author, Is it all St. Paul could do, all you allow him, to give some light,
some helps, when his Proselytes had any doubt about the Sense of Scripture?
Were they not obliged to believe the Sense and Interpretation he gave to the
Text? Then, etc.

Here the Prover is either confounded in his own thoughts, or intends to
confound and amuse his Reader. The Opinion he maintains is, That in matters of
doubt, a Person doubting is to be absolutely concluded by his Guide; I am to
believe, says he, because my Guides tell me I must do so. Now he would have
it, that to deny this Authority to the Apostles, is to allow them only to give
some light, some helps, that is, (as I conceive he means) to make them no more
than Common Teachers. But I shall endeavor, if it may be, to set our Author
right in this matter. Toward which it is to be observed,

1. That there is an absolute and sovereign Authority in the Church, which all
are bound to follow, believe and obey, without any dispute, and that Authority
is soly the prerogative of our Savior, and which no man, or society of men can
claim, Mat. 23. 8, 9.

2. There is a subordinate Authority, which is immediately derived from him;
and this was peculiar to inspired Persons, and is extraordinary. So the Apostle
says of himself, Gal. 1. 11, 12. The Gospel which was preached of me, is not
after man; For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ. But as such Persons were sent, so they were able to
prove their Commission and their Doctrine to be received from Christ: And they
did not require any to believe them, because they told them they were their
Guides, and they must believe them, because they tell them so; (for that was to
have dominion over their Faith) but they appealed to the Scriptures, to their
Miraculous Gifts; 2 Cor. 12. 12. and encouraged their Auditors to try and
examine their Doctrines; Acts 17. 11. Gal. 1. 8, 9. And this way of trying is
so far from making Faith Vain (as our Author pretends) that it would be vain
without it.

But, says he, Were not the Proselytes of St. Paul obliged to believe the
Sense and Interpretation he gave to the Text? Without doubt; but then he did
not require them to receive and believe it, because he told them so, but
because it was revealed, and that they beforehand were satisfied in the
Confirmation he brought of his Apostleship. For where there was a new
Revelation of any Point to be believed, or matter to be done, being that could
not be any farther examined by Scripture than as it was not contrary to it, it
wholly was to be resolved into his Mission; and they had the same reason to
believe his Doctrine, as his Mission.

3. There is another sort of subordinate Authority, which receives both its
Mission and Doctrine in an ordinary way: And therefore must needs be subject to
the like ways of trial and proof as the former. But with this difference, that
what inspired Persons taught as revealed from God, that upon proof of their
Mission by Miracles, 2 Cor. 12. 12. was to be believed: but now when we have
only ordinary means, and the written Word for our Rule, there is no other
Doctrine to be received, than what is contained in that Rule, and so neither
can they oblige us, nor are we obliged to believe them, because they tell us
so, but as it is consonant with, or contained in, or rightly inferred from the
Scripture, which we are to compare it with, and to judge of it by.

But now our Author makes their Guides not only equal, but superior to the
Apostles, when he tells us, We are bound to believe them, because they
themselves tell us so; and that without any examination. So that if a man
mistakes his Guide, or his Guide mistakes, he must unavoidably mistake also,
being wholly to be determined by them. And then he must be an Arian with the
Popes Felix and Liberius, a Nestorian with Anastasius, a Monothelite with
Honorius, and deny the immortality of the Soul with John XXIII. And now let any
judge where the Foundations of the Prophets and Apostles are dug up; whether
in the Reformed Churches, that teach us we are not bound to believe any Guide,
without trial of their Doctrine; or the Church of Rome, which, with our Author,
affirms we are bound to believe our Guides, because they tell us we must do so.

Clear Proof.
Now our Answerer takes his turn to ask Questions. He tells us that for the
first he has a pinching one: `Tis this; If I must know the Church by some marks
or notes, then I must find these marks first; and where must I seek them? This
is pinching indeed! Suppose in a Gazette I should find some marks of a Man that
is sought for, were it not a severe Objection against the Man who gave them,
and a pinching Question, I must find these Marks before I find the man; and
where shall I find them? I conceive such pinching would force a smile, and this
Answer, Why Friend, the marks and the man are found at once, for they are to be
seen in his Face. At the same time as one takes a view of the Catholic Church,
he sees therein a continual Succession of Bishops and Teachers from the
Apostles; he discovers her in all parts of the World, and finds her thus
Catholic; he sees in her an undivided Faith, Union under one Pastor in the use
of the same Sacraments, and finds her One; he observes her Rule is, Let nothing
be altered of what was received from the Apostles by a constant Universal
Tradition in the Churches which they founded, and is convinced she is
Apostolical; he finds God favors her with the Gift of Miracles, promised Mat.
10. and Joh. 14. that she has fulfilled the Prophesies concerning the
Conversion of Nations, converted to Christianity by her Children only; and he
concludes this is she.

Vindication.
The Prover says that, Now the Answerer takes his turn to ask Questions. And
good reason, after the Addresser had put so many before. He tells us further,
That for the first he has a pinching one. It Is this, If I must know the Church
by some Marks, then I must find out those Marks first; and where must I seek
them? But, why is this called the first Question when there are several before
it? He might better have called it the only Question, since it is what he has
singled out of many to try the power of his Logic upon. And now let us see how
he quits himself, when he comes to be Respondent. His Answer to the Question,
is, Suppose in a Gazette, etc. and the Marks, and the Man are found at once,
for they are to be seen in his Face. Where his whole business is to go off from
the Question that is asked, to a Question that is not asked. The main Question
in the Answer was, How shall I find out the true Church? Is it because She her
self so declares? Or that She is knowable by a self-evident Light? Or is She to
be found out by Marks? If by Marks, then we must find out the Marks before we
find out the Church, which is to be known by those Marks; and then the pinching
Question comes on; Where must I seek them? That, it is to be feared, will lead
us to the Scriptures. Now what is the Sense of the Question, Where must I seek
them? Certainly, it is not in dispute, whether the Marks are not to be found in
the thing sought for, by those Marks (as he impertinently lays it) For if they
are the proper Marks of the thing; then, surely, they are to be found with the
thing that they are the Marks of; or else it is impossible to find out the
thing by these Marks. But the meaning of the Question is the same as it was in
the Address, (and from whence the Answerer borrowed the Terms) and that is,
Where are the Notes? Where are they described? Or, How shall I come to know
them? And thus it follows in the Answer, It is to be feared, this will lead us
to the Scripture. But because some men are hard of Understanding, whether for a
weak or a bad reason, I determine not, I shall begin the matter again. It is
agreed, that there is a Church, and that there are certain Marks by which the
Church may be found: Now the Question is, What are those Marks? Whether
Continual Succession, Universal Extent, Union under one Visible Pastor, etc.?
Or, The Profession of the true Faith, right Administration of the Sacraments?

Now how shall we know, or where shall we find, which of these are the Marks
belonging to the Church, and by which it is to be known?

I shall make it plain by his own instance; Supposing that there is somewhat of
great Importance depends upon finding out a particular person; and that he that
would find him out, knows not the man, but for his better direction applies
himself to one that knows somewhat of this matter, and asks him, Sir, How shall
I find out such a Man, or where may I seek the Marks by which he may be
discovered? Would it not force a Smile to have this Answer? Do you ask that?
Why Friend, the Marks and the Man are found at once, for they are to be seen in
his Face. Would he not be made much the Wiser, by this grave Reply; and
forthwith be able to find out the Man he seeks for, by this goodly Direction?
Or would he not say, Sir, I came not to be informed of that which every one
that is not a stark Fool understands as well as your Worship; but I would know,
what are those Marks which are to be seen in his Face, and by which I may know
him from your self, or any other, and where are they described? And will not
the other, if he be able and willing to inform him, then tell him, the Marks
are in the Gazette, and there you may find them. Now, which is to be found out
first, the Marks or the Man? And what are those Marks, and where must I seek
them? Surely it needs no Application. As for his Triumphant Marks of the
Church, he may find them answered to purpose in the Book not long since
published upon that Argument.

Clear Proof.
It Is also observable at what a distance these men are from the true Church,
who conceive it so hard to find her out. All holy Fathers ever judged it a most
easy thing to each Person, insomuch that the Holy Doctor Cc. 2. in Psalm. 30.
St. Augustine thus delivers his Sense of it: I tell you with truth, Brethren,
the Prophets have spoken more obscurely of Christ, than of the Church; I
believe, because they saw in Spirit, that men would make Sects against the
Church, but would not be so much divided about Christ. But it is natural for a
Crimnal to question the Power of his Judge; and these men know it has ever
been the Sense of all Christians, which St. Augustine De Unit. Eccl. l 4. c. 8.
expressed in the following Words; There is no Salvation out of the Church, who
doubts of it? Therefore whatever you have from the Church (Seripture, Creed,
Sacraments, etc) help you not to Salvation out of the Church, whether you
believe contrary to the Truth, or being divided from Gal. 5.
the Unity, gather not with Christ; whence St. Paul says to Heretics, Those who
do such things, shall not possess the Kingdom of Heaven.

Vindication.
He says, It Is observable at what a distance Men are from the true Church, who
conceive it so hard to find it out. But our distance from the true Church, is
not the more, because we conceive it so hard to find her out in their way, and
by such Marks (which if there are no other) it is impossible to find her out by.
But now, if we go in St. Austins way, then it is not difficult, for thus he
determines De Pastore, c. 14.
it. The weak seeks for the Church. The wandering seeks for the Church. I inquire
after the Voice of the Pastor. Read this to me out of the Prophet, and read it
out of the Psalms; recite it from the Law, the Gospel, the Apostle. Look for it
in the Scripture, and there you will find it.

Here the Prover cites a Passage out of St. Austin, which I am confident he did
not read there. For (1.) he quotes the 4 th Book of St. Austin, de Vnitate,
whereas there is but one Book in all. (2.) There are several mistakes in the
Quotation it self. As he says, There is no Salvation out of the Church, who
doubts of it? Whereas the Words of St. Austin are, Qui autem super arenam
aedificant [i. e. qui audiunt Verba and non faciunt, as just before] quis
dubitaverit, quod regnum Dei non possidebunt? That is, But those who build upon
the sand, who doubts that they shall not possess the Kingdom of Heaven? Again
the Prover reads it, Whatever you have from the Church (Scripture, Creed,
Sacraments, etc.) help you not to Salvation out of the Church. Whereas there is
nothing of this, but it follows after what was said of the builders on the
sand, Nihil utique prodest Baptismi Sacramentum, that is, So that the Sacrament
of Baptism profits not such. And then he quotes that of St. Paul, Those which
do such things, etc. without that other Insertion of his, Whether you believe
contrary to the Truth, etc. The matters are not much material; but by this the
Reader may judge what a careless, injudicious, or confident (to say no worse)
Adversary I have to deal with.

Clear Proof.
His other Queries have no difficulty, and withal so little of Sense, that I
shall not offer to force my Readers Attention on them.

Vindication.
Whether the other Queries had any Sense, I shall leave to others to judge; but
however, because they may not be so easy to others, as to himself, it is to be
wished he had showed a little more of his good Nature, and Condescendency, to
have resolved them. I shall try once again, whether I can make sense of them,
and leave him to try whether he can answer them: If they are not Sense, they
are not to be understood, and so there can be no hurt to Propose them: If they
have no difficulty, they are the easier and the sooner answered.

The Queries Propounded in the Answer, and yet remaining to be resolved, are
these.

Q. 1. What those Necessaries to Salvation are, that are not contained in
Scripture, and where each of them is to be found?

Q. 2. Whether the Articles of Pope Pius's Creed joined to the Nicene Creed,
are as clearly to be proved from Scripture, as those of the Nicene Creed; or
that those of the Nicene Creed are no more to be proved from Scripture, than
those of Pope Pius?

Q. 3. Whether it is as necessary to believe the Church of Rome is the Mother
and Mistress of all Churches, and the Pope to be the Vicar of Christ, and all
the other Articles of that Creed, of Pope Pius, as it is to believe that our
Lord Jesus was Incarnate, and the rest of the Articles of the Nicene Creed?

Q. 4. Which has the first and Supreme Authority, the Scripture or the Church?

Q. 5. Whether the Church can ordain new Articles of Faith, and which when so
ordained, are as much to be received and believed, as those which have their
Authority immediately from Scripture?

Q. 6. Which is to be sought for first, the Notes, or the Church that is to be
found out by these Notes? If the Church, then how shall I know it? If the
Notes, where must I seek them?

Q. 7. If the Church be to be an Infallible Guide, when it is found out; then
what is the Guide that will infallibly lead to the Church? And whether is that
Guide to be sought for within the Church, or without it?

Q. 8. Whether we may be infallibly certain out of the Church; or how we can
find out the Church infallibly, if the Church alone be infallible, and that we
cannot be infallibly certain till we come into the Church?

Q. 9. Where is the Seat of Infallibility in the Church, whether in every
particular Person, or the Supreme Pastor, or a General Council? And whether
they all agree in this matter?

Q. 10. Whether what they disagree in can be the Sentiment of the whole Church;
or that we are hound to believe what they cannot agree in?

Q. 11. Whether we are any more bound to believe the Infallibility of their
Church, which they thus disagree in, than the Address would persuade us we are
not obliged to believe the Trinity, because the Arians, tho Christians, deny it?

Q. 12. How one at a vast distance of Time or Place, can be infallibly assured
of the Certainty of those Decrees which are said to proceed from an Infallible
Power; or that he can be any more certain of the Truth, Certainty, and Sense of
these, than he can be of the Truth, Authority, and Sense of Scripture?

Q. 13. Whether our Savior has not spoken as plainly and intelligibly in
Scripture, as his pretended Vicar, or their Councils have done in their Decrees
and Canons?

Q. 14. Whether, when the Persons that publish or give the Sense of those
Decrees and Canons are Fallible, a Person can be infallibly certain that these
are the very Decrees, or that the true Sense of them? Or whether a Person in
these Circumstances can be any more certain, tho a Member of an Infallible
Church, than another may be, that is a Member of a Fallible Church?

Q. 15. Whether, for example, we can be any more certain that there ever was
such a Pope as Pope Pius, or that ever there was such a Creed drawn up by him,
or that this or that is an Article, or the Sense of it, than we are that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, and that the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation are clearly contained in them?

These are the Questions in the Answer, and which I have drawn out in order; I
hope they show themselves to be Sense; it remains to the Prover to show they
have no difficulty to be resolved.

Clear Proof.
All well-meaning Protestants finding that Scripture interpreted the
Protestant-way is so far from being an easy and clear Rule of Faith, that a
Protestant in the Answer to an Address made to the Ministets of the Church of
England, approved by a Chaplain to the highest Ecclesiastical Authority under
the King, cannot as much as teach by it the first Principles of Christian
Religion; will seek a better method of using that Divine Rule, and not be
hereafter so easily imposed upon by those Guides who give them but their own
private fancies, under the Veil and Name of the Word of God. I was (I confess)
surprised to find Guil. Needham, etc. approving this Answer; but God and Truth
are of our side; Et inimici nostri sunt Judices; the weakness of our Opposers
Arguments bear a proof to it.

Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam.

Vindication.
I may now leave the case to all well-meaning Protestants; for who that is of
that number, or indeed is impartial, but may soon discern, who they are that
make the Scripture a Rule of Faith; Whether those that resolve all Necessaries
to Salvation wholly into it, or those that join Tradition with it in Esteem and
Authority? They may again as soon discern, Whether the Scripture be Easy and
Clear, and best understood in the Protestant Method, when it is Translated for
Vulgar use in the Mother Tongue, and the People are allowed and exhorted to
read it; or in the Popish Method, when it is kept in an unknown Tongue, or if
Translated, not permitted to be read by them? Whether again They feed them with
their own private Fancies, that teach the people nothing but what both Teacher
and Hearer learn from Scripture; or they that make things necessary to be
believed and done, which are not contained in Scripture?

I find our Author surpised to find Guil. Needham, a Chaplain to the highest
Eeclesiastical Authority under the King (we know who they are that set up an
Ecclesiastical Authority above the King) to approve the Answer. But why so
surprised? When it is likely G. N. was as confident as the Prover could be on
his own, that God and Truth are on the Answerer's side; and perhaps might have
a good opinion of his Performance, though I grant, it is likely, not as good as
our Author has of his own Clear Proof.

Here I should have ended, but it seems the poor Answer has met with another
Adversary, one (as he himself tells us) that An Answer to Dr. Sherlock's
Preservative.
at a full, mixed Assembly in the City so laid it open, that most of the
Protestants there ashamed of it, found no better Salvo than to disown the
Answerer as an Ignorant Scribler, who had betrayed his Cause. I wish this
successful Undertaker had but given us a Breviate of the Case as he propounded
it to that Assembly; for if he managed it in the same way as his Friend the
Prover has done, or as he himself has answered the Preservative, sometimes
omitting, sometimes mangling, and at all times Misrepresenting his Adversaries
Arguments, I will for once excuse my Friends the Protestants, if they then
thought the Answerer worthy of no better a Character than is here related; who
I hope for the future they will have less reason to believe an Adversary; and
use that kind of liberty, which the Church of Rome so much envies them, and
belongs to them as Men and as Christians, and judge for themselves, by seeing
with their own eyes, whether the Cause is maintained or betrayed. But after
all, I know not whether I may not have as little reason to believe him
concerning these Protestants, as they had to believe him concerning the Answer.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome. By the Author of the [Six
Conferences concerning the Eucharist.] 4 o.

Mr Pulton Considered in his Sincerity, Reasonings, Authorities: Or a Just
Answer to what he has hitherto published in his True Account; his True and
Full Account of a Conference, etc. His Remarks; and in them his pretended
Confutation of what he calls Dr. T's Rule of Faith. By Th. Tenison, D. D.

A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to
the Eucharist, wholly different from those of the Present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the belief of Transubstantiation. Being a sufficient
Confutation of Consensus Veterum, Nubes Testium, and other late Collections of
the Fathers pretending to the Contrary. 4 o.

An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy; With a Reply to the Vindicator's Full Answer, showing that the
Vindicator has utterly ruined the New Design of Expounding and Representing
Popery. 4 o.

An Answer to the Popish Address presented to the Ministers of the Church of
England, 4 o.

An Abridgment of the Prerogatives of St. Ann, Mother of the Mother of God,
with the Approbations of the Doctors of Paris, thence done into English, with a
PREFACE concernining the Original of the Story.

The Primitive Fathers no Papists, in Answer to the Nubes Testium; to which is
added, a Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints, in Answer to the Challenge
of F. Sabran the Jesuit; wherein is shown, that Invocation of Saints was so far
from being the Practice, that it was expressly against the Doctrine of the
Primitive Fathers. 4 o.

An Answer to a Discourse concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy, lately Printed
at Oxford. 4 o.

The Virgin Mary Misrepresented by the Roman Church, In the Traditions of that
Church concerning her Life and Glory, and in the Devotions paid to her as the
Mother of God. Both showed out of the Offices of that Church, the Lessons on
her Festivals, and from their allowed Authors.

Dr. Tenisons Sermon of Discretion in giving Alms. 12 o.

A Discourse concering the Merits of Good Works.

The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome, demonstrated in some Observations upon
the Life of Ignatius Loyola, (Founder of the Order of Jesus).

A Vindication of the Answer to the Popish Address presented to the Ministers
of the Church of England. 4 o.

Reflections upon the Books of the Holy Scripture, in order to establish the
Truth of the Christian Religion, in 3 Parts. 8 vo. In the Press.

The Texts which the Papists cite out of the Bible for Proof of the Points of
their Religion, Examined, and showed to be alleged without Ground. In several
distinct Discourses, Five whereof are published, viz.

Popery not founded in Scripture. The Introduction.

Texts concerning the Obscurity of Holy Scripture.

-- Of the Insufficiency of Scripture, and Necessity of Tradition.

-- Of the Supremacy of St. Peter, and the Pope, over the whole Church. In Two
Parts.

-- Of Infallibility.

The Rest will follow Weekly, in their Order.


