THE PATTERN OF Ecclesiastical ORDINATION, OR APOSTOLIC SEPARATION. Being a
Discourse upon Acts the 13.4, 5. At first intended for the satisfaction of some
Objections raised upon the said Trinitary Text by a Private, Worthy Friend, and
now by his desire made public for the Satisfaction and Instruction of others
whom it may concern. By Edward Wakeman, Rector of St. Matthews Friday-street:
London.

(...). Council Gangrens. can. 6. LONDON, Printed by J.G. for Richard Royston,
at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1664.

IMPRIMATUR:

Geo. Stradling S.T.P. Rever. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Archiep. Cant. a Sac.
Domest.
Ex Aed. Lamb. Junii 22. 1664.
To the most Reverend Father in God, And the Right Honorable, GILBERT, Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBURY, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of
the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Most Reverend Father in God,
WHen I consider, as I cannot but often do so, (for Ingratitude is an
unpardonable crime) the Largeness of your Former Favors, amongst the rest of
my Honorable Friends; and that Influence I received from you, when you shone
so bright in a somewhat lower Orb than now you do: I cannot, but confess at
least, my debts to you far greater, than ever I shall be ever able to pay.

Children can never make a sufficient return unto their Parents, though they
should honor them with all they have, all that they can do or suffer: since
without them they could never have been in a capacity of Being, much less of
Well Being. Immortales gratiarum horti.

This makes me now so bold to present this small Handful of Tender, First
Fruits unto your Grace, which I confess were against my Will Crop'd from me by
a Friendly, Over-powerful hand.

And indeed, to whom should I devote the Pattern of Ecclesiastic Ordination,
but to the Greatest Apostle and Arch Angel of it in this our Church, next under
Christ, Your Self?

It is no ceremonious but Fundamental point, the Ordination to and execution of
the Ministerial Function. And yet, I expect hard censures from the World on all
sides: but Fear none that are uncharitable.

If any will but take the pains to teach me better, I shall be thankful.

However your Lordship and the World may guess by this, how I spend that Talent
of Health and Time, etc. which God is pleased to Lend me.

I cast both it and my self at your Graces Feet; and think my self to have
obtained enough, if it find acceptance with or Protection from, you

My Lord, Whose obedient Son and Servant, in the Blessed Jesus, I am, Edward
Wakeman.
July 5th. 1664.
THE PATTERN OF Ecclesiastical Ordination: Or Apostolic Separation.
Acts 13.4, 5. 4. So they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed --

5. And when they were at Salamis, they Preached the word of God in the
Synagogues of the Jews.

The whole story runs thus,

V. 1. Now there were in the Church that was at Antioch, certain Prophets and
Teachers, as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene,
and Manaen which had been brought up with Herod the Tetrarch, and Saul.

V. 2. And as they ministered unto the Lord and Fasted, the holy Ghost said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them.

V. 3. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they
sent them away.

V. 4. So they being sent forth by the holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia, and
from thence they sailed to Cyprus.

V. 5. And when they were at Salamis, they Preached the Word of God in the
Synagogues of the Jews.


THe Text is a relation of the entrance of two that were solemnly ordained upon
the sacred Ministerial Function.

Paul and Barnabas after some considerable time spent amongst the sage and
learned Prophets at Antioch, that noble nursery, and such reputation gotten, as
that they were thought fit enough to be entrusted with a public employment for
the Church at Jerusalem (nor that without desert, for St. Luke tells us at the
9. and 11. chapters, They were full of the Holy Ghost) are now by virtue of an
express from the same Holy Ghost, separated, or, (which is all one) consecrated
to their Apostleship, by the laying on of hands.

I call it their Apostleship, rather than Episcopacy or Priesthood (though
neither interpretation want its Patrons) as finding in their execution of that
Function whereunto they were now called (and we do not read of any new
Ordination of them afterward) little agreement with the Office of a Bishop, it
being limited to some particular Church; and less with that of a Presbyter,
which gave him neither power of Ordaining nor yet of Censures: both which St.
Paul at least is recorded to have exercised, and that indifferently, in any
part of the World.

Besides that it seems too much below the Eminency of an Apostle (though the
Schoolmen be not ashamed to fasten all their seven Orders upon our Savior
Christ himself) to be tied to those Gradations, now when the Spirit was poured
out upon all Flesh, which were only necessary for the succeeding Christian
Church, wherein the Gifts of the holy Ghost were in great part to be supplied
by Man's endeavor.

This Apostleship therefore being conferred upon them, immediately like
faithful Stewards they applied themselves diligently to the Performance of
their charge, And being sent forth by the Holy Ghost departed -- And when they
were at Salamis they preached the word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews.

In the former part of which words we have laid down their commission for this
great Function in these words, Being sent forth by the Holy Ghost.

In the latter we have expressed their Exercise of that Function,
Synechdochically laid down in these words, They departed and preached the word
of God in the Synagogues of the Jews.

Their Commission is twofold.

First, Internal from the Holy Ghost, expressed in the text, sent forth by the
Holy Ghost.

Secondly, External from the Church, implied by the connection of this with the
former verse, They on whom the Prophets had laid their hands, They were sent
forth by the Holy Ghost.

Which Commission from the Church, if we again consider with Reflection upon
this from the Holy Ghost, we may observe by way of Deduction the joint
concurrence of the one with the other, or the certain effect of this Imposition
of hands, the gift of the Holy Ghost.

In, or from the 2. part, I shall show you that the duty of such as are thus
Commissioned by the Holy Ghost and by the Church, is Preaching, and what that
Preaching was, is, or ought to be.

But before I enter upon the particulars named, because the text has been
otherwise by some interpreted; it will be very requisite that I give you some
account of the exposition that I mean to follow. For,

There are who contend that Ordination is nothing concerned in this place; that
Paul and Barnabas were not by this Imposition of hands admitted to any degree
Ministerial, but only received it in way of a Blessing upon the expedition they
were now about to be employed in.

So our Annotator upon the Rhemists interprets it, which we might suspect, done
out of too much heat of contention; and that because They had expounded (...)
in the second verse, Saying of Mass, He would needs find fault too with their
construing Imposition of hands, in the next verse, Giving of orders, but that
we find the same opinion in some of the Romanists too; all of them grounding it
upon St. Paul's assertion in the beginning of his Epistle to the Galatians,
chap. 1. v. the 1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ.

For answer to which, it is confessed, not only that Paul had an Immediate
calling from God but also that such a Mission was altogether as essential to
the Apostleship, as to the Prophets in the Old Testament.

But this Calling or Sending was nothing else properly but the Designation and
Appointment of fit persons; which while the High Priest of the New Covenant was
present with them, had perhaps annexed unto it their Inauguration: Both however
were received immediately from him,

After his Ascension this latter must needs be left in the hands of the Church.

Nor does it any way blemish their Prerogative above the after-Fathers of the
Church, to own Ordination By man, since their Master had vouchsafed to receive
the sacrament of Baptism from one, who he himself had pronounced less than the
least of these Prophetical Ordainers.

So then our Apostle was not (...) receiving his authority from Men, nor is any
Presbyter: For all are sent by the Holy Ghost; neither was he (...), designed
or chosen by man to this Ministry, as all ordinary Pastors are; but he might
nevertheless be ordained by man, and so (to omit late Interpreters,) St.
Chrysostom tells us, he was ( in his Homily upon my text, (...),) as having no
authority to exercise his Apostleship to which he was called by special
Direction from the Holy Ghost, till he was ordained to it by the laying on of
hands.

So that there is no reason why (...) in the text urged, should be any more
then (...) in the 1. to Timothy, by the commandment of God, or (...), in almost
all the rest of his Epistles, by the will of God.

Nor is it worth the while for them to urge the Letter of the Syriack
translation, which renders it, Not of the sons of man, nor by the hand of the
son of man; for it follows, but by the hand of Jesus Christ; which is enough,
methinks, to make them forsake the argument, and look better into the Propriety
of the Language.

It seems then not improbable, that all Apostles after Christ's Ascension into
Heaven, received their Apostleship by Imposition of hands from the Church.

That Timothy had his office (...), by the designation of the Spirit is not to
be denied; 1 Timothy 4.14. But yet that it was (...), with the laying on of hands,
is clear from the same place, and more expressly and particularly from another,
(...) by the laying on of my hands, 2 Timothy 1.6. And do we not read that Timothy
was placed at Ephesus, as Titus was left at Great, to ordain others after the
same manner? Tit. 1.5.

Even Matthias himself, of whose choice we find mention without any of his
Ordination; For though our English in translating (...) he was numbered with,
make the text seem to imply him sufficiently instated in his Apostolate, by
having the lot fallen upon him, yet the Original will better bear Erasmus's
Cooptatus est, or Beza's Communibus calculis allectus, after which, implying
only a Nomination, might well follow a solemn Admission, though we have no
mention of it in this sacred History.

Here you see we have an (...), from the Holy Ghost for Barnabas and Saul, the
Holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have
called them, at the second verse. Which to say, was no more than send away
Barnabas and Saul to Cyprus, betrays so much Ignorance in the use of that
expression in both Testaments, that I think it cannot find much entertainment
with any Person of Reason.

This Separation therefore was nothing else but their Ordination, and the
conferring that power upon them which the Holy Ghost now called them to by an
External, Extraordinary Call, and afterward ratified by an Internal, Ordinary
Calling, at their laying on of hands upon them.

And so I come to the First part of my text, which represents unto us their
Commission, and that first from the Holy Ghost, expressly given us in these
words, -- Being sent forth by the Holy Ghost

This is the first particular, namely, that the Holy Ghost is the
Superintendent or the Unction, they receiving their Commission from him.

That by the Holy Ghosts sending, is rather to be understood his Inward giving
them that Power which their Ordination entitled them unto, than either his
Extraordinary Calling of them, before mentioned in the second verse, or the
Secret Instinct of the Spirit directing them whither they should go (though
both expositions have their throngs of Assertors) I am for my part, induced to
think, because the former Interpretation seems to impose a needless repetition
upon the text: the latter, (besides that this Cyprus whither they went, was
Barnabas's own Country (as appears plainly at the latter end of the 4. chap.)
so that he might in all probability be carried thither by his own Affection)
has none or very few Parallels in this History or elsewhere, either Historical
or Grammatical.

For first, how many Journeys of S. Paul and others do we here meet withal
without the least mention of the Holy Ghosts sending? it being sufficiently
known and elsewhere to be collected, that they were directed by him in almost
all their undertakings.

And then secondly, The spirit of Prophecy (except where in general those
Extraordinary gifts are expressed in one, as St. John 7.39. and the like) is
not usually called, (...) but barely (...), not the Holy Ghost, but the Spirit,
as you may see in the 11, 19, 20, and 21. chap. of this book, to name no more;
whereas this power of Orders is styled the holy Ghost in that very form which
the greatest part of the Western Church has taken up from our Saviors own
mouth.

And in the 20. of this book v. 28. the Presbyters which were ordained by the
Apostles, are charged by S. Paul at Miletus, to take heed unto the Flock, over
which the Holy Ghost had made them overseers. These had no Extraordinary
Mission as our Apostle here, and yet They were sent by the Holy Ghost; and
therefore, why not These in the same sense? For,

In the 2. v. they were sent by him upon his Immediate choice and appointment:
In the text they were sent by him upon his Bestowing that Power which the
Prophets at Antioch bid them receive at their laying on of hands.

So then from the Holy Ghost comes all Power to exercise any sacred Ministerial
Office in the Church of God. This was the chiefest business of God the Father,
and God the Sons breathing forth or sending down the Holy Ghost from Heaven, to
qualify and make some fit for the performance of Church-work, with his (...).
his gifts, according to their several stations and capacities; for when Christ
gave the gifts of the Holy Ghost to men, Ephesians. 4.8. He gave some Apostles,
some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, verse the 11 And as a learned observer says very
well, All the reason in the world that he should have a special hand in giving,
where himself is to be received. Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Joh. 20.22.

Whosoever therefore undertakes this Warfare (for so the work of the Levites is
often called in the book of Numbers) without a Commission from him, viz. the
Holy Ghost, though he make pretense of never so plausible Intentions, is but a
Traitor to the Holy Ghost, and can look for no better thanks than Uzzah had for
his Officious Profanation.

For though there be mention here of Apostles only receiving the Holy Ghost,
it is evident they received not this Gift as Apostles, but as entering into an
Ecclesiastical Ministry: else why did they impart the same afterward to
Bishops and Presbyters, which St. Paul's History and Writings do abundantly
witness.

The text then does as nearly concern Us at present in the Christian Church, as
if Paul and Barnabas had been now ordained Priests.

So that I may without offense (I hope) to the scope of the History, take a
view of it, especially as it represents us with the Priests Ordination, the
chief business of this present solemnity.

And that we may be the better ascertained, that it is the Holy Ghost who gives
this Power; let us enquire, so far as we may, what the Power is, and how
distinguished from other Gifts of the Holy Ghost who thus commissions.

Not to run too far backwards, but to begin with the Apostles themselves.

You may observe in the Gospel that the Holy Ghost is twice promised by our
Savior to his Apostles, once under the promise of the Keys, in the 16 of St.
Matthew v. the 18. about two years before his Passion: afterward under the
promise of a Comforter (or as the learned Grotius translates it, an Advocate)
Luke 24.49. after his Resurrection (though ye shall find the same Promise made
unto them, and often repeated the Day before his Passion, in the 14, 15, and
16. chapters of St. John, and some months before that, to all Believers, St.
John 7.38. and yet sooner to his Apostles in the 10. of St. Mat. v. the 20)

The Former of these was performed after his Resurrection, S. John 20.22. when
he said unto them, Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose soever sins ye remit, they
are remitted, and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. The Latter
was performed upon the day of Pentecost; as appears in the second of the Acts
of the Apostles, when the holy Ghost came down from Heaven in the shape of
cloven fiery Tongues, which came as it were in a windy, rushing Chariot, and
sat upon each of them, yea and inspired them with the Gift of Tongues, verse
1, 2, 3, etc.

Now Both these gifts had a Power annexed unto them.

With the First, was a Power of the Keys;

The Other was a Power from on high, a Power of conviction by Miracles, When
the Comforter is come, he shall convince the world of Sin, of Righteousness,
and of Judgment, St. John 16.8. A Power of Answering for themselves without
taking thought before hand; When they should be brought before Governors, for
the name and the cause of Christ, St. Mat. 10.18, 19, 20. And a Power of
knowledge of the truth, St. John 14.26. The Comforter which is the holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things.

You shall find a third Power given by Christ to his Apostles, immediately upon
having created them Apostles, a power of Miracles, St. Mat. 10.1. He gave them
Power against unclean Spirits to cast them out, and to heal all manner of
Sickness, and all manner of Disease.

There is Lastly, another sort of Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which though they
were always in the Church of God, yet Now first came under that name. And those
are such as the Apostle reckons up in the 12 of his Epistle to the Romans v. the
8. He that gives let him do it with simplicity: He that rules, with
diligence: He that shows mercy, with cheerfulness: Together with several
other graces which he reckons up, and calls Gifts in the 6. verse, (Having then
gifts, differing according to the grace that is given to us,) and Fruit of the
Spirit in his 5. to the Gal. v. the 22.

That these Ghostly Gifts of the fourth kind of Sanctifying Graces, are
perpetually to be enjoyed by the faithful, is confessed on all hands.

That the Power of Miracles which the Apostles exercised while Christ was upon
the Earth, was a Gift Extraordinary, and not to out-last their own times, will
be easily admitted among us: and the same of that which was given at the Feast
of Pentecost: excepting that part of it mentioned in the 14. of St. John, The
Gift of knowledge, which we must warily distinguish, what it was in the
Apostles, and what in the succeeding Church; They had in its Fullness, they were
taught all things by it, but after ages had only that Proportion which seemed
good to the Author and Disposer of it. For,

Should we leave this wholly among the Extraordinary Gifts of the Apostles, we
had quite relinquishd our interest in the Comforter, and should have no more
reason to look for him at our Veni Creator, than to expect the mighty rushing
Wind or the Sound from Heaven, or the Cloven Tongues as of Fire.

The controversy then lies in the Gift first named, which is the same we
enquire after: some making it the same with Sanctifying Grace: some the same
with Grace Enabling for the Performance, which I take to be nothing else but
that Gift of Knowledge under the second kind of Graces mentioned; and of these,
some there are (in our own Church I mean,) who think it nothing inferior to
that which the Apostles had, A plain Infallibility: The rest confound it with
that Gift of the Comforter, as it belongs to the Universal Church.

They that think it the same with Sanctifying Grace, (to say no more) must
needs forget that Judas Iscariot, (in whom was little or no sign rather of
Sanctifying Grace, when he betrayed his Master,) was, one of the twelve, and
(if we may draw any parallel from the Law) that Caiaphas the High Priest
prophesied, St. John 11. v. 49, 50. and 18, 14.

They would easily confess that it is too possible there may be more employed
in the Building of Gods Ark the Church, than shall be preserved in it.

To them who imagine an Infallibility of the Spirit accompanying all true
Ordination, and dare call them Laymen, which arrive not at the same perfection
of knowledge which they dream themselves Masters of (when indeed to differ from
them in any one fond opinion is enough to fetch us under this Censure) the
woeful experience of their too fruitful Errors is a sufficient answer.

And Lastly, that Holy Orders consist in being qualified in some measure with
abilities fit for the Execution of them, has not any Authority, so far as I
can find, from holy Writ: For although God do require this Ability in every
one, in some more, in some less, yet he has not passed any promise to tie it
to the Churches Ordination: for, the Comforter is no otherwise promised than
other Graces of special Favor, upon condition of our receiving them; And we
have too sad experience that we do often Grieve and Quench this Holy Spirit of
God in our Understanding, as well as in our Conscience.

Whatsoever therefore it is, it must needs be an Accession to the Priesthood,
and we are to acknowledge God the Author of a double Blessing, when he provides
Bezaliels and Aboliabs for the work of this his Spiritual Tabernacle. Whereas
he has then promised this Power of Orders to all that enter upon his more
Immediate service, when he directed the Apostles to lay us down that pattern of
Ordination. It being a Gift of perpetual Necessity in the Church, which if at
any time it were denied, would open a gap to confusion in the Dispensation or
Administration of holy things, which can in no wise proceed from the God of
Order and Decorum.

It remains that the Gift of the Holy Ghost in Ordination is nothing else but
that Authority and Right the Ordained have in the Administration of Divine
Mysteries; That Gift whereby the Priest (not to speak here of the Bishops
Power) has a kind of property in Dispensing Gods holy written word and
Sacraments, in Offering up the public prayers of the Congregation for them,
and in Pronouncing Gods sentence of pardon or condemnation upon them.

And this is properly our Inward Calling:

Those other gifts of Grace and Knowledge (such as Arts, and Languages, and
Virtues) which may precede our Ordination, as they are Motives to any man so
qualified to offer himself to the Church of Gods service, are an Invitation,
and in that sense, an Inward Calling. As they do enable any man for the
performance of his Duty; they are not a warrantable Calling but a Blessing, and
do not confer any Right upon him to the Priesthood, but only strengthen his
hands in the Discharge of it.

Were this rightly considered, the world would not be so full of mistakes
concerning the Call to the Function.

But do we not now rather wonder that the Holy Ghost reserves not this so great
a Gift in his own hands, than that he owns the Donation of it?

It is a Power over the Consciences, over the Souls of men, That by which our
Savior differences God himself from the most Potent upon earth, at the 10. of
St. Mat. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul.
And can Man confer this Power of his own authority? No, It Is the Lord of the
Harvest that must send these Laborers into his Vineyard: and he never sends
them into it by a False Key, through a Back Door, over the Wall, or in at a
Window: But has given Order and Power to his Church to let them in by a solemn
Consecration of them to his Service; And so I am fallen upon

The second particular, or second part of their Commission: Their External
Commission for what they undertake, given them, by the laying on of hands, They
on whom the Prophets had laid their hands, They were sent forth by the holy
Ghost.

In the days of old, there were three sorts of Persons that were Anointed, The
King, The Priest, and the Prophet; who though they were designed and Appointed
by God, had yet some External, Ceremonious actions performed toward them by
Man.

And thus in the New Testament, though the Holy Ghost be the Unction, yet there
is no way for it to be applied but by the Laying on of hands.

Which Imposition of hands is here put for all the ceremonies of Ordination, as
Preaching afterward for the Apostles Office, by a kind of Synechdoche, a part
being being put for the whole, and is much used in Holy Scripture.

The more essential ceremony is the form of words used with it, Receive the
holy Ghost, etc.

So that, that late observation of the use of Imposition of hands upon Laymen,
for Election into their Office, had better have been spared than published, to
be laid open, as it is, to the giddy mis-interpretation of troublesome
unsettled times, and quarrelsome, irreconcilable Spirits. For,

What if the same were there used (which was long enough ago confessed?) Is
therefore a Presbyter and an Elder of the same Sanhedrim all one? both equally
consecrated and set apart from the People? These will be the collections of
some readers: Whereas if the Author had but mentioned the Forms of our
Ordination, as he has done those of the Jews, it had been an easy matter for
every one to see some difference between Sit tibi facultas Judicandi, and
Accipe Spiritum Sanctum.

And those two Ceremonies, some of the Church of Rome (cited by Franciscus de
Sancta Clara, upon our 36. Article) acknowledge sufficient for Ordination,
reckoning Unction to be but a mistake of the Greek Fathers expressions, by
understanding Material where they meant Spiritual: All (excepting some
Sycophants of the Court of Rome, that affirm the Pope can make a Priest by a
Priest, nay though never so far distant, by saying only Esto sacerdos,) count
them necessary chiefly in respect of the Apostles practice, which in things not
depending upon circumstances variable, stands for a Law to their Successors;
but then withal perhaps, in as much as it is scarce possible for the Church to
express in fewer signs her Commission, without which we can have no assurance
of the Holy Ghosts.

Having in the beginning of this discourse showed that Barnabas and Saul and
others were manumi'zd by the Church even in those very times wherein the Holy
Ghost was shed forth in an ample measure, and that Men have always had to do in
giving Commissions to all such as are to execute any office in the Church: I
might from hence press the necessity of a calling from the Church, which
Calvine himself urges from this place in the 4. book, the 3. chapter the 14 Section
of his Institutes, in these words, Sic Paulum quoque Singulari praerogativa
Dominus per seipsum designavit, ut Disciplina Ecclesiasticae Vocation is
interim uteretur.

But since this is an Article not denied by any, but such who have so far
renounced their Understanding, that they are resolved to hearken to none but
their own Schismatical, Fanatic Teachers, I conceive it more pertinent and of
greater concernment, and more advantageous to the Fathers and Sons of the
Church, to clear the Text from giving Patronage to that opinion so magnified of
late, that the power of Ordination belongs of right to the Presbytery, (a
Position condemned by the Council of Trent, Sess. 23. can. 7.) and is but
usurped by the Bishop.

If I would enter upon a discourse of the Bishops Right in Ordination, I might
tell them, It was a very Ancient Usurpation (if it be one) even within one year
after Christ's Ascension into Heaven (as Chronologers reckon it) For we find (at
the 6. of this book, which treats of things done within the 33. year of Christ)
the Apostles laying on their hands upon the seven Deacons, without any
challenge from the Seventy two of being excluded.

But to keep to the Text: It will suffice to enquire by what Title these
Prophets of Antioch exercised this Power, and so consequently whether their
practice be a sufficient ground for this Opinion.

That it is not the same Power to Ordain a Priest and to Ordain an Apostle, is
true; But it makes the more for them, since it is far more plausible to say,
that Priests have a power to ordain a Priest, than that they have so to
consecrate a Bishop.

Some therefore to avoid this, say, there were Bishops among these Prophets,
three at least; Others say, that the Prophets themselves did not lay their
hands on them, but sent them to the Apostles at Jerusalem, and that it was they
that laid their hands on them.

A learned Divine among us, with far greater probability, affirms, they were
more than mere Presbyters, in that they were Prophets, reckoned at the 4. of S.
Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians. v. the 11 in the next rank to the Apostles, before
Evangelists, they themselves being even Apostles Secundi Ordinis, if I mistake
not his meaning.

The two former Opinions have no countenance at all from the Text, and so I
leave them; The Last Interpretation, though very probable, may admit of some
dispute: since the Scripture seems to evidence that this Spirit of Prophecy
(which is thought chiefly to consist in Interpreting the word of God by
Immediate Inspiration) was at this first breaking forth of the Sunbeams of the
Gospel, communicated to far greater numbers of men, than were likely to have
any Precedence or Authority in the Church, above Presbyters.

Read the 14. of the 1 Epistle to the Corinthians, and you shall find the
Apostle exhorting all his Corinthians to desire especially the Gift of
Prophesying: and at the 34. v. of the same chapter, he commands Women to keep
silence in the Church, implying that They also sometimes had this Gift of
Prophesying: as we see Acts 21.9. Phillips Daughters were Prophetesses,
agreeable to Gods promise repeated out of the Prophet Joel, at the second of
the Acts, verse the 17. your Daughters shall Prophecy.

The result of which will be, that these Prophets were rather Inferior to
Presbyters in Authority than above them, though perhaps sometimes Fuller of the
Holy Ghost, that is, better enabled by the Spirit for the performance of that
part of the Presbyters charge which consisted in Preaching.

And therefore, since we cannot conclude they had the Power of Ordaining
Apostles, unless we acknowledge them at least equal to Apostles, which this
Interpretation does not make good: with submission to the Reverend Author, or
any other who shall otherwise instruct me, I think we need not contend for
their Superiority above Presbyters: but rather be contented with this, that
whatever they were they did not this by any Power tranferr'd upon them in
ordinary, no not even as they were Prophets, but by Particular, Extraordinary
Appointment and Revelation from the Holy Ghost. For so much St. Luke tells us
expressly in the next verse save one before my Text, As they ministered to the
Lord and Fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the
work whereunto I have called them.

What then will this advantage them toward the grounding a perpetual practice
on it?

Durst the Jews (do you think) consecrate an High Priest without those
Ceremonies mentioned in the 8. or 9. chap. of Levit. because God himself did
dispense with them in the Consecration of Eleazer upon Mount Hor, Number. 20? Or,

Might the Priests presume to use any other Altar for Burnt Offerings, than
that in the Tabernacle, because God for the Conviction of Baals Prophets,
approved of Elijahs Sacrifice, which he offered upon stones that we do not read
where were ever Hallowed, 1 Kings 18?

Why did not They who had so many Judgments denounced against them, for
letting their children pass through the fire, make this reply for their
Innocence, Lord, why do thou lay thine heavy hand upon us? Did not thou
command the Father of the Faithful, thy servant Abraham, to offer up his Son,
his only Son Isaac for a burnt Sacrifice?

If the Prophets at Antioch ordained some upon a special command from the Holy
Ghost: Let not Presbyters challenge to themselves the same Power till they can
show the same Patent for it. But,

If it were absolutely necessary, nay only lawful to follow all Examples
recorded in Holy Writ, and which too perhaps are not therein condemned, we
should quickly dash the first against the second Table, and cast off our
Service to God, our Obedience to the Church, and our Love to one another.

The Consequences would be such as this; there were but twelve that Christ
administered the Blessed Sacrament unto, before he departed this world, and they
were all Men, and his Disciples, yea Apostles, and it was after Supper, in an
upper chamber, and in Jerusalem, together with many other circumstances, the
least whereof if any omitted, would look but of a bad complexion. There must
be no more, nor any other now.

But to the business in hand. Without all question it is not over safe for any
Presbyters to venture upon the conferring of Orders upon any, where there are
no Bishops. For though,

Those Churches beyond Sea, (not to meddle with our Neighbors) urge the
Example of the Levites, executing the Priests Office, when the Priests were too
few, at the 29 of the 2 book of Chron. yet if they did well consider that this
was done but till the other Priests were Sanctified, certainly they would long
before now have provided themselves of Bishops.

Indeed the Protestant Churches beyond the Seas had Bishops once; and where is
the advantage which any of them have received by Rejecting them? Alas they are
so few, that you can scarce name any.

Indeed if Toleration and promiscuous Indulgence of Heresies, which are no
where so rife, as where there are no Bishops, be an advantage, then Amsterdam
is as happy, yea happier now, than ever it was. or any other place can be.

I find in Mr. Durels excellent Treatise of the Conformity of other reformed
Churches with the reformed Church of England, that when some religious
Protestants in the Churches of Bohemia were in great straits and under strange
Persecutions, and resolved to betake themselves unto the Woods and Mountains
and Caverns of the Earth, where they might serve God securely: Nothing so
troubled them in this their sad condition as how to supply the Defect and
Mortality of their lawful Ministry. For they thought they should in vain
expect any Romish Bishop to come amongst them for the Gospel sake; Doubts and
Fears did arise in their minds, Whether such an Ordination, by which a
Presbyter and not a Bishop should create another Presbyter, would be lawful;
and how they should be able to maintain such an Ordination as well against
others, when opposed, as to their own people, if by them questioned.

Quassabat animos met us, an sat is legitima foret Ordinatio, si Presbyter
Presbyterum crearet, non vero Episcopus. Et quomodo talem Ordinationem, si lis
moveatur defensuri essent, sive apud alios, sive apud suos, says Commenius in
Fratr. Bohem historia Sect. 59.

The Result of their Doubts and Fears was this in short: They sent one Michael
Zambergius, a Minister, with two others to the confines of Moravia and Austria,
whither they heard some of the Waldenses were fled for Conscience sake, to
acquaint them with their condition, and with what passed amongst them about the
Election of their Ministers by Lot; and having found Stephanus their Bishop,
after they had imparted to each other their sufferings, and declared their
Faith and Doctrine, the said Michael Zambergius with his two Colleagues, were
consecrated Bishops by Stephanus and another Bishop, with some Presbyters whom
they called and joynd with them in that work, and so returned home with
Episcopal power; which was by them transmitted to their Successors until this
day. Thus Mr. Durel page 13.

If the Authority of the Scriptures, the Practice of the Primitive Church, the
Testimony of the Ancient Fathers, the Confession of such as have been shrewdly
suspected to be Adversaries, and the Decrees and Canons of General Councils be
of any validity herein, we are well enough, and might hope to give sufficient
satisfaction to all that have not Abandoned their Sense and Reason, and show
them clearly, that to Bishops only belongs the Office of Ordination.

Nor is it strange that Christ has left this Power with the Angels only of his
Church: since this laying on of hands is no Naked or Empty Solemnity, but the
Real conveyance of that Commission from the Holy Ghost. Which brings me to,

The third particular to be handled, which is by way of Deduction, the Joint
concurrence of the Internal with the External Commission, or the certain effect
of this Imposition of hands, The giving of the Holy Ghost. Of which briefly.

You read before, that God has solemnly engaged himself to his Church, to
accompany their outward Donation with the Gift of his Holy Spirit, in as much
as he directed and commanded his Apostles to leave us this pattern of
Ordination: which is as it were an Ecclesiastical Procreation, and to continue
as long as God has a Church in the world.

Now that God made good this promise in their own Ordinations it appears in the
forecited place at the 20. of this book, v. 28. Take heed unto the Flock over
which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers; like an Unction as it were,
poured forth by Hands; Which unless it had reached farther than the Apostles,
St. Paul had never commanded Titus to Ordain Elders in every City.

Now whatsoever belonged unto Titus, why may not the whole Church lay claim
unto it? not doubting but that God who always was so Jealous of the least
Pollution of the Priests under the darkness of the Law, will not leave his Holy
Mysteries to be disspensed by common hands (for no more they would be, if they
were not sanctified by the Holy Ghost, as well as by the Bishop) now in the
Light of his Glorious Gospel.

So that Mr. Calvin has no reason, while he reckons up some of Christ's
inimitable Actions, to put together his saying to Lazarus, Lazare veni for as;
and his saying to his Disciples, Accipite Spiritum Sanctum. One of these being
a Miracle necessary only at the first Publishing of the Gospel, the other an
Act of perpetual use in the Church to the worlds end. See Calvin's Instit. the
4. book 19. chap. 29. Sect.

Thus I have done with the Doctrine of the first part of my Text, namely, The
Commission Internal from the Holy Ghost, and External from the Church.

I proceed now to the 2. and the last part, namely, to show you that the duty
of such as are Commissioned by the Holy Ghost and the Church is Preaching, and
what that Preaching was, is, or ought to be, which is the 4. particular.

That St. Paul and Parnabas were to Preach the word of God, seeing they were
Apostles, is, I suppose, denied by none, and therefore shall not trouble the
Reader with any further Argumentation, than two or three places of Scripture,
whereby to prove that this was their Business.

Says, Jesus to the Disciples St. Matthew 28. verse 18. All power is given unto
me in Heaven and in Earth, verse 19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
etc.

And verse 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you.

St. Mark the 16. verse 15. Go ye into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to
every creature.

And in St. Luke the 24. verse 47, etc. you may find somewhat to the same
purpose, that they were to do so: and here in my text as well as in other
places we find they did so, from this time forward, to the day of their death.

The Jewish High Priest, was called the Messenger or Angel of the Lord of
Hosts: namely, because he executed Gods commands in giving of the Law to the
People; and teaching them what they should do, Mal. the 2. v. the 7. (...), as
Diodorus Siculus has it.

And thus under the New Testament too, such as are to dispense the Word and
Sacraments are called, and therefore called Messengers of God, or The Churches
Angels For look what the duty of an Ambassador or Messenger upon Earth, of an
Earthly Potentate is, the same is the Business of the Ministers of God, viz. to
declare his Will, and to treat about matters of concernment, which is done, as
by other ways, so by this too of Preaching. Which what it was then, and what it
is or ought to be now, comes next to be discoursed of.

The Preaching then (and indeed such it ought to be Now) was the declaration of
the Gospel of Christ, or the glad tidings of Salvation whereby men were secured
of eternal happiness upon condition of Repentance from dead works, and a
steadfast Faith in all Gods Attributes: and (wheresoever there is defect, as
there is indeed in the best of our performances) an Affiance in the Merits of
Christ. That Gospel or Doctrine they Preached which came down from Heaven,
which was inspired and sealed by the Holy Ghost, and confirmed by Miracles. And
this they did by immediate Inspiration of God.

We live in an age whose Religion dwells altogether in their Ears: so little
are we for the Practice. They think now a days, that Preaching, as they call
it, not as the Scriptures mean it, and Pulpit, Extemporary Discourses are the
sum total of the Priestly duty, and the best of Christian Privileges.

But this is a gross Abuse both of the thing, the Preachers, and themselves.
For let it be granted, as most true it is, that Preaching is an holy, excellent
Ordinance of God, appointed by him for the salvation of Souls, if warrantably
undertaken, and rightly managed and performed; It may be a Comfort to the
Conscience that is Comfortless, a Relevation to Souls that are Afflicted, a
Deletory for Sin, an helpful means to a good life, and an excellent instrument
tending to promote all the parts of Gods service, and at last to bring us to
Salvation.

It pleases God, says St. Paul 1 Cor. 1.21. by the foolishness of Preaching
to save some, and, saving, true Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word
of God, and how shall they hear without a Preacher? says the same Apostle to
the Romans, chap. 10. v. the 14.

But then we must not mistake, but warily distinguish what is meant by the Word
of God, which is, The Doctrine of the Gospel, and what by Preaching, which is,
Not the manner of delivering, but the matter delivered.

For notwithstanding all the wonderful and rare Effects, which may be wrought
by Preaching, yet Preaching and Sermons, such as are now in use, are not the
Word of God, in the properest and strictest sense; Though yet the English
Puritan will not believe this, insomuch that he magnifies any Pulpit Discourse,
above the written Word of God, comprehended in the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, daily read in Churches at the set time of Divine Service, and which
he makes of little or no esteem or use in the conversion of Souls unto God;
Believing it to be much inferior to that of Preaching upon a Text by the sandy
Clock.

Certainly, That thing which sweetens others, must be far sweeter of it self;
And if the waters in the channels or the veyns of the Earth be so pure and
pleasant, how much more excellent and wholesome must the Spring it self be, and
the place from whence those Waters flow? In the one there is no fear of the
Spawn of Toads, or the Vipers venom: no destructive soul-damning Tenants of
Heretics to be found in the Scriptures, imposed on us; whereas by too sad
experience we have known and find it, that the pestiferous breath of some
Pulpitmen has been that which has first given life to the Factions and
Heresies in this our Church, and then by their laying about with their Hands
and Tongues, has fired the Church and Kingdom, nay almost burned it to ashes,
had not God in his mercy, as well as in his Justice, removed the Incendiaries;
who because they cannot daringly go on and prosper, lay all the Private trains
they can to disturb our Peace, the Peace of the Church and Kingdom too, and to
break our Unity.

I shall not inveigh here against the secular ends and Ungodly Interests which
of late were introduced by this their Pharisaical kind of piety, nor tell you
how they corrupted the savor of life into a savor of death. (Corruption optimi
est pessima.) You well know the Seditions and Disturbances, the Cheats and
Treasons, Murders, Plunders, Sequestrations, Imprisonments, Banishments, etc.
which were caused and acted by some men's public as well as private
Insinuations, whose Calling gave them too great an opportunity, and all under
the notion of Painful, Soul-saving, Godly Preachers, superseminare haeresin, to
scatter tares in the Field of God, and sow that which Preaching ought to Root
up.

And as one says very well for me, Preaching and Thirsting after the Word, are
so good things, that the very Names of them may mislead good People if they be
misapplyed: And so they are very often; For a great many there are that most
vainly and impertinently apply to Sermons or popular Orations all those
glorious things which are spoken of the Word of God, and of Preaching, as Faith
and Salvation, To. 10.14. 1 Cor. 1.21.

Man by the Fall got a crack in his Understanding, his Will grew Perverse, and
his Affections dull and heavy: All the Faculties of his Soul are depraved, and
he is ready to comply with any thing but the commands of God, and Obedience to
the truth: and therefore indeed upon this consideration, it may, it must be
granted, that there is more need of humane Artifice, witty Complyings, sober
Insinuations and Ingenious devices to recover men from the errors of their
ways, and to keep them right when they are so; But this may be done by other
ways (would men admit of the Trial) as well, nay better, and with more ease,
than by the Pulpit. For I do believe (for I know no reason to the contrary) as
many souls went to Heaven Before, as do Now, that we have so much Vulpit
Preaching.

And yet mistake me not: For I do not say this to decry and undervalue
Preaching, that ancient Ecclesiastical Ordinance, but to magnify the Reading
and Hearing of the Scriptures, which are indeed the Word of God: and to teach
you that the Scriptures are the best of Sermons.

That Word which came down from Heaven, and was sealed by the Spirit of God:
That Word which has been spoke by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets and
Apostles: That Word which has been watered with the Blood of Martyrs, confirmed
by Miracles, and strangely preserved even beyond all Miracle, and Believed in
all ages: And which Word, which way, or in what manner soever it be conveyed
unto us, whether by Reading in Lessons, or Epistles or Gospels, is the same
thing still, and ought to have the highest estimate in our Affectiand
challenges as greedy an ear as any thing can do.

That the Reading of the Scriptures in the Church, is Preaching to the People,
I shall give you some unquestionable Testimonies of Councils and Fathers: and
if this be not sufficient, or whether it be or no, produce the Supreme
Authority of the Scriptures themselves.

Let the first be that of Justin Martyr in his second Apology to the Gentiles,
(...), that is to say, On the Day called Sunday all that abide in Towns or the
Countries about, meet in one place, and the Records of the Apostles, or the
Writings of the Prophets are read, as far as occasion serves. Then the Reader
having done, the President in a speech instructs, and exhorts to the
imitation of such excellent things; and in another place he says, that In their
Writings the Judgment to come is Preached.

Take another from St. Chrysostom, who was as great and as golden a Preacher as
ever spoke with Tongue: yet his Writings tell us that it grieved his very soul
to see men Flock and Crowd more to hear his Pulpit Discourses, than they did to
hear the Scriptures Read in time of Divine Service; a Fault too common in this
our age. I shall quote you his own words, make the best you can of them, where
he tells you that All things that are necessary to Salvation, are plain and
obvious to the eyes, clearly laid down in the Scriptures, so that reading is
sufficient to convey the knowledge of them to us: and as for other things it is
sufficient that they are not Necessary: and that it is men's Curiosity or
Slothfulness, I may add their Invincible Ignorance, that makes them so greedy
of so much Pulpit Preaching. The good Fathers words are, (...). If you look
into the Council of Vase, you will find that the Fathers of that Council say,
The Priests being absent or troubled with Infirmity, do Preach by their
Deputies, who are appointed in their stead to read the Homilies. Lector
personat verba sublimia, says St. Cyprian, Evangelium Christi legit, a
fratribus conspicitur, cum gaudio fraternitatis auditur.

The fourth Council of Toledo calls the usual Reading of the Gospel Preaching.
And I meet with the same Opinion and expression diverse times in Rupertus and
Isidore in their Pooks de Officiis divinis and Ecclesiasticis. Isid. lib. 1.
chap. 10. Rupert. lib. 1. chapter 12, 13.

But if these authorities be not sufficient, hear what the Scriptures
themselves do say, Deuteron. 31. v. 13. Ye shall Read this Law before all
Israel, that ye may learn to Fear the Lord. Blessed is he that Reads the Words
of this Prophecy, says St. John, and they that Hear and keep those things
which are Written therein, Revel. 1. ver. 3. and Acts 15. ver. 21. Moses of old
time has them that Preach him, in that he was Read, or being Read every
Sabbath day.

And surely good reason there is, that the Scriptures and the Reading thereof
should be preferred before that thing we call Preaching in the Pulpit.

For the One is the Immediate word of God who is Infallible, the Holy Ghost did
Preach it: The Other are the words of a Mortal Red Earth, who knows not the
thousand part of what he is ignorant. Humanum est errare. Our Sermons are no
farther pious and religious than that they are derived from the salutary
Fountains of Holy Scripture. They never were confirmed by Miracles from Heaven,
nor shall they be, as the Scriptures have been.

And then for the Matter delivered, and the Manner of the Delivery, how Poor
and Jejune and Shallow will the best shapen Words and Narratives of the best
Rhetoricians, Orators, Poets, or Historians appear, when compared with the
sacred Oracles of God?

Would you have the Efficacy of Preaching to consist in Derivation from
Antiquity, in the substance of Matter, in Appositeness of Sentences, in
Elegancy of Style, Evidence of things, in validity of Proofs, in the Authority
of the Author, and the Power it has to effect that end for which it was
ordained? Take up the Scriptures then, and fall to Reading, and Frequent the
Temple where it will be Preached, i. e. Read unto you, and the Lord give you a
good and a right understanding.

By searching the Scriptures we look for life, so said our Blessed Savior,
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. For, These things are
written that ye might believe in him, i. e. Christ, and that Believing ye might
have life through his name.

You know who said it, Cursed is he that Adds or Diminishes. I only say, The
bringing in of so many Sermons into the Church was the thrusting out of the
Bible not long since.

The Church both can and does Preach without Sermons, namely, when by her
careful order, the books of Holy Writ are solemnly Read.

And truly, for ought I know, as the Learned Mr. Thornedike, in his Just
Weights and Measures, page 101. says, and most wise men believe, they that
never heard many Sermons may have heard more and better Preaching, than
hundreds and thousands of Sermons, dangerous, if not destructive, to Salvation,
(a thing which experience proves more than possible) can furnish them, who
shall do nothing else but run from Sermon to Sermon.

I grant it was a just complaint at the Reformation, that the People were not
taught their duty. But I do not grant, either that they cannot be taught their
Duty, without two Sermons every Lords Day: or that they are like to be taught
their Duty, by two sermons every Lords day.

It is not possible to have men for all Churches fit to preach twice a day, to
the edifying of the People. It will never be possible to maintain their
Preaching to be such as may be accounted an Office of Gods service, Thus He,
and consequently not a Discharge of the Holy Ghosts and the Churches
Commission, so I. But you may read more concerning this point in the 5 book of
the Judicious Mr. Hooker.

Thus I have done with the Explication of the parts or Doctrines deducible from
the Text.

Let us now look upon them in the Use of them; and from the Four particulars
named, we shall receive especially Four Cautions toward the better performance
of our Duty, in order to the sacred charge undertaken.

One for the Bishop, three for the Priests.

First, From the Grant of our Commission from the Holy Ghost; Not to dare to
enter upon this Employment except we find our selves in some measure fit for
the discharge of it.

Second, From the Grant of our Commission from the Church; Not to forget what
Obedience we owe to our Spiritual Fathers in God.

Third, From the efficacy of Imposition of Holy Hands toward the conferring of
the Holy Ghost; That Bishops use all possible care, as they shall one day
answer it, not only for themselves, but for all those, whom they may by their
own neglect, or theirs whom they entrust for them, suffer to run upon their own
Perdition, not to dispense this sacred Gift of the Holy Ghost, but to the Glory
of God, and the Improvement and Benefit of the Church.

And lastly, From their careful applying themselves to the Execution of their
charge, in Preaching the word; That we prove diligent followers of so good an
Example.

Each of these are very Weighty, and might be very worthy Consideration. I
shall but touch upon each of them as far as is necessary, and so conclude; For
to say true, if the First and the Last only were well observed, the Rest might
be Spared.

Were All that come for Holy Orders fit for the Execution of their charge, they
would be better acquainted with their Duty to the Church, than to smother or to
spurn at her Commands, and were all both Able and Likely to be Diligent in the
use of their Abilities afterward, the Bishops choice would be made to his
Hands, it being impossible for him to grant amiss, when none ask but such to
whom he ought not to deny.

To begin with the First of these, That none presume to enter upon this great
Employment, except they find themselves fit in some measure for the discharge
of it, fit for Abilities of Knowledge in the Mysteries of God, and fit too for
Piety of Life.

Fit first, for Abilities of Knowledge. None ought to thrust themselves (as in
a matter of course, after some years spent in a Gown) upon this service of God,
with any of their Learning in their too easily procured Testimonials; These
will not sufficiently qualify. For thus while they cry out against Tamar, they
themselves prove Judah, nothing differing from those whom they think meanly of,
but in that These profess Ignorance; They themselves only being guilty of it.
These are not fit Messengers for the Holy Ghost; For he does not expect the
Deaf and the Dumb, the Blind and the Lame should offer themselves to go upon
his Embassy. He calls for Witnesses (Hay-Fellow-Witnesses, for both the
Apostles and the Holy Ghost too are Witnesses of these things Acts 5.32.) and
we must not present him such, who are indeed too ready to be sworn, but know
nothing of the cause in trial. How will these invite Christ's Guests to his
Supper in the Parable, St. Luke 14.16. that know not themselves where it is
kept? Whose Hearers excuse will be, Not, I have bought a Farm or Oxen, I have
married a Wife; But, you tell me not where the Feast is, I am unacquainted with
the way. And do ye not think those so bidden will taste as much of the Supper,
as these Bidders?

S. Paul counts it nothing less than a swerving from the Faith (and that's
somewhat of kin to Apostasy) to desire to be teachers of the Law, understanding
neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm: 1 Timothy 1.6, 7. Such indeed may
escape our Saviors Woe to the Lawyers for taking away the Key of knowledge:
for that they never had it. Hence it comes to pass, that when men are forced
into the Pulpit by the Peoples Outcries, or through Ignorance or Indigency,
they Preach neither Christ nor themselves, but their Parish: knowing no
difference between the Doctrine of the Church, and the Opinions of the Vulgar;
which in a little time shall make such Preachers vile enough amongst them too.
And miserable men that must be frighted into their Duty, to avoid the contempt
of their Hearers. Shall any man make so little account of destroying Gods
People, when he is sent amongst them to build them up? of polluting that
Fountain of Living Waters, which he ought to give clear passage to? Nay, dare
any man fasten so many errors and absurdities upon the Holy Ghost himself,
whose Message he undertakes to deliver? What is this less than presumptuous
sin, for which under the Law there was no Sacrifice? which whosoever is guilty
of, let him know, that he grieves that Spirit, whose Gift he begs at his
Ordination, and it will cost him some Groans too if ever he mean it shall be
turned to a Blessing.

Secondly, It is required that they be fit for Piety of Life; And this
condition has so great Affinity with the Former, that we may justly fear to be
deprived of both, if we be guilty of the want of either. Thus Balaam being so
far possessed of the Love of the world, and his profer'd Preferment with King
Balak, that he was in hopes God would change his purpose, and suffer him to go
and curse Israel, had at last an answer fitting his humor, but such a one as
proved a crime to hearken to.

Methinks a man that knows himself enamoured with the Delights, or that is
resolved upon the Trade of Sin, should be as much afraid of having any thing to
do with the Holy Ghost, as the Gadarenes were of having Christ among them,
which a Learned Commentator attributes to their guilty Consciences, not their
loss of the Swine. For how can such presume to have more Joy in Gods presence,
than Abimelech and Laban had in his appearing to them, which was neither to
give nor promise them any Blessing, but only to rebuke them?

The Canon Law forbids the Church to receive Tithes from the Profits of sin:
Not that the Thief, the Usurer or the Harlot have any Privilege or Exemption
granted them, but in as much as God cannot accept such Oblations, and therefore
neither must the Parson.

And dare we offer our sins themselves, for the Employment of the Holy Ghost?
as though he could be content with Servants that scorn to wear any but the
Devils Livery. Such who, if we were to offer (as the Priests under the Law
were) the same sacrifice for our own Sins, and for the Sins of the
Congregation, might be quit with God for the Number (with reverence be it
spoken) as being able to vie sins with the whole Congregation?

Far more excuse it would be for them to stay behind, and Bury their Dead (and
free Leave they might have) than thus to follow Christ: to follow Christ into
the Holy of Holies, while they are not fit so much as to come within the Camp
for Uncleanness.

I dare not speak this out of any Presumption of my own either Abilities or
Uprightness; But do acknowledge my self to have as much need of Hezekiahs
Prayer (2 Chronicles. 30.18.) as any of my Brethren, The good Lord pardon every one
that prepares his heart to seek the Lord, though he be not prepared or
cleansed according to the Purification of the Sanctuary.

And may the Lord hearken to these words, and so Sanctify all those by the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, that are, or shall hereafter be Ordained to the
Ministerial Function, that they may never Forget whose service they undertake,
and their Canonical Obedience to the Fathers of the Church, which comes next to
be looked into; as being deduced

From the Grant of their Commission from the Church, which is, that they forget
not to Honor and Obey all such under whose Protection and Government in the
Church they are.

Did men but seriously consider that Voluntary, solemn Oath which they take at
their Ordination, to observe the Canons and Articles of the Church, and this in
the presence of God and the Bishop, upon the pain of Destruction, we should not
then have any cause to complain of Neutrality, Prevarication, and Indifferency
in the Execution of their Office. They would not then Grumble and Spurn at the
Churches Injunctions, and cheat the souls of such as are committed to their
charge, into ruin. But thanks be to God, that this may be cured by the care
and Vigilance of our good Bishops; and therefore the less may suffice to be
spoken to it.

Pardon, O Pardon me, my most Honorable and always to be Revered Fathers, if
the Text by my poor Pen re-minds you, that you are to use all possible care
concerning the Persons to whom you dispense the sacred Gift of the Holy Ghost.
I know you neither confide in Testimonials alone, nor Parts without Good Report
of them that are without; You are to Command and Rule, We to obey. And
therefore I return to such as are, or are to be Commissioned.

You read in the Division of the Text, that Preaching was St. Paul's and St.
Barnabas's charge, (and consequently ours,) in a Synechdoche only, and not the
whole performance that lies upon us. There is likewise necessary a right and
due, frequent administration of the Eucharist, and of Baptism, as often as need
requires, a Reconciling of Neighbors that are at variance, and a catechistical
Instruction of all such as are of younger years, this is our duty too. But
although Preaching be not the sum total of our duty that lies upon us, yet we
must take heed of seeking advantage from hence, we must not leave it quite out.

There are sometimes necessary diversions from it (I speak of those who have a
charge of souls committed to them,) occasions of the same importance for the
good of the Church with Preaching: but it will not be safe for any to snatch up
these for a pretense to Idleness, and think he can answer God as easily as Man;
As if God had laid aside that Attribute which Moses leaves not out, even while
he implores his Mercy, Number. 14.18. By no means clearing the guilty. He that
would teach the people that he ought to have liberty sometimes to forbear,
should do it by his Doctrine, not by his Practice: as our Savior dealt with
the Pharisees, first vindicating the Lawfulness of doing even servile works on
the Sabbath, and yet for the present forbearing himself to do them, as Grotius
observes; For he heals the man without so much as a Touch, only saying to him,
Stretch forth thine hands, Mat. 12.13.

If all the Lords People were Prophets, there would yet be need of frequent
Preaching, so much ado we have to Learn to Practice, what we know never so
clearly.

But then if we look upon the Late times, whose too much and dangerous
Preaching, has been far worse than the Neglect of Preaching, how will it
concern every one, now that God has restored our lately miserable Church to
Peace and Order, to set our selves to weeding apace, to root up every plant our
Heavenly Father has not planted: and to be at least nothing less sedulous in
seasoning the Lump with the Leaven of the Kingdom of Heaven, than our
Adversaries have been, and are, in scattering the Leaven of the Pharisees? so
shall we deliver our own souls, and not cut off those committed to our charge (
Number. 4.17.) from among their Brethren; so shall we give proof of those Gifts of
the Holy Ghost which we receive at our Ordination: and having discharged our
Consciences here, in sowing the good seed committed to us, we shall hereafter
reap Life everlasting. Which God of the Riches of his Mercy grant all the
Clergy and People of this Land, for the Merits and Satisfaction of his Son
Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be rendered as is most
due, all Honor, Power and Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

