AN ANSWER To sundry Matters contained in Mr. HVNT'S Postscript, To His
Argument, For the Bishops Right in judging Capital Causes in PARLIAMENT. VIZ.
1. As to his publishing a scandalous LETTER of the Clergy. 2. As to his
wrongfully charging His Majesty with neglect of the LAW, if he called not a
Parliament once a year. 3. As to his false Affirmations, that the Succession of
the CROWN is the Peoples Right; and that not only the Line of Succession, but
Monarchy it self may be altered.
Whereunto is added A Query to be put to the Scrupulous and Dissenting
Brotherhood. WITH An Advertisement, how Usurpers of the Crown, ought to be
dealt with. By Wa. Williams of the Middle Temple, a Barrister at LAW

Si Deus nobiscum quis contra nos. LONDON: Printed for Charles Harper, and are
to be sold by Walter Davis at Amen-Corner, 1683.

A POSTSCRIPT Anteposited.
SIR,
I Had a long time since framed this ensuing Answer to y^^^ most celebrated
Postscript, but having done it, the c^^sideration of the wise Kings Advice,
Answer not a Fo^^^ and Answer a Fool, wrought such a Conflict within (...) as
hindered my sending it; until of late I found by your w^^^ Defense of the
Charter, that you were become wise in y^^^ own Conceit; Therefore to endeavor
to move that ^^stemper in your self, and to undeceive such as may be in^^cted
with the State-Heresie, I at length Resolved to (...) it, in hopes it may
effect your and their Reformation, w^^^^ is desired by

W.W.

TO THOMAS HVNT, Esquire;
SIR,
HAving occasion lately to pass through several parts of the Kingdom, and in my
Journies, discoursing with several Gentlemen, that had been Members of the
Honorable House of Commons, in some of our late Parliaments, concerning the
late Bill of Exclusion of His Royal Highness from the Succession of the Crown;
I found some of them, who once had no great opinion, neither of the necessity,
nor honesty of that Bill, begin to entertain some favorable thoughts of it;
and that which induced them to it, as I was informed, was the powerful
Arguments they met with in a very ingenious Piece (as they termed it) called
Mr. Hunt's Postscript, which was in great plenty very industriously dispersed
about by some Newtrue-Protestants, and magnified by them equally with, if not
above the Scriptures.

This great Character, and the mighty Effects it had wrought, set my Curiosity
upon enquiry after this sublime Fabric of Politics, but having found it; I
must tell you without Complement, it proved a mere heap of confused scandalous
Rubbish, situate like the Firebrands in the Tails of Sampson's Foxes, tacked to
the hinder end of a plausible thing, viz. Your Argument for the Bishops Right,
etc. Your self suspecting (as I guess by the matter of it) that it had never
found the way into our standing Corn, without the help of some such Fox-like
trick; it being stuffed with nothing but Railings, false Recitals of Scripture
History, Fallacies and Chicaneries; which in plain English, are nothing but
subtle impertinent quirks and quillets.

First, you act the slanderer by Proxy, and as I apprehend it, you feign a
Letter from a Friend, containing very scandalous things of the Clergy; amongst
the rest, page the 2d. belying them, that they are all for a Popish Successor,
and no Parliament, and that they do as much as in them lies, give up our
ancient Government, the Protestant Religion, the true Christian Faith, to the
absolute will of a Popish Successor; wherein you have done extremely ill,
notwithstanding, you have declared your own opinion, that you believe that
there are but few of them guilty of that charge; for your supposed Letter has
deeply wounded their Reputation with the credulous People, and given them too
great an occasion to hunt after Conventicles in search for, supposed more Godly
Teachers; and I dare affirm it, that your declaring your own opinion of them,
is but a very ineffectual Plaster for their broken Heads, Whether you could
have Argued better for them or not, I cannot say; but if you could not, your
inability will no more excuse you, than it did the young Conjurer that raised
the Devil, but could not lay him; and though you would father the Lie upon
another, I conceive however, that you have committed an Offense against the
Statutes of Westminster, the first and the 2d. of R. 2. Touching Reporters of
false News, whereby slander may arise to the Bishops of this Realm, for by
Clergy is understood the Bishops, as well as the inferior Ministers: your
Friends tale being the most scandalous thing that could have been invented, and
most likely to make the People hate all the Orthodox and Conformable Clergy in
the Nation; for which I wish you your condign Punishment.

Another matter, you have taken great pains in page 29. of the Postscript, and
thereabouts, is to represent to the World, a Statute as in force, which is
Repealed, and by Color thereof, you take the freedom to asperse even His
Majesty himself; for you say that by the Statutes of Edward the 3d. Parliaments
are to be holden every Year; and thar the Statute of this King requires a
Parliament every three Years; which as you say, being an affirmatory Law, does
not derogate from those of Edward the 3d. And you say farther, that if the King
does not call a Parliament once a Year, He neglects those Laws, and if he
delays calling a Parliament in three Years, He neglects the other Law of His
own time.

This renders you an audacious man, that dares thus openly and barefaced Libel
your Prince; but it will never give you the Reputation of a great Lawyer, a
good Logician, nor a dutiful Subject; for this Argument of yours, is as gross a
Solecism, and non-consequence as any Sophister, (to render it more
intelligible) any Deceiver ever yet attempted to cheat the World with. And to
Demonstrate it so, consider with your self, If I should make you a Lease of a
House at the Rent of Twenty pound payable Yearly, and afterward should make
you another Lease of the same House at Twenty pounds payable once in Three
Years; would not you say that this last Lease did disanul and make void the
first Lease, the making and accepting of a new Lease, being a surrender in Law
of the old one: and whereas by the first Lease you were to pay Twenty pound
every Year, would you not then think your self obliged to pay your Twenty pound
but once in three Years? I dare say you would; however, you may pay Twenty
pound every Year, if you will, notwithstanding the new Lease; and so may the
King call a Parliament once every Year, or oftener if He please; but is not
nowbound to do so by the old Statute, any more than you are bound by the old
Lease, after a new one made of the same thing. To make this matter more plain,
I will give you another instance to this purpose, according to what a Reverend
Father in the Law says, Examples do not perplex, but clear the point.

Suppose, you and I should make an Agreement in writeing, that you should call
at my House once a Year; and afterward by another Agreement, Reciting the
former Agreement, whereby you were obliged to call once a Year, we agree that
for the future, you shall not omit calling once in three Years; Surely, you
would not think your self after this last Agreement obliged to call every Year.

Just so it is in the Kings case, as to those Statutes of Edw. the 3d. for a
Statute is but an Agreement between the King and His two Houses of Parliament;
and whereas by the Statute of the 4 Edw. 3. cap. 14. It is mentioned, that it
was Accorded that the Parliament should be holden every Year once, and oftener
if need be, and by the Statute of 36. Ed. 3. cap. 10. to the like effect; and
afterward his now Majesty and both Houses of Parliament in the Sixteenth Year
of His Reign, come to a new Agreement touching Parliaments, thereby Reciting
the said Statutes of Edward the 3d. and do Agree that Parliaments shall not be
discontinued above three Years; Doubtless, this last Statute and Agreement is
by Implication of Law a Repeal of the Statutes of Edw. the 3d. as to calling
Parliaments once a Year, and is as much in effect, as if it had been mentioned
in the last Statute, that notwithstanding, the said Statutes of Edw. the 3d. it
is sufficient if the King calls a Parliament once in three Years: and moreover,
this last Statute, that Parliaments should not be discontinued above three
Years, had been a vain Statute, as to that particular, if after this was made,
the King was still obliged to call a Parliament every year; and it is almost
Sacrilege in some cases to think that the Parliament should offer any thing
that is vain to the King; and by your pardon Sir, there be other maxims in Law,
(viz.) Leges posteriores priores contraries abrogant, later Laws differing from
the former do make the former void: and Lex nil frustra facit, the Law, (or if
you please the Legislative Authority) does nothing in vain; which maxims I
must tell you had been of better use in the Exposition of those Statutes of
Edw. the 3d. than your notions of a firmatory Law, for it had been in vain to
have made a Statute that required Parliaments every three Years, if they
intended the other should be enforce: And I conceive it may with better Reason
be affirmed, that a wilful publishing that the King has neglected the Law,
especially when he has not, is a publishing of words to stir up the People to
a dislike of His Majesty's Person and Government; and in my judgment affirms
you an Offender within the Statute of 13 Ca. 2. cap. 1. though you very
confidently, like the rest of your Gang, in the close of your darling
Postscript, say you were moved to what is there set down, by nothing but a
hearty Love and Affection to the King; but I hope neither His Majesty, nor any
of His Loyal Subjects will believe you nor them any more.

To convince you further of your Error, that the King has not neglected those
Laws of Edw the 3d. as to calling Parliaments, for by the first of the Laws,
that is, the 4. of Edw. the 3d. cap. 14. It is not absolutely required, that a
Parliament should be held once every Year, but it is conditionally, if need
should require; which you deceitfully omit to mention in the charge upon the
King, for you well knew it was the King was the judge when need required a
Parliament: and this may the better appear, because from the next Year that
Statute was made, viz. that 5. of Edward the 3d. there was a discontinuance of
Parliaments until the 9th. and the other Act of the 36 of Edw. the 3d. cap. 10.
says Parliaments shall be held once a Year, as at another time was ordained
that is, under the same condition as the other Statute was; but perhaps after
all this you may be that Fool, that though brayed in a Mortar, would not
forsake his folly.

The next thing I have taken notice of in your Postscript, and which I suppose
was the main matter and drift thereof, (and to maintain it, you have used the
best of your skill) is another Conclusion of yours drawn, I dare say, (for your
Credit be it known) only from your own mere natural parts and notions; for I am
sure it cannot be either from Divine Precept or Example, Humane Experience of
past Ages, nor the present practice of any considerable part of the World, of
which I have taken some consideration, and it is that which you set down in
page the 43. of the Postscript line the 14. that the Succession of the Crown is
Hereditary, because the People so appointed it, would have it so, or consented
to have it so, yet (as you say) in a particular Case, for saving the Nation
forsooth, when (by the by it is in no danger) the whole Line and Monarchy it
self may be altered by the unlimited power of the Legislative Authority: but
Suppose the Nation were in such danger as you say (which I shall manifest to
the World it is not.) I hope no King of England (which you your self admit to
have a part in the Legislative Authority) will ever make a Law (though the
Parliament should desire it) either to alter the Government of Monarchy in this
Kingdom, nor the Succession thereof, till they see the Nation cannot be saved
without it, or find greater Cause and better Reasons for it than the World ever
yet produced; though your Fools Bolt Sir is already shot, but has missed the
mark you aimedat: And I hope will ever do so.

In order to maintain your Assertions, you inveigh extremely against those that
affirm Kingly Government to be of Divine Right and Institution; for which I
must say, the World affords more Arguments, and far more convincing than any
you have Coined against it. However I will add my mite to the Mint, and more
than that, I dare enter the Lists to maintain it against you that Kingly
Government, yea Hereditary Kingly Government, is the only Government of Divine
Institution in the World.

My Reasons for it shall follow, but in the first place I will propose you are
no Atheist, and that you will not deny but that God is the Supreme King and
Governor of all things, and that he takes some care of the World, and knows
best by what ways and methods to Govern it, and that what he ordains is of
Divine Institution; for it is a maxim in Logic, quod contra negantem
Principium non est disputandum, There Is no Reasoning with such as will not
admit fundamental Truths, no more than any buildings (unless Castles in the
Air) can be raised without laying a foundation.

These premises being admitted, which I know you will not gainsay, whatever you
think, I would represent to your observation, that when God had that great Work
to do, both to govern and deliver out of Captivity his, own peculiar People the
Jews, and to redeem them out of the power of a mighty King, he chose them a
King, Moses, who none will deny to be a King, that knows what belongs to the
Office and Power of a King; although he was not named a King, for he as only
Supreme under God by Gods own appointment (not by the Peoples Election)
exercised all the Offices of a King over that People, he was their chief
Captain, and their chief Judge, and so were all his Successors after him that
went by the name of Judges, they were Kings and Sovereigns in their turns, and
were then called Judges; as I conceive propter Excellentiam, because it is the
chief part of a Kings Office by himself and his Deputies to Administer Justice
between his Subjects: and in those days, and long before, most Kings were
called Judges; though of latter times the word is applicable to the inferior
Magistrates only. God himself is called the Judge of all the Earth, as well as
the King of Kings.

That the Judges of Israel that succeeded Moses might as well have been called
Kings as Judges, will plainly appear if we consider the signification of the
word King, and the Offices and Powers exercised by those Judges; as to the word
King, it signifies him that has the highest Power and Command in a Country,
and those Judges in their turns, and but one at once and during his life,
exercised all the power of a King, they commanded the Officers of the people
and judged Israel. And I would also note unto you, that most of them were
chosen by God himself, and but very rarely by the people, and when ever they
did usurp upon Gods Prerogative in that particular; as they did when of their
own accord they chose Abimeleck the base Son of Jerubbaal, it soon happened
that they fell a Butchering one another, and thereby reduced themselves to such
a confused state for want of a Rightfully Constituted King or Judge that they
were brought to the brink of Ruin; and so it happened to them always when they
transgressed in that nature: but still upon Recantation, and seeking to God he
would vouchsafe to choose them a King then called a Judge, and whilst they
could keep such a Judge they did well enough. Yet after a little Prosperity
they were still apt to return to their licentious Liberty, and after this rate
did they continue for about Four hundred Years; but at length it was brought to
that pass by their perverse selfconceitedness that God had quite forsaken them:
and whereas formerly God did often Converse with their Prophets (as one man
does with another by word of mouth) and directed them, they rejected his
directions and depended only on their own Policy, so that God withdrew his
favor from them for a long time. And in the Third of the first of Samuel you
will find it Recorded, that there was no open Vision in those days, but in a
while after God was pleased to Reveal himself again to Samuel, and to advise
him how to Retrive and Govern those almost lost People. And forasmuch as soon
after they asked for a King, and that it is there said, that God was angry with
them for it, and forasmuch as that passage is made use of by some as an
Argument against Kingly Government, I cannot omit showing unto you, that God
was not against their having any King at all, but the displeasure was, because
they would at that very time have another Governor or King than God had set
over them, which was Samuel. Such a Feeble old man as he, according to their
understanding, was not fit to Govern them, they did not at all regard it, that
God was with him. And this was the cause of the Anger, as appears by the sequel
of the Story; For says God to Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but me have
they rejected. And this I do the more firmly believe to be the true meaning of
that passage and reason of Gods Anger, for God designed long before that time
that they should have a King, and consequently should be Governed by a Kingly
Government; though you say page 36. That it was a Government of their own
choice, for in Numb. 24, verse the 7. The Prophet Balaam foretelling the
prosperity of Israel, says that the King of Israel should be higher than Agag
the King of the Amalekites, and Deuteronomy. 17. verse 14. God gives Israel these
Directions, When thou art come into the Land which the Lord thy God gives
thee, verse 15. thou shall in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy
God shall choose, not whom they would themselves: with Directions in that
Chapter, how their King should behave himself and his Sons after him; so that
if there had not been a King designed for them by God himself, sometime or
other that Prophecy of the Prophet Balaam could never have been fulfilled, and
the Directions who should be King, and how he was to behave himself, and upon
what terms he and his Sons after him were to enjoy the Crown had been in vain;
whereby it is most manifest that the mere desiring of a King as some would have
it was not the fault, but desiring a new King at an undue time, desiring a
King, not choosing one themselves, which had they done, had been a greater
fault by much.

Another Reason that makes me of belief, that the mere asking of a King, had it
been at a due time, had been no Offense; because God was not long angry, nor
did he long withstand their desires, but soon after commanded Samuel to hearken
to the people and give them a King; but this King was to be of Gods choosing,
not of their own choosing as you falsely affirm, page 36. for God himself told
Samuel that Saul should be the man, and caused him to be Anointed before the
people knew ought thereof, and afterward God directed the Lot according to his
own Predestination and fore-appointment; and when Samuel presented him to the
people as chose by God, they made no more ado but submitted to the choice, and
shouted and cried, God save the King; yet some Sons of Belial there were in
those days that did not like the choice, all which proceedings you may find in
the Eighth of the first of Samuel.

Saul being thus Established, and a Successor thought of, for as yet the
Succession of Monarchy was not settled: Samuel by Gods special appointment, and
of his own mere motion without any Request from the people, chose David to be
Saul's Successor, and in him did God make Monarchy Hereditary, and Established
it so as you may see in the Second of Samuel 7.12. by saying to David in this
manner, when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, I
will set up thy Seed after thee; and verse the 16. thy House and thy Kingdom
shall be Established before me for ever, and in another place, the Scepter
shall not depart from Judah until Shiloe come. Here Is no Proviso, that the
people should alter the Succession; that was to be done by none but God himself
or by his special Command, a clear instance whereof soon happened, for when
David was Bed-ridden as it were, and every day expected Death; Adonijah one of
David's Sons by the Mother of Absalom, Exalted himself, saying I will be King,
1st. of the 1st. of Kings, and prepared him Chariots and Horses, and Fifty men
to run before him, and made great Feasts, at which the people and Captains of
the Hosts cried, God save King Adonijah; yet God and old David said Solomon
should be King, and was so; wherein is observable this thing further, that God
who foreknew without doubt that Solomon in his latter days would set up
Idolatry; yet he did not punish him beforehand, he did not pronounce the
sentence against him, that the Kingdom should be rended from him; nor was there
any Bill of Exclusion against him, until he had actually committed the Offense,
which Offense was not only that himself privately had Committed Idolatry; but
that he had also publicly encouraged the people thereunto, by setting up high
places to sacrifice to Kemosh and Moloch as appears in the Eleventh of the
First of Kings; and pray note further, when this sentence came to be Executed,
and ten Tribes were given to Jereboam, there was not a blow struck on either
side, from whence you may take notice by the by, that God did not require the
assistance of Rebellion or Seditious scriblers to effect those works, and it
cannot be said that Gods Arm is shortened now more than at other times.

I conceive Gods Example is as obliging as his Precepts, and that if we imitate
him, we shall never do amiss; it is therefore Argument sufficient that
Monarchy, yea Hereditary Monarchy is most agreeable to his will of any
Government whatsoever, because he Established it himself amongst his own
peculiar people, and since he did so, and so frequently commanded Obedience to
it, I wonder how any man can say that Hereditary Monarchy is not of Divine
Institution: or having said so, can suppose he should be believed; and methinks
you your self seem diffident that there would not be much credit given to your
Hypothesis, and therefore you make Provision as well as you can against the
universal approbation and embracing of that sort of Government; and would
endeavor to make the World believe it was a Government peculiar to the Jews
only, for you say page the 36. That the Jews form of Government ought with less
Reason to be the rule of all Kingly Governors, because it was a Government
chosen by themselves; than the Laws of the Jews ought to be the Laws of all
Nations which they are not. These are the words of the Postscript.

I have already showed, that you were mistaken in affirming that the
Monarchical Government of the Jews was of their own choosing, for it was of
Gods choosing; and as to your intimating that the Laws of the Jews ought not to
be the Laws of all Nations; there you ought to have distinguished, for though
the Law of not eating Swines flesh was only peculiar to those people in respect
of the Climate they lived in, for that it inclined the Inhabitants of that
Country to Leprosy, and therefore was never intended to be an universal Law;
and the Ceremonial Law of the Jews is now out of doors, because it consisted of
Types of Christ coming, who is now come, and therefore the Types of his coming
are useless; yet the Moral Law of God the Ten Commandments which were Laws to
the Jews, ought to be Laws all the World over, and are so taken, and they are
Everlasting and Immutable as well as universal Laws; but there is no Rational
consequence in your Argument, if I should admit that all the Laws of the Jews
had been peculiar to themselves only, for though their Laws might not be Laws
for all the World to follow, yet Gods method in enforcing the Jews to obedience
to these Laws, might upon good reason be thought a good precedent to be
followed to enforce obedience to other Laws.

There is a great difference between Laws and Government, though you seem to
make the same Rule for both, for Laws are Rules for men to walk by, and
Government is the exercise of the means and methods to enforce men to walk by
those Rules; and though some Laws of one Country may not be convenient for
another; yet the means and method to enforce obedience to those Laws which are
best, are the best; the Ore in all Countries is not alike good, but that which
is the Universal best way of refining it, is so, whether the refining be in
England or Scotland; so that if the Jews were best Governed according to their
Laws by an Hereditary Monarchy, I can see no reason why the English should not
be best Governed according to their Laws by an Hereditary Monarchy also.

It is not only God's example in governing the particular people the Jews, but
they are his general Precepts that intimate his good liking of Monarchy all the
World over, for fear God, and honor the King, are general and universal
Commands not limited nor restrained to any particular Place or People, and they
have so close a Connection, and are placed so near together, that it seems to
imply as much as that, if you fear God you will honor the King, and that God
requires the one from us as well as the other: many places of Holy Writ
requires our obedience to Kings as Supreme, and to Governors under them, but I
find not a tittle that requires obedience to any other sort of Government where
there is not a King, I find no approbation of such as the Kingless Keepers of
the Liberty of England or other place; Hogen-Mogen States of the United
Provinces, Burgo-Masters of Venice or Geneva, or such like; such Governments
seem to be quite out of Gods care or regard, and therefore not to be regarded
by good men, nor to be looked upon to be of Divine Institution, having neither
Divine Precept nor Example to Countenance them.

But though I take Monarchy to be Hereditary by Divine Appointment, yet I
cannot believe that any man of common sense, unless it be such an enemy as
sowed Tares in the Wheat, or some false friend that will affirm that by Divine
Right and Institution, a King may Tyrannize over his Subjects, or impose
unreasonable and unjust things upon them for Law; but I humbly conceive Kings
are obliged to observe the Laws of God and Nature, and are bound truly, and it
is their duty to govern according to those Laws, and the Laws Rightfully made
by themselves and Predecessors, which are not contrary to the Laws of God, as
you may see in the forementioned 17. of Deuteronomy. and very plentifully in Scripture
elsewhere: but if a King breaks any of those Laws, he is not punishable by his
Subjects, but God assumes that to himself, and it is sufficient punishment, for
it is a woeful case to fall into the hand of the Lord when angry.

Descend we now to Natural Reason, and consider what that dictates to us in
this matter, it being sufficiently demonstrated, that Monarchy is of Divine
Institution by what is beforementioned, but put case there were nothing
touching it in Divinity one way or other, has not the experience and practice
of the World for some thousand of years informed us, that an Hereditary
Monarchy is the best sort of Government for the People, in reference to the
support of Human Society? Have not all Philosophers and Politicians of any note
left their Opinions to posterity that it is so? Has not Monarchy been the
settled Government of this Kingdom for so many Centuries of years? And are not
our Chronicles so plain in the point, that no considerable mischief ever befell
us but by interrupting Hereditary Succession of the Crown, and that that
mischief has been of no less consequence than the ruin of the then
Inhabitants? and shall such Mushrooms as you pretend to say, that not only the
Line of Succession but Monarchy it self may be altered? because such
Ignoramus's in Politics know no other way of saving a Nation from drowning but
by casting it into the fire? We have had warning sufficient, I hope not to be
gul'd with any such whim whams any more. But because nothing less at present
than the alteration of the Succession or of Monarchy it self would serve your
turn to keep out Popery, I will for your satisfaction, if it be possible, and
if your understanding and honesty will bear it, make it plain, in a few words
that we are as safe and secure against Popery, as the Art of man can make us,
and that we want nothing but what is Gods own work to secure us from Popery so
long as we stick close to and maintain the Hereditary Succession of the Crown,
though we should happen to see a Popish Successor; and the way to perfect the
work and to prevail with God to do what does belong to him, is by Prayers and
Penitence, not by Sedition and Rebellion.

If ever Popery should be established in England, I speal in reference to what
lies in the power of men, it must be either by Military force or by Law, the
Military force must be either home force, or foreign force; by home force it
can never be, though the King were a Papist, because the whole Nation is averse
to it, and very violent against it except a very inconsiderable number who if
they should offer the least look that way, they would be devoured, as a hungry
Lion would devour a new fallen Lamb, and as to foreign force the only way to
subject us to it, is to divide us into two considerable Parties, and then to
engage us in the Slaughter of each other, which would most assuredly be the
consequence of setting a side of any of the Royal Family from their turn of
Succession. And of this the Kingdom can give many sad instances; I shall
mention only that of Deposing Richard II. and settling the Crown upon Henry the
Fourth, though by Act of Parliament, and with Richard the Second's seeming (but
forced) consent, which produced such miserable Wars between the Heirs and
Favorers of both Kings, as rendered the Kingdom a mere Slaughterhouse for the
most part of fourscore years, in which time the number of the slain is
uncertain, but if we may guess at Hercules's body by the length of his foot,
their number must be very vast, for I find there was slain upon that occasion
in one Battle thirty six thousand seven hundred, threescore and sixteen
Persons; and all the Arts and Acts of Parliament afterward, which were many,
and which played handy-dandy with the Crown, acting it one while upon one, then
upon another, could never settle affairs till it had pleased God to do it by
ordering the matter so, that the Heirs of both Families were, one of them a
Man, and the other a Woman, and that these did marry one another whose Nuptial
Feasts lulled the Nation into a pacifick slumber, and put an end to those
unhappy Troules, and England once again enjoyed a blessed peace, until another
unparalled Usurpation upon the Crown, by the seeming sanctified Parliament in
King Charles the First his time, which can never be forgot, though you are
angry it is not. These Instances should be caution enough to any reasonable
men, not to invade Gods Prerogative, and interrupt the Hereditary Succession of
the Crown, but leave it to its due and established course of Descent.

I am confident scarce any man of sense believes but that if ever hereafter (in
our days especially) it should happen that the next in Suceession to the Crown
by course of descent should be put by, though by Act of Parliament it would
produce as sad effects as ever it did; and it is not improbable but our Popish
Neighbors (who are more Potent now than ever) would lay hold on such an
opportunity: the French King, as I am credibly informed, having now a standing
and established Army of two hundred thousand men or more, how easy then would
it be for him, when we had mangled, torn and destroyed the greatest part of our
selves, to make himself Master of the wearied surviving Party, and then Impose
upon them his own Popish Religion? So that to me nothing seems so ready a way
to introduce Popery as altering the Succession of the Crown out of its Lineal
Course of Descent, unless it be by suffering Conventicles, where men teach, and
the scrupulous Brotherhood learn with greediness any manner of Doctrine,
specially the lawfulness of King-killing, and Rebellion, to propagate their
Heresies, Sects and Schisms.

Hence I may say, it is very evident that by force of Arms Popery can never be
settled here so long as the Succession of the Crown is kept in the due course of
Descent, and it may be made as manifestly appear, that it can never be
introduced by Law, though there were a Popish Successor; for though the King be
the Lawmakers, yet his power is so limited and restrained by the Law of Usage
and Custom, that he can make no new Law without the consent of his Parliament;
and the Law as it is, is Provisional enough to prevent the Papists acting to
any prejudice. For as the Law now is, no man is to be a Member in either House
of Parliament unless he upon Oath renounce Popery, and take the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy; nor can any man practice the Law, Physic,
Chyrurgery, the Art of an Apothecary, or any Liberal Science for gain, unless
he renounce Popery, and take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: No man can
be Ordained a Minister of the Gospel, or permitted to Preach in a Church,
unless he Renounce Popery; but at a Conventicle be he Papist or be he Turk, or
Jew, or what he will, he may Preach there any manner of Doctrine, and the
People are angry if they be interrupted. So that we are in danger of being
taught no Popery in Pulpits, unless among the Lawless Conventicles, whose
Teachers, if the Law be put in Execution against their Disciples, will have but
few Hearers; and if all this be not enough his Majesty was Graciously pleased
to assure us that he would make any new Law to secure us from Popery: Yea, even
to the restraining of a Popish Successor, so that the Succession of the Crown
were not put out of its Lineal Course of Descent, and I dare say the great
Gown-man whoever he was whose Opinion (as some say) so far swayed the Commons,
that they thought no Law could sufficiently secure us against a supposed Popish
Successor, but Exclusion from the Succession, could not really be of that mind;
for a King can do no great harm, he is but one man, and if he should in his own
Person attempt to offer any unjust violence to any man, it is an easy matter
to fly from him, and that without imputation of Cowardice, it being upon no
account justifiable to resist the Kings Person with force, but if any man
(Officer or other) should by the Kings Command, kill, wound or beat any man
that does not obstinately refuse to answer his charge by course of Law, before
he is Convicted of the Fact by Verdict of his Peers or Equals, or by his own
Confession, and before he is sentenced by a Judge for that purpose lawfully
Authorized; he that should so do, is punishable notwithstanding such Command:
and moreover though the King by his Prerogative Royal may lawfully cause any
man to be Imprisoned in order to come to Trial yet if in the Commitment it
appear not to be for Treason or Felony specially named, he must be bayl'd by
the Judge and though Imprisoned for any of those offenses, yet he is to continue
in Prison but until he may be Tried by due Course of Law; but unto the Kings
Legal Commands in a Judicial way, the whole Strength and Power of the Nation is
bound to assist in compelling Obedience thereunto, be his Commands signified by
Himself or by his Magistrates and Judges in his Name, who are sworn to do
therein as the Law requires, and not otherwise, so that the King has all Power
to do lawful things lawfully; yet to do any thing illegally, he has so little
Power, that it is truly said the King can do no wrong: and besides all this,
every King at his Coronation takes an Oath to confirm the Laws to his People,
to maintain the Gospel established in the Kingdom, to keep Peace, execute
Justice, and grant the Commons their rightful Customs (be his own Religion what
it will.) So that here is all the Bars and Bolts imaginable to keep out Popery
from being imposed on the People of England, whatever the Kings Religion be,
which those do not well consider, that compare these days with those of Queen
Mary, which were long before any of these Laws beforementioned were made, and
when Reformation was but scarce begun by her Father toward the later end of
his Reign, and countenanced, but not much improved by her Brother who died an
Infant King; and when that Queen came to the Crown, it cannot be supposed that
the tenth part of the Nation were Converts from Popery, as appears by what then
happened, for she soon got a Popish Parliament, who as soon submitted themselves
to the Pope, and asked Pardon for their offenses against him, and declared
themselves ready to abrogate all Laws prejudicial to the Sea of Rome: but the
Case is altered now. Here Is no Popish Members can be elected, the whole Nation
being almost Protestants, and consequently will elect no Papist, nor one
suspected to be so; or if any such should chance to be so elected, yet no such
Popish Member is to be admitted into Parliament. So, here is no Popish
Parliament can be that should consent to make Laws in savor of Popery, nor can
there be any Popish Magistrates admitted that should favor the Papists by
omitting to execute the Laws against them. Nor is there any Priests that should
persuade them to Popery to be heard among us, unless in Conventicles; so that
here is no room by Law for Popery sure in England, nor ever can be if we keep to
the course we are in, and gape not after changes in the Government, or suffer
our selves to be frighted with shadows, so far as to depend more upon dishonest
Policy than Gods Providence and honest Prudence.

But suppose that Originally the Succession of the Crown were in the people;
yet in the same breath you contradict your self, by saying, it is so now; for
you say also, that they have appointed and consented that it should be
Hereditary. Is not a Bargain a Bargain? Do you think they can Revoke this
Agreement at pleasure? I think there is no Law for that.

That the people of England, both in this and former Ages as far as an Oath
Established by Act of Parliament can oblige, (which I think no man will say,
but it is the greatest obligation in the World) have or ought to have ^ound
themselves that the Succession of the Crown shall ^e Hereditary.

The Oath of Allegiance Established (by the Legislative ^uthority in your own
Notion) and by the Statute 3. ^^c. and 4. and elsewhere, so frequently obliged
to be ^^ken, is in these words, viz. That we will bear faith and true
^llegiance to his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and him ^^d them will
defend to the utmost of our power against all ^^nspiracies and Attempts
whatsoever, which shall be made ^^ainst his or their persons, etc.

Now for a little Exposition upon the Text, for nothing can be so plain, but
some may invert the sense of it, since some wrest even the Scriptures to their
own Damnation, and yet go according to their Consciences still, such as their
nature is, such is their Logic: the Spider draws Poison from the same Flower
that the Be gathers Honey.

First, I shall observe only, That the Statute which appoints this Oath of
Allegiance was made since the Statute of the 13. of Queen Elizabeth, which made
it an Offense to say the Queen by Authority of Parliament could not limit the
Descent of the Crown, and if the said Statute that appoints the said Oath, by
such appointment, has so limited and settled the Descent and Succession of the
Crown, that I cannot perceive how now it can be justly altered: for
demonstration whereof it is requisite, the signification of the word Heirs be
rightfully understood; this word Heirs, is in our English Dialect the same the
Latins called, Heredes Sanguinis, Heirs of the Blood, not adopted Heirs, still
the next of kin to the Deceased Successively one after the other for ever; for
though a Father should give away his Estate from his Eldest Son; yet he is
Heir, though a disinherited one, and though men dispose of their Lands as they
think fit: Yet, Deus facit Haeredes, God makes Heirs; and I take the meaning of
the word Heirs in that Oath to be no other than the next of Kin to the deceased
King, and the joining of Successors to Heirs is capable of, (or at leastwise in
the common sense and understanding thereof, which is the sense it ought to be
taken there, can have) no other construction, but that the Kings Heirs shall be
his Successors for ever, and that we shall pay the same Allegiance to the Kings
Heirs in their turns, as we do to them; but you say the unlimited power of the
Legislative Authority can do any thing, alter Succession, yea Monarchy it self
even at the very day that you wrote the Postscript; without Controversy the
power of the Legislative Authority is very great, but I must distinguish
between what may be done, and what may be justly done. If Monarchy or the
Succession thereof should be altered by the Legislative power, as it was by a
Part of the Legislative Authority in dismal 48. and as is apparent some wish it
should again; It does not therefore follow, that it should be just to do so any
more; for whatsoever is contrary to the Eternal Law of God, though commanded by
the Legislative Authority, is unjust: and though the Legislative Authority may
be of that power and force as to compel Obedience to their Laws; yet they can
never make Vice a Virtue, or give Sanctity to a thing that is malum in se, evil
in it is very nature and essence.

By the Oath of Allegiance we declare, that we do plainly and sincerely swear
according to the express words there set down; and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of these words. If so, by Heirs there, must be
meant, the same that is meant thereby according to the common sense, in common
discourse; and according to that sense then, by Heirs is meant the next of Kin;
for when we enquire who is such a man's Heir, we mean who is next of Kin to him.
But oh, say you and the new-true Protestants, the Succession of the Crown was
not intended to be so absolutely limited to the Heirs, but that if the
Parliament thought fit to appoint another that is not the real Heir, he must be
the man.

This is a very vain idle and empty Hypothesis, and a mere groundless
supposition, for the Oath it self restrains the meaning of the words to their
common sense and understanding, and renounces all manner of mental evasion or
reservation whatsoever: so here is no reservation for an objection against the
Heir, neither as to his Religion or Person.

Here I have showed you Gods Example of Establishing an Hereditary Monarchy,
and his precepts to obey it; in no place in Divinity, do I find a power given
from God to the people to alter it at pleasure, or when they think fit upon any
pretense whatsoever; here is also an Oath of Obedience required by Act of
Parliament from all people to stand to, and defend the Hereditary Succession of
the Crown; here is also in that Oath a Renuntiation of all Pardons and
Absolutions from that Oath: and an Explanation, that it is to be understood
according to the common sense and meaning of the words, and this Oath is on
ought to be taken by all people in the Kingdom: How justifiable then would it
be in the Legislative power to Act Counter to all these, and having once
required us to swear fidelity to an Hereditary Successor, and to renounce all
Absolutions from that Oath; yet after wards to compel us to swear fidelity to
one that is not the Hereditary Successor? Dic quibus in terris and eris mihi
magnus Apollo, from such Legislative power as despise Gods Example, Reject his
Providence and will engage a whole Nation to forswear themselves rather than
use other means to Restrain even a Popish Successor, Good Lord deliver me.

As to this point of Succession, I shall add what I find Recommended by Mr.
Prin in his Preface to Cottons Records, fol. 10. Observe 14 Kings (says he)
Created and set up merely by Parliaments and their own power in them without
any true Hereditary Title, have seldom answered the Lords and Commons
Expectations in the preservation of their just Laws, Liberties and Answers to
Petitions; yea themselves branded at last for Tyrants, Traitors, Murderers

(...) such another Doom, as the ambitious Tower-Builders had, confusion of
Tongues, yea and Senses to.

And as to the Scrupulous Brotherhood, Recommend me to them, and let them know,
that I dare affirm their Teachers are most of them Jesuits; the true Papists in
Masquerade, who instead of Preaching Peace, incite the people by a side-wind to
Rebellion: and let them know also, That I desire to know of those seeming
tender Conscienced Dissenters what Answer they will make at the great Tribunal,
when it shall be asked them why they occasioned the Murdering of their King,
put three Nations together by the Ears, made them suck each others Hearts blood
out, Rob, Ravish and Burn? for that has once been the consequence of their
Scrupulosity, and may be so again, if they be not prevented. Do you and they
think it will be a sufficient excuse to say, we could not hear a man Preach in
white sleeves; we had more kindness for one in a little round Cloak; we could
not look upon the Minister making the sign of the Cross in Baptism, or we were
loath lest we should spoil our silk Stockings, to kneel at the Sacrament; for
our Consciences told us, he was the finer man that Prayed and Preached without
Book, by the help of the Spirit (whither good or bad) than he that well weighed
and considered what he should say before he spoke, though we are commanded not
to be hasty to utter any thing before God. Sure these reasons will never excuse
them; the rather for that they themselves acknowledge that they are but
indifferent things in their, own nature wherein they dissent from the
Government; and being so, they are the more to blame that dissent, and there is
greater reason that they should comply with the Government, than that the
Government should truckle to every Humorist: You say well, in that you say
there is nothing more exposes the Authority of Government to contempt, than a
public and open neglect of its Injunctions; therefore I do heartliy wish our
Magistrates would use civil force and power as far as by Law they may, to
enforce Obedience to the Laws both in Church and State; and like good wise
Parents give their stubborn Children the Rod of Correction in due time before
they grow too headstrong.

I had almost omitted to say any thing touching Usurpers, which I conceive may
be very material, for it is not enough to know who has right to the Crown at
the Decease of a King: but it behooves us also to know how to prevent or remove
Usurpers, in case any such should happen, and for that purpose I cannot but
inform you, that in my reading I find mention made of two sorts of Tyrannical
Monarchs; one sort of Tyrant is he who of his own Authority takes upon him the
Sovereignty by the Assistance of some loose irregular Party, without right, and
this sort of Tyrant is he who by the Laws and Writings of the Ancients is
commanded to be killed, with promise of ample Rewards to such as should do it;
in this case making no difference, whether he be a good man or a wicked one,
for it is not lawful for any man living of himself, or by the Assistance or
incitement of any Factions or discontented Party, without good right to invade
the Sovereignty, and to make himself Master of his fellows; what color soever
of Virtue, Justice, Religion or Reformation he pretends, in plain English he
deserves the worst of Deaths that does it. In this only case it is lawful to
proceed according to the Course once known in England by the name of
Abbington-Law, that is to hang them first, and try them after. And this manner
of proceeding in case of an Usurper was once Established by Law among the
Romans by the name of the Law Valeria; and thereby leave was given to every man
to slay such Tyrant without Trial. For in such a case to proceed by way of
formal Legal Justice, the Commonwealth would be consumed with the Firebrands of
Usurpation before they could be quenched; and besides, it was impossible to
bring such formally to Justice: for who could in a Judicial way call to account
such a one as Oliver Cromwell in the Head of his Conquering Army; therefore it
was thought better in such a case to suppress the Tyrant by force, or
stratagem, rather than by too nice insisting upon the Regularities of
proceedings by Law, lose both the Law and the State also. And when I consider
this, I cannot but say it was much to the disreputation of the old English
Cavaliers, considering how many indigent Officers did appear at his now
Majesty's Restoration, that none of them had the courage by Dagger or Pistol,
to cut off that Usurping King-killing Tyrant NOLL. But on the other hand, this
course is by no means justifiable but in case of an Usurper, not in case of a
Sovereign Prince that is lawfully established and settled, or has right to the
Sovereignty either by special call from God, as Saul and David, or by right of
Hereditary Succession, as the Heirs of the Kings of England, Spain, France,
Turkey, Russia, and all the Countries of Africa, etc. I say in such cases that
course is by no means to be thought upon, for though perchance (which falls out
rarely) that such a lawful Prince forgetting his duty should become beyond
measure, cruel, covetous and wicked, perverting both the Laws of God and man
(which is the other sort of Tyrant) his Person ought by no means to be touched,
for God commands, Touch not my anointed.

The want of making a distinction between these two sorts of Tyrants has led
many into great mistakes, holding it lawful for Subjects to rise up in Arms
against any sort of Tyrant; a conclusion of a most dangerous and destructive,
as well as irreligious, consequence: For where that Opinion has got any
footing, seditious and ambitious Men will never fail to scandalize the best of
Princes, thereby to provoke the People to Rebellion, that these few Villains
may reap some profit to themselves by the Ruin of multitudes of others; and it
has been often experienced, that Rebellion against a lawful Prince, though
ever so cruel, has caused more mischief than could possibly have happened had
such a one been suffered for his time, even in Kingdoms where Kings had more
power to do evil than here they have. So that in Human Prudence, as well as in
obedience to Divine Precepts, and for our own Oaths sake, it is most safe for
us to be firm in our Allegiance to our Kings and their Heirs: and as to what
may happen upon failure of Heirs, and who then shall be Successor, let it alone
for those to determine that may be then concerned; but for my part. I am
resolved not to be forsworn for any Power upon Earth, for I am confident those
above will never desire it. Nay more, God has said, He will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain.

It is said by our Savior, That all sins shall be forgive men, but the sin
against the Holy Ghost.

And I have often thought wilful Perjury might be the sin against the Holy
Ghost, not only from the evil consequence of it, which is dreadful, but even
from the word of the Commandment that forbids it, which says, Thou shall not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, (which has this meaning, Thou shall
not swear falsely by his name or affirm any thing falsely, and call God to
witness the truth of it) for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes
his name in vain; which is to be understood as if it had said God will not
pardon him that takes his name in vain. And there is not that said of the
breakers of any of the other Laws; but this I refer to the Consideration of
your self and the rest of the Bill of Exclusion-men, and to all other that make
shipwreck of their Oath, and Consciences, and let me recommend it unto you,
that you pray for the Peace of our English Jerusalem, for they, and they only
that love it, shall prosper: And that they may do so is my hearty desire, And
when I am convinced you are of that temper, but not until then I shall be

Your Friend W. W.

FINIS.

