A SHORT DISCOURSE Concerning the Churches Authority IN MATTERS of FAITH.
Showing that the PRETENSES OF THE Church of Rome ARE WEAK and PRECARIOUS In the
Resolution of it.

LICENSED, March 8. 1686.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1687.

THE PREFACE.
FInding, that in our Modern Controversies with the Church of Rome which are
Printed, and in Discourses with those of that Communion, they make their
Retreat almost upon all Accounts to the Churches Authority; either as a Point
that may be most Colourably defended, or which lazy and weak Heads most readily
take up with, I was induced to examine it.

Safety and Certainty are things very valuable, not only because they carry a
delightful correspondency to our Minds, but also for the respect they have to
the Time before us, which in Prudence we must provide for; no Condition being
so uneasy and disgraceful, as when a Man comes to proclaim his own Folly by
saying, Who thought of this?

Such as our Interest at stake is, such ought our Care to be, that we may not
be imposed upon by Pretenses. It argues a degenerous Mind, that rests it self
upon that which comes next hand. But not to enlarge this Preface, I will only
say a very few Things concerning Faith, for which Church Authority is pretended
as a Ground.

Faith is often in Scripture put to signify Religion; and in that Sense it
implies, not only those Things which a Christian must know and believe, but
also the applying the Mind to them in all Obedience and Humility, not excluding
the assistance of Grace which subdues the perverseness of our Wills; and thus,
with a particular Propriety, it may be styled the Gift of God. But in this
following Discourse, as sometimes in Scripture, Faith more especially means,
that Act or Operation of the Mind whereby it embraces those, Things which are
sufficiently Proposed to it. And as Truth is more or less apparent, so the Mind
is more or less firmly united to it. Not that the Object of our Faith has in it
any Uncertainty, but that our Prejudices and Passions, our Interests and
Pleasures, by which our Wills are warped and made stubborn, hinder the Mind
from apprehen^ing Truth. These false Biasses too often ^^nfound our Reason^ngs*
and misguide our Minds: And hence it comes to pass, as the Scripture observes,
that Faith in some is Weak, in all capable of Increase.

It Is manifest, the Mind may discern Truth so, as to be certain of it; but
still a Corrupt Will may as it were unhinge the Judgment, and make its
adherence less firm. This was well enough observed by him that lately wrote the
History of Sect. 40. page 38. Printed at Oxford.
the Life of Christ, That Faith which springs from the Evidence of Sense, or
from clear Demonstration, must needs be of small Esteem and Reward with God.
St. Thomas was Checked for not believing without it; and the Parable tells us,
if Moses and the Prophets could not Convince, neither would they be persuaded
though one rose from the Dead. Now if the Churches Authority be that which our
Faith may resolve into; the Assent of the Mind would in all Points be equally
Firm and Clear; and so Faith would be Equal in all, annd capable of Improvement
in none.

Plain it is, that the design of Religion is to bring Men to a right
apprehension and belief of God; and to engage them to a holy and virtuous Life,
in conformity to such an Idea of that pure and perfect Being. He that has not a
Mind so disposed, will never be influenced by an Infallible Guide; and he that
has an humble Mind, and teachable Spirit will need none. However, I am sure, he
that will not be satisfied without one, must go farther than Rome to find him.
But this grows too fast for a Preface; therefore I will only tell you, that I
have purposely avoided a multitude of Citations, because they have more or less
Authority as People please; but I have proceeded by the weights and moments of
Reason, which are equally valuable to all.

A SHORT DISCOURSE Concerning the Churches Authority IN MATTERS of FAITH.
IT is a fundamental Maxim, and of unquestionable Authority in Nature, That
Truth is always and every where one and the same. So that among the various
Opinions in the World, but one of them can be right. Upon which account,
Schism, with its ill Consequences, is on all sides much lamented, whilst every
body thinks he has the Truth, and Peace, and Unity, in pretense at least, much
desired. But the misery is, all would have them upon their own terms, and that
frustrates their desires.

Controversies therefore still depending, and the Points under debate being of
such importance, that the Party which affirms them, makes the believing them to
be a necessary Condition of Catholick-Communion, and damns them that refuse
them; while the Party that denies says, they run a manifest hazard that embrace
them: It cannot be thought unfit for any Man to inquire after a method, which
may bring these Disputes to an issue, or that may keep in Peace and Quietness
the Minds and Consciences of Christians, while Pride, Interest, or Prejudice,
shall keep open the Breach, or maintain the Quarrel.

Nothing is more Natural and Congenial to Mankind than Truth; and the desire of
it is implanted in the hearts of all Men; an impartial search after it
therefore, is what all Men are bound to. And as Salvation is the End in Common
aimed at by all, so, it highly concerns-every Christian to examine the way by
which he goes toward that End; and he ought to inquire the more Cautiously and
Diligently, for that the ways proposed for attaining Salvation are Many and
Different: And those that go one Way, will hardly allow Safety to them that
take another. And this at present is the Case between the Papists and the
Protestants, which invite Men to each others Communion, as safer and better for
attaining Eternal Happiness.

Every Man has a Soul to be saved; and what must be done to inherit Eternal
Life, is an Enquiry every one in the World ought* and, I hope, most Christians
do, make for themselves.

For since our first Parents, by their Disobedience, incurred Death to
themselves, and their Posterity, Salvation is what by Nature we could neither
Claim nor Expect. But, that the Devil might not triumph in an absolute Conquest
over so glorious a part of the Creation as Mankind, God, of his infinite Mercy,
was pleased to enter into a Second Covenant with Men, in order to their
Salvation; but this upon Condition of Faith and Repentance on our parts, to
answer the Salvation proposed and offered on his.

Now this Covenant, being an Act of mere Grace, issuing purely from the good
Pleasure of God; it is very plain, Mankind can know no more of this Covenant,
nor of the Conditions of it, than God himself has been pleased to Reveal and
Discover. So that all Questions and Disputes, about our Common Salvation, must
be brought to this one as the Standard of all, viz. Whether it be the Will of
God, or rather, Whether God has Discovered it to be his Will. For though the
Will of God be the Fountain of all Duty and Obligation* yet it cannot be a
binding Law to any body, till it be made known to him, or sufficient means
given for him to know it.

That God can make his Will known to any Man, is too certain to be doubted; but
that his Will should be known, before he has discovered it, can never be
pretended. And because every Man, considered as a Creature, and more especially
every Christian, is bound to obey the Will of God; therefore every Man is bound
to inform himself of so much as God has made necessary to be known for his
Salvation. I have added this, to show that Implicit Faith is a dangerous bottom
for any body to rest upon: For to believe as another believes, unless a Man
knows what it is he believes, and upon what account, is very absurd, as may be
made out anon.

So much of the Will of God, as may be discovered by the Light of Nature, is
besides my present Business; because there is little difference among us about
it. But that part of the Will of God, which we are bound to know, and adhere
to, as we are Christians, by Profession distinguished from the rest of Mankind,
as being in Covenant with God, is the Subject of this ensuing Discourse.

Now this part of the Will of God, is either revealed to the Mind of every
individual Christian, by particular and immediate Inspiration from God, or it
was made known to some particular select Persons, who were to instruct the
rest. The first of these ways is not pretended, or allowed, either by
Protestants or Papists; but the second is, viz. That God did Discover his Will
to some that they might Publish it to the rest. And thus far I take it to be
agreed betwixt us.

Before we advance another step, we will lay it down 1 Cor. 2. 11.
as a Ground, That no Man knows the* Mind of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man
that is in him: No Man can know the Mind of another farther than it is
Discovered to him. And by Consequence, no Man can know Revelations from God,
made to the Mind and Understanding of another, but by one of these two ways; in
the first place, either God, by Inspiration, must assure him that he has made
such Revelations to the other: As when God sent St. Paul at his Conversion to
Damascus to be instructed by Ananias, which was an extraordinary Case, not fit
to be drawn into Precedent; and so neither pretended to, nor to be expected,
since stances of it hitherto are so rare. Or, in the second place, he, to whom
the Revelation is made, must bring such Testimony and Evidence, as may Convince
Men that it is really Divine. His bare word for it, will not be a Competent
Proof: Nor will the Testimony of other Men satisfy the Minds of reasonable
Enquirers in this Case; for those others must have some to Witness for them
too, and so on without End. Which plainly evinces, that this is not a Basis for
Faith to rest upon. Let us see then what will do, for we cannot forget what our
Savior confesses of himself to the Jews, viz. Joh. 5. 31.
That if he bear Witness of himself, his Witness is not true; that is, it is not
of force to Convince. But then he tells the Jews, Joh. 14. 11*
They ought to Believe him for his Works sake; and accordingly he appealed to
his Hearers. That the Works which he did in his Fathers Name bore Witness of
him. Post. monstra tot perdon^ta, post Phlegram impio Sparsam cruore, postque
defensos Deos, nondum liquet de Patre? Sen. Her. Fur. Act. 2. Sc. 3.
the Miracles which he wrought among them were sufficient to prove his
Authority to be Divine, and his Doctrine to be from God. Nicodemus freely
confessed as much, when he owned him a Teacher come from God; because no Man
could do the Miracles which he did; except God were with him. And as our
Savior did demonstrate his Divinity by his Works; so, when he sent his
Apostles to publish his Doctrine to the World, he sealed their Commission, by
giving them a Power to work Miracles, which might convince their Hearers of its
Truth. And they (the Apostles) went Mark 16. 20.
forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming
the Word with Signs following. So that it is not to be doubted, but that the
Doctrine which the Apostles preached was Divine; and the Miracles which they
wrought, are our assurance that it was so. And hitherto all Christians proceed
with little or no difference.

Having thus laid down Miracles as a foundation upon which we are in some
manner to ensure our Faith; it seems necessary before we proceed, in few words
to set down, 1. What we mean by Miracles; and, 2. How far this Testimony of
Miracles may extend, so as to authorize our Belief.

First, by Miracles we must understand such Works as are not only without the
Lines of ordinary Course, and measure of Nature; for of this kind many things
happen, which may be called Wonders, but not Miracles; but such as are above
the power of Nature to effect.

But because many such Works have in appearance been wrought, for very
different Purposes; we must, in the second place, look what Judgment must be
made of all such things. And certainly some way there is to distinguish; or
else, the Minds of Men would be involved in most perplexing and inextricable
Difficulties, by such Contradictions, as have been abetted with Signs and
Wonders. Let us see then by what Rules we must examine and judge Miracles
themselves, or such Doctrines as are advanced upon them. For to receive all
without distinction, would come to the same thing as to allow none: Because
that can never prove any one Point, which may be alleged, or colourably
pretended, in favor of another; unless there be some way to appropriate it to
one side, as by the Rules following it may.

Whatsoever Doctrine is proposed, that is contrary to right Reason, or the
fundamental Laws of Nature, cannot be Divine, or such as we ought to believe,
though never so many Signs should be showed to confirm it. For right Reason is
only a Judgment made according to that Law and Standard of Justice and Truth,
which God our Creator has stamped upon the Minds of Men. And the Fundamentals
of Reason issuing from God, as Light flows from its Fountain the Sun, must
always remain unchangeably the same; because he himself, from whom they Spring,
has no variation. And if the Principles of Reason were not so fixed, we should
be exposed to all manner of illusion; and should never be able to believe any
thing, because we could be certain of nothing.

Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2.
Upon this ground God directs the Jews to try their Prophets; who if they
preached up other Gods, were not to be hearkened to, though they worked
Miracles; nothing being more absurd, or inconsistent with right Reason, than
allowing many Gods. Yet further, God, when he created Man, according to the
exact Laws of eternal Justice, implanted in our Natures the Seeds of it, and
the Sense of Honesty; insomuch that whatever Miracles tend to the Damage of
Mankind, or the Corruption of Manners, they cannot be from God; nor can they
authorize any Doctrine as Divine* that is inconsistent with the forementioned
Standard of Justice and Reason. And this makes a real Distinction, and Origin.
cont. Cells. lib. 2. page 91. Ed. Cant.
sensible Difference betwixt the Miracles wrought by Christ, or his Apostles,
and those by Heathen Magicians. On the one hand, the Miracles always tended to
good, and were such as might invite Love as well as Admiration. On the other
hand, they were, for the most part* hurtful to Men's Persons and Estates; unless
it was sometimes that the Devils cured the Diseases they had caused, but it was
still to establish a greater Tyranny. When the Jews taxed our Savior Matt. 12.
24.
with casting out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils; he answers to
this effect, That the Devil was too Wise a Creature to destroy his own Kingdom,
by casting out Devils; especially, when sometimes they were made to own
themselves to be Devils, and to confess Christ to be the Son of God: But, says
he, Ibid. verse. 28.
if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then the Kingdom of God is come
unto you. And this was frequent, in the Primitive Church, that the Christians,
by a Divine Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. cap. 13. and alibi.
Power, overruled all the Powers of Darkness, employed by the Magicians of those
times. For as to do Works above Nature, speaks a Power above her; so, when
those Works tend to the good of Men, by promoting Virtue, and establishing true
Piety, they must reasonably be concluded to be from a Divine Author. Let this
then be the first Step, or the Ground of all; That whatsoever Doctrine, or
pretended Revelation, destroys Justice, or contradicts Reason, cannot come from
Heaven; and ought not to be Believed.

In the next place; when once a Law is established as Divine, upon a sufficient
Testimony of Miracles, no other Revelation that is contrary to it may be
allowed, until it be repealed; and no repeal can be, but from the same
Authority that enacted it: And therefore the repeal cannot be of force, till
the Authority upon which it stands makes it self manifest by as great, if not
greater, Miracles than were wrought at the Promulgation. In this Point was the
Prophets Miscarriage, that went to cry against the Altar in Bethel, who
suffered himself to be overcome by the pretense of the 1 King. 13. 18.
old Prophet, contrary to his own Commission.

But without pursuing this farther at present, it is manifest, and by all
Christians acknowledged as such, That the Gospel, which our Savior and his
Apostles published to the World, is neither contradictious to Reason, nor
destructive of Virtue, or good Manners, or inconsistent with former
Revelations; but that, on the contrary, it proposes the noblest End, viz.
Eternal Life, and directs to the fittest and most agreeable Method for
attaining it, and therefore must be accounted Divine.

This being granted, it follows, That no Doctrine, or Revelation, which is not
reconcilable to this Gospel, can be from Heaven, or have Power to bind us. If
an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. Gal. 1. 8.

My present Business being not with Heathens, but with Christians, I will take
it for granted, till I see more occasion to prove it, That the Apostles and
Evangelists, who were Divinely Inspired, committed to Writing that Gospel which
they had received; that is, Cum sit perfectus Scripturarum Canon, sibique ad
omnia s^tis superque sufficiat, etc. Vinc. Lirin: Com. adv. Haer. cap. 2.
as much of the Will of God, as might be necessary for Men to Know and Believe,
in order to their Salvation. Papist Misrepr. and repr. cap. 13.
The late Representers of Popery seem to allow as much; when they own the
Scripture to be the Word of God, of the greatest Authority upon Earth, and
capable of leading a Man to all Truth.

It must also be granted, That these Scriptures are no otherwise the Word of
God, than they are rightly Understood and Interpreted. And here the
Controversy begins, about the Sense of Scripture. For the Gentlemen of the
Communion of the Church of Rome Mons. de Meaux Expos. of the Doctr. of the
Cath. Sect. 19.
tell us, we must receive the Canon of the Scripture, and the Sense and
Interpretation of Scripture, upon the Authority of the Church; for so the
matter is stated even by their late Writers. And this being of great
Importance, we will consider it Carefully, and proceed with as much Clearness,
as may be a sufficient, though short, discussion of the Point.

If we are to receive the Canon and Sense of the Scripture upon the Churches
Authority, then the Churches Authority is the Ground upon which the Canon and
Sense of Scripture depends as to us; and if the Canon and Sense of Scripture
depends as to us, upon the Church, then the Church has Authority to engage and
determine our Faith in these two Questions, 1. What Books are Canonical; and,
2. What the Sense of them must be. For if I know not the Sense of them, I know
not the Will of God; without which it signifies nothing to have the Books,
although they had been written with God's own Finger. And

If the Church has Authority to declare what Books, and what Sense of those
Books, is Divine; then the Church has a Power to make me Believe its
Declaration. I say, the Church must have a Power, if it has Authority, to make
me Believe; because no Man can Believe more than he can Believe, nor help
Believing what for the time he does Believe.

If the Church has a Power to make me Believe, it either has it of it self, as
it were by Nature, or it has it from God: But, of it self, the Church can have
no such Power; because God only has a Dominion over the Minds of Men, and is
therefore to be Believed by virtue of his own Authority.

If therefore the Church, as it consists of Men, who in their private
Capacities, (that is, as they are Men may err) has no Authority of it self to
determine my Faith; then the Authority of the Church, if it have any to make me
Believe, must be Supernatural and Divine: Which, I think, is granted by the
Author of Cap. 15. of Tradition.
the Papist Misrepresented and represented; when he says, he believes no Divine
Faith ought to be given to any thing but what is of Divine Revelation.

It Is then an established Point, That the Churches Authority is not to be
believed as Natural, but as Supernatural and Divine; and if it be Supernatural,
it cannot be proved out of Natural Principles. This the Papists seeing very
well, lay down Infallibility for the Ground of the Churches Authority: So that
the Churches Authority arising from its Infallibity, no Man can be bound, in
matters of Faith, to submit to the one, farther than he can be Convinced of the
other; and the Church can no longer have a Power over Men's Faith than she is
Infallible.

The Infallibility then of the Church, being the Ground of her Authority, the
Papists expect we should resolve our Faith into it; and we will consider how
reasonable their expectations are in this Case.

But, first, let us remember, That all this Authority and Infallability is
challenged for the present Church of this Age; or else there is no visible
Infallible Judge, and so the matter comes to nothing: For if they were affixed
to the Church of any one Age, then our Faith, when that Age is expired, must
resolve it self some other way, as we shall see anon.

This hint being given, we proceed in search of this Infallibility; which is
indeed a safe Basis to rest upon, wherever it is found. In the first place
therefore, we must enquire what it is, or, what is to be understood by it.

Infallibility, properly taken, is the knowledge of all things. He that does
not know every thing, may be mistaken in some thing; and he that may be
mistaken in any thing, is not Infallible. To know all things, is to be
Omniscient; and so God alone, who created every thing, by virtue of his own
Infinity, is absolutely Infallible: But, for created Beings, their Knowledge is
confined to such things as the wise Creator has placed within their Capacities,
and so made knowable as it were by Nature. Therefore in other things which are
Supernatural, and of which we can know no more than is revealed to us,
Infallibility means a being preserved from all Error and Mistake about them;
and by Consequence must it self be a Supernatural and Divine quality, imparted
according to the good Will and Pleasure of God.

And now our Business is come to this, to know first, Whether any body, or no,
has this Infallibility. Secondly, if any body has it, where he, or they, are to
be found? And thirdly, how others may be assured, that they, who pretend to
have it, have it indeed.

First, Whether any body has this Infallibility. I take it for granted, upon
the foregoing Proofs, that it is a Divine Supernatural Gift; and being such,
that it must issue from the good Pleasure of God. Now any Gift whatsoever,
which is Arbitrary, and Depending upon the Will of any one, cannot be pretended
to in Reason, till he in whose Power it is, has made his Will known, that the
Right and Possession of it pass over to him that Claims it. In like manner, no
Divine Gift, which concerns more than them, who personally pretend to it, can
have any weight or force without a Divine Testimony to ensure its own Credit.

Upon this Point the Papists argue, That Christ, who was not less able or
faithful than Moses in his house, would not leave his Church destitute of
sufficient means for Peace and Unity it is granted; But then, say they, without
an Infallible Guide (beside the Scripture) there can be neither reason for
Faith, nor ground for Peace among Christians. A bold Assumption Pap. Misrepr.
and repr. cap. 16. page 19.
this! Nay farther, it is said, That Christ has promised to teach his Church all
Truth, by special Assistance of the Holy Ghost, to the end of the World. This
indeed is to the Purpose; but, that if any thing, it proves more than they
wish: For it does as much prove all Christians to be Infallible as one, or
more. For the Promise, being indefinite, cannot justly be appropriated to
particulars; and, if it contains perpetual Infallibility, let them that can
show, from that Promise, that the Pastors have more right to it than the People.

But suppose now there is Infallibility in the Church, let us see whereabouts
it is Lodged, that we may have recourse to it, to end the Disputes, which have
so long disturbed the Peace of Christendom. For if it De non apparentibus and
non existentibus eadem est ratio.
cannot be found, we shall hardly be made to grant that there is any such thing;
or, if it cannot be come at, we shall value it at the rate of all useless
things.

I ask therefore, Where this Infallibility is, that has been so much talked of?
Why, some have showed their good will to fix it to the Popes of Rome: And one
would at first think the Author, who represents a Papist, looked that way; when
he told us, he did Cap. 18. p. 21.
not doubt but God assists them (the Popes) with a particular helping Grace,
such as was given to all the Prophets, when they were sent to Preach, that was
Extraordinary. Such as was given to Moses, when he was made a God to Pharaoh,
that was Miraculous. Sure he forgot the Lives of some Popes; or else, some late
Pope has divided the Sea, or turned a River into Blood, and so filled him with
Wonder, that he never thought to make any Reflections. Lastly, with such Grace
as was given to Caiaphas, when he prophesied that Jesus should dye for that
Nation: A Truth which he uttered without any good Design, as appears by his
Sentence afterward; and this instance indeed might well fit Pope Greg. 7. Yet,
after all this, we are told that it is our Choice, Whether we will allow Pap.
Misrepr. and repr. cap. 18. page 22.
the Pope to be personally Infallible, or no: And if they do not see reason
enough to believe it, I am sure I do not; and so the Pope's Claim must be
dismissed as indefensible.

But is a Council without him then Infallible? If it be, what becomes of the
Pope's Supremacy? For wherever Infallibility goes, the Supremacy, touching
matters of Faith, must go with it. And they cannot be separated, since, as we
showed above, the one has its whole dependence upon the other.

This difficulty has been apprehended; and so, to secure the Pope's Supremacy,
a Council without him Vide Not. Bever. in Conc. Nic. en. secund. Chron. Vrsper.
An. Dom. 793.
has been judged not Infallible: And where any Council has wanted the Pope's
Confirmation, as we see for matter of fact, it has been thought to want
Authority to. Though for all this, the Point of Supremacy, of how great
importance soever, is not well agreed among Vide quid Chron. Vrsper. ex Brunone
Card. de Greg. 7. ad An. Dom. 1080.
them; for Councils have taken upon them to depose the Pope, and the French
Roman Catholic Divines allow them in it.

The only expedient in this Case is, what some lay down, That a Council
assembled by and under the Pope, whose Authority must confirm their Decrees, is
Infallible.

Being come to this, as the last effort, we will proceed with a regard due to a
Tenet of such moment.

And here I ask again, Whether every Bishop and Devine, that Debates and Votes
in Council, be Infallible? No; this must not be said, because there have beeen
great Differences among the Divines, and contrary Opinions much urged: Besides,
it would make every Bishop as absolute as the Pope, to make him Infallible,
which would quite undo the pretenses of the Church of Rome. But then, if every
Bishop in Council be not Infallible, for ought I can see, this Infallibility
must be given to the Pope. And if his approbation be indeed necessary to
Authorize their Decrees, he has even most right to it. For if the
Authentickness of the Decrees depends upon the Pope, it is plain, he must have a
Negative vote to the Council; and, if he has a Negative vote to the Council,
either he must have this Infallibility, or there can be none at all of any use.
But as to the Pope's being Infallible, we were told before, it is no Article of
Faith; and so we are at Liberty from them to believe it, or let it alone.
Though, to say the Truth, if I had been told the contrary, the Errors which
some Popes have fallen into, would have hindered me, in despite of any good
will, from owning him so.

Is this Infallibility shared among them, so that every one has some? For
Infallibility they must have, or their Authority is lost: No, this cannot be
neither; for Infallibility is a Quality that cannot be divided, or enjoyed to
the halfs. And if it could, it would not do the business; for then they would
be Fallible in part, as well as Infallible in part. And so we should be as hard
put to it, to find which part their Infallibility reaches to, as we are to find
that they have any at all.

Here peradventure, it may be thought, because it has been said heretofore,
That though the Pope and his Council may be Fallible, in their Arguments and
Discourses, yet, in the Result of them, viz. their Definitions which only
concern the Church, they are Infallible. This indeed is to the purpose, if it
could be as easily proved as said. But since neither Art nor Nature does allow
an Infallible Conclusion to issue from Fallible Means, it must be wholly
Supernatural and Divine. And so we are come, in the third place, to ask, How
they came by a Power to make the Conclusion Divine, the Means being Humane? or,
How they will make it appear to me, or any Man else, that they are endued with
such a Power?

Certainly a Claim so bold as this, ought to be very well made out. But here,
alas! we are turned over to Motives of Credibility, which are sometimes called
the marks of the Church; however, we will see what can be made of them.

By Motives of Credibility, must be meant, such as may work upon my Reason, and
so incline my Mind to believe, or assent to any thing for a Truth; and so I can
be induced to believe no farther than the point is made Credible to me. Well;
but whatever is Supernatural can never work upon my Reason, as being quite
above it, without some Divine Evidence and Testimony; and that must either be
Miracles* or Scripture. For Miracles, they have of late been little pretended
to: But from Scripture, they tell us, Christ has promised to his Church a
perpetual Assistance of his Grace; yea, such a measure of the Spirit, as made
Caiaphas prophesy Truth, almost whether he would or no. But how can they
pretend Scripture in this Case? Pap. Misrepr. and repr. cap. 14. page 15.
who have told us, we must receive the Sense and Interpretation of Scripture
from the Infallible Authority of the Church: And that not in a few Points, but
in every Doubt; and never presume upon our own private Sentiments, howsoever
seemingly grounded on Reason and Scripture. If we must thus absolutely depend
upon the Authority of the Church for the Interpretation of Scripture, then the
Authority of the Church must be better known to us than the Sense of the
Scripture: And if it be better known, it cannot be proved by Scripture; for
every thing that proves another must it self be more evident. And if the
Churches Authority cannot be proved by Scripture, it can never be proved
without Miracles; and by consequence can never be believed. But if Christians
must read and judge of Scripture, and believe it in this Point, I can see no
reason why they may not in every one else that concerns Religion; since there
are few Points in it that are not much more cleary expressed.

Here Traditions would put in to help out. But, to spoil all we are told, we
must receive them too upon the Authority of the Church; for it would be as
dangerous to trust the World with a liberty of judging Traditions, as of
judging Scripture, and more contests there are and would be about them. And
yet, which is an insuperable Difficulty, Tradition is silent in many Points of
the Romish Faith; nay, in all, whereabout any Difference is, I mean, as to the
Primitive Church; and sure Tradition cannot be produced where there is none. If
Tradition could be produced, still the Difficulty returns: That Tradition would
be more manifest, and therefore above the Churches Authority. And how
acceptable a Point that is at Rome, Mr. White Vide Histor. Haeres. Blaclo.
and Mr. Sergeant could have told at their own Cost.

But though Scripture and Tradition are insufficient, perhaps Succession may
make out this Matter; or else, why are we so often told of it? and truly, I
must needs say, I do not know why we are. For, if they mean a Succession of
Bishops, that can prove nothing to Rome, because it is common to other
Churches, who have as undoubted a Succession as they. If they mean a Succession
of Doctrine, from the Apostles to us, it is what we allow; and, for want of it,
refuse those other Doctrins they would impose.

There is behind a very forcible Argument, to prove, That the Pope and his
Council together are not Infallible, or, that the Papists themselves do not
think them so. I Instance, in the Lateran Council, under Pope Innocent the III.
where it was decreed, that Princes may be Deposed. He that Represents a Papist,
Pap. Misrepr. and repr. cap. 20.
answers, That this is no Article of Faith, and that they are not bound to
believe it. But if this be not to be believed, it is because the Truth of it is
not evident enough; and if it be not evident enough, it must be because the
Churches proposing or decreeing is not sufficient to make it evident, which is
the Point I aim at.

If he will, as some have, acknowledge the deposing Doctrine to be true; let the
World consider what kind of Subjects those must be that are in such a
Communion; and if he disavows it; he makes it appear that he does not think
their Church Infallible. Nor can I think that Church has sufficiently cleared
it self from the Charge of this Doctrine, which some of them call a Calumny,
till it be as Publicly and Authoritatively Repealed, as it was Decreed. Nor
can I imagine, how that Author could tell us, in the fourteenth Chapter of his
Book, that he thought himself obliged not to rely on his own private Judgment,
but upon the Authority of the Church, in any Doubt; and yet, in the twentieth
Chapter of the same Book, tells us, in Consequence, what the Church has
peremptorily Decreed, is not to be believed. I am sorry, when that Decree
passed, such a powerful Measure of the Spirit, which made Caiaphas Prophecy,
was absent. And since it was so then, I do not see how they can reasonably
presume he was not absent in other Points too. Damnation being so particularly
denounced against Rebellion, we cannot think that a Point so inconsiderable as
to be passed by in advertency.

It now plainly appears, that this Challenge of Infallibility is very
unaccountable; and, to show its absurdity yet more, you shall see, that though
we should grant (as we do not) that they have Infallibility some where, yet, in
the resolution of Faith, it would be useless.

The Church at this day is vexed and divided by many Heresies, and contrary
Opinions. How must the Truth be cleared, and Peace be restored to Christendom?
By the Churches Authority, say the Papists. But it has been proved that the
Churches Authority extends no farther than she has Infallibility; and the Pope
being not Infallible alone, and their being no Council assembled under him, the
present Church has no Infallibility, and so, by Consequence, no Authority to
determine Controversies about Faith.

Peradventure it will be said, the Council which sat in the last Age defined
all Points, and so determined our Faith. I answer, That what that Council
defined is one thing; and its settling Faith, and determining Controversies,
appears by the effect to be another. It will be said, it determined all but
what Pride and Obstinacy still kept on foot. But if Controversies still remain,
whether from Pride or Heretical-pravity, or from any other Cause whatever, it
matters not: Why should the Scripture be taxed as insufficient to be a Rule of
Faith, for not effecting what their Infallibility cannot bring to pass? Sure,
there is no reason why it should.

Well, but for obstinate and prejudiced Persons, we will set them aside; and
see what can be done for inquisitive People, such as are Willing to be
Convinced; what shall these do?

They tell us, They must be guided by the Definitions and Decrees of the last
General Council assembled at Trent. But how shall they be ascertained that they
have a true Copy of the Acts of that Council? For upon occasion Suppositious
Canons have been alleged by the Church of Rome. The Authority of the present
Church cannot do it, as you may conclude from that which has already been said;
besides, it is the thing in Question. However, suppose from the Testimony of
the present Church witnessing, though not authorizing, and by such Methods as
we receive the Works of other Writers, we should admit the Acts of the Council
of Trent to be truly derived to us; What shall we do to attain the true Sense
and Meaning of them, without which they can signify nothing?

And to show you that this is no Captious Question, some great Men among them
have interpreted that Councils Decrees very differently. And the late
Representer of a Papist has construed them in a Sense very wide, from what some
eminent Doctors long since gave of them. Are we not now in a fair way for Peace
and Unity? After all, if so many Difficulties surround the Learned, what shall
Women do, and such as only understand their Mother Tongue?

I can meet with no Answer to this, but that the Learned must with honest
Minds, and just Diligence, search out the Sense of the Churches Definitions;
and from them, must those of less Judgment and meaner Capacities, receive it.

But if the matter must rest here, for my Life, I cannot see why the like Care
and Pains should not bring a Man to the true Sense of the Scripture, as well as
of a Council. 'Twould be an ill Reflection upon God's Wisdom to say, he ordered
his Will to be written, but not so intelligible as human Writings. And if there
be some, who for want of Ability in themselves, must rest their Faith upon
other Men's Judgments, I do not see why the Clergy of the Church of England may
not as well be relied on, as the Priests of the Church of Rome; since the World
has no reason to think them less Learned, or less Sincere.

The Church of England, among all impartial Men, has this manifest advantage,
that She derives Her Faith from Scripture; not fancifully Interpreted, but
Expounded to a Sense which the Text reasonably leads to. And to strengthen Her
Exposition, She takes in the Testimony of the Church in Her four first General
Councils: Not that She rests upon an Authority in them, but She takes them as
Witnesses to show, that in Her Interpretation, She is neither Singular nor
Private.

Thus, in short, a Member of the Church of England proceeds. He is certain his
Faith is right and true, because it is founded, as to its Object, upon the Will
of God. He is certain it stands upon the Will of God, because it stands upon
the Word of God. He is certain it is built upon the Word of God, because it is
built upon the Scripture. He is certain the Scripture is the Word of God,
because the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles, that wrote it, were Divinely
Inspired. And he is made certain that they were Divinely Inspired, by the
Divine Testimony of Miracles which God gave them. Nor, lastly, can he doubt,
but whatsoever God sets his Seal to, is Truth; for he will not, he cannot Lie
or Deceive.

If he be asked, how he knows these Books to be Written by those Inspired Men,
to whom they are attributed? He Answers, for that, he has an universal
Testimony of Friends and Enemies through all Ages: Which is as good an Evidence
as a Matter of Fact can bear, or does require; and, when he reads them, he is
farther Confirmed, by finding them so admirably Compiled and Suited to that
Character.

If he be asked, how he attains the right Sense of them? He answers, by using
due Attention, and an unprejudiced Mind, with such other helps as are fit for
that Purpose; he gains as great Certainty of the true meaning of Scripture, as
Sense and Reason can Duplici modo munire fidem fidem nostram debemus Primo
scil. divinae Legis Authoritate tum deinde Eccles. Catholicae Traditione. Vinc.
Lirin. Com. adv. Haer. Cap. 1.
bear in an ordinary Capacity, (I mean, as far as concerns the Articles of Faith
summed into his Creed;) and is as safe, in this Resolution, as was the
Primitive Church, with which he agrees. More than this, he does not apprehend
necessary.

After this, since the Papists have taxed our Faith as wavering and uncertain,
how unjustly, you may easily discern, I might here make them a Requital; by
telling the World, that upon their own Principles, they can have no Faith at
all.

For if what Faith they have arises from the Churches Authority, then, if the
Church has no Authority, they can have no Faith. But, I have proved before, the
Church can have no such Authority, because it has not Infallibility; and it
cannot reasonably pretend to Infallibility, because it can make no Evidence of
it, and without Evidence no Man can believe.

But God forbid I should say, or think, they have no Faith: I only offered
this, to show the weakness and insufficiency of the Principles they go upon,
and what little Reason they have to charge us.

And now to that Question so often asked, By what Authority we depart from the
Faith of the Church of Rome? I answer, by an Authority which is inseparable
from the Mind of every Man, to refuse to believe any thing for which he has not
a Reason to him sufcient; indeed, no Man can believe without it. For the Mind
of Man is so disposed, as to Truth, that it immediately embraces it, and closes
with it as soon as ever it discerns it: But if the Mind discerns no Truth in a
Proposition, it cannot assent to it, whatever Profession the Man makes.

The Church of Rome has not sufficiently proved the Doctrins in dispute betwixt
us; and that, if we had no more, would be Authority enough for us to refuse
them, and depart from her; since She will not receive us to Communion, but upon
Conditions which they cannot make out to be reasonable, unless we grant that
false Supposition of Infallible Authority.

They ask farther, who is to be Judge of the Controversies and Reasonings
between us? I answer, every Man must for himself: For as every Man must
believe, so every Man must have a Reason why he believes; and sure every one
must be a Judge of his own Reason whether he be Convinced or no.

We are told, That then there will be Heresies and Schisms; it is true there
are so, and, for ought I see, will be so still: But that is no more than the
Apostle told the Corinthians must be, that those which are 1 Cor. 11. 19.
approved may be made manifest.

The Church of Rome may appear yet more unequal in Her Pretenses; for that She
advances a Doctrine which cannot be believed, even by those who pay the utmost
deference to her Authority, and that is Transubstantiation, which implies
several Contradictions. Some, that own the Churches Infallible Authority, and
are resolved to rest upon it, may so overrule their Minds as to keep them from
considering or thinking upon that Doctrine, and so for the time do not as it
were disbelieve it; but, whenever they come to weigh it, their Minds cannot
embrace it, because there can be no Reason for a Contradiction: For sure Church
Authority cannot go on where the Power of God ceases. If it be said, it is only
a Contradiction in appearance, that comes to the same thing; for 'till it can
be made not to seem a Contradiction* it must have the same effect upon all Men's
Minds, as upon ours, who know it to be really a gross one. And this makes me
sensible, That it is a greater absurdity to believe, as they say, implicitly or
indefinitly as the Church believes, when a Man considers not what that is, than
to Pray implicitly, or in a general intention with the Church, when one knows
not what the Church Prays for. It being absurd to say, a Man believes any thing
which the Mind does not particularly embrace, or apply it self to; and the Mind
cannot be said to embrace that which it thinks or knows nothing of.

Here it must not be forgotten, that I am not speaking of the Habit, but the
Acts of Faith. Nor do the Principles I have laid down oblige me to think, every
one has alwas a true ground for his Faith. I doubt not, but many believe upon
inducements, that would, if examined, be found Slender and Disproportionate:
for such it is their good fortune if they believe aright, but if they are in
the wrong, they must answer for not taking greater Care. But if they have used
their utmost Care and Diligence, and yet continue in the wrong, we may leave
them without any desperate apprehension to the mercy of God.

Most of the Points about which we differ with Rome have been discussed in
particular Treatises, and so I will meddle little with them, having from the
first designed in chief to consider the grounds of Faith.

I would here have taken leave, but that I am stayed with a Pretense, That the
Faith which we own, we had from the Church of Rome. They that desire an account
of our Church primitively, let them read the Learned Origins Britanicae.
I will not here inquire into the merits of this Pretense, but examine what use
they make of it. Suppose now we had the Scripture, and the Creeds from them,
what follows? Why, then they would have us receive all the rest of their
Additional Articles too. Indeed, if we had received all we believe upon their
Churches Authority it had been a better inference. But they know, we did not
receive any Articles upon any Authority but the Reason of them; and therefore
where that ends our Faith stops, and we receive no more.

They would it seems prescribe; and, supposing we embrace some Truths which
they pretend to have delivered to us, would have us entertain whatever else
they offer. This is very strange indeed!

If any one hearing the Devils declaring Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, as
the Gospel tells us they did, should have believed him so; and Edatur hic
aliquis sub Tribunalibus vestris, quem Daemone agi constet, jussus a quolibet
Christiano loqui Spiritus ille impurus, tam se Daemonem confitebitur de vero
quam alibi. Deum de falso. Apolog. Cap. 23.
Tertullian we know made it a great Argument, and appealed to the Heathens upon
it, when the Devils made Confession; must they therefore have believed all the
Devils said at any time, because they saw reason to believe what they said some
times: 'Twould have been a strange Case with Religion, unless Men had been
assured the Devil's inclinations to deceive should have always been overruled;
and they, like Caiaphas, should have been made to speak Truth whether they
would or no. In like manner, to have received some Truths from the Church of
Rome, can be no reason why we should believe others.

Thus far I have considered the Grounds of Faith, and showed the Weakness and
Insufficiency of those Means which the Church of Rome takes to resolve it by. I
pray God, by his Grace, so to inlighten the Understandings, and dispose the
Wills of all Christians, that they may heartily endeavor the Peace and Unity of
the Church, by an humble and impartial Enquiry after Truth, the only Way
effectually to bring it about.

Popery has of late been Expounded to a more favorable Sense, and Represented
in a less formidable Dress, than it wore heretofore: And so far am I from being
angry at it, that I am heartily glad; hoping it may tend to the Scattering
those thick Mists of Prejudice and Ignorance that have obscured the Truth, and
hindered many from discerning it. I only wish they would manifest the Sincerity
of their Representation by a Practice answerable to it. They took away the
Scriptures from some, least in reading they should misinterpret it: And I wish
they would take away Images, which have been horribly misunderstood; since they
now tell the World they think them but as Books to instruct the Ignorant, and
honorary Remembrances to the Learned. This would be one reasonable and fair
Step toward restoring Peace, and healing the Schism. And since we are told,
that no Power upon Earth can limit, alter, or annul, any Precept of Divine
Institution, contrary to the Intention of the Lawgiver, (a Position highly
reasonable) we expect the Cup should be given to all of the Communion; seeing
that our Savior instituted and gave that as well as the Bread. And after his
Institution, the same Night that he was betrayed, I cannot find that he made
the least Alteration. To say our Savior had no Mind that should be done which
he appointed, would be very absurd: Therefore what he once instituted, must
continue in force as his Mind still, unless they can show that he altered it;
and this would be another good Step toward our Union. They have now reduced
their praying to Saints departed, to a desire only that the Blessed would
assist them with their Prayers to God, as we desire good Men on Earth to pray
for us; but this not implying any Necessity of praying to them, though for no
more than to pray for us, it is great pity they will not lay down a Practice to
which our Apprehensions will never suffer us to be Reconciled. One would think
they that aggravate the Sin of Schism so much, should remove all Obstacles that
may be a hindrance of Union: The Order and Decency of God's Service would be no
way disturbed by such abatements. And let them look to it, that divide the
Church upon Points by their own confession not necessary; and no otherways to
be accounted for, but upon the pretended Authority of the Church. But this is
to enter into particulars, which I resolved to decline, having undertaken only
to examine that Pretense: And so I will wind up all in a short Advertisement,
That when I dispute against the Authority of the Church, I do not mean that
Power which every Church, as an Incorporate Society, must have to cast out of
her Communion such as walk Disorderly; nor that Power therefore which every
Church must have over Her Members to establish Rules for Decency and Order, in
the Circumstantials, the Ceremonies of Religion: But, I mean, that Authority
which the Church of Rome pretends to have over our Consciences and Faith; in
which Case we own no Master but one in Heaven.

Cui Tri-uni-Deo sit honor, laus and gloria, in secula seculorum. Amen.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
BEcause the Author could not attend the Press, to correct the Errors of it, he
prays the Reader to excuse the Faults he may find that are Literal, and such as
are in the Pointing; and read Page 4. Line 25. instances, p. 12. l. ult. but at
the rate of, p. 13. l. 20. it is in our Choice, p. 19. l. 20. Supposititious.


