A SERMON PREACHED AT St. Mildred's Poultrey, JANUARY 3. 1696-7. BY JOHN
Lord-Bishop of CHICHESTER, And Late RECTOR of the said Church, Upon his Leaving
that PARISH.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. And (...) at the Bible on the South Side of
the Royal Exchange. MDCXCVII.

To His Loving Friends, the Parishioners of St. Mildred's Poultrey, and St.
Mary Cole-Church.
HAVING in the following Sermon prevented my self of what might otherwise be
the fit Matter of such an Epistle; I have no more to say, than to recommend it
to your serious Perusal; and to desire you to Accept of it as a Testimony of
that unfeigned Love I have for you, and shall be ready always to express, in
our common Savior Jesus Christ; to whose Grace I Commend you. I am,

Your Faithful and Affectionate Servant JOHN CHICHESTER.

HEB. XIII. 20, 21. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
BEING upon the point of leaving this Station, in which I have continued for
the space of above Twenty three Years, it neither became me, nor indeed was I
willing to pass from it (where I have found so great a Respect, and have had as
great Satisfaction as any, I think, could have in that Condition); I say, I was
not willing to quit it, without a Solemn Farewell; and which to me is little
less Solemn, than if I were to leave you and this World together.

And therefore I shall at this time so endeavor to Speak, and I wish you may
also so attentively Hear, as if it was my dying-Sermon, and what I should
Preach, were it the last that ever I should Preach, and this the last time that
ever I should Converse with you.

The Sum of what I should say to you, or desire for your good, is contained in
the Words I have read. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead
our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd, etc.

In which Words we have set forth,

I. The State which every Christian is to aspire after, and that is, a
Perfection or Promptitude in every good work.

II. The Means by which that Perfection is to be acquired, and that is, by
God's Assistance; and therefore the Apostle begins with it; Now the God of
peace -- make you perfect, etc.

III. The Hopes or Assurance we have of Acceptance, and that it is
well-pleasing in his sight; and that is, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant; and of the Efficacy of which there is sufficient Testimony, when the
God of peace brought again Jesus our Lord from the dead.

The main of what I have to say, will fall upon the First of these, and that
is, The being perfect in every good work; which does suppose that there is no
Good Work but what a Christian must be practiced in. His Obedience must be
universal, and what is as large and extensive as the Law it self. And as the
Law which is to govern us would not be a perfect Law, were it deficient in any
Points requisite to be known, or in any Duties requisite to be done: So neither
is a Christian completely so, if he be deficient in any good Work which that
Law requires. Such as a Person is in all Points to be, such is the Rule to be;
and such as the Rule is, such is he in all Points to be. He that is a Perfect
Man, is in every state of Life alike; watchful over himself, and skilful in the
government of himself; he is Temperate, Holy, and Humble, Patient, Meek, and
Contented: Charitable in his Opinions and Characters of others; Just and Honest
in his Dealings; useful in Society. And he is not only thus extensive in
respect of the Duties he is to practice, but to be expert in them; perfect in
every good work; and that being spurred on by a fervent Zeal for the Glory of
God, and of doing good in the world, wisely takes hold of such opportunities
for exerting it, as fall in his way.

And now if we would know what those Good Works are which we are to be perfect
in, and what the Occasions are which we have for such Good Works, and the
Practice of them:

I shall consider you of this Auditory, that I am more especially to direct my
self to, under a Threefold Capacity.

I. As in a Public Relation, and what is usually called a Parish.

II. In a Domestical Relation, as in a more peculiar Relation, that of Families
and Households.

III. In a Personal Capacity, and what belongs to every one in particular.

I. As in a Parish.

This is in it self a very useful Constitution, and what, were it broken up,
and all laid in common without that distinction, we should soon find the want
of, in the Confusion we should be in. For as it is necessary that Mankind
should be ranged into Kingdoms, and those Kingdoms into Districts and Counties,
and those Counties into Towns and Cities; so it is very convenient, if not as
necessary, those Cities should be subdivided, and broken into lesser
Proportions; that the mutual Offices of Mankind one toward another, might be
the better executed.

And if it be so, there is a duty arising from each Member of that Society to
another, and much more to the whole; and which a Person can no more suppose
himself discharged from, than he can be a branch of a Family, and yet not be
obliged to seek and promote the Welfare of it. For a Parish can no more
subsist, and answer the ends of such a prudential and useful Constitution, than
a Family can be supported, without each Member of that Society do according to
his capacity contribute to the good of it.

And in the first place, the Peace of such a Society ought with the utmost
diligence to be maintained; and all Prejudices, and Passions, and private
Interests (the great Nurseries of Faction) ought to be laid aside. And no
Person, how displeasing soever another may be to him in respect of his Temper,
how prejudiced soever he may be against him in respect of any clashings that
have been between them, how repugnant soever their secular Interests may be, is
to right himself upon the Society's disturbance; but is to behave himself upon
all Parochial Meetings, and in all Parochial and Common Interests, as if they
were all of one Mind, and as embarked in the same design. In such cases no Man
is to act like a particular Person, but still to consider the Relation he
stands in to the Community; to know neither Friend nor Brother on one hand, nor
Enemy on the other, so as to do wrong to the whole, or to any particular of it;
but in the Apostle's Phrase, to bear one another burdens, and so to fulfill the
Law of Christ, that noble Law, That whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you, do ye also to them.

But there is a farther improvement of this Relation; for a Parish is not only
a Civil, but a Religious Society, instituted for the Service of the Church of
God, and for the maintenance of Religion; and this lays us under a stricter
obligation.

In this case, a Parish is but another Name for a Church; and each Member of
such a Society ought to have a mutual care for each other. Our Church does
suppose it, where notorious Offenders are to be taken notice of, and proceeded
against, and debarred the Communion, upon good information of their scandalous
Misbehaviour, till they have given satisfaction (if public) to the
Congregation.

But how could this be, if there were not a Society to whom this Offense is
given, and a Neighborhood that could (generally speaking) observe it?

And accordingly, as they are thus joined in Neighborhood by situation, and
in an Ecclesiastical Society by a Parochial Union; so there are acts of
Religion and Worship, which as of such Society they are to join and Communicate
in: And that under a general Character, is what we call Public Worship,
consisting in Prayers, Exhortations and Instructions, Psalms, and Sacraments.
And since these are the public Testimonies of Communion, and what we are
required by the Divine Command to Communicate in, how much are they to blame
that live in the neglect of these or any of these?

Of which there are Three sorts.

Some that are of another Communion, that join not in what we call Parochial;
this is a Case I will not at the present intermeddle in farther, than to wish
as St. Paul in another case, I would to God, that they all were altogether such
as we are that do join in this Parochial Communion; and that they would examine
carefully, and lay aside all Prejudices that arise not from the nature of the
things; and that they would think that the Peace of the Church and the Union of
Christians, are as Necessary, as they are Beneficial and Beautiful; and that in
order hereunto, they would come as far as they can. If this were done, I am
pretty confident, that if there were not a Union in Worship consequent upon it,
yet that the Differences would grow less, or at least, that the Charity would
be greater than the Difference is.

A Second sort are those, that are in Profession Members of our Parochial
Churches, but are in the largest sense Non-Communicants; that wholly, or
generally, live in the neglect of such Duties as are the Significations and
Symbols of that Communion; that do not frequent the Public Worship, but loyter
away that time, which the Nature of our Religion, the Precepts of the Gospel,
and the Laws of the Land have made it our Duty to observe: That take it ill if
they are not accounted Churchmen, and yet if you may judge of them by their
practice, are the remotest from that Character. We call others by the Names of
their Communion, according to what they Profess, whether Papists or
Protestants, whether Presbyterians or Independents, etc. But of what Church are
they who live in no Communion? That rarely or never appear in our Assemblies;
and whom ill Weather, or some Accident, or other Obligations, sometimes bring
to these places, and so may be at the best reputed but Occasional Communicants?

Next to these are they that I may call Partial Communicants; that are of the
Church as to one part, but live in the plain neglect of another, no less
necessary to be observed; those I mean that neglect what is called (from the
Eminence of it) the Communion. As if it were in their Power what to do, and
what to leave undone; and though our Lord has said, Do this in remembrance of
Me, neglect it, as it were in Contempt of him.

And now I am upon this Argument, I must mind you of another solemn Ordinance
of our Religion, that if we respect the Use and End of it, should first be
Treated of, and that is, Baptism. An Ordinance indeed not neglected; For who is
there amongst us that is not willing and forward to have his Children thereby
Matriculated and admitted into the Church of God? But if we consider how it is
generally Celebrated in Private, in the corner of a Room, in the presence of
scarce so many as will entitle the Company to a Congregation; it is far from
being a Solemnity, or from being treated as a Divine Institution; far from
answering the End of that Institution: For what is the End of that Ordinance,
but to initiate the Person into the Church of Christ, and to entitle him to the
Privileges of it? And where is that Society that he is admitted to? Is it not
when Assembled after the most Solemn and Conspicuous manner for the Worship of
God, and for the testifying of their Communion in it? And where is the
Profession to be made before such admission, where the Stipulation to be given,
where the Promise to undertake the Duties of a Christian, but where the Church
is? And how can all this be done in Confusion and Precipitance, without any
timely notice or preparation, without such an Assembly as the nature of the
thing, as well as the Order of the Church, in consequence of it, does require?
The Ordinance is certainly Public, Public in the Nature and End of it; and
such ought the Celebration of it to be: And the neglect of such a Celebration
is the less excusable, because it is so easily remedied.

But I come not here so much to Reprove as to Exhort; and do no farther tax the
neglect of such, than as it may serve to awaken them that are guilty of it, to
a sense of their Duty. O what an Honor would it be to Almighty God! what a
Service to our Religion! what a Means to sweeten our Tempers, and to treat each
other with Fairness and Simplicity, if as we are Men made of one blood, as we
are Christians and Redeemed by the Blood of one Common Savior, so we could all
come to join in the same Worship. What a glorious sight would it be when we
come into the other World, to find all of one Mind, no grudgings, no
animosities, no Sides nor Parties, no private or personal Interests, no
supplanting or undermining, but that all as much agree, as if they were but
one! That is a Church Triumphant indeed, without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing!

And is not the Church here a part of that Blessed Society, a Nursery to train
us up to it, and supposed to be endued with the same Divine Qualities, in a
lower degree and proportion? And how little resemblance is there between Church
and Church, if we Divide as if we are under different Heads, and had different
Creeds, and were in no expectation of having a Portion in the Blessed State
above? Whilst, I say, we Wrangle, and Divide, and Censure, and Revile, and
treat each other like the Wild Beasts of Africa, rather than Men, Christians,
and Brethren. These are things to be complained of wherever they are; but,
Beloved, I hope, and I may say of some, I know better things of you, and things
that accompany salvation.

Let it therefore be a Testimony of the Concernment you have for our Religion,
and of your Zeal for the Glory of God; nay, let it be a Testimony of the hope
you have of Salvation in the World to come; that you promote what you can the
Peace and Union of the Church and Place to which you do belong; that you be
Frequenters of the Public Worship of God, attentive Hearers of the Word,
Honourers of your Pastor that is to Instruct you, Devout Partakers of the Holy
Ordinances, especially of the Lord's Supper, and the Public Prayers, to which
the Scripture has annexed special Promises and Blessings.

And for what end is all this required? To what purpose was it that the Saints
of Old, and the Primitive Christians, chose to Die, and to expose themselves to
such Deaths, as came armed with the most formidable Terrors, rather than not
join in the Public Communion; but that this was in effect to Renounce their
Religion? And shall not we be as careful to do our part when it is so easily
and safely performed, and by our Attendance on the Divine Offices maintain the
Credit of Religion against Gainsayers, and testify as much as we can, That this
is our Religion, and what we believe to be the True?

Go to the ant, thou sluggard, says Solomon; and we may be sent to the
Mahometans and to the Heathens, and to those of a False Religion, and the
Disguisers and Corrupters of the True (I mean the Zealots of the Church of
Rome), to those of other Parties, to learn how to Honor our Religion, and to
bear Testimony to the Truth of it.

What a Reproach is it to see the Fields full and crowded, and the Churches too
often scandalously thin on the Lord's day?

To see on other days what a vast Concourse there is on the place of Commerce,
what Crowds pass along by the Church-doors, and how few are, in our Savior's
Phrase, able and willing to enter. How full are our Houses of Youth and
Servants, and of others that have in some hours of the day little to do? And
how often the most Busy have time to spare, and stand at the same time Idle and
Unemploy'd, when there is Public Notice given that the time of Divine Service
is then come?

If we were but prudent husbanders of our Time and Business, How easily might
the Public Service of every day, be made, for the most part, consistent with
the common Affairs of our Professions? And I will appeal to any that have
considered and tried it, whether this is not generally Practicable; and I will
appeal to those that think it Unpracticable, whether they have as carefully
computed this, as they have cast up their Books, or thought aforehand after
what manner to dispose of their time upon any day to the Advantage of their own
Affairs.

I would make all allowances that I can, and pass the most favorable
Constructions upon the urgency of Affairs; and in the conclusion must leave it
to every Man's Conscience (as the best Director) to answer for themselves.

This I am sure of, and what all must allow, that if there was a joint
concurrence in the Divine Worship, that all Persons were of one Mind, and with
one Mouth Celebrated the Divine Praises, that the Public Worship were
Universally frequented; it would be to the Honor of our Religion and Church,
and consequently to the Honor of God. And if I may speak my own Opinion, from
the best Observation I am able to make, If every one did what they could, if
each Person would well and impartially weigh his own Case; and those that are
Governors of others, and have Families, would consider how to proportion and
adjust their time to their Business; and lay aside what time they could well
and conveniently spare, the House and Service of God would never be without a
laudable Congregation. I desire no more in this case, than I did before of
others that Dissent from us, That Persons would do what they can. No Man knows
what he can do till he tries; till which every Difficulty seems impossible, and
every little Inconvenience a Difficulty, and every Appearance shall be an
Inconvenience.

God requires not according to what we have not, but according to what we have;
and has so wisely ordered things, that our Worldly Business and his Service may
be consistent; and we find no inconvenience to our selves, that out of Seven
Days he has reserved one to himself.

If this were left at large, and we had no such portion of time set apart by
Divine Institution, but were to do it of our selves, or were required by
Superiors, we should be apt, I doubt not, to complain, that it was impossible
for us to spare Fifty two days in a Year for such a Service, considering the
multiplicity of our Affairs, and the pressing Necessities we were under; we
should (I say) be apt to complain very heavily of such a restriction. And yet
notwithstanding what this would seem to be if we had not tried, we find it very
Practicable; and those that do Conscientiously Observe it, and rest from all
worldly Business on that Day, do as well dispatch their Affairs, and are as
successful, as those that do apply as much of it as they can or dare to their
own peculiar Service. And I am Confident, that so it would be here, if we did
but try, and endeavored to order our Affairs, and husband our Time to the best
Advantage. We should then, for the most part, find that we have spare People in
our Families, that may have leisure given them, or which those that are in
their own power may take, for the Serving of God.

Who could think but that in these Two Parishes, in which there are (if I
mistake not) about Seven hundred Communicants, there should be so many found as
should make up a Congregation every day; and when among the Hundred and Thirty
Houses, of which these United Parishes consist, there are not much above Twenty
of them that, of all Persuasions, do Dissent from us? Whoever considers this,
cannot well conceive, that all are alike employed, and have the same pretense
to excuse such an Omission, as tends in the consequence of it so much to show
our want of Zeal and Concernment for the Religion we Profess.

The Reformation of this depends upon Management and Consideration. And if upon
this they find it unpracticable, I dare be their Compurgator, and plead their
Excuse. But that I am in some measure secured there will be no occasion for.

Thus far I have Considered the First General; as you are in a Society, and of
a Parochial Communion.

II. I am to consider you under a Domestical Relation, that of Households or
Families.

We Read in the Epistles, Romans 16. 5.
of a Church in the House of Aquila at Corinth; 1 Cor. 16. 19.
which was when there was no Place in that City for Public Communion, or when
it was not permitted in the times of Persecution. But however, every
Christian-Family may maintain that Character, where the Master is a Priest, as
it were, and Presides over it: And as there is a Public Service for the
Public Congregation, so is there a Private due from the Private, in which he,
or some other fit Person Deputed by him, is to Officiate.

And the first Duty that offers it self to our Consideration, is that of
Domestical, or Family Prayer, with which the day should begin and end; being a
just Tribute we owe to Almighty God for our daily Preservation, and for all the
Advantages we receive from the Inspection and Bounty of his Good Providence.
Without which we do no more than the Beasts, who Receive, but have no Knowledge
of their Benefactor; nay, our condition seems to be worse than theirs, who have
such Faculties and Powers as they have not, and are made for Society, and reap
the Pleasure and the Benefit of it. And how unseemly is it for us that are
under one Roof, thus embodied into little Societies, that are conversant all
the day in Business relating to the good of the Family, and take no notice of
Almighty God, the common Guardian and Patron?

How would it look, and how would the Master of the Family resent it, if his
Children, or his Servants, should take no notice of him time after time, but
wherever they meet him, pay him no Respect, nor Obey his Orders, though he
Provides for them, is Kind to them, and continually Obliging them by his Favor
and his Care?

And what an Indignity is it then in the Master of the Household, and all under
his Roof, to Live upon the Bounty of Heaven, to be Preserved in their going out
and coming in, their lying down and rising up; to be Successful in the
beginning and end of their Affairs, through his Blessing, and yet to live as if
they had no need of, or were not beholding to such a Power?

And especially are these of our Communion the less Excusable, if there be any
(as I doubt there are too many) that are guilty of this neglect.

For these are satisfied in the Lawfulness and Expedience of Using a Form
(which some of other Communions Scruple) and which they may readily be
furnished with, out of the numerous Books of Devotion that are extant. If it
were otherwise, that they thought a Form of Prayer Unlawful, they might,
perhaps, plead a Disability as to themselves, a want of Elocution, a want of
Words, or Thoughts, or Assurance. And if it really were so, that there were a
Disability or Incapacity in the Person; and that a Form were in it self
Unlawful, or that they did in their Conscience conceive it so to be; then the
plain Consequence would be, That there could be no such Family Prayer performed
by him, and that Order of Devotion must unavoidably fall, as far as the Master
is concerned in it.

But whenas the contrary to this is true, and owned so to be; then there is no
excuse to be pleaded: For if he cannot Pray without a Form, yet there are Forms
for him every where to be had.

The next Duty incumbent upon the Guides and Governors of Families, is a due
regard had to the Behavior of those under their Care, and an Instruction of
the Younger sort especially in the necessary Principles of Religion and Virtue.

It is a great Advantage a Master of a Family herein has, and that beyond the
Minister; for he is near to them, Converses with them every day, can observe
their Humors, Inclinations and Demeanor, and so can apply himself in a
peculiar manner to them; and if he prudently manages these occasions, he may do
it to great advantage.

And especially is this evident in Catechizing and Instructing them; or if that
be too much, that he send them to be Catechized, or to hear the Catechetical
Expositions of his Pastor: This is no toil, takes up none of his own time; and
perhaps may be more to their Benefit.

This neglect, I must confess, is what Religion and the Public suffer much by;
as daily Experience shows. It is from the want of sowing the early Seeds of
Piety, that the Enemy takes the opportunity of sowing his Tares; not only of
False Principles, but of Evil Inclinations, and of improving them to their
final undoing.

Here the Mischief generally begins, from whence all Disorders in Families and
Societies do proceed: And therefore, though the Persons themselves are guilty
that fall into these evil Circumstances, and shall without Repentance suffer
deeply for it another day; yet they to whom the care of their Education did
belong, are also accountable for it. For the Governors of Families are not to
repute themselves to be single Persons (as I have before said in another Case)
and at liberty to do what they please, and to use their Authority only for the
service of their own Humor or Interest; but are to remember that they serve a
Master, as well as others are to serve them, the Lord of both Master and
Servant, the common Parent of Mankind, and therefore have a part to discharge,
and are answerable for.

And he that shall think he has done all when he provides Food and Clothing,
or Worldly Necessaries and Conveniences for them, and looks upon himself as
concerned no farther, puts his Children and Servants into the condition of his
Beasts, which have alike Treatment from him, according to their condition. No!
They have Souls as well as he himself, and his business is to see those as duly
cared for, according to his Power, and Capacity, and the Opportunities he has
for it.

If this were done, that every Family were thus a Church, and the Service of
God set up, and a care taken for the Education of Youth, and the bringing them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; What an alteration should we see
in the face of things? What a blessed change in the World? How much Quiet and
Comfort within doors, and how much Order without? The Church and the Nation
would reap the blessed Fruits and Advantages of it, and the Ages to come would
rise up and call that Blessed in which this Reformation did begin.

But on the other side, there is a Duty also belonging to the Inferiors; which
they should be as careful to Discharge; I mean Children and Servants, that they
be Submissive in their Behavior, Tractable and Obedient, Honest and Faithful
in the discharge of their Trust; as knowing, that though such may escape the
indiscerning Eye of their Master, who cannot observe and act all by himself
(for then what need would there be of Servants and Subordinate Officers) nor
penetrate into their private and clandestine designs; yet that there is a
greater Master, to whom, though invisible to us, nothing is invisible: Let them
remember (as the Apostle says) they serve the Lord Christ; and therefore be as
Diligent and Just in the Affairs committed to their Trust, Care and Management,
as if our Lord and Savior himself were visibly present, and would also be as
sure to discover them to their Superiors, as he is to know and observe them.

This leads us to the

IIId. Division, and that is,

The State of Particular Persons, and the Duty which every one is obliged to,
as to Himself, his Profession, and Station.

Here indeed we are naturally to begin; for if we learn to govern our selves,
we shall the better learn how to exercise all the parts of a Christian, as to
other Relations. If any man, says the Apostle, James 3. 2.
offend not in word, has the power over his own will and passions, the same is
a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body, whether it be the
Political or Oeconomical. But this is the hardest task, for a man may sooner
Govern others than himself; notwithstanding all the advantages he has for it,
and is, or should be, best known to himself. And if the Foundation be not laid
here in the renovation of a man's Temper, in the mortification of his lusts,
and the command of his passions, it must needs slacken and cool his endeavors
toward the reformation of any disorders that he is obliged, or is in his
power, to rectify. He therefore that will be a good Parishioner, a good Master,
a good Servant, and to say all, a good Christian, must begin with himself; Luke
22. 32.
and if he be thus converted, he will be able to strengthen his brethren. This
will then prompt him forward to lay himself out for the good of others,
wherever he is, and according to his Capacity and the opportunity he has for
it. He will then be fit for Society, who is neither apt to Provoke, nor to be
Provoked by others; but behaves himself with a seemly and a regular Temper. He
will then be Just in his Dealings, True to his Word, and be as cautious of doing
any Wrong, as any can be of suffering it.

He will then live in the fear of God, and not dare to do any thing wilfully,
that may offend the Divine Majesty, how great soever the Temptation be; nor
neglect any Duty that the Divine Precept has made necessary, how inconvenient
soever it may be to him. For such a one must be conceived to depend upon God in
all his Affairs, to commit himself by daily and constant Prayer to the Guidance
of his Providence, to set him before his Eyes, as the Spectator at present in
this World, and that will be the Rewarder of him in another.

This is the Character I would above all recommend to you, and which I am
certain, if you come up to, as it will be the best fruit of my Ministry, and of
the many Years I have spent in your Service, so it will be as much to your
everlasting advantage; when both Minister and People will rejoice together in
that happy and glorious Society we come into this World to prepare our selves
for. There is no better sight nor happiness in this World, than to see Brethren
to dwell together in Unity; and to find such a Correspondence and Concordance
in a Nation, City, Parish, or Christian Society, that there be no no breaking
in, Psalm. 144. 14.
nor going out; no reason for complaint in our Neighborhood; but that by a
holy emulation, each of you may strive to outdo one another in the mutual
offices of Charity and Kindness, and to be Exemplary to others, or to follow
the good example of others in all things becoming a Christian, and as those
that look for that blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the great God, Tit.
2. 13.
and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Here we are, indeed, a small Congregation Assembled together for the Worship
of God; and to take a solemn Farewell, as Minister and People, after we have
lived so long together in a Parochial Communion and Fellowship. But what is
this Assembly to the whole National Church of this Island (though for
Convenience it is divided into more than Ten thousand lesser Congregations)?
What our little Whole, comparatively to the Catholic Church now existent, and
dispersed far and wide upon the face of the Earth? And what is all this to the
general Assembly of all the Faithful Servants of God throughout all Ages that
shall be convened together, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
when our Lord shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in
all them that believe: This we are always to bear in mind. Here one Generation
comes, and another goes; but then we that are now divided into several Places
and Ages, shall at once stand before the Son of Man; 2 Cor. 5. 10.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad.

Then, and I tremble to speak it, I must appear as your Guide and Instructor to
give an account of my Stewardship, and of the Flock committed to my Care; and
you must appear as Disciples, to be accountable for what you have Heard and has
been Taught.

As for my own part, I am conscious of my own manifold Infirmities, and of the
Omissions known and unknown that I have been guilty of throughout the Exercise
of my Ministry among you; must beg Pardon of God and you: Of you, that you will
exercise your Charity in covering those Faults you may have observed; for
though I can say with the Apostle, Act. 20. 23.
I have coveted no man's silver or gold; yet I am far from pretending to the
other part of his Character.

As to Almighty God, the words of the Psalmist become me to use, Psalm. 130. 3,
4.
If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? but there
is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. It is that which I beg
for my self and you. And, O that the consideration of this might awaken us all
to a due sense of our condition! that we may so live and behave our selves in
this present state of trial, as that after a short life spent here, we may
enter into, and be partakers of the joy of the Lord.

And for which we have great advantages and encouragements, which are are no
less than the Divine Assistance, which God has Promised to bestow upon us, if
we sincerely desire it; and Acceptance through the Blood of Jesus our alone
Redeemer and Mediator.

And that this may be the Issue of all, and that you and I may meet together,
and for ever rejoice in the Society of Just Men made Perfect, shall be my, and
I hope will be your, constant Prayer, according to the Advice of our Apostle:

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his will; working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 11. l. 3. for would r. will. p. 17. l. 16. for Corinth r. Rome.


