The Valorous Warrior's Welfare, IN God's Victorious Warfare. A SERMON PREACHED
In His Majesty's English Camp, near the City of Ghendt in Flanders; Before the
BATTALION of His Royal Highness GEORGE Prince of Denmark, Under the Command of
the Right Honorable Colonel CHARLES CHURCHILL, Major General of His Majesty's
Forces in the NETHERLANDS. By WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Minister of the Gospel, And a
Son of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for John Pero, at the White Swan, and Edward Powel next the
Pump-Coffee-House in Little Britain; and sold by R. Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1696.

TO THE Most Magnanimous, Magnificent, and Munificent MONARCH, William the
Third (By GOD's Providential Appointment) KING of Great Britain, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
IN the lowest degree of Submission, I appeal to Your Regal Clemency for a
Royal Pardon, in presuming so Sublime and Supreme a Dedication, being very
conscious of my Imperfections to manage this Great Enterprise: Yet considering
that the meanest Loyal Subject has some Interest in the Favor of his Prince,
I emboldened my self on that account to shelter the follow Sermon under the
Defense of your Royal Patronage; which at its Promulgation in your Majesty's
English Camp in Flanders, gained the diligent Attention and Approbation of its
Auditors. In pursuance whereof, I briefly manifested and maintained, The
equitable Cause of your Majesty's late and continued Wars with the Adversaries
of your Realms and Government; The indubitable Pleasure of God in placing and
establishing your Royal Person on the Thrones of our Three Kingdoms; The
seasonable Preservation of our British and Irish Church, in the Principles and
Prerogatives thereof by your sacred Defense of her Christian and Catholic
Faith; The profitable Wea l of our Nation, by your Princely and Puissant Aid,
in securing the just Rights and Liberties of Freeborn Subjects; the
innumerable Deliverances of your Secular, Civil, and Martial Excellency, from
those dangerous and desperate Hazards to which you were often exposed by the
Fatal Peril of the Sword; And the incomparable Protection of your pious Person
from the Destructive Designs of Sanguinary Assassinates, whose Aim (in all
probability) was to subvert the present Government.

These particular Instances, with the whole Matter derived from the Subject of
my Warlike Discourse (though delivered in a plain and familiar Method) I humbly
Dedicate to the Condescension of your Royal and Favorable Perusal; being a
Pledge of that Impartial Love and Loyalty which shall be duly and daily paid to
your Regal Authority, by him who is, according to those Apostolical Rules, of
Fearing God, Honoring the King, with Subjection for Conscience, and Submission
for the Lord's sake,

Great SIR, Your Majesty's most Observant Subject, and Obeysant Servant, Wi.
Williams.

TO THE CAPITAL COMMANDERS, And All Other Military Officers, According to their
Respective Posts or Stations, Engaged in the Management of the English Army,
William Williams wishes, National, Personal, and Internal Tranquillity.
Temporal, Substantial, and External Prosperity. Spiritual, Immortal, and
Eternal Felicity.

Valorons and Victorious Martialists,
IT was the pleasure of Almighty God, as being the Tutor of Valiant David and
other Famous Worthies, of Heroic Spirits, before he instructed them in the Art
of Military Discipline, by teaching their Hands to War and their Fingers to
Fight (being Achievements fit for Combatants, and such as are trained in
Gladiatory Affairs) to assume unto his Sacred self the Champion Title of a Man
of War, in Exodus 15.8. where his Servant Moses declares in the same Scripture,
that the Lord is his Name: Thereby importing that Power, Courage, Success,
Victory and Triumph, are all of them Endowments proper and peculiar to God
alone; though by his Condescensive and Permissive Pleasure a communicative
Respect in a participative manner (having its Commission from himself) is
supernaturally instrumental, in causing admiring Mortals to Praise God, and to
Blazon the Braveryes, Adorn the Acts, or Fame the Feats of Military Men. This
sort of Martial Honor eminently appeared in the Public and Princely persons
of Saul and David, whose magnanimous and magnificent Victories over their
numerous Adversaries embellished the Trophies of their Conquering Triumphs,
with resounding Acclamations of Royal Renown and Popular Applause, which as
lasting monuments of their Hostile Exploits are Registered (to inform all
Humane Posterities) in the Canonical Chronicle of Sacred Histories, witness the
first Book of Samuel, Chap. 29 Ver. 5. where it is reported -- That the
Israelites sang one to another in Dances, saying, That Saul slew his Thousands,
and David his Ten Thousands, to Memorize the Fame of Fate and Fortitude.

This Account of the Slain amounting to Thousands, and Ten Thousands, seems to
intimate an unknown, innumerable, or numberless number; but as to the Armies or
Militia that were destroyed by the Generals, Chieftains, Centurions, and
Soldiers of David, we find that the Divine Warrior ascribed the Success which
attended his Arms and Weapons of Warfare, to the concurring and corroborating
Power of God, as it is apparently evident in the words of my present Text,
where he speaks these Courageous and Religious Expressions, -- Through God we
shall do valiantly; for he it is that shall tread down our Enemies. The Valiant
Acts here mentioned, or Valor derivative (in this Verse from God to Men) I
Christianly Conjecture was Experimentally observed by many Worthies, to whom I
Dedicate this Epistle, in their Warlike Enterprises relating to the late
Affairs of Ireland and Flanders, who with the rest here hinted, may lay a just
Claim to the Discourse issuing from the following Subject; which having the
Approbation of numerous attentive Auditors, and also their Importunity to have
it made public for the Benefit of the Army, I have by forcible Obligations
yielded to the sway of prevalency, and adventured (as far as Moderation allowed
me) to comply with their reasonable Request: And if it meet with some Thwarting
and Carping Dispositions of Captious or Conceited Critics, too much
intermedling and busying themselves in this Censorious Age, I assign Armed Men,
whose Cause and Right it is, both to Patronize and Defend its Innocence,
leaving such Causless Quarrellers on the Forlorn Hope of doing Injury, either
to Ministerial or Martial Authority. In ample Satisfaction or full Assurance
whereof, I commit the Army, the Fleet, my Self, and all that desire the Welfare
of our Three Kingdoms, to God's Gracious Protection and Providence; remaining,

Most Courageous Worthies, Your Devoted Friend and Servant, William Williams.

The Valourous Warriors Welfare, in God's Victorious Warfare. As it was
Delivered in a SERMON PERTAINING To the English Army in Flanders, and Preached
On Psalm. LX. Ver. 12. Through God we shall do Valiantly: for he it is that
shall tread down our Enemies.
THIS Psalm, whereof my Text is a part, was Compiled by the Military Monarch
David, when he and his Army waged War, or strove with Aram Naharaim, and Aram
Zoba, even at the return of Joab the Son of Zerviah, (who was a Chief Officer
over the Host of David (from slaying of the Syrians or Edomites in the Valley
of Salt, to the number of Eighteen Thousand Men. The History of which
Engagement, you may find Recorded in 2 Samuel 8.1, to 17. and also in 1 Chronicles.
18.1, to 16. in which Relation we may observe, that Holy David was very
Successful in his Warlike Enterprises, for he overcame many Potent Kings and
Kingdoms, through a fixed Affiance in the Faithfulness and All Sufficiency of an
Infallible and Omnipotent God, who is the most Magnificent Monarch, and
Mightiest Warrior, of whom Moses says in Exodus 15.3. The Lord is a Man of
War, the Lord is his Name, or his Name is Jehovah, which denotes both his
Holiness and Hostility. This Military Description of God may be fitly styled
the Soldiers Armory or Magazine, where not only his Carnal, but also Spiritual
Weapons, Accoutrements and Ammunition are constantly kept in a Warlike
Readiness: It is as it were the Tower of David, whereon there hang a Thousand
Bucklers, all Shields of Mighty Men, as you may Read in the 4th Chapter of
Canticles or Song of Solomon, at the 4th Verse: Or as that Tower of Solomon
mentioned in Prove. 18.10. where it is said, that -- The Name of the Lord is a
strong Tower, the Righteous runs into it, and is safe. Therefore let us
betake our selves to this strong Citadel, or Invincible Garrison, which is the
Christian Combatant's Fort Roval, where the Captain of our Salvation is Christ
Jesus, and the Generalissimo of our Believing Forces, God Almighty, whose
Banner over us is Love, and that stronger than Death; for many Waters could not
quench his Love, neither could the Floods drown it, as you may note in Cant.
8.7. This is that Love which surpasses Knowledge, whereof the Apostle St. Paul
speaks in Ephesians. 3.19. The Superlative Transcendeney of which is apparently made
manifest in the Miraculous and many Renowned Victories obtained (over their
Enemies) by the Adventurous Armies, and Courageous Champions of the Living God;
under whose Irresistible Power, not only Royal David in particular, but also
his Loyal Host in general, did Valorously resolve to Encount or and Conquer
their Adversaries, yet so, as at the same time, and in the mean space, that
with one Unanimous and Harmonious Consent, they voluntarily and devoutly
ascribed unto God, (to whom it was due) even the Glorious and Praiseworthy
Success of their Valiant and Vigorous Victories, according to these Heroical or
Martial Expressions of my present Text, where Divine and Undaunted David, as it
were after an Alarm to take up Arms, made this Consolatory Speech unto his
Army, Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
Enemies.

This Portion of Scripture, being the Subject of my Warlike Discourse, has its
Foundation laid on the most durable and unmovable Rock of Ages, namely, God
himself; and that by a Matchless Monarch of Israel, to wit, the Militant and
Triumphant David, in which Text, as a Garrison Town, or City of Refuge, he has
Erected on the East Side an Heavenly Castle of Safety, and on the West an Holy
Tower of Security: The Heavenly Castle of Safety, importing God's Favorable
Presence with his People, in Countenancing them to defy the fierceness of
their Enemies, according to these former words of my Text, Through God we shall
do valiantly: The Holy Tower of Security, implying God's powerful Providence to
his People, in Encouraging them to Defeat the Forces of their Adversaries, as
concurring with these last Expressions in my present Subject, For he it is that
shall tread down our Enemies.

Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
Enemies.

In walking the Rounds of this Text, Town, or City of Refuge, which has God
seated in the Circuit, Situation and Center thereof, for its Safety, as also
Sallying the Ports, viewing the Rampires, Platforms, Counterscarps, Fortresses,
Flankers, Battlements, Bulwarks, and Batteries thereof. Besides, a Castle and a
Tower Erected on the Eastern and Western sides, to prevent the Storming,
Surprising, Besieging, Invading or Taking of the same by Force; I likewise
discovered it strongly fortified on the North and Southsides, with two other
Regal Citadels, or Royal Forts of Defense, and they are these which I shall
describe unto you.

First, King David's Divine Consideration, That the Foundation of a Just War in
the Defense of his Peoples Lives, Laws, Liberties and Religion, has its
Victorious Dependency on the Supreme Power and Providence of God, the which is
apparently evident in the front of my present Text, where the purpose of God in
preserving his People from the violent Enterprises of their Enemies, is thus
Elegantly and Excellently expressed, Through God we shall do valiantly.

Secondly, King David's Divine Suggestion, That though the People of God may be
Instrumental in subduing their Enemies, yet the Success that makes their Foes
their Footstool, is a principal Prerogative only peculiar to God himself: And
this is likewise apparent in the Rear of my present Subject, where the pleasure
of God in punishing his Peoples Adversaries, is thus Emphatically and
Pathetically worded, For he it is that shall tread down our Enemies.

Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
Enemies.

I have divided my Text into Two Parts or Portions, like Two Regiments or
Battalions of Soldiers, in which respect it represents the Right and Left Wings
of an Army. But having thus opened my Text, both to the Right and Left, that I
may put it again in a proper form, I shall reduce the Divisions as they were,
and thereby bring it to its close Order, drawing up the main Body thereof into
a more Complete and Warlike Posture, by demonstrating unto you in a
considerable measure, what Glorious Conquests the Successful and Successive
Sabaoths or Hosts of God, obtained in former Ages over their Adversaries: In
order to which Demonstration, I design through God's Gracious Assistance, to
speak unto the Two Chief Generals, or General Heads, posted at the Royal
Standard of my Text; as in the

First place, To King David's Divine Consideration, That the Foundation of a
Just War in the Defense of his Peoples Lives, Laws, Liberties, and Religion,
has its Victorious Dependency on the Supreme Power and Providence of God.

Secondly, To King David's Divine Suggestion, That though the People of God may
be Instrumental in subduing their Enemies; yet the Success that makes their
Foes their Footstool, is a principal Prerogative only peculiar to God himself:
Both which Observations are inseparately included, and completely comprehended
within the Bounds and Limits of my Celestial Subject, where in Expectation of
Aid from the Deity to suppress his Adversaries; it is thus Dictated by Devout
David, Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down
our Enemies.

In all the Series of Holy Scripture, we may evidently behold, that when
Almighty God intended to accomplish some Notable Deliverance to his People, he
gave them to understand (in the mean space) that it was not so much their own
Might and Manhood, as it was his mere Mercy that saved them: And this is very
Conspicuous in the Courageous Resolutions, and Admired Actions of the Religious
Israelites, who by their Military Affair, and God's Favor, overcame no less
than Thirty One Considerable Kings and Kingdoms; as you may Read in the 12th
Chapter of Joshua, where there is a perfect Catalogue of their Names and
Number; the first being the King of Jericho, mentioned in the 9th Verse; and
the last the King of Tirza, specified in the 24th Verse, which consummates or
concludes the same Chapter.

Thus you see, according to the Words of my Text, how the Israelites did
valiantly; for God did tread down their Enemies.

Israel, above all the Nations in the World, had the Honor of fighting the
Lord's Battles; and when they wanted Champions or Conducts for their
Encouragement, God was entreated by them, that his Power might appear in the
cause of their Warfare: Who, according to his own good pleasure, sent several
Rescuers, that protected them from Multitudes of malicious Enemies; one of
whose Deliverers, or Savior's, (as his Name imports it) was Joshua the Son of
Nun, Moses his Minister and Successor; for he destroyed the Anakims in the Land
of Israel; he also overcame many Prince's that resisted them, and hanged five
noted King's, on five several Trees, that were their Adversaries; namely,
Adoni-Zedeck King of Jerusalem, Hoham King of Hebron, Piram King of Jarmuth,
Japhia King of Lachish, and Debir King of Eglon, as you may read in the 9, 10,
11, and 12 Chapters of Joshua. Thus Joshua did valiantly; for God did tread
down his Enemies.

Secondly, The Israelites were delivered from the bold Attempts of the
Aramites, by Othniel the Son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger Brother, and the Land
had rest forty years, as it is observable Judge. 3.9, 10, 11. Thus Othniel did
valiantly; for God did tread down his Enemies.

Thirdly, The Israelites were preserved from the Molestations of the Moabites,
by Ehud the Son of Gera a Benjamite, a Man left handed, when they slew of the
Children of Moab about Ten thousand Men, all lusty, all Men of Valor; so that
the Land had rest fourscore years, as you may note in Judge. 3.15, 29, 30. Thus
Ehud did valiantly; for God did tread down his Enemies.

Fourthly, The Israelites were succored from the Fury of Philistines, by
Shamgar the Son of Anath, who slew Six hundred Philistines with an Ox-goad; and
he also delivered Israel, as it is apparent in Judge. 3.31. Thus Shamgar did
valiantly; for God did tread down his Enemies.

Fifthly, The Israelites were desended from the Incursions of the Canaanites by
Deborah a Prophetess, the Wife of Lapidoth, and Barak the Son of Abinoam of
Kadesh-Nepthali, who by the assistance of God, prevailed against Jabin King of
Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin King of Canaan; as is specified in Judge.
4.6, 24. Thus Deborah and Barak did valiantly; for God did tread down their
Enemies.

Sixthly, The Israelites were saved from the Mischiefs of the Midianites by
Jerubaal, that is, Gideon the Son of Joash the Abi-ezraite, who discomsited an
Host of Men with broken Potsherds, Lamps, and Rams-horns, together with the
Noise of the People, who cried earnestly before their Enemies, until they were
daunted, routed, and ruined: The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, as it is
recorded in Judges 7.20, 21. His Messenger also took two Princes of the
Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and they slew Oreb upon the Rock Oreb, and Zeeb they
slew at the Wine Press of Zeeb; and they pursued Midian, and brought the Heads
of Oreb and Zeeb unto Gideon, on the other side Jordan, as it is remarkable in
Judge. 7.24, 25. Also Gideon arose, and slew Zeba and Zalmunna, two chief Kings
of Midian, as farther appears in Judge. 8.21. Thus Gideon did valiantly; for God
did tread down his Enemies.

Seventhly, The Israelites were protected from the Arms of the Ammonites, by
Jepthah the Gileadite, a mighty Man of Valor, who smote the Children of Ammon
from Aroer till thou come to Minnith, even twenty Cities; and unto the Plain of
the Vineyards, with a very great Slaughter. Thus the Children of Ammon were
subdued before the Children of Israel, as you may find it written in Judge.
11.33. Thus Jephthah did valiantly; for God did tread down his Enemies.

Eighthly, The Israelites were freed from the Forces of the Philistines by
Samson, who slew a Lion: He killed thirty Philistines for thirty Changes of
Garments; burnt their Corn with Firebrands tied to three hundred Foxes Tails;
carried away the Gates of Gaza; destroyed a thousand Men with the Jaw Bone of
an Ass; and by pulling upon him the Theater of the Philistines, slew more at
his death than he did in his lifetime, as the Histories thereof make mention,
in the 14th, 15, and 16th Chapters of Judges. Thus Samson did valiantly; for
God did tread down his Enemies.

Ninthly, The Israelites were secured from the Onsets of the Ammonites,
Moabites, and Inhabitants of Mount Seir, through the gracious and seasonable
Advice of good King Jehosaphat, together with the Divine Assistance of Almighty
God; as it is penned 2 Chronicles. 20.20, 21, 22. where the Relation is thus worded:
Here me, O Judah, and ye Inhabitants of Jerusalem; believe in the Lord your
God, so shall you be established; believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper.
And when he had consulted with the People, he appointed Singers unto the Lord,
and that should praise the Beauty of Holiness, as they went out before the
Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for his Mercy endures for ever. And when
they began to sing and to praise, the Lord set Ambushments against the Children
of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were come against Judah, and they were
smitten, Thus Jehosaphat did valiantly; for God did tread down his Enemies. In
the

Tenth place, I shall, through God's Providential permission, demonstrate unto
you some of the Noble Acts of Royal David, who (being the Man after God's own
Heart) always won the Field of the Lord's Battle under the Lord's Banner;
according to these expressions of my present Text: Through God we shall do
valiantly; for he it is that shall tread down our Enemies.

We read in the Acts of renowned David, that when he was but a ruddy Youth, he
killed a Lion and a Bear, as also slew the Chief Champion of the Philistines,
namely, the Great Goliath of Gath; as you may read in the 17th Chapter of the
First Book of Samuel. He smote two hundred Philistines, for which Exploit he
had the Honor of Majestical Assinity, in being made the King's Son-in-Law, as
appears in 1 Samuel 18. He took a Spear, and a Pot or Cruise of Water that stood
at Readiness head, as you may note in 1 Samuel 26. He warred the Lord's Warfare, and
slew Rechab, and Baana his Brother, the Sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, as you
have it observable in 2 Samuel 4. He overcame the Philistines twice; he took the
Fort Sion; he restored the Ark; he prepared for the Building of the Temple he
overthrew the Aramites, and all his Enemies, as you may farther remark in the
5th and 6th Chapters of the Second Book of Samuel. Thus, according to the words
of my Text, David the Darling of God did valiantly; for He did tread down his
Enemies.

These are some of the Royal Prophet's Achievements, who upon such
Undertakings always consided in God's willingness and readiness to assist his
Endeavors, in all necessary Engagements: For the Lord himself, who is a Man of
War, vested him in an heavenly and impenetrable Coat of Mail, or spiritual
Armor, according to those prudent and prevalent Expressions, of his unbiased
Resolution and Reliance, recorded Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3. where he thus expostulated
with himself, touching his holy Warfare: The Lord is my Light and my Salvation;
whom shall I fear? The Lord is the Strength of my Life; of whom shall I be
afraid? When the Wicked, even mine Enemies and my Foes came upon me to eat up
my Flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an Host should encamp against me, my
Heart shall not fear: Though War should rise against me, in this will I be
consident.

This ought to be the courageous Resolution of all sincere Christians, but more
especially of Christian Soldiers, who seem to carry their Lives in their Hands,
and are observed to stand upon the brink of the Grave: Yet if such conside with
David, in the corroborating Power of God, taking cognizance of the Equity of
our late continued War, and the just demerit of the Cause thereof, being in
defense of Christ's Gospel, and such Kingdoms, Territories, Dominions, and
Provinces, as maintain his true Religion, together with the Lives, Laws, and
Liberties of freeborn Subjects, who are thereby protected from infringing
their Privileges, invading their Properties, and infecting the Principles of
their pious Profession: Doubtless such necessary Warriors may have a welcome
Access to the acknowledgment of my present Text, in order to defend God's Word
with David's Sword, and there to say with the sacred Psalmist: Through God we
shall do valiantly; for he it is that shall tread down our Enemies.

In this place, I have formed or framed my Text, to bear a lively
Representation of the late Assairs of our British Nation; where a Party of its
Inhabitants, like the disturbed Israelites, have had several Commotions both
with domestic and foreign Enemies: This Truth is experimentally memoriz'd by
many of us, who, through God's gracious permission, have our continuance
hitherto in the Land of the living. But what shall we say to these things?
since God has been for us, who could be against us? For through God we have
done valiantly; he trod down these our Enemies.

It was the good Pleasure of God Almighty, in sundry, and some late years past,
to send variety of Judgments upon the Kingdom of England, that the Inhabitants
thereof might learn Righteousness; as Isaiah speaks, Chap. 26.9. But as the
pious Prophet David says, in Psalm. 28.5. we have not regarded the Works of the
Lord, nor the operation of his Hands, either in the late noisome Pestilence
which swept away thousands (in the Metropolitan City of the said Realm, namely,
London) hurrying them into the dark and gloomy Chambers of the Grave; nor the
raging Fire, which burnt up the Dwellings of many thousand Families, burying
them in their own Ruins; nor the revenging Sword, that in the Series of War
slew a marvelous multitude of our Martial Men, in their Engagements with
furious Enemies: And because we are not yet reclaimed by all these signal and
singular Tokens of God's Displeasure with us, we may justly fear, that
Providence prepares some other severer Judgment, either utterly to destroy us
from off the face of the Earth, or to force us in it unto better Obedience. And
to this purpose are those terrible Threatenings of a rewarding God, recorded in
Levit. 26.15, 16, 17, 18. where he speaks these dreadful Expressions: If ye
shall despise my Statutes, or if your Soul shall abhor my Judgments, so that
you will not do all my Commandments, but that ye break my Covenant: I also will
do this unto you; I will even appoint over you Terror, Consumption, and the
burning Ague, that shall consume the Eyes, and cause sorrow of Heart: And ye
shall sow your Seed in vain, for your Enemies shall eat it. And I will set my
face against you, and ye shall be slain before your Enemies. They that hate
you, shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when none pursues you. And if ye
will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then will I punish you seven times
more for your sins.

Here we have a satisfactory Account, in what way or method God usually
proceeds to inflict his Wrath upon refractory Sinners: First, he imposes one
Calamity; and if that reclaim them not, then he will add a second, sometimes
doubling that with a fourth, or trebbling it with the sixth Affliction. And if
all these work not upon the hardness of their Hearts, then will he prepare
another, that like Nebuchadnezzar's Fiery Furnace, shall be seven times more
punishable than the former. Moreover, it is the Customary Phrase of God in
Scripture, when his Holiness would deter us from Vice, to threaten our
Destruction with Vengeance, as in Deuteronomy. 32.35. where he says, To me belongs
Vengeance and Recompense. Again, he speaks in Ver. 41. of the same Chapter, If
I whet my glittering Sword, and mine Hand take hold on Judgment, I will render
Vengeance to mine Enemies, and will Reward them that hate me. And in Ezekiel.
25.17. thus says the Lord concerning the Destruction of the Philistines and
Cherethims, I will execute great Vengeance upon them with furious Rebukes; and
they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall lay my Vengeance upon them.

Hence it is observable, that as the heavy Judgments of God are made so
unconceivably intolerable, by the weight of Divine Vengeance, our safest Course
in avoiding of them, is to flee from Sin to his Sanctuary, and there humbly and
devoutly pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, for they shall all prosper that love
Communion with the Church of God; and that your Requests may be made
conformable to God's most holy Will, at all times, in all places, and upon all
occasions, both Christ and his Church to that end have furnished you with
sufficient Rules of Devotion, he in the form of his gracious Petitions, and she
in the frame of her Pious Ejaculations: He in his Petitions saying, Lead us not
into Temptations but deliver us from Evil; and she in her Allusive Ejaculations
saying, From all Evil and Mischief, from Sin, from the Crasts and Assaults of
the Devil, from thy Wrath, and from Everlasting Damnation, good Lord deliver us.

Many Material Circumstances might be alleged to demonstrate our Church and
its Government consistent with the Divine Will and Pleasure of God, for she is
so highly in Favor with the Highest, that he removed those who caused her
Breaches, far from her, in order to uphold her Walls and Bulwarks; yea, her
Interest appears so Interested in God, that he lately Dethroned a King that
offended her, and in his stead, Enthroned a King to defend her. This is the
Lord's doing, it is Mavelous in our Eyes; as the Kingly Prophet expresses it
in Psalm. 118.23. For Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West,
nor from the South. But God is the Judge: He puts down one, and sets up
another, as appears, Psalm. 75.6, 7. That this Dethronement and Establishment
was God's own Handywork, is Divinely Vindicated by the Prophet Daniel in the
Unparalled Case; and Preternatural Condition of King Nebuchadnezzar; who for
his unsufferable Arrogance, was Exiled from the Society of Rational Men, to
take his Abode and Food with the unreasonable Beasts of the Field; touching
whom the said Daniel in his second Chapter at the 20th and 21th Verses, spoke
on this Wise, Blessed be the Name of God for ever and ever: for Wisdom and
Might are his. And he changes the Times, and the Seasons: He removes Kings,
and sets up Kings: He gives Wisdom unto the Wise, and Knowledge to them
that know Understanding. Again, we Read in the 37th Verse of the same Chapter,
that the Prophet said to the King on this manner, Thou, O King, art a King of
Kings; for the God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength,
and Glory. Moreover Daniel told him in the 4th Chapter of his Prophecy at the
25th Verse, That the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will. Thus we see that the disposal of Earthly Kingdoms, is a
peculiar Prerogative absolutely pertaining to the King of Heaven; for God being
an Universal Monarch, has ageneral Title attributed unto him, in Jer. 10.7.
where he is styled by the Prophet, The King of Nations. And that because all
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, in their Enthronements, wear their Crowns, sway
their Scepters. govern their Kingdoms and Principalities, by God's own special
Authority: This Truth bears the Badge of his warrantable and undoubted
Testification, in the 8th Chapter of Solomon's Proverbs, Ver. 15. where he
speaks these certain and significant Expressions, By me Kings Reign, and
Princes Decree Justice. This Assirmation has sufficient Assertions of
Scripture to assure it, as in 2 Samuel 12 7. where God by the Mouth of his
Prophet Nathan, spoke these words unto David, I anointed thee King over Israel:
Solomon also acknowledged, that the Lord had placed and established him on the
Throne of his Father David, as you may Read in 1 Kings 2.24. Moreover it was
the saying of Ahijah in the Person of God to Jeroboam, I will give the Kingdom
unto thee; as it is observable in 1 Kings 11.35. By all these Scripture
Instances it plainly and punctually appears, that the removing and settling of
Crowned Heads, relate to God's Dispensative Power; and therefore we may say of
God in such Cases, as Job spoke concerning the Life and Death of his Children,
in, Job 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name
of the Lord. Having thus proved unto you, that the Government of this Lower
World, is according to the Rule of God's undeniable and unlimitted Authority;
so neither the Kingdoms, nor Power of Princes, but all things else proper unto
them, are after a peculiar manner God's, their Crowns, their Anointing, their
Globes, their Scepters, their Thrones, and the Government thereof are his; and
their Persons adorned with all these Endowments, are so Sublime and Sacred,
that they are compared for Excellent Eminency, or Eminent Excellency, unto the
Angels of God, in 2 Samuel 14.17. and also styled Gods, by a Deify'd kind of
Dignity, and called the Children of the most High, in Psalm. 82.6.

From these and such like Observations, the sanctified Vessel St. Paul, that
great Apostle and Patron of the Gentiles, compiled an Excellent Lecture of
Loyalty, in order to oblige both Religious and Rebellious Subjects, to bear
true Allegiance and submissive Obedience unto their Supreme and Lawful
Superiors; the which you may find Recorded in Romans 13.1, 2. where it is thus
worded, Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers; for there is no
Power, but of God. The Powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation. Hence it is observable, that as every
individual Person ought to be in subjection to his superior and inferior
Rulers, by reason that the Power of their Government is derivative from God,
and the Governors now in being, Established by his Ordinance, whom to resist,
is plain opposition to God's own Order, for which resistance they become liable
to receive unto themselves the Reward or Stipend of Damnation. Therefore to
abandon Disloyalty, being the Cause of this Damnable Alotment, as Religious
Servants to God, Loyal Subjects to the King, and Loving Sons of the Church: Let
us that are her Empal'd Children firmly stand in God's, the King's, and the
Church her Cause, resolving, that in case no other Kingdom or Nation, should
accommodate us with their Assistance, neither to dread, nor to be dismayed at
it, although our present Enemies, whomsoever they are, may seem much more in
number than our selves, for the Race is not always to the swift, nor the Battle
still to the strong, but to those that have God for their powerful Copartner;
for there is no restraint to the Lord, to save by many or by few, as it is
observable in 1 Samuel 14.6. This Truth is farther confirmed by the Divine
Expressions of Asa, who with an Army of Five Hundred and Fourscore Thousand
Men, waged War with Zerah the Ethiopian, whose Host consisted of a Thousand
Thousand in number, as you may note in 2 Chronicles. 14.8, 9, 10. Moreover it is
said in Verse 11. That Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, it is
nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no Power:
Help us, O Lord our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy Name we go against
this multitude; so the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah,
as you may Read in Verse 12. of the same Chapter: These Excellent Observations
have their full and clear Evidence in Deuteronomy. 20.1, 2, 3, 4. where God granted
unto Israel a Warlike Commission Sealed with his own Hand, and delivered with
his own Mouth, in these Expressions Recorded by Moses, When thou go to
Battle against thine Enemies, and see Horses and Chariots, and a People more
than thou, be not afraid of them; for the Lord thy God is with thee, which
brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. And it shall be when ye are come nigh
unto the Battle, that the Priest shall approach and speak unto the People, and
shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, you approach this day unto Battle against
your Enemies; let not your Hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither
be ye terrified because of them; for the Lord your God is he that goes with
you, to fight for you against your Enemies, to save you. In this Divine
Commission, we have a Reviving Cordial to cheer up the drooping Spirits of a
faint-hearted Soldier; for it is matter of no great moment to him whether his
Enemies are many or mighty, since he has the Infallible Promise of the most
Mighty to take his part in all Lawful Engagements; then a Thousand may fall at
his side, and Ten Thousand at his Right Hand, but it shall not come nigh him.
God will be with him in Trouble, to deliver him, and honor him. With long Life
also will he satisfy him, and show him his Salvation, as it is expressed in
Psalm. 91.7, 15, 16. Therefore for such a Deliverance as is here promised, let
us give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name; for God is never more
pleased with us, than when his Heavenly Majesty is most praised by us: A
frequent Acknowledgment of God's Praises, is an undeniable means of obtaining
our desired Deliverances: And to this end, because our frail Lives are
uncertain, by reason of Destructive Wars, with other daily Casualties; and that
while we have our continuance on this side the Grave, we may live in God's
fear, and in our departure hence, Die in his Favor, thereby to obtain Eternal
Felicity. I humbly crave your Christian Patience for some few Moments, that I
may discover unto you what Praise is, together with the Fruits and Effects of
it in Ten brief Particulars; also how God is to be praised, in Six Compendious
Points.

First then, Praise is the End, or Ultimate part of our Devout Petitions; for
we call upon, and importune God to bestow on us out of the Rich Treasury of his
Bounty, and unexhausted Supplies, such Benefits as are most necessary or
needful, both for our Corporal and Spiritual Necessities, that we may bless and
praise him for the same; to which purpose Holy David in 1 Chronicles. 16.35.
teaches us a Divine Method how to sweeten our Prayers with Praises, according
to these Expressions, Save us, O God of our Salvation, and deliver us, that we
may give thanks to thy Holy Name, and Glory in thy Praise.

Secondly, Praise makes Petition powerful, for God is most ready and willing
to hear their Petitions, whose Hearts are inclinable to praise him, in giving
due Thanks for former Benefits, we do as it were engage God thereby, to confer
upon us further or future Blessings. For on this Direction of David in Psalm.
50.14. Offer unto God Thanksgiving, the Lord himself made this Gracious Promise
in the next Verse, Call upon me in the day of Trouble, I will deliver thee.

Thirdly, Praise is a due Debt, which Petitioners are bound to pay; for he that
inviteth thee to call upon him, and promises thy Deliverance from Trouble,
requires and expects that Compensation or Recompense from thee, as to Reward
his Promise with thy Praise, according to these Expressions of deserved
Retaliation, Recorded in Psalm. 50.15. Thou shall glorify me.

Fourthly, Praise is the full Requital that we can give unto God for every good
and perfect Gift, which his Divine Benignity bestows upon us; for when the
praying and praising Psalmist propounded this Question in Psalm. 116.12. What
shall I render unto the Lord, for all his Benefits toward me? The Answer or
Resolution was thus given in Ver. 13. I will take the Cup of Salvation, and
call upon the Name of the Lord: As if David should have said, I will offer a
solemn Sacrifice, wherewith, wherein, or whereby I may clearly manifest the
numerous and tremendous Deliverances or Preservations which God has afforded
to me; for by way of Exposition, he adds these words in Ver. 17. of the same
Psalm, I will offer to thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and will call upon
the Name of the Lord.

Fifthly, Praise is a Satisfactory Evidence of that good Respect which we owe
to the Lord our God. By Petition, we show that favor which we bear toward our
selves. The Ten Lepers who came unto Christ, lifting up their Voices, and
saying, Jesus, Master have Mercy on us, Luke 17.13. showed a care of their own
welfare, only one who returned to give Glory unto God, discovered his
Carefulness of the Lord's Honor.

Sixthly, Praise is so prevalent a Duty, that it moves God to show good
Estimation or Respect to Men; for he that said in 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor
me, will I honor, without Controversy will perform so punctual a Promise.

Seventhly, Praise is the greatest Honor that we can give to Almighty God, for
it is his own Declaration or Acknowledgment, in reference to his Divine and
Essential Fame, Recorded in Psalm. 50.23. He that offers Praise, glorifieth me.

Eighthly, To Praise God, is the most Excellent Piece of Religious Service that
in this World can be performed; and also all the Celestial Spirits are
concerned herein, as it is observable in Rev. 5.13. where he says, That every
Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as
are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing, Honor,
Glory and Power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
Ever and ever.

Ninthly, A setting forth of God's Praise, is an indubitable means to enliven
the Spirit, and to make the Heart of Man more ready, active, and cheerful in
performing the Duty of Prayer; for when David's Heart was in a prepared Temper
to praise God, he presently applies himself thereto, and by confessing his
stability therein, said to his Tuneable Tongue, and Musical Instruments, in
Psalm. 57.7, 8. 9. My Heart is sixed, O God, my Heart is fixed: I will sing and
give praise. Awake up my Glory, awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake
early. I will praise thee, O Lord, among the People, I will sing unto thee
among the Nations. When the Spirit of a Man is under an undisposedness to pray,
let him then meditate on the Mercies and Excellencies of God, by which Divine
Contemplations, he shall find a Spiritual Vivification and Vigor put into him.

Tenthly and Lastly, Praise is comely or pleasant, as Devout David phrases it
in his acceptable Psalms of Thanksgiving; but Ingratitude is one of the most
odious and vicious Qualities that can be named, for Israel's ungratefulness or
unthankfulness was the only Cause of their Captivity, as you may Read in 2 Chronicles. 36.16, 17. where part of the History is thus related, They mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
Wrath of the Lord arose against his People, till there was no Remedy. Therefore
he brought upon them the King of the Chaldees, who slew their young Men with
the Sword, in the House of their Sanctuary, and had no Compassion upon young
Man or Maiden, old Man, or him that stooped for Age; he gave them all into his
Hand. We find that unthankfulness was the main Reason why God gave the Gentiles
over to a Reprobate Sense, in Romans 1.21. and Christians over to
Antichristianism, as you may note in 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. This also caused
that Nebuchadnezzar was transformed into the Nature of a Beast, as you may Read
in Dan. 5.20, 21. And that Herod was eaten up of Worms, as it is Recorded in
Acts 12.23. Therefore let us learn from their harms to beware of Ingratitude,
and even at this present instant, or juncture of time, return Thanks unto God
for those great Deliverances and manifold Mercies, which we continually Enjoyed
from the Moment of our Nativity, to this present Opportunity, resolving from
henceforth (until our departure out of this Life) to render Praise unto him for
whatsoever Benefits or Blessings his good Providence may treasure up for us in
order to our future Happiness; saying with the Sacred Psalmist in Psalm. 72.18,
19. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things.
And blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let the whole Earth be filled
with his Glory, Amen, and Amen. Thus have I showed you what Praise is, together
with the Fruits and Effects of it in Ten Particulars.

In the next place, I design by God's permission to demonstrate unto you how
God is to be praised, and that in these Six Compendious Points.

First of all, God is praised by acknowledging him to be what he is, in
Himself, in his Son, in his Spirit, in his Properties, and in his Attributes:
For Moses, in his Psalm of Thanksgiving, Exodus 15.3. did praise God by speaking
of him on this wise: The Lord is a Man of War; The Lord is his Name.

Secondly, God is praised by attributing unto him that which is his, as holy
David did, 1 Chronicles. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. where it is thus written: Wherefore
David blessed the Lord before all the Congregation: And David said, Blessed be
thou, Lord God of Israel our Father, for ever and ever. Thine, O Lord, is the
Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty; for
all that is in the Heaven and the Earth is thine; thine is the Kingdom, O Lord,
and thou art exalted as Head above all. Both Riches and Honor come of thee,
and thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is Power and Might, and in thine
hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore, our
God, we thank thee, and praise thy Holy Name.

Thirdly, God is praised, by acknowledging that which his Providence seemingly
effects, to be only done or performed by himself. Thus does Moses praise God,
by ascribing unto him the Overthrow of Pharaoh and his Hosts in the Red Sea, as
you may observe Exodus 15.4. So also does the Psalmist, in most of his Psalms of
Praise; as in Psalm. 136.1. and from the 15th Verse to the 23d. where it is thus
worded: O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for his Mercy endures for
ever. To him that overthrew Pharach and his Host in the Red Sea: To him which
led his People through the Wilderness: To him which smote great Kings, and slew
famous Kings; Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King of Bashan; and gave
their Land for an Heritage; even an Heritage unto Israel his Servant: And this
he did, because his Mercy to his People endures for ever.

Fourthly, God is praised by owning that which he disposes, to be only given
of himself; this was David's candid acknowledgment of God's hounteous Benefits
and liberal Gifts, in 1 Chronicles. 29.14. where he thus spoke unto the Lord: All
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. Also St. Paul says,
in Romans 11.36. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to whom be
Glory for ever. Amen.

Fifthly, God is praised by declaring or mentioning unto others all the
forenamed Points concerning him. Thus did the sweet-tongu'd David, that
singular Singer of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 16.8, 9. where he speaks these godly
Expressions: Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name; bring an Offering,
and come before him: Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness.

Thus also have I showed you, in six compendious Points, how God is to be
praised.

If therefore, according to these pithy and practical Points of Piety, our
Hearts are inclinable to praise God, who is the most Victorious Conqueror and
matchless Man of War, under whose Bellonick or Warlike Banner, we seem terrible
in sight of our Adversaries; because, as Abijah said to the Israelites, in 2 Chronicles. 13.12. That God Himself is with us for our Captain, triumphing
gloriously for the Discomfiture and Destruction of his Peoples Enemies: As
Moses speaks concerning the Overthrow of Pharaoh, in Exodus 15.4. and of whom
David says, Psalm. 98.1. That he has done miraculous things; for nis right
Hand, and his holy Arm has gotten him the Victory: That by this means (as
Zacharias prophesied of Christ and his believing People, Luke 1.74, 75.) We
being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, might serve him without fear,
in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of our life; renewing the
Vow and Covenant that we made with Christ in our Baptism, of fighting manfully
under his Banner against Sin, the World, and the Devil; and to continue his
faithful Soldiers and Servants unto our Lives end: To which end, in order to
prolong our Lives and see good Days, by keeping our Tongues from Evil, and Lips
from guile, we must abandon and abominate all horrid and rash Jurations, all
hasty and hurtful Protestations, all hellish and heinous Imprecations, all
envious and evil Communications, with all unchaste Desires and uncivil
Deportment in our Lives and Christian Conversations; for in so doing, we have
God's own inviolable Promises, to be still aiding or assisting to us, in all
Manly and Military Enterprises. So that we may well agree in the pious Opinion
and divine Disposition of indubitable and undaunted David, to say in the
Dialect or Warlike Words of my Text: Through God we shall do valiantly; for he
it is that shall tread down our Enemies.

This Portion of Scripture, is a Text befitting the holy Parade and Camp of the
Lord of Hosts; for we have God in the Front, God in the Center, and God in the
Rear of it: If we wheel the Text to the Right hand, there we shall find God
triumphing; if to the Right about, there triumphing valiantly; if we move the
Text to the Left hand, there we shall find God trampling; if to the Left about,
there trampling down our Enemies: If we place the Words as they were, either
upon their orderly Guard, or in their close Order, and as on the Patrol, walk
the Rounds of my Text, Through God we shall do valiantly; for he it is that
shall tread down our Enemies.

Having thus rendezvous'd, countermarch'd, exercised, or mustered my Text, and
formed the Bands, Battalions, and Squadrons of our Camp in Battle Array, let us
proceed in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, to display unto our Enemies the Flag
of Defiance, and make our Proclamation with holy David, Psalm. 18.1, 2, 3.
saying on this wise: We will love thee, O Lord our Strength: The Lord is our
Rock, and our Fortress, and our Deliverer: Our God, our Strength, in whom we
will trust; our Buckler, and the Horn of our Salvation, and our high Tower. We
will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised; so shall we be saved from
our Enemies. Like to this cordial and cheerful Proclamation, was that
comfortable Speech which good Hezekiah made to enliven and encourage his Army,
who being but few in number, as compared with their Enemies, the great Host of
Senacherib King of Assyria, were nevertheless, by a settled Dependence on God's
Power, both willing and ready to give them the Encounter, as you may read in 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. where it is thus related: Be strong and courageous, be not
afraid nor dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all the Multitude that is
with him; for there be more with us than with him: With him is an Arm of Flesh,
but with us is the Lord our God, to help us and to sight our Battles. And the
People rested themselves upon the Words of Hezekiah King of Judah: And while
the People rested on the Words of Hezekiah, behold the Lord sent a destroying
Angel, that on the same night smote in the Camp of the Alliances, an hundred
and fourscore and five thousand. And when the People rose up early in the
Morning, behold they were all dead Corpses, as you may read (...) in the 2d of
the Kings, Chap. 19. Verse. 35.

Hence we may observe, that a King who had the best Cause, never failed of the
best Courage: The same may be said of WILLIAM the Third, King of Great Britain
and Ireland; for God has given him a good Cause of War against his Enemies,
as, namely, the securing of pure Religion, the procuring of lasting Peace, the
uniting of divided Kingdoms, the composing of Peoples Differences, the
preserving of wholesome Laws, the correcting of disloyal Servants, and the
protecting of Loyal Subjects. These being the Causes of God, the King, and the
Church, do so enhance his Majesty's Spirit, that he is not afraid to meet his
Enemies in the Gate, but seems to declare his Interest in the Lord, with holy
David, Psalm. 118.6, 7. where the Prophetical King speaks on this wise: The Lord
is on my side, I will not fear what Man can do unto me: The Lord takes my part
with them that help me; therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me.

Hence we may find it observable, that the Lord also takes part with our
King's Party, in order to fulfill his Desire upon his Enemies. This Truth
visibly appears in the late Wars that were managed both in the Kingdom of
Ireland, and the Territories of Flanders, where God wonderfully preserved his
Majesty's Sacred Person from the violent and revenging Peril of the Sword; as
if no Weapon formed against him should prosper; like one interested in those
Escapes of David, mentioned Psalm. 18. v. 50. namely, Great Deliverances gives
he to his King, and shows Mercy to his Anointed, to David and to his Seed
(and Religious Successors) for evermore. Many miraculous Deliverances has his
Majesty already experienced, as if a Guardian or encamping Angel, had a special
Commission from Heaven, at all times, in all places, and upon all occasions, to
protect or preserve his pious Person. Such a Commissionated-Angel we read of in
Psalm. 34. verse. 7. where it is said, That the Angel of the Lord encampeth round
about them that fear him, and delivers them. But of all the miraculous
Deliverances and Preservations which Heaven decreed for his Safety, the most
capital and remarkable was his last Escape from a cursed Cabal of Assassinates,
who by mischievous Machinations, hatched a Hellish Stratagem how to embrew
their hateful and unhallowed Hands in the scarlet and crimson Dies of his Royal
Blood, had not God (as the Anointed of Himself) prevented the Martyrdom by a
matchless Miracle of mysterious Mercy.

We have not, besides what Divine Revelation affords, a greater Argument to
prove this World to be governed, and all Things in it, carried on and directed
by the vigilant Eye and powerful Hand of Almighty GOD, than the sudden and
seasonable Discoveries of such damnable Enterprises, contrived with the utmost
Caution and Secrecy; propagated with great Subtilty or Cunning, and being just
ripe for execution; yet in an instant blasted, in a trice broken all to pieces,
either by a surprising dread seizing the Conspirators themselves, or an unwary
Word overheard, or an unaccountable Suspicion of ill Designs, though founded
upon no reason, or a very trifling one, yet has proved true; or God smote upon
the Conscience of some one of them, and for the ease of his tortured Mind, he
is forced to a Discovery.

Peradventure their Jealousy of being betrayed by others, has made some to
give notice of it themselves. A Letter miscarried, a Fright, Mistake,
Oversight, or something happening otherwise than was expected, has brought the
hidden Works of Darkness to light, whereby the King and his Liege People, or
Loyal Subjects, have been mercifully snatched from the Jaws of Ruin, and the
Conspirators themselves brought to condign Punishment, according to that
remarkable Observation of the Royal Prophet, in his IX. Psalm, at the 16th.
Verse; where he says,

That the Lord is known by the Judgment which he executes: The Wicked is
snared in the Work of his own Hands.

From these Diabolical and Inhumane Attempts, may the Omniscient, Omnipresent,
and Omnipotent God, Protect His Majesty's Gracious Person, to improve that
prepared Portion which we hope Divine Providence has laid up for him in the
Disposal of Sacred Providence, as length of Days in her Right Hand, and in her
Left Hand Riches and Honor. For her Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her
Paths are Peace, as appears in Prove. 3.16, 17. Seeing therefore that the plain
Paths of Wisdom are all of them both pleasant and peaceable, let us learn of
her to be so prudent as to make our Addresses unto God, that he would be
pleased to withdraw our Feet from the rugged Ways of War and Bloodshed, that he
may guide them into the smooth and pleasant Paths of Peace; for in so doing,
both Church and State will famously slourish. This was a Pious and a Primitive
Observation among the Jews, as appears in Psalm. 76.1, 2, 3. where holy David
speaks these Expressions, In Judah is God known: his Name is great in Israel.
In Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his Dewlling Place in Sion. There brake he
the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, and the Sword, and the Battle. But now to
the Praise and Glory of God, we Christians may say, That in Britain is God
known, his Name is great in England, in the Salem of our British Dominion is
his Tabernacle, and his Dewlling Place in the Sion of our Three Kingdoms. There
also brake he the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, and the Sword, and the Battle,
where the Church of God has a sound Principled King to her Nursing-father,
Elected and Established by Divine Providence, to Defend her from Wrong and
Violence; and though her furious Foes are many, yet her Faithful Friend is
Mighty, for God is in the midst of her, therefore she shall not be moved; God
shall help her, and that right early, as holy David well observes in Psalm.
46.5. Since therefore that God is a very present help in, Trouble unto his
Militant or Warfaring Church, we are in that respect obliged to pray unto him
for her good Success and Prosperity, as that his Divine Pleasure might be
entreated to adorn and continue her in the Beautiful Ornaments of Unity, Peace,
and Concord; for in her Peace we shall enjoy Peace. It is a certain Truth, that
as War is the Producer of Mortality, Poverty, and Perplexity among Men, in that
Kingdom or Nation wherein it is seated; so Peace is the Procurer of Safety,
Plenty, and Prosperity, both to Church and State; for which cause the Sacred
Psalmist exhorted and excited the People (in his time) to Pray for the Peace of
the Jewish Church, which Petitions are very suitable and useful for the Church
of God under Christianity, as appears in Psalm. 122.6, 7, 8, 9. where the sweet
Singer, and Orator of Israel, thus spoke unto his Fellow-petitioners, Pray for
the Peace of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy
Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces. For my Brethren and Companions sakes,
I will now say, Peace be within thee. Because of the House of the Lord our God,
I will seek thy good.

Next to our Petitions for the Peace of the Church, we ought to Pray for the
Peace and Prosperity of the King, that God would be pleased to endue him with a
Long Life, a Prosperous Reign, a Secure State and Habitation, Unbiased
Representatives, a Faithful Privy Council and Parliament, Judicious and
Conscientious Lawyers, Mild and Merciful Magistrates, Able and Valuable
Physicians, a Plentiful and Painful Ministry, a Victorious Fleet and Army, and
all sorts of his Subjects that are Professors of Arts, Sciences, or other
National Occupations, a Religious, Loving, and a Loyal People; all which will
very much tend to advance the Fame of His Majesty's Grandeur, that as he is the
Defender of our Catholical, Apostolical, Episcopal, and Protestantial Faith, he
may say at the end or full Expiration of his Wars, with the holy Apostle St.
Paul in 2 Timothy 4.7, 8, 9. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my
Course, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give at the last Day.

And may also all His Majesty's Commanders and Soldiers both by Sea and Land,
Experience the Truth of my present Text, where it is thus expressed by the
Warlike Psalmist, Through God we shall do valiantly: For he it is that shall
tread down our Enemies.

Which God the Father of his Multitudinous Mercies grant, through the
Mavelous Merits of God the Son, and the Miraculous Manifestations of God the
Holy Ghost; to which Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, be ascribed, as is
most due, all Honor, Glory, Power, and Praise, both Now, and for Evermore,
Amen.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for J. Pero, at the White Swan in Little Britain.
JEsus is God: Or, the Deity of Jesus Christ Vindicated; being an Abstract of
some Sermons Preached in the Parish Church of St. James Clerkenwell. By D. Pead.

The Abridgment of Christian Divinity; or, True Religion and Undefiled in all
its Principal and most Useful Branches; both as to Belief and Practice, briefly
Stated and Explained to the Meanest Capacities. A Work Seasonable for these
Times, wherein so many Articles of our Faith are Questioned, and so many Gross
Errors daily Published.

A Persuasive from the Creatures, to a Perfect Resignation of the Will to
God's. By B. Pratt, of Merton College, Oxon.


