THE Papist Represented, AND NOT MISREPRESENTED; BEING In ANSWER to the FIRST
SHEET of the Second Part of the PAPIST Misrepresented and Represented. And for
a further VINDICATION of the CATECHISM truly Representing the Doctrine and
Practices of the Church of Rome.

LICENSED, December 18. 1686.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVII.

THE PAPIST REPRESENTED, And Not Misrepresented, etc.
AFter a Cause has been managed to so plain a Disadvantage, that there has
been no place left, and no reasonable care taken for its defense, He must have
a good Measure of assurance in himself, and presume too much upon the weakness
or good Nature, the ignorance or drowsiness of the Age he lives in, that before
the Controversy is cold, shall venture the same again into the World, without
offering at any show of a New Argument, to support and vindicate the Old. And
yet this is the case of the Author of the Second Part of the Papist
Misreprented and Represented; who in the single Chapter newly published, of the
Veneration shown to Images, has in substance and contrivance transcribed what
was wrote upon the same Subject in the First Part, and that with as much
Liberty and Confidence, as if there had never been such Books in the World, as
the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, etc. And An Answer to
Papists protesting against Protestant Popery; that had taken this Argument to
task, and showed the weakness and the falsehood of it. When I first cast my Eye
upon this Sheet, and observed how formally he had drawn up the Argument in the
beginning, I thought now, if ever, he would state the Case, and argue closely
upon it; and that he that complains so much of the Mists and Confusion raised
from the disagreeing Opinions of Divines amongst themselves, and the Infamy
cast upon the Doctrine and Practice about Images in their Church, by letting
loose the School-debates amongst the Multitude; would have been so kind to the
World, as to show us what we are to trust to, and what those once famous
Directors of Controversy and Conscience (the Schoolmen) but now it seems
dangerous Enemies to the Peace and Propagation of their Religion, do hold to
the Detriment and Disadvantage of it.

But instead of that, we have a Character of an Image-worshipper of his own
making, setforth with a various mixture of Similitudes and Resemblances, which
after he has trimmed up in somewhat a new Fashion, he hopes may pass with
better Authority, and be received with greater Respect than whatsoever these
abovesaid wrangling Disputants, attended with all their Speculative Scruples
(to use his words) can propose.

But though he thinks fit thus to desert the Schools; yet having some Reverence
for Them, and more for Truth, I shall gently take him by the Hand, and from the
Mists and Confusion of a Declamatory Discourse, turn him back to the old way of
Argument, and see if we can better understand one another, and the Cause we are
at present concerned in.

In order to which, I shall show,

1. What is meant by an Image.

2. What Worship is given, and to be given to an Image in the Church of Rome.

3. That the Catechism he opposes, has given no other account of their
Doctrine and Practice in this matter, than is conformable to it.

An Image (in the Ecclesiastical sense) is an external and visible
Representation of some Divine or Glorified Being and Object, (such as God, the
Blessed Trinity, Christ, Angels and Saints) set up for the receiving Religious
Honor and Worship.

So that whatever things do not Represent, or are not intended to Represent a
Divine or Glorified Object; or that are not set up to receive Religious
Worship, or have not Religious Worship given to them, are not concerned in the
Dispute. And of this kind thus Excluded, are,

1. All visible signs and marks of Distinction; Such (to use his Instances) are
a Lion and Unicorn when set up in a place to intimate that there the King is
owned as Supreme. And such may a Cross be (where there is occasion) when set
up, suppose in or upon a Christian Church, to distinguish it from a Turkish
Mosque. But why Crosses or the like should therefore be so necessary, that
those that allow them not (as well where this reason is not, as where it is)
should be deemed to allow of nothing to show they are Christians, is an
inference of our Authors, but what I confess is past my understanding.

2. Hereby are Excluded all those Effigies and Pictures that are for Ornament,
or that serve to testify the Honor and Respect we bear to the Persons to whom
they have a resemblance. And of this kind are the Pictures of Moses and Aaron,
Queen Elizabeth, and King Charles the first of Blessed memory, which are in
some of our Churches; and those of Christ and the Apostles, which are retained
in others.

3. Hereby are also Excluded all Historical signs, that are intended for the
preservation of the memory of Good and Holy Persons; or that occasionally may
either excite in us devout thoughts and affections, or that may serve for
instruction (if that can be): For how such do instruct like the Bible, when the
Bible can instruct those that are before ignorant of the Mysteries of our
Religion; but a Picture or Image cannot instruct without somewhat else to
instruct before or with it; Or how an Image or Cross is upon this consideration
a part of Gods Holy Word, without any difference from that Chapter of the Bible
which treats of the same, except the different fashion of the strokes, and
manner of laying on the Ink; are Doctrines that become a member of that Church,
which for the better Edification of the People, whilst it exposes Images to
them, keeps the Bible from them.

4. Of this sort are those things which have an eminent relation to God and his
Service, to which for that reason a certain reverence and suitable respect is
more or less due. And so its lawful and decent to be uncovered at reading the
Bible, and the hearing it expounded; and to kiss it in taking an Oath, as a
token of the reverence and the regard we have for it. And this we do, not
because in the Bible the strokes of the Ink are so ordered and joined in the
Paper, that they signify and Represent the Doctrine and Passion of Christ, (a
description that rather becomes a Book of Emblems and Hieroglyphics, than of
Divine Doctrine) not because I say it Represents (as he mistakes) but as it
contains the great Articles of our Faith, etc. These are things which the
Controversy is not at all concerned in (being either no visible
Representations of Divine or Glorified Beings, or not set up for receiving
Religious Honor and Worship). And yet to these are all the Resemblances used
by our Author, to be referred; and who with these, shuts up the whole
Controversy, as if there was no other use of Images in the Church of Rome,
than what the Pictures of Queen Elizabeth, or Moses and Aaron serve for in
ours; and that the Honor and Reverence they give to them, is no more than the
reverence we give to the Bible: For thus he concludes, Let Divines wrangle
[meaning their own] to the Worlds end, and dispute whether this Honor, this
Reverence and respect shown to the Bible, to a Preachers Sermon, to Pictures or
Images, be the same, or distinct from what is given to the things represented;
whether it terminates on them absolutely after an inferior manner, or only
relatively, and so forth. This they may go on with, etc. but for his part, he
is little concerned. Where he supposes two things, (1) That it is a
Controversy amongst them, whether the Honor and Reverence they give to
Consecrated Images and Pictures, be other than what is shown to the Bible, or a
Preachers Sermon: And (2) that the Controversy among their Divines about the
Worship given to them, whether Absolute or Negative, is of little concernment;
whereas the former (as shall presently be showed) neither is nor can be a
Controversy among them upon their principles. And the latter is a Controversy
of that importance, that each Side charges the other with no worse a
consequence of their Principle, than Idolatry.

As to the former part of the description I have given of an Image (viz. That
it is a visible representation of a Divine or Glorified Being) there is no
dispute; but the dispute will be, about the latter part [ viz. that it is set up
for the receiving of Religious Honor and Worship.] For as our Author has
avoided the word Worship all along, even to the omission of a Clause in what he
quotes from the Council of Trent [ Propter quam sint colendoe] so he seems
resolved not to admit of it, or even so much as the external actions belonging
to it.

For so he goes on. This then is what he [the Papist Represented] does as to
Sacred Images; and though his Adversaries, by calling this worshipping,
adoring, and falling down to Images, raise a Notion of Idolatry, etc. So that
it seems it is only a Fiction of their Adversaries, what they call so, but
which they neither do in Fact, nor so much as in word, call by those Names of
Worshipping, Adoring, and falling down to Images.

But if I prove that they use the words by which those things are understood,
that they use such Actions and Postures as are conformable to those words, and
that they apply those Actions and Postures to the Images, and that the Images
are to be had and retained in Churches for that end; I think I shall have by
that time done whatever is necessary to make good the abovesaid Description of
an Image, and of what is inferred from it.

As to the words, Council. Trid. Sess. 25. and Catechis. ad Paroc.
there are three used by themselves in this Matter, viz. Honor, Veneratio,
Cultus. Which last I know not how otherwise to render, as distinct from the two
former, than by Worship; S.C. Answ. to Dr. Pierce, c. 14.
and so I find it rendered by one of themselves. And that it is so to be
understood, is evident from the 2d Council of Nice, (which that of Trent in the
same place appeals and approves to) where we find an Anathema against those
(...), Actio. 1.
that do not worship the Holy and Venerable Images: And so Pope Adrian, in his
Epistle to that Synod, says of his own practice, I adore the Images, etc. And
that this is the Doctrine of both the one and the other Council, I appeal to
many of their own Authors, (which I shall produce if there be occasion) who
say, Suar. in 3. p. q. 25. Disp. 54.. 1.
that Images are to be adored: And Suarez for all says, that it is de Fide
Imagines esse adorandas, That it is a Matter of Faith that Images are to be
adored. But as the Words, so the Postures show it, it being an unhappy
oversight of our Author's, who says, That falling down to Images, is a Fiction
of their Adversaries; when the Council of Trent is so express in it, that by
the Images which we kiss, and before which we uncover our Heads, and fall down,
we do adore Christ, etc.

But here our Author it is like has a reserve: for will he say, the Thing that
our Adversaries charge us with, is falling down to Images? but that I deny, for
we only fall down before the Images, as the Council says, but do not fall down
to them. Indeed if this be his Refuge, it is fairly argued: but if this be his
Sense, then what becomes of that other part of the Decree of the same Council,
which requires, That due Honor and Veneration be given to them, [ eis
impertiendam]? And which ought to be kept in Churches, and are there set up
that they may be worshipped, as says their Catechism. ad Paroc.

But this will be further confirmed, when, 3. I have showed, that the Catechism
he now opposes, has given no other account of the Doctrine and Practice of
the Church of Rome about Images, than is conformable to it. Against this, for
the present, our Author objects nothing but the Phrase therein used of praying
to Images. And here he runs again to his Resemblances, to the Monument, the
Statues upon the Exchange, and the Giants at Guild Hall; to Rhetorical
Exclamations, and Expostulations, with much piquantry against the poor Six-peny
Catechism: But what is the haste to coast thus up and down the Town, to
Westminster, to the Exchange, to Wapping and Spittle-fields, and where not? I
perceive it will be too great a Task to follow him who sets no bounds to
himself; and therefore to shorten the way, I shall 'ene lay my self open to
him, and confess the Charge I exhibited against them of praying to Images. To
prove which before, our Author says I made use of this Argument, viz. Prayer
is to the Object to which the Veneration is to be given; but the Veneration is
to be given to the Image, as Representing, and so is the Prayer. And here he
cries out Sophistry, and triumphs over it for near half a Page together. But is
this Argument mine, or was it produced to prove the Papists pray to Images?
Indeed I had argued that if they do not pray to Images, Why are the Prayers
used at the Consecration of them? To what end are the Pilgrimages to them? Why
do they direct their Prayers to them? But to this there is not a word of
Answer, when in reason it ought to be expected, whereas he takes much pains to
confute that which never was asserted. Had the Argument been (as he supposes)
to prove, that if they give Veneration to Images, they therefore pray to them;
he ought to have been so ingenuous, as to remember, that the Catechism
supposes that the Terms Veneration and Worship, are in this case much one and
the same; and that the Church of Rome does Worship as well as Venerate Images
(which now I have showed my Reasons for): And this the line immediately before
would have instructed him in. And if so, the Argument has so much Truth in it,
that it will cost him some more time and thoughts to disprove. But to what
shall I impute it, whether to oversight, or Sophistry, when he places the
Argument upon a wrong foot, and from a Proof, that praying to Images in the
Catechism, was to Images as Representing, does translate it to a Proof of
praying to Images because they venerate them. I am confident the Controvertists
of Spittle-fields and Wapping, as little as I know them (the Reader will pardon
the Phrase for it is his own) would not have argued more inconsequently, and
those that have but stepped over the Vniversity-Threshold, (to use his words)
would have called it an arguing a baculo ad Angulum: when what I say respects
the Object, and he transfers it to the Act. But this it is to run impetuously,
with much Fancy, and little Consideration, into the field of Disputation. For
take the Argument as it lies, and I think it is fair and plain. For, if the
Proposition is true, that the Worship (not Honor alone, that is his Insertion)
given to Images, is to the Persons represented; then so is all depending upon
it. For what is the Image, but the Image of the Person represented? What do
they honor, venerate, and kiss? before what do they fall down? to what do they
offer Incense, but the Image of the Person represented? And then, to what do
they pray, but to the Image of the Person represented? For where the
Veneration, the Salutation, the Prostration, and the Oblation are, there is
also the Prayer. I must confess this way of arguing may prove too much for him;
but that I cannot help, be it to them that lay down the Premises from whence
the Conclusion is inferred.

But because he does not like Consequences and Inferences (unless they are of
his own making) I shall first of all put him in mind, that it has been proved
by one, An Answer to the Papists protesting, etc. page 81, etc.
whom he should in reason be acquainted with, that To, Before, and In presence
of a Representative Object, as representing, are the very same. And to the
solid Proof which that learned Author has given of it, I shall add, that not
only do the Latins use those Phrases alike in that case, and so what in Pliny
is, Imagini supplicare, is in Arnobius, ad Imaginem; but that these words are
thus promiscuously used also in the Church of Rome it self: So in the Decree of
the Council of Trent, before cited, what in one line is, iis impertiendam, to
the Images, is in another, coram iis, before them. And that I may not be
without some sufficient Proof, we have our Author himself thus speaking to and
fro; for sometimes it is a Veneration before Images, Page 4. sometimes a
Veneration to them, Page 3, and 5. And why I may not be allowed to use these
words indifferently, that are indifferently used by them: Or, why To in praying
to Images, should be worse than To in a Veneration given to them, I know not;
unless what is right in them is wrong in me? But this praying to Images is a
thing not to be born, it is to leave the Papists, their Credit, and their
Doctrine to the favor and mercy of -- But who is to be blamed for this? Why do
they then in Terms pray to the Cross and the Veronica, etc? Why do they tell us
of a Divine Presence, that is, if not in them, yet with them, as Tursellinus
affirms of that at Lorreto? Lauret. Hist. Praef. Mirac. 120. Consrat. 7. dolor.
Duad 1619.


Why do they write whole Books of the Miracles wrought by the Virgin Mary, and
others Saints by their Images? Why do they suffer Persons to go long and
tedious Pilgrimages to them? etc. Certainly it is as innocent for us to say,
they give Worship and pray to Images, as for them to say, and to do it.

But because I am willing to conclude, I shall, in confirmation of what I have
said, transcribe an old Form of Abjuration imposed upon the Lollards, Spelman
Council. To. 2. p. 655.
which is this; I do swear to God, and to all his Seynts, upon this Holy
Gospel; and fro this day forward I shall worship Images with PRAYING AND
OFFERING TO THEM, in the Worschop of the Seynts that they be made after. So
that if I have erred, I have erred with a Council, with their Breviaries, with
the Decrees and Practice of their Church, and with approved Authors of their
own. And if they stand right and justified in it, I hope I may be acquitted.
Considering especially that after all that this Gentleman, (who has bore thus
hard upon me, and used such a sort of Wit, and such Phrases and Modes of
Speech, as are more fit for a Stage, than a Scholar and Divine) has
transgressed in the same way, and called our kneeling at the Lord's Supper, a
kneeling to the Elements, or (as he calls it) to the Sacramental Figure, page
5. whereas he very well knows, or ought to have known, for the sake of a
Passage, in the Preface to the First Part of The Papist Represented and
Misrepresented, (if the Author be the same) that the same Church which has
required we should receive the Sacrament Kneeling, has also declared, that no
Adoration is intended, or ought to be done, to the Sacramental Bread and Wine
there bodily received. The Kneeling to, supposes an Object of Adoration before
us, and is an Act of Worship; but the Kneeling when, is no more than a devout
posture of receiving it; and which our Church says, is a signification of an
humble and grateful acknowledgment of the Benefits of Christ therein given to
all worthy Receivers. So that with as much Truth and Reason might he have
affirmed, we Kneel to the Minister from whose hands we receive the Elements, as
to the Elements we receive from him. Now if in conclusion I should return upon
him the same lavish Rhetoric (not to call it worse) for his Misrepresentation
of our Church, which he has treated me with, for what he can never be able to
prove, is a Misrepresentation of theirs, I am sensible I should offend against
the Laws of good Manners, and of the best Religion in the World.

And here I should take my leave of him, but that this day he sends me a Second
Challenge, which as little as I love Disputes, I shall yet accept of; and do
not question (but through God's assistance) I shall give him such Satisfaction
as becomes a Christian, a lover of Truth, Peace, and Charity.

FINIS.

