A Wakening Call: OR, An Alarm from Heaven TO THE Wise and Foolish Virgins.

WHEREIN The Vices of this Age is laid open, and bewailed; the Subtilty of
Satan discovered in his Temptations, in several Particulars.

I. As to Original Sin. II. As to the Love of the World. III. As to the Danger
of Ignorance. IV. As to the Evil of Pride, etc.
Likewise, There is discovered the Nature of Regeneration, or the New Birth, in
several Particulars.

I. The Nature of Union to Christ. II. The Nature of True Faith III. The Nature
of True Repentance. IV. Christian Carriage commended. V. The Glory of the
New-Ierusalem Opened.
From a Minister in the Country, to a Minister in the City, for the Publication.

A Verse may find him who a Sermon flys,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.
Herbert's Temple, p. 1. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and Sold by Will.
Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street; and John Marshall, at the Bible in
Grace Church Street; MDCXCVIII.

CHAP. I. Concerning the purely Divine Nature, and Things thereof.
1. GOD in his Divine Nature was infinitely blessed in the Sight and Enjoyment
of himself from all Eternity, above and beyond all possibility of Addition or
Diminution to his Blessedness, by any thing, mere Creatures, Angels or Men,
good or bad, can ever be, think, say or do, to all Eternity; yea, even
Creature-nature, in the Mediator's wonderful compounded Person, set up by the
immediate Divine Hand (though by unchangeable personal Union with the Divine
Nature, all one incomprehensible God) adds not to the infinite Blessedness of
the Divine Nature; but was set up from the Beginning, and possessed by the Lord
in the beginning of his Way, toward the Creation of Angels and Men, Prove. 8.
22, 23. This was the Beginning of the Creation of God, Revel. 3. 14. Divine
Nature had no Beginning.

The whole Creature-part in Christ's Person, Root and exalted Branch, adds not
to the Glory of the Divine Nature, but was set up in reference to the twofold
Creation of Angels and Men, natural and spiritual, and as the Means to let down
the Visions of the Divine Glory at second-hand, with safety to the spiritual
Sight, Understanding and Enjoyment of blessed Angels and Men in their
new-created Capacities.

2. In the Divine Nature, the Divine Essence and Form are the infinite Divine
Father and Son. The Divine Form, Image or Glory of the Divine Essence, is the
Son thereof, by eternal and ineffable Generation; very God of very God, in the
most absolute Sense; coequal and coeternal with the Father; both are one
Infinite, Incomprehensible, Divine Being. But the Divine Essence is not the
Form; nor Form the Essence.

The Three distinct invisible Powers in the Divine Essence or Father, did from
all Eternity shine forth in the divine Form or Son, to God's own infinite
Understanding, Enjoyment and Delight. The same three are, therein, the
immediate Object of Sight and Enjoyment, to the whole Creature-part of the
Mediator, Root and exalted Branch, as in unchangeable personal Union with the
Divine Glory or Form in him; but are never so to any mere Creatures, blessed
Angels or Saints, to all Eternity, in Heaven. They can never so approach unto,
or see and enjoy the Divine Light or Glory, immediately, as he does, 1 Timothy 6.
15, 16. Mat. 11. 27. John 1. 18. In, with, and through his heavenly
Creature-Spirit, as born of that which in him is God, ( John 1. 1.) and therein
Partakers of the Divine Nature, (2 Pet. 1. 4.) can and will they see and enjoy
the Divine Glory, mediately, as let down to them by the exalted Creature-Son
and Branch, being Members of that spiritual Body, his true Gospel- Church, to
which he, therein, is Head, Col. 1. 18. For this Purpose it pleased the Father
or Divine Essence, that even in the lowest Creature-part of the Mediator, the
exalted Son and Branch, all Fullness should dwell, all the divine and
Creature-fulnesses and Perfections of his divine Form and Creature-root.

The Divine Essence, singly and abstractedly considered, in and by it self, is
absolutely invisible for ever; nor will the Divine Form, Glory, Image, or
Visibility thereof, and of the three that are one, therein, ever be the
immediate Object of Sight and Enjoyment to any mere Creatures, blessed Angels
or Saints, to all Eternity; but only to the whole Creature-nature in Christ's
Person, Root and exalted Branch. Never will any mere Creatures be found in
personal Union with the Divine Nature, as Creature-nature in Christ is. They
will never have Divine Nature, an Ingredient into their personal Constitution;
or as the supreme Principle of Life and Operation in them, as some in our Days
have most presumptuously and unwarrantably affirmed: for then would there be an
innumerable Multitude of Christ's and Gods, the greater sort of Polytheism.

The Divine Form or Son, is the Eternity, the supreme Heaven of Heavens, the
high and lofty Divine Essence, or Father inhabited from all Eternity, in
distinction from the Creature-form, Glory or Image thereof; the high and holy
Place, or heavenly Creature-temple, of immediate Divine Building ( Prove. 9. 1.)
in personal Union with the Divine inhabitant, Isa. 57. 15.

This heavenly Creature-Spirit, House and Temple, with the Life and Things of
God therein, was prepared by and within himself, to be communicated in the
distinct appointed Portions thereof, to them that love him (1 Cor. 2. 9.)
because he first, even from Eternity, loved them, 1 John 4. 19. These
spiritual, heavenly Creature-things of God, communicable to Men and Angels, by
a new or second Creation, are quite out of the reach or sight of the highest
single natural Understanding of Man, at best, in the but restored
first-Covenant-Law-life of the Creature, given in the first Creation. No
intellectual Eye, Ear or Heart, therein, can see, hear, perceive, conceive,
receive, own, or know what to make of them; Isa. 64.4. Hence does Man account
them, and all right Words about them, Foolishness, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 14. Here Is the
Case of Man at best, in but the living Soul of the first Adam: In the Life of
the quickening Spirit of the second Adam, and the new, spiritual, infallible,
all-discerning Understanding, therein, do Saints see and know all things,
divine, and both spiritual and natural Creature-things, (in their proper
Differences, Distinctions, Subordinations and Superiorities) even the deep
things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. And as they have an infallible Understanding to
know all things; they have also therein, an incorruptible Will, in unchangeable
Harmony with the Infinite Divine Will, for the doing all things after God's own
Heart. In his Heavenly Creature- Spirit, can any rightly worship his Divine
Spirit, John 4. 23. In it only can any rightly perform all Duties to God, and
to their Fellow Creatures. All these things lie hid from (and are unpracticable
by) Man, as out of the Reach of his own Understanding, and desiring or
performing Power of his own Will. So will he not regard, look, or seek after
God, for the Life and things hid with Christ in God, Romans 3. 11. Col. 3. 3.
Paul, with others that come to be true Saints, till the spiritual Seed of true
Life be wakened up in them, are wholly ignorant of any such heavenly
Creature-Gospel-Life and things of God, however eminent in restored Law-life,
Wisdom and Righteousness of Man, Phil. 3.6. Hence they verily think they do God
Service, in persecuting Gospel-Saints, as the arrantest Heretics and
Blasphemers in the World, Act. 26. 9, 11. John 16. 2. The reformed natural Man,
at best, understands not the transformed, truly regenerate spiritual Man's
Understanding, nor any of the Divine or spiritual things, he thereby
understands and speaks of. He cannot know them; for they can only be
spiritually discerned, and he has no spiritual discerning, 1 Cor. 2. 14. If
therefore he finally lean and trust to his own Understanding, at highest, for
directing his Steps, contrary to God's Counsel, ( Prove. 3. 5, 6. Ier. 10. 23.)
he is gone for ever, he never sets one Foot in the Paths of Life. A Man of
deepest Reason, most soaring, searching, natural Capacity, vastest Display of
his rational and intellectual Powers, with all Imbelishments of Art or acquired
Accomplishments, may be Paul's most unreasonable Man to be dealt with, or
discoursed, in Gospel-Matters, which he therefore desired his Thessalonian
Converts to pray for his Deliverance from, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1, 2.

What Is here said in this first Chapter, may give some aim toward right
thoughts of God's Divine Nature and Things, which are to be acknowledged above
and beyond all Conception or Language, by the Understanding or Tongue of
natural Man or Angel; yea, will be Master of wonder to blessed Angels and
Saints to all Eternity, in their spiritual new-Creation-Capacities.

CHAP. II. The twofold Purposes or Counsels of God within himself from
Eternity, with reference to the twofold Creation of Angels and Men.
1. GOD, in the free Purposes and Counsels of his own Divine Mind, did, from
Eternity, when he pleased, determine to create Angels and Men, and to give them
immortal Spirits, by a first Creation; but, to put into them a corruptible Seed
(1 Pet. 1. 23.) of a mortal, earthly, though pure and spotless, First-Covenant
Law-life, in which to be but mystical Trees of Good and Evil. He declares, he
will break down this first Building, and pluck up this Tree (though of his own
planting) by the Roots, Ier. 45.4. This changeable good Life and Things, given
them in their first Creation, could not answer the Needs and Wants of their
immortal Spirits, nor enable them to answer the whole Counsel, Will, and
Command of God, in an everlasting well-pleasing active Obedience to him.

2. He did, therefore, in his Free-Grace-Purposes (another sort of Counsels
within himself) determine, from the same Eternity, by his own immmediate divine
Power, to form, produce and set up a heavenly Creature-spirit of originally
immortal Holiness, everlasting Righteousness, infallible Truth, and eternal
Life, and to take it into personal Union with his divine Nature, in the
Mediator. He determined also to find a way in his infinite Wisdom, to render
this Life communicable to Angels and Men, by a second or new Creation of them,
as the only Principle of Desire, Thought and Action, in which, ever possible to
please him, so as to find eternal Blessedness to themselves, in the Sight and
Enjoyment of him. All conducible to this, was prepared to be given them by a
second or new Creation, in a New Covenant Life, the Life of the Creator, above
all Deaths, Dangers, Enemies, Bondages, or Fears.

The Life given them in their first Creation, God calls their own, with all the
things thereof, their own Wisdom, Righteousness, all natural Excellencies and
Perfections: All is but a Life, a Wisdom, a Glory to be done away for ever,
with all Works or Fruits, possible to be done or brought forth by them, therein.

The new and everlasting Covenant-Life (given by a second Creation of them)
God's own heavenly Creature-life (with all the things thereof, the Wisdom and
Righteousness of God therein) is a Life, a Glory, that unspeakably excels the
former, and will remain for ever, 2 Cor. 3. 10, 11. By God's new building them,
and putting his incorruptible Life into them, they become particular Trees of
Life, under and with Christ, working all their Works in God, and bringing forth
right Fruits to him, John 3. 21. Romans 7. 4. Their own Life and Wisdom, etc. was
given them for Trial of their Obedience to the declared Method of God's Wisdom
for receiving his. All that finally refuse, in Passive Obedience, to submit to
the Death of their own, in order to find all again, with unspeakable Gain, in
his own, prefer the Life of the Creature to the Life of the Creator, and will
perish for ever, Romans 1.25. All Life and things, given Angels and Men, in their
first Creation, are charactered in Scripture by Grass, Flesh, a fading Flower (
Isa. 40. 6-8. 1 Pet. 1. 23, 24.) called a vain Show, altogether Vanity, a
vanishing, transient Shadow of the heavenly Creature-life and Things of God,
offered by a second. In this, it is as impossible, ever to sin against or
displease God, as it is in our own earthly Life, to please or find everlasting
Peace with him. If the First-Covenant-Life, given in the first Creation, had
been faultless, or not defective, as to the pleasing God, or finding true
Blessedness to our selves, no Place had been sought for a second, Heb. 8. 7.

CHAP. III. The preparatory Condescensions of God, toward accomplishing the
said twofold Purposes or Counsels, with reference to the twofold Creation of
Angels and Men.
1. THE first of the three distinct Powers in the Divine Nature, called Father,
did by the peculiar Operation thereof, in the one Divine Mind of all three,
produce, beget, form and set up a Creature-spirit of originally immortal
Holiness, everlasting Righteousness, infallible Truth, and eternal Life. This,
in the Creature-part of Christ's wonderful compounded Person, is called by the
Name of its peculiar Divine Producer, Father.

This was the first Step of God's preparatory Condescension toward the
Creation of Angels and Men; the Beginning of the Creation of God (Revel. 3.
14.) that will have no ending. This is the supreme Root of all Creature-being
and Life, in both Creations or Worlds (Heb. 1. 2.) natural and spiritual, by a
first and second Creation of Angels and Mer, and also of the Creature-Son and
Branch in the very Mediator's Person. This originally unchangeable
Creature-Spirit, in personal Union with the divine Nature, was situated too
high, above the Capacity of being the immediate Hand of God, either for the
first Creation of Angels and Men, or the giving them eternal Life by a second,
so as to answer and fulfill the twofold Counsels of God concerning them.

2. The second therefore of the Divine Three in One, called the Word, did, in
the one Divine Mind of the Three, cause the said Creature-root to bring forth a
Creature-Son and Branch, in the Fountain-purity of all earthly mortal First
covenant Law-life, determined of God to be set up in Angels and Men, by a first
Creation of them.

This Creature-Son and Branch is called by the Name of its peculiar divine
Causer, in the Creature-part of the Mediator's Person, the Word. This Word, as
the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, (Revel. 13. 8.) and exalted by
and out of that Death, into the originally unchangeable Life of his
Creature-root and Father, became the living Word of God, and immediate Creator
of all Angels and Men, by a first Creation, and of an innumerable Multitude of
both by a second. He will also be the immediate Performer of the whole Divine
Will, on all Angels and Men, good and bad, in the final Love or Wrath of God,
in Heaven or Hell, to all Eternity.

3. In order to all this, did the third of the Divine Three, called Holy Ghost,
cause the said Creature-root and Father, as the supreme mystical Abraham, to
perform a sacrificing Death-work on his Creature-Son; and caused the said
Creature-Son, as the supreme mystical Isaac, not only to submit thereto, in a
complete Passive Obedience to the Divine Will; but (in the supreamly partaken
of heavenly Creature-life of his Root, and Love thereto) to join therewith, in
Active Obedience to the Divine Will, for carrying on the said Death-work on
himself. The like did he, in our mortal Nature, when in the Fullness of God's
appointed time, taken by him, in the Fountain-purity thereof, above and beyond
what it was in the first Adam, before his Fall. He was, therein, also full of
Grace and Truth, John 1. 14. full of the Holy Ghost, Luke 4.1. He was Son of
Man in Heaven (in full Possession of the eternal Life of his Creature-root,
without any mortal Life about him) at same time, that he was Son of Man on
Earth in our mortal Nature ( John 3. 13.) and long before. All in Christ's
Person, below his infinite Divinity and Creature-root, is called Man. His whole
Creature-nature, Root and Branch, in personal Union, is the heavenly
Creature-spirit or Holy Ghost, rendered communicable to Angels and Men, by the
exalted Creature-Son and Branch. This Creature-Son was one of the three Men
that did eat of Abram's Meat, else would not have owned his worshipping him, in
Prayer, for Sodom, when the other two created Angels were gone toward it, to
destroy it, and deliver Lot, etc. The two good Angels are also called Men, Genesis
18. 1-8. and v. 22-33. Satan also with his evil Angels, are Men of Sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.

Christ was active in carrying on the Death-work upon himself, as Firstborn of
every Creature; and so was he, in his second Sacrifice, by carrying on the
Death of our whole mortal Nature, in him, Spirit, Soul and Body. By the Holy
Ghost or heavenly Creature-spirit in him, did he crucify the Spirit of our
Nature in himself, Luke 12. 49, 50. He was also a voluntary Giver up of his
Body into the Hands of Men, under Devils, to put a full Period to all that was
mortal about him, John 10. 17, 18. He laid down the Life of our whole mortal
Nature, and took it up again, in the originally incorruptible, immortal,
eternal Creature-life of his Root, above all Deaths, or Enemies. And by his
communicated heavenly Creature-spirit, or Holy Ghost in Saints, will he enable
them to be active in carrying on the like Death-work on the Spirit of Nature,
at best, in themselves; and freely also to give up their bodily Life, into the
Hands of evil Angels and Men, God's and their Enemies, where God so permits and
orders, for the witnessing his Gospel Truths.

The Record, Witness, or Products of the first and second of the Divine Three,
Father and Word, in the Creature-part of the Mediator's Person, as brought into
inseparable Union by the Third, bears the Name of the peculiar Divine Causer,
Holy Ghost. All these things were transacted and done, by and within God
himself, before any mere Creatures, Angels or Men were brought forth. The Three
in the Divine Nature, with their Record in Heaven (the Divine Form) are one;
and the same Three, as bearing Witness in Earth (the Creature-part of the
Mediator) agree in one. The one Divine Mind is declared and done, in and by
both, and all, 1 John 5.7,8. By what was done of the Divine Three, by their
distinct Products and Operations, in the Creature-part of the Mediator, will
they let down themselves to the Sight and Enjoyment of blessed Angels and
Saints for evermore.

The Divine is not the Creature-nature in Christ; nor, in his whole
Creature-nature, is the Creature-root, the exalted Branch. And his whole Divine
and Creature-Person, is most intimately one with the Divine Essence or Father,
the Head of all in him, 1 Cor. 11. 3. All are one incomprehensible God, John
10. 30. The exalted Branch in Christ, is the immediate Head of his true
Gospel Church. The Creature-root in him, Head of that; his Divine Form, Head of
his whole Creature-nature, Root and Branch; the Divine Essence or Father, Head
to his whole Divine and Creature-person; yet remains uncompounded with
Creature-nature, as the Divine Form or Son is, Gal. 3. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 5. After
all this account of Superiorities and Inferiorities in all that is truly called
God, the lowest Creature-part in the Mediator, the exalted Branch, or living
Word of God, thinks or infallibly knows, that it is no Robbery or unwarrantable
Presumption in him, to reckon himself equal with God, as in personal Union with
his Creature-root and infinite Divine Nature, Phil. 2.6. These are strange,
seeming Contradictions to Man's Wisdom, which is Foolishness to God's, and to
be destroyed ( Isa. 29. 14.) in all self-confident Disputers of this World, 1
Cor. 1. 19, 20.

CHAP. IV. The infallible Consequents of the said preparatory Condescensions of
God within himself, in pursuance and for the accomplishing of his abovesaid
twofold Purposes in the twofold Creation of Angels and Men.
1. THUS were the Works determined of God to be set up in Angels and Men, by a
first Creation of them, finished (Heb. 4. 3.) to his well-pleasing, by the
right Use of the mortal, earthly, First-Covenant Law-life of the Creature, in
order to receive the Heavenly-Creature New Covenant Gospel-Life of the Creator.
Finished they were, by the Mediator himself, as the Lamb slain in the
Fountain-purity of the first, and ascended into the originally unchangeable
Gospel-life of the second, Rev. 13.8. All this was done within God himself, by
the Mediator, as the Lamb slain from (or in) the Foundation of both Worlds
(natural and spiritual, this World and the World to come) laid in himself, the
Creator of both. All, received by Angels or Men, in their first Creation, or
restored in Men by the Redeemer (since their Fall in Adam) is (with the
fallible Understanding and corruptible Will thereof, their discerning and
desiring Powers, their own Righteousness, Wisdom, Glories, natural Excellencies
and Perfections, therein) to be given up, in Sacrifice to the Will of God, by
Passive Obedience. This is the only possible Means and Way, for their being
transformed and exalted into the originally unchangeable never-sinning
Creature-life of God, in the Mediator, the only Life or Principle of
everlasting Active Obedience to God, and Blessedness to Man. All true
thorow-Followers of the Lamb slain (in the narrow unpleasing Way to Nature, at
best) will find all their own Life and Things, with unspeakable Gain, in an
infallible, all-discerning, spiritual Understanding, and incorruptible Will, by
personal Union with Christ in his heavenly Creature-spirit of true Holiness and
eternal Life. And so will they find themselves in unchangeable Harmony with,
and Obedience to the infinite Divine Will. This is the glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God, in which they that are born of God, by the new-creating
Workmanship of Christ passing upon them (to the Death of their natural Spirit,
and Resurrection into his spiritual Life) come to be Heirs and Coheirs, under
and with Christ, of God, Romans 8. 17.

2. Thus became the exalted Creature-Son and Branch in the Mediator, of the
Firstborn of every Creature (in the Fountain-purity of a mortal earthly Life)
the Firstborn from the Dead, (Col. 1. 15, 18.) in the originally immortal
Creature-life of his Root and Father. So became he the living Word of God, (
the Book of Life of the Lamb slain and exalted) in which were written ( by the
super-wonderful mysterious Way of Divine Writing or Engraving) the Names of all
God's Elect, predestined to be conformed to Christ their Head, in a like
Passive Obedience to the Divine Will, by the Death of their natural Spirit or
living Soul of the First Adam, and Resurrection into the quickening Spirit of
the Second, the Life of their Creator, Romans 8. 29. and 6. 3-6. Whoever do
finally refuse to die with him, (and lose all their own mortal, earthly Life
and Things, received in their first Creation, or restored since, with all Works
or Fruits, done or brought forth by them, therein) will never attain that
heavenly, eternal Creature-life of their Creator, in which to live and reign
with him, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. True Followers of the slain Lamb of God, will be
enabled to say with him, I was dead in my own mortal, earthly Law-spirit of
Works, and am alive in his Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth for evermore, Rev.
1. 18. All that establish themselves in their own Law-spirit of Works, and
Righteousness of Man, will be found unchangeable Enemies of God's
Righteousness, in his heavenly Gospel Spirit, and so in unchangeable Union with
the God of this World, the Devil. Such mystical Sodomites, in Filth of Spirit,
Enmity to God and his Gospel Spirit of Grace, will have worse of it for ever,
under the Wrath of God, than common Sinners in Filth of Flesh, wallowing in the
miry Filths and Brutalities of literal Sodom, Mat. 11. 23, 24.

3. Thus became the exalted Branch in the Mediator, the ready prepared
immediate Hand and living Word of God, for performing his whole Divine Mind and
twofold Purposes thereof, in the twofold Creation of Angels and Men, and for
the dealing with them, both and all, as hating their own Life, given them in
their first Creation, in love to his own, offered them by a Second; or, as from
love to their own, in the first, unchangeably hating his own (offered by a
second) in Union with the Devil.

The said exalted Son and Branch, did bring forth Angels and Men, out of their
radical Existencies in himself, into their personal Subsistencies and
Individuations in themselves. This was their first Creation, in the same kind
of mortal, earthly First-Covenant Law-life, himself had first taken, in the
supreme Fountain-purity thereof, as Firstborn of every Creature therein, and
rightly used in order to the second, in which he became the Firstborn from the
Dead, in a Life above all Deaths, temporal or eternal. Thus was it true, in the
immediate Creator, as well as in mere Creatures, Angels and Men; First, that
which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 46.
Unchangeable Love to our selves in our own Life, received in our first
Creation, is the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, or heavenly
Creature-spirit of Christ, and Life thereof, offered by a second.

4. The exalted Creature-Son, or living Word of God, his prepared and fitted
immediate Hand, for the twofold Creation of Angels and Men, was also his ready
prepared infallible Mouth, Wisdom and Word, to declare to them, as soon as
made, his whole Counsel, Will and Command, for the right Use of their natural
Beings and Life, given them in their first Creation, in order to a second; and
that, as their unspeakable Concern, as well as Duty, for finding the Salvation
of Heaven, or scaping the Damnation of Hell. Final refusing the Loss of all
their own, in the first, for his own, by a second, will be everlasting
Destruction to all that so do.

5. Christ, as exalted Creature-Son and Branch, became the ready prepared
immediate sacrificing High Priest of God, after the Order (and in the Power) of
the Original Melchisedec, ( Heb. 5.6,10. and 6.20. and 7. 17.) his
Creature-root and Father, who first performed the sacrificing Death-work upon
himself, when in the Fountain-purity of all mortal First-creation Life. Thus is
the immediate Creator of Angels and Men, by a first Creation, the immediate
High Priest of God, to perform the like sacrificing Death-work on them,
therein, as his Creature-Father had before performed upon himself. This exalted
Son and Branch, was the Melchisedec, Priest of the most high God, that met
Abram, returning from the Slaughter of the four Kings, and blessed him, Genesis
14. 18, 19. Heb. 7. 1. He was also one of the three Men, Abram prayed to and
worshipped, as God, ( Genesis 18.) which no good Angels would ever own, Rev.
19.10. and 22.9. The Devil and his proud self-exalting evil Angels, own
themselves as Gods, (in the uncontrolled Sovereignty of their own Wills, above
and against all that is truly called God, and to be worshipped) requiring
Divine Worship to be paid them, Isa. 14.12-14. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4. Yea, Satan
most presumptuously attempted to bring the Lord himself to own, fall down and
worship him as the true God, whom he knew to be the true Lord and God ( Mark 1.
24.) he and all Angels and Men ought to worship, Mat. 4. 8-10. Christ owned the
wise Men's worshipping him, when born in our Nature ( Mat. 2. 1, 11.) and after;
others worshipping him, Mat. 8.2. and 9.18. with eight other Scriptures in the
four Evangelists.

6. And lastly; Christ as exalted Branch, was in the fully partaken of Life of
his Creature-root, the ready prepared infallible Example and unerrable Pattern
for Angels and Men to follow, by the like Death of Nature in them, at best, in
order to a happy Resurrection into the spiritual everlasting righteous Life of
their Creator. All that finally refuse a Submission in Passive Obedience to
this Change, will perish for ever. For this Change, as their Duty and
unspeakable Concern, did he represent himself in such Transactions as had
passed in the Creature-part of his Person, to all the Angels single and higher
intuitive natural Understanding than Man's, though in but the same
First-Covenant Law-life of the Creature, as Man. He appeared to the Angels,
immediately, as four living Creatures that had the Likeness of a Man, ( Ezekiel.
1.5.) the comprehensive Sum of all changeable First-Creation-Being and Life.
The word Man, comprehends all. Every individual Man is a Microcosm, or lesser
World, having all found in the Macrocosm, or greater, without him, and
something more, peculiar to himself. He has Being; an earthy Body, with
Elements, and all inanimate Simples or Compounds; a threefold Life, or Spirit
of Lives, ( Genesis 2. 7.) Vegetable, with Grass, Herbs, Trees, etc. a Life of
Sense, with Birds, Beasts, Fishes and creeping things; an intellectual Exercise
of the Life of his natural Spirit, above and without the Body, while in it,
with Angels, but inferior to them, therein. Then, besides all this, has he the
rational Exercise of his natural Understanding, by bodily Organs, not found in
any Parts of the greater World, Angels or Beasts.

The four living Creatures, by which Christ represented himself to the Angels,
had the Face or Likeness of a Man: And they are called again and again, the (or
one) living Creature (Ezekiel. 1.20,21. and 10. 15, 17, 20. The good Angels
figured by Wheels, or Chariots ( Psalm. 68. 17.) followed this Head, fully:
Whithersoever his Spirit was to go, they went, and turned not (or looked back)
as they went, Ezekiel. 1. 17, 20. The Reason hereof was, the Spirit of the living
Creature was in the Wheels (v. 20, 21.) a Seed of his spiritual Life was in
them. Hence, when the four living Creatures with the Face of a Man, did let
down their Wings, the said Angelical Wheels did let down their Wings, v. 24. In
Passive Obedience to the Divine Will, and Conformity to Christ's Death of the
first Creation, they ceased from the mortal Life of their own Spirits, given
them in their first Creation, and from the Exercise of their own fallible
Understandings and corruptible Wills, therein, which are the mystical Wings, by
which natural Angels and Men fly abroad, in this perishing World, to view and
place their Thoughts and Affections on what seems desirable to them, in order
to pick up a true Happiness to themselves, where it never is to be found. While
Man thus rambles and flies abroad for a self-pleasing delusive Happiness,
amongst the Delights of the Sons of Men, he never looks or seeks after God, and
his heavenly Creature-life and Things, the peculiar Delights of the Sons of
God. These heavenly Creature-things, offered by a new Creation, are out of the
Reach of all single natural Understanding of Man, (1 Cor. 2. 9.) and the only
way for attaining them, is most contrary to his natural Will. The Death and
Loss of both and all, is the appointed way, in God's Wisdom, whose Thoughts and
Ways are not as Man's, but quite contrary, about their true Salvation, Isa. 55.
8, 9.

When the good Angels had let down their Wings (importing a perfect Rest and
Cessation from the Labors or Exercise of their own Spirits, Wills and
Understandings) a Voice from the Firmament, over their Heads, calls them out of
the said Death of Nature, into a living spiritual Faith, working by love to
Christ, as seen by them, the Man upon a Throne, as exalted Son and Branch, in
his heavenly Creature-life. Hereby were they actually possessed of eternal
Life, and infallibly sure of being completed therein, in God's time. They
patiently waited (with a holy kind of Impatience, well-pleasing to God, also)
in longing Desires and Pantings after the actual Gift of the Holy Ghost or
Gospel Spirit of the Man, they saw upon his Throne, therein. They, with
Old-Testament-Saints, waited four thousand Years, for this promised unspeakable
Gift, which was not given to either or any of them till Christ was ascended in
our Nature, John 7.39. But, as inseparably united therewith, by a living
spiritual Faith, working by Love thereto, they all had a good Report with God,
as well-pleasing and acceptable to him, though they had not received his
promised Holy Ghost, Heb. 11. 39. All along the said four thousand Years, the
good Angels with Old-Testament-Prophets and other Saints, desired to pry, look
into, and consider what time the Spirit of Christ in them (as enjoyed by a
spiritual Faith therein) did signify, when it testified beforehand, the
Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow, with the Holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven; and clear Gospel-preaching, experienced therein, 1 Pet.
1. 10-12. On this account, the good Angels had Cause of Rejoicing at the Birth
of Christ, in our Nature, as their own concern, as well as Man's, though not in
reference to Sin. For they never sinned, at all, nor were in danger of ever
sinning, after their first change from Nature to Grace. They rejoiced also, on
behalf of Mankind, who are all born Sinners. The high Joy of the good Angels,
on these Accounts, at Christ's Birth, is recorded. Luke 2. 8-14.

By the first Demeanor of the good Angels, is implied the contrary Behavior
of the evil ones. The good followed Christ, their Head: the evil ones turned
from their true Head, as they went, or were going, a while, with the good,
under the same Light. Satan made himself a contrary, opposite Head to Christ,
and, with his Tail, drew a third part of the Angels, ( Revel. 12. 4.) signified
by Stars, ( Job 38. 7.) into the same Condition with himself, under him as
their Head, in the self-chosen earthly Life of the first Creation, in
unchangeable Enmity to God and his heavenly Life, offered them, by a second. As
thus it was with the evil Angels, so, too often, with Men. Under high spiritual
enlightening Gifts, many that have gone a while with Gospel-Saints, after
Christ, as their Head, finding his Cross, or the Death-work of his heavenly on
their earthy Spirit, to be passed under, in order to be married to him, as
risen from the Dead, they turn away from him under Satan's Witch-crafts ( Gal.
3. 1, 3.) to set up for themselves in their holy Flesh, or righteous Life,
given them in their first Creation, in unchangeable Enmity to God and his holy
Gospel Spirit, offered by a second. So Satan, as God and Prince of this World,
brings them under his Influence, by which, he renders them the most enraged
Antichristian Enemies of Gospel-Saints and Truths, 1 John 2. 19.

A third part of the Angels will perish for ever. Of Mankind, the many in the
broad, easy, self-pleasing Way to Hell, out-number Christ's few, in the narrow
Way to Heaven, though they, also, out of all Generations, will be a numberless
Multitude, Revel. 7. 9.

CHAP. V. A short Review of the four preceding Chapters, by way of
Recapitulation.
CHAP. 1. God, infinitely blessed, from all Eternity,

Chap. 2. Determined to create Angels and Men, to give them immortal Spirits,
and to put into them a mortal Life, in their first-creation, to be called their
own, with all the things thereof, their own Righteousness, Wisdom, Works,
Fruits, etc. but all mortal, and to be done away for ever. He, therefore,
determined to set up in personal Union with his Divine Nature, a
Creature-Spirit of originally eternal Life, and render it communicable to Men
and Angels, by a new Creation of them. The former rendered them but mystical
Trees of Good and Evil. The latter makes them particular Trees of Life, under
and with Christ. God, hereby, works all their works in them, (Isa. 26. 12.) and
they, in him, John 3. 21. The Leaves of such Trees never wither: every thing
they do, therein, prospers, Psalm. 1.3. All good Works or Fruits done or brought
forth by them in the former, at best, are nothing to God, ( Hos. 10. 1. Job 35.
7, 8.) nor of any avail for their ever entering into his Kingdom, but only a new
Creature, Gal. 6. 15. The most restored Life and Righteousness of Man, preached
up and warranted for Salvation, is Man's Dream, under Satan's Witch-crafts; all
their delusive Doctrine, therein, Chaff, Psalm. 1.4. And what is this Chaff to
the Wheat, the Gospel-Doctrine, Words and Things of God? Ier. 23. 28.

Chap. 3. (1.) In pursuance of God's twofold Purposes, for a twofold Creation
of Angels and Men, the first of the Divine Three, called Father, did produce,
beget, and set up a Creature-spirit of immortal Holiness, of the same Name in
the Creature-part of the Mediator, with its Divine Producer, Father.

(2.) The Second, the Word, caused the said Creature-root, to bring forth a
Branch, in the Fountain-purity of all mortal First-creation Being and Life,
that was to be set up in Angels and Men, by a first Creation.

(3.) The Third, the Holy Ghost, by its peculiar Operation, brought the
Creature-Father and Son, into unchangeable personal Union, and so the whole
Creature-nature in the Mediator, into unchangeable Union with his Divine
Nature. The Creature-Son and Branch, thus exalted, was the immediate Creator of
all things, in both Creations or Worlds, natural and spiritual, Heb. 1. 1, 2.

Chap. 4. (1.) Thus were the Works, determined of God, to be set up in Angels
and Men, by a first Creation, finished in the Mediator, by the right Use of
all, in order to the second, Heb. 4. 3.

(2.) Herein, was the exalted Son and Branch, the living WORD and Book of God,
in which were written the Names of all the Elect, that are to be conformed to
him, in the like Death of the first Creation, and Resurrection into the Life,
given by a second.

(3.) The exalted Branch, or living WORD of God, gave Angels and Men their
Being and Life, by a first Creation; as the immediate Hand of God, for it.

(4.) He was, therein, the infallible Mouth of God, to declare his whole
Counsel to them, for the right Use of all, given them, in their first Creation,
in order to the second.

(5.) He was, therein, the High Priest of God, to perform the like Death-work
on them, as had passed upon himself, by the Original Melchisedec, his
Creature-root and Father.

(6.) And lastly; He was the ready prepared infallible Pattern, for them to
follow, out of the mortal, earthly Life of the first Creation, into the
immortal and heavenly, by a second, as the only Means and Way, to find the
Salvation of Heaven, or escape the Damnation of Hell.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Trinity.
THE three distinct Powers in the Divine Essence or Father, shining forth, from
all Eternity, in the Divine Form or Son, considered separately, in each, or
jointly in both, are called Father, Word and Holy Ghost, 1 John 5. 7. The one
of these is not the other in the Divine Father or Son.

The word, Father, as the Divine Essence is called, in distinction from the
Divine Form or Son, is of a very differing Consideration from the same Word, as
signifying the first of the Divine Three in both. So, the word, Son, as
signifying the Divine Form, is of a very differing Signification from the same
Word, as signifying the Second of the Divine Three, in Father and Son. The like
may be said of the Third of the Divine Three, the Holy Ghost, in Father and
Son, of distinct Significancy from what the Divine Father and Son, jointly
together, are so called, as the one Infinite Divine Being.

The Three distinct Divine Powers in the Divine Father and Son, do beget and
set up their distinct secondary Record or Witness of themselves, in a
Creature-Form, distinct from the Divine Form. The whole Creature-nature of the
Mediator, Root and Branch, is called Earth, in distinction from the Divine Form
in him, the supreme Heaven of Heavens. Their threefold Witness in Earth, is
signified by Spirit, Water and Blood, 1 John 5.8. The same Three that are One
in the Divine Nature, agree in completing the one Mind of all Three, in the
Earth, or whole Creature-nature of the Mediator. The Witness of the First of
the Divine Three, is Spirit, a Creature-spirit of originally immortal, Holiness
and eternal Life. The Witness of the Second, is called Water, signifying the
Creature-Son and Branch, in the Fountain-purity of all mortal Being and Life,
designed to be set up in Angels and Men, by a first Creation. Blood signifies
the Death of that, as firstborn of every Creature, in order to its
Resurrection into the originally unchangeable Life of its Root and Father, and,
therein, firstborn from the dead. In, by and through this Creature-form, do
the three in the Divine let down the Vision of themselves, to the spiritual
Sight and Enjoyment of Angels and Men; and by such Transactions, therein, do
notify to both, the only Means and Way for their true Blessedness, by the Death
and Loss of all Life and Things received by them, in the mortal First-Covenant
Law-life of the first Creation, in order to ascend into and receive his
originally immortal new and everlasting Covenant Gospel-life, by a second,
communicated to them by the exalted Son and Branch, as firstborn from the
dead; and, therein, the immediate Performer of the one Will of the Divine
Three, in both Creations, and in dealing with all Angels and Men, Good and Bad,
in final Love or Wrath, to all Eternity, accordingly as they submit, or refuse
to submit to the Terms of receiving the Life, offered by a second.

Thus was the Foundation laid, within God himself, in the Creature-part of the
Mediator, for rendering the three that are one in the Divine Nature, discernable
and enjoyable to blessed Saints and Angels, in their spiritual New Creation
Capacities. Man's highest Wisdom and Understanding sees not the heavenly
Creature-things of God, by which only the Divine Three can be known, 1 Cor.
2.9. So, all his Conceptions, Thoughts and Words, about the Trinity, can be but
implicit random-Conjectures and Discourses, not seeing or knowing what he says.

The immediate discernable Objects of Man's highest natural Understanding, are
but the mortal Life and Things of the first Creation, by which they ought to
conclude and may know, there is an eternal Power and Godhead; but see nor that,
nor his heavenly Creature-things, immediately, Romans 1. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Isai. 66. 2.

The Three in the Divine Essence or Father, singly and abstractedly considered,
will be absolutely invisible to Saints and Angels in Heaven to all Eternity.
And the Divine Form, Son or Glory thereof, in Christ's Person, will never be
the immediate Object of their Sight, but be let down to them, in the first
Conjunction thereof, with his Creature-root, through the exalted Creature-Son
and Branch in him, the immediate Creator of all. This is the Branch, God made
strong for himself, ( Psalm. 80. 15.) to perform his whole Divine Mind, in both
Creations; in this World, and the eternal World to come. This is the Branch
that shall reign on Earth, execute Judgment and Justice, therein, as the Lord
our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 5, 6. and 33. 15, 16. By and through this exalted
Branch, the immediate Do-all, in both Creations, will the same Three in the
Divine Essence, that shined forth in the Divine Form, from Eternity, let down
themselves to blessed Angels and Saints, to Eternity. All the Three in the
Divine Essence, and heavenly Creature-Glories, are one Trinity, and that
Trinity, one individual God, John 10. 20.

The Three that are One in the Divine Nature, are the immediate Object to the
Sight and Enjoyment of the whole Creature-nature in Christ (Root and exalted
Branch) that is in personal Union therewith: but never so, to any mere
Creatures, blessed Saints or Angels, 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. John 1. 18. Mat. 11. 27.
They are personally united with the exalted Branch, in him, as Members of his
mystical, spiritual Body, to which he is Head. But never so to his
Creature-root; and much less, yet, to his Divine Nature.

The Three in the Divine Nature, shining forth to mere spiritual Creatures, by
and through the exalted Branch, are no where, in Scripture, called a Trinity,
nor said to be three Persons. If they be three Persons, as three distinct
individual Angels or Men, in Angelical or humane Nature are, would they not be
three distinct individual Gods? would not this be the asserting a Tritheism,
the lesser sort of Polytheism? If they be called three Persons, it must be, as
acknowledged in a Unity, transcendently above mere Creatures, who are so, in
one specifical humane or angelical Nature. The three, in God, are three, in one
individual Divine Nature, shining forth to Saints and Angels, in the Mediator's
one individual Creature-nature, which, in and with his Divine Nature, is, with
his Divine Father or Essence, one individual God. In this Sense, if any, may
they be called three Persons. But the acknowledging three distinct Powers in
God, may justly secure any, from the Imputation of Antitrinitarianism. They are
so three, that the first is not the second; nor second, the third. The Divine
Form in Christ, is not the Divine Essence, nor his Creature-nature, his Divine;
nor his Creature-root, the Branch in him; but all one individual
incomprehensible God, John 10. 30. He that says (knows and owns) God the Father
and his Divine and Creature-Son, says all that God is, or is God. Man, in the
fallible Understanding and corruptible Will of his First-creation Life, can
never truly see, rightly know and do the one Will of both. All, therefore, that
trust to their own Understanding, deny both the Divine Father, and the divine
and heavenly Creature-Son. Whosoever denies the Divine and Creature- Son, has
not the Father. But he that rightly acknowledges the Son, has the Father also,
1 John 2.22, 23. Antichristian Deniers of both, pass in reputed Orthodox Man's
Day of Judging, under Satan, God of this World, as the only true Christians,
excommunicating or casting out of their worldly Churches, the true Owners of
both, as the arrantest Heretics and Blasphemers in the World.

God the Son, or Mediator, in the Divine and Creature-glories of the Divine
Essence or Father, is called a Person, 2 Cor. 2. 10. In his Creature-part, he
is called the Brightness of the Divine Glory in himself; and, therein, the
express Creature- Image of God's whole Divine Person, Essence and Form, Heb. 1.
3.

The Creature-root in the Mediator is God's Soul, not immediately discernable
to the highest spiritual Understanding of mere Creatures: but, in its first
Conjunction with Divine Nature, is let down to their Sight and Enjoyment, in
and by the exalted Creature-Son and Branch, as God's Body, or Visibility of
all, to them. Of the Creature-root, God's Soul, himself says, in reference to
the unpardonably sinning Shepherds (or pretending Teachers of the Way to
Heaven, and Peace with God, in but the restored Life and Righteousness of Man)
my Soul loathed them, and their Soul, also, abhorred me, Zech. 11. 8.

Every individual Man, in the three essential Ingredients into his personal
Constitution, Spirit, Soul and Body (1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.) is a shadowy Image of the
three in one God; and of the Divine Spirit, Creature-root or Soul, and
Creature-body or Branch, in Christ's wonderful compounded Person. Man, in
another Sense, was in the primitive Purity of his whole Being, a shadowy Image
of God's Righteousness. This was lost, to all Mankind, by their first Sin, in
and with Adam. The Reason therefore of the threatened Death on Murderers (that
whosoever sheds Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed: for in the Image
of God, made he Man, Genesis 9. 6.) relates to Man's being the Image of God, in
the former Sense, Genesis 1. 26, 27. The Image of him, in the latter, being wholly
lost, the Murderers of him, in reference to that, might seem unaccountable.

The Spirit of Man, singly and abstractedly considered, may seem a dark Shadow
of the very Divine Essence, as comprehending in it, a threefold distinct Life,
rational, sensual, and vegetable; but all three, invisible and unexercis'd,
till brought into hypostatical or personal Union with its fitly organized Body.
And, all the said three Lives, when brought into Exercise, are called a living
Soul, in distinction from the Spirit, separately considered; and, from the
Body, that is the personal Appearance or Visibility of the whole Man. And, in
both and all, the Man is but one Person.

CHAP. VII. The Mystery of God in general (of all that is truly called God, and
to be worshipped) and, in particular, of God the Father, or Divine Essence; and,
of Christ, the Divine and Creature-Son, ( Col. 2. 2.) both and all, one
incomprehensible God, John 10. 30.
IN general, all are one individual God. In particular, the Divine Form or Son
(though most intimately one with the Divine Essence or Father, in the one
infinite Divine Nature) became personally united with the Creature-form of God,
the Divine Essence or Father, remaining, ever, single and uncompounded
therewith, Gal. 3. 20. A Mediator is not of one Nature; but God, in his Divine
Essence, is one. God the Mediator, as consisting of two Natures, Divine and
Creaturely, in personal Union, is fitted to mediate between infinite Divinity
and finite Creaturality, in blessed Angels and Saints, for ever, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

The Divine and Creature-Son will remain a Mediator, for ever, in Heaven,
between infinite Divinity and elect Angels and Men, in their completed
spiritual Beings, and New Creation Capacities; not in reference to Sin, or any
Danger or Possibility of Sinning, ever incident to them. But,

First; For letting down the Visions of the Divine Glory or Form, in himself,
with Safety, to their spiritual Understanding and Enjoyment, through the
transparent Vail or heavenly Creature-Image of the Divine Nature, in him. No
Man or Angel has seen God, immediately, at any time, in his purely Divine
Nature, nor ever will, or can, to all Eternity, in Heaven. The only begotten
Son, will, in and by his Creature-spirit, as the prepared Means for it, let
down the Visions thereof to them, at second hand, John 1. 18. Mat. 11. 27.
Should the Divine Glory of the Father, in the Son, shine forth, immediately, in
the infinite Brightness thereof, on Gospel-Angels or Saints, in Heaven, it
would be a consuming Fire to their very Beings, Deuteronomy. 4. 24. and 9. 3. Heb. 12.
29. The Request therefore of Moses, ran too high, when he said, Lord, I beseech
thee, show me thy Glory, Exodus 33. 18. That he meant the immediate Sight of the
very Divine Glory, Form, or Face of God, in the Mediator, appears by God's
favorable Answer to his mistaking Thought, saying, no Man or Angel) can ever
so see me, and live. But there is a heavenly Creature- place by me, in personal
Union with my Divine Glory, through which, as my back-parts, thou may see
me; but my Divine Face or Glory, shall never be immediately seen, by thee, or
any mere Creature, to all Eternity, in Heaven, v. 20-23. By and through the
Creature-form or Face of God, in Christ, did he speak to Moses, Face to Face,
(v. 11.) Mouth to Mouth, as his living Word, Numb. 12. 8. It Is the peculiar
Prerogative and transcendent Privilege of the Man Christ Jesus, only, to see
the Divine Glory, immediately, in himself, as the supreme Ingredient into his
personal Constitution. He is that King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in the
Creature-part of his wonderful Person, dwelling with and in that Divine Light
or Glory, which no Man or Angel, can ever so near approach unto, as immediately
to see, 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16.

Thus will the Dignity and Prerogative of the infinite Divinity, and the
peculiar Privilege of Creature-nature in the Mediator, be preserved, in the
transcendent Superiority of both and all, above all mere Creatures, Saints and
Angels, for evermore. And so will they be secured in their unspeakable
Privileges and utmost Blessedness, by the wonderful compounded Divine and
Creature-person of the Mediator.

Secondly; A second Office of the Mediator, to all Eternity, in Heaven, will be
the presenting the blessed Persons of Angels and Saints, with their spiritual
Sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving, to the absolute well-pleasing
Acceptance of his Father and their Father, (John 20. 17.) his God and their
God, in, with, and through him, for evermore, 1 Pet. 2. 5. The Multitude of
Saints which no Man can number, (Revel. 7.9.) and the innumerable Company of
Gospel-Angels ( Heb. 12. 22.) will, in their eternal Praises to God most high,
acknowledge and ascribe their eternal Blessedness in the Sight and Enjoyment of
him, to his electing Love, in the Free-Grace-Purposes and Counsels of his
Divine Mind, from Eternity, as the single and only supreme distinguishing Cause
of their everlasting Blessedness, from those that perish, for ever, under his
everlasting Curse, and unquenchable Wrath.

Creature-nature, of immediate Divine Begetting, qualifies him to mediate
between two vastly distinct Natures, Divine and mere creaturely, in Angels and
Men; so as to answer all that can rightly be desired by them, and to enable
them, to answer all that God requires of them. By his right Performances,
therein, on both and all Accounts, Divine Nature cannot suffer the least
Diminution, nor mere Creatures, Angels or Men, be swallowed up, or consumed, in
their highest Exaltation. The infinite Dignity of the one, and unspeakable
Privileges of the other, will ever be preserved by the Mediator. He is the
wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father (of Saints and
Angels) the Prince of Peace, the only Procurer of their everlasting Peace with
God, Isa. 9. 6. He transforms and translates us, out of the earthly Life of the
Creature, and fallible Understandings, and Freedom of our own corruptible
Wills, received in our first Creation, into the heavenly, eternal Gospel-life
of himself, our Creator, and infallible spiritual Understanding of all things,
and incorruptible Will, therein, for the right doing all things, God requires
of us; which is the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, in unchangeable
Harmony with his infinite Divine Will.

The Head of every Man, is Christ; the Head of the Woman is the Man; and, the
Head of Christ, is God, 1 Cor. 11. 3. The Woman, or natural Man, in the
changeable Womanish Life of the First-creation, is, by Death, and Resurrection
into the unchangeable manly Life of the second, brought into the glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God, into unchangeable Harmony with the infinite Divine
Will. In this Transformation, the manly Spirit of Christ, becomes the Head of
the transformed womanish Spirit of Man; and, the Head of every such spiritual
Man, is Christ; and, the Head of Christ's whole compounded Person, is God, the
single, uncompounded Divine Essence or Father of all. But all these
Superiorities and Inferiorities, in God the Father, and his Divine and
Creature-Son, are swallowed up in Christ's wonderful compounded Person, into an
equality, as with his Divine Father, one incomprehensible God, John 10. 30.
All, that is in personal Union with the infinite Divinity, is God.

CHAP. VIII. The Mystery of Godliness, and Mystery of Iniquity.
TO awakened spiritual Saints, it is given to know the Mystery of the Kingdom
of God, the Mystery and Power of Godliness: but, to them that are without such
spiritual Life and Knowledge, all the spiritual heavenly Creature-things of God,
prepared for them that love him, are done and spoken in Parables, earthly
Figures and Similitudes. So, hearing, they hear, but do not understand; seeing,
they see, yet not perceive, or rightly take the mystical Truths, therein and
by, signified, Mat. 13. 13, 14. and Mark 4. 11, 12. They desire not to
understand them, they are so contrary to their own Wills, and self-Interests.
They, rather, like, choose and approve of Satan's Mystery of Iniquity, and
embrace the Doctrine that carries on that, which gratifies their own Wills,
both as to self-Interests in this World, and a delusive Hope, therein, for true
Blessedness, in the World to come, also. In Conclusion, he that has not the
Life, God has prepared and offered by a New Creation, which alone is eternal,
from him shall be taken even that which he seems to have, or thinks to be
eternal Life, Luke 8. 18. And so, will he find eternal Death, in a most
exquisite Sensibleness of his whole Being, Spirit, Soul and Body, under the
unquenchable Wrath of God. This will Men get, by following Satan's delusive
Gospel, in his Mystery of Iniquity. Those that shall be Saints, till the
spiritual Seed of true Saintship be wakened up in them, may be, for a time,
under the same delusive Power of Satan, with others. Paul, till then, was a
fierce, self-confident Enemy to Gospel-Saints and Truths, in the
Law-righteousness of Man, under Satan's Mystery of Iniquity, Phil. 3.6. All
reading of the Scriptures, or hearing them expounded by Men, in
Law-righteousness, however eminent in their own Understandings, will never
deliver from being captivated by Satan's Mystery of Iniquity. All Scripture is
a Book sealed, Isa. 29. 11. Let Man, in but his own Understanding search the
Scriptures, he will not come to Christ, the living Word and Book of God, for
that Life, in which, alone, it is possible to understand, receive and own the
mystical Truth of all. Such Interpreters, with their self-confident Hearers,
should they be at this Work, longer than Methuselah lived, they would still be
wholly to seek, as when they began, as to that eternal Life and things of God,
in which, it is possible to enter into his Kingdom, or escape the Damnation of
Hell. Awakened Saints, in their new spiritual, infallible, all-discerning
Understanding, are enabled to see and declare, not only, the heavenly
Creature-life and things of God, therein; but, to pry and search into the deep
things of the infinite Divinity, in Christ's Person, (1 Cor. 2. 9, 10.) to
understand all things, ( v. 15.) the divine and spiritual things of God, and
what the natural things of Man, given him in his first Creation, amount unto.
The becoming a little Child, as to the Life, Wisdom, Will and Understanding of
Man, in order to a receiving the heavenly spiritual eternal Creature-life and
Things of God, his Wisdom, his everlasting Righteousness, true Holiness, a new
infallible Understanding, for knowing all things, and a new incorruptible Will,
for doing all things well, in God's Sight; this, Christ makes absolutely
necessary to our ever entrin into his Kingdom, Mat. 18. 3. and Luke 18. 17.
Paul, an eminent self-confident Pharisee, in the Law-righteousness of Man, and
a fierce Persecutor of Gospel-Saints, was, doubtless, of high esteem with those
that in his Law-principle were wise, strong and honorable. But, when a
Gospel-Saint, he became as a little Child, a Fool weak, and despicable, in the
Judgment of those, who were wise, strong and honorable in restored Law-life
and First-covenant Seize from Christ; Phil. 3. 6-11. 1 Cor. 4. 10. When a
Gospel-Saint, he renounced the Knowledge of Christ himself, after the Flesh; to
be married to him in that Spirit, into which risen, out of the Death of our
Nature, in himself, 2 Cor. 5. 16. Romans 7. 4. He had, now, a Life and Things, as
far above all, given Angels and Men, in their first Creation, as the Heavens
are higher than the Earth. This Life, hid with Christ in God, from Man's
highest Understanding; and, all Man regards, given up, in Sacrifice to God,
what Esteem could he find, with Men? This has been the Case of true Saints,
Prophets and Apostles, and of Christ himself, all along this World, from Abel,
to this Day, Matthew. 23. 34, 35. While any are confident in Satan's Mystery of
Iniquity, preferring the Law-life of the Creature and Righteousness of Man, to
the Gospel-life of the Creator and everlasting Righteousness of God, therein,
such are the greatest Haters of true Saints, and were the Murderers of Christ
himself, when Pilate a Heathen Judge, would have released him, as finding no
Fault in him, John 18. 38. and 19. 4, 6. Christ warns his true Followers, to
expect the like Usage, from such, John 15. 18-20. and 16. 1, 2. Saints, fixed
in Union of Mind, with God, become the most hateful to all, fixed in the
Law-righteousness of Man, in unchangeable Union with the Devil. In the Form of
Godliness and Righteousness of Man, they deny the Power of Godliness and
Righteousness of God, as a diabolical Fiction, 2 Timothy 3.5. Such said of Christ
himself, he had a Devil, and was mad. Here Is the demeanor of any, fixed in
Satan's Mystery of Iniquity, to such as experience and declare the Mystery of
Godliness. Hence, are God's true New- Ierusalem-Saints a Contempt, all along
this World, under Satan's Reign. But, when Christ shall appear the second time,
in his all-powerful, all-discovering Gospel Light, and enter upon his Reign on
Earth, they will be a Praise in the Earth. For this, therefore, all Gospel-Saints
and Angels continually pray, and keep not silence, Isa. 62. 6, 7.

Man's Wisdom denies true Godliness to be any Mystery, at all, which God's
Wisdom declares without Controversy, and beyond all dispute or question, to be
a great Mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. The Scriptures, and Mind of God therein, as to
the eternal Concerns of Men, are easy to be understood, says Man: impossible to
be understood, says God, by Man's highest Understanding, in the Light, Wisdom,
and Righteousness of Man, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 14. Isa. 29. 11. God, here says, what
learned Man should say, in his highest Wisdom. It Is not in Man, to make one
right Step toward eternal Life, in his own best natural Understanding, Reason
or Wisdom, Ier. 10. 23. It Is, says Man's Wisdom, and warrants final Peace with
God, therein ( Ezekiel. 13. 1-10.) where there is no such Peace. Boldly and
confidently does Man's lying Spirit of Divination, in Satan's Gospel-Divines,
say this, and warrant their Hearers, they will confirm their Word, v. 6.

Man may know God's infinite Divine Power, by the things that are made in the
First-creation: but, sees neither his Divine Nature and things thereof, nor any
of his hidden, spiritual, eternal Creature-things, prepared to be given, by a
new or second Creation, Romans 1. 20. 1 Cor. 2. 9. All Mankind are capable of,
and may receive the common Salvation, as a Fruit of Christ's Death, in our
Nature, and convincing Discoveries of his Truth, or Gospel-life, if they will,
1 Timothy 2. 4. But, as to special Salvation, or eternal Gospel-life, this is not
of him that wills, but of God, who will show such Mercy, to whom he will,
Romans 9. 15, 16. Many, in all possible Seize in the former, will perish
for ever.

Satan attempted to bring Christ himself to be a Member of his Church, or
Synagogue, and worship him as God, in his Mystery of Iniquity, Mat. 4. 8, 9.
where are we, till infallibly experiencing his Gospel-life, and therein the
Mystery of Godliness? All along this World, under God's most wise Permission,
Satan and his Gospel Ministers, transformed into the Likeness of Christ and
his, carry all before them, 2 Cor. 11. 13-15. All, in but their own Spirit and
worldly Life, at best, wonder and run after them, (Revel. 13. 3, 4.)
worshipping the Dragon, and under and with him, opening their Mouth in
Blasphemy against God, and his Creature-name, that is his heavenly Tabernacle,
and them that dwell therein, v. 5,6. And it is given to him and his Party
amongst Men, to make War with Saints, and overcome them, ver. 7. They are
condemned as Traitors, discovering his Counsels in the Mystery of Iniquity, and
he will cause them, to be so accounted, also, against Heathen Cesars, and
others, of his Party, under him. Christ himself was condemned and murdered, on
this Pretense, John 19. 12, 15. Saints can discover him, when sitting in the
Temple of God, showing himself that he is God (2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.) to be the worst
of all Creatures, the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, ver. 3. Will he quietly
bear this Discovery? will he not, by his humane Instruments, show his utmost
Rage against them? and, God permits. But be it as it will; the Sum of all true
Gospel-teaching, is a declaring the Mystery of Godliness, for the Salvation of
Men and preventing their Damnation; and, a discovering Satan's Mystery of
Iniquity for the Damnation of Men, and preventing their Salvation. So, only,
can Saints, with Paul, become free from the Blood of all Men, (Acts 20. 26.
Ezekiel. 33. 7-9.) as having no Share in that Guilt, by which they bring that
Blood upon their own Heads, which will be found to amount unto no less than
eternal Death to their whole Beings, Spirit, Soul, and Body, in a Resurrection
of Damnation. The experimental Knowers of the Mystery and Power of Godliness,
and faithful Discoverers of the Mystery of Iniquity, will have a Resurrection
of Life, (John 5. 29.) above all Deaths, temporal or eternal.

CHAP. IX. The first Sin, Fall, and Punishment of many evil Angels, and of all
Mankind, in Adam.
EVIL Mankind, in Adam, joined with evil Angel-kind, in Satan, through a mutual
Union of Love to themselves and one another, electing or choosing for
themselves, their own earthly, mortal, First covenant Law-life of the Creature,
given by a First-creation, in preference and opposition to the heavenly,
immortal, Second-covenant Gospel-life of the Creator, offered them by a second
or new Creation. The evil Angels herein, did, at first, commit the unpardonable
Sin against the Holy Ghost, under the immediate Beamings forth of Christ's
heavenly Creature-Gospel spirit, the Son of everlasting Righteousness, upon
their highest, single intuitive natural Understandings. Secondly, They had no
superior Rank of Creatures, in the First-creation, already fallen, above them
in Subtlety and Power, to tempt them. Thirdly, They were all, actually created
and set up, in their completed personal Beings and Life, at first; Mankind
receive their personal Beings, successively, Generation after Generation.
Fourthly, Mankind's first Sin, in Adam, was not against such clear Knowledge of
their own unspeakable Concern, as well as Duty to God, though in the same kind
of First-covenant Law-life, with Angels. The inferior Ingredients into Man's
personal Constitution (bodily, Sensual-life, tho created pure and incorrupt)
rendered his intuitive Discerning, inferior to that of Angels, where 'twas
single and alone. Hence, what was immediately and more convincingly made known
to Angels, was represented to Adam, by a figurative Tree of Life; and, himself,
in distinction from that, by the Tree of Good and Evil. The former represented
Christ to him, in that heavenly Creature-life, offered by a new Creation: the
latter, represented himself to himself, as but a mystical Tree of Good and
Evil, in his own Life, given in his first Creation, corruptible and changeable,
mortal and perishable, with all the earthly things, therein, Will,
Understanding, Righteousness, Wisdom, etc. with all Works or Fruits ever
possible to be done or brought forth, therein. By, and under the superior
Subtlety and Power of the Devil, the mystical Old Serpent, was Adam, in the
primitive Purity of his whole Being, and Mankind, in him, as their Head and
Representative, induced, persuaded and deceived, so as to prefer Satan's
self-pleasing Lie, to God's Spirit of Grace and Truth. So, under and with the
Serpent, he chose his own earthly Life of the Creature, in preference to God's
own heavenly Creature-life of the Creator. Many of Mankind, when restored out
of the Darkness and Death of their own Spirits, into the Light, Life and
Righteousness of Man, do sin again, in their own Persons, after the Similitude
of Adam's first Transgression, who, at best, in Innocence, was but a Figure of
the Second Adam who was to come, in the Fountain-purity of our Nature, and
also, full of the Holy Ghost (Luke 4. 1. John 1. 14.) his heavenly
Creature-spirit of Grace and Truth, Romans 5. 14. This Sin, again, in their own
Persons (after all sad Experience of fallen Mankind, thereby, in Adam, and all
Warnings and Counsels of God, since) is unrepentable by them, ( Heb. 6. 4, 6.)
and unpardonable, by God, Heb. 10. 26, 27. This is the Case of any, that
conclusively and absolutely prefer their own restored earthly Life of the
Creature and Righteousness of Man, to the heavenly Creature-life of the
Creator, and everlasting Righteousness of God, therein. All, that will not
receive and have, the heavenly Creature-life of God (by submitting to the Death
of restored Nature, at best, the Loss of all their own Life and things,
therein) God will take away the said Life, from them, again, and lay them down,
for ever, under his unquenchable Wrath, in eternal Death, Luke 8. 18. This is
that, Christ says, Mat. 16.25. Whosoever will save his Life, shall lose it:
and, whosoever will hate and lose his own Life, for my Sake, from Love to my
heavenly Creature-life, shall find it, with unspeakable Gain, as changed by
Death and Resurrection, into an eternal Life. Satan was at it, with Christ
himself, ( Matthew. 4. 8, 9.) to stay and set up with and under him, as a State
of true Happiness, in the mortal Life of our Nature; and, by his Apostle Peter,
was at the same Point, to pity and spare himself, there, saying, be the Death
thereof, far from thee: this shall not be unto thee. Christ discovered and
declared this Word of Peter, to be Satan's Counsel, in and by him, Mat. 16.
21-23.

As the first Sin of Angels was differing from Man's first Sin, so was the
Punishment. The Punishment of evil Angels, was the giving them their own evil
Choice, their own self-chosen earthly Life, received in their First-creation,
with all the things thereof, their own Wisdom, Righteousness, Subtlety and
Power, all natural Excellencies and Perfections, therein, as by them abused,
turned into, and used, in unchangeable Enmity to God and his heavenly Creature
spirit of eternal Life. God also permitted to them the Exercise of a ruling
Power over sallen Mankind, all along this World, by which, Satan carries on the
same delusive Work, as on Adam, at first: that the Life, given in the
First-creation, is eternal, no need of a second; nor, therefore, of the Death
of the first. Ye shall not die, Genesis 3. 3. This is Satan's uniform Lie, all
along this World, that the Life given in the First-creation is eternal. You
must die, or never live and reign with me, in my heavenly Creature-life, which
is eternal: This is Christ's Truth, his faithful Saying, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
There Is nothing more pleasing to Man's Will, in the restored earthly Life of
the First Adam, than Satan's Lie: and, nothing so universally contrary to it,
as God's Truth; that, the Death and Loss thereof, with all the things therein,
is indispensably neceessary to any Man's receiving that Life which is eternal,
by a new Creation. Man, in the restored Life of the First Adam's living Soul,
and highest spiritual enlightening Gifts, convincing him of the Life offered by
a Second, and of the Necessity of parting again, with the restored earthly Life
and things of the First Adam 's living Soul, for the heavenly Life and Things
of the Second Adam 's quickening Spirit; under all this Mercy, is Man liable,
through his own unspeakable Folly, to be bewitched back from looking after
Christ's heavenly, Gospel-life, showed and offered him, and to set up for
himself, under and with Satan, in his own earthly Law-life and Righteousness,
signified by Holy Flesh, Gal. 3. 1, 3. This may be called a Sinning after the
Similitude of the evil Angels first Transgression, under the clearest Discovery
of the Life offered by a new Creation, with the Terms of receiving it, and
their unspeakable Concern for submitting thereto, as the only possible Means to
find eternal Life, or escape eternal Death.

That the Punishment of evil Angels for their first Sin, by God's giving them
up, to their own self-chosen Life, and their own Will and Way, therein, all
along this World, that this was a greater Punishment than Man's for his first
Sin, (which was the Death and Loss of his abused First-covenant Life and
Things, received by a First-creation) may seem strange to Man's Wisdom, who
reckons, Adam should have kept what he had, in the primitive Purity of his
First-creation, the keeping of which, in preference to the Life of the Creator,
offered by a Second, was his Sin; the Loss of it, by God's taking it, from him,
his Punishment. At Man's rate of Judging, the evil Angels were in the Right, as
keeping what they received in their First-creation, all the Glories and
Excellencies, Wisdom and Power, therein.

Quest. Could Mankind, or human Nature, at best, in Adam, choose the heavenly
Creature-life of God, shown and offered them, by a New Creation?

Answ. No. Neither Man nor Angel had Power in their own earthly Life and Wills,
to choose the heavenly Creature-life of God, offered by a New Creation: for,
then they would have elected themselves. The receiving from Christ, as a Fruit
of his meritorious Sufferings and Death in our Nature, the renewed Life and
Righteousness of the First-creation, is of him that wills. All may receive
that, if they will. But, the attaining and receiving of the Life, God offers,
by a Second-creation, this is not of him that wills or runs, in his own
Spirit and Will, at best, but of God who will show this Mercy, to whom he will,
only, Romans 9. 15, 16. All, that finally elect or chase for themselves their own
earthly Life of the Creature, reject the heavenly Creature-life of the Creator.
All, that God has elected, will be brought to hate and lose their own earthly
Life, at best, from love to his heavenly, as the only Way to receive it.

A third Part of Angels fell, irrecoverably, by their first Sin, Revel. 12. 4.
The far greater part of Mankind, the many in the broad Way, will be found
irrecoverably fallen, for ever. Yet, will Christ's few, in the narrow Way, be
an innumerable Multitude, Revel. 7. 9.

CHAP. X. The second Sacrifice of Christ, in our whole human Nature, Spirit,
Soul, and Body.
IN and by his first Sacrifice, he became the immediately fitted Hand of God,
(the living Word of God, which is God, John 1. 1-3.) for performing the whole
Divine Will, in both Creations of Angels and Men, and in dealing with them,
all, for ever, in final Love or Wrath.

This first Sacrifice related not to the Pardon of Sin, in Angels or Men. They
were none of them, then, extant in their own personal Beings. A Preparation for
preventing Sin, in both and all, was thereby made; notwithstanding which, many
Angels sinned and fell, irrecoverably. All Mankind sinned and fell, in and with
Adam; but, recoverably, both as to their Sin and Punishment, and also to a
being rendered capable of that true Salvation-life, they, at first refused.
This second Sacrifice of Christ, therefore, in our Nature, related only to the
Sins of Mankind. The good Angels never sinned, at all. The evil, were
absolutely unpardonable. In reference to Sin, therefore, Christ took on him the
Nature of Man, not of Angels, ( Heb. 2. 16.) and, therein, became a little
lower than Angels, even than evil Angels, in the Glory of their First-creation,
chosen by them, and granted them by God, in his just Judgment on them, with a
ruling Power over Mankind, therein, all along this short-lived World; and then
to be stripped of all their worldly Power and Glory, and laid down, for ever,
in everlasting Burnings, under his unquenchable Wrath, in the lowest Hell-part
of the eternal World, to come.

In reference to this second Sacrifice of Christ, we are to consider his
Entrance into this World, in our Nature. The Virgin Mary was found with Child,
of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 1. 18. An Angel appears to Joseph, in a Dream, telling
him, that what was conceived in her, was of the Holy Ghost; and, warned him,
that when born, he should call his Name, Jesus, that would save his People from
their Sins; and, Immanuel, also, was he to be called, that is, God with us,
ver. 20-23. Isa. 7. 14. The like Account, as to his wonderful Formation in the
Womb of the Virgin, we find, Luke 1. 26-35. and his Birth, Luke 2. 7. The good
Angels rejoiced thereat (Luke 2. 13, 14.) not in reference to a procuring their
Pardon for Sin, having never sinned; but, as knowing thereby, the time drawing
near, for them (with Old-Testament-Saints) to receive the Holy Ghost, which
they waited for, all along, four thousand Years, by a living spiritual Faith,
working by Love to God, therein, and amounting to an indissoluble Union with
Christ, therein. But, the Holy Ghost was not given to Angels or Saints, till
our Nature, in Christ, was ascended and glorified, John 7. 39. Both the said
Angels and Saints obtained a good Report with God, as well-pleasing to him, by
a living spiritual Faith therein, though they had not received the promised
Holy Ghost, Heb. 11. 39. From the good Angels Concern, herein, did they, with
Old-Testament-Prophets, desire to pry, look into, and diligently to search out
what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ in them, did signify, when it
testified beforehand, the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should
follow (1 Pet. 1. 10-12.) to our ascended, glorified Nature, in him; and to
them, by the Holy Ghost's being sent down from Heaven, into Angels, with the
Spirits of Old-Testament-Saints, departed, and New-Testament-Gospel Saints, in
the mortal Body, Act. 2.1-4. This is the other, better Comforter (Christ told
his Disciples, the Father in pursuance and for accomplishing of his
Free-Grace-Mercy, to them, would send) than he had yet been to them, as a
fleshly Bridegroom, in the but restored First-covenant Life and Righteousness
of Man, therein, John 14. 26. This better Comforter, he told them, would teach
them all things (divine and spiritual) and so bring to their Remembrance, all
that he had hitherto, spoken to them, in Parables, earthly Figures and
Similitudes, in which, the mystical divine and spiritual Truths, lay hid from
them, as well as others.

The good Angels also rejoiced at the Birth of Jesus, on the behalf of Mankind,
in general; and, of Saints, in special, as the means for recovering all, out of
the Darkness and Death, into which brought by their first Sin and Punishment
thereof, Genesis 2. 17. John 1. 9. The World was made by him, yet when he came
into the World, none, in their worldly Life of the Creature, at best, either
knew, received, or owned him, John 1.10. The righteous First-Covenant
professing Jews, in Union of mind with evil Angels, were the most signally
enraged Contradicters, Blasphemers and Murderers of him, for his
Gospel-Doctrine of Salvation, Acts 3.13-15. The exalted Son and Branch, was the
immediate Former of himself, in the Womb of the Virgin, the Son of God, on
Earth, remaining, still, what he was in the Beginning, the Son of Man in
Heaven, John 3. 13.

Evil Angels and Men were God's permissive Hand, under his infinite overruling
Wisdom and Power, to finish the Death-work on all that was mortal, about him,
in our Nature; and so, often, on Saints, to their greatest Good, and Enemies
greatest hurt. Hereby, do they complete Saints Conformity to Christ's Death,
freeing them from all that is mortal, about them, while in the Body, Isa. 57. 1,
2.

The Jews would have made Christ, a King, if he would have owned his Kingdom,
in that mortal First-covenant Law-life they saw him in, John 6. 15. But,
witnessing his Kingdom, not to be in that worldly Law-life, but in his
Gospel-life of Grace and Truth, ( John 18. 36, 37.) they murdered him, and so,
completed the Death of him, as to that mortal Law-life, wherein they would
have made him their King. They chose rather to be Subjects to a Heathen King,
than such a King as he owned himself to be, ( John 19. 12, 15.) who would have
made him such a King, as would have rendered them Traitors and Enemies to
Caesar. Here Is the confounded Doings of Man, at best, in his own worldly Spirit
and Life. Some Corinthians, Laodiceans, and other Professors, in but the
First-covenant-life and Righteousness of Man, all along, since, are of the same
mind, with them, 1 Cor. 4. 8. Rev. 3. 17.

The God of this World offered Christ, a far larger Bribe than the Jews did,
all the Kingdoms of this World, visible and invisible, under him (all worldly
Power, Human and Angelical) in Case he would own his Kingdom to be in this
First-creation Worldly-life, Mat. 4. 8, 9. Whoever are finally taken with his
worldly Bribes, the literal or mystical Riches of this First-creation World, do
fall down and worship him, as God. And, by such Loyal Subjects of him, does he
murder true Saints, that refuse so to do; as they did Christ himself. True
Heaven-born Sons of God, have the whole self-confident legal-spirited
Generation of Professsors, on the same Account, universally, in all times,
against them. They mortally and irreconcileably hate them, for owning the
Death-work of Christ's Gospel Spirit of Grace, on that Law-spirit of Works,
they confidently trust in, for entering into the Kingdom of God. Such become the
highest Rank of Satan's Subjects, and most serviceable Instruments for
maintaining the Credit of his worldly Kingdom, as the only true Blessedness, to
any. God's Thoughts and Ways for true Salvation, are not as Man's: and, when he
has declared his Ways, in his holy Oracles, let Man's highest Wisdom undertake
the interpreting them, all shall run on Satan's Side, God's Thoughts, therein,
remaining fast sealed and locked up, from Man's best Understanding, in but a
restored First-covenant Life, Isa. 29. 11.

CHAP. XI The Difference of Christ's Death, in our Nature, as to the intent and
Extent thereof, from Saints Conformity to him, by the Death of Nature, in them.
CHRIST's condescending to take our Nature, and, therein, by the Grace of God,
to taste Death for every Man, ( Heb. 2. 9.) was in reference to the pardonable
Sins of Mankind, in Adam, and, also, in their own Persons. This was God's
appointed Way, for the redeeming and recovering them out of their fallen State,
wherein born, dead in Trespasses and Sins, (Ephesians. 2. 1. Col. 2. 13.) into the
Light, and also Life, received by them, in their First-creation. All may
receive this general Redemption-Mercy, the Common-Salvation-Work of Christ, as
a Fruit of his meritorious Sufferings and Death, in our Nature, if they will.
But, as to the special eternal Salvation of the Elect, in his new and
everlasting Covenant Gospel-life, this is not of him that wills or runs,
in the most fruitful Exercise of his own restored First-covenant Law-life, but,
of God's Free Grace- Mercy, which he will (effectually and infallibly) show, to
whom he pleases, only. The ceasing from their own Life, Will, and
Understanding, is the only appointed Way for their receiving this special
eternal Salvation-life of God. Jude (with others) writ of both these distinct
Salvations, common and special, temporal and eternal. And when he had, with all
Diligence, informed them of the former, he found it needful to exhort them, to
contena earnestly, in Prayer to God, for a living spiritual Faith, working by
Love to him, in the latter, in which, only, true Saintship and Salvation ever
could or will be found, by any Man, Jude v. 3. Thus is Christ the Savior of
all Men, with a common or general Salvation; but of them that believe in his
Gospel-life, and place all their Hopes of Salvation, in that, with a special, 1 Timothy 4. 10. They trust in the living God, that living Word of God, which is
God, John 1.1. Those that wax confident in the common Salvation, the restored
Life and Righteousness of Man, do trust in that Life, for Entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven, which Christ crucified, in the Fountain-purity of it, in
himself. God will, not only, that all Men should be saved, with the common
Salvation, but has rendered them capable also of receiving the Knowledge of the
Truth, (1 Timothy 2. 4.) his Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth, by the convincing
Discoveries thereof, to their natural Understandings. But, after all this, are
they liable to apostatize, fall away, and finally refuse so great Salvation, as
is thereby offered them, and perish for ever, Heb. 6. 4-6.

The submitting, in Passive Obedience, to the Death and Loss of all, received
from Christ, in the Common-Salvation-Benefit of his Death, rendering them but
holy Flesh, is absolutely necessary to their finding the special, eternal
Salvation-life of his holy Gospel Spirit, the Holy Ghost. Otherwise, after all,
received in the Common-Salvation, they will find everlasting Destruction.
Conformity to Christ's Death, by the Death of Nature, at best, in us, is the
appointed way, to reign with him, in the Life he is ascended into, out of the
Death thereof, in himself, Romans 6. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. Nor Devil, nor Jews,
could prevail with him, to own his Kingdom in the Fountain-purity of his
worldly Law-life; but, in that Gospel Spirit of eternal Life, he was to ascend
into, out of the Death thereof. Paul, when a Gospel-Saint, would no longer
know, or own Christ himself, after the Flesh, in but the restored fleshly
First-covenant Law-life and Righteousness of Man, but, in his holy
Gospel Spirit and Righteousness of God, therein, 2 Cor. 5. 16. As married to
him, therein, only, is it ever possible for any, to bring forth Fruit unto God,
Romans 7. 4. All, fixed by Satan and themselves, in the Common-Salvation, become
the most irreconcilable Enemies to those, in the special. Those that own but
the Form of Godliness, Righteousness of Man, in the Common-Salvation, as a
State of true Happiness, and finally deny the Power of Godliness in Christ's
Gospel-life, they are mystical Infidels, (after all such temporary Faith in
Christ, by which they have received their own Life, again, from him) the most
criminal Sinners, spiritual Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon, such as crucified our
Lord, (Revel. 11. 8.) and have been the Murderers of true Saints, all along
this World, from Abel, downwards, and will so be, to the ending thereof; and,
reckon, they do God Service, therein, John 16. 2. Literal Infidels vastly
out-number these mystical Ones, not believing in Christ, at all, so as to
receive the Common-Salvation-Life and Righteousness of Man, from him. What a
World of such, is there, now, in this World? Mahumetans, other Pagans and
Infidels, and amongst all Varieties of such as are called Christians,
innumerable even of them, not living in the Principle of rational Light, that
many mere Heathens walk in Obedience to. What final, eternal Benefit, are all
these like to find, from the meritorious Sufferings and Death of Christ, in our
Nature?

Saints Conformity to Christ's Death, as true Followers of him, in the narrow,
unpleasing Way to Nature, through the Strait Gate of Entrance into his eternal
Gospel-life, relates not, at all, to the peculiar Benefits of Christ's Death in
our Nature, for Mankind, in general; or, Saints, in special. But, it is their
unspeakable Advantage, to follow him into the said Death, by the Death of
Nature, at best, or in whatever Condition, as the only Way to find the
Salvation of Heaven, or escape the Damnation of He^l.

The restored righteous Life of Man, in his own Spirit of Works, put him,
afresh, upon his own personal Trial, for the Right Use thereof, as was the Case
of Adam, at first. If from Self-love, he finally choose this, in preference to
the Gospel-life and Righteousness of God, therein, he sins, again, in his own
Person, after the Similitude of Adam's pardonable Transgression (Romans 5. 14.)
unpardonably, and unrepentably, Heb. 6. 4, 6. and 10. 26, 27. Filth of Spirit,
Enmity to God's Divine and Creature-Holy-Ghost or Spirit, lurking under all
Righteousness of Man's holy Flesh, will, to all, unchangeably fixed therein, be
eternal Death.

The Surrender and Loss of the Life of our own Spirits, at best, and our own
fallible Understandings and corruptible Wills, therein, is the only Way to
arrive at the happy Experience of an infallible Understanding and an
incorruptible Will, in God's heavenly Creature-life, the only Principle of
everlasting well-pleasing active Obedience to him, and Blessedness to us. A
ceasing from the best Works, and fasting from the best Fruits, performable or
producible by us in our own Spirit, Will, and Way, to live in God's
Sabbath-Spirit of true Rest, to us in him and him in us, and Delight only in
such incorruptible Fruits as can be brought forth by us, in his Spirit only,
this is such a Fast, and such a Sabbath as he has chosen, Isa. 58. 5, 13. And
this, will all, whom he has chosen, be brought unto, by his infinite
Free-Grace-Mercy. All outward bodily Fastings and Sabbath-keepings, never
accompanied with this inward mystical Truth of all, were an Abomination to God,
when his own literal, figurative Appointments and Ordinances to the Jews, Isa.
1. 10-15. and 66. 3.

Gospel-life is the Wine of Christ's Kingdom, which Saints, with Christ, can
daink of, only, in his Kingdom-spirit, as, therein, new Creatures; Mark 14. 25.
This was figured in Iotham's Parable, cheering God and Man, (Judge. 9. 13.)
answering all, Man can rightly desire of God, and enabling him, to answer all,
God requires of him. No such true New- Ierusalem-Saints, shall ever have
occasion to say, we are sick, (Isa. 33.24.) or need any thing; and to say, we
fear no Danger of Repenting, or Change, from a mind of everlasting Obedience to
God; nor, therefore, of Condition, from a State of unchangeable Blessedness, in
the Sight and Enjoyment of him, in his infinite Divine Favor and Love. This
gets Man, by a change from his own earthly, continual sinning Life of Vanity,
to God's own heavenly never-sinning Gospel-life. He will be enabled, therein,
to say with Christ, I was dead in my own Spirit, and am alive for evermore, in
his, Rev. 1. 18. Our own right Eye, Hand, and Foot, the highest Light, best
Practice, and walking in our own Spirit, Understanding and Will, must be
plucked out, cut off, and cast away, or we shall be cast into Hellfire, Mark 9.
43-48. They offend us, as rendering the Cross or Death-work of Christ's heavenly
Spirit on our earthly, offensive and displeasing to us; and us, therein
offensive to God; and so, standing in our Way to eternal Life; so, on all
Accounts, and in every Sense, offensive to God and our selves. We are to pray,
that God, by his Spirit, would do this to, and for us; pluck out our right Eye,
etc. We ought, also, by his Spirit in us, or a living spiritual Faith, working
by Love to him, to be active in carrying on such Work, in Obedience to his
Command. We are also to rejoice, in what God suffers evil Angels (or Men) to do
to us, in their implacable Malice, as knowing all, overrul'd by him, in a
constant, infallible Conducibleness thereunto. So, only, can we arrive at the
happy Experience of an infallible spiritual Understanding for knowing all
things, and an incorruptible Will, for doing all things, to God's
well-pleasing, in the mavelous Light and glorious Liberty of the Sons of God;
in such a Free Will, as is in unchangeable Harmony with the infinite Divine
Will; the Free Will of the second Adam. The Light and Free Will of our own
Spirit, at best, kept up, in Opposition to his, turns it into the greatest
Darkness and Bondage, of all, Mat. 6. 23.

The Will of our Nature in Christ, found the full Death thereof, so exceeding
terrible, as to pray, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this Death-
cup pass from me. But, he instantly renounced the Request of his natural Will,
so, as in the same Breath, to say, nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will; thy Will be done, Matthew. 26. 39, 42, 44. As to the Sufferings of Nature,
in Saints, as the Will of God, for their greatest Good, Christ says to them, my
Yoke is easy, and Burden light, Mat. 11. 30. There are none of the said
terrifying Ingredients into the Death of Nature, in Saints, peculiar to the
Death of it, in Christ himself. Nor were they, in his first Sacrifice of
Nature, in general, above-spoken to: To Saints therefore the Sufferings of the
present time, are not reckoned worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall
be revealed in them, ( Romans 8. 18.) which, they have the infallible
forehand-Sight of (by such Beginnings thereof, as they already experience in
them) with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, 1. Pet. 1. 8.

CHAP. XII. Regeneration.
BY true Regeneration, Man, that was made of God, by a First-creation, in the
mortal, earthly, Law-life of the Creature, is born of God, in the immortal,
heavenly, Gospel-life of the Creator, the living Creature-word of God, which is
God, John 1. 1-3. As for the Life and Things, given Angels and Men, in their
First-creation, those are things which have been, but shall not be, for ever;
temporary, transient things, to be laid aside, in order to their receiving
God's own heavenly Creature-life, by a New Creation. To the blessed Submitters
to the Terms of receiving this, does God look, with Regard and Delight, as
Objects of his everlasting Love, Isa. 66. 2. The poor, broken, contrite Spirit
of Man (under the Cross or Death-work of the heavenly Creature-spirit of
Christ, on his earthly, in order to be born of his heavenly) is of more Value,
in God's Sight, than all the unbroken Excellencies and Perfections of Men and
Angels, in their First-creation-Make and Life. All, that by a delusive
Confidence in their own earthly Life, given them in their First-creation,
finally despise God's heavenly, offered by a second, do choose Satan's Lie, in
Union with him, in the first, in unchangeable Enmity to God's Truth, offered by
a second. They prefer the Form of Godliness in the Life of the Creature, to the
Power of Godliness, in the Life of the Creator, 2 Timothy 3.5. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10-12.
True Saints are Followers of Christ, in the Regeneration, Mat. 19. 28. by the
Death of their own Spirits, at best, into his everlasting true Salvation-life,
above all Deaths. So, come they to be changed from a visible First-covenant
People of God, in their own holy Flesh, Righteousness of Man, into an invisible
People of God, in his Holy Ghost, or heavenly Creature-Gospel-spirit; and,
therein, have a Life hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 1-4. Their Peace with God,
therein, passes (or surmounts) all natural Understanding of Man, with all the
Things of God, wherein it consists. Man's highest natural Understanding in the
First-covenant, understands not the Saints spiritual Understanding, in the
Second, nor any of the divine and heavenly Creature-things of God, he, thereby,
sees, understands or speaks of. He therefore, reckons all, Foolishness, 1 Cor.
2. 9, 14, 15.

The Seed of Life, put into Angels and Men, in their First-creation, was
corruptible, in the second, incorruptible. This latter is the Life, which by
the Gospel, is preached and made known, 1 Pet. 1. 23-25. This, Saints come to
be the happy Experiencers of, as the Root, Spring, and Principle of their
Desire, Thought, and Action. By Death of the First-creation, and Resurrection
into the Second, was Christ himself, as Firstborn from the dead, qualified to
be the immediate Creator of Angels and Men, by a First, and the giver to them
of eternal Life, by a Second-creation of them. So, only, can any be Subjects to
him, in his heavenly Kingdom. None that finally refuse to suffer and die with
him, in the First, can ever live and reign with him, in the Second, 2 Timothy 2.
10, 11.

By true Regeneration, the corruptible Life, with the fallible Understanding
and corruptible Will of the Creature, is changed and transformed into the
incorruptible and infallible Life, Will and Understanding of the Creator; the
mavelous Light and glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.

Awakened Saints, in the all-discovering Light of the quickening Spirit of the
Second Adam, see an end, all natural Life, Wisdom, Glories, Excellencies and
Perfections, in the living Soul of the First, will come to, Psalm. 119. 96. No
such changeable Life or temporary good Things will be found in the Heaven or
Hell-part of the eternal World to come, Rev. 18.14-19. There will be nothing,
then, but eternal Life or Death; eternal good or evil Things.

The changeable, fallible, womanish Spirit of the First Adam, at best, is the
mystical Iezebel, or false Prophetess, as to Men's eternal Concerns, exactly
serviceable to Satan's Designs, in such Interpretation of the Scriptures of
Truth, as to preach up, with all Confidence, his Lie, for Salvation; to them
and their finally deceived Hearers everlasting Destruction. All this Iezebel's
Children, her Thoughts, Doctrines, Works or Fruits, will be killed with eternal
Death; burnt up, and destroyed, for ever, Rev. 2. 20-23.

By the wrong Use of their own Free Will, did evil Angels, at first, set up for
themselves, in a Shadow of Divine Sovereignty, to be as Gods, in the
uncontrollable Exercise of their own Wills, as God is, in his infinite Divine
Will. And, they soon drew Mankind, in Adam, to make the same Choice, with them,
to be as Gods, telling them, that God knows they shall be so, and will own
them, therein, as having made a right Choice, for their everlasting
Blessedness, Genesis 3.5. In pursuance of this first destructive Lie, as soon as
any of Mankind are restored into the Life and Righteousness of Man, by the
Redeemer, Satan is at the same Point, with them, as, at first, in Adam, and
prevails with many such redeemed ones, to strike up an everlasting Covenant
with him, in the First-creation-life of the Creature, in unchangeable Enmity to
God and the everlasting Life of their Creator. To all such, God says, what have
you to do, to take the Words of my new and everlasting Covenant, in your Mouth,
(Psalm. 50. 16.) as pretending to preach my Gospel, when Ministers of Satan's
other, no Gospel, in a direct Contrariety to mine? Gal. 1.6,7.

Saints, by true Regeneration, as born of God, do experience his working all
their Works in them, by his heavenly Spirit, Isa. 26. 12. What a surprising,
amazing Answer, will all others find, at last Day, from Christ, we find, Mat.
7. 21-23. Depart from me, ye that work Iniquity.

CHAP. XIII. The Difference of the spiritualized Natural, from the spiritual
Understanding.
MAN, in the former, is said to be a Partaker of the Holy Ghost, or heavenly
Creature-Gospel-spirit of Christ, the living Word of God, under highest
spiritual enlightening Gifts. These are the best Gifts, to be coveted or
desired, receivable by and upon Man's natural Understanding; but short yet, of
the more excellent Way or the very spiritual Life and Gospel-Principle of all
right Desire, Thought and Action. Without this, called Love, as rendering any
true Lovers and Beloveds of God, Fulfillers of the whole Law, Mind and Will of
God, after his own Heart, all is nothing, as to eternal Life, 1 Cor. 12. 31. and
13. 1, 2. Romans 13. 8, 10. The natural Understanding (with all such enlightening
spiritual Gifts, received thereon) is to be given up, in Sacrifice to God, with
the Life wherein exercised, for the new spiritual, eternal Gospel-life of God,
and true infallible Understanding, therein. Man, under all spiritual
Enlightening, discovering to him, the more excellent Gospel-life of the Creator,
offered by a New Creation, is yet liable, by Satan's Witchcrafts, with his own
Consent, to be fetched back again, from looking after, or owning Christ's
Gospel-life, though known to be his unspeakable Concern, to submit to God's
Terms and appointed Way of receiving it, as the only way to find the Salvation
of Heaven or escape the Damnation of Hell, Gal. 3. 1, 3. and 5. 7, 8. Thus
prevalent was Self-love, at first, in evil Angels, under the clearest
Conviction of their unspeakable Concern as well as Duty; and, they prevail to
bring Men, under the like Knowledge of their eternal Concerns, to make the same
wrong destructive Choice, to their known eternal Ruin. They are persuaded by
Satan to receive his self-pleasing Lie, that by a being made perfect in their
Flesh, the fleshly Life of the Creature, Righteousness of Man, they will find
Peace with God, and Entrance into his Kingdom. This, yielded to, and absolutely
concluded, is the unpardonable and unrepentable Sin against the Holy Ghost,
Heb. 6. 4-6. and 10. 26, 27. This Sin excludes any, for ever, from any Benefit
of Christ's meritorious Sacrifice, leaving them nothing but a certain fearful
looking for of Wrath and fiery Indignation, which will devour all such wilful,
incorrigible Adversaries; forcing them to dwell with and under everlasting
Burnings, as in unchangeable Union of Mind, with the Devil.

All spiritual enlightening Gifts, and thereby, understanding all Mysteries, and
having all Knowledge of the Will of God and their own eternal Concerns; and,
speaking with the Tongues of Men and Angels, in the utmost Dexterity of
organical or intuitive Expression; all, still, without Love, or a partaking of
the very Life of the Son of God, is nothing; of no avail, at all, for their
ever entering into his Kingdom.

In Man's Day of judging, such are the only true super-eminent spiritual
Saints: in God's, unchangeable Enemies, and the highest sort of Adversaries to
him and his Saints. In the ever-new Life of God, given by a New Creation,
Saints come to experience a new infallible spiritual Understanding, and an
incorruptible Will, in Harmony with the very infinite Divine Mind and Will. In
this Life and Principle of Desire, Thought, and Action, can they answer that
Command, for loving the Lord their God, with all their Heart, Soul, Strength,
and Mind, and the true mystical Neighbor, Christ, in his Gospel-life, and
spiritual Saints, born of God, therein: No fixed Law-spirited, however
righteous Man, loves, but hates the Lord his God, and the true
Scripture-Neighbour, Christ and true Saints, the new eternal Gospel-life, in
him and them (Head and Members, one mystical Body, (1 Cor. 12.27.) the true
Neighbor) with a perfect, unchangeable hatred. This may seem the dangerous
Case of the self-confident Lawyer, that tempted Christ, saying, Master, what
shall I do to inherit eternal Life? Christ asks him, what is written in the Law?
how read thou? These are two distinct Questions. The Lawyer agreed with
Christ, in answer to the first, as to what was written in the Law. But, was to
seek, for answering the second, as to the right reading or understanding, in
what Spirit and Principle of Life, 'twas ever possible to perform what was
written, Luke 10.25-28. The implacable Haters of the true spiritual Neighbors,
Christ and his Brethren, will go away into everlasting Punishment; and the true
Lovers of them, into Life eternal, Mat. 25.31-46. Christ takes all hating and
persecuting his Gospel-Saints, as done to himself, Act. 9.4. Spiritually
enlightened Men, finally refusing to submit to the Terms of receiving Christ's
offered spiritual, Gospel-life (though, a while, among Gospel-Saints, as
Members of the true Church, owning Gospel Truths) will, at length, depart from
them, and become their most signal Antichristian Enemies, 1 John 2. 18, 19.
Such prove grievous Wolves to Christ's true Sheep, ( Act. 20. 29, 30. Mat. 10.
16.) Satan's choicest Instruments, to dissuade and draw away Disciples after
them, from looking after, or owning any such thing as Christ's Gospel-life, or
Doctrine thereof. Hereby, become they the most criminal Sinners, of all
Mankind. This, after they had run well, among true Saints, owning
Gospel Truths. Who did hinder or call them back, that they should not finally
obey the Truth? Gal. 5.7. The Devil. He, prevailingly, called them back, from
what Christ fairly offered, and invited them to, ver. 8. Such become Satan's
chief Apostles, Ministers of his other Gospel; fitted for his Work, in calling
others back, from all Gospel Truths, as diabolical Illusions. So, do they shut
up the Kingdom of God, and set open Satan's; exclude, explode and deny all
Christ's Gospel Truths, and preach up Satan's Lie, the Life of the Creature,
given in the First-creation (transformed into the Appearance of, and decked
with all Scripture-Titles, belonging to the Gospel-life of the Creator, offered
by a second) as a State of true Salvation. In this Posture, and, at this Work,
did Christ find the most enlightened teaching Jews, Matthew. 23. 13, 33. Teachers
of Satan's other Gospel, furnished with all Wisdom, Subtlety, Eloquence and
Dexterity of Expression, may thus be dressing up Satan's Lie, with all
Scripture Language of Christ's Gospel Truth, so as with their Hearers to grow
irrefragably confident (under Satan's strong Delusion, and God's giving them
up, thereto) as verily to think, they are in a State of true Salvation. Thus,
the renewed Old Man, passes for the new Creature; restored Nature, for a State
of Grace; Reformation of Naturals, for Regeneration into Spirituals; Satan's
and Man's Nothings, for God's All-things; the restored mortal Life and Things
of the Creature, for the immortal Gospel-life and Things of the Creator. So,
the Devil, God of this World, passes for the true God; his Kingdom, for God's;
his Lie, for God's Truth. Where such are like to be, at last, see, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
10-12. At this rate, all along this World (Satan's permitted Reign, and Man's
Day of judging, under him, in Matters of Religion, and remarkably, in this long
Antichristian Day of twelve hundred and sixty Years, now near expiring) have
things gone. God's only things that are (and will ever be) his eternal
Gospel-life and Things, pass for chimerical Nothings, in Man's Day; and Man's
confidently reputed All-things, will be found nothing, in God's Day of Judging.
Man's highest Wisdom calls nothing in his pretended Divinity, by the right
Name; but, the contrary, in all Extremity. Satan's Gospel passes current for
Salvation; and Christ's, for a Blasphemous Fiction of the Devil, and Madness.
If it was reckoned so, by eminent First-covenant righteous teaching and
professing Jews, in Christ himself, what can his true Followers expect? John
10. 20. and 15. 18-20. and 16. 1, 2. All worldly Honors, Applauses, and
Rewards run on Satan's Side, to his reputed Gospel-Divines; nothing but
Contradiction, Reproach and Persecution, are the usual Recompense of Christ's
true ones, in this World; under all which, they rejoice, in the certain
Foresight of their great Reward, in the next, Matthew. 5. 11, 12. Act. 5. 41.
Satan offered Christ himself, all the Kingdoms of this World, if he would own
him for God, and his false, Law-Gospel, for God's true: if not, crucify him,
crucify him, says he, by the legal-spirited professing Jews, John 19. 6. If he
or his Followers preach up another Kingdom, contrary to mine, away with them,
kill them, as Traitors to me, and my earthly Cesars, under me, in but my
worldly Life and Principle (though under the Name, Christian, and that of the
highest Rank, in but First-covenant-Righteousness of Man) mystical Infidels, as
to Christ's New Covenant Gospel-life and Righteousness of God. Thus will
Matters go, while Satan and his Ministers are permitted to transform themselves
into the Likeness of Christ, and his, 2 Cor. 11. 13-15. They carry all, before
them, in this World; Christ and his, will have all, in the next, to Eternity.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the two Covenants, first and second.
THE Life, given Angels and Men, in their First-creation, was the Principle of
a First-covenant-communion with, and worshipping of God. Many Angels, and all
Mankind, in Adam, by such Knowledge of God, as they had, therein, by the things
that were made, glorified him not as God; were not thankful for what they had
received, nor made the right Use thereof, in Sacrifice to his Will, in order to
receive the eternal Gospel-life of their Creator, by a new or second Creation,
the only Principle of a new and everlasting Covenant with him. They became vain
in their Imaginations, professing and owning themselves wise enough to know
what was best for themselves to do, in their own First-covenant Law-spirit of
Works, as not needing any other Life or Things for true Happiness, in a Second,
Romans 1. 19-22. God made Man upright, (Eccl. 7.29.) pure and incorrupt, in the
First, but not incorruptible, as in the Second. All Mankind are sad
experimental Witnesses of this, however many of them, all along this World,
deny it with their Mouths. The Disputers of this World, under Satan's
Inspirations, seek out many Inventions, to defend and maintain their evil
Choice and false Confidence in the First, (as transformed into the Likeness,
and disguised with all Scripture-Titles, belonging to the Second) in
unchangeable Enmity to God and the Second.

This greatest Folly, as to their eternal Concerns, are many guilty of, taking
great Pains to dispute themselves into everlasting Destruction. They decry the
New-covenant-life, and, therein, the Wisdom and Righteousness of God, which
Christ requires all, to seek after (Mat. 6. 33.) and complains, that no Man
will, ( Romans 3. 11.) while confident in his own fallible Understanding, in
which, he can never make one right Step in the Paths of Life to himself, or
Peace with God, Ier. 10. 23. Prove. 20. 24. Had the First-covenant-life (given
Man, in his First-creation, or restored by the Redeemer, since) been faultless,
(or not defective, as to his true Blessedness) no place should have been
sought, or appointed of God, for a Second, by a New Creation, Heb. 8. 7. Men's
establishing themselves in the First, in unchangeable Enmity to God and the
Second, turns a visible People of God, inholy Flesh, Righteousness of Man, into
no People of God at all, but a Synagogue of Satan, Hos. 1. 9. and 2. 2. Revel.
3. 9. Yet, when so, will they confidently, under Satan's strong Delusions,
assert themselves to be the only true Jews, or spiritual Israel and Church of
God: but, lie. This will they say, when in unchangeable Enmity to God and his
true Saints. Such have been, all along this World, Haters and Murderers of true
Saints, Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, for the Life and Doctrine of
the Second-covenant. True Saints, under the Inspirations of the Almighty, are
gradually ceasing from the Labors of their own Law-spirit of Works, at best,
or delighting to seed on the best Fruits brought forth by them, therein, and to
commit their Way to the Lord, to work all their Works in them, (Isa. 26. 12.)
by his heavenly Creature-spirit of Grace, and to feed on such incorruptible
spiritual Fruits as are producible by them, therein. This is the true mystical
Fast and Sabbath, which he has chosen, and requires Men to keep, Isa. 58. Man
is but a mystical Tree of Good and Evil, in his own Spirit, Will and Way; a
mystical Tree of Life, in God's. All outward, literal, bodily Fasts, and
Sabbaths, though God's own Appointments and Ordinances, to the Jews, without
this inward mystical Truth of all, rendered all their Performances an
Abomination to God, and themselves a mystical Sodom, (Isa. 1. 10-15.) worse
than literal, Matthew. 11. 23, 24. The delighting in, and feeding on the best
Fruits of our own Spirits, in preference to God's, is the self-same thing with
Eve's Apple, and our first Transgression, in Adam. All First-covenant Life,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Works, and Fruits of Man's own Law-spirit of Works, are
to be given up, in Sacrifice to God, in order to our arriving at the happy
Experience of the spiritual, heavenly Creature-life, Righteousness and Wisdom
of God, working all our Works in his Spirit of Grace and Truth, ( John 3. 21.)
and bringing forth right Fruits to him, Romans 7. 4.

That the First-Covenant Life, given Man in his first Creation, was eternal, is
Satan's Lie, (carried on, all along this World, by all manner of Disguises, in
his evil Angelical Subtlety) in opposition to God's Truth, in the second. The
Law was given by Moses, to direct to First-Covenant Righteousness of Man, in
the living Soul of the first Adam; but Grace and Truth come by Jesus Christ, in
the quickening Spirit of the second; John 1. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 45. God rewards the
Righteousness of Man, for a season, as a Debt to him, ( Romans 4. 4.) but takes
away such Rewards from Saints, the inward Comforts of a good Conscience, there;
and, sometimes, outward also, by the permitted Hands of evil Angels and Men, to
make room in them for his eternal Life and Blessings, where all is of Grace,
both Works and Rewards. Job was a signal Experiencer of both; and Paul also,
with other Saints; Phil. 3. 6-11.

All that passes in Man's day of judging, and Words of his own Wisdom, for
eternal Life, will, in God's day of judging, be found, by all that trust
thereto, eternal Death. All first-Creation Life and Things thereof, all Works
and Fruits, done and brought forth, therein, will pass for nothing in God's day.

The Temporary Wrath of God, bringing Saints into the lowest Hell, in this
World, from which there is Deliverance ( Psalm. 86.13.) is God's way for
delivering them from the Wrath and Hell to come, which are eternal. The Saints
Hell, in this World (as plagued and chasten'd all the day long, Psalm. 73. 14.
while Enemies have more than Heart could wish, v. 7.) is their true Purgatory,
cleansing them from all Filth of Flesh and Spirit, and God's way of bringing
them into the never-sinning Life and everlasting Righteousness of his Spirit of
Grace and Truth.

Man, in his own Spirit, Will and Way, at best, has no right Knowledge of the
true God; or, God of this World, the Devil; or what the Heaven or Hell-part of
the eternal World to come, amount unto; so, on he goes, in the delusive
Pleasures of this Mortal World, and Things thereof, literal or mystical, within
the reach of his natural Understanding, without any looking after God, for his
Spiritual, Heavenly, Eternal, New Covenant Life and Things, without which, it is
impossible to find the Salvation of Heaven, or escape the Damnation of Hell.

The Death of Man's Spirit, at best, in but the restored first-Covenant Life of
the Creature, is the only way to find the Life of the Creator, in the second.
The living Soul of the first Adam, has nothing, but what Death will swallow up
into Victory. The Life of the quickening Spirit of the second Adam, will swallow
up all Deaths into Victory; 1. Cor. 15. 53, 54. The deepest Reason, and highest
Wisdom of Man, in a first-Covenant righteous Life, is by Death and total loss
thereof, the only way to find all again, by way of Resurrection, the very
Reason, Wisdom and Righteousness of God, in the quickening Spirit of the second
Adam. Paul obediently parted with all the former, for the latter; Phil. 3.
6-11. God challenges the Disputers of this World, standing up, with Confidence,
in defense of their own Reason and Wisdom, to produce their strong Reasons,
against him, and see what all will amount unto; Isa. 41. 21. It Is Man's true
Interest and greatest Reason, to give up his own Reason and Wisdom, for God's.
Job was, a while, at this disputing Trade of Man, against God, as Elihu charges
him; Job 34. 35-37. At this work, we find him, under the Cross, challenging the
Almighty to answer his strong Reasons, in Self-defence, and for his
Justification, in the Life, wherein he had been eminently righteous; Job 19.
6-11. and 30. 1-10. and 31.35. When Christ told any that inquired after eternal
Life, the parting with all they have, or can do, in their own Spirit, was
necessary to the finding Eternal Life, in his; away they went, and walked no
more with him; Mat. 19. 16-22. Mark 10. 17-22. Luke 10. 25. and 18. 18-23. John
6. 66. All Words of Man's Wisdom, are without any true Knowledge, a darkening
the Counsels of God's Wisdom, as to Man's eternal Concerns. Job, that had been
confident in the former, acknowledged what God charged him with ( Job 38. 1,
2.) when in the latter; Job 42.3. I uttered that I understood not, things too
wonderful for me, which I knew not; so, darkened the Counsel of God, by Words
without Knowledge. He that contends with, and reproves the Almighty, can he
answer it? Job 40. 2.

CHAP. XV. The Mystery of Cain and Abel, Ishmael and Isaac, Esau and Jacob.
CAin, Ishmael, and Esau were sad Types of all those, that, with them, follow
Satan's whole Counsel, in his Mystery of Iniquity, preferring the Law-life of
the Creature, in the first Creation, to the Gospel-life of the Creator, offered
by a second.

Abel, Isaac and Jacob, were the joyful, happy Types and Patterns, in their
Persons and Principles, of those that follow, obey, and declare the whole
Counsel of God, in the Mystery and Power of Godliness, for the Salvation of
Men, and preventing their Damnation.

All, fixed in the former, under Satan, unchangably hate and persecute the
latter. In their holy Flesh, Righteousness of Man, they fight against God's
holy Gospel Spirit and Righteousness of God, in true spiritual Saints. There Is,
for a time, something of the Cain, Ishmael, and Esau, even in Saints, not only
fighting and warring against the true Abels, Isaacs and Jacobs, Paul's Case,
before his Gospel-Conversion, ( Acts 26. 9-11.) but also against the
Gospel Spirit and Principle of Life, Desire, Thought and Action in themselves,
after. This also, Paul experienced, after an eminent Apostolical, Gospel-Saint;
Romans 7. 15, 19. And, he warns other Saints to expect the like Civil War and
Contests within them, between their fleshly and Christ's spiritual Mind in
them, till Nature (in the thinking and desiring Powers thereof, their own
fallible Understandings and corruptible Wills, therein) be fully crucified and
silenced, in order to their living and walking in the undisturbed infallible
Understanding and incorruptible Will of Christ's Gospel Spirit of Grace and
Truth; Gal. 5. 17. Till this War be over, and Victory over the Carnal Mind of
Nature, at best, completed, are Saints to be continually fighting the Battles
of the Lord, against the Foes of their own House or Hearts, (the most dangerous
Enemies, within them, tho not more subtle and potent than Enemies without, evil
Angels and Men) till they come to live and walk wholly in the Spirit of God,
their Gospel-Principle; and, mean while, to strive continually, more and more,
so to walk; ver. 25. As to Enemies, without, the highest Rank of Professors in
but First-Covenant Principles, fixed there, in the restored Law-Life and
Righteousness of Man, with Confidence therein, for entering into the Kingdom of
God, these Cains, Ishmaels, and Esaus, are the fiercest Persecutors of true
Gospel-Saints, in the partaken of Life of Christ's Heavenly Creature-Spirit of
Grace and Truth, and, verily think, they do God Service, therein; Isa. 66. 5.
John 16. 2. So thought Paul, once; Acts 26. 9-11.

Paul singles out the particular History of Isaac and Ishmael, in this Point;
Gal. 4. 22-31. Self-confident First-Covenant Ishmaels, mock and scoff at true
Spiritual Isaacs, all along this World; Genesis 21. 9. And, even Abraham, Father
of the Faithful, was grieved, and loath to part with his Ishmael ( ver. 11.)
when Sarah, as Figure of the New Covenant Spirit, required it; and God, in
Confirmation of her most just Desire and Advice, required the same; v. 12. John
declares the same thing, figured in Cain and Abel, and in them, the murdering
Mind of Enmity in a fixed, self-confident first-Covenant visible People of God,
in holy Flesh, Law-Righteousness of Man, against an invisible People of God, in
their Gospel-Life and Righteousness, hid with Christ in God; Col. 3. 3. Cain
slew his Brother, because his own Works were evil, and his Brother's righteous;
1 John 3. 12. He was of that wicked one, (born of, and in unchangeable Union
with the Devil, in the first Creation) and, with him, in unchangeable Enmity to
God, and true Saints, in the second. Cain's Works in the Law-life of the first,
in his own Law-Spirit of Works, are, in Man's Day of Judgment, the only good
and righteous Works, and his Words of Man's Wisdom, the only right Words for
Salvation; and all true Abel's Works, and their Words of God's Wisdom, in his
New Covenant Gospel Spirit, contemptible and blasphemous. Christ himself found
this murdering Mind of Cain, in the most enlightened, righteous, professing
first-Covenant teaching and professing Jews; unchangeable Enmity to his
Gospel Spirit, and whole Counsel of God, by him declared to them, therein. On
this account, he tells them, they, with their Fathers, in the like Cainish
Spirit of Enmity, were guilty of the Blood of all God's true Prophets, shed
from the Foundation of the World, from the Blood of Abel, to that day; Luke
11.49-51. And so will it be, to the end of this World, under Satan's permitted
Reign, and Man's Day, under him, of judging in Matters of Religion and Worship
of God, so as nothing must pass for Gospel, but what Man pleases to give his
Approbation to. The Jews built the Sepulchers of the Prophets, under pretense
of paying Honor to them, and owning their Counsel, when with their Fathers,
Murderers of all such, and in unchangeable Enmity to all their Words, rightly
understood. If they had been in the days of their Fathers, they say, they would
not have been Partakers with them in the Blood of the Prophets; Mat. 23. 29-31.
Under all these Pretenses, and self-deceiving Imaginations, Christ declares
them, fixed in the self-same murdering Mind of Enmity, with their Fathers,
against all true Prophets, and himself also, as soon appeared, and therefore
asked them, how they could think to escape the Damnation of Hell? ver. 33.
Since all such dealings of the Jews with their own true Prophets and Christ
himself, with his Apostles, in the foretold long Antichristian Day, now near
ending, how have unchangeable, idolatrous Haters of Christ and his
Gospel Truths and Saints, been found under the Name Christian, building stately
Churches or Temples to the Honor of Paul, Peter, John, etc. who would, as
certainly murder them, for their Gospel-Doctrine, were they now here, as others
did, even in the Primitive Apostolical Gospel-day. Let Men, under Satan,
interpret their Gospel-Writings, in a Sutableness to their own Wills, and so in
a universal Contrariety to the Words of God's Wisdom, in them, and all is well;
and they, with the Apostles, in the way to eternal Life and true Salvation.
All, void of a true living spiritual Faith in Christ's Gospel-life, working by
Love to him, therein, are the unreasonable and incorrigible Adversaries of true
Gospel-Saints.

Paul shows the like Figurative Significancy in Jacob and Esau; Romans 9.10-13.
Esau mortally hated Jacob, and God hated Esau. Esau's murdering Mind of Enmity
to Jacob, is expressed by himself; Genesis 27. 41, 42. The like is notified, in
all his murdering-minded Followers, against God, Christ, and his true spiritual
Jacobs; Obad. v. 8-10. Amos 1. 11.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning mere Creaturality in Angels and Men in their first, and
also, in their highest spiritual, second, New Creation Capacities; with some
account of all, possible to be done by any in their first, and the differing
Ends of all, at last.
HAving already spoken of the ready prepared Hand, the exalted Creature-Son and
Branch in the Mediator's Person, the living Word of God, as qualified and
fitted for a first and second creating of Angels and Men; come we, now, to
consider, what they, both and all, amount unto, for ever, as but mere
Creatures, not only in their natural Beings and Life of the Creature, given
them by a first, but also spiritual Beings and Life of the Creator, given by a
second Creation of them.

Angels were all created, at first, in their complete Personalities, invisible
immortal Beings, without any innate Capacity of, or connatural Tendency to the
exercise of a threefold Souly or Animalish Life, rational, sensual, and
vegetable, in and by a fitly Organized Body. As for Mankind, they do gradually
descend from one another, in a continued Succession, Generation after
Generation, for a completing their Personal Beings, from the beginning to the
ending of this mortal World.

What became of Angels, good and bad, by the first well-pleasing Passive
Obedience of the former, and first unpardonable Sin of the latter, has been
above-spoken to, Chap. 4. of this Treatise. Man, inferior to Angels, in their
single intuitive natural Understandings, (tho in the same kind of Mortal,
Earthly, First-Covenant Life) is, in his completed Personality, a much more
comprehensive Being, than an Angel. He is the most complete shadowy Image of
God, on all accounts, in the whole Natural, Mortal, First-Creation World,
visible or invisible. This is signified concerning him, in distinction from
Angels and all other Creatures, therein, created before him, in a readiness for
his Entertainment. Of none thereof is it said by God, as of him; Let us make
Man in our Image, after our Likeness (Genesis 1.26.) as the Compend or Epitome of
all other Creatures, and something more, peculiar to himself, the rational
Exercise of his Mind, in and by a Body, found in no Creatures, above or below
him. So find we, a peculiar Consultation of the three that are one, to draw an
earthly shadowy Image and Representation of themselves, in every individual Man.

This Enlargement of Man's Personal Being, beyond Angels, exposed and rendered
him liable to vain sinful Desires and Thoughts, so as to wallow in Mire among
Satan's Swine, feeding on Husks, the lowest Dust of this World (below any
Palate in any evil Angels, to savor, any Belly, Desire or Appetite in them, to
lust after, delight in, or feed upon, being never linked with mortal Bodies or
sensual Life) Pleasures, in common with brute Beasts. So, the Enlargement of
Man's Being, beyond Angels, was a Diminution to his intuitive Understanding, in
common with them, and to the Exercise of his Natural Will, as exposing him, to
a running out in his Desires, after the lower sort of Desirables, in the vast
heap of vanishing Shadows, in the visible Parts of this First-creation World.
And evil Angels, tho they care not for such things themselves, have Power,
through God's most wise Permission, to shoot their fiery Darts into Men's
Spirits, and kindle in them evil Lustings after such visible things, in which,
they keep the far greater part of Mankind, wallowing in Mire, as their Swine,
far from any looking after God, at all.

The Soul, or threefold animalish, souly-Life of Man, distinct from his Spirit,
ceases, as to exercise, at the Death of his Body. The Spirit, then, retreats to
the full Experience and Exercise of its supreme, intuitive Way of discerning
and converse with Angels, good or bad; in a spiritual Intuitiveness, with the
good, Gospel-Angels, or natural, with the evil, Law-Angels, (Lawyers) from the
beginning, on their First Sin and Fall; setting up the Law-life of the
Creature, given in the First-creation, against the Gospel-life of their
Creator, offered by a Second; and so, their Lie, against God's Truth. The Devil
was a Murderer from the Beginning, (John 8. 44.) and his fixed Law-party of
Mankind, in the restored Law-life-Wisdom, and Righteousness of Man, have been,
under him, the irreconcilable Haters and Murderers of Christ himself and his
Gospel-Saints, all along this World. At the Death of the Body, Man (good or
evil) is dead. His Spirit is, for a time, stripped of the threefold Souly-life,
as to exercise, that are essential Ingredients, into his personal Constitution.
At last, Saints will recover their Bodies, in a Resurrection of Life, and,
therein, the right Exercise of their whole Beings, Body, Soul, and Spirit, in
the incorruptible New Creation Order of all, to Eternity. Incorrigible Sinners,
also will receive their Bodies, in a Resurrection of Damnation, John 5. 28, 29.
Saints, in their glorified Bodies and whole personal Beings, will be
everlastingly blessed, in the Enjoyment of God; and incorrigible Sinners, in
their whole Beings, most exquisitely sensible under God's everlasting Curse and
unquenchable Wrath, without any Hope or Possibility of mitigation or end of
their Torments, to an endless Eternity. It Is a most fearful thing, thus to fall
into the Hands of the living God, to be dealt with, in final Wrath, and
infinite revenging Justice, ( Heb. 10. 31.) without any Day's-man or Mediator
to stand between them and such Wrath; but, instead thereof, will he be their
Accuser, Witness and Pleader against them, Judge and Condemner of them, and the
infallible irresistible Executor of his infinite and everlasting Wrath upon
them. All this, will he do, so easily, as by the Word of his Mouth, by which he
made them. With the Breath of his Lips will he slay the incorrigibly Wicked,
(Isa. 11. 4.) Satan, with his Gog and Magog, his innumerable Multitude of evil
Angels, and serpentine Seed of Men. His Breath, like a stream of Brimstone,
will kindle his unquenchable Wrath upon them, both and all, as having rendered
themselves, fitted perpetual Fuel for it, in the Tophet, ordained of old, the
Lake of Fire and Brimstone, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, with their
innumerable serpentine Seed of Men, Isa. 30. 33. Rev. 20. 10.

This will be the everlasting Condition of all Inhabitants of the Earth, and of
the Sea, in distinction from the Dwellers in Heaven, who will have eternal Joy
and Blessedness, in the Sight and Enjoyment of God, for evermore. All, that in
this World, take up their Rest and Dwelling in but the earthly Law-life and
Righteousness of Man, as needing nothing, therein, for true Blessedness ( Rev.
3.17.) these Inhabitants of the Earth, will, with the Inhabitants of the Sea
(all that Party of Mankind, that wallow in the miry Filths of literal Sodom,
foaming out their own Shame) find their Portion in the same Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, in the Hell-part of the eternal World to come, Rev. 12.12. Isa. 57.
20. Jude 13. Dwellers in Heaven, that have their Conversation in Heaven, (Phil.
3. 20.) Minds, fixed on things above, the peculiar Delights of the Sons of God,
these, only, have true Joy in this World, and continual Advantage, by all, God
permits Devils and Men to do to them, in their implacable Malice. So, they
rejoice under all Trials and Injuries from evil Angels and Men ( Matthew. 5. 11,
12. Act. 5. 41.) and Woe is denounced to all sorts of incorrigible Enemies of
God and them, to eternity, after all their laughing and delusive Merriment in
this short-lived World. They Will mourn and weep, eternally, Luke 6. 24-26. Under
Satan's Reign, by his false Prophets and Apostles, true New- Ierusalem-Saints,
are counted the Filth of the World, and Offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.
13. Under Christ's Reign, they will be a Praise in the Earth; for which,
therefore, Gospel-Angels and Saints continually pray, and never keep silence,
Isa. 62. 6,7. This will Saints come to, after a little time, spent, in this
confounded mortal World, under and amongst a Throng of innumerable Enemies,
evil Angels and Men.

Come we now to consider, what was ever possible to be done by Angels or Men,
in their First-creation earthly Life, at best, with reference to their finding
eternal Life, or scaping eternal Death. The Death and Loss of all, therein,
Life, Wisdom, Righteousness, Works, Fruits, by Passive Obedience, in Sacrifice
to the Divine Will, is undispensably necessary, to the finding eternal Life,
the heavenly Creature-life of the Creator. In the Methods of God's
unquestionable Wisdom, and Appointments of his declared undisputable Will, this
is the Way to eternal Life. When any asked Christ, what they must do, to
inherit or find eternal Life, and confidently asserted, all these things they
had done, in the restored righteous Life and Wisdom of their own Spirit, in
their own Will and Way; his reply upon them, and Counsel to them, was, Part
with all this, and follow me, in the true Regeneration, by Death and
Resurrection, out of the Death of the Creature, into the Life of the Creator.
To this effect, was Christ's constant Answer to such Enquirers. And their
constant rejecting such Counsel, and departing from him, sorrowful and amazed
thereat, we find, in these Scriptures, Matthew. 19. 16-22. Mark 10. 17-22. Luke
18. 18 -23. None can do the Divine Will of the Father, but in the partaken of
heavenly Creature-life and Will of the Son; nor, therefore, enter into his
Kingdom, Mat. 7. 21. None but new Creatures can ever come there, Gal. 5.6. and
6.15. 2 Cor. 5. 16, 17. In the restored Light of the First-creation, by him
that lights every Man that comes into this World, ( John 1. 9.) ought all
Heathens to walk, and keep that kind of good Conscience, that consists in a
moral Obedience thereto, as their Principle. In the restored First-covenant
Law-life, ought Men to walk, in such Obedience to that higher Knowledge of God,
as amounts to the legal good Conscience, withstanding all brutish Lusts and
sinful Desires of their sensual Life. But all this done, till the partaking of,
and experiencing the Life of the quickening Spirit of the Second Adam, or a
living spiritual Faith therein, working by Love to God, and walking therein, so
as to have the evangelical good Conscience, we have nothing of that eternal
Life, in which, only, any can ever enter into the Kingdom of God. Paul could
truly declare to the Jewish Council, that he had lived in all these three sorts
of good Conscience before God, successively, one after another, in Obedience to
the Light of Nature, Law, and Gospel, Act. 23.1. And he found his evangelical
good Conscience, by living and walking in Christ's Gospel Spirit, ( Gal. 5.
25.) to comprehend and unspeakably outdo, all, performable by any, in the two
former. This, indeed, is the only right Performer of all Duty to God and our
Fellow Creatures, in God's Sight.

All First-covenant Life, received by Angel or Man, in their First-creation, is
figuratively charactered in Scripture, by Flesh, Grass, a fading Flower, called
a vain Show, or vanishing Shadow; all their natural Excellencies and
Perfections therein, all, but a Glory to be done away, in order to receive the
heavenly Creature-life and Image of God, in Christ, with the eternal things of
God, therein, the Wisdom and Righteousness of God, Isa. 40. 6-8. 1 Pet. 1. 24,
25. 2 Cor. 3. 10, 11. Satan, with all his humane Disputers of this World, in
the Words of his and Man's Wisdom, against God's; and for their way of
Salvation, quite contrary to his, ( Isa. 55. 8, 9.) God challenges, in a holy
Contempt of their vain Thoughts, to produce their Cause, bring forth their
strong Reasons, for self-defence, and see what all will amount unto, Isa. 41.
21.

Object. 1. Will God destroy the First creation-works of his own Hand? Will he
take away Man's Reason, Wisdom, and Righteousness, bring to nothing all his
good Works and Fruits, done and brought forth therein? Must the very Life of
our own Spirit, at best, with all the things thereof, our own Wills and
Understandings therein, be given up in Sacrifice to the Will of God, by a holy
Death?

Answ. Yes; And all, to our transcendent Advantage, and greatest Gain, in order
to find all again, in a Life above all Deaths, and therein, an infallible
Understanding and incorruptible Will, for the right knowing and doing all
things, in answer to the very Divine Will of God Most High.

Object. 2. Does God require Impossibilities of Man, such Obedience as it is
impossible for him to perform in his own Spirit, Will and Way, at best, in the
restored Life and Righteousness of Man?

Answ. Yes; But had provided an originally incorruptible, heavenly, eternal
Creature-life, in the Mediator, to be given them in the room thereof, by a
Second or New Creation of them. This is a Life above all Deaths, temporal or
eternal; will swallow up Death, in Victory, Isa. 25.8. 1 Cor. 15. 54. This Life
is figured by the Wine in Iotham's Parable, ( Judge. 9. 13.) cheering God and
Man, answering all, Man can rightly desire of God, and enabling him to answer
all, God requires of him. He that has not this Life of the Son of God, has not
Life; not true, eternal Life, 1 John 5. 12.

Quest. Will the Disputers of this World, still contend with their Maker, in
defense of their own Wisdom, Will, and Way, against his, for Salvation?

Answ. They will, till Satan's Reign and Man's Day, under him, are at a full
Period. But, what are Men like to get by this Contest? Eternal Death. True
Saints often suffer a violent temporal Death, from such self-confident Contenders
against God and them. Man's own fallible Reason or Wisdom perverts him, turns
him away, from looking after the infallible Wisdom and Reason of God, to his
own sudden unfore-seen everlasting Destruction, Isa. 47. 10, 11. He searches
the Scriptures, thinks he understands those written Oracles of God, yet never
comes to Christ, the living Word of God, for the Life, therein witnessed and
declared, John 5. 39, 40. The Scriptures are a Book sealed, as to Man's
Understanding; that reaches not to the heavenly Creature-life and things
therein signified, under Figures, Types and shadowy Similitudes, Isa. 29.11.
All spiritual, Salvation-truths, signified from the beginning of Genesis to the
End of the Revelation, are fast locked up and hid from Man's highest single
natural Understanding.

The losing all, in our own Law-spirit of Works, is the only way to find and do
all in God's Spirit of Grace, Esphes. 2. 8-10. It Is by Grace, only, or in the
never-sinning Life of God's Spirit of Grace, in Christ Jesus, communicated to
them, any can be finally saved; never, in their own boasting Law-spirit of
Works.

Having thus promiscuously considered Sinners in their First-creation, and
Saints in the Second, come we now to consider mere Creaturality, in spiritual
Saints and Angels, for evermore.

Spiritual Saints, of the Double-portion, making up God's New Heavens, in their
various distinct Portions therein, from the highest to the lowest; and
Gospel-Angels, the supreme in the single Portion, with all variety of
Gospel-Saints, therein, making up God's New Earth, in true Salvation-life, are
all Members of Christ's mystical Body. In the former, Christ's peculiar Dove,
supreme double-portion'd Saints, in the twofold heavenly and glorified earthly
Life of Christ, are the peculiar Wife and Bride of the Lamb, Revel. 19. 7.
Below these, in the double Portion, are threescore Queens; and then, in the
single, Virgins without Number, all, in a Union of Mind with her, praising her
and owning her Superiority to them, Cant. 6. 8, 9. There will be no envying of
the highest, in the lower and lowest, nor any insulting of the highest, over
the lower, in Heaven, to Eternity. They Will all rejoice in the superior and
inferior Seize of each other, as is figured in the higher and lower
Members of the literal Body of Man, all mutually rejoicing in the Joys of one
another, as completing the Joy of the whole Body, 1 Cor. 12. 12-27. The
various spiritual Capacities in higher and lower Saints, are figured by Cups
and Flagons, Isa. 22. 24.

None of all these will ever pretend to a personal Union with Christ's
Creature-root, and less yet, with his infinite Divinity, but only with the
exalted Creature-Son and Branch in him, the living Word of God, the immediate
Creator of all, and Performer of the whole Divine Will, on all, good and evil,
for evermore, in Heaven or Hell.

A World of gross Errors concerning God, Christ, and the eternal Concerns of
Men, have been tossed up and down in the various Conceptions of Man's fallible
Understanding, under the unperceived Influence of evil Angelical Rulers over
this dark World, (Ephesians. 6. 12.) so as to blind and keep Men from looking after
God, for his all-discovering Spirit of Grace and Truth, Romans 3. 11.

CHAP. XVII. The ruling Power of Satan, over Mankind, all along this World, as
permitted God thereof, under God's infinite overruling Wisdom and Power.
HE is so called in the Scriptures of Truth; God of this World. And he uses all
his evil Angelical Subtlety and Power, for the blinding and deceiving Men, so
as to keep them from any regarding or looking after God, for his Gospel-life,
wherein alone any can be saved, or ever enter into his Kingdom, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
Christ himself calls him Prince of this World, John 12. 31. and 16. 11. and 14.
30. But, says of him, he has nothing in me: nor shall be able to touch, or
ever meddle with, so as finally to overcome any Partakers of my all-powerful
Gospel-life, 1 John 5. 18. Saints, therein, are Fence-proof against all the
Gates, or Strength of Hell, all the Powers of Darkness, evil Angels and Men,
Rulers of the Darkness of this World (Ephesians. 6. 12.) in their own dark-spirited
worldly Life and Wisdom, of the First-creation.

The first unpardonable Sin of the evil Angels, was their turning as they went,
or were a while following Christ, toward that Life, he represented himself in,
to them and the good Angels, and in the Passage thereto, by way of Death and
Resurrection, in such Transactions as had passed in the Creature-part of his
wonderful Person, before they were brought forth. In a contrary Demeanor to
that of the good Angels, they turned as they went, in love to themselves, in
their own self-chosen mortal Life, given them in their first Creation, in
unchangeable Enmity to God, and the Heavenly eternal Creature-Life of their
Creator, offered them, by a second. The good Angels did let down their Wings,
ceased from the mortal Life of their first Creation, and Exercise of their own
fallible Understandings and corruptible Wills therein, signified by letting
down their Wings, in Conformity to their Head, in the Death of the first
Creation, and Resurrection into the Life of the second. So, passed out of their
own mortal First-Covenant Law-Life, into God's own New Covenant Gospel-Life, of
originally immortal Holiness and everlasting Righteousness; Ezekiel. 1.5-26.

The Devil and his Angels kept not their first Estate, but left their own
Habitation; Jude 6. To Man's Wisdom, they, only, kept their first Estate, the
Life and Things given them, in their first Creation. And, consequently, in the
Wisdom of Human Nature, is Man ready to follow the evil Angels first Choice, as
best. Here Is the case of many, restored into the First-Covenant or
First-Creation-Life of the Creature; ready to establish themselves therein, as
a state of true Salvation. This Paul feared, and labored to prevent in his
Israel-Brethren; Romans 10. 1-3. At this dangerous Point, were the Corinthians
and Laodiceans, in the delusive First-Covenant House of feasting and rejoicing
(1 Cor. 4. 8. Rev. 3. 17.) as not, at all, needing any other Life, by a second
or new Creation, for their everlasting Blessedness.

On the first unpardonable Sin of the evil Angels, they were immediately cast
down to Hell, delivered into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment;
2 Pet. 2. 4. They, by their Sin, fixed themselves in their own self-chosen
Life, in Preference and Opposition to the eternal Creature-Life of their
Creator; and God, in his righteous Judgment, giving them up to, and thereby,
fixing them in their own Choice, was a casting them down to Hell. In this Hell,
and their Chains of Darkness, are they Rulers in this dark, mortal,
first-Creation World. The Chains of Darkness, in which they are reserved to the
Judgment of the Great Day, are all Life, Wisdom, Righteousness, Excellencies
and Perfections of their Angelical Nature, given them in their first Creation,
as turned by their Abuse of all, into the greatest Wickedness, Madness and
Folly, in unchangeable Enmity to God, and his Heavenly Creature-life, shown and
offered them, by a second. So are they in a state, in all Extremity, contrary
to what they were created in, changed by Self-destroying Self-love, from a
state of temporary changeable Obedience, to a state of eternal, unchangeable
Enmity to God. An absolute Exclusion of them from the Kingdom of Heaven, is
called a casting them down to Hell. God, not only gave them their Choice, but
also, in the abusive Exercise of their self-chosen Life, a permitted ruling
Power over Mankind, all along this World, as God thereof, under the
restraining, limiting, overruling infinite Wisdom and Power of the true God,
so as that he can never hurt any true Saints or Subjects of God's everlasting
Kingdom. Yet, even Saints, for a time, are under their Power. Yea, he told
Christ himself, all the Kingdoms of this World, and Glory of them, were his,
offering all, as his greatest Bribe, to the true King in the World to come, in
case he would fall down, own, and worship him, as God; Mat. 4. 8, 9. Luke 4.
5-7. Christ denied not, that all the Kingdoms of this World were at his
Dispose, by God's most wise Permission. He that said this to Christ, in the
Fountain-Purity of the First-Creation, and full of that Spirit of Grace and
Truth, that is offered by a second, what will he not do to Saints before their
experiencing any thing of Gospel-life, or when but in some little beginnings
thereof, and Enemies within, Foes of their own House, in their own Spirits and
whole Nature, in Union of Mind with him, in Enmity to God and his
Gospel Spirit, in themselves? He is permitted a Power of transforming his
Earthly Spirit, into the likeness of Christ's Heavenly Creature-Spirit, that is
the mysterious House and Temple of God; and, therein, to show and assert
himself to be God, the very infinite Divine Being; 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. And, herein,
is he undiscoverable by the highest single natural Understanding of Man, in but
First-Covenant Principles, tho, indeed, the worst of all Creatures, the supreme
Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition; v. 3.

This God of this World, who passes with Man, for the true God, will not be
able finally to blind and deceive any but them that are lost; 2 Cor. 4. 3. If
it were possible, he would so deceive the very Elect, by his false Christ's,
evil Angels, and his false Prophets und Apostles, amongst Men, transformed into
the likeness of Christ's true ones; 2 Cor. 11. 13-15. Clothing their own
First-Covenant Law-Life, with all Scripture Language and Titles, belonging to
God's own Heavenly Creature, New Covenant Gospel-Life, as the true
Regeneration, new Creature, State of Grace, in which they have true Joy, and
final Peace with God; Ezekiel. 13. 1-10. All this is confidently asserted, by Men,
under Satan's lying Spirit of Divination. With such, the renewed old Man, in
the restored First-Covenant Law-Life, given in the first Creation, must pass
for the new Creature, without all Scruple or Contradiction; and does so pass,
in and with the most reformed People or Churches of this World, in but
First-Covenant Principles. All Worldly Preachers and Hearers, in but Worldly,
First-Covenant Principles, confidently take Satan's other Gospel, that is no
Gospel, for Christ's true; Gal. 1. 6, 7. 1 John 4. 5.

Restored First-Covenant Law-Life, is so far from rendering any, Fence-proof
against the evil Angelical Rulers of this World, that they make that, their
strongest Hold, and Men, eminent therein, their choicest Instruments, to
oppose, dispute against, contradict and blaspheme the Heavenly Creature-Life,
and Gospel-Righteousness of God, wherein any can be saved.

Let Satan, in his superior evil-angelical Wisdom, and Men in their inferior
human Wisdom, under his Influence, interpret the Scriptures, all, therein,
shall seem to run current, for carrying on Satan's Design, to the everlasting
Destruction of his blinded Teachers and Hearers, Leaders and Followers. That
shall be preached up, as a State of true Salvation and final Peace with God,
which, if fixed in, will be found a State of unchangeable Enmity to God, and
eternal Death to Man. All, established in the First-Covenant Law-Life and
Righteousness of Man, in unchangeable Enmity to the Gospel-Life and
Righteousness of God, go on, to their dying moment, with their delusive
Laodicean Confidence therein, to their sad long eternal Condition, in the World
to come. Paul was confident, awhile, but not fixedly, wilfully and
unpardonably, in his Law-Spirit of Works, against God's Gospel Spirit of Grace,
in true Saints; but, immediately on Gospel-Conviction and Conversion, gave up
the Life and Righteousness of his own Spirit, in Sacrifice to God, in order to
find all again with Usury, in God's eternal, everlasting righteous
Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth; Phil. 3. 6-11.

Many, not only eminent in the Wisdom of Man, but under highest spiritual
enlightening Gifts (received on their natural Understandings, amounting to a
partaking of the Holy Ghost ( Heb. 6.4-6.) in the all-discovering Light, but
not the all-powerful Life thereof) are bewitched back again, by Satan, to set
up for themselves, in their own holy Flesh, Righteousness of Man, Life of the
Law, against God's holy Gospel Spirit; refusing to submit to the Death of their
own Spirit, at best, for the Life of his. This do they, tho they know Christ
himself, crucified that Law-Spirit of Works, in the Fountain-purity of it, in
his own Person ( Gal. 3. 1, 3.) the preserving of which, was Satan's Attempt
and Design upon him, by himself, the Jews, and Peter, to have set up his
Kingdom, in; Luke 4. 5-7. John 6. 15. Matthew. 16. 22, 23. All Is nothing as to
our ever entering into the Kingdom of God, till we have that Gospel-Life of God,
or a living spiritual Faith, working by Love to God therein; 1 Cor. 12. 31. and
13. 1, 2. Such a Faith, only, renders any, true Lovers and Beloveds of God;
right Performers of all Duties, to God and their Fellow Creatures. Such as look
back, after all convincing Discoveries and Offers of Christ's Gospel-Life, for
Justification with God, in their Law-Righteousness of Man, are fallen from
Grace; Gal. 5. 4. Who hinders Men, or calls them back, from Christ's offered
Gospel Truth? ver. 7. The Devil and his human Instruments, that shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven, excluding and denying all such Gospel Truths, by which any
can ever enter thereinto.

Satan takes Men alive, at his, and their own Will, in the restored Life and
Righteousness of Man, as the highest Snare, by which, to keep them from ever
looking after the Gospel-Life and Righteousness of God, therein; 2 Timothy 2.26.
The Greek Original runs thus; That they may awake out of the Snare of the
Devil, who are taken alive by him, at his Will. Christ requires all, to look
after God, for his Heavenly Kingdom-Life, and everlasting Righteousness (Mat.
6. 33.) and complains, that no Man, while confident in his own Understanding,
will answer this Advice, or seek after God (Romans 3. 11.) for his Heavenly
Creature-life and things, which lie quite out of the reach of all single
natural Understanding; 1 Cor. 2. 9. Neither Morally righteous Heathens, nor
First-Covenant Jews or Christians, regard or look after God, for his new or
second Covenant-Life, in which any can be finally saved. But, where God wakens
up any, out of their delusive Dream for true Happiness, in their own
Righteousness, whether Jew or Gentile, and gives them a living spiritual Faith,
working by Love to him, in his Gospel-Life, all such will find the Salvation of
Heaven.

Satan deceived Mankind, at best, in the Primitive Purity of their Nature, in
Adam, assuring them, that holding fast the righteous Life, they were first
created in, and walking in the uncontrolled Sovereignty of their own Will and
Wisdom, therein, they should be as Gods. It Is the peculiar Prerogative of God,
so to live and be; and the unpardonable Presumption of any Angels or Men, to
conclude and set up for themselves, in their own Wills, so as never to be
subject and obedient to his. Obedient Subjects of God, will be eternally
blessed; and all proud, presumptuous Self-exalters, to be as Gods, will fall
under the everlasting Curse and Wrath of God.

He that prevailed with the first Adam, in the Primitive Purity of our Nature,
when he found the second Adam in the Fountain-Purity of our Nature, a little
lower than his Angelical Nature ( Heb. 2. 9.) he most presumptuosly tempted
him, to fall down and worship him, as God. What Work is he like to make with
Men, in but the restored Life, Wisdom and Righteousness of Man, with Filth of
Spirit, Enmity to God and his Spirit of Grace, under all?

In awakened Gospel-Saints, while any thing of the Carnal Mind and Life of
their own Spirit remains uncrucified, he will be continually kindling the
sinful Lusts and Desires of that, his own Party, yet, in them, as Paul found;
Romans 7.15, 19. and 2 Cor. 12. 7. Hereby, does he endeavor to quench and
extinguish the Mind and Life of Christ's Gospel Spirit in them, keeping up the
War of their Fleshly Mind, his Party in them, against their Spiritual Mind,
Christ's Party, so that they cannot do the things they would (Gal. 5.17.) fully
and constantly, till this War within them be finished, by a full extinguishing
of the Life of their own Spirit, and Mindings thereof. Then are they freed from
all Filth of Flesh and Spirit, too, for ever. Till then, tho they live in God's
Spirit, they do not continually and constantly, walk, think and speak therein,
as is their Duty and Concern; ver. 25.

In all this Combat and Danger, Saints, in a living Faith, know their Salvation
sure, by a final Victory over all Enemies, without and within them. No Devils
or Men shall ever be able to pluck them out of Christ's All-powerful Hand; John
10. 28, 29.

When the God of this World, with his Party of Men, find, they cannot prevail
with Christ or his Followers, by any Worldly Bribes or flattering self-pleasing
Offers, to turn from and disown any such thing as indeed is God's eternal
Gospel-Life and Truth, then go they to work, another way. When all Allurements
fail, they will, in the Exercise of their implacable Malice, try to fright them
out of their Gospel-Profession, and, if permitted (as often they are) to murder
their Bodies, Christ himself was so dealt with by them, and warns his Followers
to expect the like; John 15. 20. and 16. 1, 2. Evil Angels and Men have a kind
of short, self-pleasing Heaven, in this World; and Saints a short, and to their
natural Spirit, unpleasing Purgatory-Hell, by which, cleans'd from all Filth of
Flesh and Spirit. The former are ripening and fitting themselves for the
eternal Hell, and God is ripening and fitting the latter, for the eternal
Heaven, in the World to come. God's temporary Wrath upon them, bringing them
into the lowest Hell, in this World, is his way, for delivering them, from the
Wrath and Hell to come, that is eternal; Psalm. 86. 13. and 116. 3. 2 Samuel 22.6.
Nature in Saints is sorely put to it, in this Hell-work of God upon them, in
this World; but know, God will not leave their Soul there, for ever; Psalm. 16.
10. Tho chiefly spoken of Christ, will these words, at last, be found true, in
Saints. All that God does to them, and all he suffers evil Angels and Men to do
them, in their implacable Malice, does God overruled, to their greatest good.

When Satan appeared or stood before the Lord, before whom, he knew it was to
no purpose (because impossible) to conceal his way of deceiving, in Ahab's
case, he downright acknowledged it, that he would be a lying Spirit in the
Mouth of all his Prophets. And God said, Go, and do so; Thou shall persuade
him, and prevail also; 1 Kings 22. 22. Thus did he prevail, as God's permissive
Hand, to the Destruction of Ahab. His four hundred false Prophets, pleased
Ahab, to his Ruin, and were highly esteemed; and, God's one true Prophet that
counseled him for his good, was cast by him into a Prison, and fed with Bread
of Affliction, and Water of Affliction; v. 26. 27. He hated Micaijah, the
Lord's true Prophet, as not prophesying, what he reckoned good, concerning him;
but, loved and rewarded Satan's false Prophets, as pleasing to his own Will,
and after his own Heart's Desire. So, Jeremy, who counseled King and People
for the preserving their Lives, was cast into a Dungeon, where he sunk in the
Mire, while Satan's false Prophets pleased them, to their Destruction; Ier. 38.
5, 6. God's one true Prophet, among the then only visible People of God, a
fleshly First-Covenant Israel, found King, Princes, Priests and People, all, as
one Man, against him, while Satan's false self-pleasing Prophets were listened
to, and rewarded.

Satan, that acknowledged to God, he would be a lying Spirit in Ahab's
Prophets, is so far from being discovered by the highest Wisdom or
Understanding of Man, in but First-Covenant or First-Creation natural
Principles, that he will pass with them, there, for Christ and God most high,
when, indeed, the worst of all Creatures; 2 Thessalonians. 2,3,4. Where God permits
this, and not only so, but, in Judgment, gives them up to Satan's Man-pleasing
strong Delusions, for believing his Lie, rather than God's Truth, the Issue
will be, eternal Death to their whole Beings, Spirit, Soul and Body, in a
Resurrection of Damnation; ver. 10, 12. Men are either brought by Satan, in
love to their own righteous earthly mortal Life, given them in their first
Creation, to hate God's Heavenly Creature Gospel-Life, offered by a second; or
by the electing Love of God, to hate their own Life, at best, so as to give it
up, in Sacrifice to God, in love to, and as the only way for attaining and
experiencing his New Covenant everlasting Gospel-Life, by a second or new
Creation; ver. 13. This latter is Christ's Counsel ( Luke 14. 26.) in the
Mystery of Godliness: the former, Satan's, in his Mystery of Iniquity. Satan's
Counsel is, for sparing, saving and keeping the Life of the Creature, given in
the first Creation: Christ's Counsel, is, for the Surrender and Loss of that,
and all the things thereof, for the Life of the Creator, offered by a second,
and things of God, therein. The keeping the former, in Preserence and
Opposition to the latter, Christ declares will be the loss of all Life and
Righteousness, God's and Man's too, on which, their whole Beings, Spirit, Soul
and Body, will be laid down, for ever, in the Nakedness of their own
unpardonable Guilt, under the unquenchable Wrath of God, for evermore; Mat. 10.
39. and 16. 25. Mark 8. 35. Luke 17. 33. John 12. 25. Man, not only eminent in
the First-Covenant Life, Wisdom and Righteousness of Man, but under highest
spiritual enlightening Gifts, on his natural Understanding (short of the very
Gospel-Life of Christ, or a living spiritual Faith, working by Love to him,
therein) is yet within Satan's reach, to beguile, bewitch, and fetch back into
an unchangeable Union with him, in the first Creation, and unchangeable Enmity
to God and his Heavenly Life, offered by a second; 1 Cor. 12. 31. and 13. 1, 2.
Gal. 3. 1, 3. and 5. 7. Satan would keep all Mankind, in the dead, corrupt
State of Nature, wallowing in Mire as his Swine, spending and ending their Days
in this World, in the brutish Lusts of literal Sodom. But, when cast out, as to
this kind of Work in them, as fast as any are brought by Christ, out of such
Filth of Flesh, into the Righteousness of Man, he attempts and frequently
prevails to get into such mystical cleans'd Houses, and fix them with himself,
in Filth of Spirit, unchangeable Enmity to God, and his everlasting righteous
Creature-Spirit of Grace and Truth; and then, he has a sevenfold surer hold of
them, than ever; Mat. 12. 43-45. Luke 11. 24-26. So comes the last State of
that Man to be worse than the first, in his corrupt Nature. Mary Magdalen's and
Zacheus's, in the Filth of corrupt Nature, were capable of Christ's true
Salvation Gospel-Life, and such righteous Scribes and Pharisees utterly
incapable thereof, or, therefore, of scaping the Damnation of Hell; Mat. 23.
33. and 21. 31. Publicans are brought to justify God, and be eternally
justified before him, while righteous Pharisees and Scripture-Lawyers, in
restored Law-life and Righteousness of Man, reject the Counsel of God, for
receiving his Gospel-life, to their everlasting Destruction, Luke 7. 29, 30.
and 15. 1, 2. and 19. 2-9.

Fixure in Law-life and Righteousness of Man, in unchangeable Enmity to
Gospel-life and Righteousness of God, renders Men, mystical Sodomites, in Filth
of Spirit, worse and more criminal Sinners than literal Sodom, in Filth of
Flesh, Mat. 11. 23, 24. But, corrupt Nature or Filth of Flesh, fixed in, with
literal Sodom, is unpardonable, also. And, therein, do the greater part of
Mankind, run their Race in this World, from their Cradles to their Graves. Take
and put together all, of both the said Sorts of Mankind, in the broad Way to
everlasting Destruction, under Satan's prevailing Influence, and they will be
found wonderfully to out-number, Christ's few in the narrow Way to Heaven, Mat.
7. 13, 14. Yet, will they be a numberless Multitude also, out of all
Generations, Revel. 7. 9. Many of Satan's two Parties, fixed in the corrupt or
righteous Spirit of Nature, against God and his Gospel Spirit of Grace, often
die, without any Remorse or Fear, as to any Bystanders Observation; without
any right Knowledge of the true God, or false God of this World, Heaven or Hell,
till in the latter, beyond all Remedy, for ever.

Yet, farther, Satan will not only exercise his permitted ruling and
tempting-Power over Mankind, all along this World, but after his Imprisonment
at beginning of Christ's thousand Years Reign on Earth, and his loosening out
of it, at the ending thereof, will he, as his last and most transcendently
presumptuous Attempt, rally up his Gog and Magog, his innumerable Multitude of
evil Angels and Men, and in the transformed Appearance and counterfeit Guise of
Angels of Light and true Saints, besiege the New- Ierusalem-City of true
Saints, in the very Glory of the Resurrection, Revel. 20. 1-3. and v. 7-9. This
last Attempt of Satan and his Party of Angels and Men, will have no Success at
all. Immediate will be the Decision of this intended Battle, by Fire from God
out of Heaven, to devour them all; casting them, with the Devil that deceived
them, into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where to be tormented, for ever and
ever, ver. 10. Then Creation ceases, and all Angels and Men good and bad,
finally concluded in their eternal Conditions of Joy or Sorrow, unspeakable, in
Heaven or Hell.

CHAP. XVIII. Concerning Heresies and Heretics.
THE Word (...) signifies Option or Choice, all variety of humane Opinions, in
which Men choose to set up for themselves, with Confidence for Salvation,
contrary to the sound fundamental Principles of Religion, and right Worship of
God in his Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth, in which alone any can be saved,
John 4. 23, 24. All, short or destitute of this Spirit, or a living spiritual
Faith therein, working by Love to God, worship they know not what, or whom,
ver. 22. All, in but their own worldly Spirit or Principle, at best, in the
restored Light or Life of the First-creation (and conclusively setting up
there, with Confidence for Salvation, as a State of eternal Life and Peace with
God) will be found, at last, unpardonable Heretics, Sinners against the Holy
Ghost, in unchangeable Enmity to the Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth, offered
by a New Creation, in which, alone, any can ever enter into his Kingdom, or
escape the Damnation of Hell.

Evil Angels were the supreme Heretics, in their first sinful Choice of their
own earthly, mortal First-covenant-life, given them, in their First-creation.
They soon prevailed with all Mankind, in Adam, to make the same Choice. In
Mankind, when by Christ restored into the Light and Life of the First-creation,
and therein, but the Understanding and Wisdom of Man, whoever do conclusively
set up for themselves therein, as a State of true Blessedness, do become with
evil Angels, unpardonable Heretics, Sinners against the Holy Ghost, rejecting
the whole Counsel of God, and denying his Gospel-life, in which, only, any can
be saved.

Man, in his highest fallible Understanding, for judging, and corruptible Will,
for choosing, in Matters of Religion and Worship of God, is under the Power of
Satan, to deceive and impose upon him. Hence, are all the Doctrines and Words
of Man's Wisdom, about eternal Life and Peace with God, Heresy. In all the
various Conceptions, and Language of Man's Wisdom, we find a World of contrary
Opinions, and Disputes, amounting to a mystical Babel. They will, all, in one
Mind, reject and disown the Gospel-life and Truths thereof, as the grand
universal Heresy of all. Scribes, Pharisees, Essen's, Herodians, etc. among the
enlightened, righteous professing First-covenant Jews, were all, as one Man,
against Christ himself, for his Gospel Truth. They said, he had a Devil, and
was mad; that he was a Blasphemer, a Sabbath-breaker, a Wine-bibber, a Friend
of Publicans and Sinners; an Enemy of righteous Men, most uncharitably
sentencing them to the Damnation of Hell ( Mat. 23.33.) and taking up Mary
Magdalen's and Zacheus's, Publicans and Sinners, into the Salvation of Heaven.
These were the strange, wonderful Appearances, Christ and his Doctrine, and way
for eternal Life, had, in the Sight and Understanding of wise, righteous,
First-Covenant, Saint-like People. What wonder? None, in that Principle of
Understanding can see, know, own or receive the Gospel- Life and Things of God
(1 Cor. 2. 9.) the New Covenant Principle of true Salvation, which, therefore,
is universally denied by them all, as a Diabolical Illusion. Many, that come to
be true Saints, at last, may be found, for a time, with Paul, deeply engaged,
in a murdering Mind of Enmity to true Saints, for their Gospel-Principle, and
Doctrine, in the words of God's Wisdom. But, all that fix there, become
unchangeable Enemies to God and them.

All final Builders on the sandy Foundation, the mortal, earthly, perishing
Life of the first Creation, will deny, contradict and blaspheme all that are
built on the firm, sure, rocky, Gospel-Life of God, in which, alone any can
ever enter into his Kingdom. What these differing Builders will come to, in
Conclusion, Christ declares; Mat. 7. 24-27. The Righteousness of Man, in
Scribes and Pharisees, is not that, in which, any can ever enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; Mat. 5. 20. The Righteousness of God, in his new and
everlasting Gospel-Life, which Christ requires Men to seek after ( Mat. 6. 33.)
this only will give all the happy Partakers thereof, an Entrance into his
Kingdom. The imputed Righteousness of God, to the completing the imperfect
Personal Righteousness of Man (for a First-Covenant Communion with, and
worshipping of God in that Principle) is still but the fading Beauty, and
Righteousness of Man, in and with which, he is liable to play the Harlot with
the Devil, in Enmity to Christ, as offered to be a spiritual Head, Lord,
Bridegroom and Husband to them, in his Heavenly, Eternal Gospel-Life, by a new
Creation of them. So, come they to be judged as mystical and most criminal
Adulterers and Murderers; Ezekiel. 16. 14, 15. and v. 38. Imputed Righteousness or
Comeliness of God, to Man, in the First-Covenant, on Man's abuse of all, in
him, in Union with the Devil, is withdrawn again, and he, for ever deprived of
all or any Benefit of Christ's Sacrifice, in our Nature; Heb. 10. 26. In the
second Covenant Gospel-Life of God, Man comes to have the Righteousness of God,
in him, under and with Christ. This is a Life, a Wisdom, a Righteousness and a
Glory never to be done away. In this, only, can any enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. This is as much above the Righteousness of Man, as the Heavens are
higher than the Earth. Thus are God's Thoughts and Ways for Salvation, as far
above Man's Thoughts, and Words of his own Wisdom, as the literal Heavens are
higher than the Earth; Isa. 55.8,9. God requires the plucking out our right
Eye, cutting off our right Hand and Foot, when finding our selves therein
offended at his way of saying us; and so, offensive to God and to our selves,
as to our own truest Interest and greatest Concern, for finding eternal Life,
or scaping eternal Death; Mat. 5. 29, 30. and 18. 8, 9. Mark 9. 43-48. This,
with other like Requirings of God, are not to be understood, in a literal
Sense; nor, if so performed, would answer the Counsel or Command of God. We may
give our whole Body to be burned, and yet be destitute of that Spirit of God,
called Love (rendering all the happy Partakers thereof, true Lovers and
Beloveds of God) and so of no Value with God, or true Advantage to our selves;
1 Cor. 13. 3. So, the selling all that we have, and give to the poor ( Mat.
19.21. Mark 10.21. Luke 18.22.) the mystical Truth of such Commands, relates to
the mystical Riches of Man's Law-spirit of Works, and Fruitfulness of his own
Nature, therein; all which, are to be given up, in Sacrifice to God, for the
durable Life and Heavenly Treasures of his Gospel Spirit of Grace, in them. The
right Eye, Hand and Foot, to be plucked out, cut off, and cast away from us,
are, in Mystery and Truth, the most enlightened natural Understanding,
signified by the right Eye; the best Practice in our own Will and Way, and most
righteous walking, in our own Law-spirit of Works; all such, seeing, working
and walking, are to be given up and parted with, in Passive Obedience to the
Will of God, in order to find all again with unspeakable Gain, by seeing,
working, walking, and doing all things, in the Gospel-Life of God, the only
Principle of everlasting, well-pleasing, active Obedience to him, and
Blessedness to us. In the infallible Understanding of his Spirit, can we know
all things, and in the incorruptible Will thereof, can we do all that God
requires of us. God himself, therein, works all our Works for us ( Isa. 26.
12.) and we work all our Works, in him. These are the only Works, that will not
be burnt up, at the last Day; John 3. 21. All Christ's Gospel-Words, seemed
hard Sayings, even to his Disciples, while known to them, but as a fleshly
Bridegroom, in a restored First-Covenant Principle of seeing, working and
walking; John 6. 60. To give up all inward Riches of their own Spirits, all
Righteousness, Wisdom, Works, Fruits (every thing, given them in their first
Creation, or done by them, therein, at best) this seems a hard Saying,
exceeding strange and amazing to Man's Wisdom. The very Disciples were
exceedingly amazed at such words of Christ, saying, Who then can be saved at
all? Mat. 19. 24, 25. This was a narrower Question, than he asked, that said to
Christ, Master, are there few that be saved? Luke 13.23. If there be no
possibility of entering into the Kingdom of God, by the best, Man can do or be,
in the restored Life, Wisdom and Righteousness of his own Nature, he is ready,
with the Disciples, to ask the same Question. Consequently, is he ready to deny
the Truth of Christ's Saying, and that as a Duty to God, that sure, he would
never require more of Man, for his true Blessedness, than the utmost he can do,
in the Life, given him, in his first Creation, or restored since. The Disputers
of this World, under Satan's delusive Influence, in defense of their Worldly
Principle of Life, Desire, Thought and Action, will never have done, till the
ending of the Devil's Reign, and commencing of Christ's. Such Disputers are not
to be striven with, but, in Meekness instructed, and if they will hear, well and
good: if they be peremptory and conclusive, in their own fallible
Understandings, contradicting and blaspheming all right Gospel-words of
Counsel, for true Salvation, Saints may pray, and desire other Saints Prayers,
for a Deliverance from such unreasonable Men; who (tho temporary Believers in,
and Owners of Christ, in the restored First-Covenant-Life and Righteousness of
Man, which he crucified in himself) are mystical Infidels, as to that
New Covenant Gospel-Life and Righteousness of God, he is ascended into. They
call all the right Words and Doctrine thereof, a blasphemous Fiction. Here Is
the pass, true New Covenant Saints, with their spiritual Faith in Christ's
Gospel-Life, are at, with First-Covenant Believers, in their restored Law-life.
All Contests with them, amount but to a vain, unprofitable jangling. Such
Teachers of the Law, understand neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm
(1 Timothy 1.6,7.) utterly denying the Gospel-Principle of true Love to God and
our Fellow Creatures, in which, alone, possible to be obeyed and fulfilled;
Romans 13.8, 10. But, still, this remains to be the Saints Duty, with Paul, to
become all things to all Men (1 Cor. 9. 20-22.) stooping and condescending to
all kinds and degrees of Understanding, in the Light of Nature, Law, and
Gospel, owning what is good, in any; but, in order to lead them into, and build
them up in, what is unspeakably better, Christ's Gospel Spirit of everlasting
Righteousness and infallible Truth. They will, also, as their Duty, bear with
such, as at present, persecute them, as Blasphemers of the Law, by preaching
the Gospel-Cross and Death-work of God's Heavenly, on their Earthly Law-Spirit
of Works, at best. This, Man's Wisdom calls a blaspheming or evil-speaking of
the Law, Moses, and God; Acts 6. 11-13. Paul was at this Work, for a time, in
his own Law-Spirit: Yet, at length, became a most eminent Preacher of the
Gospel; and then, was as fiercely persecuted, by such as he once was, in their
own Law-Spirit of Works. In Man's day of judging in Religion, and interpreting
the Scriptures in the Words of his own Wisdom, all his Preachings and Writings,
therein, will exactly conduce to the carrying on the whole Counsel of the
Devil, in his Mystery of Iniquity, for the Damnation of Men, and preventing
their Salvation. And, as in Church, so in State Affairs, may we see what Man's
deepest Reason and Wisdom amounts unto, as to his own eternal Concerns in the
case and end of Achitophel. His Counsel was, as if a Man inquired at the Oracle
of God, and that, under such a Man of God, as was King David. In Conclusion, on
God's crossing him, and disappointing his Counsel, in the Case of Absalom, he
hanged himself; 2 Samuel 16. 23. and 17. 23. Thus, is Man (trusting to his own
Understanding, at best, for directing his Steps) gone, at every turn, in this
World, and the World to come.

To enumerate particular Heresies, all along, since the Primitive Apostolical
Gospel-day (and, remarkably, in our own Day, and Nation, within the compass of
sixty Years) would be endless, and to no end. If God's Gospel Truth, be
evidenced, and received, all the Disputes and Controversies, managed in the
fallible Understanding of Man, on all hands, about Satan's Lie, in his Mystery
of Iniquity, will be discovered, and laid in the Dust.

CHAP. XIX. Concerning true Charity or Love.
TRue spiritual Saints, in God's Gospel Spirit, called Love, are the only right
Performers of all Duty to God and their Fellow Creatures, therein. They have a
right Love to all Men (not known to be fixed in Enmity to God and them) and a
peculiar Brotherly Kindness to the Household of Faith, Christ's and their
spiritual Brethren. Yet, are none reckoned by Men, in their own Wordly Life and
Wisdom, at best, so universally uncharitable, as reckoning all, below their
spiritual Principle of true Life, to be in great danger of Damnation. Men, in
the restored Life, Wisdom and Righteousness of their own Spirits, are ready to
say to them, as the Disciples said to Christ himself, Who then can be saved, at
all? Are all Mankind damned, both corrupt and righteous? This amazing Truth,
renders Saints, in all appearance, the most uncharitable of all Men. If all the
World wonder after the Beast, and worship the Dragon, that gives Power to his
Human Beast, his false Prophets and Apostles (in their Wordly First-Creation
Principles, at best, all Righteousness and Wisdom of Man) what a most
uncharitable, censorious Creature, must the true Saint appear to be? Rev. 13.
3-7. If all that dwell on the Earth, fix and set up for entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven, in but their own Earthly Life, in which none can ever enter
thereinto, what must Christ's few in the narrow way, whose Names are written in
the Book of Life of the Lamb, slain from the Foundation of the World, be
accounted? v. 8. They that are of the World, in but the Earthly Life of the
first Creation, preach up that, in the Righteousness, Wisdom and Glory of it,
as a state of eternal Life; and the World, all in that Principle, hear and own
their Doctrine, as God's Gospel Truth. We are of God, says John, he that
knows God, hears us: he that is not of God, hears not us; 1 John 4. 5, 6.
What is Man's Wisdom like to say, to this? You are in the right Principle for
Salvation, and all, short thereof, or contrary thereto, in a delusive
Persuasion, doing, saying and worshipping they know not what. This is your most
presumptuous, uncharitable and unwarrantable Opinion of others, and a
justifying your selves, as the only true People of God. The First-Covenant
righteous teaching and professing Jews said to Christ, they were born of God,
and that he had a Devil, and was mad; Joh. 8.48. and 10.20. and 8. 52. Now we
know that thou have a Devil. Here Is the Language of a First-Covenant People,
fixed in their own Earthly Spirit, concerning Christ himself and his Followers,
by the Death of that, into the Life of his Heavenly; his Holy Ghost, they call
the Devil. While the God of this World passes for the true God, with any, what
other Language can be expected from them? If the World hate you, says Christ,
ye know that it hated me, before it hated you; Joh. 15. 18. It was the highest
Rank of Men, in the Worldly Spirit, a righteous visible People of God, that
contradicted, blasphemed and murdered Christ himself. What can his true
Followers expect? His choosing them out of the World, his transforming them, by
death of their own Earthly Spirits, and Resurrection into the Life of his
Heavenly, will render them hateful to all, fixed in their own Earthly; ver. 19.

True Saints in Christ's Gospel Spirit, can answer that Command of God, in
Sincerity and Truth ( Mat. 5. 44.) Love their Enemies, etc. They can truly
forgive other Men's Trespasses against them. These are Commands, too hard for
Man, in his own Nature and Spirit, at best, to answer. The right performing
them is an infallible Evidence of their being born of God's Heavenly
Creature-Spirit, or Holy Ghost; ver. 45. They that pray, God would forgive
their Trespasses against him, as they forgive others Trespasses against them,
in case they do not so forgive others, they pray, in effect, God would not
forgive them; Mat. 6. 14, 15.

True Saints, on all accounts, are truly and universally, the only right
Performers of all Duties to God and their Fellow Creatures, by a true universal
Charity or Love to all Men, not fixed in Enmity to God. Such, it is their Duty,
in Union of Mind with God, to hate with a perfect Hatred; Psalm. 139. 21, 22.

Christ himself said, of our Nature in the Fountain-Purity of it, I can of my
self do nothing; John 5. 30. The only doing Principle, for everlasting
well-pleasing, active Obedience to the Divine Will, in me and my Followers, is
my Heavenly Creature Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth.

Against this Spirit of Truth, God permits Satan to carry on his Mystery of
Iniquity, by transforming his Earthly, into the likeness of Christ's Heavenly
Creature-Spirit, that is God's House, and as sitting in that Temple of God,
showing himself to be God. And then, are his Ministers (preaching up the
Righteousness of Man, only, for eternal Life) transformed into the likeness of
the Gospel- Ministers of the Righteousness of God; 2 Cor. 11. 13-15. They dress
up Satan's and their Earthly, with all the Titles belonging to Christ's
Heavenly Spirit; and are received and owned, beyond all Dispute and Question,
as true Ministers of the Gospel.

Where Satan, in and by his Party, among Men, sits on the Judgment-Bench ( Rev.
2. 13.) and Gospel-Saints forced to stand at the Bar, all right Gospel-words,
for their Defense, will be reckoned matter of Condemnation to them, without any
need of other Witnesses against them. Christ himself was thus handled. He has
spoken Blasphemy, says the High Priest, What think ye? Guilty of Death, say the
Jews, as his Jury; on which they did spit in his Face, and smite him, saying,
Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, who is he that smote thee, Mat. 26. 65-68. They
not only condemned, but ridiculed him, in their proceeding toward the
murdering of him. This did they to him, who had that Spirit in him, which
created all Angels and Men.

True Saints give no ground for any to despair of Salvation, who are not guilty
of the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, in a fixed wilful, unchangeable
Enmity to the Gospel Spirit of God. They also endeavor, by all Condescensions,
Ways and Means, to bring them into the Knowledge and right owning of Christ's
Gospel Truth, in which, alone, any can be saved. Final Refusers of their
Gospel-Counsels, will persecute them, for their Pains, as has been experienced
in all Times. And, we are now drawing near to, yea, are in the worst of Times,
since Noah's Flood, under the permitted Exercise of Satan's great Rage, because
he knows he has but a short time, to the finishing of his Reign over Mankind,
Rev. 12. 12. All manner of Wickedness increases and abounds, more and more,
continually; such Wars, Tumults and Confusions, of all sorts, as now are, have
not been the usual Experience of former days. All tends to the running down the
present Generation, toward that Midnight-darkness; a State, in which, Christ
declares, that at his second Coming, he shall find the World, at near the same
pass, Mankind were found in at the Flood; Mat. 24. 37-39. Luke 18. 8.

Under all these Discouragements, Saints have an infallible fore-head-Sight,
what Matters will come to, on all Hands, at the winding up of all, in the final
Love or Wrath of God. Then, the unwarrantable Charity of Men, warranting
Salvation and Peace with God, in a Principle, where never to be found, will be
sadly and remedilesly experienced by themselves and their blinded Followers, to
have been the leading their Hearers into everlasting Destruction, with
themselves. Then all Persons and Things, all Words and Doctrines, will be
called by the right Names. Under Satan's permitted Reign, all things in
Religion and the Worship of God, have been called by wrong Names, all along
this World, and will more and more confidently be so called, to the full ending
thereof. In these last Days, and near approach of the second Coming of our
Lord, will there be more Scoffing at any such thing, and a more universal
Disregard and Denial of the Spirit he will come in, than ever, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4.

CHAP. XX. The Conclusion of this whole Treatise, showing the Security of true
Saints, all along this troublesome confounded World; wherein God never suffers
the Rulers of this dark World, Devils or Men, to do any thing to them, in their
implacable Malice, but what his infinite Wisdom and Power overrules into a
constant Conducibleness to their greatest Good. This, with many other things,
are the Matters of this Concluding Chapter.
TRUE Saints have God, and Christ himself, on their Side, in a Partnership with
them, under all the Blasphemous Contradictions of Men, to their Words of God's
Wisdom, Words which the Holy Ghost, his Gospel Spirit in them, teaches. In
Blaspheming such Words, they blaspheme Christ himself and God Most High. Christ
said to such as searched the Scriptures, in but their own Understandings (and
thought they had eternal Life, in such Obedience as was performable by them, in
the restored Life of their own Law-spirit of Works) ye will not come to me, the
living Word of God, for my Gospel-life of Grace and Truth, in which only, any
can be saved, or enter into my Kingdom, John 5.39,40. From the same infallible
Mouth of God, we have a yet seemingly harder Saying than this; No Man can come
to me, except the Father which has sent me, by the attractive Power of his
electing Love, draw, bring and give him to me, John 6. 44. And, I will give
eternal Life to as many as the Father has given me, (John 17. 2.) to all,
whose Names are written in me, the living Word and Book of Life, (Revel. 13.
8.) predestined to be conformed to me, in that heavenly, eternal
Creature-life, into which I was exalted, as the Lamb slain, from the Foundation
of the World, out of the Death of the First-creation, into the Life, appointed
to be given Angels and Men, by a Second, Rev. 13. 8. Romans 8. 29. The attaining
eternal Life, is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, in the Life,
Will and Understanding of his own Spirit, at best; but of the Will of God, who
will show to whom he please, such Mercy, as is the Free-Grace-Gift of quite
another Life, Will and Understanding, than was given Angel or Man, in their
First-creation, Romans 9. 16. The Election, or Elect from among Mankind, will
obtain what they seek for, even eternal Life; the rest will be blinded by
Satan, and find eternal Death, Romans 11.7. These, with many the like Sayings in
the Scripture, seem exceeding hard to Man's Wisdom, in which, if the attaining
eternal Life, or scaping eternal Death, be not in the Power of his own Will;
and if the things of God, in his eternal Gospel-life, be quite out of the reach
of his own Understanding, so as that it is impossible to be saved, in his own
Will and Way, he is ready with his strong Reasonings to charge God himself with
Unrighteousness, as requiring Impossibilities, Romans 9. 14-21. Man, with all his
strong Reasons, when he produces his Cause, and stands up in his own Defense
against God, will be found less or worse than nothing, Isa. 41. 21, 24. All
seeming hard Sayings, in the Scriptures of Truth, about Men's eternal Concerns,
(the finding eternal Life, depending singly and merely, on the electing Love of
God) exclude none from the Hope of a Share or Portion therein, till guilty of
the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost or Gospel Spirit, and so, of
unchangeable Enmity to God. Even Gospel-Saints know not who are elected of God,
till it appear to them, by the self-evidencing Fruits of Christ's
Gospel Spirit, in them. On this account, Paul knew his Gospel-converts, amongst
the Thessalonians, to be the Elect of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4,5. Those that are
elected of God, and shall be true Saints, are born, with all others of Mankind,
dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Col. 2. 13. Could the self-confident
righteous Scribes and Pharisees, think Mary Magdalen and Zacheus, the Elect of
God, while in the same corrupt Spirit of Nature, with other Publicans and
common Sinners, in Filth of Flesh? Could awakened Gospel-Saints think Paul
elected of God, when they saw him a fierce Persecutor, and Blasphemer of all
Gospel Truths? None are absolutely excluded from a Hopefulness of a Share in
God's electing Love, and so of finding eternal Life, till fixed by their own
sinful, unpardonable Choice (and God's righteous Judgment upon them, in giving
them up thereto) in Filth of Flesh or Spirit, corrupt or righteous Nature,
rendering them a literal or mystical Sodom, in unchangeable Enmity to God and
his Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth. No Scriptures, rightly interpreted and
understood, give ground to any, for despairing or giving up all Hopes of God's
electing Love, save to the two abovesaid Sorts of Sinners. A distrusting our
own Understandings, and Wills, at best, as to the finding eternal Life, or ever
answering the whole Mind, Will, and Counsel of God; such a kind of Despair, is
a Duty, of high Concern; and, a false Confidence therein, is exceeding
dangerous, as answering Satan's whole Counsel, to our eternal Destruction. God
forewarns us hereof, Ier. 10. 23. Prove. 3. 5-7. None will finally take this
warning, but the Elect, and not they, till the dormant Seed of Gospel-life,
unknown to themselves, be actually quickened and wakened up in them. The Words
of God's Wisdom and Counsel about our eternal Concerns, are universally
contrary to the Words of Man's Wisdom. Christ told the self-confident
Law-righteous Scribes and Pharisees (who reckoned themselves and Followers,
such as were born of God, ( John 8. 41.) and could not miss the Salvation of
Heaven) they were Serpents, a Generation of Vipers, that could not escape the
Damnation of Hell, Mat. 23. 33. He calls them Hypocrites, not as pretending,
only, to, and not really experiencing the Righteousness of Man; but, as
accounting themselves, therein, the only true Saints, in the Kingdom-life and
Righteousness of God, when in unchangeable Enmity thereto. All such
Interpreters of Scripture, exploding, denying and blaspheming Christ's
Gospel-life and Truths, in which any can ever enter into his Kingdom, are said
to shut up the Kingdom of Heaven, dissuading any that are looking after that
Life, in which, alone, possible to enter into it, as a most dangerous delusive
Fiction, ver. 13. Except our Life and Righteousness be quite of another kind,
than the Law-life and Righteousness of Man, to wit, the Gospel-life and
Righteousness of God, by a New or Second-creation, we can in no wise, enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5. 20. The highest Rank of Antichristian
Enemies to true Saints, and their Doctrine of Grace, in the Words of God's
Wisdom, are such righteous Men, who set up for Salvation, in the same
Law-principle of restored Nature, as Christ found the teaching and professing
Jews, in. Under all blasphemous Contradictions, and Persecuting-work of such as
set up in the restored earthly Law-life and Righteousness of Man, in preference
and opposition to the Heavenly Gospel-life and Righteousness of God, Saints
have God on their Side; who can be against them, (Romans 8.31.) so as to do them
the least Harm? 1 Pet. 3. 13, 14. Whatever Devils or Men, as God's permissive
Hand, can, in their implacable Malice, do to them, is infallibly overrul'd by
God's infinite Wisdom and Power, for their greatest Good. They are secured from
any hurt, by the great red Dragon, or any of his innumerable serpentine Seed of
Mankind, Rev. 12.3-5. What was the Issue of the first War, in Heaven, between
Michael and his Angels, in the heavenly Life and Glory of the New or
Second-creation, and the Dragon and his Angels, in the earthly Life of the
first, we find, v. 7, 8. They were utterly excluded out of Heaven, from ever
entering thereinto, as transformed by themselves into the Guise or Appearance of
true Gospel-Angels of Light. And, by such deceitful Work, does that Old
Serpent, the Devil and Satan, deceive the whole World, ( v. 9.) all, in but the
worldly Principle of Life, and Righteousness of Man. By such deceitful
transforming Work of Satan and his Angels of Darkness, into Angels of Light,
and his Ministers of but the Righteousness of Man, into the Likeness of
Christ's true Gospel Ministers of the Righteousness of God, does he decry all
Gospel Truths, as the greatest Heresies and Blasphemies in the World. Christ
himself suffered himself, to be so dealt with, by them. When Saints declare the
Gospel-life, and assert, that therein, only, any can ever enter into Heaven, or
escape the Damnation of Hell; they do not deny that any in the corrupt or
righteous Life of their own Nature or Spirit, can ever come to experience
Christ's Gospel-life, or enter into his Kingdom; but endeavor to be
instrumental, under Christ, for leading them thereinto, 2 Timothy 2. 24-26.

Quest. Does the Gospel-Doctrine of true Salvation discourage or condemn the
Righteousness of Man, in the honest moral Heathen, walking in a Sutableness to
the rational Light of Nature, restored by Christ, in all Mankind, as a Light
which lights every Man that comes into the World? John 1. 9. Does it
discourage the righteous First-covenant Jew, or Christian, walking in his
higher kind of good Conscience, in the restored First-covenant Law-life, as his
Principle, owning the imputed Righteousness of Christ, there, for the
completing him, in a First-covenant-Communion with, and worshipping of God?
Consequently, does it judge and condemn the moral Heathen, or legally righteous
First-covenant Jew or Christian, for teaching and exhorting others, to walk in
such Obedience to God, as is performable in the said Light of Nature, or Life
of the Law?

Answ. Nothing of all this, is justly imputable to the right Teaching of the
Gospel. Moral and legal Righteousness of Man is good for himself and his
Fellow Creatures in this World, ( Job 35. 8.) and better in God's Sight, than
gross Wickedness, Injustice, vile Affections and brutish Lusts: but, as to
entering into the Kingdom of God, in the World to come, not at all, available,
Gal. 6. 15. God himself testified of Job to the Devil, that there was none like
him in the Earth, a perfect, upright Man, fearing God and eschewing Evil, Job
1. 8. The Devil (knowing Job, in all this, to be rewarded of God, as a Debtor
to him, ( Romans 4. 4.) for such Righteousness, in a Plenty of this World's
temporary good Things) replied, v. 9, 10. Have thou not blessed the Work of his
Hands, and increased his Substance in the Land? Take all this away again, and
see, if he curse thee not to thy Face, v. 11. God puts it into Satan's Power,
to be instrumental, herein, for the Trial of Job's Patience, and carrying on
the Work of his Cross upon him, in a Conducibleness to his greatest Good. His
ten Children are killed by a great Wind, blowing down the House, where they
were Feasting; all his Goods were taken away by wicked Men, under the Influence
of the Devil. Thus far, Job did bear his Trial, without sinning, or charging
God, foolishly; blessing the Lord, that gave him, and then took all the said
Gifts away, again, from him. Then Satan desires the Liberty of smiting his
Body, and God grants him a limited Power, as to that. Then Satan moves his
Wife, to counsel him, to do what himself, had said to God, ( Job 1. 11.) Curse
God and die, Chap. 2. 9. Job rebukes her, saying, shall we receive Good from
God, and not Evil? In all this did not Job sin with his Lips, Job 2. 5-10. But,
when he felt the Cross or Death-work of the Spirit of God, on his very Spirit,
as to the Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of Man, and Satan's permitted working
upon him, in this Hour and Power of Darkness, he was sorely put to his utmost
Trial, and uttered many hard Words against God's strange and wonderful Dealings
with him, reflecting upon his faithful Walking, ( Job 29. 2.) so as not, in the
least, to deserve any such dealing of God with him, Job 3. and 19. 1-11. and
31. 35. He desires that the Almighty would answer him. Here Is the Case and
Demeanor of the Mirror of Patience, next the Lord himself, under all
Sufferings, in our Nature. Elihu charges him with multiplying his Words against
God, Job 34. 37. The Lord himself charges him with darkning Counsel, by Words
without Knowledge, Chap. 38. 1, 2. He saw not, as yet, or understood the
unspeakable Advantage of all this strange Dealing of God, with him. So,
contended with the Almighty, and therein, reproved God himself, Chap. 40. 1, 2.
He reflected upon his former Condition and flourish in all worldly Prosperity,
and such an Eminency in Wisdom and Righteousness, that when he opened his Mouth
in Counsel, Princes refrained talking, and Nobles held their Peace; now,
Children of Fools abhorred him, made him their Song and Byword, not sparing to
spit in his Face, Job 29. 9, 10. and 30. 8-10. He comes, at length, to abhor
himself, in such a Change of Life and Mind, for the better, as to rejoice in
seeing all the fading Glory, Wisdom and Righteousness of his own Spirit, turned
into Dust and Ashes, as the Way of God, for experiencing his heavenly
Creature-life, above all Deaths, and his eternal good Things, therein, the
Righteousness and Wisdom of God, and his living and working all his Works, in
God's Spirit of Grace and Truth. But, in the hundred and forty Years of his
Life, after all this, we hear not a Word of such high Esteem with Men, as when
eminent in the Wisdom, and Righteousness of Man.

Were the restored Life and Righteousness of Man, all that God requires of him,
for entering into his Kingdom, Godliness would be no Mystery. The Light of
Nature, in all Men, convinces, judges and condemns all gross Sins, vile
Affections and brutish Lusts in all others, and themselves also, who are guilty
thereof. And, then, also, Satan would have no Mystery of Iniquity, to make use
of, in his destructive Practisings upon Mankind. But, for this, he has, not
only all the Wisdom, Righteousness and Glory of the First-creation, in himself
and Men, to deceive them, by; but a permitted Power, also, to transform all
that, in himself and Men, into the Appearance and Likeness of Christ's
Gospel-life, and Righteousness of God, and by his Ministers amongst Men, to
dress it up with all Scripture Language and Titles of the very Gospel Truths of
God; Regeneration, New Creature, and the like. So does Satan, as the supreme
mystical Whore of Babylon, with his whole Babylonish Party of evil Angels and
Men, (furnished with all Glory of the First-creation, and counterfeit
Appearances also of the Second) carry on his Work, in the womanish Spirit of
Nature, against God's manly Spirit of Grace, as decked and adorned with all
worldly Glory, Pomp and Beauty, and having a gilded (not golden) Cup, full of
Abominations, by which, to deceive, if possible, the very Elect, and,
infallibly, all others, into everlasting Destruction. Even John, the peculiarly
beloved Disciple, an eminent Apostolical Saint, marvel'd to see the Pomp and
Glory of Satan and his whole Party, herein, and in all that, called, Mystery,
Babylon the Great, Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth; all,
amounting to a rebellious fixing in the earthly Life of the Creature, in
unchangeable Enmity to God, and the heavenly Creature-life of the Creator,
offered by a New Creation. The Righteousness and Wisdom of Man are the best
sort of things, in Nature's First-creation; spiritual enlightening Gifts are the
best Gifts, toward a New Creation, receivable by the natural Understanding;
and yet, Man, in all these Advantages, short of the very Gospel-life of God, or
a living spiritual Faith therein, is nothing, has nothing that will give him
Entrance into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 12. 31. and 13. 1, 2. The best things
in Nature, are corruptible, and if corrupted, become the worst of all things.
The highest Light, Wisdom and Righteousness, therein, established, in preference
to the marvelous Light, Wisdom and Righteousness of God, offered by a
New Creation, is the greatest Darkness, Wickedness and Folly, of all, Mat.
6.23. Mystical Babylon and Sodom is worse than literal, Mat. 11.23,24.

The prevailing Power and Danger of Self-love, did most signally appear in the
first Sin of evil Angels. Under the clearest Knowledge of the Will and Command
of God, that was possible to be given to their supreme natural intuitive
Understandings, for the right use of their natural Beings and Life, given them
in their First-creation, in order to the Second, they turned away from God's
Offer of the latter, in Love to themselves, in the former. This did they, in a
known Rebellion against God, and a known Contrariety to their own unspeakable
Concern, for finding eternal Life or scaping eternal Death. They preferred the
Life of the Creature in themselves, to the Life of the Creator, in himself, in
an unchaste, adulterous, murdering Mind of unchangeable Enmity to their Creator,
as offered to become their Lord, Bridegroom and Husband, in the Life of that
all-powerful Spirit, that gave them their own Beings and Life, by a
First-creation. They added to this first unpardonable Sin, the drawing all
Mankind, in Adam, to make the same evil Choice, for themselves. And, all along
this World, when any are restored into the Life of the First-creation, and
brought under high spiritual enlightening Gifts, convincing Discoveries and
Offers of the heavenly Creature-life of God by a Second, evil Angels do
attempt, and prevail with many, under such Advantages, to fetch them back
again, from Christ's offered eternal Gospel-life of the Creator, in his holy
Spirit, and set up for themselves in their own holy Flesh, or earthly Life and
Righteousness of Man. Gal. 3. 1, 3. and 5. 7, 8. Balaam and Saul, with many
others, are signal Instances of such Apostasy from Christ, under the prevailing
Influence of evil Angels. The Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, so that he was
among the Prophets of God, under the enlightening Gifts thereof, by which God
turned him into another Man, gave him another Heart, to see, know, and seek
after him. But, he turned from God, and the Spirit of God departed from him;
and when his Life was in danger, he asked Counsel of the Devil, in a known
Witch, what would become of him, 1 Samuel 10. 6, 9, 11. and 16. 14. and 28. 7.

Balaam, taken by the Lord, for a time, out of the Hands of the Devil, was
forced, contrary to his own and the Devil's, and Balak's Mind, to bless,
instead of cursing Israel. He declares, that he heard the Words of God, and
knew the Most High, saw the Visions of the Almighty, Numb. 24. 16. He prayed,
that he might die the Death of the Righteous, and that his last End might be
like his, Numb. 23. 10. He tells Balak, if he would give him his House full of
Silver and Gold, he will speak what the Lord says, Chap. 24. 13. After all
this, the Holy Ghost in Peter, charges him, with loving the Wages of
Unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 15. When he found himself disabled to curse Israel,
he counseled the Midianitish Women, to go amongst them, to allure them to
Whoredom, and so, to cause the Lord to appear against them, Numb. 31. 16. And,
listing himself in the Midianites Army, was slain, with the five Kings of
Midian, by the Israelites Sword, v. 8.

None, in the restored Life of Man, and under the enlightening Discoveries and
Offers of the Gospel-life of God, are out of Satan's reach, till born of God.
Then have they a Life in them, which the evil one cannot touch, 1 John 5. 18.
All restored Life and Righteousness of Man, renders Men but natural Branches in
Christ, Servants in the House of God, liable to be turned out again, and cast
into unquenchable Fire, John 15. 1-6. and 8. 35. In all restored Law-life, and
Freedom of their own Wills, Men are under the Law, and under the Curse, (Gal.
3. 10.) in danger of the final condemning Power thereof, while destitute of
that Gospel-life, that is the only continuing Principle of infallible
everlasting well-pleasing Obedience to God. This brings with it, into Man, the
glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, wherewith Christ makes Men free indeed; in
a free Will to Good only, under an Impossibility of ever doing Evil, therein.
The Will of Man, in New-creation-life, is in unchageable Harmony with the very
Divine Will. In this, he never sins. But, in his own Will, till fully
crucified, the Saint continually sins, opposing and fighting against his
spiritual Will, that never sins, 1 John 3. 9. and 1. 8. Romans 7. 15, 19. Gal. 5.
17. In the First-creation, at best, Man was but a mystical Tree of good and
evil, but changeably good, and liable, by his own choice, to become
unchangeably, unpardonably, and unrepentably evil. In the second, he becomes a
particular Tree of Life, under and with Christ, amongst the innumerable
Multitude of blessed Angels and Saints, unchangeably Good, and under an
Impossibility of ever becoming unchangeably evil. The uncontrolled Sovereignty
of our own Will, at best, and the highest Light of our own Understanding, fixed
in, is the greatest Darkness and Bondage. The unchangeable Subjection and
Captivity of our Will to the Will of God, is the glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God, 2 Cor. 10. 5.

Man, in all the Light, Life, Wisdom and Righteousness of the First-creation,
(restored by Christ, as the Common-Salvation-Benefit of his Death in the
Fountain-purity thereof) is still within the Compass of Satan's universal
Monarchy or Kingdom of this World, in Opposition to the mavelous Light and
glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, in Christ's reigning Gospel Spirit of the
World to come. The Old Serpent was too hard for humane Nature, and so, for all
Mankind, in Adam, at best, in the primitive Purity, and personal Perfection of
all First-creation-life and Things. We must quit all kindred with the first
Adam; yea, with Christ himself, as a Husband and Head to us, in but the
restored fleshly Life and Righteousness of Man, to be married to him as our
spiritual Lord, and Bridegroom, in that quickening Spirit of the Second Adam,
his Gospel Spirit of true Holiness, 2 Cor. 5. 16. and 1 Cor. 15. 45-47. Ephesians.
4. 24. Christ crucified the living Soul of our Nature, in himself, by which, he
purchased the restoring of that, in Mankind; and, therein, also, became an
unerrable Pattern to them, for the right Use thereof, in Passive Obedience to
the Will of God, in order to the attaining that heavenly, eternal,
incorruptible Creature-life, he ascended into, which is the only Principle of
everlasting well-pleasing active Obedience to God, and Blessedness to Man.

Man, in his First-creation, at best, before his Fall, had but a fallible
Understanding and a corruptible Will. And, what was fallible, Satan could and
did deceive: what was corruptible, he could and did corrupt: all Mankind are
sad experimental Witnesses of both. And, the same things can he do to any, in
but the restored Life and Righteousness of Man, of the First-creation sort,
ever since.

If we consider the small part of Mankind this Day, under the Name, Christian,
and even amongst them, so called, somewhat rare to find such as walk in
Obedience to the common Light of Nature, as honest moral Heathens, and much
less yet, as First-covenant Believers in Christ, and much less yet, as having a
living spiritual Faith in his Second-covenant Gospel-life; all this put
together, and considered, evidence the near approach of Christ's second Coming,
of which himself has said, that when he comes, shall he find Faith on the
Earth, (Luke 18. 8.) a Faith in that Gospel-life, he will come in? Both Wise
Virgins, in New Covenant Gospel-principles; and foolish ones, in but
First-covenant Law-principles, cleans'd from filth of Flesh, only, will be
found all slumbring and sleeping, Matthew. 25. 1-12. Yet, will he own the Wise,
but to the Foolish, he will say, I know you not; so, Matthew. 7. 21-23. In the
dark Midnight-Season to both, will he come, to the amazing Surprise of the
Foolish, and unspeakable Joy of the Wise. All are required to watch (the time
of his Coming, being unknown to both and all) Mat. 25. 1-13. 'Twill be a like
amazing surprise to the far greater Number of Mankind, as the Flood to the Old
World; or Fire from Heaven, on Sodom, Luke 17. 26-30. The Day or time of his
Coming, is kept secret, from the Knowledge of spiritual Saints, and the very
Angels of Heaven, Matthew. 24. 36. (yea, and from the Son himself, Mark 13. 32.)
Saints are required, therefore, to watch continually, not knowing the time of
his Coming, v. 42. A thousand Years with the Lord is as one Day; and one Day as
a thousand Years, 2 Pet. 3.8. 'Twas said, sixteen hundred Years ago, This is
the last time, (1 John 2.18.) and, yet a little while, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry beyond the appointed time, for his second Coming,
Heb. 10. 37. Hab. 2. 3. A Day, an Hour, a little time, in God's Account, may be
a long time, in Man's. When the Disciples asked Christ (after his Resurrection,
and ready to ascend into the Glory, he will come again, in) Will thou at this
time, restore again the Kingdom to Israel? his Answer was, It is not for you
(or any) to know the Times or Seasons, which the Father has put in his own
Power, Act. 1. 6, 7. Satan can be willing, Man should be presumptuously
foretelling, with great Confidence, what is utterly unpossible for him, to
know; that, while busy about an Impossibility, he may be so ignorant and
regardless of the Gospel Spirit and Glory, he will come in, as may render his
second Coming, most amazingly frightful to him, amongst and with Millions of
others, who will be found in unchangeable Enmity to that Spirit, he will come,
in. Yet, after all this, and God's withholding the Knowledge of the time
thereof, it is Man's Duty to observe the fore-running Signs of Christ's
Approach, Mat. 16.3. And, such Signs are now remarkable, beyond all former
Days; the Harvest seems very near ripe for the Sickle of God's Vengeance, the
Press full, the Fats overflowing, the Wickedness of Mankind, exceeding great,
Joel 3. 13. This is a great Sign, that the Day of the Lord is near, v. 14. But,
preparatory to the Lord's personal Appearance, will he send his Gospel- Angels,
to gather his Elect together out of all Mankind, that Day, on Earth, ( Mat. 24.
31.) and they will call up his Gospel-Witnesses, from amongst Men, into an
Association with them, in the said Work, Rev. 11. 12. That Gospel Dispensation
will be accompanied with a more abundant wonder-working and Gospel-converting
Power, than was experienced in the primitive Apostolical Gospel-day. This
preparatory Dispensation, by Gospel-Angels and Saints, may seem to be, as to
the Duration thereof, forty five Years, Dan. 12. 11, 12. This Dispensation,
will be but the Sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, ( Mat. 24. 30.) not his very
personal Appearing. In this Preparatory Dispensation, will evil Angels, as
false Christ's, with their false Apostles, amongst Men, in their transformed
Appearances of Christ and his true ones, be permitted to make their utmost
Opposition to true Gospel-Angels and Saints. Satan, with his evil Angels, will
not be excluded from such delusive Practices, by his false Apostles, till
Christ comes forth in his own Person. Then, they will be imprisoned in the
bottomless Pit, and disabled to deceive Mankind any more, till Christ's
thousand Years Reign be fulfilled, Revel. 20. 1, 3. After Christ's thousand
Years Reign, Satan will be loosed out of his Prison, and permitted with his Gog
and Magog, his innumerable Multitude of evil Angels and Men (transformed into
the Guise of good Angels and Saints) to compass the Camp of Saints, God's New-
Ierusalem-City, in the very Glory of the Resurrection, as their last and most
transcendent Presumption, on which, immediately to be destroyed, for ever,
Revel. 20. 7-10. Saints will be immediately taken up into their eternal Heaven;
and all Enemies will be thrust down into their eternal Hell. Then, to all
eternity, in Heaven, will Saints and Angels acknowledge and ascribe their
eternal Blessedness, above all Conception and Wonder, to God's infinite
Free-Grace-Mercy and electing Love, as the single and only supreme
distinguishing Cause thereof, from those that perish, forever, under his
everlasting Curse and unquenchable Wrath.

The often saying the same Things, and quoting the same Scriptures, on several
Occasions, is no other than is found in the very Scriptures, where the same
things are often said by the various Penmen thereof; and, by the same, also.

FINIS.
Books, published by the Author.
FIRST Part of Evangelical Essays -- 1666 Book of Nature -- 1667 On the Whole
Book of Job, the two Epistles to Timothy, and sixteenth Chapter of Numbers --
1677 Reign of Christ -- 1679 On the Whole Book of Ecclesiastes -- 1680
Gospel-Catechism -- 1688
The two last, and this are sold by William Marshal at the Bible in
Newgate-street, and John Marshal at the Bible in Grace Church Street.

This is also sold by Andr. Bell at the Cross-Keys in the Poultrey.


