Dr WILLIAMS's FOURTH SERMON AT Mr. BOYLE'S Lecture, 1695.

IMPRIMATUR,

April 1. 1695. Guil. Lancaster.

The Truth of the Holy Scriptures.

A SERMON Preached at St. Martin's in the Fields, April 1. 1695. BEING THE
Fourth of the LECTURE For this present YEAR, Founded by the Honorable ROBERT
BOIL, Esquire.

By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill, Senr and Junr: At the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey. M DCXC V.

HEB. I. 1, 2. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time
past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us
by his Son, etc.
IN these words, there is contained (as I have before showed)

1. A description of Revelation, it is God's speaking.

2. The Certainty of it, it is by way of declaration, God who at sundry times,
etc.

3. The Order observed in delivering this Revelation, it was at sundry times,
etc.

4. The perfection and conclusion of all, it is in these last days by his Son.

Under the Second I have showed,

1. That God has actually revealed his Will at sundry times, and in diverse
manners.

2. What are the Characters of true Revelation.

3. I am now in order to prove that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
do contain the Matter of Divine Revelation, and have upon them the Characters
belonging to it.

For the better disposing of what I have to say under this Head of Discourse, I
shall observe,

1. It Is one thing to assert and prove the matter of Scripture to be true, and
another to prove it to be of Divine Revelation.

2. It Is one thing to prove the matter of Scripture to be of Divine Revelation,
and another to prove these Books to be of Divine Inspiration.

3. It Is one thing to assert that there were once such Books so inspired; and
another thing to prove this Set of Books, which now make up and compose the
Canon of the Old and New Testament, to be those very Books.

From hence arise Four Questions, viz.

Quest. 1. How we can prove the Matter of Scripture to be true?

Q. 2. How we can prove the Matter of Scripture to be of Divine Revelation?
Books of mere Human Composition may contain nothing but Truth, without any
Supernatural Assistance; and therefore though we were never so well able to
maintain and prove the Truth of the Matter, that is not sufficient, unless we
can advance higher, and prove the Authority and Divinity of the Matter?

Q. 3. How we can prove those Books to be of Divine Inspiration? The Epistle of
Clemens Romanus was sometime read in the Church (as the Apocrypha anciently
was, and is now with us) because of the Excellency and Profitableness of the
Matter; but yet it was not esteemed to be Canonical, and of immediate
Inspiration from God?

Q* 4. How we prove these Books, that are now extant and received by the
Christian Church as Canonical, to be those Books which were once in time past
wrote by Inspiration from God?

It will be of some use to us in the prosecution of this Argument, to consider
the First Question, concerning the Truth of the Matter of Scripture, by it
self, and apart from the Divine Authority of it.

Now the Matter of Scripture is of various nature, such as Morality, Doctrinal
Revelation, Institution, Prophecy and History: Of which the greatest part will
be here set aside: For it is not necessary to prove the Truth of the Moral part
of it, which is no other than the Dictate of Nature; and therefore, though
explained, confirmed, and illustrated in Scripture by many useful Rules,
Principles and Observations, needs no proof.

That of Doctrine and Institution, falls in with the Divine Authority, and so
belongs to the Second Question.

Prophecy, if yet to be accomplished, is not capable of other proof than
Revelation; and if already fulfilled, by the Event following and correspondent
to the Prediction, it is the proof of it self.

So that the Part now remaining to be proved more especially, is
Scripture*History; which is a Relation of matter of Fact, of what has happened,
been declared, or done, in the several Periods and Ages of the World for Four
thousand Years together, and upwards.

Under which Notion, I do not question but it may be made appear, That there is
more to be said for the truth of Scripture-History, than for any thing of that
kind in the whole World.

I don't question again, but it may be made appear, that no Authors had greater
advantages for Information in the Subjects they treat of; nor were there ever
any Writings that bore upon them more ample marks of Ability, Impartiality, and
Care. So that if after all that is to be suspected, nothing of that kind is
certain, and we call in question all matters of the like nature whatsoever.

But this is further to be inquired into.

Now of this kind, there are some things to be found only in Scripture, and no
where else. In which case we have no other way to judge of the truth of it,
than by the Credibility of the matter, the Self-agreement, its Concordance with
time, place, and other circumstances of Action, together with the Credit and
Reputation of the Penmen of it.

But there are other things which fall in with other Writings; and then besides
the former way of trial, we are to have recourse to such Books, to compare
them, and determine concerning the truth by such a comparison.

So that we have three sorts of Proof before us, or so many Characters by which
we may judge concerning the Truth of what the Scripture relates: viz.

1. The Credibility of the Matter therein revealed.

2. Self consistence and Self agreement.

3. Its concordance with other Books of good and sufficient Authority; where
such there are.

And if this be made out, we have as much Evidence for the Truth of Scripture
as is possible to have, in our circumstances; and where the Matters related
were transacted in place and time far remote from us. For all the Evidence we
can have, is to be resolved into Testimony, and that Testimony into the
Credibility of the Relators, or of the Matters related: And if we have as much
Evidence of this kind as the nature of the thing will bear and admit, we have
as much as is reasonable in it self, and sufficient to ground a certainty upon.
For according as the nature of the thing is, and the ground upon which its
Proof and Evidence depends, such is the Certainty: And as in things
Mathematical, Demonstration is the Proof; and in things Natural and Sensible,
Sense is the Proof; and in things Rational and Moral, Reason and Argument are
the Proof; so in Matters of Fact (where we our selves are not present)
Testimony and Records are the Proof; though for a further confirmation of it,
there is the collateral proof of Moral Evidence, viz. the credibility of the
Matter, and the Persons, into whose Testimony and Veracity the Matters are
finally resolved. And beyond this we cannot go, in the Evidence for the truth
of the Matters of Fact; and consequently, if we have this Evidence, we have as
great a certainty in things of this nature, as Demonstration is in things
Mathematical, and Sense in things sensible; I say, beyond this we cannot go,
unless we advance to supernatural Evidence; but that belongs not to this place.

So that here we have no reason to doubt; and where there is no reason to
doubt, there is certainty. And if we can be certain of any thing we our selves
have not seen, or been present at, we may be certain of what is recorded in the
Scripture: Since there is no Evidence for any thing of that kind, which we have
not for the Truth of Scripture; and I may say we have that Evidence for it,
which no Matters of Fact besides have. If then there be any certainty in such
things, if any credit be to be given to them; then there is here a sufficient
Evidence to ground that Certainty and our Belief of it upon: And if there be no
certainty in them, and no ground to believe them; then there is no certainty in
the world, and no credit to be given to whatever is, or has been allowed by
others in the world: Then there is no more credit to be given to the
Commentaries of Caesar (which he wrote himself) nor to the Histories of the
Four Empires, nay to those of our own Nation; than there is to Achilles Tatius
or Heliodorus, than to the Vainest Romances, the Fables of Poets, or the
Legends of the most Superstitious and Credulous Ages of the world.

And with all our Histories, though never so famed, and commonly received; we
are in no better a condition, than if Varro's fabulous and obscure Age had been
continued, and all the Ages were now this day what it was before the Olympiads,
wrapped up in Invention and Conjecture.

But if there be any credit to be given to such Memorials, and that we read
approved Histories with another sort of appetite and assurance, than we do
Fables; and that we read Lucan (a Poetical Historian) with another sort of
relish than Ovid's Metamorphoses; then the like Credit is to be given to the
Scriptures as to any; and so much the more, as the Evidence proper to its kind
is beyond the Evidence we have for any other Writings whatsoever.

And this I shall undertake and prosecute, by proving,

1. That the Scripture has sufficient Evidence of that kind to ground a
certainty upon.

2. That it has all the Evidence that any Writings or Matters of this kind
have, and more.

In order to which it may well serve as an Introduction to what is to follow,
briefly to reflect upon the Writers themselves and their Qualifications; upon
whose Credit and Authority there must be confessedly sometimes an absolute
reliance. Since the Relators of matters of Fact profess not to Write out of
their own Heads, but to receive what they Write from a constant and
uninterrupted Tradition, or to Collect from the best Records and Memorials, or
to set down what is of their own Knowledge and Observation: And therefore the
Reputation of their Reports and Narratives does very much depend upon their
Skill and Judgment, that they be not abused by false Informations, and upon
their Honesty and Integrity in not putting abuses upon the World.

As for the ways of Information, there is nothing of that kind wanting in the
Sacred Penmen. For the First Writer, Moses, lived so near upon the Traditionary
Age, and the things he Writes of are of such a nature, as may well be supposed
to be delivered down without any difficulty from Progenitors to Posterity, had
there been no other means of Conveyance; and especially (as has been before
suggested, Sermon II.) if we consider the few hands they were to pass through,
when at the most Eight Persons only in succession continued the Line of above
Two thousand five hundred years, from the Deluge to the time of Moses; and that
the Matters were snch as all those held themselves concerned to deliver them
down as they had received them. Forasmuch as all the Prophecies they had
received, which concerned the Good of Mankind, and of their Posterity, depended
upon the careful and faithful preservation of these Memorials; both as to Time
and Pedigrees, as well as the Matters which the Series of Times and Descents
were to be the great Supporters of.

From hence it was afterward that these Chronological Tables, and Genealogical
Rolls were in all times exactly kept, and which upon occasion they might have
recourse to; and that there were Annals in future Ages that were looked upon as
Sacred Repositories: And from whence the Holy Writers drew their Materials, and
to which they do Refer, as may be observed in the Books of Kings and Chronicles.

But if we add hereunto, That a great part of what is the Subject of Holy Writ,
was what the Writers themselves had the Personal Knowledge of, bore a part in,
and what happened in their own Times; it gives the greater Authority to what
they have Written. And this was the case of Moses as to the Four last of his
Books; of Joshua, of Samuel, of the Prophets, and of the Evangelical Writers.
So that if we will grant any thing to be allowed to Tradition, to Records of
Ages, to Reports of Eye and Ear-Witnesses, there is the highest Credit to be
given to the Divine Authors, in what they have Collected and made Report of.
And what has been done with so much Faithfulness, Impartiality, and Judgment
(as their Composers testify) that even that what tends to the disparagement of
their Nation and Ancestors, their Families and Persons, is not concealed, when
it might tend to the Glory of God, the Reasons of the Divine Proceedings
toward them, or the giving any Life to the Matters they Relate. A practice
rarely to be observed in other Authors; and when it is, does give Credit to
what they Report.

But the chief thing is the Credibility of the Matter (which I shall now
proceed to)

1. The Credibility of the Matter, which is a standing Character that we are to
judge of the Truth of a Relation by.

But then we must judge aright concerning the Credibility of it. For that at
first sight may seem to be Incredible, which upon farther consideration and
examination may prove to be Credible: As St. Paul says to Agrippa, Acts ^6. 8.
Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you that God should raise the
dead? It might seem a thing Incredible at the first proposal, as it did to the
Athenians Acts 17. 32. but the Apostle states the Case right, 1 Cor. 15. 35. in
Answer to that Question, Some man will say, How are the dead raised up, and
with what body do they come? thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened
except it die. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall
be, but God gives it a body, etc. Where he first of all confirms it by a like
Instance in Nature, and then resolves it into the Power of God.

It Is for want of these Two Considerations, that is, of the Understanding of
Nature, the Order, Power, and Operation of second Causes; and of the Power of
God, the Supreme Cause, that we often mistake about the Credibility of things;
and judge that to be Impossible and Incredible, which in it self, and often in
the Event proves to be Possible and Credible.

And thus it frequently fares in matters of Fact, of the Credibility or
Incredibility of which, we are as liable to mistake, as about the Possibility
or impossibility of Effects in Nature; when we judge of other Nations and Ages
by our own, and of what we do not know, by what we do; and sometimes are so
vain as to reason against others Experience and Observation. Thus it was with
the Ancients, that thought the Torrid-Zone Uninhabitable; and with others, that
accounted the Opinion of Antipodes Fabulous and Impossible. Hence it is that
the Errors of former Writers are so often Corrected by Modern Observations. But
this we may confidently affirm of the Holy Scripture, that after it has stood
the Test of above Three thousand Years in whole or in part (for so long is it
since the time of Moses) and that nothing has been left unattempted by its
Adversaries to overthrow its Authority, it has yet maintained it, so as to be
the most Exact, Faithful, and Impartial Relation the World ever had.

For the better Judging of whose Veracity, and Confirming its Credibility, we
may observe;

1. That a great part of it carries with it its own Evidence, and has the
common Consent of Mankind to attest it. Such I account the History of the
Creation of the World, the Formation of Man, and the Degeneracy of Human
Nature, to be. The first of these was universally acknowledged; nor was the
Creation of the World ever Questioned or Disputed, till above a Thousand Years
after the time of Moses (as Aristotle, who was of that Opinion, acknowledges,
de Coelo, lib. 1. cap. 10*). And the last was the Observation of all Ages.

2. There is a Relation of such things in Scripture, as have in them the face
and appearance of Truth; and of which no certain or tolerable account can be
given by any other Monuments of History that are, or ever were extant in the
World. Such are the Age of the World; the Dispersion of Nations; the Variety of
Languages; the Distribution of Time, etc.

Now if the Account given of these things in Scripture be True, we are capable
of Solving the greatest Difficulties as to these Matters. And that they are
True, there is good Reason to conclude. As for Instance, let us consider the
Instances before given, viz.

(1.) The Origin of the World as it is in Genesis. I acknowledge there may be
nothing in the Composition of it, or in the Course of Nature, to determine this
Point more in favor of Moses, than of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, or Chinese.
But to lay aside all other Arguments from the Novelty of Arts and Sciences, and
the reputed Inventors of them; it is certain that in the Account given by Moses
there is an Exact Order, the Narration begins and is carried on with a strict
Coherence; and let us trace it back from the Flood to Adam; or from Abraham
(suppose) to the Flood, there is a very regular Relation of Persons and things.
But besides the Incredibility of the other, of the Thousands of the Egyptians,
the Hundred thousands of the Chaldeans, and the Millions of the Chinese; it
all ends at last in Fable, in Apotheoses, or imaginary Gods and Heroes, and
Self-Contradictions (as has been shown by many Learned Writers on this
Argument).

(2.) As to the Dispersion of Nations, and the Consequents of it, the Pedigree
of Moses is justified in the Names of Places agreeing with those of the
Persons; as has been abundantly proved by Bochart in his Geographia Sacra. And
which would appear to the Eye of every Reader, if a Table was made of the Tenth
Chapter of Genesis, and compared with the Ancient Geography; and should have
been here inserted, were there a place for it.

(3.) As to the Distribution of Time, there is an orderly Progression, both
with respect to the Genealogies of Families, and the several Periods from the
Creation to the Flood, from thence to the Law at Sinai, from thence to the
Rearing of Solomon's Temple, from thence to the Captivity, and from that to our
Savior's Death. Time and Place are good Characters of the Truth of any matter
of Fact, as well as good Marks and Directors; and carry in them a great
appearance of Truth where they are to be found. And then none can be presumed
to be more certain than the Scripture, where the Relation these had to the
Messiah, and each Person had to his Tribe, and each Tribe to its Place and
Situation, made them to be scrupulously exact and Critical.

3. There are other things that are highly Credible, and have nothing difficult
to be admitted; and if admitted, are a wonderful Instance of the Divine
Providence; as in the Punishment of profligate and incorrigible Wickedness, in
the Two Notorious Examples of the Deluge and Sodom; 2 Pet. 2. 5, 6: So in the
Preservation of Pious Persons, such as Noah, Abraham, Lot, Joseph, David, etc.

But above all is this evident in God's erecting, establishing, guiding and
preserving his Church, when in Egypt, in Canaan, though perpetually surrounded
with watchful and malicious Adversaries; and recovering so much of it out of
Captivity as was sufficient in a continued Succession to answer the end of
accomplishing all the Scripture-Prophecies in the Person of the Messiah, that
was to descend from the Lineage of Abraham, the Tribe of Judah, and the Family
of David.

So that as the Ancient Genealogies, together with the Chronology of Scripture,
were carefully recorded, to demonstrate to succeeding Generations that the
World had a beginning, and a late beginning in comparison: So the later
Genealogies from Abraham were very exactly preserved, that so it might appear
to all the World, that what had been foretold above 1800 years before, was in
its order and time punctually fulfilled: Which if the Genealogies had been lost
or confounded, could not have been observed; and so we had been wanting in a
considerable Evidence of the Descent of our Savior, and consequently of his
being the Messiah.

Indeed the whole Scripture History is little else than the History of Divine
Providence; where there is an admirable concatenation of Relations of various
kinds, but all subservient to the same End; and were there an Extract made of
it, and all the Events rehearsed, and Operations therein described, brought
into one entire Body, it would be the best Commentary on that Divine Subject in
the whole World, and infinitely beyond any Human Composure.

4. There are* other things that are difficult, either as to the Relations
themselves, or the manner and circumstances of them; but what should no more
prejudice us against the truth and certainty of the things related, and much
less of the whole, than the Difficulties of Divine Providence should warrant us
to deny it; and for want of not understanding some of its Operations, or
Events, we should take encouragement to deny what we do understand. It Is an
excellent Saying of St. Austin, De Doctrina, l. 4. c. 6. (speaking of the
Divine Writers) Where I do understand them, there is nothing seems to me more
wisely or more eloquently expressed: But where I do not understand them, there
to me appears less of their Eloquence; but yet I do not doubt it to be such, as
it is where I understand it.

We ought rather to suspend our Censure, with the modesty of this Father, and
for the sake of what we do understand, think the more favorably of what we do
not.

And therefore, as when we have uncontrollable Reason to believe a Providence,
the difficulties about it are no sufficient reason to call the Doctrine of
Divine Providence into question: So when we have so great reason to believe the
Scripture's Relation of things to be true, the Difficulties about it ought not
to derogate from its Veracity; nor give us the confidence any more to question
the Truth of Scripture, than the Certainty of Providence. For by this way of
proceeding, not only the Truth of Scripture, but of all other Books whatsoever
will be overthrown; nay the plainest and most obvious appearances in Nature.
And yet of this kind are many of the Objections that are brought into the
Field, and are made to serve in the Cause of Impiety: Such as these, That we
don't know into whose hands those Books have fallen, nor in what Copies such
various Readings have been found; or whether there are not more of that kind in
other hands. Theol. Polit. c. 7.

The issue of all which is, That if this will invalidate the Truth of
Scripture, it will also invalidate that of all Writings whatsoever; and so is
no more to be regarded, than an Argument against Motion, which is rather to be
contemned than answered.

It Is but reasonable then that we should give the same quarter to the
Scripture, that we allow to other Writings. And therefore all Objections
levelled against the Scriptures, which will equally be managed against any
others, ought not to be allowed, unless we will give credit to nothing but what
we our selves hear and see: And then to carry on the Cause, We must recede
again, since there are thousands of Cases happen, where even our own Senses may
be subject to Error and Mistake.

II. Another Character for the proof or discovery of the truth of History, is
Self-consistence and Agreement.

This is a necessary Character, and absolutely requisite to all true History;
for nothing more shows the weakness and injudiciousness of a Writer, than that
he comprehends not his own Design; and it is a sign he does not comprehend it,
that contradicts himself, and makes one part to disagree with another.

I grant that this alone is not an infallible Character of Truth, that it is
self-consistent; for where the Plat is wholly fictitious and imaginary, there
may be an exact agreement throughout the whole: The Model may be so regularly
squared, and laid out, that there may be a becoming Symetry; and Place, and
Time, and all Circumstances made to concur, to set it off with the greater
advantage. But though this may be, where Truth is not; yet that cannot be true,
which is without it, Truth being always consistent with it self. But there is
this above all others observable in Scripture, That it is a System of several
Books, wrote by several Persons, in several Ages, on several Subjects; and yet
however different in Style and Phrase, Method and Order, are like the several
Features in the Face, that besides the sweetness in each alone, there is what
we call Beauty, that arises from the mixture of all.

Thus it is in the Sacred History, which has a great variety in it of matter,
dispersed up and down sometimes to quicken the Appetite, and excite the
Diligence of the Reader, where each has its Order and Use: But when considered
in one complex Body, and compared and shown together, there is such a wonderful
Agreement between the Old Testament and the New, the Types and Anti-Types, the
Predictions and the Events, etc. that it makes a very beauteous, lively, and
admirable Appearance, without any such inconsistencies as may make it liable to
have its Veracity questioned, if duly considered, and seriously examined.

I say, if duly considered, and seriously examined; for else it must be
acknowledged, that there are some appearances of this kind.

1. But I account not those to be Inconsistencies, which in other Authors may
justly be esteemed Errors of the Transcribers; and for which no Author suffers
in his Reputation. As for instance, When the Famous Historian Herodotus in one
Euterpe. c. 53. Vita Hom.
place says, That Homer lived about Four hundred Years before his Time; and in
another place, That it was about Six hundred. This escape does not lessen his
Reputation among Judicious Persons; but for all that, he preserves the
Character of Pater Historiarum* and is esteemed as no injudicious or careless
Writer. And so if a greater number in Scripture is taken for a less, or a less
for a greater, when there are sufficient Directions therein for the Correction
of it; it is not reasonable to charge this as an inconsistency, and to urge it
as a reason for the overthrowing the Credit and Veracity of it.

If it be said, How does it appear that they are the Faults of the Transcriber?

A. I Answer, It Is apparently so sometimes, as may be observed in the various
Readings; which could not be, were there not such mistakes in the Transcriber:
And where it does not appear so to be, we ought in reason so to judge, where
there are all the appearances of Faithfulness, Diligence, and Observation in
the Writers themselves. As for instance, What can be more exactly Penned than
the Book of Joshua, in which there is a punctual account of the Situation and
bounds of each Tribe, as it was set out and described by Joshua himself, the
Chief Arbiter and Director of all; and if there should be found in his Book any
Literal Errors, one Name put for another, or a different Reading of the same
Names, we cannot in reason judge it to be an oversight of so Sufficient, and so
Careful a Writer, but that it might proceed from some one that Transcribed it
after the (...), or Original Copy, in some successive Generations, and which in
reason it is impossible wholly to prevent.

It Is not here necessary for me to enter upon a debate, how far the Providence
of God does herein concern it self in preserving the Text free from all
Corruptions: I am now Treating upon this Argument humanly speaking, and of the
Truth of it separately from its Divine Authority. And admitting there are such
petty Errors that creep in by such imperceptible ways, though we cannot tell
when or how they came in, and have been disseminated into all Copies, for ought
we know, that are Extant; yet I don't know any reason why they should be
charged upon the Original and the Compiler of it; nor how the main Cause is
herein concerned.

It is a respect due and given to all Authors of any Repute for their Care and
Fidelity, that Write consistently as to the main, to pass the most favorable
Construction upon any such little Errors; which if theirs, were not voluntary;
or rather, not to make them theirs, without an apparent necessity for it.

And surely we should not then press the case with the utmost severity, and
make that, which is in it self, and in all Books besides, a Venial Error, to be
no less than a Mortal one in the Scripture, and to stab its Veracity to the
heart, and spoil its Credit for ever for the future.

If it be said there is more reason for this in the case of Scripture than in
any other Book; because That alone pretends to Divine Authority.

I Answer, That for the present is not the matter under Consideration; we are
now upon the Point of its Truth, and content our selves to enter upon this
Debate, as if it had no pretense to Divine Authority and Inspiration.

And so we claim the same Favor and Right on its behalf, as we do for any
other Author's Credit and Repute, of great Antiquity; and general Reception.

And therefore there ought no such Arguments or Objections to be urged for the
Invalidity of its Authority, which it is not decent or reasonable to offer
against other Writings; and we may reasonably claim the same allowance for that
which all Mankind do give, or in reason ought to give, in things of this nature.

2. I don't account these to be Inconsistencies or Contradictions, which do not
affect the main body or part of the History; but that are like a Parenthesis in
a Sentence, that whether inserted or omitted, the sense is perfect and
complete. And therefore when the History of Jacob blessing his Sons is the
Subject under Consideration; whether it was as Genesis 47. 31. He bowed himself
upon the bed's-head, or as Heb. 11. 21. He worshipped -- upon the top of his
staff; is not material.

And so it may be in many cases besides; But what real prejudice will redound
to the Reader by the mistake of any thing of this kind, or what prejudice is
there to the Relation, when a thing of no moment is omitted or inserted,
exchanged or altered? I say not this as if I despaired of having an account
given of these matters (for that I am sensible is to be done, as in the Case
before-recited) but to show how unreasonable it is to condemn Scripture for
that which we will let others go away with, free from all Blame and Censure;
and they shall be good and laudable Writers, and their Histories admitted to be
true and exact, though they have many Errors of this kind; and in the mean
while the other shall be sifted to the very bottom, and every Molehill be a
Mountain; and upon every little supposed defect, it shall be said, It has been
weighed in the balance of Reason and Examination, and has been found too light.

Thus partial are these sort of persons, while they malevolently lay the Right
hand upon the youngest, and their Left upon the eldest.

If indeed the inconsistency were like a Disease in the Vitals, that affects
the Heart or the Brain, it is to be accounted Mortal; if it did affect the main
Body of the Relation, and had originally proceeded from the Author, it would
have been a just Allegation, and his Truth and Fidelity, his Knowledge, and his
Care might with good reason be called in question. But that we deny; and appeal
to all the various Readings and Observations on Scripture as our Compurgators
in this point. And consequently the Scripture will so far remain as a true
Relator of matters of Fact, and may compare with, and be deservedly set above
all other Writings whatsoever; in which no one Man, whose hand passed through
the whole Work, can compare with that to which so many Hands in various
Circumstances, at several times did so exactly concur and agree, as if they had
been wrote by one Hand and at one Time, and were but one entire Argument
running through the whole.

III. Another Character is the Agreement of Scripture with other Authors; when
such there are.

I may well say, when such there are.

Since it is evident that there are no Writers can pretend to the like
Antiquity with Moses; and then we must wholly rely on his Authority for what he
relates. But however, though the most ancient among the Heathens are much later
than him, and so wanted those Advantages for Information which he had; yet they
(so far as they agree with him) give a Confirmation and Credibility to what he
relates, since they deliver it as the Sense of the Ages before, and of those in
which they themselves lived. It is not here so much to our purpose to enquire
from whence they derived the knowledge of the things they relate, whether from
the Jews, or from the general Tradition (which was best to be known from the
Eastern Parts of the World) as it is to observe their concurrence in them with
the Sacred Writers. It is indeed probable that the Ancient Writers of the
Heathens were (if at all) less beholding to the Jews for their Information, and
the Later more; as may be observed from the great difference between the one
and the other, the later being much plainer in many things than the former: For
the higher we ascend from the time of the Olympiads, the more intricate,
obscure, and fabulous they are. So that generally speaking, it is with them as
Plutarch says of Geographers, That rather than leave any vacant places in
their Maps, fill them up with inaccessible Mountains, Frozen Seas, or Monsters.
So when such Historians would complete their Narratives; rather than be
deficient in it, they insert wonderful and tragical Stories; and like Nations
that can give no account of their Pedigree and Original, derive themselves from
the gods, or from the Earth, and become Aborigines.

But however, though this be too truly the state of the World for about 3000
Years from the Creation; yet there is a mixture of fine Gold with the greater
dross; and from whence we may extract so much as may serve to confirm what the
Scripture advances for Truth, and we for the sake of it receive as such; as
might be shown.

This is a Tract has been often beaten by Ancients and Moderns, by Aristobulus
and Josephus among the Jews; by several of the Fathers, such as Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Eusebius, etc. and by many in these Days. And it were easy Bochart,
Huetius, Dr. Stillingfleet, etc.
to form a History out of them; especially if we change but the Names, and
instead of Saturn, read Adam; and instead of Pandora, Eve; instead of the
Garden of Jupiter, Eden; instead of Ogyges or Deucalion, Noah, etc. for we
should find more of the Truth under the disguise of the Fable than at the first
appears; and that the former gave occasion frequently to the later.

But over and above this, we have a great part of the Ancient History of
Scripture confirmed by the express Testimony of some of their gravest and
strictest Writers, as the Collection that has been made in that way by several
of the Learned, shows. To go no further than that of Moses, who is placed by
some of them in the first rank of the chiefest Lawgivers, and whose Wonders in
Egypt, and at the Red Sea, are not obscurely referred to by them.

4. When there is a Disagreement between the Scripture and other Authors, there
is sufficient reason to prefer the former before the later, and to rectify
these by that. As for the first 3000 Years it is acknowledged, That there was
elsewhere little else than Fable and Conjecture, Confusion and uncertain
Tradition, as has been before observed: And who is there that is not able to
see the difference between an Adam and a Saturn, a Noah and Bacchus, a Moses
and Mercury; between the Building of the Babylonish Tower, and the War of the
Giants with the gods; that is, between the true History and the Fable?

Who can observe the various Accounts amongst the Pagan Writers, their
inconsistencies one with another, their apparent ignorance of what they write
about, especially when it concerns other Nations or Ages, than those in which
themselves lived; but must needs surrender up the Cause, and own that the one
has much the advantage of the other in point of Credibility?

So that setting aside the Divine Authority of Scripture, yet it has upon it
all the Characters of Truth, which any Book or Books in the World can pretend:
And if there be any thing necessary more than what those have, to establish its
certainty and Credibility, that is not wanting. In conclusion, After all the
attempt made to weaken its Authority, it is with no better success than that of
Celsus or Hierocles, who endeavored to set up an Aristeas or an Appollonius,
in Competition with our Blessed Savior; and opposed their pitiful Shifts and
Impostures, to his approved and incontestable Miracles.

But there is somewhat farther to be respected. Hitherto we have considered the
Scripture as able and sufficient to support it self without any supernatural
Aid; and by the sole evidence of Humane Testimony, and such Characters as
belong to other Writings in common with that: But there is a further point in
reserve, and which I had chiefly in my Eye, and that is an Authority superior
to all others, and peculiar to Scripture, That I mean of Divine Revelation* and
what for the matter of it was inspired from above. And this, the due
Consideration of it as an excellent History will open a way to; when we find
not only all the Principles, Precepts, and Means, that are necessary to a
virtuous Life therein taught and prescribed; but also admirable Examples of it
in Fact, that nothing might be wanting to animate and encourage us to the like
practice. See it in the Noah's, the Abraham's, the Joseph's, the Job's, the
Moses's, the David's, and all the Patriarchs of old. See it in the Holy
Apostles, the Martyrs and Confessors; but above all in the Example of Examples,
our Blessed Savior.

Here is a History, that fills the Mind with the best Ideas and Images of
things, that represents the Instances of our Duty with all the advantage to our
Thoughts, that recommends it self to our Attention by the importance and
profitableness of the Argument, as well as the force of its Authority. Upon
this therefore let us dwell, and make it the delightful Subject of our most
serious Hours, which will abundantly reward all our Pains, and is sufficient to
furnish us thoroughly unto all good Works.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. l. 19. for Composers r. Composures, ibid. l. 23. after Glory of God,
add to the manifestation of, p. 16. l* 19. for them r. the Jews, p. 18. l. 3.
after events add therein*


