Edwards Mayor.

Martis 14. die Octobris, 1679. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi, Angliae,
etc. xxxi.

THis COURT does desire Mr. Williams to Print his Sermon Preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday last, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this
City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, AND ALDERMEN of
the City of LONDON, AT THE GUILD HALL Chapel, October 12. 1679. BY JOHN
WILLIAMS, Rector of St. Mildreds Poultrey, London.

LONDON: Printed by M. Clark, for R. Chiswel, and W. Kettilby, at the Rose and
Crown, and at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

To the Right Honorable Sir JAMES EDWARDS, LORD MAYOR of LONDON, And to the
Court of ALDERMEN:
Right Honorable,
WHat the terms are upon which our Church has stood, with the Church of Rome,
since the Reformation, and how well it has acquitted it self in the matters
disputed betwixt us, is very well known to the World. But notwithstanding the
power of Truth, and the success that has aforetime attended the endeavors of
such as have amongst us maintained it, we have found by experience, that we
have of late gained little upon them by all our diligence. What Political
Reasons there are for it besides becomes not me to enquire; but that our
Divisions amongst our selves have been a principal one, and given our
Adversaries both the confidence to set upon us afresh, and also an opportunity
of so doing with greater security, is what no one can be ignorant of. This is
one evident Cause of our present danger, and what we can therefore never hope
to avoid, without uniting upon some common Principle and Foundation. It is this
that I have endeavored to point and make out in the ensuing Discourse, with
what success I must leave others to judge; but which I hope may be the better
received as it had your Approbation, and has now your Order and desire to have
it made more public. In obedience to which I have ventured it abroad, that I
may thereby publish how much I am,

Right Honorable, Your humble servant John Williams.

A SERMON ON EPHESIANS. iv. 16.
From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which
every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love.
IN the beginning of this Chapter the Apostle does exhort the Ephesians to the
Christian duty of Charity; and that he may come upon them with the greater
advantage, does make use of several Arguments to enforce it, v. 4, 5, 6. taken
from the state they are in, and the profession they are of; that there is one
Body of which they are members, one Spirit by which they are quickened, one Hope
of Eternal Life by which they are excited, one Lord whom they profess to obey,
one Faith and Form of belief that they embrace, one Baptism by which they are
initiated into the Church, and one God whom they do depend upon, and from whom
they do receive all Temporal and Spiritual gifts and blessings. And whereas it
may be thought that the variety of Gifts and Officers in the Church should
minister to contention, he adds, that however they may be abused, and the
persons in those circumstances may happen to pervert them, yet as they were
primarily intended by Christ the dispenser and disposer of all for the order,
the safety, and the Edification of the Church, so they do make much for it, v.
11, 12, 13, 14. For it is from him that the whole body fitly joined together
and compacted, etc. makes increase of the body, etc.

In which words there is a comparison employed betwixt the Natural body, and the
Christian Church, called the body of Christ, v. 12. that as the Natural body
does consist of several parts, and those parts have a dependence upon the head,
and are so fitly compacted and united among themselves, that there is a
distribution of nourishment to all of them according to their measure and
capacity: So there is in the Church (1.) a Supreme power in Christ the Head,
(2.) a due subordination of the several parts to the Head, (3.) a strict
relation betwixt these several parts to the Head and to each other, (4.) a
derivation of all necessary supply from the Head; and from each communicated to
the other according to their measure, proportion and relation.

All that I shall at present take notice of from hence, is,

1. The firmness of the union that is to be amongst Christians, they are joined
and compacted together; not only as they are at large members of the Catholic
Church, called here the whole Body; but also as they are more strictly
combined, according to the places of their residence, in particular Societies
and Churches; having Officers to guide and minister unto them, and Laws by
which they regulate themselves in such Combinations. This I take to be
signified in this verse, (1) in the phrase (...), every joint, which I conceive
has respect to the Officers of the Church, whether extraordinary, as Apostles,
Prophets and Evangelists; or ordinary, as Pastors and Teachers, v. 11. which
the Apostle says, v. 12. were (...), for the perfecting and compacting of the
Saints, and upon whom the gifts did primarily descend for the edifying of the
body of Christ, v. 12. These are as Ligaments and Joints to the body, that do
move, strengthen, preserve, and secure it, (2.) It Is further signified in the
phrase (...), every part, by which I conceive is to be understood, with respect
to the limbs of a Natural body, the particular Churches which Christians
according to their convenience of abode and affairs were cast and distributed
into. And this I the rather think, because I find particular Christians called
often in Scripture (...) members of Christ, 1 Cor. xii. 26, 27. But this word
(...), part, is never so applied to any particular person; and when on other
occasions it is made use of, it constantly has a respect to number and
multitude, as, Acts xxiii. 6. one part were Jews, etc. And this may further be
presumed from what the Apostle says, Chap. ii. 19, 20. where after he had
spoken of the Catholic Church, of which all Christians are fellow-Citizens, he
proceeds to their particular union as a Christian Church in that place, v. 22.
In whom ye also are built together for an habitation of God through the Spirit.

2. Here is the advantage of such an union, it makes increase of the body; and
is for the preservation of it, as ver. 14. does imply, that we henceforth be no
more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine,
etc. which was to be prevented by the compacting the Saints together, ver. 12.

From what has been hitherto said I observe,

1. That a constitution or fixed order in the Church does make much for the
increase and safety of it, and is necessary toward the propagating and
securing of Religion.

2. That a constitution which takes in these ends is to be regarded. I shall at
this time chiefly apply my self to the latter, viz. the securing of Religion,
and I shall do it in this following order.

1. By showing that the preservation of a Church and Religion, is mainly
depending upon a settled Order and Constitution.

2. By considering what that Constitution is, particularly with respect to our
selves, in this Nation, and our present circumstances.

3. By showing what regard is to be given to such a Constitution, and how far
it is the interest of every true Protestant to comply with it.

First, I shall show that the preservation of a Church and Religion is mainly
depending upon a settled Order and Constitution. When I speak of the great
security of the Church, the respect which it has therein primarily to God the
great Patron of it, is to be supposed, who can and will protect it against the
most formidable powers which may threaten and invade it: And when I speak of
other security, I am to be understood of Prudential and Rational means, and
what is to be done in that way on our part in order thereunto: And of this sort
I take a Constitution to be. Without this there cannot be a Church, i.e.
without Laws and Officers for direction; without having the work of those
Officers set forth and described; and without a people that bear such a respect
to those Officers, and to each other as the Laws agreed upon do require. For if
every person be at liberty to be what he will and do as he please; either to
rule or to be ruled, to teach or to be taught, to act or forbear, the Church
would be none, and from being like a City that is compact together, it would be
no better than a field of contention and confusion.

And what particular persons are with respect to a Church, such are particular
Churches with respect to the whole; and therefore as every Christian is to look
upon himself as a member of the Church, and to bear a due respect to the body
of which he is: So are particular Churches as parts of a greater body to have a
regard to it. It Is for the safety and edification of every particular Christian
not to stand alone, but to be united to a body; and it is for the security and
advantage of particular Churches to draw into more general Combinations, that
so they may upon all Emergencies receive mutual advice and assistance. And this
is to be done according to the Nations they are of, the government they are
under, the times they are in; which kind of combination is usually known by the
name of a National Church, that is, when there is an union of particular
Churches under one Common Form. This is in it self a thing most decent, and
what, as it does unite the hearts of a People or Nation more firmly to one
another, so does also provide for their security: for as all good order does
contribute to safety; so the more general that Order is, the greater security
must redound from it. And therefore however some may in speculation please
themselves with particular Churches altogether independent upon others; yet
whenever it comes to practice, they are forced to take other measures, and to
enter into larger Combinations, as it happened in New England. And from hence
it is that the Quakers themselves how much soever they pretend to be against
all Forms, are fallen into such a kind of Order, and have several Laws amongst
themselves, which become binding to the rest, and are more or less as extensive
as their party is. Which is therefore in Print complained of by several amongst
them, as Usurpation and Arbitrary Imposition Spirit of the Hat. Hidden things
brought to light. Bullocks Tracts. Q. Spiritual Court.
. The usefulness of Order to the purposes spoken of is what Nature and Reason
do dictate, and what in all other Cases no man does dispute; it is that which
brought men into Societies, and is the great preserver of them. It Is that which
is the safety of Nations, and Armies, Cities, and Families; and it would be the
opinion of all men in the present case, were but their own Religion and
Constitution to be the measure prescribed. No man can deny, but if the Nation
was all in one way, and the people all of one mind in matters of Religion, it
would be as much for our Peace and mutual Satisfaction, our Welfare and
Security, as it is lovely in it self. And then methinks no man should deny but
that a Constitution of one sort or another, which may reach the general part of
the Nation, and most suit the Government of it, does in its degree tend the
same way, and that it is more for our safety to have that which is a National
Constitution than to be without it.

And this is the more necessary in regard of a Potent Enemy that we have to
encounter, against whom all the force that we can raise, and the care that we
can take will be little enough to secure us. For the Church of Rome is so
strongly compacted, and so well provided of whatever may support it at home, or
enlarge its Conquests abroad, that it will vie with any Constitution in the
World. There is first an Universal Head who challenges the Supreme power over
all Churches in the World, and whom all in their Communion are bound to
acknowledge as such. It Is he that has the power of calling Councils,
arbitrating Differences, passing Decrees, granting Dispensations, issuing out
Indulgences, making Expositions, and of bringing all things to a certainty and
determination in their Church. It Is he whom all the Bishops and Priests amongst
them do swear particular obedience to, and which they hold so Sacred and
Inviolable, that it shall cancel all Obligations to, and defend them against
all Impositions of any Secular Prince whatsoever. It Is his Commands all the
several Orders of Monks and Friars do observe, and his pleasure they attend;
and by their vast numbers spread through the Christian World, and the entire
dependence which they have upon him, he has both an opportunity of gaining
Intelligence, and of obtaining ordinarily what he designs with greater facility
and success than any Prince by his Ambassadors, Agents and Correspondents
whatsoever. For these are the constant Emissaries of the Church, and by whose
Generals residing at Rome all Orders that may be for the Common Good, are
immediately dispersed, and so Religiously received, that wherever these
persons are sent they immediately go, whatever they are commanded they out of
hand do, which they do with the greater resolution bend themselves to, as they
have cast off all Relations, and have no expectations from them; have no
posterity to take care of, or that have any dependence upon them, and so if
they miscarry, the mischief of it lights wholly upon themselves. And these that
are chosen out for that purpose, being persons of inquisitive and active
tempers, capable of looking into affairs, considering circumstances, and
finding out the interests, designs and inclinations of others, and supplied
with all things that may be necessary for such an undertaking, have a great
advantage over any people that are without such Instruments. (2.) There are
besides great preferments and hopes of gaining them, to whet their Industry and
encourage their endeavors: for those of all kinds that Church does abound in,
and flows with that wealth gathered from First Fruits, Tenths, Appeals,
Dispensations, Pardons, Jubilees, Pilgrimages and other innumerable ways of
advantage, as that no design shall fail for want of succor in that kind. (3.)
There is a settled Conformity throughout that Church, and all agree in their
Service as it is now established, that whatever differences there are among them,
yet They seem to be One to others, and are really so in what makes for their
own advantage and security. (4.) They have a great power over the Laity in the
interests they make among them for the reasons abovesaid; and by obliging them
to Auricular Confession, by which their secrets are poured into the Priests
bosom; and so as they are under a tie not to do any thing which they would not
trust him with the knowledge of; so if they have committed a secret to him, dare
not disoblige him for fear he should disclose it. By which means men dare not
own their doubt, or so much as entertain a thought of doing otherwise than the
Church will allow. Lastly, there are such permissions and allowances in their
Church, that for the service and good of it men may shape their course as they
please, take up any Garb, and fashion themselves to any temper of men or state
of people whatsoever, for such an end.

So that from a Church thus Constituted, and Established with Power and Policy,
there needs all the industry, consideration, and unity, that can be to preserve
those that are threatened by it.

And this without a settled general and National Constitution I see not how it
may be. We may as well think to go out against a veterane and well disciplined
Host, and hope to overcome them without any known Orders to be observed, or
Officers to Lead and Command, as to defend our selves against the invasion of
so powerful and formed a Church as that is. For had we no Form at all, or were
there different petty Forms without submission to one as Supreme, there would,
it is likely, be as many Factions as Forms, and those so furiously contending
with each other, that the very approach of the Enemy would hardly be able to
curb the violence with which each would bear upon the other: or however there
could not be that good understanding, that necessary Intelligence, that sober
advice, that mutual care for each others safety, and that ability to advance it
as when there is but one. The Adversary would have an opportunity of sowing
dissensions, of widning differences, and of infecting the multitude with such
Principles as should make them a fit prey, for his own power, when there is a
fit season for it.

From all which the necessity of having a General and National Constitution
does appear where it is not, and of maintaining one where it is.

2. I shall consider what that Constitution is that may best preserve a Church,
and a Church whose welfare is maligned by such an Adversary as I have before
described. And that I shall do by laying down some Characters which may belong
to such a Constitution, and then by searching for such a Church as may have a
Correspondence to these Characters.

1. That Constitution which is agreeable to Scripture, and the practice of the
Primitive and Universal Church, is most likely to maintain it self against all
opposition. For then it is able to encounter an Adversary with great advantage,
and beat him from his strongest holds, so far as Authority is admitted to the
decision of the Case. If we have the Scripture on our side, none can ever
warrantably throw us out of possession, or make good any charge against us:
since whatever we hold or do by virtue of its Authority will remain firm and
unshaken, and which none can touch upon but they must strike at the Foundation
of Truth and Religion. And if we have the Primitive Church, and the Records of
the first Ages to stand by us, as we have thereby the best Expositors of
Scripture, so the best Authority next to it; and which none can wholly reject
without great rashness and arrogance.

2. That Is to be supposed a Constitution of this Nature, which the Adversaries
do most of all oppose, and seek the downfall of. If we see an Enemy bending all
his force against a particular place, and passing by others with all have and
diligence imaginable seeks to surprise it by Stratagem, or overthrow it by
violence, we may well suppose it to be of great importance, and what he is most
of all apprehensive of danger from. And if we find the Church of Rome always
undermining and assaulting some particular Establishment amongst us, or some
one Church more than others in the world, we have good cause to think such a
Church and Constitution to be considerable in it self, and what is also a great
affliction and obstruction to them.

3. That is likely to be a Constitution of this kind which best suits the Civil
Government, that has such a dependence upon it, and is so complicated with it,
that it cannot cannot carry on a different interest from, or seek the trouble
and ruin of the State, but it must also trouble and ruin it self. Whereas if
these two are divided, or have several Centers to respect, there will be a
continual contention, which can end in nothing but destruction.

4. That is likely to be a Constitution for this purpose which is most
generally suited to the temper of the people, and which even the greatest part
of Dissenters will choose to dwell under, rather than another. There cannot be
a Constitution which all will equally like, approve of, and agree in; and since
a National Constitution is necessary for our preservation, that which will come
nearest to this is most eligible.

5. That Constitution may be presumed to be fit for this end which we have had
good Experience of and know what it is able to do and is sufficient for. For
whatever semblance another may have of great virtue and sufficiency, yet
nothing can be positively concluded, because that which has not been at all,
or not fully tried, is very uncertain, and so unsafe, especially in a dangerous
Season. It may then be what people may as much slight as they did before desire
it, and as soon grow weary of it as before they were forward to embrace it. It
may come for ought we know to yield the cause instead of maintaining it, and be
so far from resisting Popery, that it may be swallowed up by it.

6. That Constitution seems most fitted to this end, which is capable of the
best consultation and most vigorous prosecution; where the persons concerned in
preserving it, neither want Education, nor Experience to know what may be for
the welfare of the Church; and have also a sufficient Power and Authority to
provide it. For without these advantages of training them up in the ways of
Knowledge and Experience, those to whom the care of the Church is committed
would rather ruin than preserve it, rather betray than rescue it, by their
weakness or their ignorance.

7. I may add to this, That which has encouragements for learning and
industry, and ways to bring them up in the one, and quicken them to the other.
Without these, Learning would be scarce, and the spirits of men sluggish and
he^^^: and without these a Church that is eminent ^^^rein, as Rome is, would
quickly espy and make their advantage; as she has already done in the Eastern
Churches, which in little more than an Age are almost overrun by her: And that
though they had a settled and Ancient Constitution, and were generally
sufficiently prejudiced against the Romish Usurpation; yet what from their
poverty, and their ignorance (which follows from the former.) The Supremacy of
the Pope is now there in very many parts their avowed principle. And if at that
distance they have thus far prevailed, they must necessarily meet with the like
success in a Church when nearer to them, if Learning be not encouraged by an
honorable maintenance.

8. That Constitution is likely to answer this end which Bystanders, and so
the most Impartial persons have given their verdict for, and which they promise
themselves greater security by, if they could obtain it.

9. That is best for us which in such a time of fear, as this, is most likely
to create least disturbance, and expose us to the least danger. For the
particular Case, now, is to give us a Rule, and that is best to us which will
best secure us against the public mischief.

Having gone thus far to show that a settled National and General Constitution is
necessary toward our preservation, and to find out such Characters as in the
opinion of all unbyassed and considering persons may fit such a Constitution as
is best for us. I have nothing else to do but to find out a Constitution which
may fit those Characters. But by this time you will prevent me in your
thoughts, and perceive how these things do agree with our present Constitution,
and what reason we have to maintain it.

But before I proceed to draw the parallel, and set it before you, I shall
premise

First, that we are to take the several Characters before laid down together,
for that is the best, which all agree in.

Secondly, That these Characters are not to be applied to any single part of
the Constitution, but to the whole. For we are not obliged to maintain that
every particular thing in our Church is the best, and that nothing in it can be
mended. For it is freely declared otherwise, as particularly in the Commination
to be used the first day of Lent. It is sufficient that the Constitution is in
the whole agreeable to those Characters.

Thirdly, much less do I think my self obliged to defend the miscarriages that
may be in the Administration of what belongs to the Constitution, when they
flow not from the Constitution it self. For they are the faults of the persons,
not the faults of the Constitution. But,

Fourthly, I say that the present Constitution amongst us, best suits those
Characters, and as it is in it self the best Constitution that I know of upon
the face of the Earth, so it is most fit for us, and is to be best thought of by
us. And this will appear by comparing our Constitution with the Characters
before laid down.

1. Our Constitution is agreeable to Scripture and the practice of the
Primitive and Universal Church. It Is agreeable to Scripture: For it owns
nothing for Canonical, but what is divinely inspired, and makes nothing
necessary, but what is thereby made necessary. Whatever things indifferent, and
of a middle nature are taken in, are only used as indifferent, and what are
therefore alterable in themselves, and upon just causes may be altered and
changed, and therefore are not to be esteemed equal with God's Law, as our
Church declares Rubr. Of Ceremonies, why some abolished, etc.
. And those that are in use are what she has the ancient Church for her
pattern in. Her Government in the substance and essential parts of it, is, what
was unanimously and universally the Government in the Church, according to the
most ancient and authentic Records that we have in Being.

2. This constitution of ours is the more considerable, as it is what our
Adversaries of Rome do most inveigh against, and labor to overthrow. It is the
weakness of some to accuse us of Popery, because of Episcopacy and a Liturgy,
and other things in which we do agree. For although they have Episcopacy and a
Liturgy in the Church of Rome, yet our Episcopacy and Liturgy is what they bear
an immortal hatred unto, neither owning the former, nor suffering their people
to be present at the latter. For as long as Episcopacy does not acknowledge the
Pope's Supremacy; and as long as our Liturgy is discharged of the fopperies and
Idolatry that theirs is stuffed with, it is to their reproach. This of ours is
not only an established, but also a very regular Constitution, and bears in it
so great a Conformity to the ancient order of the Church, that there is none in
the world which they so much try their skill and their practices upon. And
therefore whereas they let the writings of other Parties amongst us, lie by
with such a kind of contempt, that I remember not above Two that for this
Twenty years they have vouchsafed to take notice of, and to reply to (and for
which I could give a particular reason;) in the mean time they have run upon
the Church with all their might, and picked out the Goliahs of their Party to
encounter the Writers amongst us: As well knowing if they could make them to
give ground and retreat, the day was like to be their own. This I observe, not
to disparage the labors of our dissenting Brethren in that kind, but to show
wherein the strength of the Protestant Religion is thought, even by our
Adversaries, to consist.

3. Our Constitution does best suit the Civil Government, as it does maintain
the King in his Just Rights, and does not invade the Liberty of the Subject.
The case in these Nations formerly was, that the Church-constitution rendered
the condition of Princes and People unsafe and perplexed; for having a
dependence upon, and giving themselves over to a blind obedience to a Foreign
power, viz. the Pope, there were always Jealousies of each other, and very
turbulent Factions maintained to the great prejudice of the Kingdom; as in the
time of King Henry the I. by Anselm, and in the time of Henry the II. by Becket
Archbishops of Canterbury. But now the Supremacy being settled upon the King,
and maintained by the Church, there is but one Interest, and the Peace of the
Public is thereby provided for Of this, v. Dr. Puller's Moderation of the
Church of England. c. 12.
. For the Church has now Laws made for the Clergy, as well as others, by the
Supreme Council of the Nation, and is as much obliged to submit to them when
made. But it is evident how little these things are considered and respected by
any other Parties, in comparison of ours, and what I choose rather to refer you
to others for satisfaction in Dr. Puller ut supra. p. 339.
.

4. Our present constitution does best suit the temper of the Nation, and which
the greatest part even of Dissenters would choose to dwell under, rather than
another. That which pretends mostly to a competition with ours is the
Presbyterian, as it is a National form. But if we should come to enquire into
the inclinations of those that pass under that name, I dare be confident that
there are very few of them (if any) that are satisfied with the frame that is
laid down, and the orders and rules that have been observed in the Churches,
where that way of government has been established: or if they are, it is that
at which the people are generally prejudiced and which the rest of Dissenters
do unanimously complain of, and protest against: Should we come to the
Congregational way, then the Churches must be consisting of such persons as are
gathered out of Churches, and who are presumed from some good grounds to be in
a state of grace, and that must oblige themselves by a particular Covenant at
their first admission. By which means all that scruple these terms, or that are
not really converted, or not so thought by them, will have no relation to the
Church, and they and their children be no members of it. And how this would
relish with the Nation in general, or other dissenters, may be well conceived.
So that either we must have no Constitution, or the present, if we will
gratify the greatest part of the Nation, and even that of the Dissenters
themselves. For whatever other Constitution is uppermost will have more
adversaries than ours, as it will have, besides the other dissenters, the
present Church and the members of it to be against it, who are more in number
than any other party, and I think I may say, than all others put together.

5. Ours is a constitution which we have had good experience of, and have seen
how it has kept its ground, and bid such constant defiance to the Church of
Rome, that they of that Church have not been able to run it down with all their
prowess: and over whom, were it not for our divisions at home, which take up
the thoughts of those that are the Guardians of it, we should have had such
advantage, as might have made them weary of attempting us. There was no
reformation in the world that was more orderly begun, more regularly pursued,
and more steadfastly maintained than ours. It was that which was watered with
the Blood of the Reformers, and has for above this Hundred Years been still
upheld by the unwearied endeavors of those that were in place amongst us. And
notwithstanding all the Popery that has been charged upon us, I dare challenge
any to show such Monuments of Learning and Industry; such clear detections of
the Apostasy, and such solid consutations of the arguments of that Church, as
are extant, and have been writ by the Bishops, the Clergy, and even the Laity
of ours.

6. In our constitution there is a capacity of the best consultation and most
vigorous prosecution. In respect of the Church it self, as there is a due
subordination in it, where the Inferior are under the inspection and command
of their Superiors. And where the Superiors are often present at Debates in
Councils, have an hand in making and passing Laws, are conversant in affairs of
the Nation; and so are in a better capacity of espying out and providing
against the attempts of the Enemy, than if they were to reside upon particular
Cures, and to attend the business of them. For then for want of such we should
be an easy prey to those that had a will and power to seize us.

7. I might insist upon the encouragements amongst us for Learning and
Industry, both in preparation for the service of the Church in the
Universities, and after they are admitted to it, in Livings, and Dignities; by
which means the Clergy may be in a capacity to furnish themselves with Books,
and all necessary accomplishments. And then again upon the care that is taken,
or might be, that none but such as are competently learned be received and
entertained.

8. Our constitution has the good opinion of impartial persons, such as
Learned Protestants abroad, many of whom it has courteously received,
cherished and maintained. Indeed our Church is looked upon as the top of the
Reformation, and to which in difficult cases others have made their appeals. It
has been honored by our Friends, feared by our Enemies, and contemned by none
but our selves at home: And how much that has been, and is to the damage and
hazard of the Protestant Religion, both at home and abroad, might easily be
made to appear.

9. Our constitution at this juncture and season is our great security, and
what will expose us to the least disturbance and danger: For whilst this stands
we cannot be worse than we are, but if this be thrown down, God knows into what
confusions we may be cast, or whether ever we may come to a settlement again. I
am sensible that there are some that do with all their might endeavor the
total subversion of it, and whom nothing less will content, than with Edom, to
say, Ps. 137. 7. raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof. But I would
fain know what is hereby intended, whether such would bring us to confusion or
settlement? If the former, I hope all good Protestants of what Persuasion
soever, will look upon them as their mortal Enemies; since nothing then can be
the issue but destruction, both to Religion and our selves: For whatever they
may pretend, they are far from the temper and spirit of the Gospel, where we
are told, 1 Cor. 14. 33. that God is not the Author of confusion, but of Peace
in all the Churches of the Saints. If a settlement be intended, I would as
willingly know where they will fix? For it is a most wretched imprudence to pull
down the old Mound, before they are provided of another, and to expose us to
the Boar out of the Wood, and the wild Beast of the Field to enter in, and to
make havoc of the Church of God, for want of a fence and security. If they are
come to any issue, and are provided of a constitution to set up, Are they
secure that this project of theirs shall without delay be taken into
consideration, and considered without partiality? Will there no controversies
arise about the terms of Communion, or the nature and parts of that Government,
which they would substitute in the room of what they now quarrel at? Can they
secure us, that the frame which they have laid will be better than that which
they seek to overthrow, and that upon Experience, and in the current of as many
Years it shall not prove as faulty as what falls under their present censure?
Can they secure us, that their Model will take, and that all Parties that now
join against ours, will center in theirs? or that those that dissent from them
shall meet with better quarter, or fairer usage, when theirs is advanced to the
Supremacy, than they do under ours? If this cannot be assured, or so much as
made probable, we had as good be where we are.

But suppose there could be a better constitution than what we have, and that
matters might be better regulated; yet we must consider our present
circumstances, in which without doubt it is better to bear with an
inconvenience than a mischief, and to be content to be secure with what we
have, than to venture all for somewhat that we have not. For a dissolution
cannot be at this time without greater mischiefs, than what can be conceived to
be in the constitution. It being as in a Fort, where perhaps the Fortifications
may be made more regular, and contrived to the greater security of it; but
though this might be done in a time of peace and leisure, yet to pull down the
old for this purpose, whilst the Enemy is before it, would be to throw it into
his possession, and he that should advise to it, and adventure upon it, though
with a good intention, would do as great a mischief, as if he conspired with
the Enemy. We are now in the midst of danger, and have an Enemy that is deeply
concerned to let no opportunity slip that may be to our damage; and if we now
pull down our constitution, which is the bulwark of our Religion, we expose our
selves to his mercy, and he that should attempt it is in these circumstances to
be looked upon as no less dangerous an Enemy, than if he were of the Party, and
equally concerned in the plotting our ruin. For my part, I had rather continue
in a Town that is defensible, though not fortified altogether to my mind, than
neglect the present use of that, and betake my self to great consultation to
amend it, and in the midst of all my curiosity be with Archimedes knocked of the
head by the Enemy.

So that the preservation of the present Constitution, how irregular soever it
may seem to some, will less expose us than the dissolution of it. But yet how
far it is from being really so, I have before showed. And now I shall proceed
to the

3. Third general, to show what regard is to be had to such a constitution. If
what I have said be true, that the present constitution be the best qualified
for making resistance to, and defending us against the Church of Rome; if it be
the common Bulwark of the Protestant Religion amongst us, and the great
security of it abroad, it becomes every one that is a true lover of our
Religion, to seek and promote the welfare of our constitution.

I know this will be a great piece of self-denial in those that do dissent from
it, and that perhaps in so doing they may not increase or derive any particular
power to themselves: But if it be really the interest of our Religion, I hope
they will see it to be their duty, and make it their endeavor. When the Jews
were carried captive to Babylon, they were required to seek the peace of the
City, whither they were carried captive, and to pray unto the Lord for it: For,
says the Text, in the peace thereof shall ye have peace: Jerem. 29. 7. When in
a state of captivity, and amongst Heathens, they were thus obliged to have a
respect to the welfare of the place and government. And then much more should
we, when our Religion is the same in its fundamentals, and the Civil liberties
are, what all are alike partakers of. We all agree in the vital parts of our
Religion, we agree that Popery is a common Enemy, we agree that it is our
Interest to join against it. And where shall we meet, if it be not in some
settlement: and in what shall we agree, if the present Constitution will not so
far unite us?

I am sensible that there are many that will not understand this; that are like
those, Lament. 4. 12. that would not have believed that the adversary and the
enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem; that do the Church of
Rome what it can, it can never make its way, and set up its standard amongst
us. They think if they can clear themselves of our Church at home, that they
are sufficiently provided against danger from abroad. They are ready to say, as
Tyrus of Jerusalem, Ezekiel, 26. 2. Aha she is broken, that was the gates of the
People, she is turned unto me, I shall be replenished now she is laid wast: And
each Party is apt to promise much to it self upon such a victory and change.

Such as these do watch to break down the carved work thereof with Axes and
Hammers. These labor to cast Fire into the Sanctuary, and attempt all ways to
alienate the affections of the People from the present establishment, and to
raise slanders upon any that appear in its defense. They are these that load
the present Ministry with contempt, and are continually in their Pamphlets
exposing them, as well knowing that if they can remove the Shepherds, or make
the People to believe them to be Wolves, they have done their business, and the
whole Flock is likely to lie at their Mercy.

These are they that make way for Popery to enter in. For is it not the
Ministry of the Church of England, that appears in the Breach upon all
occasions, that either flings down or takes up the Gantlet, and that has
hitherto so far prevailed, that the Romish Party has at last almost quitted
the way of Argument, and has attempted the Conquest of us by Blood and
Violence, when they could not do it by Learning and Reason?

If we had nothing but a Worldly interest to move us, if that were the Compass
we steer by, (as some do basely insinuate) if there were nothing of duty in the
Contention, we might be as quiet as others, and make our terms upon as good
advantage with a Church that has store of preferments to reward us, and where
the Clergy has a reverence paid to them beyond what we do meet with, or may
expect in ours. If we would show quarter to them, we are sensible enough that
they would show it to us. But when notwithstanding all our Industry and Care,
all our Pains and Hazard we shall be Papists, there can no security be given
that any are not such, and much less those Gentlemen that take the liberty thus
to asperse us.

But it is not with us the boldness of these Persons has stopped, but they
will bring others into the same Condemnation:

If the mischief had staid with us we might be silent, or if the State and
Religion may be secured, and we be ruined alone, it might not be so material.
Let them proceed in their calumnies and mischievous Designs: If that were all,
I hope God will give us patience to bear whatever they may throw or inflict
upon us. But when the Government it self is assaulted, and things are come to
this pass, that any one that will not strike in with them in all points shall
be a Papist, and what not, when a Man must not speak for the Church of England,
but he must be hoysing up Sails for the Church of Rome, it is time to refel such
a Calumny, and to expose the Design.

O what a pleasant sight is this to the Church of Rome, to see the Storm
diverting from themselves, and that the work which has cost them such
Consultation, Expense and Labor, shall be done to their hands; and instead of
the sore disappointment, which they did Hourly expect, have no more to do but
to stand still, and see the destruction of their greatest Enemy. To see us by
such an artifice made so jealous one of another, that we know not whom to
trust, and each Party ready to turn the Plot upon the other.

It is fit that Men's eyes should be opened, and be made to see whither they are
driving. It Is fit to put a stop to the Danger which is coming upon us.

I do not charge this upon all Dissenters; I know there are many of them that
are so wise to observe it, and so sincere as to abhor it, as well as we; such
that see into the mischievous consequences of these Proceedings. I may well
say, is not the hand of the Jesuit in all this? what either proceeds from them,
or Men of their temper.

It Is high time then for all sober Persons to look about them, and rather to
think of what is fit and necessary to be done for our common safety, than for a
private satisfaction. Let them lay aside all little grudges and animosities,
and their present dissatisfactions, till it is a time to find relief for them.

It would be an happy time to find the Nation of the temper that it was
generally in, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, to have all conspiring and
serving God in the same way. But since this is not likely to be; let all
however be overruled by a Principle of common safety and interest, and do what
may best serve to promote it; which is, in defending what is the Bulwark of our
Religion, by commending what we like in it, by joining with it in what we can,
and by dissenting with modesty where we cannot. For next to the being of one
mind in Religion, there would nothing more daunt and strike a greater terror
into our Adversaries, than to see us stand up for one Constitution, and
unanimously resolved to maintain that which is the general Mound and Security.
Hereby our dissenting Brethren will give satisfaction to the Government they
live under, they will show that they are Christians and Protestants indeed.
They will then show themselves worthy of favor, and will prompt Authority to
find out a way to extend it to them.

We shall then begin to be One, and from being tossed to and fro, we shall be
growing toward the temper and state of the Text, when the whole Body fitly
joined together, and compacted by that which every Joint supplieth, according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
Body, unto the edifying of it self in love.

O Lord, we beseech thee, let thy continual Pity cleanse and defend thy Church;
and because it cannot continue in Safety without thy Succor, Preserve it
evermore by thy Help and Goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

