THE Julian and Gregorian YEAR: Or, the Difference Betwixt the Old and
New-Stile. SHOWING, That the Reformed Churches should not Alter their
Old-Stile, but That the Romanists should Return to It.

(...) Conc. Nic. Can. 6. LONDON. Printed for RICHARD SARE, at Gray's Inn Gate,
Holborne. 1700.

TO THE READER.
THE Old and New-Stile having been of late the Subject of many Debates,
occasioned chiefly by the near approach of next February, when, instead of Ten,
there will be Eleven Days difference betwixt them, and thereby the Julian and
Gregorian Accounts set at greater odds than ever; and finding this Controversy
not generally understood, I thought I could; not at present, do a more
acceptable piece of Service to the Public, than put this matter into as clear
a Light as I could; and show, with as much brevity as possible, not only the
Unreasonableness of the Romanists pressing of the Reformed* Churches to comply
with them in the Gregorian Account, but also endeavor to persuade them to put
an End to the Difference, by returning to the Obedience of the first General
Council at Nice, and an Union with the Universal Church. The Church of Rome,
for above One Thousand Years, were in this matter conformable to the rest of
the Christian World, and the Popes, at their Inauguration, were sworn to
continue it. Viz. Se quatuor prima Concilia servaturos, usque ad unum Apicem.
i. e. That they would critically observe the first four General Councils, to
the least tittle. Can. Sanct. Did. 16. and how the late Pope Gregory XIII.
dispensed with himself in this matter, I know not; but I am sure, that his
famous Predecessor of that Name, Pope Gregory the Great declared his esteem of
the Four first General Councils, to be equal to that he had of the Four
Gospels. So that Popes are divided in their Judgments, as well as other
Christians, and whereas, but an Age or two past, the Romanists pressed the
Protestants with the Authority of Councils, which they pretended to be on their
side, they have now publicly rejected the Determination of the most famous
Christian Council in the World, since that of the Apostles; and the design of
this Paper is to press them to the Obedience of it, and to return to the
Communion of Saints, and no longer continue in a Schism, and Separation from
all the Christian Churches in the World.

ERRATA.
PAge. 2. l. 27. add two p. 4. l. 27. add on, or p. 13. l. 1. for (...) read
(...) p. 20. l. 22. the and that transprosed.

Of the Julian Year, the Time of the Jewish Passover, and the Decrees of the
Christian Church for finding of EASTER.
WHEN J. Caesar had Conquered Egypt, (where all sorts of Learning, and
especially Astronomy, had long Flourished) he brought with him thence, a more
Exact Account of a Solary Year, than any that had been before used among the
Romans; and, though this New Calendar was drawn up by Sosigenes, and other
great Astronomers; yet being Published by Julius Caesar's Authority, was called
the Julian Year. But, the Romish Priests having been long used to another sort
of Year, mistook the Rules, and, instead of every Fourth, they reckoned
Inclusively, and Intercalated a Day every Third Year; which, being observed by
Augustus, and Restored to what Julius had at first Established, was still
called the Julian Year, and made Authentic in all the Roman Empire.

THE Julian Year consisted of 365 Days and 6 Hours; but because of the
Inconvenience of Inserting of Six Hours, at the end of every Year, they were
ordered to be reserved to the end of 4 Years, when they came to a Whole Day,
and then to be Inserted at the 24th Day of February. For the Old Roman Year
ended at Feb. 23, on which was observed the Feast of Terminus, and the Old
Intercalary Month was always inserted at that time. And because the
Intercalary-dayes (according to the Method of the Egyptians) were never
accounted any part of Month, or Year, but only an Appendix to them, and Cato in
Tit. Dig. ss. 98. expressly says of the Practice of the Romans, Mensem
intercalarem additicium esse, omnesque ejus dies pro momento temporis
observandos, i. e. That the Intercalary Month was no part of the Year, and
though it consisted of 28 days, was esteemed but one moment of Time; Therefore
the Romans, in the Julian Year, accounted the 24th day of February, that is,
the 6th of the Calends of March, two days together; which is the reason that in
our Calendar, Leap-year is called Bissextile, or the Year, in which the 6th of
the Calends of March came twice over, or was continued for Two days together:
We in England, having been very anciently Subjects of the Roman Empire,
received the Julian Account; and, pursuant to the Method of the Romans, our
Parliament, in the 21st Year of Henry the 3d, passed an Act, That in every
Leapyear, those days at the 24th of February, should be accounted but for one.
Now, because in the Western Church, the Feast of Matthias has been very
Anciently kept on the 24th day of February, and there might a doubt arise,
about the true Day of this Feast in Leap-Year; the Rule that had been observed
in that Matter, was, to keep it on the Second of those Two Days in Leap-Year,
according to the Old Verse*

Posteriore die Festum Celebrato Mathiae.

AND on the Second Day we also kept it in England, till a few years since it
was altered by an Injunction of a Late Archbishop, who thought it not so
Agreeable to the last Act of Uniformity.

JVLIVS CAESAR, in his Calendar, placed the Vernal Equinox on the 25th day of
March; and presuming, that his measure of a Solary Year was exactly true, he
had no foresight of the Precession of the Equinoxes in the Julian Months, and
gave no other Direction, but that the said Equinox should be continued on the
25th Day of March for ever.

THE Jewish Passover was, by the Law of Moses, to be kept on the 14th Day of
the First Month, Exodus 12th. and Levit. 23, etc. And on the 16th day of the
same Month, they were to offer up the First Fruits of their Corn, upon which
account this First Month was called Abib, that is, a Ripe Ear of Corn; and so
their Passover was always in that Month in which their Corn began to be Ripe.
And because their Corn in Canaan usually began to be Ripe about the Vernal
Equinox, as appears from Philo, Josephus, and others; therefore, the Jewish
Passover was at that time of the Year, and usually answered to our March or
April.

THAT the Jews Anciently used Lunary Months, appears beyond Exception in this
Law of the Passover, which being on the 14th day of the Month, was always at
the Full-Moon; and therefore the Jews, to make their Lunary Months Conformable
to a Solary Year, were forced, in every Two, or Three Years, to Intercalate a
Month, and have 13 Months in their Year. And when that was to be done, they
seem anciently to have had no other Rule, but when their Corn was Ripe; and
though that might not be so certain a Guide, for the True Measure of a
particular Year, yet, in Ten thousand Years, would never err much, but was as
fixed and certain as their Seasons and Harvests.

BUT, after the Jews had been Conquei'd by the Babylonians, Persians and
Greeks, and carried Captives into all Nations, they saw the different Seasons
of Harvests in the several Climates, and so in order to an Uniformity, were
forced to establish their Year upon* Astronomical Rules, and Reduce it into
Tables, that so the Jews, in their Disperson all the World over, might be
United in their Feasts, and keep their Passover (as they now do) at the same
time.

ONE Principal thing agreed on, was, the Dependence of their First Month upon
the Vernal Equinox, or the Suns entrance into Aries, and particularly, that the
15th Day of that Month should be always after it; and When that was, the Jews,
in the Time of Our Savior, seem to have taken from J. Caesar's Calendar. For
that Emperor, and his Successor, Augustus, were very kind to the Jews,
indulged them the use of their own* Law; excused them from Tribute every
Seventh Year* and sent Sacrifices to Jerusalem for the Daily Oblation: For
which Reasons, the Jews were extremely Fond of them; and (as even Suetonius
Relates) Lamented many Days and Nights together at the Funeral of the former.
This was it that made them so readily comply with the New Calendar of Julius
Caesar, as far as their Law would give leave, and at least take the time of the
Vernal Equinox, and Suns entrance into Aries from thence; the first of which
was there fixed at March the 25th, the other at the 18th Day of the same Month.
And whatever Rules of this nature were once agreed on by the Sanhedrim, or
Chief Council at Jerusalem, they took care to Communicate to the Jews all the
World over.

NOW its evident from the Gospels, that Our Savior was Crucified on Friday, at
the Jewish Passover, and Rose again from the Dead on the Sunday following,
being, at that time, called, The first day of the Week, Mat. 28. 1. Mark 16. 1,
2, etc. And when the Christians thought it necessary to keep up the Memory of
so great a Deliverance, by a Solemn Festival, they called theirs also the
Passover, and had no other Rules for the finding of it, but what the Jews had
for theirs, and left the Calculation of it to them: For most of the First
Christians were Converts from Judaism, and Zealous for the Rites of the Law of
Moses (Acts 21. 20.) and one Philip, giving an Account of a Paschal Synod, in
the Second Century, begins his Epistle with this Observation, That the Apostles
being wholly taken up with Preaching of the Gospel to the several Nations of
the World, did not establish any Rules among Christians for the exact time of
Easter. And, Epiphanius farther relates, That there was an old Apostolic
Constitution, by which the Christians were forbidden to trouble themselves with
scrupulous Calculations; but keep it at the same time as the Christians of
Jerusalem, who being Converts from the Jews, understood the Methods and Rules
that were used by them for the discovery of the Passover. Now all the Bishops
of Jerusalem, till Adrian destroyed it, were originally Jews, as is observed by
Eusebius; and so long the Christian World received the time of Easter thence:
but after Jerusalem had been quite Ruined by the Emperor, and there were no
more Bishops there of the Circumcision, every Church began to have Rules of
their own, and the Christian World was divided about their Feast of Love; and
though many SYNODS were Assembled to determine this Matter by Pope Victor at
Rome, Theophilus at Cesarea, and other Bishops in other Churches, yet still the
Dissension continued, and Disputes increased, till at last, A. D. 325, they
were happily ended by Constantine the Great, in the First General Council at
Nice, Rules established, and Tables drawn up for the exact discovery of the
Time of EASTER for ever.

THAT the Christians, even from the Beginning, did observe this Feast, is
evident from St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for
us, therefore let us keep the Feast, not with old Leven, neither with the
Leaven of Malice and Wickedness, but with the Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and
Truth. And Origin, an early Christian Writer, in his Comments on St. John's
Gospel, Explains those words; Now the Passover, a Feast of the Jews, was at
hand; to have been used by the Evangelist, to distinguish that from the
Christian Passover, which was then observed.

THE greatest part of the Christian World, since the First Council of Nice,
have conformed themselves to the Paschal Rules that were there established; and
the whole Western Church, at the time of our Reformation from the Church of
Rome, knew of no other. As in other things, so in this also, it was the Method
of our Reformation, to depart no farther from the Church of Rome, than she had
from the Truth, ( see* Can. 30. published A. D. 1603.) and, in keeping of
Easter, conformed her self to the same time that was then observed in Italy,
France, Spain, Germany, and most other Churches of the Christian World, and all
this in Obedience and Conformity to the Decrees of the First General Council.
And, to prevent all difference upon this Subject, our Church has, in her very
Liturgy, Established by Act of Parliament, not only from that Council at Nice,
inserted this General Rule, That Easter Day is allways the First Sunday after
the First Full Moon, which happens next after the 21st day of March; and, if
the Full Moon happen upon a Sunday, Easter Day is the Sunday after: But also,
lest any difference should arise about the New Mons, has, in the First Column
of the Calendar, put down all the New Mons for a Complete Cycle of 19 Years,
with Direction to take the Paschal New Mons from that TABLE for ever; and all
this according to the Decrees of the First Council at Nice, and Practice of the
Universal Church.

AND though the Vernal Equinox, since the time of that Council, be gotten from
the 21st to the 10th of March; and this TABLE of New Mons is now above Four
Days false; yet, in things undetermined by God's Law, we have always
Preferred Peace and Unity, and the Communion of Saints, before a Needless
Separation and Division.

IT was once the Objection of Mr. Baxter and his Party, That our Church did not
keep Easter, according to our own Rules; and that some Years our Easter was not
the First Sunday after the First Full Moon that was after the 21th Day of
March. But had that Scrupulous Person understood the Cycle of New Moons
inserted in the First Column of our Calendar, and that the Paschal Moon is to
be taken thence; he would have seen his Mistake, and been ashamed of the
Objection.

NOW because the Nicene Council, in Composing these TABLES, has made use of
the Julian year, this also is usually called the Julian Account: the Julian
year has been vulgarly used from before the Birth of our Savior, and the way
of finding Easter for above 1300 years.

Of the Gregorian ACCOUNT, and New-Style.
FROM the time of the First Nicene Council, till the year of our Lord 1582, the
Julian year, and Nicene Rules were made use of in most Countries in the World
for finding of Easter, till in that Year Pope Gregory the 13th, by his sole
Authority, Cancelled all this Old Account, Introduced a New Calendar, Composed
chiefly by Aloysius Lily and his Brother, and New TABLES for the finding of
Easter: Because the Vernal Equinox was then from the 21st gotten to the 11th of
March, he ordered Ten Days to be left out of the Month of October, so that the
15th Day was that Year next after the 4th, from whence arose the Difference
betwixt the New and Old Style, our Fifth of October, thereby becoming their
15th.

AND, that my Reader may have a clear Apprehension of this matter, I have here
Inserted the Month of October, Transcribed from one of the Original Calendars,
that were Printed and Published by the Command and Authority of the said Pope
Gregory the XIIIth, for the very Year 1582.

Dies Mensis. Cai desunt 10 Dies pro correctione Anni Solaris. 1 Remigii Episc.
and Confess. 2 3 4 Francisci confessoris. Duplex. 15 Dionysii, Rustici, and
Eleutherii Mart. Semi dupl. cum commemo. S. Marci Papae and Confessor. and S.
S. Sergii, Bacchi, Marcelli and Apulei Martyrum. 16 Calisti Papae and Martyr.
Semidupl. 17 18 Lucae Evangelistae. Duplex. 19 20 21 Hilarionis Abbatis, and
commemoratio S. S. Vrsulae et Sociarum virginum and Martyrum 22 23 24 25
Chrysantae and Dariae Martyr. 26 Euaristi Papae and Martyr. 27 Vigilia. 28
Simonis and Judae Apostolorum. Dupl. 29 30 31 Vigilia.

I need not Insert a Translation of this Month, it being obvious to every
common Reader, what a Skip here is, from the Fourth to the Fifteenth Day; and
how the Commemoration of all those Saints, that were usually on those Ten
days, were that year added to the Fifteenth Day. Now, by this Regulation of
Pope Gregory, the 15th Day of October was that which was called the 5th, the
16th what was formerly the 6th, and so on; by which means there arose Ten Days
difference betwixt the Julian or Old Style, and the Gregorian or New. A thing
scarcely to be paralleled, except with that Humorsome Edict of Alexander the
Great, who, when he found his Soldiers superstitiously averse from Fighting,
because it was the Month Desius, Published a Decree, that for the future, that
Month should not be accounted the Month Desius, but Artemisius; and immediately
engaged and beat the Enemy: Or else, with that more absurd Decree of the Men of
Athens, who, when Demetrius, in the Month of March, had a great desire to be
initiated into their greater and lesser Ceremonies, one of which was constantly
in the Month of November, the other in August, they ordered that that March
should be forthwith called November; and when those lesser Rites were over,
they Decreed again, that that same Month should be called August, and it was
so; of which the Poet Philippides thus Jested upon Demetrius,

(...) i. e. That contracted a whole Year into one Month, Plutarch in the Life
of Demetrius. Much such was the power of the Papal Bull in contracting the 31
Days of October into One and twenty, and making the 15th Day immediately
succeed the 4th. And because the same Pope foresaw, that in Tract of Time, that
Correction also would be false, and the Equinox again Anticipate in the Julian
Months, he farther Decreed, that after the Year 1600, Three even Centuries
should pass without any Intercalations, though they were otherwise Bissextile
Years, viz. A. D. 1700, 1800, 1900; and then, that the 4th even Century, or A.
D. 2000. should be Bissextile again; and that same Method of making only every
4th even Century, Bissextile, should continue for ever. By which means it comes
to pass, that though the Gregorian Account has hitherto differed but 10 Days
from the Julian; yet, after the 24th Day of February next, when in the Julian
Year, a Bissextile Day is to be Intercalated; there will be 11 difference
betwixt them: And a Letter Dated on the First of March, A. D. 1700, N. S. will
be 11 Days before one dated the same day, according to the Julian, or Old
Style: And at the end of the next Century, the Difference will be 12 Days, and
so on.

TO discover the New Moons for ever, instead of the Golden Number, and Tables
of New Moons fitted to them, the same Pope Gregory appointed Tables of Epacts,
and others of Equation of Epacts, to continue for ever. And because the taking
of Ten Days out of the Month October, perverted the order of the Dominical
Letter, the same Pope was forced to Cancel the Old, and establish a New Cycle
of the Dominical Letter, quite different from the former.

That the Reformed Churches should not lay aside the Julian, or Old-Style, to
Establish the Gregorian, or New-Style.
HAVING thus far given a True, though Short Account of the Julian, or Old, and
the Gregorian, or New Style; the next thing that I shall here briefly inquire
into, is, Whether it be Expedient for the Reformed Churches to continue the
Julian Account, and Old Paschal Tables, which have been all along continued in
the Christian Churches from the Primitive Times, or, if we leave that, should
follow the New-Style of Pope Gregory. And though, at first view, it might seem
reasonable for us, in an indifferent thing, and where they are nearer the
Truth, to comply with the Church of Rome; yet, in my Opinion, in the Matter
before us, it is by no means advisable.

First, BECAUSE in matters relating to Religion, it is best not to make any
Alterations, except upon great and pressing occasions, and where our Church may
get some considerable advantage by the Change; or unless the matter in Dispute
be determined by the Word of God, and it is evident from thence, that our Church
is in an Error. But, as I shall show presently, such alteration as this is not
likely to produce good, but mischief to our Church, and occasion new
differences, as it has already done in the Palatinate Churches; and the matter
before us, is, in its own nature, purely indifferent, and never determined one
way or other, neither by Moses and the Prophets in the Old Testament, nor by
Christ and his Apostles in the New.

Secondly. IN things thus left indifferent, we ought principally to be governed
by the Determination of General Councils; and when they also are silent, by the
Decrees and Canons of National Synods. And, to apply this Rule to our present
purpose, if we look back to the Primitive Church, its evident what heats and
feuds were then amongst Christians, occasioned by the different Rules they had
for finding of Easter. And so long as this matter stood undetermined by a
General Council* every National Church followed its own way, and all the
Threats of Rome, by Victor, and other Bishops of that See, signified very
little toward ending of the Controversy, till it was, at length, happily
determined by the First General Council at Nice, to whose Authority all the
Churches of the World quietly submitted, and Peace and Uniformity were
established, till at length, above a Thousand years after, Pope Gregory revived
the difference, and set up the Authority of that one See above the Decree of a
General Council. And this the Bigots of that Religion pretend to justify. How
did the Church of Rome at the beginning of the Reformation Triumph over the
Protestants, that the Fathers and Councils were all on their side; but after
they had been sufficiently baffled by Bishop Jewel and other Learned
Protestants, and it has been sufficiently proved that the Fathers and Councils
are on our side, they are run into the quite contrary Extreme, and in a
needless controversy, left the Protestants in full possession of a General
Council on their side, whilst they themselves ran schismatically into a
manifest contempt of it, and publicly owned the laying of it* aside. Had the
Reformed Churches done this, the whole World would have been filled with
Clamours against them, and a great Outcry made of their Schism.

Thirdly. WERE the Church of Rome in the right, and the Gregorian Style far
better than the Julian, yet we should be backward in complying with them, both
upon the account of the Romanists, who will construe this to be a Compliance
with the Decree of Pope Gregory, whose Language in this matter is very absolute
and imperious. Nulli ergo hominum liceat hanc paginam voluntatis nostrae
infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire, si quis autem hoc attentare
praesumpserit, indignationem Omnipotentis Dei, ac beatorum Petri and Pauli
Apostolorum ejus, se noverit incursurum -- and again, qui secus secerit
Excommunicationem incurrat, i. e. Let no one dare to contradict this our Decree
(about the New Style) and if any one shall presume to attempt it, let him know
that he incurs the indignation of Almighty God, and of his holy Apostles St.
Peter and St. Paul -- and shall forthwith be excomnnicated out of the Church.
Hitherto we in England have layn under this horrible Curse, and what will our
present Compliance be construed, but a fear of the Papal Thunder, and at least
a tacit Submission to that Chair; Hoc Ithacus velit* Much less should we comply
upon the account of the Protestant Dissenters, who have been always jealous of
our inclining too much toward Rome, and in this matter should we do it, will
most certainly censure and upbraid us for the Compliance, and observing the
Decrees of a Pope of Rome made since the Reformation; and let us beforehand
consider how we shall be able to answer them. However it was the Wisdom of our
first Reformers to comply as far as possible, with the Rites and Customs of the
Church of Rome, and thereby bring over many of them to our Communion; yet since
now there is little of that nature to be hoped for, our wisest Bishops have
laid aside all thoughts of working upon them any further by compliance, and
much rather take care to Convince the Dissenting Protestants, who are far the
more numerous Party, that we are not Popishly inclined. When there was lately a
Controversy in England about the Feast Day of Matthias, our late Archbishop,
to prevent a seeming compliance with the Rules of the Romish Church, ordered it
to be kept on the 24th day of February, even in Leap-Year, notwithstanding the
Church had been then long in possession of a different practice, and was in
some measure countenanced in it, by an Act of Parliament, that ordered the 24th
and 25th of February in Leap-Year, to be esteemed as the same day. If we look
back into former Ages, we may learn from our own Bid, what Struglings and long
Contentions our Bishops had with the Church of Rome, rather than they would
alter their old way of keeping of EASTER. One thing in that Controversy is very
remarkable to our present purpose, viz. That the Bishops of Rome did then urge
against our Bishops, the Decrees of the Universal Church in the Council of
Nice, (Bedae Eccl. H. l* 2. c. 19.) and that their way of finding Easter was
practiced in Africa, Asia, Egypt, Greece, and almost all the World. ( ib. l. 3
c. 25.) Now it seems very unreasonable, after we have been persuaded to comply
with them upon those Reasons, that the same Persons should now endeavor to
persuade us to leave that very way which they have taught us, and that too, not
with (as formerly) but against the Authority of the first general Council, and
the consent of the Asian, African and Greek Churches, which are now on our
side. So far will our compliance be from promoting the peace of the Church,
that in our joining with the Romanists, we shall manifestly fall off from the
Grecian, Asian and other Eastern Churches, who to this day critically observe
the Rules of the first Nicene Council. There is one considerable reason why we
should be governed by the Rules of that Council, and that is, because we were
at that time Subjects of Constantine the Emperor* who summoned that Council,
and confirmed their Sanctions, and did then submit to their Decrees about
keeping of Easter, as appears from that Emperors Letter preserved by Eusebius
in his Life of Constantine. One of our late Acts of Parliament (Stat. 1. Eliz.
chapter 1.) declares the Authority of that Council, as next to that of the Holy
Scriptures, and our present Act of Uniformity, has not only Authoritatively
settled the Nicene Creed, but the Nicene Rules also for finding of Easter; so
that this matter cannot be altered without an Act of Parliament and change of
our Liturgy, which since we have been so averse to, for the sake of our own
Protestant Dissenters, it will seem very unreasonable to do it in compliance
with the Romanists.

That which will be a matter of the greatest moment for us to consider is,
whether this alteration by Pope Gregory be correct and true, or whether, if we
should now comply with them, some new Pope may not correct these Alterations,
and think some other way more exact, as was famously done in the correct
Edition of the Bible by Pope Clement VIII. who in 2000 places changed the
Infallible Edition of the Bible, published but two years before by Pope Sixtus
V. and then we shall be again importuned to dance after them, and leave the
Gregorian, as they would now have us leave the Julian Account. I shall
therefore in the next place examine the Errors and Mistakes of Pope Gregory in
correcting the Year: and that

First, IF we would have corrected the Paschal Tables, we ought not to have
reduced them to the Order of the Heavenly Bodies, at the time of the Nicene
Council, 325 Years after Christ, which is all that is pretended to by Pope
Gregory, but to the time of our Savior and the first Christian Passover; to
the end that Equinox should not have been brought back to March the 21th, but
to March the 25th where it was at the time of our Saviors Crucifixion. And
whereas the Romanists now commemorate our Savior's Resurrection on the first
Sunday, after the first Full-Moon, that is after the 21st of March, our Savior
did not rise from the Dead, till the first Sunday after the first Full-Moon,
that was after the 25th of March, if the Equinox in that Age was their Guide
for the Passover. This was certainly a great oversight of the Infallible Chair,
and may be a sufficient reason why we should not join with them.

Secondly. THERE is great reason for us to suspect, that the Jews in the time
of our Savior did not mind the Equinox, but the Sun's entrance into Aries,
which according to the prevailing opinion of that Age was Eight days before it.
Thus Josephus (Antiq. l. 2. c. 10.) says, That the Jewish Passover was the
14th Day of the first Month, the Sun being in Aries, and Anatolius from several
old Jewish Authors relates, That that was the first Month among the Jews, in
which the Sun entered the first Sign of the Zodicak; and perhaps the Jews might
think, that their Paschal Lamb, which was always to be a Male, might have some
relation to the Sign of Aries in the Heavens. Now its certain, that about the
time of our Savior, Learned Men distinguished betwixt the time of the Equinox,
and of the Suns entrance into Aries, and made this last Eight Days before the
other, as appears from Varro, Ovid, Manilius, Columella, Pliny, and the very
Calendar of J. Caesar, in which the Sun's entrance into Aries is March the
18th, and the Vernal Equinox March the 25th. When Anatolius placed the Equinox
March the 22d, he expressly said, that the Sun was then got Four Degrees in
Aries, and therefore entered Aries March the 18th, and in Bid the Sun's
entrance into that Sign is the 15th of the Calends of April, or March the 18th.
Nor was this the opinion of the Greeks and Romans only, but of the Egyptians
also, as appears from Manetho's Apotelesmata, who ( l. 2. v. 73, 74, 75.)
expressly says, that the Summer Solstice was, when the Sun was in the 8th
Degree of Cancer. And this Entrance of the Sun into Aries, was what both Jews
and Christians chiefly looked after in discovering the time of the Passover.
Hippolitus was the first Christian Writer that published Paschal Tables, and in
them imitated the Jews; these Tables are now extant, and in every 16 Years
Easter twice fell upon March the 18th, long before the Equinox, but not before
the Sun's entrance into Aries. St. Cyprian in his Book de Paschate gives the
Rules for discovering of Easter both among the Jews and Christians, and its
evident that he begins the Paschal Month at March the 4th, so that the 14th day
of the Paschal Month may be March the 17th, and the 15th day on March the 18th.
For so the Jews agree that the 15th day of Nisan, may be upon that day that the
Sun enters Aries (Maimon. de Consecr. Call.) Victorius particularly explains the
Paschal Terms according to the Christians both in Egypt and Rome, and, with
small difference from the Jews, makes the Paschal Term begin at March the 5th,
and so the 14th day of the first Month might be March the 18th. The Christians
at length about A. D. 260 began to understand that the Sun entered Aries at the
Vernal Equinox, and Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria informed the Christian
World, that they ought not to keep Easter before the Vernal Equinox. After this
was compiled that Canon that forbad the Christians to keep Easter, as the Jews
did before the Equinox, for which the Jews were blamed also by the Emperor
Constantine, they still keeping their old way of the Sun's Entrance into Aries
8 days before the Equinox. I shall only add, that the Acts of Pilate (a very
Old Book, quoted by Justin the Martyr, and other early Fathers) had our
Saviors Crucifixion on the 18th of March, as appears from Epiphanius, which
would have been very absurd, if the Jewish Passover could never have been so
early. If therefore its evident that the Jews in the time of our Savior, and
the Christians of the 1st and 2d Century, did not mind the Equinox in computing
of Easter, but the Sun's entrance into Aries 8 days before it, then this will
be a convincing Argument against the Truth of the Gregorian Account, that makes
Easter depend upon and succeed the Equinox. Nor is it to any purpose for the
Romanists to reply that the Jews erred in keeping the Passover at that time,
since all that the Christians can do, is to keep their Easter at that time when
our Savior was Crucified and rose again, which was at the Jewish Passover,
whether they observed the right time or not.

Thirdly. THE Gregorian Rule for finding of the Equinox, makes the Precession
come to three days in 400 Years, that is, one day in 133 Years. Now I think it
may be proved that the Precession is much greater, and comes to one whole Day
in 120 Years. For the Demonstration of this, I shall refer my Reader to that
excellent Book of Lidyat's de Anni Solaris Mensura, and may my self hereafter
confirm what he there lays down, with other convincing Arguments, which that
Learned Man never thought of. For these Reasons I take the Gregorian Account to
be very injudicious and false, and therefore not to be followed by Protestants.
Not to mention that if we would have reduced our Easter to what it was at the
Nicene Council, there had been an easier method and free from the
inconveniences of the Gregorian. There need have nothing else been done, but
declaring the 11th of March to be the Paschal Equinox, and that in every 120
Years, it should have advanced one day farther, for its not material what day
of our Solary Month we call the Equinox, so that we be agreed of the time. And
then, instead of introducing perplexed and difficult Tables of Epacts, the
New Mons might be discovered for ever by the Old Tables, only going backward
one Day in 312 Years, from the time of the Nicene Council, at this time 4 Days,
according to that known Rule in Caelis est hic. This had really answered the
whole design of the Church of Rome, in restoring of Easter to the measures of
the Nicene Council, and yet had neither disturbed the Julian Account, nor
perverted the Old Order of the Dominical Letter, nor destroyed the use of those
Old Tables of New Mons, and the Golden Number. To conclude therefore this
short Dissertation; Its very observable, that when God Almighty ordered the
Jews to keep the Passover, and thereby bare in memory the day of their
deliverance out of Egypt, and at that Feast teach their Children the reason of
their keeping of it; God did not give the Jews any exact Rules for finding of
the Day in a Solary Year, but only bade them keep the 14th Day of their First
Month, or that Month in which their Corn began to be ripe, be it according to
the different Seasons, sooner or later; and in that Feast, notwithstanding such
difference, the Jews were to say in their Hymns and Prayers, and teach their
Children, that on that Day God had delivered them out of Egypt; and so in the
common and civil use of Words, the same Day of the same Month is reckoned the
same time, though the Month fell earlier or later in the Solary Year. At the time
of our Savior, the Jews erred in the time of their Passover, (if our Rules
that make it depend upon the Equinox are true) and made it depend upon a time 8
Days sooner; and yet when this was the Day that the Sanhedrim had agreed on,
and they that sat in Moses Chair had solemnly appointed; our Savior and his
Apostles never scrupled the time, but Christ expressly said of it, Luke 22. 7.
That that was the day in which the Passover ought to be killed. And so the Jews
assert, that it was always in the power of their Chief Court to apoint their
Passovers, and tho they erred, yet were to be obeyed. Talmud Sanhed. p. 13.
etc. Cozri p. 213, 214. Maimon, Cons. Call. p. 349. and the Jews quote for that
opinion. the words of the Law. Deuteronomy. 17. 9, 10.

THE chief thing aimed at by God in all these Festivals, was the Heart and the
Devotions; the Prayers and the Thanksgivings, and when they were duly
performed, his People might be the less solicitous for the circumstance of
time. The best Rule about the time, and what our Savior himself practiced, is
to follow the Commands of our Guides and Rulers, and though they should Err in
some minute Circumstances of time, yet so long as the End of the Feast is
obtained, and Peace and Unity preserved, we are sure to be blameless. And this
has been the method of the Church of England and other Reformed Churches; who
constantly kept Easter according to the Decrees of the Fathers of the first
General Council; who happily made Peace and Union in the Christian World, and
according to the practice of all the Christians in the World, except the late
Schismatics of the Church of Rome, who have in the last Century, broken the
Decrees of those very Councils that they themselves magnify, and forsaken the
practice of all the Christians in the World. One of the Principal things that
God obliged the Jews to, was to keep the Passover in the first Month of the
Year, and yet the Romanists, after all the Corrections of Pope Gregory, do very
often keep Easter in the last Month of the Year instead of the first, for the
Roman Year begins at the 25th day of March, and yet their Easter may be on the
22d, 23d, or 24th day of March, and so in the last and not in the first Month
of the Year. I do not mention this as a matter of such great moment, as to
deserve our altering our Old Rules; for, so long as we be within the compass of
that which the Jews called the first Month of the Year, its not very material
by what Name we call it, but only to show the many Errors and Mistakes of the
bungling Corrections of the Church of Rome, and that there is no reason at all
for us to follow them, but either to keep to our Old Rules and Union with the
Christian World, or else, if we must be changing, to do it more correctly than
they have done. I shall end this short Dissertation, with that Excellent Advice
of the wisest of Kings, and wisest of Men, twice mentioned in the short Book of
Proverbs.

Remove not the Ancient Landmark.
FINIS.
Books Printed for R. Sare.
An Appeal to all the True Member, of the Church of England, in behalf of the
King's Supremacy, as by Law Established; by our Convocations Approved, and our
Eminent Bishops and Clergymen Stated and Defended, against both the Popish and
Fanatical Opposers of it, Octavo.

A Practical Discourse concerning Profane Swearing; especially in the Two
great Points of Perjury and Common Swearing; Octavo.

The Principles of the Christian Religion Explained in a brief Commentary upon
the Chapter Catechism. Oct.

These Five by Dr. Wake.

Epictetus's Morals with Simplicius's Comment, made English from the Greek;
with the Addition of his Life, from the French of Monsieur Boileau. by G.
Stanhope D. D. In Octavo.

An Answer to all the Excuses and Pretenses which Men ordinarily make for their
not coming to the Holy Communion. Fitted for the Meanest Capacities, and very
proper to be given away by such as are Charitably Inclined. Price three Pence.
By a Divine of the Church of England. The Fourth Edition Corrected.

Parsons his Christian Directory, being a Treatise of Holy Resolution. In two
Parts. Put into Modern English; And now made Public, for the Instruction of
the Ignorant; the Conviction of the Unbelieving; the Awakning and Reclaiming
the Vicious, and for, Confirming the Religions in their Good Purposes.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Sare at Gray's Inn Gate in Holborne.
FAbles of Aesop and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections,
Folio. The Third Edition.

Fables and Stories Moralized, being a Second part of the Fables of Aesop, and
other Eminent Mythologists etc. Folio.

The Visions of Dom Francisco de Quevedo Villegas Knight. of the Order of St.
James: The Eighth Edition Octavo.

Twenty Two Select Coloquies out of Erasmus Roterodamus; pleasantly
Representing several Superstitious Levities, that were crept into the Church of
Rome, in his Days. The Third Edition, Octavo. These Four by Sir Roger
L'Estrange.

The Genuine Epistles of the Apostolical Fathers? St. Barnabas, St Ignatius,
St. Clement, St. Polycarp, the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Martyrdoms of St.
Ignatius, and St. Polycarp; Translated and Published with a large Preliminary
Discourse. relating to the several Discourses here put together. Octavo.

The Authority of Christian Princes over their Ecclesiastical Synods Asserted;
with Particular Respect to the Convocations of the Clergy of the Realm, and
Church of England: Occasioned by a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Letter to a
Convocation Man, Octavo.


