Dr. WILLIAMS's FAST-SERMON Preached before the House of COMMONS, On Wednesday
the 11th of December, 1695.

Jovis 12. Die December. 1695.
ORdered, That the Thanks of this House be given to Dr. Williams for the Sermon
by him Preached before this House Yesterday at St. Margarets Westminster, and
that he be desired to Print the same. And that Sir Robert Cotton do acquaint
him therewith.

PAUL JODREL. Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE House of Commons, ON Wednesday the
11th of December, 1695. BEING A Solemn Day of Fasting and Humiliation,
Appointed by His MAJESTY, For imploring the Blessing of Almighty God upon the
Consultations of this Present Parliament. By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D. Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill, Senr and Junr; at the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul s Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey. M DC XC V.

A SERMON Preached before the House of Commons, etc.
1 SAMUEL II. 30. Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me,
shall be lightly esteemed.
THE Words of the Text are a general Proposition, but made use of as a reason
to justify the Severity of the Threatening here denounced by a Prophet against
the House and Family of Eli; whose Sons at that time executed the Priests
Office under him at Shiloh: Of whom, and their case, it is requisite to give
some account, as an Exemplification of the Text, and what may serve also as a
Comment on it.

Eli, that was then High Priest, was a Descendant of Ithamar the Younger Son of
Aaron; but how the Succession came to be altered, which from Aaron's death had
probably continued for V. Ezra. 7. 3.
Seven Generations in the Line of Eleazar the Elder Brother, the Scripture is
silent.

There is nothing to be collected from thence to Eli's disadvantage and
disparagement, in the double charge he Officiated in, whether as a Chap. 4. 18.
Judge, in which Station he was for Forty Years together, or as the High Priest.

There is not a Syllable that charges him with Intrusion any more into the
Priesthood, than into the Judicature.

1 Chronicles. 6. 7.
There was in being at that time a Meraioth or an Amariath, one of the Family
of Eleazar, and the next in Blood and pretense too, if a direct Succession were
inviolably to be observed, and yet it is no where imputed to Eli that he
invaded or was possessed of another's Right; nor is it said that any did abhor
the offering of the Lord for that reason, as they Chap. 2. v. 17.
did for another.

No! There we find Elkanah and Hannah (and without doubt those pious Persons
were not alone) repairing to the Tabernacle at the appointed Seasons, and
applying themselves to him as 1 Samuel 1. 15, 26.
God's Minister, and the Director of the Public Service.

To him, and his Sons, were they wont to bring their Offerings, as it is
expressly said there, v. 3. When Elkanah went up out of his city yearly to
worship, and to sacrifice unto the Lord of Hosts in Shiloh; the two sons of
Eli, Hophni and Phineas, the priests of the Lord, were there.

Whence this Translation of the Priesthood, from the Elder to the Younger
House, proceeded; or when it was, whether before, or whether it began in Eli
(as it is most probable) is not certain. It seems, whenever it was, to have
been by God's approbation, if not his immediate direction; and that, perhaps,
for some gross neglect, or great Miscarriages, or some incapacity on the other
side: Or from the necessity of having such a Person in that Station in those
perilous and uncertain Times, as would by a wise and steady Hand, and his
prudent Conduct, and above all, by his Exemplary Piety and Virtue, maintain the
Honor and Dignity of the Priesthood, and keep the People firm to their
Religion, under all the inclinations, and too often prevailing inclinations to
Idolatry.

This seems to have been the state of Affairs at that time, and the reason of
Eli's introduction into the Priesthood.

And because of the difficult Service he was to enter upon, God encouraged him
(as he was wont to do in great undertakings) by a particular promise of
establishing his Posterity in that Sacred Function; as the words immediately
preceding the Text do intimate; I said indeed that thy house, and the house of
thy father should walk before me for ever.

Eli, as to his own person, and whilst in a condition, seems to have answered
this Character, and to have acquitted himself worthy of the choice made of him,
in both capacities, as a Priest, and a Judge; for during the whole time of his
Administration, the Times seem to have been quiet, and the Nation in an orderly
condition for about forty years together; and accordingly it is passed over in
silence in the Sacred Annals.

Chap. 4. 15.
But Eli grew superannuated, being 98 years old, and blind, and incapable of
officiating in person at the Altar; and so it fell to his Sons, two dissolute
Young Men, that being from under their Father's Eye, and possessed of so large
a power, as from him devolved upon themselves, set no bounds to their arbitrary
and licentious Humors, but broke through all the ties of Piety and Modesty,
treating the Institutions of their Religion with so profane an Insolence, that
men abhorred the offering of the Lord; and so Chap. 2. 17.
lewd were they in their Conversation, that by their Example and Encouragement,
they made V. 24.
(as their Father tells them) the Lord's people to transgress.

This was a Case too hard and perverse to cure by gentle means and calm
reasoning, the way used by their over-indulgent Father, verse 23, 24. therefore
it was time for God to appear to threaten and to punish: It Is time then for him
to reverse his own Laws, to cancel his Promises, and recall his Favors which
were so ungratefully and impiously abused; so it is represented in this verse,
Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed, that thy house, and the
house of thy fathers, should walk before me for ever: but now the Lord says,
Be it far from me: For them that honor me, I will honor; and they that
despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.

1. I shall Treat of these Words by themselves as a general Proposition, and as
containing several important Truths, and that are worthy of our most serious
Consideration.

2. I shall Treat of them with respect to the Context, and make use of them by
way of Application to the occasion.

Before I proceed to which, give me leave to observe, That though it is in the
power of every man, more or less, as well as it is his Duty, to honor God by
his Words and Actions, by the Obedience he gives to his Laws, and the
Acknowledgments he makes of his Providence, by the regard he pays to the Sacred
Offices and Institutions of Religion; yet that this more especially belongs to
those that are in a more eminent Station, and have greater advantages and
opportunities for doing Good, than others, by their Authority, Power, and
Example. Of these it is said, that if they then Honor God, and lay out
themselves, and use their utmost Endeavors for promoting his Religion in the
World, he will then Honor them, that is, will show himself to be their God, by
supporting them under all the discouragements they meet with, by directing them
to the most proper methods, and giving success to all their endeavors; by
raising them a just esteem, and making even their Enemies to be at peace with
them; and by a thousand other ways, that good and worthy Persons have the
comfortable experience of in the faithful discharge of their Duty toward God
and Men. To these the words (as they are before us) do more especially belong,
Them that honor me, I will honor. Of which I shall treat first of all, as a
Proposition in general, and by it self.

1. I shall treat of the Words by themselves, Them that honor me, I will
honor.

The Honor due to Almighty God, is founded upon the same reason as his Being;
and by the same Arguments and ways that we know him to be, by the same is he
concluded to be of Infinite Power and Wisdom, and endued with all those
Perfections which make him to be God, are peculiar to him, and do distinguish
him from all other Beings besides; and for that reason we can no more be
wanting in the Honor due to such a Being, than we can suppose him not to be,
or not endued with those glorious Perfections that unalienably belong to his
Nature.

And therefore if we did not understand the depravation of human Nature, nor
had any experience of the state and inclinations of Mankind, we might well
suppose that we should find the whole World a Temple, and all Mankind, in Fact,
agreeing in a constant Adoration and Honor of God, as they do in the Belief of
Him.

For who can consider the wonderful Power and Wisdom shining through the Works
of the visible Creation, without the profoundest Reverence for their Great and
Almighty Creator?

Who can Contemplate his Goodness and his Mercy, his Mercy to the worst, and
his Beneficence to all; his readiness to Give what we Want, and to Forgive when
we have Offended; but must express his sense of it by an humble Love to his
Gracious Benefactor, and a hearty desire of being Conformable to him in the
like Divine Temper?

Who can consider God's Government of the World, and his constant Preservation
of Mankind, and an Order amongst them under all Vicissitudes and Changes, which
like an Earthquake tear up, as it were, the foundations of Kingdoms; but must
own his and the World's Preserver by his Prayers to him, and a Dependence upon
him?

Who that considers the Equity and Perfection of the Divine Law, how suitable
to the Nature, Reason, and Condition of Mankind, but must testify his regard
to it by a ready and cheerful Obedience?

Who can reflect upon the Preservation of a Church (the Conservator of Divine
Truth) under all the opposition it has met with from the fury of Bad men, and
the malice and craft of evil Spirits, that with one consent have been
Confederates against it; but must acknowledge the watchful Providence that
presides over it, and which has made even the Blood of its Martyrs, and the
Sufferings of its Confessors, to be the Seed of the Church?

Lastly, Who is there that has made any observation of himself, and looked into
the Circumstances of his Life in the various Scenes of it, of Youth and
Manhood, of Prosperity and Adversity, of Health and Sickness, of Success and
Disappointments, of the Mistakes and Miscarriages when he has trusted to his
own Wisdom and Conduct*, and the wonderful turn of Affairs to his advantage,
when he often least thought and expected; but must own a Cause superior to
himself, and his obligations to this Almighty Power?

These are Considerations lie open to every man's eye; and, in reason, we might
as soon find so many Infidels and Atheists in the World, as any Contemners of
the Most High.

Surely there is no need of any other Arguments than the nature of the thing to
induce us to honor our Creator, Preserver and Benefactor; and so the Text may
seem to be in vain, when it is said by way of Argument, Them that honor me, I
will honor. What need is there of this Doctrine? What need of any Rewards
proposed and promised, any more to provoke, encourage and oblige us to honor
God, than to love our selves? Since the same reason that will direct us to the
one, will also direct us to the other.

Surely then there cannot be an instance given of so hateful a Creature as the
other part of the Text supposes, of one that despises God, no more than of one
that denies him: And if such an one there were, it may reasonably be supposed
the whole World would with one mouth condemn him, and cast him out of their
Communion.

But it was not in that Age alone that there were such Hophni's and Phineas's,
such Sons of Verse. 12.
Belial, that knew not the Lord; and such among the People that abhorred the
Offering, and that despised the Divine Institutions.

It has been too much the Vice of most Ages; and I wish I could say, that this
in which we live, were among those that are to be excepted: For then, whatever
need there were of this Doctrine in a degenerate Age and Nation, there would be
no need of it in ours.

But though, blessed be God, we are not arrived to that prodigious state of
Impiety, and that the Offerings to Almighty God, and the public Offices of our
Religion, are not so profaned, as among the Israelites at that time; but are
maintained, generally speaking, by the Guardians of the Law, and the Governors
of the Church, as well as by the Laws and Established Order: Yet we may find
too much of that Impiety insinuating it self among us; and work enough for all
concerned in the government of Church and State to provide against. And
therefore that the Argument of the Text is fit to be insisted upon.

But I shall refer the treating of it in this way to the Second General.

In the mean time, as the words lie before us, we may collect from them,

1. That Religion and the Civil Interest are closely connected: The honoring
of God, and God's honoring those that thus honor him.

2. That Religion is in the first place to be taken into consideration: First
honor God, and then God will honor.

3. According as Religion is encouraged, and God thereby honored, may we judge
concerning the state of Persons or Nations.

1. Religion and the Civil Interest are closely connected.

It was strictly so among the Jews, whose Government was a Theocracy, the
Constitution of God's sole Contrivance, and his immediate Establishment; so
that they could not admit of any alteration, or revocation, but by the same
Divine Authority.

And the Law of the Land being then of God's own Institution, there was a
peculiar Providence and Blessing that was connected to their Obedience by a
Divine Promise: And by this they were eminently distinguished from other
Nations.

But though it was thus with them after an especial manner, yet the whole World
always was, and ever will be under the government of God's Providence; and the
same general Reasons are there for it over the face of the Earth. It being in
this case, as it is in Government amongst Men, which however it varies, whether
a Monarchy, Aristocracy or Democracy, has the same foundation, and the same
Ends to pursue; which are the determining and securing men's Rights, the
impartial administration of Justice, and the preservation of the Public Peace
and Order.

And howsoever the Providence of God may vary in its motions, now turning it
self this way, and then another; yet there are immovable Reasons upon which it
always proceeds, and that is Religion, and the Blessing of God; our honoring
of him, and his honoring of us, in conjunction and cooperation.

For Religion will stand to the World's end, whatever become of particular
Persons and Governments: As the Earth will abide for ever, though the
Inhabitants of one Age give way to another; though Rivers change their course,
and Mountains their station. And it is Religion that gives the surest
establishment, and infuses a new life into a Nation, or a Cause, when it seems
to be upon point of expiring; for that engages Providence on its side; and then
they have in reality what the Heathens had in imagination only, when they
fought, as they conceived, against poor Mortals, with the advantage of having
their gods concerned in their quarrel.

While Mortals engage with Mortals only, there is the like Force to defend, as
to assault; and the success depends upon the greater Numbers, the inbred
Courage of the Soldiery, the Conduct of the Commander, or some fortunate
Accident: And the last sometimes has the advantage of all the rest, and is
instead of Numbers, Conduct, or Courage; so that as Solomon observes, The
battle is no more to the strong, than the race is always to the swift, Eccles.
9. 11.

But now when the Divine Providence comes to be concerned, it is not what the
Number, or the Courage, or the Conduct, nay or Accidents, are on the adverse
side: Because that is all in it self, and becomes all wherever it is.

And there it will be, where the Honor of God and Religion is concerned. This
was it that inspired David with an undaunted Resolution; Thou come to me with
a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield; but I come to thee in the name of
the Lord of hosts, whom thou have defied, 1 Samuel 17. 45.

And these are no more to be separated, than the Soul and the Body; for if we
once with Goliath defy, or to speak in milder terms, neglect or despise
Religion, and have no regard to the Honor of God in our Consultations and
Resolutions, our Affairs and Proceedings, we are upon the brink of destruction;
and if we are preserved, and become successful, it is not for our own sakes,
but for the sake of others, or some further design the Providence of God has in
reserve for us.

There is a vast difference between what is done by Divine Providence for our
own sakes, and what for the sake of others, or for other Reasons than what
appear, and what are unknown at present to us. If for our own sakes, as it is,
when grounded upon Religion, and the Honor we pay to Almighty God, it will
then continue, and last as long as the Reason lasts upon which it stands. But
if it be for other Reasons that we succeed in a Design, and not for our own
sakes; then when the Reasons cease, our assistance that we had from the Divine
Providence ceases with it. Thus it was with the haughty Assyrian, who prosper'd
in his Invasion of Judea, not as he himself thought, by the wisdom of his own
Counsel, and the mere force of his Arms; but as he was the rod of God's Anger,
and sent by his special Commission against that hypocritical Nation. But that
Service ended, there was a stop put to his Victory, and he soon fell under the
like Calamity; As it follows, When the Lord has performed his whole work on
Mount Zion, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria,
and the glory of his high looks, Isa. 10. 5, etc.

In which Case Prosperity and Success may be so far from being a Blessing, that
it becomes a Curse; and often Men are thereby made but Instruments of mischief
to each other, and the Assyrian is conquered by the Babylonian, the Babylonian
by the Persian, the Persian by the Grecian; and the Grecian after a little time
dies, as it were, upon the spot; and the Power, which when entire, was
confiderable, broke and crumbled into numerous Kingdoms, and came to nothing.

And thus it has been throughout the World from the time of the mighty hunter
Nimrod, to the present Age; when it has been a mere humane World, subsisting,
as it were, by it self, and managed by the Policy, and too often by the
Passions and Vices of Mankind; by their Ambition and their Pride, their Revenge
and Cruelty, the great Incentives and Boutefeus of the World. And thus there
will be a circulation of rising and falling, of punishing and being punished;
and like Billows of the Ocean, of swallowing up, and being swallowed up, till
the World's end; whilst in this condition, whilst acted and managed by the
Interests of Men, without respect had to a higher Cause, and Principle, viz.
Religion, and the Providence of God. But now if we consider the World as a
compound State, when there is as certain connection between Religion and the
State, as between the Soul and the Body; then there is another account to be
given of things, and a better State to be expected. The World is then as the
Jewish State was, a kind of Theocracy, God is the Governor, and Religion, as it
were, the Soul of it: And then it is that God becomes their Patron, and his
Providence their security.

Indeed without the Providence of God, we are neither secure of what we have,
nor can be sure of success in what we pretend to. It is there only that we are
safe, by that only we can hope to succeed. And therefore as there cannot be a
more comfortless prospect in view, than to take a cause in hand, where we
cannot promise to our selves that assistance; so there cannot be a greater or
more dangerous error committed in the conduct of Affairs, than to leave that
out of our consideration, and to separate those two Interests of Religion and
Civil Affairs, which God has so advantageously, as to the Good of Mankind,
joined together.

2. As these Two are thus to be connected, so Religion is to have the
preference: Them that honor me, I will honor.

Second Causes have this advantage of the first, that they are visible, and so
sooner affect us than the Supreme, who is invisible; and therefore Mankind have
been inclined to direct their expectations and endeavors another way. And as
the Heathens, for want of looking further, made the most conspicuous, and
sometimes the meanest Creatures, because present, the Objects of their
Adoration; so when second Causes stare us in the face, and we see how one moves
another, and from what immediate reasons the success of affairs does arise; we
are apt to begin with them, there to stay our hand and lodge our thoughts, and
depend upon their concourse and influence as if they all moved of and from
themselves, and there were no Superior Power, no Invisible Agent, that they had
a relation to, and dependence upon. Thus it was with them, Isa. 22. 8. etc.
They looked to the armor of the house of the forest, made up the breaches,
gathered together the waters of the lower pool, made a ditch for the old pool;
but, says God, ye have not looked to the maker thereof.

But this is an unpardonable oversight, to begin thus at the wrong end; as if
because an Artificer uses a Pencil and Colors in the various Figures which he
draws, and sets off by his Skill to the greatest advantage; that a Person
should impute all to the Instruments the Artist uses and applaud their Skill,
and apply himself to them as the Operator, and pass by the Painter, upon whose
Judgment they wholly depend in their Use and Operation.

Much so do they that apply themselves to the next Causes, and to the Means
(how proper and sufficient soever they are in their own nature to answer the
design) to the neglect of Him who is the Supreme Cause, and that gives Laws and
Activity to all Inferior Agents, and directs, and overrules, and determines
them as he pleases. An imprudence that no Person would be guilty of in any case
besides. It is not to be denied but all these inferior Powers, these second
Causes, these Instruments and Means, may be and are very proper, convenient,
and necessary in their place and order; but to begin with them without asking
leave, and begging the Blessing of God in the use of them; is of Inferior to
make them Supreme, of Instruments and Means, to make them the Efficient; and
what therefore they may with the like Devotion, as the Romans applied
themselves to Fortune, make the Objects of their Prayer.

Prayer is somewhere due, for we receive what we cannot of our selves procure;
we live as well as we begin to be, by the like Power; and if we enter upon our
affairs under the influence only of our own wisdom and power, we may as well
pray to our selves, as depend upon our selves; since where our dependence is,
there are our devotions due. But how ridiculous would he appear, that should
thus adore himself, and pray to himself? A folly greater than that of Caligula,
who when he required others to own him for a god, could not in the mean time
think himself to be so. And yet this is a folly he must be guilty of that does
not in the first place own a God and a Providence, in the guidance and conduct
of human Affairs; and darkly pursues them under the covert of a blind Chance,
or of a Wisdom of his own, very often as blind as that.

We are taught a wiser course, and what will always hold and continue to be so,
Prove. 3. 5, 6. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine
own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy
paths. Or as it is here; Them that honor me, I will honor.

3. According to the honor we give to God, and the regard shown to Religion,
we may expect to be honored by him; such we may expect the Event will be.

It is an easy thing to conceive that such the Event will be, forasmuch as God
Governs the World; and when we lay things in their proper order, there is no
reason to think but that prosperity, honor, and success, should attend those
that honor God; as heat and light do the Sun. And we may as well question,
whether it will be day when the Sun rises; and whether it will be Summer with
us when the Sun is in Cancer; as whether God, who is infinitely Good, and has
the Sovereign disposal of all things, will not so Govern and Order, as shall be
for the Interest, Good, and Happiness, of such as honor him.

And yet if we draw near, and view the case as it is often in Fact, we shall
find it far different from what it is in Speculation.

If indeed this were constantly so, that those that honor God were always
honored by him with such peculiar marks of favor as distinguished them from
others, it would serve as a character by which the Good might be known from the
Bad. But since nothing is more evident from common experience, than that all
things, generally speaking, come alike to all; then those that do not honor
God, may fare alike with such as do; and those that do honor him, fare no
better than those that do not; and so the force of the Argument in the Text
will be lost.

But setting aside, for the present, what may be said in defense of the method
of Divine Providence in such a seeming promiscuous dispensation of things (as
the Wiseman speaks of) and the reconcileableness of the proposition in the Text
to it, as to particular persons; we are to remember what has been already said,
that it is more especially to be applied to such Persons that are of eminent
Character in respect of Quality, or Office; or for the advantages they have and
improve to the honor of God, and promoting of Religion. Such as these God does
honor in the eye of the World, and by Providence as extraordinary as their
stations and improvements, does often, and for the most part, crown with
success, or a Blessing greater than that. So that even their disapointments
shall be to their advantage, their danger to their security, and their fall, if
not to their after-advancement (as was the case of Job and Joseph) shall be,
however, to their reputation and honor.

Such as these that do good for goodness sake, and that lay out themselves for
the honor of God, the service of Religion, and therein for the public Good,
are Benefactors to Mankind; and had they lived among the Heathen, who had no
better, they should have been taken into the Calendar of their Gods: And surely
such as these will God more especially regard.

But if we raise the argument higher, and apply it to Nations and Communities,
it improves in our hands, and we have a noble Instance of this Truth. It must
be granted, that God that has a regard to the Flowers of the Field, the Fowls
of the Air, and the Beasts of the Earth, is as much more concerned in the Good,
Preservation, and Happiness of Mankind, as these in their Nature exceed the
other; but yet because we see not into all the Events and Circumstances
relating to men in this World, and that there is a reserve for them in another;
we cannot so settle what relates to them, but that we are forced to suspend,
and must acknowledge there are great difficulties, and that must remain so to
be, till the whole comes to be disclosed. But now as to Men combined together
in Societies, the case is not so perplexed; for there we may, generally
speaking, observe, and perhaps, if a careful History of Acts and Events were
preserved, it would appear, that God does honor those Nations which honor
him; and that there is no People among whom, as well by their Practice as Laws,
Virtue and Religion have been, and are encouraged, but has a suitable Blessing
attending it, and the Divine Providence eminently appearing in their behalf.
Even among the Heathens this was both acknowledged and experimented. And if we
will but take the pains to consider the periodical Revolutions among the Jews,
we should find all along through the course of that History, that it is a
continued Series and Narrative of the Divine Providence, proceeding by this
Rule: So that I am confident there cannot be one Instance given to the
contrary, that ever they were delivered up to their Enemies, or had any great
Misfortune befell them, but what was brought upon them from some foregoing
Apostasy, and high Provocation.

And if there be any thing wanting for the proof of this part (of God's
honoring them that honor him (as surely there is not) yet there are Instances
upon Instances on the other part, that those that despise Religion, shall be
lightly esteemed.

There are some Vices that in their own nature and apparent consequences root
up Families, make Nations effeminate, and poor-spirited, and render them an
easy Prey to the bold Invader: As was evident in the declining Times of the
Roman Empire, declining in Virtue as well as Power, and declining in Power,
because they declined in Virtue.

But there are other Sins that have as bearing an influence in the Judgments
that befall a Nation, and especially a Nation in Covenant with God, as a Church,
that deprives them of their best Defense, the protection of God, and exposes
them to the worst of dangers; and these Sins are a profane contempt or neglect
of things Sacred.

Of which we need seek no further for an Evidence than the times we are upon,
viz. of the Judges; insomuch, that during the 450 years of Act. 13. 20.
that Administration, there were 111 of those years, years of Oppression; the
reason of which is all along ascribed to their Apostasy from the True Religion;
and that therefore God strengthened Judge. 3. 8. 12. 4. 1. 6. 1. 10. 6.
their Adversaries, and delivered and sold them into their hands.

And if we descend lower, and consider the Example set before us in this
Chapter, we have one Instance beyond all exception, in the Family of Eli; whose
Sons Hophni and Phineas were both slain in one day, the Ark taken, and
thereupon Shiloh, which had been the place of its Residence Psalm. 78. 60.
for 340 years, (if not more) left desolate.

A Case so remarkable, that in as degenerate an Age, when they placed as much
confidence in the Temple, as these did in the Ark, they are sent to this
Monument of God's just Indignation for their confutation. Jer. 7. 4, 12. Go ye
now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and
see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel.

And this we find to be the usual method of Divine Providence throughout the
Book of God: That whilst Religion was maintained, and the Hands of Moses held
up, the Jews prevailed against the Amalekites, and prosper'd whithersoever they
went: But if they fell, and Religion declined, that Contempt gave force and
success to the Stratagems and Combinations of their Enemies. Then God will
forsake his own Tabernacle, Psalm. 78. 60.
and deliver up his strength into the hands of their Enemies, that he may make
them sensible, that his Justice and his Word are greater than the Ark, which
was to be worshipped for his sake; as Josephus De Bell. l. 5. c. 12.
expresses it.

So that in fine, if we would make a just calculation of what is like to be the
fate of a People, whether to the better or the worse, to the success or
disappointment, the safety or ruin of a Nation, we need not have recourse to
the Stars, and the vain Pretenses of a Delusive Art: But we may go no farther
than to the state of it as to Religion and Virtue on the one hand, or Vice and
Impiety on the other; and then without the Spirit of Prophecy we may come to a
point, and foretell how it shall be with them in the latter end.

And this is a Subject fit for the serious Consideration of a People, and
especially at such a time as this, when we are assembled together before
Almighty God, to implore his Blessing upon the Public Counsels and
Proceedings, upon which the good of this Nation, and the Fate of the Western
part of Europe more especially, does depend. And this will lead us to the
Second General, which is

II. To consider the Proposition in the Text, with relation to the Context; and
to the matter of Fact it is subjoyned to.

We have a remarkable Instance of this before us in Eli, who was (as aforesaid)
as well a Judge as a Priest, and established in both capacities; that by this
conjunction of two of the highest Offices in himself, he might be in a capacity
of recovering the pristine honor of Religion and the Nation; which for a long
time had been in a very declining state, and by the untimely Fall of Sampson,
Eli's immediate Predecessor (as may be conceived) little less* than desperate,
in human appearance.

Eli being thus invested with the Supreme Power and Authority, had an
opportunity for doing the greatest Good, for Reforming matters in Church and
State, and settling them upon a sure and lasting Foundation. In which, how
happily soever he succeeded for a time, and so as to have the former part of
the Text verified in him, Them that honor me, I will honor; yet afterward
there followed so great disorders, through the evil Practices of his Sons, and
his Indulgence to them, that drew upon him as severe a Train of Judgments,
according to the threatening of the Prophet Elkanah (as the Jews say) as ever a
Person or a Family felt and suffered; to the confirming the latter part of the
Text in the highest sense of it, Those that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed, that is (according to the usual Meiosis in Scripture, and as we are
taught by the Event) shall be most severely punished.

Romans 15. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 6.
Now these things were our ensamples, and are written for our admonition: For
the History of Scripture is a practical Comment upon Divine Providence; and
what was in its design composed for the use of all future Ages, that Posterity
might by the numerous Examples of all kinds as to good or evil, be encouraged
as to the one, and cautioned against the other.

And to such as these is our Text more especially to be applied; to such a
People, and such Persons, whom God by his signal Providence has been
propitious to above the common sort and case of Mankind.

Eli had much to answer for, because more might justly be expected from him by
reason of the Advantages he was superior to many others in: That Eli, whom God
had thus chosen to his Service, and had thus dignified beyond any other of his
Successors; as was also the Nation he was of, beyond any People in the World.

And to what does all this serve, but to teach Persons of Eminence for their
Quality or Office, for their Interest, Power and Authority, what use they
should make of it? That so they whom God has honored in advancing them to
such a degree of Superiority, may not as the degenerate Sons of Eli, make
themselves vile and contemptible: That when God has made them to be Stars in
the Firmament of Heaven, to give light, and shed their benevolent influence
upon the Earth, they should in the issue prove no other than Meteors, shown to
the World for a time, but all of the sudden expire without any benefit to
Mankind.

Can we think that no more is expected from us, whom God has endued with the
light of Reason, and fitted for Service in the Station and Condition we are,
than from the Horse and the Mule that have no understanding; and that we have
answered the end of our Beings, if we spend our days in a torpid and
unprofitable sloth, or in such things as the Bruits can do as well as we?

And can such Persons whom God has blessed with Gifts and Talents above
others, or raised by his Providence to a state of Eminence, think that there is
no more required of them, in their public Station, than if they drowzed away
their time in some obscure Corner, alike unknown, and unprofitable to the World?

No surely; but as we ought often to reflect upon our selves, and to consider
how we that are reasonable Creatures, and whom God has made vessels to honor,
may employ our Talents to the Glory of our Creator, suitable to the dignity of
our Nature, and to high and nobler purposes than those Creatures that are made
vessels to dishonor: So ought those, who out of the common mass of Mankind are
exalted above others, to answer the dignity of their Station, and to consult
how they may demean themselves worthy of that honor their Creator has thought
fit to place such a distinguishing Character upon.

Our Savior says, Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required; and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more:
Luke 12. 48. And especially may this be expected from those that are the
Representatives of a People, and that are concerned in making those Laws for
the promoting of Religion and the honor of God, by which they themselves, as
well as the Community, are to be Governed. How does it become such to establish
the Authority of those Sanctions by their Example, and not to take that undue
Liberty to themselves, which they, in the Laws they make, deny to others?

How does it become them to be the support of Religion, to stand up in the
defense of it, to revive its drooping Spirits, and to make that by their
Authority as Sacred as the Holy Mount, under the Law, which no man should dare
to break in upon and violate!

Here is a Cause not only worthy of their Appearance and their Zeal, but what
also is at this time Necessary, when the very Foundation of Religion is
Attempted; and that which all the World has so much wanted, and desired where
it was not, I mean Revelation, is exposed; and that which we all venture our
Salvation upon, the Christian Institution, the Sacrifice and the Mediation of
our Blessed Savior, is openly declared to be Derogatory to the Perfections of
Almighty God, and Injurious to Men.

We are here a Christian Assembly met together in the Fear of God, and with a
Hope in his Mercy through Jesus Christ; and it is an happy opportunity offered
to us by the Supreme Authority of the Nation, for Imploring the Divine Blessing
upon the Public Councels and Affairs; by which we declare to the World what
honor we bear to Almighty God, what dependence we have upon him, and do
professedly put our selves under his Protection: And how can this better be
expressed by the Patriots of our Country, than by taking his Religion into
theirs, by bearing as great a regard to, and being as much concerned for the
Honor and just Rights of it, as for their own?

If this be the Event of this Solemn Appearance, and shall be the Compass by
which they principally steer in their Consultations and Proceedings; as they
will therein honor God, so he for their so doing will honor them, and make
them a public Blessing to the Nation; and the Nation as Jerusalem, a praise in
the earth, Isa. 62. 7.

Which God of his mercy grant for the sake of Jesus Christ our only Mediator.

Amen.
FINIS.

