REFLECTIONS Upon a PAMPHLET ENTITLED An Account of the Growth of DEISM in
ENGLAND.

REFLECTIONS Upon a PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, An Account of the Growth of DEISM in
ENGLAND.

Together with some CONSIDERATIONS About the Christian Religion.

Qui bona fide colit Deos amat and Sacerdotes.

Stat. Epist. Dedic. in V. Lib. Sylv. LONDON: Printed for John Newton, at the
Three Pigeons over against the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. 1696.

REFLECTIONS Upon a PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, An Account of the Growth of DEISM in
ENGLAND.
IT has now for a great while been the Complaint of Good Men, that Atheism and
Infidelity grow mightily among us, which is indeed a very melancholy
Consideration, but I am afraid is but too true, did not the Profane and
Blasphemous Discourse which one is often forced to hear, sufficiently show
this: The Air and Humor of the Age is so very different from that Seriousness,
Plainness, and Simplicity which a through Belief and Consideration of the
Christian Religion would inspire Men with, that one who takes notice of the
Difference, cannot easily imagine that this Religion is so generally believed
as it is professed. Add to this the great Corruption of Manners, the great
Difficulty there is to breed up Young People soberly and virtuously; or to find
those of Riper Years who are Men of Honesty, Integrity, and Public Spirit to
be employed in the Service of their Country.

Now when a Nation is so much corrupted as ours is at present, it can hardly
proceed but from one of these two Causes; either first from a Corruption in
their Religion, by making that consist in outward Observations, or giving Men
hopes to please God, and get to Heaven, by some other Method besides real
Holiness, and a Care of their Lives; by which means the Conscience is left
loose in that respect: or else, secondly, from a Disbelief of the Religion it
self: for though some Men make a shift to do it, it is an uneasy thing to go
against Conscience; and therefore a general Corruption of Manners can hardly be
without one of these two Causes, which leave Men at Liberty to indulge
themselves without Disturbance from it.

As for the first of these, the Corruption of our Religion, by making that
consist in outward Observations, or giving Men Hopes of getting to Heaven by
any other Method but real Holiness of Life; it is what cannot be charged upon
the Present Age or Church; wherein, whatever Zeal may have been showed upon
other Accounts for things in themselves indifferent, yet it has always been
plainly taught, that nothing but inward Piety can recommend us to God, or make
our Peace with him; and that there is no way of getting to Heaven, without the
real Reformation of our Lives. And these things have been showed so distinctly,
plainly, and clearly, both in Opposition to the Superstitious Observations of
Popery, and to some Popular Errors about Religion, among our selves, that
perhaps no Age can show the like; as may appear to any that has been but a
little conversant in the Sermons and Books that have been published by the
Divines of the Church of England. And I believe one great Reason why so many
Loose People have made Infidelity their Resuge, is, because it has been so
clearly showed them that there is no Hopes for such Persons from our Religion;
which they would not so easily have left, had we had but any Trick to save
them, and let them enjoy their Sins together. And therefore we see that most of
our Debauched People take this way, contrary to what may be observed in some
other Countries, where People of as ill Morals as they, yet speak with
Reverence and Respect about their Religion. Of which Difference I can think of
no other Reason but this, That the one has no Hopes from his Religion, and
therefore treats it accordingly; the other has still some Reserve in his Eye
that may stand him in stead after a Wicked Life, Absolution, and Extreme
Unction, or at most some Money for Masses when he is dead. And upon this
Account his ill Morals often increase his Zeal for his Religion, and set him
upon endeavoring by that to make God what amends he can for those Sins he is
resolved to enjoy.

The Effect, I believe, is apt to be quite contrary with Serious and
Considering Persons, who among us, cannot but have a Reverence for that
Religion which they see so worthy of God; which does not consist in little
Tricks, or outward Observations, but in solid and substantial Goodness; such as
is for the Good of the World, for the Advancement of our own Nature, and tends
to make us pious and holy, and as like God as may be. Considering Persons will
be very apt to have a Reverence for such a Religion as this.

And on the other side, such Persons, if they live in Countries where this is
degenerated into outward useless Observations, where Men may get their Sins
pardoned, and make their Peace with God by such things as even a Wise Man would
have no regard to; no wonder if they cannot esteem it: and if they have
opportunity to know nothing of Christianity but as it is thus practiced, it is
no wonder at all if they do fall into Deism; as our Travelers tell us, that
this is a very common thing among such Persons in Italy, and some other
Countries.

There has lately appeared a Pamphlet which pretends to give an Account of the
Growth of Deism in England: that is indeed the Title of it, but I believe not
the Author's Design; who seems to have had no other Aim, but to say as many
ugly things as he could against the present Established Church and Clergy.
Whether the Author be a Christian or no, I shall not pretend to determine; I
would willingly suppose he is, since he seems to say so; but I believe he
himself will not deny that he has more Zeal against the Church of England than
he has for the Christian Religion; and if he be a Christian, I would leave it
upon his Conscience, how he will be able to answer it to Jesus Christ, that he
should with such aggravating Circumstances, and so much Virulence expose that
to the View of the World which he himself says commonly makes Men Deists, and
yet be at so very little pains to give any Antidote against it. It looks as if
he were uneasy that such good Arguments against Christianity should lie hid
only amongst his Clubs of Atheists and Deists; and that he was willing to try
how many Proselites they were like to gain by being exposed to public View.

Our Author's Design being only to expose Christianity, or else expose the
Clergy, which I rather believe, we cannot expect a full Account of the Growth
of Deism from him. I shall therefore first, in short, take notice of what I
judge to have been the Causes of the Increase of it; and then, consider those
assigned by his Author.

1. The great and chief Cause of Deism at present, was the general Corruption
of Manners brought in in the late Reign, and encouraged during that time both
in Clergy and People; and in order perhaps to prepare the way for Popery,
carried on so far then, that it is now a very hard Matter to reform it.

2. Another thing that much promoted it, were the Divisions and Factions both
in Church and State; the grols Enthusiasm of the late Times, and the many ill
things done under the pretense of Conscience: And then on the other side; the
open Profaneness of some in Opposition to them. Add to this, that both Sides
too much made it their Business to expose one another, and so made each other
appear indeed much worse than they were; by which means, great occasion was
given to ill men, first to look on all Sides as Knaves, and then to laugh at
all Pretenses to Religion.

3. Another thing that accidentally came in to help it forward, might be this;
That at the same time such Offense was given, and there was such great
Corruption of Manners, Mr. Hobbs's Philosophy and that of some others came much
in Vogue, which brought in some loose Principles, and encouraged Men in a
Skeptical Humor, and made them suspect every thing: and when once Men of ill
Lives are unhinged in their Principles, they will hardly be at the pains to
think deep enough to set themselves right again; especially when their Religion
is so contradictory to their Lusts.

4. Another thing that may have promoted it, is the Detection of the gross
Forgeries of the Church of Rome as to Miracles and other things; which though
found out in the Last Age, yet then only increased Men's Zeal against Popery;
but now when Men were become more indifferent in Religion, it had a very
different Effect, and inclined many People to suspect the Evidence of
Christianity it self, though very absurdly, the Cases being so very different.

5. Another great Cause of it may be this, That Religion has been openly
exposed commonly in our Plays. They have not indeed brought our Savior upon
the Stage, and exposed him in Person; but it has been almost as bad; they have
made it their Business to laugh at the true Life of Religion, at all Sense of
Conscience, or talking seriously about Spiritual Matters. They have encouraged
Looseness and Debauchery, and made it their Bufiness to make 'em as easy to
the World as possible. In short, the whole Genius and Spirit of our Modern
Plays is as contrary to that of the Christian Religion as Darkness is to Light;
and then it is no wonder if People that are much conversant in these, do in some
time lose all Sense of the other.

6. I shall name at present but this one more, which though not much taken
notice of, may have had a considerable Influence this way, upon Young Gentlemen
especially; and that is this, That by the false Laws of Honor now in Vogue,
they see they cannot live and act like Gentlemen, and at the same time keep to
the plain Rules of their Religion. Christ commands us to forgive Injuries, not
to render Evil for Evil; but if a Gentelman at present will not cut his Neighbors
Throat for a small Affront, he must be contented to suffer himself what is very
hard to be born, to be exposed, and counted a Coward, and be perhaps kicked out
of Company; by which means the Christian Religion is really in a State of
Persecution. Now this is a great Snare to Young Gentlemen, and must make very
many of them resolve rather to leave their Religion in that Point, than undergo
what is so hard to be born; and though the case do never happen to them, yet the
very Resolution must debauch the Conscience, take away much, if not all the
Authority Religion has over it, which must needs make that very uneasy, and so
incline him for his own Quiet to throw it quite off; or come to despise it, as
not being fit to be the Rule of the Life and Actions of a Gentleman.

Had our Authors Design been to give us a full Account of the Growth of Deism
in England, he could hardly have missed either of these, or some other Causes
besides those he mentions; which I shall now take the Liberty a little to
reflect upon.

He lays then, the whole Guilt of the Growth of Deism upon the Clergy. A very
severe Charge; and which, if true, must justly make them the Hatred both of God
and Man. Certainly Clergymen, of all Persons, ought to take care of
themselves, that they may not, if possible, so much as by any Infirmity
prejudice Men against that Holy Religion which they are Commissioned by God to
keep up and propagate in the World. And they will have very much to answer for,
to their great Master, if they do, like Eli's Sons, make themselves Vile; and
make people abhor the offerings of the Lord. But then, for the same Reason that
it is so great a Sin in them to make themselves vile, it is so in others to
endeavor to render them so: for if they are made vile and contemptible, the
Mischief and Prejudice to Religion is the same, whether they are made so by
their own Fault, or other Peoples. The very same Obligation that lies upon
Ministers to take Care of themselves, the same lies upon other People not to
defame them, or misrepresent their Actions, or aggravate their Infirmities;
because upon their Reputation the Good of Religion does indeed very much
depend. If they lose their Reputation by their own Fault, they must be
accountable for all the ill Effects of it; but if other People will do, it
either by inventing, or aggravating Matters, the Guilt must light there where
the Fault is.

I would therefore once more apply my self to our Author, that he would
seriously ask his own Conscience, whether, though he represents the only Cause of
Deism to be the ill Opinion Men have of Clergymen, yet he does not in this
Pamphlet make it his Endeavor to render them as vile as he can? and whose Work
he can suppose he has been doing in it? For either the Foundation of his Book
must be simple and impertinent, that the ill Opinion the World has of
Clergymen is the Cause of the Growth of Deism; or else he himself must grant,
that the exposing them with so much Virulence, must certainly serve the same
end.

2. I would ask him, Whether he has observed those Rules in this Pamphlet which
every honest Man should observe when he speaks ill of any, and much more in a
Case of such Importance as this is: Every Man that would meddle with Matters of
this Nature should take care.

1. That he speak nothing but what is exact Truth.

2. That he relate Matters in a plain and natural way, without putting false
Colors upon them; without putting in, or leaving out Circumstances that may
quite alter the Matter: that he don't aggravate little things, or use tragical
or ridiculous Expressions to disguise; but in short, that he represent things
as they really are.

3. When a thing is capable of a double Construction, he must not presently
suppose the worst; especially he must have a Care that he don't, as is too
often done, tack his ill Construction to the thing, and so represent it as part
of the Matter of Fact.

4. Though a thing bereally ill, he ought to make so much Allowance for
Ignorance, or Prejudice, or it may be Passion, or other Infirmities, as a good
Man may be guilty of; and to consider whether some of these may not justly be
brought in to alleviate the matter.

5. That he should at least let every Man bear his own Burden, and no more;
not censure one for the Fault of another; or bring in a whole Body of Men for
what concerns only some, and it may be but a few of them.

Had our Author observed these good Rules, we should hardly have seen this
Pamphlet: And now I have mentioned these, I believe I may leave it without fear
of any great Danger from it. However, I shall take notice of some Paragraphs in
it before I proceed to what I farther designed.

His first Instance that he gives of the Progress of Deism is taken from the
time of King Charles the First; Page. ^
for from that time chiefly begins the Hatred of the Party against Clergyment.
His Instance is of a Young Gentleman sent to travel into Popish Countries, and
principled by his Tutor to have a Care of Popery, because it is a Religion which
in almost all its Branches is only calculated and designed to serve a Turn,
etc. -- Well, the Young Gentleman when he has done his Travels, returns to Old
England, and finds Archbishop Laud and the Presbyterians quarrelling about
Power; and this gives him a Prejudice against the Religion of his Country, and
so he turns Deist.

Now sure this Young Gentleman had not a good Tutor; or else he discharged him,
as is commonly done, too soon. I suppose when he was sent to Spain or Italy,
his Tutor did not bid him disbelieve the Apostles Creed because the Errors of
Popery were invented to serve a Turn: but his Meaning was, That he should have
a Care, and not easily, without good Evidence, believe any thing that had such
an Objection against it. And he was in the right to bring this Caution home
with him, If they were quarrelling about Power, not to believe either till he
had examined the Matter. But there were a thousand other things in which they
agreed, and which did not serve the End of Power or any other Interest; why did
he throw them off? But especially, Why did he throw off the Holy Scriptures
before he knew whether their Master did encourage them in such ambitious
Designs? Page 7.
It was not very wisely done in a Matter of such Concernment. Page 5.
Yet this was one of our Author's Men of Probity and Sobriety. But I rather
think his Manners were corrupted in his Travels, and so he had no great mind to
Religion; otherwise he would not have parted with it so easily.

As for Archbishop Laud, who is struck at here, and so often in this Pamphlet,
I shall not pretend to justify all he did: if he were guilty of Miscarriages,
he suffered severe enough for them, and the Party might now very well let him
rest. But as for his Zeal in defending the Government of the Church; were it in
it self an indifferent matter what the Government of it should be, yet since
Episcopacy was Established, it would not have been very wise, without Good
Reasons, to have hazarded so many Evils as might come by a Change. But he had
this farther to say for himself, that his Zeal was to preserve that Government
which the Church of Christ had universally had in all Ages from the Apostles
Days; that which apparently had been the Government in England ever since there
were Christians here; that Government under which this Church had been
reformed, and had so long flourished; and therefore that one in his Place
should have betrayed his Trust had he not done all he could to preserve it.

Our Author invidiously takes notice of the Bishops Courts, Style, etc. Page 6.
-- If the Nation has thought fit to show their Respect to their Religion by
bestowing some Honors or Conveniences on the Ministers of it, which they
cannot, and do not pretend to by the Laws of Christ, it will be a hard matter
for this Author to show any Reason why they may not make use of them.

But as for what follows, it is very surprising, and shows that our Author
should have taken some Care to know the Principles of the Church better before
he railed at it so much: His words are these, Page 7.
But the Bishop is the Higher Power, because by the Principles of Episcopacy he
can Excommunicate the King, i. e. forbid him the very Conversation of his
Subjects, and thereby render them incapable to make good their Oath of
Allegiance in yielding their Aid and Assistance.

It is like enough some may be of Opinion, that it is the Duty of a good
Christian Bishop, or Minister, to refuse giving the Holy Sacrament even to a
King, if he be notoriously Scandalous in his Life: but, to Excommunicate him
so, as to forbid him the Conversation of his Subjects, is to Depose him, at
least if he remains contumacious; which, upon second Thoughts, our Author
himself will hardly take to be the Doctrine of the Church of England.

It is not my intent to follow him through every particular of such a loose
discourse; but only to take notice of what occurs most remarkable. He does in
several Places fall upon the business of the Persecution of Dissenters: to
which I shall make no other Reply, but that I am sorry that all Parties have
given each other so much Provocation, and have therefore been so apt to be hard
upon one another at every little Advantage the Times afford; and I am very
sorry, that so much Heat and Animosity still remains on all Sides, and is still
like to do, if Men go on to write such Books as these of our Author, on purpose
to inflame.

He expresses himself very angry at the Test, "and calls it a Church-device; to
which I shall make no other Answer, but, that it is not an Act of Convocation,
but an Act of Parliament; and when made, looked upon to be a good Act by
Persons not thought to be much influenced by the Counsels of Churchmen. And
after all, it will be a hard Matter for our Author, or any else, to give any
good Reason, why a State or Kingdom may not, to preserve Unity, and
consequently Peace and Quiet, give that Encouragement to the Established
Religion, That none shall enjoy any Office of Honor or Profit, who is not of
it; and who does not, as a Testimony of that, bring a Certificate of his
actually joining in Communion with it in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
And I would be very glad to see so much Moderation in those who dissent from
the Church, of all sorts, that it should be advisable for her to put more
Power in their hands than they have.

The next Cause he mentions of Deism, Page 10.
is the Clergy's Prevarication in this Revolution, as to their Principles of
Passive Obedience; in which Case, whatever Cause of Scandal may have been
given, has been very much aggravated by the Enemies of the Church, of all
sorts. But methinks an equitable Considerer of things would rather argue thus,
That if some of them did in this leave some Principles they were fond of
before, 'twas a Sense of the Good of their Country that changed their Minds,
because we see that they did stick to their Religion with a great deal of Zeal
when it was very hazardous for them; and we have just Reason to think, that
very many of them would have cheerfully lost all they had in the Cause, and
have resisted, even unto blood.

But after all, there were not many of the Clergy that were so far for Passive
Obedience, that had the Case been put to them as ours really was at the
Revolution, of a King that was actually overturning the whole Constitution, and
either designed to inslave us by a Foreign Power, or, which was much the same
thing, so far hugged and encouraged a Monstrous Power in one of his Neighbors,
that in a very little time it had not been in his own Power to save either us
or himself. I believe, had the Case been put thus, there were not very many who
would have said that it was unlawful for a People, in such Circumstances, to
save themselves; of which, beside others, I have this Reason, That this was the
Opinion of some Authors in great Reputation among our Clergy. Grotius, Barclay,
Dr. Falkner.
They did indeed preach up Passive Obedience in general Terms, as the Scripture
and the Laws of England deliver it; and as for such Cases, they were odious,
and not very fit to be mentioned; but sufficiently excepted in the Nature of
the Thing, and such as common Sense would easily find out whenever any Case of
that kind should happen.

As for those who went farther than this, or carried the Matter with Heat and
Violence, I shall leave them to stand or fall according as they can approve the
Sincerity of their Hearts to our Great Master, who can make Allowance for
Mistake, and Prejudice, and other Human Infirmities, though Men will not.

But our Author is still angry, and says, that the Clergy are Enemies to the
Government, for a King de facto only, and still Subjects to King James: which,
if it be true, I am sure there is no great matter of Priest-Crast in it, for it
is apparently against the Interest of their Church.

But by this, as well as other things, we may guess our Author knows very few
of the Clergy, especially those that have been preferred since this Revolution,
of which number are above two Thirds of the Bishops, whom this Author calls
Jacobites, but some of his Friends use to call the Dead Weight for the
Government in the House of Lords; which contrary Reproaches are a good Sign
that they carry themselves like Moderate and Honest Men, and good Patriots of
their Country. He makes a great Stir in several places with Dr. S -- k, as if
he were the only Clergyman almost he had heard of, or that all the rest were
guided by his Notions. But I can assure him the Dean has more Reputation for
his Books of Death and Judgment than he has for his Case of Allegiance.

It is a hard Matter to answer for so great a Body of Men as the Clergy of the
Chapter of England, especially in a Case where they are not all of one Mind; and
should I endeavor to clear them all from the Aspersions he there throws, it is
possible I should have as little Truth of my side, as he has Truth or Justice
in aspersing them all; or as those have who censure all Men of our Author's
Stamp as Persons against Kingly Government, and that design to make England a
Commonwealth; and yet that there are some such, he himself will, I am
persuaded, hardly deny.

As for what he charges upon them, their making the King to be only so de
facto; if by it he mean that they look upon the King to be an Usurper, and that
though they may submit to him while he has them in his Power, yet that this is to
be only till they can have a good Opportunity of serving him who is their
Rightful King. This, I believe, is a gross Calumny, and such as can be charged
upon very few.

But there may be perhaps some others whom our Author will call de facto Men,
who though they should be mistaken in the Principles they go upon, yet however
may upon those Principles serve the Government as well as any that live under it.

Some it is possible there are, who do not approve of all that was done in the
Revolution, on, and therefore would not themselves concur in it; but yet when
the thing is done, and the Government settled by the Consent of the Majority,
may think themselves bound to submit to it, and when they have given their
Oath, to stick to it as much as if the Original of it were never so
uncontestable.

Others, it is likely, there may be, who do not think particular private Persons
bound to examine the Titles of Princes; that as in private Cases it is not
their own Judgment, but the Determination of the Judges that is to direct their
Consciences to whom they are bound to pay their Rent or any other Due; so in
this great Due of Allegiance, it is the highest Authority we have, that of the
Parliament, must direct them to whom to pay it: and whether that great Court be
right or wrong in their Determinations, they are not proper Judges.

And to mention no more, there may be some others who may think, that though
every thing at the Revolution was not exactly agreeable to common Forms, yet
since it was agreeable to the great Law of Necessity, we should thank God for
the great Benefits it brought us, and stick to it against all the World.

Upon these Hypotheses, and several other, it is like some People may have come
into the Government; and though they should not be in every thing in the right,
yet it will be a hard matter to show any Reason why they may not be good
Subjects, and very faithful to the Government: and it is neither just, nor
charitable, nor for the Interest of the Government, to censure all these as
Subjects to King James.

But our Author still threatens the Clergy with an Oath of Abjuration. Page 16.
But whether he and his Friends will be able to persuade the Parliament to
appoint such a one, Time must tell us: it is a Matter has been proposed more
than once, but has never yet been judged for the Good of the King and Kingdom.
It was the Wisdom of our Parliament, at the Beginning of the Government, to
frame the Oath of Allegiance in as general Terms as they could, and to give as
great a Latitude to the different Opinions and Apprehensions of Men as
possible; for which they had this very good Reason, That the Government was so
apparently for the Good of the Kingdom, and so necessary to its Preservation,
that all Lovers of their Country would be glad to join with it if so be there
was nothing to shock their Conscience: and therefore to gain all sorts of
People, it was necessary to allow as great a Latitude for that as they could.
And the same Reason will hold still; for the Government, blessed be God, is
still in the Interest of the Nation; and therefore it will be the Desire of all
Lovers of Peace to preserve it, unless the Government makes them Enemies to it
by its first becoming Enemies to them; by shocking their Consciences, and
turning them out of Employments as Persons not fit to be trusted. And certainly
it must be the Interest of any Government to make it self as many Friends as it
can, which is most effectually done by studying in all it does the Public
Good, and next to that by provoking and disobliging as few as possible. I don't
question but several true Lovers of the King and Government may have desired
and promoted such an Oath of Abjuration: but upon considering the Matter as far
as my Understanding will go, I cannot think of any Advantage it is like to
bring; for it will not make the King one Friend he had not before; but no body
can tell how many Enemies it may raise. All the Good that is like to come by it
is, that we may then be able to distinguish betwixt Men: But how be able to
distinguish? Not, who are Friends to the Government, and who are not; but, who
are for it upon one Principle, and who are for it upon another: which will be
Knowledge dear enough bought, if it must be by provoking all those who do not
come into the Government upon one and the same Principle, though it be the
right.

In short, multiplicity of Oaths has always an ill Influence upon Religion, and
does naturally tend to take away that Reverence which Men should have for a
thing of so sacred a nature; and it would be a thing very worthy the Care of
the Wisdom of the Nation, to look into that great number of Oaths of all sorts
which Men in any Employment are to take, and which, in a great measure, are
reckoned only things of course, and therefore, though not in their own nature,
yet by accident, are apt to ensnare Men's Consciences, to make them either
swallow them down without considering, or else set their Wits at work for such
Salvo's and Interpretations as make the Oaths vain and useless, and are very
contrary to that Plainness and Simplicity with which Men should enter into so
sacred an Obligation.

To conclude this Matter, If such an Oath should be imposed, and upon that be
generally taken by the Clergy and their Friends; this Author would be for
writing another Pamphlet about Deism, and tell all the World they had renounced
their Principles; which though it be false, if he means any Principles of the
Church, yet however such a Clamor as this would very likely be a great
Prejudice to Religion. But if on the other side they should generally refuse
it, then they would be represented as Enemies to the Government; and,
considering the common Resentments and Passions of Human Nature, perhaps many
of them be made so; which may prove no more for the true Interest of the State,
than it would of the Church.

I have dwelt the longer upon this, because it is frequently made use of as an
Argument of the Clergy's not being in the Interest of the Government, because
many of them seem to be against such an Oath; but I hope by what has been said
it may appear, that true Lovers of the King and Government may be against it
too, and the more against it for their being so.

But I now come to consider another of those Causes of Deism mentioned by our
Author; which is, The great Zeal the Clergy have showed for Modes, and
Ceremonies, and other things of an indifferent nature; who, he says, have been
more concerned about them, than about the substantial Points of Piety and
Holiness: which he is pleased to call Priest-Crast, or the carrying on an
Interest of their own, under pretense of Religion. About which matter, he
quotes two Passages out of Sir Matthew Hale's Letters. To which I shall only
reply, That Sir Matthew does in those Passages talk like himself, that is, like
one of the best Christians this Age has produced: And had our Author spoke
about these Matters with that Spirit and Concern for Religion the good Judge
does, he should have had no Reflections from me.

It has been often matter of great Concern to me, to consider the Infirmity of
Humane Nature, how apt Men have been, in all Ages and Nations, to fall into
Superstition; to leave off the Thoughts of Piety and Holiness, the Subduing
their Passions, and the Sanctification of their Souls, together with the other
noble Virtues of Justice and Charity, Meekness and Humility, and the like,
which even common Reason would teach us, must be the best way to please a holy
and good God; and instead of these, to expect to recommend themselves to him by
little Tricks and Observations of their own inventing. But especially it has
been a great Trouble that so pure and holy a Religion as that which Christ has
delivered to us should suffer so much under the same fate. Much of this may
have been owing to Weakness of Understanding; and more, I am afraid, to the
Corruption of Nature; when Men have been unwilling to take so much Pains as to
deny their Appetites, and govern their Souls under the influence of Religion;
but yet still desired to please God and get to Heaven; which because they would
not do one way, they must artempt to do another. This has, in most Ages, given
Men a strong Bent to Superstition, as being their only Refuge; and for this
Reason it is chiefly, that it is so hard a matter to keep any Nation from
running into this, or else into Irreligion and Atheism.

Men being so apt upon these Accounts to run into Superstition of themselves,
this may have been helped forward by the Ignorance of some, and the Designs of
some other of those who should have taught them better; and when Corruptions of
this kind were once brought in, it would hardly be in the Power of those that
were wiser and better to remove them again; as I remember St. Austin makes a
great Complaint of this kind against the Christians of his time, that they were
so set upon many Superstitious Observations, that he durst not oppose them, as
seeing he was only like to lose himself, and should not be able to do any Good
upon them.

But not to dwell upon this any longer, I think the corrupting so holy a
Riligion, and taking away the Power of Godliness, and laying great stress upon
little Matters to the Prejudice of true Piety, to be so very ill a thing that I
shall most heartily join with our Author in being angry with any that are
guilty of it. But before he be too hasty with charging the present Church with
it, I desire he would with me, consider these three Things.

1. That no Church in the World did ever declare more expressly against all
Superstition of this kind than the Church of England has done, and none ever
taught People their Duty more clearly in Opposition to it than is done in Our
Churches. We are taught no way to please God but to keep his Commandments, and
endeavor to be like him; no way to get our Sins pardoned but to repent and
forsake them. The Ceremonies enjoined in our Church are very few, designed only
for the Decency of Public Worship, with an express Declaration of their being
in themselves Things indifferent, no otherwise good, but as they are
Expressions of our Reverence, or tend to public Order.

Now it is possible, that though Men look upon Things to be never so indifferent,
yet by an unreasonable Opposition they may be forced to make a great noise
about them, and a greater than they do about many other Things which they judge
much more necessary, but which no body gainsays or contradicts. And this is
what commonly happens in a thousand other Cases besides this, that Men are
forced in their own Defense to make a Stir about what they should otherwise
take little notice of. If Men will cry out against indifferent Matters, as
Popish and Antichristian, it cannot be Expected that they who use them should
lie quietly under such a Censure, have themselves and the Church they are
Members of bespattered, and their People drawn away from them, without saying
any thing, for fear of making a Stir about indifferent Matters.

2. I desire he would consider, that though the things themselves in Contest, are
indeed of no great consequence; yet, the Principles upon which they are
contested, are; and if these be taken into the Account, it cannot be said that
the Controversy and Heat is about indifferent Matters. The Principles upon
which these Disputs have been carried on, are such as must have made them
Separatists from all the Churches of God we ever heard or read of, and from all
that were ever like to be; and if Peace, and Love, and Unity, be desirable
Things, and Christian Duties, these are not indifferent Matters. To name but
this one among many other of their Principles of the like nature, that things
in themselves indifferent become unlawful by being Commanded. Now if this be
true, there must be an End of all Christian Societies, which never will be able
to subsist without some Rules and Orders not immediately commanded by God, but
such as in Discretion they see proper. Therefore such a Point as That is of
Consequence, and must not be given up, unless we will give up all Peace, and
Quiet, and Order in the Church.

3. I desire he would consider, That though Ceremonies are things indifferent,
yet Disobedience to the lawful Commands of Superiors is not, and Schism is
not; and so many ill Consequences as have come from that among us, may very
easily raise a Heat much above what the nature of the things originally
deserved. But after all, I will not undertake to defend either the Wisdom or
the Piety of all that have been engaged in these unhappy Controversies, or to
make an Apology for Heats and Animosities. Both Sides, I am afraid, have been
to blame, and have too much followed their Passions, and the secret Influences
of those who keep up these Heats to serve their own Turns of it in the State.
God grant that both Sides may be wiser for the future, and study more the
things that make for Peace, and not do the Work of the great Enemy of Souls,
and disgrace their Religion under Pretense of Zeal for it. One thing I would
only observe before I leave this Matter, the great Partiality of this Author,
who when a Controversy is, as he says, betwixt two Parties about indifferent
Matters, blames only one Side, and that Side too which must be confessed to be
upon the Defense, and lets that go which certainly began the Fray, and must be
at least as guilty in making a great Stir against indifferent Matters, as the
Church is in making it for them.

But I now come to the Charge which he lays more directly upon the Church it
self; and that is, That Three of the Thirty Nine Articles are wholly designed
to uphold the Power of the Clergy over the People.

But I hope there is no harm in that, if it be a Power that God designed they
should have; which methinks our Author should have considered a little, and not
have thrown off the matter so abruptly, as if it were in it self a great
Absurdity, that they who in Scripture are called Overseers, Guides, Leaders,
Pastors, Rulers, should have any Power over the Flocks committed to their
Charge. What is the Meaning of that Precept, Acts 20.28. Heb. 13.^.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls? Obedience and Power are relative Terms; 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17.
and Obedience can never be a Duty but where there is Power to require it. In
short, Is there any Office in all the World where Men have not some Power in
what is their proper Business?

But our Author thought the whole Matter might be blown away by a hard Word,
and that it is sufficient to dash any thing if he can but call it Priestcraft.
And indeed that is so hard a Word, that a Person who makes Conscience of what
he speaks should consider well before he pass such a Censure, and have examined
well, whether the Power claimed be reasonable and fit, and such as the nature
of that Holy Office requires: He should have looked into the Holy Scriptures,
and the History of the first Ages of the Church, when Men could propose no
other Interest by being Bishops and Ministers, but only having a greater Crown
of Glory in the other World, as being Persons that commonly did and suffered
most for Christ in this: he should have a little considered what was then the
Power of Churchmen; which whosoever knows, will hardly after that accuse the
Church of England of Priestcraft in that respect.

He does not name which the three Articles are he finds fault with, so that I
am left only to guess; and in truth I can think but of two which seem any way
liable to the Censure he passes upon them. It Is like he may mean the three
Articles which our Dissenters have sometimes found fault with, and which they
are excused from Subscribing in the Act of Toleration: but this shows that our
Author never read them; for only one of them, the ThirtyFourth, is about the
Power of the Clergy; the other two are about the Homilies, and the Book of
Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, etc. I shall therefore take notice
only of those two, and wait for the third till he explain his Mind more fully.

The first Article, I believe, that he drives at, is the Twentieth; the Words
of which are these; The Church has Power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and
Authority in Controversies of Faith. And yet it is not lawful for the Church to
ordain any thing that is contrary to God's Word written, neither may it so
expound one place of Scripture that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore
although the Church be a Witness and a Keeper of Holy Writ, yet as it ought not
to decree any thing against the same, so besides the same it ought not to
enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation.

The other Article, I believe may be the Thirty Fourth; which I shall here
repeat at large too.

It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or
utterly like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the Diversity of Countries and Men's Manners; so that nothing be
ordained against God's Word. Whosoever, through his private Judgment, willingly
and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church,
which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and approved by
Common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly (that others may fear to do the
like) as one that offends against the Common Order of the Church, and burteth
the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the Conscience of weak Brethren.

Every particular or National Church has Authority to ordain, change, and
abolish Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church ordained only by Men's Authority; so
that all things be done to edisying.

This is not, indeed, the first time that these Articles have been censured:
but if rightly understood, I cannot see, that they Contain any thing more than
what all established Churches I ever heard of do either claim expressly, or at
least in their Practice; and no more than what is highly reasonable, To begin
with the first, That the Church has Power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and
Authority in Controversies of Faith.

As for the first part of it, the Power of the Church, in Rites and Ceremonies,
it will come in under the other Article, and therefore I shall pass it here;
but as to the other part, her Authority in Controversies of Faith, I desire to
observe, first, That the Church does not here claim any Infallibility to her
self in determining such Controversies; she is so far from that, that in the
very next Article she says, Art. 21.
that even General Councils may err and be deceived.

2. I would observe, that the Church does not here decree that private
Christians are bound to believe any thing as Matter of Faith merely upon her
Authority; but the Church must bring the Authority of God's Word for what she
says; when, and not before; she ought to be believed; this she declares in the
same Article even of General Councils; Art. 21.
Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither
Strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
Holy Scripture. And therefore,

3. Our Church allows all her Members to examine the Truth of what she teaches,
by the Holy Scriptures; nay more, encourages them to do it, only advises, that
this be done with Modesty and Humility. To this End, the Holy Scriptures are
translated into our Mother Tongue, and read in our Churches, and every body may
have them at home and read them as much as they please; and I am sure they are
in Our Churches frequently exhorted to do so, and that not only as a thing
which they may do, but as a thing which they ought to do.

4. I would observe, That though our Church has for the Instruction and
Edification of her Members, drawn up her Opinion of the chief Points of the
Christian Religion in the Thirty Nine Articles, yet she no where requires the
Profession of the Belief of them from the People that join in Communion with
her; neither does she Excommunicate every body that does not believe just as
she believes; if Men will but be modest, and not openly oppose, though she takes
care to instruct them in what is the truth, yet they may enjoy a great liberty
in their Opinions, and still live in her Communion.

So that the Meaning of the Church, in this Article, seems to be no more than
this. That God has given the Bishops, and other Ministers of the Word,
Authority to Preach the Gospel, and by this made it their Duty to instruct
those under their Care in the true Faith. And that if any Controversies happen
about the Faith, they have by this their Commission, Authority, and by it God
has made it their Duty, to declare their Judgment in the Case; which may be
done either by Preaching, or by Writing, either single, or in a Body, as in
Discretion they see fittest to be done: That when they have thus declared their
Judgment, especially if this be done by the Whole Body of the Clergy of any
place, their Determination is to be received with Reverence and Respect by the
People under their Care; Not that they are for that Reason bound to believe it
true; but they are to carry themselves modestly and humbly, to examine the
Matter sedately first, whether it be true or no; and if they should be
convinced in their Conscience that the Determination of the Church is wrong,
and find such Reasons as put the matter past doubt with them; yet even then not
to oppose or contradict the Public Determination with their Private Opinions,
but to keep their Thoughts to themselves, unless they are withal fully
convinced that the matter is of such Importance that they ought not to be
silent; or, that the Profession of this Error be required of them as a Term of
Communion. In short, They ought to have as great a Regard as possible to the
Peace and Quiet of the Church, and the Authority of those whom God has set over
them.

This seems to me to be the Meaning of this Article, in which there does not
appear any very dreadful Power the Church claims over the People; here is no
enslaving their Consciences, no keeping them in Ignorance to serve any Ends or
Designs upon them, no locking up the Scriptures from them, no usurping
Authority above the Word of God, or making that useless to them, by denying
People the use of their own Reason in reading of it: In short nothing appears
here of that horrible Imputation of Priestcraft.

The Authority here claimed is no more than what is absolutely necessary to the
Peace and Quiet of the Church, no more than what is implied in the Authority
God has given Ministers to Preach the Gospel; no more than what is plainly
supposed in those Names of Teachers, Pastors, Guides, Rulers, etc. given them
in the Scripture. And no more than all the Reformed Churches claim either
expressly in Words, or else virtually by making Confessions of Faith to instruct
their People, Vid. Harm. Confess.
and which they expect not to have openly contradicted by any that live within
their Communion.

Thus much may serve for the first Article about the Power of the Church in
Controversies of Faith: I proceed now to the second, about her Power in
Appointing Rites and Ceremonies; which Words, have for some time sounded a
little frightfully in England by reason of the Prejudices some have taken
against some Ceremonies in use among us; whereas, had that Article been
expressed in some other Words, it is probable enough it would hardly have met
with Opposition: for, the Meaning of it seems to be no more than this, That as
God has made it the Duty of those that are entrusted with the Government of the
Church to look after the Purity of the Faith, and consequently has given them
Authority to do it; so he has also to take care of his Worship, that it be done
in such a decent and reverend manner as becomes the Worship of God; and to that
end, to take care to appoint such Times, and Places, such a Method, and Order,
and other Circumstances of it, as may best serve for the Honor of God, and the
Peace and good Order of the Church; and that whoever shall openly break such
good Orders, established by Public Authority, ought to be rebuked openly, as
one that offends against the Common Order of the Church, and hurts the
Authority of the Magistrate, and offends the Consciences of weak Brethren.
But that the Church in this must not act by arbitrary Rules, appoint what she
pleases, or clog Christianity with a number of unprofitable Ceremonies, but all
things must be done to edifying.

This seems to be the Sense of it, as far as our Author may be supposed to find
fault with it; the rest is in Opposition to some Points of Popery not needful
to be taken notice of at present.

Now what is there in this that can be justly found fault with? Has God made it
the Duty of those that are Rulers and Guides in the Church to look after his
Worship, and see that it be performed with Reverence, and Decency, and good
Order, or has he Not? If he has made it their Duty, he has given them Authority
to do it (for God makes nothing to be any Man's Duty which he has not Authority
to do.) If he has given them Authority to do it, he has by that made it the
Duty of other People to comply with such Orders which are not against the Word
of God. Indeed how can they be said to be Rulers and Guides in the Church who
have no Authority; not so much as to see that God be Decently served?

To conclude this Head; This is a Power which, by what appears to us, has been
exercised in all Ages of the Church. One of the Chief Uses of Synods, both of
National and General, has been to regulate Matters of this kind. And as for the
Reformed Churches, though some have determined more, and some fewer of the
Circumstances of God's Worship, yet all have determined some, and consequently
claimed a Right to do it, as much as the Church of England; who pretends no
Right to do any thing of this kind, but so far as it does not contradict God's
Word, and tends to Edification.

One thing I would observe to our Author before I proceed; and that is, That
the whole Method of the Public Worship of God among us, is not only appointed
by the Ecclesiastical Authority, but by the Civil too, and cannot be altered
but by the same Authority: and therefore he need not be afraid of any Excessive
Power of the Clergy.

But I now come to consider a Charge of a much higher nature, because it makes
the Growth of Deism to come from those Doctrines which Persons that read the
Scripture will be apt to conclude (notwithstanding all this Author can say
against them) to be the chief Doctrines of the Christian Religion. He says,
That many turn Deists from the Impossibility of Believing the Doctrine of the
Trinity; which is made a Point necessary to Salvation, and yet is in it self
unintelligible, of which those who profess it have no Notion, and differ widely
among themselves about it: That he cannot see to what End such a Doctrine was
revealed, which can serve for nothing but to puzzle and amuse, but can neither
teach Men any thing, nor have any Influence upon their Practice.

These are the chief Things of what he objects about the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and do deserve to be very seriously considered. But because several
Persons have designedly written upon this Subject, and it is very like others
quickly may again, I shall say only some few Words to it, and refer my Reader
to them.

It is an Unhappiness in all Controversies, that he who objects will be able to
talk generally more plausibly, and perhaps intelligibly, than he that defends.
The Reason of this is, That to defend a Thing well, a Man must have a clear and
a full Notion of the whole Matter; but a little, and a superficial Knowledge,
will be enough to find out Difficulties. But this does not hold in any thing so
much, as when Men dispute about the Nature of God, of which we know at best
very little; and when we come to explain our selves, must talk very darkly, and
commonly then find out our Ignorance of what we thought we knew before.

I remember Tully somewhere observes, That though all the Philosophers agreed in
this, That there was a God; yet, no two of them agreed what he was. Now it is
like some of the Wits of those times might from thence take an Occasion to
laugh at the whole Matter; that the Business was unintelligible; that those who
talked most of God did not agree what they meant by that Name, but only agreed
in a Word which every Man put a different Sense upon. But sober and considering
Persons would argue quite another way; That though they could not tell what God
was, yet so far they knew, That he was the Maker and the Governor of the
World: this almost all of them agreed in; and this was a sufficient Foundation
for the Worship they were to pay him; and as for the Contests about his Nature,
or Substance, or Essence, it was a great Evidence that Men were fully convinced
of his Being, that so many Difficulties and Disputes could never beat them out
of the Belief of it.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, if Men will go beyond what is revealed, has very
great Difficulties in it; but if Men will content themselves with what God has
told us of the Matter, though this will not answer all the Questions that Curiosity
may ask, yet it may give us a Notion clear enough to answer those Ends for
which God revealed it.

The Scripture plainly tells us, that there is but one God, and yet gives the
Name and the Attributes of God to the Father, to Jesus Christ the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. How far each of these is distinct from the other, it no where tells
us, only that each of them is God; and yet there is but one God. Here then we
must stick, That the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost God, and
yet there are not three Gods, but one God; and must conclude with our selves,
that there is some way which God has not thought fit to reveal to us, perhaps
because we are not now capable of understanding it, whereby these three are one.

Now in all this there is no Absurdity or Contradiction; but the only
Difficulty is, whether this be sufficient. But if God has revealed this, and
revealed no more, that ought to be no Difficulty: this is not sufficient to
gratify Men's Curiosity, or to answer all those Questions that we would indeed
be glad to hear resolved: but without going farther, here is sufficient in this
to answer those Ends which we may suppose God had in Revealing it. For,

1. If the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are God, here is sufficient Foundation
for Divine Worship to be paid to each of Them. So that this Doctrine of the
Trinity is not, as our Author represents it, a Doctrine of mere Speculation,
but is a Foundation of one of the greatest Religious Duties, the Worship of
God. If Jesus Christ be represented to me in Scripture as God, as God blessed
for ever, I ought then to Worship him, though I don't know how far he is distinct
from the Father or the Holy Ghost, or how these three are but one God.

2. We may from the Revelation of so much, understand the chief Points of the
Christian Religion. The great Doctrine of the Gospel of the Redemption of the
World by Jesus Christ, cannot be understood without it; but with it, we can
give such an Account as can be expected of a matter of so high a Nature. Of the
Dignity of Our Saviors Person, That the Word was made Flesh, Joh. 1.14 1 Timothy
3.16.
that God was Manifested in the Flesh; and thence of the great Love of God, and
of Our Savior Jesus Christ to us, who tho he were in the form of God, Philip.
2.6, 7.
yet for our Jakes humbled himself even to the death of the Cross. We have
hence a Reason of the great Value and Merits of his Sufferings, which must
needs be very great in such a Person whom, when he came into the world, Heb.
1.6.
all the Angels of God were to worship; which cannot be accounted for, without
such an ineffable Union to the Divine Nature, as makes the Person Jesus Christ
to be truly God. And to name no more, This gives us an account of our being
Baptized in the Name of the Father. Son, and Holy Ghost; of which, without the
Belief of each of them to be God, it would be a hard matter to give a good
Account; but with this we may, without knowing how far each is distinguished
from the other.

But my Design was only to touch upon these things, to show that what God has
revealed has not those Absurdities in it our Author suggests, and is sufficient
to answer all the wise Ends of the Revelation, perhaps as much as if we had
been told more; and if Men will go further than this, and then quarrel with one
another, it is not the Revelation of God, but their own Notions, which they
quarrel about.

But to return now to the Matter of Deism; I am afraid that it is but too true,
that these Controversies have been a Prejudice to the Christian Religion: but
then I believe, the Guilt of this must light chiefly upon Our Author's Friends,
the Socinians, who have made it their Business to expose and ridicule those
Doctrines, which will be found, after all, to be the Doctrines of the Holy
Scriptures; and to have been the Belief of Christians in all Ages; which, as it
is in it self a very great Argument for the Truth of them; so on the other
side, it must be a mighty Shock to Christianity, to represent those things as
Absurd and Contradictory, which have been for so long the Common Faith of
Christians; and indeed, it will be a hard matter to have any great Opinion of
that Religion which has been in the World for above sixteen hundred Years, and
has hardly ever yet had any Professors but those who have grossly
Misunderstood, and Misrepresented it.

But it is not my Business to recriminate; and I have designedly hitherto
avoided it, that I might not give any Occasion to Quarrels, of which, God
knows, the World is but too full already. God in Mercy forgive all those who
have any way done any thing to the Prejudice of so holy a Religion, and grant
that they may Repent, and by their Zeal and Concern for it, for the future, may
make some Amends for the Mischief they have done.

To conclude this Head; This is not the first Time or Age in which the Doctrine
of the Holy Trinity has been charged with Absurdities; yet notwithstanding
that, it still continues to be the Faith of Christians, and I believe is still
like to be so, notwithstanding all the Difficulties either the Disputes of its
Friends, or the Opposition of its Enemies, can load it with: a very good
Evidence this, that it is very well founded, since so many Shocks have not been
able to overthrow it. And methinks there may be fetched some Evidence for the
Truth of the Christian Religion it self, from the Opposition which this and
some other of its Doctrines have met with in the World. None of its Enemies can
prove any Absurdity or Contradiction in them; but it must be confessed, that
they are such as are not in themselves very plausible and taking, or very apt
in their own Nature to win upon the World: and therefore we see that the
Apostle complains, that Preaching up Christ, and the Method of our Redemption
by him, was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. If we
add to this Consideration, what a mighty Prejudice the World commonly has
against receiving any thing upon the Credit of such mean Persons as the first
Preachers of Christianity were, it will be very hard to conceive how this
Religion should ever have prevailed, unless God had in some extraordinary
manner concurred with it. The Truth is, it is not easy to imagine how these
things should ever have come into any body's head, unless God had Revealed
them. But besides, if Men had had a mind to invent, they would have thought of
something more plausible; and of all things in the World, they would never have
made it their Choice to preach up a Crucified Savior: Certainly nothing but a
full Conviction of the Truth of it, could ever have persuaded a few mean
People, of a Despised Nation, to think of Converting the World to such a
Doctrine as this; and nothing but the mighty Power of God concurring with them,
could ever have brought it to effect. The less internal Credibility there is in
the Nature of the Things themselves, the more external Evidence is necessary to
gain 'em Belief; especially if for the Belief of these, Men must go against
their former Prejudices, and hazard the Loss of all they have.

I have now considered the chief Causes of Deism assigned by our Author: there
are some other matters still behind, but it was not my Intent to take notice of
every thing that might be found fault with in his Pamphlet; but only to make
some Reflections upon those Calumnies or Mistakes in it that were like to do the
greatest Mischief. As for those things that remain, they are either only
Repetitions of what has been spoke to already, or else Matters of small
consequence, or such things as the World will easily see through; and therefore
I do not judge it proper to trouble either him or my self about them.

I hope I need not beg pardon either of God or the World, for the manner of
handling these Matters; and I am sure I need not beg pardon of the Person who
wrote the Pamphlet I reflect upon: A Man that has a hearty Concern for
Religion, cannot but sometimes show that Concern where he sees Religion in
Danger, and upon that account speak his Mind plainly. But I am so great an
Enemy to all Wrath and Bitterness in Writing, that I do not think it
justifiable even in replying to one of the spitefullest Pamphlets I ever saw;
for the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. The Cause of God and
Religion does not need the Passions of Men to defend it. And whoever brings
them into the Controversy, whatever Good he may do it one way, will certainly
do it Prejudice another.

Having now dismissed our Author, I think it proper before I conclude, to
prevent any Prejudice which such a Representation of things as he has given may
do to the Christian Religion, to say something to that. In doing this, I shall
not insist upon those many Arguments commonly brought to prove the Truth of it;
such as the exact fulfilling of the Prophecies of the Old Testament concerning
the Birth, and Life, and Death of our Blessed Savior; the many Miracles that
were done in Confirmation of this Religion for several Ages together,
especially the Resurrection of our Savior himself from the Dead; the Purity of
its Precepts, the Nobleness and Excellency of its Promises, the Divine and
Heavenly Nature of it; which whoever well considers, will find it to be a
Doctrine worthy the Care of a good God. These things have been largely insisted
upon by others, and do indeed effectually prove what they are brought for. But
I shall at present pass them over, and desire leave only to insist upon this
one thing, which I chose to do, because it contains in it a full Answer to the
whole Method of arguing which our Author puts in the mouths of his Deists; and
that is this, That the Persons who were the first Preachers and Promoters of
our Religion, and who have delivered us an Account of the Miracles done in
Confirmation of it, were Persons who could not propose to themselves any
Interest of their own in what they did; they could have no Expectations, but of
that Reward which their Religion promises them in the other World; as for the
things of This, we see plainly they did not pretend to them: Their Master had
told them, that Persecution was like to be the Portion of his Disciples; which
accordingly they did very sufficiently meet with, being persecuted from one
Place to another, till at last they laid down their Lives in Confirmation of
that Truth they had preached. But we see however, that while they had their
Lives, they went very zealously and cheerfully on, being joyful if they could
but do their Master's Business, and contribute toward the saving of Souls,
whatever became of themselves. Of this S. Paul gives us a pathetical Account in
his Farewel-Speech to the Church of Ephesus, as you may see at large in the
20th Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles; You know, says he, from the first day
that I came into Asia, how I have been with you at all times, serving the Lord
with all lowliness, and many tears, and temptations which happened to me from
the lying in wait of the Jews. And now behold, being led by the spirit, I go up
to Jerusalem, not knowing what shall befall me there; only that the Holy Ghost
has told me, that in every City bonds and imprisonments abide me. But I regard
not these things, neither count I my life dear, so I may but finish my course
with joy, and the Ministry that I have received of the Lord Jesus to preach the
Gospel of the grace of God. These, and many other things, he there speaks to
them with that Air of Seriousness and Concern, and true Greatness of Soul which
became an Apostle of Christ; and plainly showed, that he was in good earnest.
The truth is, it seems to be impossible that there should be so much Zeal and
Earnestness to promote that which they were not fully convinced in their
Conscience to be true; and much more impossible that they should with so much
Joy suffer for that which if it were false they must know to be an Imposture,
and an Impudent Lie.

But it may be some may object, that the bare Suffering for any Cause is not a
sufficient Evidence of the Truth of it; because we see, that there is scarce
any Religion, but what has had those who have Suffered for it: And therefore if
that were a good Argument of the Truth of any Religion, it would prove
Contradictions to be true, it being a very common thing in the World, to see
some Men suffer for Affirming, and others for Denying the same thing.

As to this it may be answered, That there seems in several Respects to be a
great Difference betwixt the Sufferings of the first Christians for their
Religion, and the Sufferings of any other Party* but this I would not insist
upon. All that I would prove from their Sufferings, is, That they were honest
Men, and did really believe That for which they Suffered to be Truth; and this,
I think, cannot well be denied if we grant 'em to have had Flesh and Blood as
we now have. And this may perhaps be said for those that suffer on other
Accounts, That they are honest Men too. And therefore the best way to see the
difference, is, to consider the different Natures of the Things for which they
suffer. As for Matters of Opinion, or the Sense of doubtful Expression in a
Book, or the like, these are Cases in which an honest Man may be mistaken; and
therefore if he suffer in such a Case, though it may prove him an honest Man, yet
it does not prove him to be in the right; because in Cases of this kind, the
honestest Man in the World may be sometimes Mistaken; and because he is an
honest Man, will, if there be occasion, suffer for that Mistake: But the Cause
for which the Apostles and first Christians suffered was of a different Nature,
and such as they could not be mistaken about. A great part of what they
Preached to the World were plain and open matters of fact; that they saw their
Savior frequently do Miracles; that they saw him heal the Sick, cast out
Devils, raise the Dead, by his bare Word; that they saw the Wonders at his own
Death; that they saw him frequently after his Resurrection; that he gave them
such and such Instructions to Preach to the World; that they saw the miraculous
Effusion of the Holy Ghost at the day of Peutecost; that they heard the whole
Multitude of their Friends and Acquaintance whom they knew before, to speak
with Tongues they had never been taught; that this Gift, and that of working
other Miracles, was common in the Church, and frequently and openly exercised:
These are plain and open Matters of fact, such as they could not mistake in,
such as must be true, or else the most impudent Lies that ever were told; and
yet these are the things for which they did so joyfully suffer the Loss of All,
and undergo all that is hard to human Nature.

To conclude this Head; There can be no Reason imagined why Our Savior, and
his Apostles should choose such parts to act in the World, without a full
Conviction of the Truth of what they said: as for our Blessed Savior, he was
to be a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, to live a mean and a
despised life, and at last to be cut off for the sins of his people; which
certainly was no eligible part, unless upon those noble motives upon which we
suppose he undertook it: And as for the Apostles and first Christians, it
cannot be imagined what should make 'em take so much Pains, run up and down the
World with so much Zeal, preach with so much Concern, and suffer Bonds and
Imprisonments, Ignominy and Contempt, and at last Death it self, with so much
Joy, unless they were fully satisfied of the Reality of those great things they
preached to the World.

This being plainly the Case of the first Preachers and Promoters of
Christianity, we may from hence infer,

That the Christian Religion was no Politic Invention, or Trick of State to
serve any Ends or Designs of Government upon the People: This is indeed a very
common Objection against Religion, that it is only an Art of Governors to keep
People in Order, and so to serve their turns of them. And it must be confessed
that to Persons who do not examine things to the bottom, there has been
Occasion given to make this Objection: for in most Ages and Nations, Persons in
Authority, as well as private Men, have served their own Designs under pretense
of Religion; sometimes by inventing things to work upon Peoples Superstition,
at other times by encouraging Parties, or any particular Opinions, as may best
serve their own Interest. These things, no question, have been frequently done;
and therefore we have reason to suspect any thing if we can give no better an
Account of its Original. But as for those who argue from hence against Religion
in general, and say it is all a Politic Device, I desire they would not be too
hasty, but consider well what they mean by Religion. As for the Principles of
Natural Religion, that God is the Maker and Governor of the World, that he is
therefore to be worshipped and served by his Creatures, that Men are to be just
and honest and true to their Words, and the like, these are things we have
plain Reason for; and therefore these, though they may be made use of to serve a
Turn, yet cannot be Inventions of State. And as for the Christian Religion,
none of its Enemies ever pretended that it came into the World in this manner.
All that States or Kingdoms had to do with it for several Ages, was, only to
persecute it and its Professors. Not but that the Christian Religion may have
been since made use of to serve Designs as well as any other, and have had
several things added to it with that Prospect. But I now speak only for so much
of it as is to be found in the New Testament, and it is as plain as any thing
can be in History, and no Man that I know of ever yet pretended the contrary,
that this is no such Invention. And if they will but grant us the Principles of
Natural Religion, and the Christian Religion, we will grant them, if they
please, that all the rest is only Trick and Design.

2. Since it is plain that the Apostles and first Preachers of Christianity
could propose no worldly Interest to themselves in what they did; but on the
other side, met with Scorn and Contempt, Bonds and Imprisonments; yet for all
that went very zealously and cheerfully on as long as their Persecutors would
let 'em live: We may from thence infer, that what they did was not to serve any
End or Design of their own; it is very plain there could be no Priestcraft
here. And therefore whatever may be laid to the Charge of After-Ages in this
kind, has nothing to do here: the Christian Religion must be freed from this
Aspersion. And this is at once a full Answer to the whole method of Arguing
used in that Pamphlet I have reflected upon. That supposing the worst, that all
those ill things he says of the Clergy were indeed true, that is really nothing
to the Christian Religion, which was either true or false many hundred Years
ago, and cannot now be made either, by any thing that can be done now: the
Credit of it does not depend upon the present Times, or Persons, or any thing
they can do; but upon the Character of the first Preachers of it, and upon what
they did: if they were Men of Integrity and Honesty, and did, and saw done,
what they tell us, then this Religion must be true; and therefore that is the
thing to be enquired after: but he that will but reflect a little upon what has
been said, can hardly doubt of that, unless Human Nature were a different thing
then from what it is now, and Men had then as strong a Desire to undergo
Contempt, and Sufferings, and Death it self, without any reason, as we see they
have now to avoid them.

It is therefore no Reflection upon Christianity, that the Clergy now live, and
live handsomely by their Profession. Time was, when their Religion was in a
state of Persecution, and then none suffered so much as they for it; and I do
not question but a great number of them would cheerfully do the same now,
should God call 'em to it: but the Times are altered, our Religion is now
encouraged; and when that is so, certainly, both God, and Nature, and the
common Reason of Mankind, require that the Ministers of it should be encouraged
too.

It is looked upon by some as a sufficient Reason to throw away any thing a
Minister can say without considering, because they say it is his Trade, the
thing by which he gets his Living; and therefore, that he must talk so. To
which, I shall only reply in a word, that it is absurd enough, that since
Heathens have done persecuting their Ministers, they will not believe their
Religion, unless Christians themselves will persecute them too. But however
this be, whatever Ministers may get now by their Religion, the first Ministers
of it, it is very plain, did not get any thing by it but the Saving of their
Souls; so that there is no reason why they should question believing them.

3. From what was laid down before we may infer, That as our Religion could not
be an Invention of State, nor an Invention of those who Preached it; so neither
could it come from Enthusiasm, or any thing of that kind, which is the only
thing that can be pretended besides. From what has been said of the Apostles,
etc. no Man can reasonably doubt of their being honest Men, and really
believing what they said to be true; so that there remains nothing, but to see
whether they were deceieved or no. But as I showed before, a great part of the
things they Preached, and such as confirm the Truth of all the rest, were plain
and open Matters of fact, the things which they had seen and heard, and those
repeated in so many Instances, that they could not be deceived; as may appear
to any that will but consider what has been said before, or read carefully over
the History recorded in the Evangelists, and the Acts of the Apostles. Matters
of Opinion and Speculation, may easily be imposed upon fanciful People; but
such a Series of Matters of fact cannot be imposed upon Men's Sight and Hearing:
and yet if those are true, All the rest of our Religion must be true too.

4. This shows us a manifest Difference betwixt the Miracles wrought by the
Apostles, etc. and some that have been since pretended in Confirmation of the
Popish Errors; That the Apostles plainly could have no Interest to invent, or
relate Matters falsely; if they did not believe their Religion true, it was
their Interest to lay it down, and have nothing more to do with it: but as for
the other, to say no worse of them, they do evidently serve a Turn; and what
does so, unless there be very good Evidence for it, we have just Reason to
suspect.

Having done, in short, with what I designed to speak to about the Christian
Religion, I would now seriously address my self to those who have any doubt
about these Matters, and especially to those who set up for Deism in England.
The Matter is certainly of very great Consequence, and what we are all very
much concerned in, and therefore does at least deserve a serious Examination,
and not to be slightly passed over, or made matter of Jest, as has been the
Custom of too many, who, I believe, have little considered whether these things
are true or no, or what the Importance of them is, supposing they are true. But
a Man had need be very sure before he venture to affront God, and what he has
revealed to us, in such a manner. I desire therefore they would consider with
me these few things.

1. That supposing the Christian Religion be true; it must be a very dangerous
thing to be an Infidel. It Is a common Opinion in this Age, that Men are under
no Laws or Obligations as to their Belief and Opinions of Things, and therefore
cannot be punished for them let them be what they will; and this makes them
easily declare for, or against any thing as Humor or Inclination leads them,
without much considering the Matter. And indeed so far they are in the right,
that God requires no Man to believe without Evidence; and if a Man knows what
he does, he cannot believe any thing but so far as he finds it true. But it is
very plain on the other side, that God may command his Creatures to take notice
of some things at their Peril; and if their Disbelief of what he reveals comes
by their own Fault, this is then as criminal as any other Immorality. And
therefore our Religion frequently reckons Infidelity among those Sins for which
Men shall be punished in the other World. The very Words by which our Savior
gave his Apostles Commission to preach the Gospel show this; Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every Creature; he that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. By which, I
suppose, he means every one that has the Gospel preached to him, but either
through Negligence, or fear of Persecution, or some other Corruption of Heart,
remains still in his Unbelief. And St. John, in Rev. 21.8. reckons up
Unbelievers among those that shall have their Portion in the Lake that burns
with Fire and Brimstone; But the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable,
and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars,
shall have their portion in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. What
God will do with those that never heard of the Gospel, he has no where told us;
no question but he will deal with them according to the Rules of Justice and
Mercy. But it is plain that God has no where promised Heaven but upon condition
of Faith in Christ, that being a free Gift which he can dispose of on what
Conditions he pleases; and as for those who live under the preaching of the
Gospel, but through any fault of their own remain Infidels, according to the
Scriptures, Infidelity is in such a Sin of as dangerous a nature as any Sin
whatever. And therefore a Man had need be very sure, and have examined the
matter very thoroughly before he set up for an Infidel, when the Consequence of
it is like to be so terrible if the Christian Religion should prove true at
last.

2. I desire they would consider how little Reason there is why any Man should
be proud or fond either of being, or being counted, an Infidel. The great
Principles of Infidelity at present are, That there is no Future State, no such
things as Rewards or Punishments in the other World. Now suppose this might be
proved true, What would the Infidel get by all this? He would only prove
himself to be a mean, pitiful, and contemptible Creature; a Creature the most
awkwardly made of any in the whole Creation; a Creature, which is to be
included within the space of a few Years; and spends almost all that time
either in little Follies, or vain Hopes, or toilsome Cares, either in fruitless
Desires, or insipid Enjoyments, either in real Sufferings, or imaginary Fears,
or something or other of that kind; and when this short impertinent Scene is
ended, must then only become a little Dirt, as mean contemptible Dirt as any he
now treads upon. Methinks this is but a poor pitiful thing, and a melancholy
prospect to any that regards the Dignity of his Nature, and yet is the very
best that such a Man can propose, and a Favor that, after all, he cannot be
certain of. This is indeed, it must be confessed, much better than to be
eternally miserable, and that is the Reason that so many wicked Men fly to it
as their Refuge; and indeed they were in the right of it, if either the one or
the other were unavoidable: But since, by the Mercy of God, this may be avoided
only by leaving our Sins, it must be great Stupidity for a Man to look upon it
to be his Interest to die like the Beasts that perish, so he may but indulge
himself a little while here, rather than have the Principles of Christianity
true, according to which it is in his Power, by the Grace of God, to be happy
for ever, and in prospect of that to make his Life very comfortable in this
World.

3. I would desire them to consider seriously, whether they have thought upon
the Matter as they ought to do; whether they have thoroughly, and with
Attention, weighed the Principles of Religion, and the Arguments for them, to
see whether they are true or no. It Is plain that these things have been the
Belief of many wise considering Men for several Ages, who have ventured all
they have in the World upon it, and lost all for it; and therefore the Matter
should be at least well examined before they venture to declare against it; for
before that be done they cannot tell but after all it may prove true; and if it
do, they are undone for ever. But then the Business must not be weighed
slightly, or put off with a Jest, or judged only by Objections, which Wit may
raise against any thing, and of which perhaps by reason of the Sublimity of the
Matter, we are not proper Judges; but the whole Evidence must be taken
together; and after all, we must not expect strict Demonstration in a Case
which, supposing it true, will not admit of it; but be content with such
Reasons and Proofs as an honest impartial Man would be in a matter of this kind.

But above all, it is necessary that we purge our Minds from all earthly and
sensual Passions; we must endeavor after a great Sincerity and Purity of Soul;
for Religion, the Christian Religion especially, is a thing of a spiritual and
sublime Nature, directly contrary to all those mean Passions and Inclinations
that debase the Soul; and therefore till that be purified, a Man is no proper
Judge in this matter, he cannot relish or see the Excellency of this Religion:
Common Sense must indeed judge of the external Arguments that prove the Truth
of it, and from them a very wicked Man may conclude that this is the True
Religion; but still a Man can hardly discern, at least not taste and inwardly
feel the Excellency of it without purity of Soul, which must take away much of
the Force of those Arguments brought for the Truth of it. To conclude this
Matter, A guilty defiled Soul must needs be of a Party against the Christian
Religion, and therefore is not fit to be a Judge.

Consider therefore seriously with your selves, whether all this I have now
spoke of have been done, and whether it be not the greatest Madness in the
World to venture your Souls upon it if it have not.

Having now finished what I designed, I would humbly take leave before I
conclude, in a few Words, to address my self to the Reverend Clergy of this
Kingdom, who are the Persons principally struck at in that Pamphlet upon which
I have been reflecting; That since their Enemies take all Occasions not only to
make them vile, but from thence also to reflect upon Our Holy Religion, they
would make it their great Care to cut off all such Occasions from those who
seek it.

It has been a great Misfortune to the Present Established Church, that it has
had so many Enemies of all sorts who have been ready to pry into the Lives and
Actions of the Clergy, to expose all their Failings, and misrepresent Things
that might well bear a good Construction; not, after all, but that in so great
a Body of Men we must expect there will be some neither so good, nor so wise
and discreet as the true Friends of Religion would be glad to see them: but I
hope, that if there have been any who have not hitherto been so careful as they
ought to be, they will now especially lay to heart the great Obligations their
Holy Profession brings upon them, because not only their own Honor, and that
of the Church, but even of our common Christianity, is concerned in it.

A grave and serious, a diligent and industrious, a peaceable and unanimous
Clergy, are the likeliest means to recover the Reputation of Religion, and to
make it sensibly lovely in the Eyes of the World: whereas on the other side,
every loose, or careless, ambitious, or contentious Clergyman, does indeed only
expose and betray that Cause which he is bound to promote. But especially as
there is nothing more essential to our Religion than Meekness, and Love, and
Gentleness, so there is nothing more shocking than to see the contrary
Character appear in the Sermons or Writings of Churchmen, though it be in the
Defense of Truth: It is very bad for Persons of that Holy Profession to be
guilty of Vices in the private Conduct of their Lives; but to Preach or to
Write bitterly against each other, is to proclaim to the World a Spirit
directly contrary to that of their Religion; and to call as many as they can to
take notice of it.

In short, Religion is a thing cannot be long kept up, as Secular Factions may
be, by Interest, or Grandeur, or any thing of that kind; no, it must have real
internal Esteem in the Hearts of Men, otherwise the Effect is very like to be,
that they will leave that for some other, or else look upon all Religion to be
only Trick and Design. It is true indeed, that no Actions of Men can alter the
Natures of Things, or make that Religion to be true or false now, which was
determinately one of them many hundred Years ago. But it is not every body that
either can or will consider things aright, that requires some Pains, and Time,
and Freedom from Prejudice; but a Good Life, especially in Clergymen, is a
sensible and a visible thing; every body knows that the great End of Religion
is to make Men Pious and Holy, and therefore they will very naturally incline
there where they see most of that.

To conclude all in a Word, The best way that either Ministers, or People can
serve their Religion, is by adorning it with a holy Conversation; and it
concerns all, as they will at the Great day answer for the Scandal brought upon
it, that they do not by their ill Lives, and as much as possible not by any
Indiscretion, cause the Enemies of the Lord to Blaspheme.

FINIS.

