A VINDICATION OF A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE UNREASONABLENESS OF A New
Separation, On Account of the OATHS, FROM THE Exceptions made against it in a
Tract called, A Brief Answer to a Late Discourse, etc.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCI.

TO THE READER
THE last Year there was Published a Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness
of a New Separation on account of the present Oaths; in which the Learned
Author endeavored to prevent that Schism which we were then threatened with,
and has since broke out amongst us; begun by some few that were dissatisfied
about the Oaths, and upon that account quitted their Preferments; but improved
by others (tho thanks be to God, with little Success) who are disaffected to
the present Government, and take all ways to render it uneasy. To the foresaid
Book at last Two Answers have been given; the one called, A Brief Answer; the
other, An Enquiry into the remarkable Instances of History, used by the Author
of the Unreasonableness, etc. The former with much Virulence, and more Heat
than Judgment, directly vindicates the New Separation; in the examination of
which I have concerned my self; and no further with the Second, than the
Reasons there insinuated and touched upon, fall in with the former. As for what
concerns the Enquiry into the Instances, and their Vindication against the
Cavils of that Pretender to English History (for so I call him, because I find
him to be a downright Plagiary from Dr. Brady's Writings), I shall leave it to
the Author, who Himself in a short time will give the World an Account of that
Matter.

A VINDICATION OF A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a New
Separation, etc.
THE Author of the Brief Answer, toward the Close of his Paper, thus professes
of himself: For many Reasons, I am unwilling to judge severely of my Brethren,
who have sworn; nor has any Man been more forbearing.

If this Champion of the Cause he appears in, had entered the Lists, and begun
his Pamphlet with such a Declaration, there might have been some favorable
Construction put upon it; though in the process of his Discourse he had been
transported beyond his first intention, by a zeal for his own Cause on one
hand, and the force of his Adversary's Arguments on the other: But to conclude
with an I am unwilling to judge severely, after he had spared neither the Order
he professes himself to be of; nor his Adversary, whose Character, Dignity,
and Learning, he sometimes is pleased to acknowledge, is a sort of refining,
not subtle enough to take with the present Age, and a practice too gross to put
upon an impartial and considerate Reader.

For, as for those he once in an overflowing sit of Charity calls Brethren,
they are in his Dialect a Pack of Jolly Swearers, page 2. Such as betray their
Consciences for large Preferments, p. 4. And he might have added, when his hand
was in, that damn their Souls by the Perjury he charges them with, p. 7.

As for his Adversary, He is one, according to the Character this Author frames
for him, that is old-excellent at mustering up the Ill Presidents, p. 6. That
has despised all sorts of Persons, as ignorant and silly in respect of
himself, p. 11. A Man who lays aside all his Divinity, for a little bad Law,
and worse History, p. 15. And, to clinch the whole, thus sets him off; A
learned Doctor, nay (God be merciful to us!) a Bishop, so styled, of our
Church. This, in his Language, is no severe Judgment; and after all (if you
will believe him) no man has been more forbearing than himself.

So much shall serve for a Proof of his Candor and Sincerity: let us now try
how this huffing Philistine, who thus struts over his Adversary, behaves
himself in close fighting.

The whole of what he says, may be reduced to these Three Heads.

I. Church Communion and Schism. II. Public Good. III. Obedience to Authority.
. 1. Of Church Communion and Schism.
The Author of the Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness, etc. professes,
That he was not a little surprised,

1. That these New Separatists, that expressed so great a sense of Schism in
others, should be so ready to fall into it themselves. 2. That they do it upon
the account of scruples, when the difference is only about the Resolution of a
Case of Conscience, wherein Wise and Good Men may easily differ.

To the first, the Author of the Brief Answer replies, They do, not fall, but
are forced into it: Which I shall consider in its due place, when he undertakes
to prove it.

To the second, he gives a spiteful return: But is then a Case of Conscience
really so trivial a thing? And after he has gravely proved the contrary for a
Column together, concludes with a special piece of Admonition to his Adversary;
Therefore, whatsoever our Author may think, I shall desire him henceforward to
speak more reverendly of a Case of Conscience, etc.

But here this Author has overrun the Point; for the word Only, is not (as he
perversely will have it) as if a Case of Conscience was not a matter of
consequence; but that the taking or not taking the Oaths, is only a Case of
Conscience, not Matter of Doctrine. For the Dispute is not, Whether an Oath be
lawful or not? but, Whether this present Oath be so? Which being a matter of a
Civil Nature, must depend upon the knowledge of the Constitution and Laws of
this Realm for its resolution; which Wise and Good Men may easily differ in, as
the Author of the Discourse observes: and so there can be no reason for those
that scruple the Oath, to separate from the Communion of those that take it.

This premised, that learned Author seasonably prevents and removes the Pleas
that may be made for such a Separation.

As, 1. When any thing Unlawful is made a Condition of Communion.

2. That it is unlawful to join with those that have taken the Oaths; and so
have done, and continue to do and defend what they, that refuse Communion,
account unlawful.



As to the first, the Discourse shows, That the Terms of our Communion are not
altered; and that taking the Oaths is made no Condition of Communion with us.

As to the second, It observes, That this is the Scruple about Mixed Communion,
which has been so long exploded among us.

Upon the first, our Author coldly replies, I could have told him forty things
which they are not; and if he should be out in that one he mentions, it would
be very unlucky; and that he is so, I shall endeavor in its proper place to
prove. But in the mean time, if amongst the forty things the Oaths are not,
they shall not be found to be the Condition of Communion, they can be no reason
for breaking off from that Communion. And I grant, he may sooner tell of forty
things the Oaths are not, than prove that they are made the Conditions of
Communion; or that They may separate from the Church for such things as are not
made Conditions of Communion with it.

As to the second, The Case of Mixed Communion, our Author is very careful to
pass it over in silence: and instead of that, borrows a sorry Invective from
some of his Friends of the Church of Rome, I could tell him of a man, etc. and
in the Answer to their Books, he will find the Reply. But he then takes a step
back to make a Reflection upon what he thinks may better suit his purpose: For
his Adversary having put a Case, Suppose those who take the Oaths to blame; if
they act according to their Consciences therein, what ground is there for a
Separation from them for so doing, unless it be lawful to separate from all
such who follow the Dictates of an erroneous Conscience? and so there will be
no end of Separation, etc. Our Author smartly returns upon him; At this rate;
there will be no end of Tristing and Sophistry; for if I am bound to separate
from some erroneous conscience, why must it needs be lawful to separate from
all? etc. And here, according to his wont when he has none to oppose him, he
states and argues the Point out and out.

But this is another of his Blunders. The plain Case is this: His Adversary
having just before showed the taking of the Oaths to be no Condition of
Communion, adds, And if they are not, what color can there be for breaking
Communion on the Account of the Oaths? And then follows, Suppose they are to
blame, etc. That is, If the Oaths are not made a Condition of Communion, what
imaginable Cause can there be assigned for a Separation, unless it be because
they are to blame, by acting according to an erroneous Conscience? and then
this will be endless.

These general Reflections past, the Author of the Unreasonableness, etc. takes
the Main Point into Consideration; viz. Whether there be any reason for those
Scruples about the Oaths? For if there be not, it will be granted, That there
can be no Obligation for a Separation on the account of them.

But it seems that Author was under a great mistake in his taking it for
granted; for our Author stands up in opposition to it, and says, He has not
fairly and truly stated the Case: For the Question is not nakedly and simply,
Whether the Oaths may or may not be lawfully taken? but, Whether Oaths imposed
under such unjust and merciless Penalties, and attended with such fatal
Consequences, will not warrant the Non-Swearers in a Separation from such as do?

But this is another of his mistakes; for nothing can be more plain than that,
if there be no reason for the Scruples about the Oaths, there can be no reason
for their sake to separate from those that take them: And therefore that Author
took the most proper course that could be, to prove the Unlawfulness of the
present Separation, from the Lawfulness of taking them. For if the Oaths are
Lawful, the Penalties, how unjust and rigorous soever, cannot make them
Unlawful: and the Consequences cannot be fatal, if those that are now
Non-Swearers, are convinced of the lawfulness of the Oaths, and so take them.

This brings me to consider his Arguments in justification of the present
Separation; and what he has said confusedly, I think may be commodiously
ranked under these Three Heads.

1. That the Penalties to be inflicted upon them, want nothing of being a
Condition of Communion to them, quatenus Ministers, p. 3, 4. 2. That their
Authority is from Christ, and so no Secular Power can Vnbishop and Vnpriest, or
disable them, p. 4, 5. 3. That they are bound to obey their Bishops and
Metropolitan, p. 5, 6.
Arg. 1. The Oaths being imposed under such unjust and merciless Penalties, and
attended with such fatal Consequences, will warrant Separation; and want
nothing of being made a Condition of Communion, etc.

Now to speak in his way, There may be forty things we know, which may have the
same fatal Consequence; for so it would be if the Clergy should not subscribe
to the Service Book and Articles; if they should not declare their Assent and
Consent to all and every thing contained in the Book of Common Prayer. And so
it would have been in former Kings Reigns, if the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy had not been taken. So that there always was upon this Author's
Argument, a sufficient warrant for Non Swearers and Non-Conformers, to Separate
from those that did swear and did conform. For Papist and Dissenter will join
with him in the Clamor, and each for themselves, as he for his own, will
complain of unjust and merciless Penalties. Penalties there are, and they are
great, but they are neither unjust or merciless, if the Government is not
otherwise to be secured. But it does not seem that they are unjust and
merciless, by his way of representing them; for as if he did not believe it
himself, he is fain to dress them up with all the Sanbenito's of an
Inquisition, and the most extravagant aggravations; for thus he opens the case:
-- After Six Months warning, and frequent rabling, if we take not the Oaths, we
are silenced for Six Months more; so then (mark the consequence) if the Oaths
be not taken, all the Churches in England must be shut up. I know not any
considerable difference betwixt this and a Popish Interdict; neither matters it
much, whether we lie at the mercy of the Pope or a Parliament, whether God
shall be worshipped in the Land, or not, etc.

So that it seems by their not taking the Oaths, and their deprivation upon it,
we have neither God nor Religion among us, (in the Phrase of their new
Liturgy;) or in the Phrase used upon the like occasion by others, the Ark of
God is removed, and the Glory departed from our Israel. But though we pity
other men's miseries, and could wish that our Brethren were as we are; yet
webless God, that whereas by the Pope's Interdict every Church was required to
be shut in the Land, (as it was for above Six Years in the Reign of King John)
all ours are open: And though the Few that refuse the Oaths, and now remain
deprived, are too many, yet that these neither bear the proportion of the 12000
to the 16000 of the Clergy that were outed in Q. Mary's time, (as M. Parker
computes it) nor of the 2000 to the 10000, as it is said was in the Reign of
King Charlet II.

But to return to the Point, What, says he, does this want of being make a
condition of Communion to us, quatenus Ministers?

To this I answer,

1. Suppose it to want nothing of being made a condition of Communion to them,
as Ministers, yet what is this to the People, of whom, as Church Members, that
is not required? This is a tender Point, and what he durst not touch upon: For
grant that they had cause to separate, yet what would they do without a People?
And how would the People justify their Separation with the Ministers, upon
whom no such Obligations were laid, as on the Ministers? So that tho the
Nonswearing Clergy might lawfully separate without sin from our Communion, yet
they must separate alone; while none of the People could join with them in
their Separation, without being guilty of a notorious Schism. For what reason
would there have been for the Ministers Separation, if the Oaths had not been
required of them? And what reason can there be then for the Peoples Non
Communion, who (as Church Members) stand as free from such Obligations, as if
no such Revolution as the present had happened, and no such Oaths had been at all
imposed.

2. Though there be this obligation laid upon Ministers, yet what is this
Political Security required of them, to their Communion with the Church? May
Persons when grieved by the Secular Power, and deprived of their Livelihoods by
an Act of Parliament, revenge it upon the Church? And will they interdict
themselves its Communion, and break it in pieces, because they are thus
injured, as they suppose?

3. If they are not suffered to officiate as Ministers, yet they may still join
in the same Communion as Laymen.

To this he answers,

If no Lay-Power can make or unmake a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, then the
Charge of our Ministry will still lie upon us, notwithstanding this depriving
Act, and necessity will lie upon us to discharge it at our Peril.

This leads me to his Second Argument; but before I proceed to it, let him
understand, That he proceeds upon a gross mistake, by confounding Deprivation
with Degradation. For what Act is there that does (in his Phrase, p. 5.) Un
Bishop and Vn-Priest men? All that the Civil Power here pretends to, is to
secure it felf against the practices of Dissatisfied Persons, and to try who
are such, it requires an Oath of Allegiance to be taken to their Majesty's, by
all in Office, Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military: And in case of Refusal, by
Deprivation to disable such, as far as they can, from endangering the Public
Safety. But if the Clergy so deprived think fit to take the Oaths, they are in
statu quo, without any New Consecration or Reordination.

Having cleared the Argument of this mistake, I shall now consider it.

Arg. 2. A Clergy man's Authority is from God; and notwithstanding any Civil
Act to the contrary, he is bound to take care of his Office, though the most
bitter Persecutions attend him for so doing. And therefore if they will warrant
a Civil Act to disable us from doing our Duties, they must excuse us, if we
have these dreadful apprehensions of the Account we have to give; That we
endeavor to do it as we can at our hazard, when we are not suffered to do it
in Communion with them, p. 4.

The Sum of his Argument is, That being they receive their Authority from God,
no Civil Power can disable them from the exercise of their duty: And if it
does, they are bound to quit the Communion of the Church, where so disabled.
The Force of which may be resolved into these Three Questions.

Q. 1. Whether a Bishop duly Consecrated, or a Minister duly Ordained, may not
be lawfully suspended and deprived from the execution of his Office, by the
Secular Power, where there is sufficient reason for it?

2. Whether a Refusal to give Security to the Secular Power for a peaceable
behavior, and Obedience, by Oath, may not be a sufficient reason?

3. Whether if so deprived, he is notwithstanding bound as a private Member to
join in Communion with that Church whereof he was a Minister before; if nothing
unlawful be required of him in that Communion; and not to separate from it?

Q. 1. As to the first, Whether a Bishop duly consecrated, etc. our Author is
not very clear; but if he is to be understood, he takes away all such Power
from the Secular Authority. So p. 5. Our Metropolitan, and several other
Bishops, are now actually by a secular Act Deprived. But are they Deprived by
any Canons, or Canonical Censures of the Church? And he makes a suitable
Distinction betwixt what he allows to the One, and not to the Other: viz. I
shall easily grant, that the Secular Power has often seized Estates, and
imprisoned and banished their Persons: but still they were accounted Bishops of
Those Churches, and ceased not to discharge their Duty, etc. And p. 6. Our
Author will think to tell us Tales, How Emperors have put our Bishops, etc.
But it is one thing to act in pursuance of the Canons of the Church, and
another thing to act against them, etc.

Now, in answer to all this ramble, I shall transcribe what the judicious Mason
replied to two or three Objections of this kind. [ De Minist. Angl. l. 3. c. 6.]

Object. Is not the Deposition of a Bishop a Spiritual Censure? how therefore
can it be ascribed to Secular Powers?

Answ. The Secular Powers depose a Bishop, not by way of Degradation, but
Exclusion. They exclude him, not from his Orders, as if he had them not; but
from the Gift, that he may not exercise it. And not from that neither
absolutely, but after a sort; that he should not exercise his Office, as to
their Subjects, nor in their Dominions. Which the holiest Princes in the Best
and Primitive Times have often exercised.

Object. Can a Prince take away what he cannot give?

Answ. He cannot give, and so cannot take away the intrinsic Power of the Word
and Sacraments, proceeding from the Keys of Ordination: but the extrinsical
Power and License of exercising the Ministerial Office, received by Ordination,
he can in his Dominions confer, and again take away, if the Case so requires.

I leave the rest about an Act of Parliament to this Author's perusal, at his
leisure.

Q. 2. Whether it may not be lawful for the Secular Power to deprive Persons in
Orders, for Crimes committed against the State, and particularly, upon refusal
to give Security to the Government for their peaceable Behavior, and
Allegiance by Oath?

The General, our Author expressly denies; and the Particular Case he will not
allow, because it is the reason why the General was maintained. So he says, p.
5.

Neither the Clergy nor People [in the Primitive Times] renounced their
Bishops, unless they were guilty of such Crimes for which the Censures of the
Church did depose them, or the Canons ipso facto deprive them. But where is the
Heresy? where are any of all these Crimes, for which these our Bishops merit
Deposition; or what just Censure of the Church has passed upon them?

Now I answer with Mason, Where was the Act of the Church, in the Deposition of
Abiathar? And where was the Ecclesiastical Crime he was charged with?

And as to the Oaths, I shall answer again in the words of the same celebrated
Author: Not without Cause was there a Law made, That all Magistrates, whether
Sacerdotal or Civil, should take an Oath, That the Queen [ Eliz.] was Supreme
Governor, and under the pain of Deposition: Which Oath since the Popish
Bishops refused, they were deprived of their Honors and Churches: nor
undeservedly, because they were presumed to be for the Pope's Supremacy.

And the same parity of reason may hold for Administering and Taking the Oath of
Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, since they that refuse to take That,
may be presumed to think their Allegiance due to another.

And that Author adds further, when the said Oath was tendered to those Bishops
by illustrious Persons deputed thereunto, and they would not be persuaded to
take it, Episcopatibus suis tandem aliquando juxta legem Parliamentariam sunt
abdicati; which I leave to our Author to English.

I think this Case is at an end.

Q. 3. Whether if a Person be lawfully deprived of the exercise of his
Ministry, he is notwithstanding bound, as a private Member, to communicate in
that Church, etc.

This our Author denies, for he would have it, that they are bound to continue
in the exercise of their Office, to do it as they can, when not suffered to do
it in Communion with them. Not suffered, he means without taking the Oaths.

The Sum is, That if they are not permitted to exercise their Ministerial
Function, they think themselves obliged to set up Conventicles, and maintain a
separate Communion.

Now this may make two Questions.

Whether Ordination obliges such an one to the actual exercise of his Office,
when forbid by the Magistrate? And then whether for the exercise of his
Ministry, he may and is obliged to set up and maintain a separate Communion?

1. Whether Ordination obliges such an one, etc.

To this I answer: If a Magistrate may lawfully deprive, (as I have showed he
may) then the Clerk may be lawfully deprived. And if lawfully deprived, he is
bound to submit to such Deprivation. And that in obedience to the Magistrate,
whom we are taught (as he knows) not to resist. But to officiate
notwithstanding such a Prohibition, is in our way to take up Arms against him;
and in a lower to do what the Pope does in a higher Station, and to control
his Jurisdiction. Our Author undertakes to tell us what was done in the
Primitive Times: but if he had consulted them, he would have found, that when
by the Imperial Power Eustathius was put out of Antioch, Athanasius out of
Alexandria, and Paulus out of Constantinople, though the Orthodox complained of
the Injustice of it, as done upon the malicious suggestion of the Arians, yet
they never questioned the Emperor's Power. But supposing that he is not bound
in this case; and that he may as lawfully, and is as much obliged to exercise
his Office as ever: Yet what is this to a Separation? For is he so obliged,
that rather than not officiate, he may and ought to break off from Communion
with the Church? It Is agreed to by all, that we are to continue in the
Communion of the Church we are of as long as we can; and that a Separation from
it is like a Divorce; which is the last Extremity, and which nothing can
justify but when the Terms of Communion are unlawful. But one deprived of his
Ministry may hold Communion with the Church if he will, since there is no
change in the Terms, and the Church is as much the same when he is not a
Minister in it as when he is: And his officiating as a Minister, being not a
Term of Communion, the Communion with it is the same when he is not a Minister
as when he is.

This was true Doctrine against the Dissenters when time was; he was a
Schismatic who gave this as a reason for his Separation. And if they now
proceed on the same Principles with the Dissenters, and take up their
Arguments, there is as much reason to charge them with Schism, as they had to
charge the Dissenters.

Arg. 3. He argues from the Subjection the People and Clergy owe to the
Bishops, and the Bishops owe to their Metropolitan: So that if Bishops or
Metropolitan be deprived, and others substituted in their room, it will
unavoidably necessitate a Schism.

Our Author that undertakes to give us an account of the Sense, Judgment, and
Practice of the primitive times, would have done well to have given us a touch
or two of his Skill that way, by some credible Authorities; and particularly of
such a Subjection of the Bishop to the Metropolitan, to the Confutation of some
of St. Cyprian's Epistles: And that Bishops after the Proceedings against them
by Imperial Authority, were still accounted Bishops of those Churches they
before were Bishops of, -- and neither Clergy nor People renounced them, unless
they were guilty of such Crimes, for which the Censures of the Church did
depose them, or the Canons ipso facto deprive them, as Heresy: or that there
is no way to free us from the Subjection and Obedience we owe to them, but
either Death, Deprivation, or their own Renuntiation; which last, he says, was
never accounted commendable in a Bishop. For the Christian World has hitherto
been persuaded, that in sitting Cases both Bishops might be deprived, and both
Clergy and People discharged of any Obedience owing to them, by a secular
Authority: (as has been showed) But if what this Author suggests, be a just
Enumeration of all the cases for which Bishops may be deprived; then there is
no case in reserve for the secular Power to forbid or deprive; and if by the
Impetuosity of that Power (as his Words are) a Bishop was set over a Church or
Diocese, in opposition to one there canonically placed already, it would always
in course produce a Schism. This he says was, and this is the case, for our
Metropolitan and several other Bishops are now actually by a Secular Act
deprived, and because by a secular Act deprived, and for no Crimes for which
the Censures of the Church depose them; they are Bishops still, and they are
bound to take care of their Churches, and their Churches to live in Subjection
to them.

This Subject cannot be thoroughly handled without passing some Limits I desire
not to transgress, though the way that he has handled it in, and the small
Deference he gives to, nay the Contempt he casts upon the secular Power,
concerning it self and interposing in the case, deserves a severe Rebuke; and
which is so far from doing any real Service to the Right Reverend Persons he
takes upon him to defend, that it would be to their Disadvantage, had not the
Impertinency of the Person plainly discovered, there are none of them in his
Counsel.

But to return to our Author, suppose the case be as he represents it, how
comes this to necessitate a Schism with us?

Is it because these venerable Persons stand deprived? Then it is not because
of any thing unlawful in the Church, but because of the Bishops that suffer by
the State, a Schism may warrantably be made by the Clergy and People.

Is it not for that reason alone, but because others are to be substituted in
their room; then why is there a Separation before it; and his Argument proceeds
upon this, that they are bound to join and go along with the Bishops.

Why must this necessitate a Schism to all? For are those Diocesses and Clergy,
who have their Bishops, equally involved in the same case with those that are
deprived of theirs?

Or why must it necessitate a Schism, when the Metropolitan and Bishops
deprived, declare their Aversion to any such Separation?

This Argument will serve either way; for if the Clergy and People are obliged
to submit to and obey their Bishops, and the Bishops their Metropolitans; Then
those that are of the Province and Diocesses, where their Metropolitan and
Bishops have taken the Oaths, are obliged to adhere to their Metropolitan and
Bishops, and may as warrantably and as much ought to separate from these that
set themselves against Authority, and refuse to swear Allegiance to it, as they
on the other side think they may and ought to separate from those that do
comply with it.

Again if they are obliged thus to go with their Metropolitan and Bishops; then
if the Metropolitan and Bishops, notwithstanding their Deprivation, continue in
the Communion of the Church, then they are obliged also to continue; and if
they separate when those don't separate, they must by his Argument become
Schismatics.

Lastly, If they separate because they proceed (as he says) according to the
Sense, Judgment, and Practice of the Ancient Church: I would fain understand,
when the Christians ever refused Communion with a Church, because of Matters of
State; or divided from others, because those they divide from thought it lawful
and their Duty to swear Allegiance to the Sovereign Power?

In fine, a Schism it must be, and a Schism they are resolved to make, let
there be a reason or none for it: And (as Truth will out) so he has at last
revealed the Mystery, and after all the pretenses they make, that it is for not
deserting God his Church and their Duty; there seems to be something else at
the bottom, and whether it be so or no, I leave the Reader to judge by what he
tells us we must expect, and why: viz. Though they may go clothed in Purple and
fine Linen (as some others would have done, or thought to have done, had the
happy days of the last Reign continued) and fare sumptuously every day, whilst
care is taken that we may be starved; yet they must expect to be Pelted, and
then Men will speak and write their Minds freely. For in vain do you imagine,
that when Men have nothing to lose, they have any thing to fear. No Sirs, if
nothing else will do it, we will humble you, and throw such a Fioe into your
Church by the Schism we will make; that you may be sensible you have provoked
Men of Spirit, and that if we cannot have Purple and fine Linen, and sumptuous
Fare with you, will make you as miserable as our selves. Look you to it, for
betwixt Dissenter and Dissenter, we will grind you to Death, and make you rue
that ever we left your Church; or that the Government has made us thus uneasy
under it.

This I take to be but a just Comment on this bold Text of his: But let him and
those of his Mind cherish this malignant humor. I am confident no wise or good
Man but will think those that are of this Kidney had better be out of the
Church than in it: They are such as there was no great reason to oblige, when
in our Communion, nor to fear (threaten as they will) when out of it.

But as for those whom by their frantic Zeal and fair Pretenses they delude,
we ought to pity and to pray for them, and with Meekness to show them their
Error.

Whether our Author has stated the case righly, I shall, with him, leave to
indifferent Persons to judge: but if he has not (as I think has been
sufficiently proved) then, to use his Words, they may wash their Hands with
Pilate, but they cannot wipe of the Crime of Schism, they are by this new
Separation justly charged with.

. II. Of the Public Good.
But now he opens a new Scene. Before he considered the case with respect to
the Church, but now he comes to consider it with respect to the State. His
Design before was to vindicate themselves, if he could, from a Schism, and to
charge it upon us: But now his Design is to expose the Arguments for the Oaths,
and to make those that take them guilty of Perjury. In order to which, he thus
states the case for his Adversary; The whole stress of his Discourse, says he,
is founded on this single Point. That the Consideration of the public Good,
does dissolve the Obligation of an Oath to a Sovereign Prince, rightfully
claiming. For this he must mean, if he will speak to the Purpose.

In Opposition to this, he says, That no Pretense of public Good whatsoever
can warrant us to destroy a lawful King, or take off the Obligations of an
Oath, whereby we have bound our selves in all things lawful and honest to obey
him. And he immediately adds, The contrary our R. Author undertakes to prove;
which I cannot reflect upon without Grief; because it seems to me a task, which
would much better become a Committee-Man, or Sequestrator, than a Divine of the
Church of England. And certainly so it would, if the Author of the Discourse
had undertaken to prove what he here charges him with, viz. That the public
Good will warrant us to destroy a lawful King, etc. But all the while this Man
cannot believe himself, and therefore he returns to the Consideration of the
Proposition concerning the dissolving of an Oath for the sake of the public
Good: or as the Discourse words it, p. 7. The public Good is the true and just
Measure of the Obligation in public Oaths. Against which he says, If we
should grant that he had proved it in Thesi, yet he has no where so much as
offered to prove it in Hypothesi, and apply it to our particular case.

Surely our Author never read the Book he pretends to answer, or if he did, he
must have a bad Memory, or a very bad Conscience: for the Discourse thus
proceeds upon it, p. 3.

I shall enquire into two Things.

1. The Nature and Measure and Obligation of political Oaths in general.

2. The Difficulties which relate to our Oaths in particular; upon the last of
which he spends two thirds of the Book.

And now let us see what our Author has to offer in Confutation of what is
rightly called the single Point, in the Discourse, about the Obligation of
Political Oaths, and the Influence the Consideration of the public Good has in
them.

I shall try, in his Phrase, to bring his rambling Arguments into some order;
and what he has to say is,

1. That the public Good is impracticable and liable to be abused. 2. Who
shall be the Judge? 3. What is the public Good?
I hope he will give me leave to begin with the last, if not for the sake of
reason and true order, yet for the quaint Expression of his Friend, that
public or common Good is a common Notion, and signifies nothing unless it be
stated and explained, Inquiry, p. 10.

1. What is this public Good? Our Author enters upon this Point in a fit of
Quixotism; I desire to know of our Author where this Divine Beauty dwells, whom
all our Knights Errants run mad for, and fill the World with Blood and
Slaughter? And he answers for him in a very Metaphysical strain; She is
generally made a delicate fine thing in the Abstract, a separate invisible
Being, distinguished from all personal Interest and Benefit. Now with his good
leave, I desire to know of him, where these Platonic Gentlemen live, that dote
thus upon Ideas and Abstracts, and run mad for such a separate and invisible
Being, which they call Public Good; that is, in his phrase, good for no body.
For I am apt to fancy no body will be found to be for that any more than
himself.

But let us see whether he that keeps out of this mad Crew, (as he calls it) and
that is willing to put in for a share in it, comes off with any better Success;
and whether after all the Knowledge he pretends to have of this Divine Beauty,
he can better describe it?

Public Good, says he, is a personal Good, and that which makes for the
welfare of every one in the Community; and which every Man has or ought to
have a share in. Or if you would have it in the same Quixotian strain, She is a
most sweet-natur'd Creature, that does good to all, etc. To do him right, as to
the Notion he is not alone; for the same way goes the Inquirer, p. 10.

Now I very much question this their Notion of Public Good. I grant that every
particular Person has his share and right in the Public. But,

1. That is not as a particular Person, but as a Member of the Public. And he
actually shares in it, when his particular Good and the Good of the Whole, or
the General Good, meet together: but if they are separated, and become
inconsistent, it then becomes a personal and private Good.

2. Public Good is so far from comprehending in it the Good of every
Individual, or of every Party of Men, that the particular Good of Persons,
Parties and Corporations is often destroyed for the Good of the Public; and
they are often undone for the preservation and benefit of the Community: For as
the Inquiry (though in contradiction to himself in the Sentence just before)
says, If it be such a Good (or rather such an Evil) as is only for the benefit
of a Party, and, in respect of the whole, of the least or a small number, [and
much more of a particular Person] it is impossible it should be a Public Good.
So that if personal Good and public Good may be and often are inconsistent,
the public Good is not a personal Good.

3. Public Good, that makes for the welfare of Every one in the Community, is
a Divine Beauty indeed, but it is a delicate fine thing in the Abstract, an
invisible Being, not to be met with in this lower World. And when we speak of
it as it is, it is in the Discourser's. Language, a General Good only.

And therefore after all, I shall make bold to conclude in that Author's words,
[ Discourse p. 9.] The Right of a Person is not to be taken as distinct from
the Public Good. For if it be inconsistent with it, there is no ground to set
up a personal Interest against a Public Good.

2. He argues against Public Good's being the measure of the Obligation of
public Oaths; because it is impracticable and very liable to be abused. Thus
our Author; How specious soever any Proposition may seem in the Theory; yet, it
ought not to be esteemed right or found, if it be impracticable, without
filling the World with perpetual Troubles and Confusions, p. 8. And so he runs
on for several Columns together in a rant against the Mischiefs this Pretense
has ushered into the World, p. 10.

The Sum of all which is, That Public Good does not take off the obligation of
public Oaths, or make it lawful to take New, because this Doctrine is
impracticable; and it is impracticable, because it is very liable to be abused.
Now besides the Inconsequence of this, this is a way of arguing that may serve
against any thing; and if we put Public Justice, or Laws, or Religion, or
Reformation, into the place of Public Good, it will hold in any of them as
well as the other. As for Example, the Doctrine of reforming the Church [how
corrupt soever] is very liable to be abused; for the greatest part of Mankind
being wicked and credulous against their Governors, under this pretense a sort
of Knaves, with active Fools, may at any time cry up a Reformation, and
overturn any Establishment, etc.

But he may say, it is not the public Good that does this Mischief, and makes
it impracticable, but the pretense of it. But how shall we know when it really
is so, and when so in pretense? Our Author is silent in the case, but the
Inquirer has an Answer ready; Nothing can be a Public Good to any Nation,
where the exercise and practice of it is not warranted by the Law, Custom, and
Constitution of that Nation, p. 11, and 20. And with him agrees the Author of
the Discourse, p. 8. (excepting in the Nothing can) The Laws, Rights and
Customs, are the Standard of the Public Good of a Country. But then these Two
differ about the Constitution, and that is not a Controversy here to be entered
into. The Use I make of it is, That the Public Good is still the measure of
the Obligation of Political Oaths, as is at last acknowledged even by the
Inquirer. But yet, if after all I should deny the Inquirer's Proposition, that
Nothing can be a Public Good, but etc. and should say, that the Public Good
is above all Law and Custom, I conceive I should not mistake. For what made
Custom, Law and Constitution, but the Public Good? And if a Case should
happen, which never happened before, in which the Public Good is so far
concerned, that without some extraordinary Course be presently taken, the
Nation and Government will be destroyed, I do not question, but this Case will
as much require the Care of the Nation, as any Case now does require the making
of a Law, for which there was no Law before: Or as it is requisite, that there
should be a Chancery to adjust those Matters, to which the Letter of the Law
does not reach. For there are such things as Necessity, Equity, and Reason of
State, which are Law all over the World; and that are as much the Standard by
which all Laws and Customs, in extraordinary Cases and Events, are to be
adjusted; as Law and Custom are the Standard by which all ordinary Cases are to
be determined, and which are the settled measures of the Obedience we owe to
Governors. Such a Case was that in Poland, when Henry of Valois in haste and
with secrecy left the Throne vacant. A Case extraordinary, and which they had
no Law to govern them in, but they had that which is a Law to Law; Necessity
and the Preservation of the Nation, that soon taught them what was to be done.

This brings me to consider.

3. Who shall be the Judge? that is, Either who shall Judge when the Public Good
is invaded, and when the Laws, Customs and Constitutions, are violated? Or, who
shall judge what is fit to de done in such a case, by way of Remedy? As to the
former, the Case before us is supposed to be notorious, and what has an evident
tendency to the Destruction of the Government: Of which some things are of that
Nature, as they are destructive of Government wherever they are, as the
Desertion of a Kingdom; or the natural Incapacity of the Governor by Lunacy,
etc. Other things there are which are destructive of the National Constitution,
and such amongst us has been thought to be an absolute and universal Power of
dispensing with the Laws. Now, when the Cases are notorious, this Author might
as well have asked, who shall be the Judge, whether the Banks are broken down in
an Inundation; or whether there is a Breach in the Walls when they see the
Enemy press through it; or the City in the Power of the Enemy, when they see
the Fortifications of it dismantled?

But who shall be the Judge, that is again, by way of Remedy? Here our Author
thus puts the Case, either that must be the Supreme Governor, or some other
Man or Body of Men, or the Mobile. The former he chooses for himself; the second
he argues out of the way; and the third he gives to his Adversary: For thus he
concludes; After all the matter comes to the Mobile, and every Man must judge
for himself: -- And have not we extremely mended the matter, by putting it into
the Power of every Subject to depose his King; or at least to endeavor it to
his utmost, in case he apprehends it will be for the public Good? p. 9.

As to the first of these the Supreme Governor, the case we are upon
immediately concerns himself; and then either there must be no Judge, or he
cannot be the Judge. For suppose the Controversy be about the Succession and
Title; suppose about an Incapacity, a Desertion and Vacancy; suppose it be
about the Violation and Destruction of the Government and Constitution designed
by him; or the Nature and Obligation of the Oaths to him. This is not only to
make him a personal Judge in his own case, (which the Law permits net in Suits
of Law betwixt Prince and Subject) but to set him above himself, and in our
Author's Phrase, to set a Supreme above a Supreme. And then the Question should
be put, not who is the Judge, but whether there is any Judge? But I readily grant
that the Supreme Governor has no Supreme, and whatever has been done in a case
extraordinary, does no more make a Convention or Parliament Judges, (properly
so called) than that the Parliament is equal to the King, because he can make
no Laws without them.

As for the Case of the People, our Author writes as if he had never read his
Adversary, who after he had resolved the Point into the Common Good, says, I
do not hereby go about to set up the Power of the People over Kings, which is
in effect to overthrow Monarchy; for then the whole Sovereignty would lie in
the People, and Kings would be but their Servants, p. 18.

And therefore there is the third case remaining, which is that of a Body of
M^n; and thus the Question is put in the Discourse:

Whether the Law of our Nation does not bind us to Allegiance to a King and
Queen in actual Possession of the Throne, by consent of the Three Estates of
the Realm: And whether such an Oath may not lawfully be taken, notwithstanding
any former Oath, p. 8.

This he undertakes to prove, p. 13. as that is no other than the Consent of the
People, whose true Representatives they are, as he shows.

To this our Author has nothing to say; but the Inquirer, that he may seem to
say somewhat, took what served his turn, and left out the rest: (to use his own
Words) For this Adversary having said, p. 18. If there be a Rule, the general
Consent of the People joined with the Common Good seems to have been that,
which our Ancestors pretended to: he presently runs out upon this in a vehement
Expostulation; Where or how can all the People meet? As if the Author he
opposes thought of no less than the numbering of the People from Dan to
Beersheba: Or as if there was no way of taking the General Consent but by an
Universal Assembling. He that quoted what was just before and after, could not
miss the Explication there given; The Consent of the People that is the Three
Estates of the Realm, etc. p. 19. and elsewhere.

I might think here of closing the Discourse upon Public Good, when he himself
grows weary of it; but to give an Answer to what remains, it is fit with him to
return to it.

The Author of the Discourse toward the beginning, treating of the Nature and
Measure of the Obligation of political Oaths, showed.

1. That the Obligation was not barely from the Oath, but from somewhat
antecedent to it, p. 4.

2. That the Public Good is that Antecedent, the main End chiefly concerned in
the Obligation; and the Obligation to Magistrates is to be in Subordination to
that end. p. 5.

3. That an Antecedent and Superior Obligation voids that which is subsequent
and inferior, when they contradict each other. So that if an Oath to the
Person is truly inconsistent with the Welfare of the People, the Obligation
cannot continue.

That this is so in other cases, he shows; there being no Relation of Mankind
one to another, but there is some good Antecedent, which is the just measure of
that Obligation they stand in to each other. Thus he describes it to be between
Parents and Children.

(1.) On the Childrens part to Parents: insomuch that if a Vow to God (which is
as solemn a thing as an Oath) hinders that Good which Children are bound to do
to Parents, it cease to oblige, as our Savior declares.

To this our Author replies: His Comparison of a Vow and an Oath is nothing to
the purpose; for whoever thought that either an Oath or a Vow bound a Man
contrary to his real Duty? The Sin in such a case is in making them, not in
breaking them, p. 13.

I answer; The Instance is to the purpose; for if the procuring and preserving
the public Good be a Duty; and what a Person has vowed or sworn, be
destructive of it; then the Oath cannot oblige, no more than a Vow not to feed
or maintain a Parent, and the Jurant is discharged of the Obligation.

And whereas he says, The Sin is in making them, etc. That is true where the
matter is unlawful in it self (as when the Jews bound themselves to kill St.
Paul) But the Case may happen so, that it may be not only lawful, but a Duty to
break that Vow or Oath, which was lawful in its own Nature; or rather the
Obligation comes to cease; because by change of Circumstances or of the
original reason of that Oath, that which was lawful may become unlawful. Thus
it was in things sacred and dedicated to the Service of God, and which could
not be alienated from it without Sacriledg, and yet it was lawful to apply them
otherwise in case of Necessity, as our Savior's case of the Shewbread proves.
And so it may happen in the case before us, when that which was before for the
Public Good, and which it was lawful to swear to maintain, may afterward come
to be plainly destructive of it; and so the same reason that there was for
swearing to maintain it, may be for the setting it aside. The want of this
Consideration led this Author into a Mistake, when he says, Let our Author
speak out, and tell me, that taking an Oath of Allegiance to a lawful Prince is
contrary to my Duty, and then, etc. For it might be lawful and his Duty to take
an Oath to a lawful Prince; but it follows not that no case could ever happen,
in which the Obligation of such an Oath ceases. It was lawful for Jaddus the
High Priest and the rest of the Jews to swear Allegiance to Darius as long as
he lived: And yet when Alexander came with a powerful Army against them, and
Darius was in no Capacity of defending them, it was lawful, and, as they
thought, their Duty, for the Preservation of their Country and themselves, to
go out to meet him, and to transfer their Allegiance to him; and certainly they
thought themselves discharged from their former Oath to the one, when they took
it to the other. So true is that which the Author of the Discourse observes;
That the Resolution of Conscience in this case does not depend upon the Will
and Pleasure of the Person to whom the former Oath was made, but upon the
Grounds on which it was made, and from which it had its force to oblige: And if
those cease, the Obligation of the Oath ceases together with them, p. 13.

(2.) It is so on the Parents part to Children, as the same Author shows; So
that if Parents, instead of regarding the Good of their Children, do openly
design their Ruin, none will say but that they are bound to take care of their
own Welfare, etc.

To this our Author replies:

1. I know not what a Madman may do, but none will suppose that a Parent in his
right Wits will do thus; as it is both unnatural and unreasonable to think,
that a King should contrive the Destruction of his Subjects, without whom he
has none to reign over or assist him. This I grant is unnatural, and
unreasonable in it self, but not unreasonable to think; for the World too often
finds that the Passions, and Lusts, and Interests of Men make them do things
unreasonable and unnatural. And our Savior tells us, how far the Hatred
Persons have to the true Religion may transport them, when the Fathers shall
betray and deliver their Children to Death.

And if it is so on the part of a Natural, it may be as well supposed on the
part of a Political Parent.

That he says is unreasonable to suppose, because a King by the Destruction of
his Subjects, leaves himself none to reign over, or assist him. But whoever was
so mad as to mean this, when he puts the case of a Prince's destroying his
Nation; for then he must come to do it with his own hand, and his Nation must
in Caligula's way have little more than one Neck to serve his Barbarity. But
they thereby mean his Design to destroy the Government, and to destroy those
that will not comply with, or oppose such a Design: He choosing rather to have
no Subjects than what shall not be his Slaves; or in the modish way of a
neighboring Prince, that will not be of the same Religion with himself.

2. He says, The Author should have told us, that the Children, in such a
Case, might have taken away all the Father's Subsistence, and done their utmost
endeavor to starve him, or cut his Throat; and no doubt but this had been an
excellent Comment on the Fifth Commandment.

But why should that Author be obliged thus to have told us?

For suppose the Father would alienate the Estate from his Children, which is
entailed upon them; and designs to adopt a Stranger into that Relation, and
substitute him in their Place: Suppose again, that a Father has several Tenants
that hold of him by ancient Tenures, and by which Tenures, and performing the
Conditions belonging to them, their Lands are as much their Propriety, as the
Land of Inheritance is their Lord's; and that he notwithstanding seeks to
destroy their Tenures, because they oppose him in his Designs against his
Children, or in that absolute Power over them which he aims at: Suppose again,
that rather than not compass his Designs, he seeks the destruction of his
Children, and of the Tenants that adhere to them for their own mutual
Preservation and Security: Is there no Mean to be found, but either to let the
Father out, and starve his Children, or that the Children must take away all
the Father's Subsistence, and do their utmost to starve him? No Mean, but to
let the Father cut the Throat of his Children, or that the Children must cut
the Throat of their Father? And may not a Son withdraw from his Parents
immediate Care, (as the Discourse says) and forsake his House, when he cannot
stay there but upon the hard terms of being destroyed, or of resigning up the
Title of his Inheritance to a supposititious Heir? Or, may not the Son take
possession of his Father's House, and the Estate of Inheritance, which the
Father abandoned, rather than he would oblige himself to continue the Estate in
his Family, and suffer the Tenants to hold their Lands by any other Tenure than
that of during Pleasure? May he not, I say, then enter upon the Estate, rather
than suffer the House to fall, and the Lands to be wasted, and the Tenants
undone for want of a Supervisor and Possessor? And may he not keep the
Possession against his Parent in his own, his Families, and Tenants Right, when
he comes with an armed Force of Rapperies to enslave his Children and Tenants,
and exercise an absolute Power over them, or else destroy them? And may not all
this be done, and the Fifth Commandment stand in its full force? If not, we
must burn our Law Books, and take new Measures from these Gentlemen that
despise and reproaeh the Common Good, as an Engine fitted (in his phrase) to
overturn any Government; and that whilst they pretend to plead for Law, set up
a mere Arbitrary Power.

The third Instance in the Discourse of the Relation of Mankind one to another,
is that of Masters and Servants, Victors and Captives; in which the Author
proves there is a regard had to the benefit of those who are in Subjection.

Here our Author interposes; I know not, says he, to what purpose he so
labors to prove that a Natural Equity or Common Right is due to Subjects, yea
even to Slaves: For whoever thought, that being under Government, Metamorphos'd
us into Beasts, or worse.

It Is the first time (though there was reason enough for it before) that this
Author confesses his Ignorance; and it is pity he should be sent away uninformed.

1. It was necessary, because though being under Government (rightly so called)
does not metamorphose us into Beasts; yet mere Absolute Power comes very near
it.

2. It was to the Purpose, because the Author of the Discourse had undertaken
to prove, that there is no Relation of Mankind one to another, but there is
some Good antecedent, which is the just measure of that Obligation they stand
in to each other. Thus it is, says he, between Parents and Children, Masters
and Servants.

Oh, but, says our Author, he should have proved, that because the Subject has
a Common Right, therefore he can receive no wrong; that is, he should have
proved Nonsense and Inconsistencies.

Or (as he goes on) if be do [receive wrong] or apprehend he shall, then he may
cry out, The Public Good, and raise Rebellion, and overturn any Government:
that is, because he has received a private Injury (in which the Public is not
concerned) he may cry out the Public Good: It Is well he before told us the
Public Good is a personal Good, or else I should have filled this up for a new
Blunder.

The 4 th Relation mentioned in the Discourse is that between Princes and their
Subjects: where the Author proved, that the Good of the whole is the just
measure of the Obligation they stand in to each other.

1. From what the strictest Casuists have allowed under a State of Usurpation.

2. From the nature of Political Oaths, which are Reciprocal. As to the first
of these.

1. In the foregoing Paragraph our Author will needs have his Adversary to have
borrowed the worst of Mr. Hobbs' s Principles to patch up his Discourse, though
he confutes him. And here he will have him displeased with the Casuists, though
they agree with him in the main Point, about Public Good, as he there recites
their opinion. It is not denied, says he, by the strictest Casuists in these
matters, but that under a State of Usurpation, notwithstanding their Oaths to a
rightful Prince, Men are bound to do those things which tend to the Public
Safety, as well as their own.

Now what is this but to prove (as far as that Author intended it for) that the
Public Good is the measure of the Obligation, because the strictest Casuists
in those matters do not deny, etc.

But however our Author will have it so that they have displeased him; and he
gives a very surprising reason for it, for thus he goes on: In another
Paragraph He (the Author of the Discourse) discovers the reason of his
Displeasure to be this, that they have not allowed them to do every thing in a
State of Usurpation, which they might do under their lawful Sovereigns.

If I had never read more than two Pages of the Discourse, I durst have
adventured as much as our Author would have laid, sometime since, that King
William would never pass the Boyn, that there is no such Paragraph, and no such
reason in the whole Book: and I dare now vouch after I have read it, that there
is no more any such Paragraph, than that King William is still on the other
side of the Boyn; or died of the Wound he received there.

But since the Casuists will not be of his Mind, that Author will it seems be
even with them; for (if our Author be to be credited) he roundly condems them
all, for founding it on the presumptive Consent of the absent Prince: but it is
his own Mistake, for quite contrary, they found the presumptive Consent of the
Absent Prince upon the Public Good.

After all it seems by his own Confession, that the Casuists and his Adversary
agree, that under a State of Usurpation Men are bound to do those things, which
tend to the Public Safety: but they disagree about the reason it is founded
upon: For says the Discourse, the Casuists found it (that is, the Obligation
Men are under in that State, to do what is for the Public Safety) upon a
presumptive Consent of the absent Prince. But that is his own Mistabe, says our
Author; for quite contrary, they found the presumptive Consent of the absent
Prince upon the Public Good.

What a Penance have I to undergo, that must teach a Man his A B C; and that
puts C for A, and B for C; (for it is no better with him here).

We are now not enquiring, upon what the Consent of the absent Prince is
founded; but upon what the Casuists found their Opinion of the Obligation that
lies on Mankind to do what tends to the Public Good under a Usurpation. The
former indeed the Casuists found upon the Public Good, but the latter they
found upon the presumptive Consent of the Prince, as is evident from what he
himself quotes out of Bishop Sanderson.

The Case then is that those Casuists found their opinion of doing what tends
to the public Safety under an Usurpation, immediately on the absent Prince's
Consent; and remotely by him, and for his sake, on the Public Good. But now
the Author of the Discourse thinks this to be a Mistake; for, says he, The
true Reason is, that Men are in the first place bound to promote the Public
Good, and consequentially and with respect to it, to regard the Will of their
Princes, who are appointed by God and Nature for that end. And if such be
rendered incapable of doing it, yet the Obligation on others remains.

2. The Discourse proves, that the Public Good is the true and just measure of
the Obligation of Political Oaths; in that the Oaths are reciprocal. Whereas if
only the Good of the Persons, to whom the Oaths of Allegiance are made, were to
be our Rule, there would be no mutual Oaths. This that Author proves from the
Word Allegiance (which originally signifies a Contract) and from Glanvil and
Bracton, etc.

Now this was a noble Subject for our Author to have tried his Skill upon, but
as if he had the Spirit of Clinias upon him, he shuts his Eyes, and runs
backward from the naked. Weapon as far as he can: At last he is to be found
three Pages behind, calling upon no less than two of the Holy Apostles to
defend him, p. 12. for thus he says, To secure the Law on his side, he cites
Glanvil and Bracton, but forgets what St. Peter and St. Paul said. Let him take
his share with the Lawyers, I will venture my Soul with the Apostles. A good
thought! if the Lawyers go one way and the Apostles another. But I never read
that St. Paul and St. Peter differed in this matter from Glanvil and Bracton;
and that those Holy Apostles ever determined against them, that Political Oaths
were not reciprocal; or that the Public Good is not the true and just measure
of the Obligation of such Oaths.

However by this conceit, he has got rid of a troublesome task; I need not,
says he, now answer the Citation: but how his as and his so come to be a
reason for it, I don't well understand. However I dare pass my word for his
Adversary ( who, he says, has changed his Divinity for a little bad Law) that
he has so much Divinity and Law yet left, as (no less, than our Author) never
to be persuaded, that it was lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to rebel, or
to countenance Rebellion against a Sovereign Prince; and I am as sure that it
is still, as he is, that not long since it was both the Doctrine of the Church
of England, and the Law of the Land: which brings me to the last Point.

. III. Of Obedience to Authority.
After our Author had wearied himself (as he professes) with discoursing of
the Public Good, and ruined the main Point, that he might yet render it, as
Jerusalem, so incapable of Recovery, that not one Stone should be left upon
another that should not be thrown down; he resolves to give a brief Answer. (to
make good the Title of his Book) to such other things in the Discourse that may
require it. Some of which, as belonging to the Subject of Public Good, I have
already considered. Amongst these, he selects the Answer that is returned in
the Discourse to the History of Passiv Obedience. And here I thought, if any
where, I should have found him bold and forward to support the Credit of that
main Pillar of their Cause; but as if he was sensible of his own Weakness, he
cries out abominably of the Answer to it, shifts it off with a silly Comparison;
and as if he had raised a Spirit he could not conjure down; runs back as far as
he can, without running out of the Book, to the case of Vows (which is before
considered) and then as one confounded, bounces forward again, and concludes, I
do not remember any thing more in his Discourse material, except a numerous
heap of Instances, and in the Van comes the unfortunate Vortigern; which with a
little Wipe he sends, as that Prince was, out of the way; and then as if he had
been inspired at Montsorrel, takes a leap from p. 13, to p. 34. of the
Discourse: and there he meets with somewhat which was not material enough to be
remembered: But it seems his Adversary being so elevated about the Determination
of our Savior, of paying Tribute to Tiberius, that he in Zeal cannot forbear
to call the Non-Swearers Perjured and Apostates; Our Author conceives he may
without any Reflection upon his own Memory call him to an account for it; if it
were only for a notable Remark he makes upon it, viz. Some Men surely are not
only privileged, but admired for speaking Contradictions. I was thinking for
some time, where this Contradiction might be, and Dunce as I was, began to look
backward and forward for it, whereas I perceived at length it was that the
Discourse charged the Non-Swearers with Perjury. But bating the Contradiction,
we know who has been sufficiently quit with him for it, in the like charge upon
the Jolly Swearers.

After I had found out this Conceit, I was at a loss again to find out the
Paragraph where this Contradiction was: and at length discovered it, but found
withal our Author true to himself; who for ought I see, may (in his own Words)
be privileged, but I doubt not admired, for his many blundering Mistakes: of
which this is one, for he might as well have said, and with as much credit to
his own Understanding, that his Adversary called the Non-Swearers Jews, as
Perjured and Apostates. For indeed what is said in the Discourse of Perjured
and Apostates, is applied to that People, and only to them. The Words are these:

As to the dreadful charge of Perjury and Apostasy which some have made use of
against those who hold it lawful to take the Oaths -- it would have had more
Appearance of Reason, if the Pharisees had urged it against our Savior's
Resolution of the Case about Tribute-Money. After this manner: For, had not God
by his own Law settled the Government amongst them? etc. What can it be then
less than Perjury and Apostasy to give any Countenance to such an open
Violation of this Law?

Who would not pity this Writer of Controversy that cannot see into the
Connection of an Argument for ten lines backward or forward? for what reason I
will not determine.

But now comes on a Flourish of Learning; for by an unhappy Parenthesis the
Discourse has of Velleius Paterculus about the Senate, he understood there was,
I will not say such an Author in the World, but such a Passage in that Author
(for he was sensible he might trust his Adversary in that matter) and here he
bears up to him, fights him with his own Weapon. To be short, says he, I think
the Testimony of Velleius to be better than our Author's, tho he so scornfully
reject him; as if his Adversary had set his own say-so against that of
Velleius, whereas he had proved the c^ntrary, from Suetonius, Dio and Tacitus;
and therefore might well say, Whatever Velleius Paterculus pretends.

We are at last drawing to a close, and therefore he resolves to give his
Adversary a parting Blow or two. He boasts, says he, what he had gained upon
the account of the Jews paying Tribute, but it will impose upon none but Fools
and Partisans, and I will give it no particular Answer. Merciful Man! because
he misrepresents the case both of the Jews and Tiberius. But it would have been
some Satisfaction in this suspicious Age to have given an Instance or two; or
else there are a sort of troublesome Inquirers, that will be apt to believe that
the best, reason he had why he would not give a particular Answer was, because
he could not. As now it will be asked, Wherein does the Discourse misrepresent
the case of the Jews? Was it that Darius was any other than a de facto King
over them? or that they did not swear Allegiance to him as long as he lived?
Or, did they notwithstanding, not submit to Alexander, and enter into his
Service, and transfer their Allegiance to him? Where again does the Discourse
misrepresent the Case of Tiberius? Had he any Right to the Empire? or had he at
first any other Title than from the Pretorian Band and Legions? Or, did not the
Senate and People swear to him at last, though he was in the Throne before, and
a notorious Usurper of it? But though our Author lets his Adversary go for once
with his Misrepresentations scot-free; yet by the virtue of some few
Particulars he has in reserve, he questions not but to put him to the rout; and
then let him (sorry Man as he is, that when girding on his Harness, boasts
himself as he that puts it off) reckon his Gains; And they are these four.

1. That none should rule over the Jews but one of their own Brethren, was
designed as a Blessing, and their being given up to a Foreign Power, was a
Judgment, etc. What then? Therefore they might not lawfully transfer their
Allegiance from their own Blood to a Foreigner. If that be the Consequence,
what becomes of Nehemiah who served as Governor under Artaxerxes? What of
Jaddus and the Jews of his time with their Oath of Fidelity to Darius? etc. If
they did well, the Question is, (as it is in the Discourse) On what Right that
Oath is founded?

2. He pleads, They were under a State of Conquest. What follows, but that
therefore their Allegiance to their Royal Stem was so far at an end; or they
might lawfully transfer their Allegiance to a Foreigner? What now becomes of
Succession?

3. He urges, That the Question to our Savior, was not concerning Oaths but
Tribute, which he grants all Casuists do allow, may be paid even to an Usurper.
But he knows, what use and what Gain too his Adversary made of this; the
Question is (says the Discourse) Whether any Act of Subjection be lawful or
not? If it be lawful to testify it one way, why not another! If in paying
Tribute, why not in solemn promising to pay it? If in promising, why not in
swearing, i.e. in calling God to witness that I do it? Thus far then we may go,
we may swear to pay Tribute; but on what account? Is it not as a Token of
Allegiance, i.e. as a Duty owing on the account of Protection? etc. If this way
of arguing will impose upon none but Fools and Partisans; why does not our
Author who is to be sure no Partizan, show that he is no Fool by answering it,
and preventing Fools from being imposed upon by such a show of reasoning as
here seems to be?

4. He says, That at that time no Man had jus potius, nor had there been any
prior Oaths taken in bar against Tiberius; so that though he calls him an
Usurper, I know not where he will find one with a better Title.

1. He says no Man had jus potius, a better Right. Surely the Author turned
over the Page before, where he will find that Agrippa Posthumus was then
living, one much nearer to Augustus, and that seemed designed by him to succeed
him.

Surely again there was a jus potius in the Senate, from whom even Augustus was
willing to receive it; and upon those Rights, the whole was an Invasion; and
which was as much as if it had been the Right of a particular Person.

2. No prior Oaths. What thinks he of the Oath of Jaddus to Darius, when yet he
went over to Alexander? What thinks he of the Obligation to the Senate, as to
the present Case?

3. He says, I know not where he will find a better Title: that is, than one
who intruded himself into the Throne without any Pretense in the World, without
the leave of Senate or People. So that in all respects there was hardly a worse
Title in the Universe.

But for once I will adventure to set a better Title before him, and that is of
one, that when wronged by a neighboring Prince and Relative, and by one
resolved against giving him any Satisfaction, to the securing that Right which
he had to the Throne after his Decease, and a quiet Possession of it, took up
Arms to right himself; upon whose Approach the other left his Throne and
Kingdom, which the injured Person with the consent of the Estates of the
Kingdom entered upon.

Now if Allegiance was lawfully sworn to a Tiberius, a Man of as little Right
to the Empire, as of little Virtue: what is not then lawful and due to one that
has such a Right and Title to it?

To conclude: If our B. Savior did allow Tribute to be paid to Tiberius, and
there is so little difference between Tribute and an Oath (as the Discourse
has shown) our Author might have saved his impudent Slander against his
Adversary, (which I will not repeat) who, as if he was run mad with the
Sectaries he speaks of in Solomon's Phrase, casts Firebrands, Arrows and
Death.

Toward the beginning our Author says of himself, I have taken a safer course
in this matter to appear before the Tribunal of Heaven, than the Jolly
Swearers, p. 2. But when I reflect upon his Disingenuity and hard Censures,
etc. I thought surely he was then in earnest (which his scornful Title he gives
his Brethren there, seems not reconcilable to) he forgot himself for ever
afterward; and litttle thought of the Tribunal (...) another World; or that
there were any amongst Mankind to inmind ((...) knows the word) or to call him
to an account here for such gross Prevarications.

FINIS.

