Jus Appellandi AD REGEM Ipsum A CANCELLARIA: OR, A Manifestation of the King's
Part and Power to Relieve His Subjects against Erroneous and Unjust Decrees in
CHANCERY. Collected out of the Authorities of Law. By WALTER WILLIAMS of the
Middle Temple, Esquire;

Rex Sapiens Judicabit Populum suum, Bract. l. 3.107. LONDON: Printed in the
Year MDCLXXXIII.

TO THE High and Mighty MONARCH, CHARLES II. By the Grace of GOD KING of
Great Britain, etc.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
HAving spent many years in the study of your Majesty's Laws, and conceaving
that several for whom I was concerned as Council had been much wronged a while
since by Decrees in Chancery, and finding that they were past hopes of being
Righted There, I advised Petitions to be preferred to Your Majesty, the
Fountain of Justice, thereby beseeching Your Majesty to relieve Your
Petitioners, either by rehearing the matter in Your Royal Person, or by
referring it to such fit persons as Your Majesty should nominate: whereupon it
was declared by some near Your Majesty, That Your Majesty could not legally
grant your Petitioners Request; and that no Relief could be had against
Chancery-Decrees but by the House of Lords assembled in Parliament; which thing
I apprehended to be a great mistake, and tended (as I conceived) to the Outing
of Your Majesty of that Just and Necessary Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence, and
Authority which is united and annexed to your Imperial Crown, and which to
assist and defend to my Power I am bound by Oath: In discharge whereof I have
made diligent search for what evidence could be found in the Authorities of Law
to make out Your Majesty's just Title to the premises, and what I have found I
have made a methodical Collection of, being, I hope, sufficient for the
purpose; whereunto I have also added some instances of the great mischief it is
to your Subjects, and may be to Your self, your Crown and Dignity, that Your
Majesty's Power in that matter is not put in practice. All which I humbly lay
at Your Majesty's Feet, begging Your Majesty's acceptance and consideration
thereof, as it is the product of the unseigned Fidelity and Allegiance of

Dread SIR, Your Majesty's most Faithful and Obedient Subject, WA. WILLIAMS.

To His Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
Great Sirs,
NExt to His Sa-cred Majesty, to C. 4. Inst. 53. Crompt. Juris. 35.
You all Honor and Reverence is due, as being Incorporate to His Person, and
Whose C. 4. Inst. 54:
High Office it is, according to the best of your Judgments truly and justly to
advise and counsel the King in all things that may be to His Honor and Behoof,
and for the good of His Subjects. And though His Majesty is armed with several
other Councels for several purposes, yet it is with You that he consults and
advises (amongst other the most weighty Affairs of State) when, and upon what
occasion it is that He is to call to His other Councels for Advice and
Assistance. It appears by the Writs of Summons of the Lords to Parliament,
Cromp. Ju. fo. 1.
and by the Writs to the Sheriffs for Election of Knights and Burgesses, that
it is by Your advice the King does call His Parliament; for after the Salutem
in those Writs are these words, viz. Quia de Advisamento and Assensu Concilii
nostri pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos statum and defensionem
Regni nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quodam
Parliamentum nostrum, apud, etc. teneri ordinavimus. If then it appertains to
You to advise His Majesty when it is proper to call His Parliament, it follows
of consequence that it appertains to You also to advise Him to call His other
Councels upon occasion: And hence I conceive it is that You have been Dignified
in ancient Records by the name of Magnum Concilium Regis, and thereby
distingnished from Magnum Concilium Regni, Co. 1 Inst. 110. cites Records to
that purpose.
which is the Parliament. Therefore, and in as much as frequent supplications
have of late been made by diverse to His Majesty for Relief against mistaken
Decrees in Chancery witheut effect, by reason of some Opinions that there was
no legal Remedy in such Cases, but by Appeal to the Lords House assembled in
Parliament: I have, for the advancement of Justice, and maintenance of the
King's Right of Jurisdiction, compiled, and adventured humbly to recommend this
ensuing Treatise to His Majesty and Your consideration; which if You vouchsafe
to peruse, I hope it will make it so clear that His Majesty may lawfully
relieve His Subjects against such mistaken Decrees in the Intervals of
Parliament, as to confute all Opponents, or at leastwise manisest so much
probability thereof, and that there is so much necessity for the use of it, as
may induce You to advise and desire His Majesty to be further satisfied therein
by the Opinion of His whole College of Judges, who in case of doubt in matters
of Law, our Law Books say, are his particular and sworn Council; Co. 1 Inst.
110. vi. Jurament. Jnsticiarior. 18 E. 3.
In doing whereof, I humbly conceive you will perform an act that will highly
redound to the Honor of the King, and welfare of His injured Subjects: my Zeal
to Both which has put me upon begging Your favorable Reception and
Interpretation of this Labor of His, who submits both Himself and It to Your
Honors Command.

W. W.

The CONTENTS.
OF the mutual Obligation upon King and People in reference to Government.
Sect. 1. What is Jurisdiction; to Whom it appertains; and How anciently
exercised in this Kingdom. Sect. 2. What is meant by judging according to
Equity, and by Whom it was anciently exercised. Sect. 3. Of the modern and
present Power and Jurisdiction of the Court of Equity in Chancery Sec. 4. Of
the Corruption and Mistakes of some great Chancellors, Sec. 5. That an Appeal
to the King in the Intervals of Parliament is an ancient legal remedy against
mistaken Decrees in Chancery, with the manner of proceeding therein, Sec. 6.
The inconveniences that accrue for want of a constant relief against erroneous
Decrees in Chan. Sec. 7. Whether the King ought, ex debito Justiciae, to hear
in person, or to grant referrences upon complaint to him made, against
erroneous and unjust Decrees in Chancery. Sec: 8:
ERRATA.
Page 2. l. 19. for Statute 1 El. c. 10. r. Statutes 1 and 5 El. c. 1. p. 19.
in 2 marg. note, for 232, r. 233. p. 29. 2 marg. note, for 16, r. 66. p. 28.
marg. note, for 33. read 13. page 33. in the 2 marg. note, fo. r. cap. p. 42.
l. 24. for have, r. has. page: 48. marg. note, for 4, r. 3. p. 70. for Bracton
r. Britton. ib. l. 13. for sua r. suam. p. 71. l: 15: for 10: r: 20: p: 78: 2
marg: note, for 14, r 24: p: 9: l: 12: for 22d: r: 12th: p: 106: marg: note,
for 32, r: 33: p: 119: in marg: note, for 37: r: 27:

Jus Appellandi AD REGEM Ipsum a Cancellaria.
SECT. I. Of the mutual Obligation upon King and People, in reference to
Government.
WHosoever will but consider it, may easily discern, that there is a mutual
benefit accrues by Government, as well to the People as to the King; the end
and design of it being the protection of Both from wrong and violence: And to
the end this may be the better accomplished, both are mutually bound in England
to act their part therein: The King is bound to govern by Law, and the People
most of the considerable part of them are bound, and all of them are
compellable to be bound to assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences and Authorities, granted or belonging to the King, His Heirs and
Successors, or united or annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; the King
by the very Constitution of his Kingly Office, and by his Coronation Oath; and
the People both by their Natural Allegiance, and by force of the Statute 1
Eliz. cap. 10. It is not a slight and mean tie that they are bound by, it is by
a sacred and solemn Oath, the greatest obligation upon Earth, and the firmest
bond of Humane Society; which whosoever voluntarily breaks, either by a wilful
acting against, or by a careless neglecting to perform, what he has undertaken
by it, I Will be bold to say, He is sit Company for none on this side Hell,
unless for some perjured Aldermen, or false Ignoramne-Jury-men.

Being thus engaged, I think it highly concerns us all to discharge our Duty
therein; and to that end it is necessary, in the first place, to understand
what Jurisdictions, Preheminencies, Privileges and Authorities do appertain to
the King; for without That, the King cannot exercise His Jurisdiction, nor the
People assist Him in it: And in as much as the King's Jurisdiction over His
Court of Chancery is now doubted of by many, dis-own'd by some, and by others
thought not necessary to be put in execution; I therefore set my self upon
enquiry after the King's Part and Power in that particular, having had
experience of the inconveniences the want of the use of it produces.

SECT. II. What is Jurisdiction; to Whom it appertains; and How anciently
exercised in this Kingdom.
JURISDICTION, in the bare literal sense and signification of the word, and ex
vi termini, imports no more than Dire Droit, or Jus dicere, a Power to
pronounce, interpret or relate what is Law and Right, in any matter of
Controversy: But as necessary appendants thereunto, there are many Privileges
and Authorities needful, to make up a full and plenary Power to administer
Justice, which are generally comprehended within the meaning of Jurisdiction;
As, first, an Authority to Command the party or parties complained against,
before Him that has Jurisdiction: Secondly, to Examine the truth of the
complaint, and to hear the Defendants defense: Thirdly, to give Judgment
according to what the Law is: Fourthly, to compel Obedience to, and Performance
of that Judgment which is done either by Imprisonment of the person until he
perform, or by seizing his Estate, or part of it, in satisfaction of the
Judgment, which is the Coercive Power of the Law, without which the rest
signifies but little.

The right of Jurisdiction is a prize for which great Contests have been for
many Ages in this Kingdom: the Pope for a long time strugl'd with our Kings for
Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical matters; some yielded to him, and some would
not; The House of Commons have often strove with the House of Lords for
Jurisdiction; the King's Courts of Justice have often contended with one
another for Jurisdiction; and now some would have it, that the King's own more
immediate Court, his High-Court of Conscience, would be so highly
unconscionable, as to out Him from having any thing to do there.

To find out the true Proprietors of Jurisdiction, for which there has been so
many pitched Battles fought, it is necessary to look a great way back, Origo
rei inspici debet, the beginning must be considered, Deuteronomy. 32. 7.
Remember the days of old, consider the years of many Generations; ask thy
Father, and he will show thee; thy Elders, and they will tell thee. After this
manner will I make my Enquiry; for I know no Statute of Limitation in the case
to bar the King by non-claim; but there is a Maxim in Law which imports the
contrary, Quod nullum tempus occurrit Regi; and therefore what I find in old
Authors as well as new, I will truly relate.

By the Opinion of all ancient and wise Politicians and Historians, Bod. l. 4.
cap. 6.
(says Bodin) Justiciae fruendae causa Reges esse creatos; Kings were ordained
for no other end, than for administration of Justice, which is a full Authority
that Jurisdiction appertained to Kings, even by their Constitution; and the
same Author says, That anciently the Kings of most Nations and Countries were
called Judges, and they thought no other Appellation or Title more honorable
than That, and they delighted in nothing more then a personal, not only
virtual, but actual, determining of their Subjects Controversies.

Moses for a great while spent the greatest part, Ex. 18.
or much of his time, sometimes even from morning until evening, in hearing and
determining Controversies between the people; But at length, finding that as
the people increased in number, so did Suits, insomuch that it was too hard a
task for him to dispatch all himself, he therefore chose men of courage out of
all Israel, and those he made Heads over the people, Rulers over Thousands and
over Hundreds, over Fifties and over Tens, who judged the people at all
seasons: but the hard causes (matters of difficulty) they brought to Moses
himself to determine; none of them pretending that because Moses had given them
full power to judge the people within their several Provinces, that he had
excluded himself from power of judging there, and examining whether or no their
Judgments were right and just.

In imitation of Moses, Cook 1 Inst. f. 168.
or after the same manner, did the ancient Kings of England divide this
Kingdom, first into Counties, and Counties into Hundreds, Hundreds into Manors,
and Manors into Townships and Villages, and appointed Jurisdictions in every
Division.

In or about the time of H. 3. one Henry de Bracton, Cow. Int. Title Bract.
a learned Judge, finding that the Laws and Customs of the Realm, (which at
that time were not reduced into writing) were oftentimes abused by unlearned
men, Qui Cathedram judicandi ascendunt antequam leges dedicerent, who became
Judges before they had been Students, and consequently determined Causes rather
after their own fancies than the Rules of Law: he therefore resolved, ad vetera
Judicia Justorum perscrutenda diligenter, to make diligent enquiry into the
ancient Judgments and Resolutions of just Judges, and to put the same in
writing for the benefit of Posterity, as himself says in the first page of his
Book Of the Laws and Customs of England; and therein as to the Temporal state
of affairs, (the Pope having in those days usurped Jurisdiction, not only upon
our Kings, but upon many other Princes in Spiritual matters) Bracton says,
Bract. l. 1. fo. 5. cap. 8.
That under Emperors, Kings and Princes, are Dukes, Earls and Barons, great
Officers, men of Renown, and Knights; there are also Freemen and Bondmen, and
diverse Authorities and Powers constituted under the King; Omnia quidem sub eo,
and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo, parem autem non habet in regno suo
quia sic amitteret praeceptum, cum par in parem non habet Imperium; item nec
multo fortius superiorem nec potentiorem habere debet, quia sic erit inferior
suis subject is and inferiores pares esse non possunt potentioribus ipse autem
Rex non debet esse sub bomine sed sub Deo and Lege, quia Lex facit Regem,
attribuat igitur Rex Legi, quod Lex attribuat ei, videlicet Dominationem and
Potestatem, And a little further, Et sciendum quod ipse Dominus Kex Ordinariam
habet Jurisdictionem and Dignitatem and Potestatem, super omnes qui in regno
suo sunt habet enim omnia Jura in manu sua quae ad Coronam and Laicalem
pertinet potestatem and materialem gladium qui pertinet ad regni Gubernaculum,
habet etiam Justitiam and Judicium quae sunt Jurisdictiones ut ex Jurisdictione
suae sicut Dei Minister and Vicarius tribuat unicuique quod suum fuerit.

To the like effect he says in another place, treating of Temporal
Jurisdiction, and Who it is that can and ought to judge, he says, Bract. lib.
3. fo. 107.
That it is the King, and no other, ought to judge, if He alone could compass
it, being thereunto obliged by tenor of his Oath; for at his Coronation he
ought in the name of Jesus Christ, upon Oath, to promise these Three things to
his people that are subject to himself, 1. That he would command, and use his
utmost endeavor, that perfect peace be continued to the Church of God, and all
Christian people, during all his time. Secondly, That he would earnestly and
strictly forbid and interdict all Pillaging, Extortion, Ravening, and
Wickedness whatsoever. Thirdly, That in all Judgments he would regard Equity
and Mercy, that he might receive Mercy from God, und that all people by his
Justice may enjoy a firm and inviolable Peaee.

He says further, that it is the Kings part and duty (he being Gods Vicegerent
on Earth) to prefer right before wrong, Equity before iniquity, that all his
Subjects might live honestly, that none of them hurt the other, and that every
one of them may have and enjoy what to him of right belongs. He ought to exceed
all his Subjects in Power; He ought to have no Equal, much more ought he not to
have any Superior, especially in administration of Justice, that it may be
truly said of him, Magnus Dominus noster, and magna virtus ejus, with a great
deal more to the same effect.

In the next chapter he proceeds, and says, Bract. l. 3. so. 108.
Dictum est in proximo de ordinaria Jurisdictione quae pertinet ad Regem, etc.

In the precedent Chapter the primitive and fundamental Jurisdiction which
belongs to the King is treated of; it follows now to treat of the delegated,
derived and substituted Jurisdiction, where a man has no Authority of himself,
but what is committed to him, as when he that does so delegate or substitute
another, cannot himself determine every particular Cause, and to the end his
labor may be the easier, by dividing the burden amongst diverse other persons,
he ought to choose in his Kingdom wise men, fearing God, in whom there is
sincerity and truth of speech, who hate Covetousness, and of such to constitute
Judges, Sheriffs, and other Bailiffs and Ministers, to whom may be referred as
well Questions upon doubtful matters, as Complaints upon injuries, who will not
decline the course of Justice to the right hand nor to the left, for hope of
Reward, nor fear of Punishment. And a little further, treating of the several
sorts of Justices, he says thus; Item Justiciariorum quidem sunt capitales
generales perpetui and majores a latere, Regis residentes, qui omnium aliorum
corrigere tenentur injurias and errores; sunt etiam alii perpetui certo loco
residentes sicut in Banco, loquelas omnes de quibus habent warrantum
terminantes qui omnes Jurisdictionem habere incipiunt praestito sacramento;
item sunt alii Itenerantes de loco in locum sicut de Comitat' in Comitat'
quandoque ad omnia placita quandoque ad quaedam speciali ficut ad Assisas
tantum and Gaolas; Et qui authoritatem habere incipiant sine sacramento cum
breve Domini Regis receperint de waranto sunt etiam Justiciarii constituti ad
quosdam Assisas duas vel tres vel plures; qui quidem perpetui non sunt quia
expleto Officio Jurisdictionem amittunt: That is to say, Of Judges some are
chief, universal, constant, and of greater power than others, always with the
King, whose business it is to correct the Injuries and Errors of other Judges;
and there are others that are of a constant continuance, resident in a certain
place; as in the Bench, determining all Pleas whereof they have a warrant to
determine; all of whom begin to have Jurisdiction by taking the Oath of their
Office. Also there are other Judges that move from place to place, as from
County to County, sometimes to determine all Pleas, sometimes some particular
Pleas, as Assizes only and Gaol-deliveries, whose Authority begins without any
Oath, when they receive the King's Writ for their Warrant; and there are Judges
constituted to determine some certain number of Assizes, as two, three, or
more, who are not of constant continuance, but having done what they were
appointed to do, they lose their Jurisdiction. And a little further, Et quamvis
quidem eorum perpetui sunt, ut videtur finitur tamen eorum Jurisdictio multis
modis, scilicet mortuo eo qui delegavit, vel mortuo eo sub cujus proprio nomine
causa delegatur. Item cum delegans revocaverit Jurisdictionem, vel alium
dederis Justiciarium: That is, Although some of the said Justices are of constant
continuance as it might seem, yet their Jurisdiction may be determined several
ways; that is, by the death of him who gives them Authority, or by the death of
him in whose name the Suit is begun, or when he that delegates, or gives the
Authority, does revoke the Authority and Jurisdiction which he gave, or
appoints another Judge. And to conclude that matter, he says, That no Judge so
substituted or delegated by our Lord the King, can substitute or delegate
another.

Thus far Bracton; whence it is most clear, that all primitive and original
Jurisdiction was in the King, and all substituted and delegated Jurisdiction
was derived from Him only, and under such limitations as he directed, so as the
Judges did act justly; the main charge of administering Justice being on Him;
and he frequently sat himself in Judgment, assisted by his Capitales
Justiciarios a latere suo residentes, who assisted him in the exercise of his
Jurisdiction, and eased him of trouble; but they never pretended to deprive him
of his power of hearing and determining himself, or changing his Judges, or
assigning them Jurisdiction as should be needful, according to the modern
Doctrine of some; for he had both complete Jurisdiction, and designationem
Justiciariorum, in himself; and it was upon good reason this power was
originally placed by God in Kings, and consented unto, and approved of by good
men; for by the assistance of, and reasoning with their Judges, they could
never fail of discerning right Judgment, and their affection to their Subjects
(like a good Father to his Children) being equal to all, it is not likely they
should be partial in their Judgments; and their Royal Estate is such, as not to
value Bribes or Rewards: So that there is not so much reason to fear Injustice
from a King, as from a professed Lawyer, (like my self) whose aim and design
(perhaps) from his Horn-book, was gain and profit, and to raise himself a Name
and Family in the world. I can but wonder then, whence started that humor in
men, rather to trust any body in deciding their Controversies, than the King?
sure it could be from no just Principle.

Besides the forementioned Author Bracton, there are others of the same
standing, that maintain the same Doctrine.

The next I shall name is one Horn, who about the time of Edw. 1. compiled a
Book Of the Laws and Vsages of England, a great part whereof (as Sir Edward
Cook in his Preface to the 9th. part of his Reports affirms, were such Laws as
the Kingdom was governed by for about 1100 years then past; to which Book he
gives a mighty credit, and in matters of difficulty is very frequently his ipse
dixit; and that Author says, Mirror 232.
That Jurisdiction is the chiefest Dignity that appertains to the King: and
thereof, he says, there are two sorts, and he calls them ordinary, and
assigned, which are the same with Original and Delegated, as the other Author
terms them. Ibid. 23.2.
Jurisdiction (Tays he) can be assigned by none but by the King; and he may do
it, because be cannot without assistance perform such a charge; and therefore
it was of old ordained, that there should be a Seat, and a Chancellor to keep
it, and grant Writs remedial to all Complainants without delay. This was the
Chancellors Province then.

And again he says, Ibid. 234.
Jurisdiction est un porat a dire Druit; a power of commanding right to be
done; and this power God gave unto Moses, and such as hold the like place as
he; and this power belongs unto the King within his Dominions, and He, by his
Authority-Royal, makes his Justices in several degrees, Ibid. 235.
and does limit to every one his power after several manners. And there he
enumerates diverse sorts of Commissions and Courts; and speaking of the chiefest
Justices of all, he says, They determined matters more or less, according to
the nature of their Commission: From whence also it follows, there were no
Judges that had, or pretended to have, any Jurisdiction originally or
fundamentally in themselves; but what all of them had, was by deputation and
delegation from the King. Furthermore, Edm. 1. out of his Princely care that
his people should be governed by certain and known Rules, caused the Laws and
Rules of Government, Britt. so. 1.
and disposition of Property, which then to fore had been used in the Kingdom,
to be put in writing, and published in his own Name; and at the same time
commanded the use and practice of those Laws in all points throughout his whole
Dominion; saving, and always reserved to himself, the power of repealing,
altering, and amending of them, as should seem good to him, with the assent of
his Earls, Barons, and others of his Council; and saving such Usages and
Customs as had been time out of mind used, so that they be not discourdants a
droft. And there he proceeds in this manner, viz. En primes en droft de nous
mesmes and nostre Court avouns issint ordeyne, etc. which is to this effect,
That first of all, in the right of Himself, and of his Court, because he could
not in his own Person hear and determine all the complaints of his people; and
to the end that his charge should be divided as is thereby appointed, he did
ordain, and his will and pleasure was, That his own Jurisdiction should be
superior to all the Jurisdictions in his Realm: So that in all manner of
Felonies, Trespasses, Contracts, and in all manner of Actions real and
personal, he had power to give, and cause to be given, such Judgments as
thereto belonged, without any other Process, (where he knew the direct truth)
as Judge. And there also he appoints, That the Steward of his Household should
represent Him within the Verge, and he assigned him his Jurisdiction, which
was, to hear and determine the presentiments of Articles which concern the
Crown, whenever it should seem good to the King; And moreover, he willed,
that Justices in Eyr should be assigned to hear and determine those Articles in
every County, and in every Franchise, from seven years to seven. And there he
gives the like power to his Justices of Ireland and Chester; and wills further,
That the Count or Earl of Norfolk, by himself or some other Knight, should
always attend upon the King and his Steward within the Verge of the King's
House, so long as he should hold the Office of Marshal. And there he appoints
the Jurisdiction of the Justices assigned, Britt. fo. 2.
to follow the King, and be where He was, if in England; and that they should
have conusance to amend false Judgments, to determine Appeals, and other
trespasses done against the Kings Peace and Jurisdiction. He also appointed a
Coroner to be in the Kings House, and in every County (un Viscount) a Sheriff;
and that under those Sheriffs there should be Hundreders, Sergeants and
Bailiffs, who should attend upon the Sheriffs. He also appointed Coroners in
every County, and allotted them their Jurisdiction. And moreover, his will and
pleasure was, That there should be Justices always residing at Westminster, or
elsewhere, (where he should appoint) to determine such common Pleas as the King
should command them by his Writs, so as the Pleadings arising thereupon should
be recorded. He settled the Jurisdiction of the Exchequer Court, and ordained,
That there should be Justices assigned for every County, to have conusance in
such causes as the King should command by his Letters Patent touching
Pety-Assizes, and of other things whereof the Kings will should be they should
make record, and that there should be Justices of Jail-deliver in every
County; And he granted to the said Justices, that they should have the keeping
of the Records of the Pleas pleaded before them; But they were not to raze or
amend their Rolls, or to make Record contrary to their Enrollments; Also, that
the power of the Justices should be limited in such manner, that they exceed
not the points contained in the Writs or Presentiments of Jurors, nor complaints
to them made, saving such incident matter, as without which the original causes
could not be determined. And he utterly forbids and prohibits that any shall
have power to amend any unjust or erroneous Judgment of his Justices, but only
those Justices which followed Him and his Courts, (who thereunto were by him
entitled) or Himself or his Council; for that matter he specially reserved to
his own Jurisdiction. He forbids also all his Coroners and Justices, except his
Seneschal, his Steward, and his Justices of Ireland and Chester, to make any
Deputies to do any thing whereof they ought to make record, without the King's
leave. He willed also, That in Counties, Hundreds, and in the Courts of every
frank Tenement, there should be Courts held by the Suitors; and also in Cities,
Towns, Boroughs, and Franchises, etc.

Besides this Book, written by King Ed. 1.'s command, and in his own name, a
while after there was another Book written, (by whom it is not known) called
Fleta, and it was in the Reign of Ed. 2. or 3. And that Author says, That
Judgment is a threefold act, Fleta lib. 1. cap. 17. fol. 16.
of three persons at the least, the Judge, the Plaintiff and the Defendant,
without which there can be no Judgment: Nor (says he) can any one Judge in
temporal matters, but only the King, or his Substiutes and Delegates. And the
same Author, in his Tract of the diversity of Courts, Fleta lib. 2. fol. 16.
says as follows: The King has a Court in his Council, in his Parliaments
when present, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Nobles, and other skilful men, who
are to determine the doubts of Judges, and where, upon appearance of any new
sort of injuries, new remedies are provided; and where Justice is to be rendered
to every one according to what belongs to him. He has also his Court before
his Steward in Aula sua, in his Hall, who now (says he) supplies the place of
the Capitalis Justiar'; whereof mention is made in the common Writ of homine
replegiando, who was wont to hear the Kings own Causes, to rectify false
Judgments, and to do Justice to Complainants, without Writ; whose Power, in
part, the said Steward of the Kings Household has. Also, the King has his
Court of Chancery in several places in his House. He has also a Court before
his Auditors specially appointed, to be near the King, whose Office extends but
to the Justices and others of the Kings Ministers,
to whom there was no power granted to determine what they heard, but to relate
the matter to the King, that he might direct punishments according to the
quality of the Offense. He has also his Court and Justices, as well Knights as
Clergymen, ( locum suum tenentes in Anglia) before whom, and not elsewhere,
unless before Himself and his Council and special Auditors, false Judgments and
Errors of Justices are reversed; and there are determined Writs of Appeals, and
other Writs upon criminal Actions, and injuries contra pacem.

He has also his Courts and his Justices residing in the Exchequer, and also
in Banco (now called the Common Pleas) at Westminster, and some are assigned
for Gaol-deliveries in every County, and some are affigned to take Assizes
generally in every County, and some are itenerant, and constituted to hear and
determine all criminal and civil Pleas. Also, the King has his Justices
itenerant, to hear and determine the Pleas of the Forest; and he has his Court
in every County, and in the Sheriffs Turn, and in Hundreds, and in the King's
Manors, Cities and Boroughs, as in the Hustings of London, Lincoln, Winchester,
York, and other places.

And the same Author having afterward treated more particularly of what
Jurisdiction the King had delegated to every Court, Fleta l 2. f. 75. cap. 33.
he writes thus of the Chancery: There is, amongst the rest, a certain Office
called the Chancery, which ought to be committed to the care of some prudent
man, as a Bishop, or Clergy man of great dignity, together with the care of the
great Seal of England, under whom are all the Chancellors in England, Ireland,
Wales and Scotland, and all Keepers of the Kings Seals, (except the Keeper of
the Privy Seal) to whom are associated Clerici honesti, honest and circumspect
Clerks, sworn to our Lord the King, and who in the Laws and Customs of England
have ample knowledge; whose Office it is to hear and examine the Complaints of
Complainants, and to grant due remedy by the King's Writ, according to the
nature and quality of the wrong. And there he treats at large of the Officers,
Clerks, and Business of the Chancery, which was to make out Remedial or
Original Writs, and Judicial Writs, also upon Recognizances and Contracts made
in the Chancery, and enrolled there: but not one tittle or mention is there
made by any of the said Authors, of any Superiority the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper; or the Court of Chancery had over the Proceedings of any of the other
Judges, either to examine, correct, or rectify their Judgments, or stop
execution thereof, upon any account, color or pretense whatsoever; which is a
most convincing proof, the Chancellor then had no such power.

SECT. III. What is meant by Judging according to Equity; and by Whom it was
anciently performed.
HAving laid the foundation of my present purpose upon what I find in the
forementioned Authors, I think it not amiss to say somewhat touching their
credit; and first of all, that which gives them a reputation with me, is, that
they set down what they themselves of their own knowledge knew to be true; they
relate what the Law was at the time of the writing of those Books, they took
nothing upon trust from other hands, but set down what they themselves knew to
be practice. Next, they were men of great Eminency; Bracton was a learned
Judge, and it was his zeal to Justice induced him to write; Britton was a Book
writ by the King's own command, and published by his approbation; and the
others, Mirror and Fleta, have always had a great reputation amongst the
English Lawyers, not only ancient, but modern; and Sir Edward Cook, who once
was honored with the title of the Oracle of the Law, in his first Institutes,
in every page almost quotes those Authors for proof of his assertions; and so
does Stanford in his Pleas of the Crown: from whence I conclude, that what they
wrote for Law, was Law then; and if so, it is Law now, saving whereinit it is
altered by the Kings Parliamentary Act; nothing less than That could change the
Law.

Bracton, Bract. f. 3.
speaking of Equity, says, Equitas autem est rerum canveniontia quae in paribus
causis paria desiderat Jura, and omnia been coaequiparat: It is a certain sort
of accord and congruity in things, which affects the like Judgments in like
Cases, and equally and indifferently considers all circumstances. Equity is
that Right which arises and appears upon a due consideration of the written
Law, the circumstances of the matter in question, and that natural Justice
which a good conscience dictates, and to judge and determine the matter
accordingly, I take to be a judging according to Equity.

It should seem that all the Judges mentioned by the said Authors, Eritt. so. 1.
were tied to proceed and judge according to prescribed Rules; for by Britton
it appears, that it was the King's will the Laws (which are Rules) should be
set in writing, and used and kept in every point, saving to himself, with
consent of his Counts, Barons, etc. power to repeal and amend them; but it
belonged to himself alone, principally and in chief to amend false Judgments of
his Justices generally, as appears by this; Car ceo reserdouns nous
especialment a nostre Jurisdiction.

The King's command to use the Laws and Rules in every point strictly, was
general to all his Judges; but it was only He that had power in all his
Judgments to regard Equiabove Rules; and he had not only power so to do, Bract.
lib. 3. fo. 107.
but he was obliged to it by the latter part of the Coronation Oath
before-recited. Bract. lib. 2. fo. 24.
It was the King only had an extraordinary Pre-eminence over the prescribed
Rules and Forms of Law, to moderate the rigor and extremity, and supply the
defects thereof upon occasion, when his Judges could not exceed the Rules
prescribed them; and this power is as necessary as any thing can be for the
right distribution of Justice; for it is impossible to make such Rules
beforehand, as may suit with all cases; for an extraordinary circumstance may
sometimes happen in some cases, that to judge thereof according to general and
prescribed Rules of Law, might be to wrong the party, and so make summum jus,
summa injuria. But our ancient Kings did not entrust this Power at any time, as
I find, with any single person: Else. Office, chapter fo. 25.
For, during the Reign of both the Williams, Henry 1. King Stephen, and Henry
2, etc. until Ed. 3's. time at leastwise, Dud. Orig. Jud. fo. 25.
if not after, there still continued a particular Court belonging to che King,
which was the place of Sovereign Justice, both for matters of Law and Equity,
called Curia Domini Regis, and Aula Regia, or magna Curia, where He himself
oftentimes sat in person; but there he had his Justices a latere suo sedentes;
as namely, his Chief Justice, his Chancellor, his Constable and Marshal, and
such others of his Nobles as the King pleased to associate to himself for that
purpose: The Justice, to inform the King of what was the strict Rules of Law;
Capital' Justic' praesider primus a Rege in Regno C. 4. int' for to Cancellarii
Angliae Dignitas est ut secundes a Rege in Regno habeatur, ibidem. fol. 78.
and the Chancellor, who was usually a spiritual man, to give advice according
to Equity, and there matters of Equity were then determined; And to this Court
any man might appeal from the inferior Courts, to have the Errors of the
Judges corrected and amended; and if the King were absent, the Justiciar was
the King's chief Representative.

But when it was that first the Chancellor had that power of judging according
to Equity so given him that he alone could do it of course, is not certainly
known.

Some suppose, Orig. Ind. fol. 36. (...) Lamb. (...).
that in Ed. 1. 's time, when the Power of the Justiciarius Anglia declined,
the King, together with the Great Seal, entrusted the Chancellor with his own
extraordinary pre-eminence of Jurisdiction over the Common Law, viz. Power of
judging according to Equity: but that Authors reason is not sufficient to
maintain that supposition; for he gives no reason for it, but that be finds no
mention made of any such power in the Chancery by Britton; which was wrote
about the beginning of the Reign of E. 1. Yet Britton mentions the Jurisdiction
of all the other Courts, and he concludes from thence, that if the Chancellors
had then had any such power, Britton would have mentioned it: which indeed is a
good argument that the Chancellor had no such power then, but it does not
follow of consequence, that because he had it not when Britton was writ, that
he must needs have it immediately thereupon: therefore we must come a little,
yea a great way nearer, before we can find this power fixed in the Chancellor
alone.

No doubt but when the Justiciarius Angliae was laid aside, the Chancellor, who
before that time was but secundus a Rege in Regno, became then primus a Rege,
and was President over the rest when any matter of Law or Equity was determined
in magna Curia, in the absence of the King; but I cannot find he exercised the
Judicative power in matters of Equity alone, until very lately, though he did
several other things alone. I find, G. 4. Inst. fo. 83. Mag. Cha. 553.
that in R. 2.'s time a matter being compromited by both sides to the King, the
King referred it to the Council, and they make a Decree, which Decree was sent
to the Chancellor to confirm under the Great Seal, which was done; after which
one of the parties petitioned the King that the matter might be left to the
determination of the Common Law; whereupon the King, by warrant under the
Privy Seal, requires the Chancellor to make Supersedeas to the Decree, which
was done: whereby it appears, the Chancellor alone did nothing but award
Process upon the Decree made by the Council, as the King and They directed. And
this, Sir Edw. Cook says, was the first Decree in Chancery that ever he
observed in all his reading.

He also cites some opinions, Cooke's Magna. Charta. 553.
that the Court of Equity in Chancery began under Henry Beaufort Son of Jo. of
Gaunt, who was Chancellor in the beginning of H. 6.'s time; and his reason for
it is, because there is not in any Book-Case, or Report of the Law, any mention
made of any Court of Equity held before the Chancellors, before the Reign of H.
6. and yet all of them speak of the ordinary Power and Jurisdiction of the
Chancery: But in the Reign of H. 6. and E. 4. Cases have been reported to have
been determined in Chancery, according to Equity; but it is observable, that
most of those Causes were heard before several others, together with the
Chancellor; and that in matters of doubt, he adjourned the patties into the
Exchequer-Chamber before himself and the Justices of both Benches, and made his
Decrees according to their Opinion: As for instance; In the Year-book of the
37th. of H. 6. fo. 13. the Case was, That one A. had bought of J. R. several
Debts due to J. R. from several persons, and A. gave a Bond to J. R. for the
sum; And forasmuch as those Debts were but things in Action, and no Property
was changed, nor no Action accru'd by the bargain to the said A. but the
Debtors remained Debtors still to the said J. R. so that A. had nothing for the
money secured by the obligation. A. prays in Equity to be discharged of the
said Bond against J.R. and prays a Subpaena against J.R. and it was granted,
and the Defendant answered, and the Chancellor, because the matter seemed
doubtful to him, adjourned it to the Exchequer-Chamber before himself and the
Justices of both Benches, and there it was debated, and by the Opinion of all
the Justices, because the said A. had not quid pro quo by that bargain,
therefore the Bond ought to be released, and it was decreed accordingly.

The like will appear to be done by the Book-cases following, 37 H. 6. f. 35,
36, 39 H. 6. f. 26.7 E. 4. f. 14, etc. And if he did not adjourn the Causes
into the Exchequer-Chamber, he always had the Judges, or some of them, with him
at all hearings, and decreed according to their Opinions; for the entry of the
Decrees in Chancery of H. 6.'s time are after this manner, Else. Off. of Chan.
fo. 51.
says the Author cited in the Margin, viz. Consideratum est per Curiam ex
assensu Johannis Fortescue Milit' Capital' Justiciar' Domini Regis ad placita
tenenda and diversorum aliorum Justiciariorum and servient' ad legem in Curia
praesent' existent' quod, etc. and sometimes it was, ex assensu omnium
Justiciar' utriusque Banci, and sometimes of one or two Justices; but before
the end of that King's Reign, the manner of entry of the Decrees was somewhat
altered, and was in this manner; Considerat' Adjudicatum and Decret' est per
Cancellarium and per Curiam Cancellar', without particular mention of any
Justices or others, and so it continued till H. 8.'s time; But toward the end
of his Reign, whereas before that time the Decrees were in Latin, and in very
few words, and entered on the backside of the Bills, they then began to be
drawn up in English apart by themselves, and therein reciting the Bill and
Answer, and afterward were enrolled in Rolls by themselves: The ancientest of
that nature that I can find, are in the Rolls Chapel, and are of the 27th. and
28th. of H. 8. when Sir Thomas Audley was Chancellor. In Queen Mary's days the
entry of all the Decrees is, That it is Ordained, Adjudged and Decreed by the
Lord Chancellor, and by the whole Court of Chancery, That so and so: and after
the same manner it is at this day, saving that the conjunctive clause And by
the High-Court of Chancery, (which in the beginning was not incerted in vain)
is now altogether superfluous and impertinent; for the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper, without the assent or consent of any other, have made Decrees for some
years past according to his own liberum arbitrium, as I shall show in the next
Section.

SECT. IV. Of the modern and present Power and Jurisdiction of the Court of
Equity in Chancery.
IN the Chancery are two Courts, C. 4. Inst. fo. 79.
one Ordinary, wherein the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seals
proceeds according to the right line of the Law, and if he gives an Erroneous
Judgment, Plowd. 393. que B.R. est le Pluis hault. Court. Dyer 315.
there a Writ of Error lies returnable in the Kings Bench; the other is
Extraordinary, wherein the Chancellor ought to proceed according to the Rule of
Equity, which according to what it is now taken, is what is according to the
Chancellor's single Conscience, quecunque Else. Office of Chapter fo. 41.
sit; it is (say some,) an absolute Power without control, other then in
Parliament, and spreads it self most largely without any Limitation, it stops
the proceedings of all the other Courts at Westminster, it renders all their
Judgments vain and ineffectual, durante been placito, of the Chancellor or
Keeper, and stops Execution, until his Conscience be satisfied whether the
Plaintiffs at Law ought to go on or no, by which means when a man has a
Judgment fairly obtained at Law, or intends to Sue there for a Just and True
Debt, if the Defendant at Law becomes Plaintiff in Chancery, and he or his
Council has but Invention enough to suggest any sort of Equity, there is an
Injunction had of course, until the Plaintiff at Law can put an Answer to the
Bill; which if he lives any thing remote from London, it will take up a Month
or two's time, or more, to send an Answer, and in the mean time the Debtor
prepares his Bag and Baggage, and by that time the Injunction can be Dissolved,
which cannot be without a considerabe Charge, the Gentlemen is perhaps got to
Ireland, Jamaico or Japan.

What ever is now finally determined in Equity in Chancery, it is done by the
Chancellor or Lord Keeper alone, and though the Clerks and Registers retain in
drawing up their Decrees somewhat of the old form, ziz. That it is Decreed by
the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, and by the High Court of Chancery; which
implies there were some others ought to have a hand in making the Decree; yet
there is none that now have, for though there are two at least of twelve that
bear the name of Masters in Chancery; and heretofore were accounted Socii and
Collaterales to the Chancellor that daily sit in Court one on each side of the
Lord Chancellor or Keeper; yet they are now but as his Attendants, and speak
not a word in determining any Causes, their only business being to wait and
expect how many References the Lord Chancellor will make to them touching
insufficient Answers, Scandalous Bills or Answers, Contempts, stating of
Accounts and the like, they being to have a Fee for their Report therein, yet
that Report is subject to the control of the Chancellor or Keeper, if he
pleases; And if at any time, which is but seldom, any of the Judges are sent
for, it often proves to be merely out of Formality, for their Opinions are
seldom regarded.

It is said of the Chancellor and Keeper of the Great-Seal of England, Else.
Office of Cla fo. 6.
that he is like the Roman Praetor, in whose Constitutions there were said to
be two kinds of Powers; one was, when without the Advice of the Judges he would
Manumittise, Emancipate, Award Possessions of Lands and Goods, Commit Wardship
of Pupills, and grant Injunctions as he thought convenient: The other sort of
Power the Praetor had, was when he proceeded to Judgment according to Leges
Regis, etc. The Kings Laws, the Laws of the Twelve Tables, the Civil Law, Laws
made by the consent of the People, or Decrees of the Senate, and therein he was
not absolute as in the other: But out Chancellor or Keeper and their Praetor do
do differ very much, for the Praetor would at his Entry into that Office
propound and publish certain Edicts, which were Principles and Fountains out of
which he would derive his Decrees; but what Rules or General Notions the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper in England does assign unto himself for Limitation of
Equity, and direction of his Conscience, those lie hid and concealed in his own
Breast, so that neither the Man of Law nor Equity is able to inform his Client
what is like to become of the Cause, and consequently no man is able to know
what is his own, so that it may be said of this great Officer armed with this
great Power, as was said of Jeremiah's Figs; Jer. 24.4.
Those that were good, were very good; but those that were evil, were exceeding
evil: For that Power if it be used according to the true intent and design of
it, is of Excellent use, Optima corrupta sunt pessima.
but if abused, it is the greatest oppression imaginable; and that that Power
has been abused, will appear by the next Section.

SECT. V. Of the Corruptions and Mistakes of some Great Chancellors.
I Find in the Journal Book of the Lords House in the year 1620. and in the
19th. year of King James, that on the 19th. of March in that year, a Message
was sent from the Lower House to the Lords, importing; That they had found
Abuses in certain Eminent Persons, about which they desired a Conference with
their Lordships, that such course might be taken, as might stand with the
Honor and Dignity of a Parliament; which was agreed to by the Lords, and the
Conference was appointed to be that afternoon; and the next day it was Reported
to the Lords by the Lord Treasurer: That at the Conference was delivered the
desire of the Commons to inform their Lordships what they had found in their
Inquiry after the Abuses of the Courts of Justice, where, after having highly
commended the incomparable good parts of the then Lord Chancellor, and
magnified his place from whence Bounty, Justice and Mercy were to be
distributed to the Subject, with which he was wholly Entrusted: They declared
that the Lord Chancellor was Accused of great Bribery and Corruption committed
by him; And instanced two Cases, one concerning one Christopher Awbrey, and the
other concerning one Edward Egerton: As to Awbrey, the matter was, That He
having a Cause in Chancery between Him and Sir William Brunker, Awbrey feeling
some hard measure, was advised to give the Lord Chancellor 100 l. which he
delivered to his Council Sir John Hastings, and He to the Chancellor; but
notwithstanding, the business proceeding slowly, Awbrey writ several Letters,
and delivered them to the Lord Chancellor, but could never have any Answer from
his Lordship; but at last delivering another Letter, his Lordship told him, if
he importuned him, he would lay him by the Heels: As to Egerton's matter, it
was set out at large at the Conference; and will appear by the substance of
Egerton's Petition to the Lords, the effect whereof (amongst other things,) is
as follows; That the said Edward Egerton being Unmarried and Sickly, he
settled his Estate to the use of himself and the Heirs Males of his Body, and
for default of such Issue, the Remainder to Sir John Egerton and his Heirs,
which Settlement was voluntarily made, without any consideration paid for the
same, and with Power of Revocation; and that Sir Rowland Egerton, Son and Heir
of the said Sir John Egerton, had got the said Settlement into his hands, and
all the Petitioners Writings; and that the late Lord Chancellor Elsemere had
Decreed, that Sir Rowland Egerton should have the manner of Wrinehal and
Haywood Barnes, being a great part of the Petitioners Inheritance, worth 600 l.
per Annum, without any cause of Equity contained in the said Decree; and that
the Petitioner had made humble Suit to the Lord Viscount St. Albans, then Lord
Chancellor of England, to have the benefit of a Subject, to recover his Ancient
Inheritance by Ordinary course of Law; and that his Lordship took from the
Petitioner 400 l. in Gold, and 52 l. 10 s. in Silver Plate, which Money was
accepted of by the said Lord Chancellor, saying withal, That the Petitioner
had not only Enriched him, but laid a tie upon him to do the Petitioner Justice
in his Rightful Causes, and by great Oaths and Protestations drew the
Petitioner to Seal an Obligation to his Lordship of ten thousand Marks, to
stand to his Lordships Award; and that afterward the Petitioner was diverse
times sent for by one Robert Sharpeigh, then Steward of his Lordships Household;
and that the Petitioner was several times offered, that if he would then
presently pay 1100 l. in ready Money, that is to say, 1000 l. to his Lordship,
and 100 l. to Sharpeigh, the Petitioner should have all his Lands Decreed to
him, which Money he could not readily pay; and that afterward the said Lord
Chancellor did not only confirm unto the said Sir Rowland Egerton, the Land
which he then held of the said Petitioner's Inheritance, being worth 600 l. per
Annum, but took away more Lands worth 15000 l. and Decreed the same to Sir
Rowland Egerton, who did not claim any Title thereto, before the said Bond
taken, and Unlawful Decree made; and that he also Decreed the Bond should be
Assigned to Sir Rowland Egerton: And the Petitioner having spent 600 l. in
Suits, and being deprived of all his Evidences by the said Lord Chancellor, and
by the indirect practice of the said Sir Rowland: He was likely to be utterly
defrauded of all his Ancient Inheritance, contrary to the common Justice of the
Land, unless relieved by their Lordships. The Contents of which Petition, the
Petitioner made Oath to be true; and he and Sharpeigh were further Examined
touching the matter.

By the Journal of the Lords House for the 21st. of March, in the year 1600. It
appears that there had been Information given to the House, that there had been
a Cause depending in Chancery between one Smithwicke and Wiche, which was
matter of Account, and had been Referred to Merchants, and the Merchants had
Certified on Smithwick's behalf; yet to obtain a Decree in the Cause, he was
told by one Borough, (that was near to the Lord Chancellor) that it must cost
him 200 l. which he paid to the use of the Lord Chancellor; yet his Lordship
Decreed but one part of the Certificate: Whereupon he treats again with
Borough, who demands another 100 l. which Smithwick also paid to the use of
the Lord Chancellor; then his Lordship Referred the Accounts again to the
Merchants, who Certified again for Smithwick, yet his Lordship Decreed the
second part of the Certificate against Smithwick; and the first part, which was
formerly Decreed for him, his Lordship made doubtful: whereupon Smithwick
Petitioned to the Lord Chancellor to have his Money again, and he had it.

It appears further by the said Journal Books, that several days were in a
great part Employed in taking Examination of Witnesses in proving and detecting
the Briberies and Corruptions of that Lord Chancellor; which being ended and
collected, were ordered to be Transcribed with the Proofs; and on the 24th. of
April following were ordered to be sent to his Lordship, with a Message that
the Lords required his Answer with all convenient speed.

The Corruptions, as they are mentioned to be proved in the Journal of the
Lords House of the said 24th. of April, are as follows: That in the Cause
between Sir Rowland Egerton and Edward Egerton, his Lordship received on the
part of Sir Rowland Egerton before he decreed for him, -- 500 l. Item, of
Edward Egerton in the said Cause, -- 400 l. Item, in the Cause between Hodie
and Hodie, a dozen of Buttons (after the Cause end ed) of the value of -- 50 l.
Item, of the Lady Wharton, 310 l. Item, of Sir Tho. Munke, 100 l. Item, of Sir
John Trevor, 100 l. Item, of one Young, -- 100 l. Item, of one Fisher, -- 106
l. Item, in the Cause of Kenday and Valor, of Kenday a Cabinet worth -- 800 l.
Of Valor (borrowed at two times) -- 2000 l. Item, in the Cause between Scot
and Lenthall, of Scot -- 200 l. Item, of Lenthall, -- 100 l. Item, of one
Wroth, who had a Cause between him and one Mannering, -- 100 l. Item, of Sir
Ralph Hansby, 500 l. Item, in the Lord Mountain 's Cause, of the Lord
Mountain, and more promised at the end of the Cause, -- 600 or 700 l. Item, of
one Mr. Dunch, -- 200 l. Item, in a Cause between Raynold and Peacock, 200 l.
in money, and a Diamond Ring worth 5 or 600 l. -- 700 or 800 l. Item, of
Peacock, -- 100 l. Item, in a Cause of Barker, 700 l. Item, there being a
reference from his Majesty to his Lordship of a business between the Grocers
and Apothecaries, he had of the Grocers -- 200 l. Of the Apothecaries, (besides
a rich present of Ambergreece) -- 150 l. Item, of the French Merchants, to
constrain the Vintners of London to take 1500 Tuns of Wine; to accomplish
which, he used very indirect means, by color of his Office and Authority,
without Bill or other Suit depending, as threatening and imprisoning the
Vintners, for which he received of the Merchants -- 1000 l. Lastly, That he had
given way to great exactions by his Servants, in respect of private Seals, and
sealing Injunctions.


By the Journal Book of the 25th. of the said month it appears, that Baron
Denham and Mr. Attorney General reported their delivery of the Charge of the
Lord Chancellors corruptions to his Lordship, and that he said he would return
the Lords an Answer: whereupon the Lords soon after sent a message by Baron
Denham and Mr. Attorney, to know if he would make his Confession, or stand to
his Defense; to which they brought answer, That his Lordship would make no
defense to the charge, but meant to acknowledge corruption, and to make a
particular confession to every point, and after that, an humble submission; but
he humbly craved liberty, that wherein the charge was more full than he finds
the truth of the Fact, he may make declaration of the truth in such
particulars; the charge being brief, and not containing all circumstances:
Whereupon the Lords sent the same Messengers back to him, to let him know, they
had granted him time till Monday next, being the 30th. of April, at 10 in the
morning to send such Confession as his Lordship intended to make.

On the 30th. of April the Lord Chief Justice Leigh (who then executed the
place of Lord Chancellor) in the Lords House, signified to their Lordships,
that he had received a Letter and paper Roll sealed up; which being delivered
to the Clark of the Lords House, and being opened, and found directed to their
Lord ships, it was read, and began thus:

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in the High-Court of
Parliament assembled. The Confession and humble Submission of Me the Lord
Chancellor.
UPon advised consideration of the charge, descending into my own conscience,
and calling my memory to an account so far as I am able: I do plainly and
ingeniously confess, that I am guilty of Corruption; and do renounce all
defense, and put my self upon the Grace and Mercy of your Lordships.

The particulars I do confess, and declare to be as follows:

To the first Article of the charge, viz. in the Cause between Sir Rowland
Egerton and Edward Egerton, the Lord Chancellor received 500 l. on the part of
Sir Rowland Egerton before he decreed the Cause: I do confess and declare, Upon
a reference from his Majesty of all Suits and Controversies between Sir Rowland
Egerton and Mr. Edward Egerton, both parties submitted to my award by
Recognizance reciprocally in 10000 Marks apiece, and thereupon after diverse
hearings, I made my award with advice and consent of my Lord Hobbart, and the
award was perfected and published to the parties, which was in February; Then
some days after the 500 l. mentioned in the charge was delivered to me;
Afterward Mr. Edward Egerton fled from the award; Then in Midsummer Term
following a Suit was begun in Chancery by Sir Rowland, to have the award
confirmed; and upon that Suit was the Decree made, which is mentioned in this
Article.

To the second Article, viz. That in the same Cause he received from Edw.
Egerton 400 l. I confess and declare, That soon after my first coming to the
Seal, (being a time when I was presented by many) the 400 l. mentioned in the
charge was delivered unto me in a Purse, and I now call to mind from Mr. Edward
Egerton: But, as far as I can remember, it was expressed by him that brought it
to be for favors past, and not in respect of favors to come.

To the third Article of the charge, viz. in the Cause between Hodie and Hodie,
he received a dozen of Buttons of the value of 50 l. about a fortnight after
the Cause was ended: I confess and declare, That, as it is laid in the charge,
about a fortnight after the Cause was ended (it being a Suit of great
Inheritance) there were Gold Buttons about the value of 50 l. (as is mentioned
in the charge) presented unto me, as I remember, by Sir John Perient and the
party himself.

Thus far it is verbatim as it is in the said Journal book; and after the same
form he proceeds, and confesses the receipt of all the money and other things
in the charge, and some particular sums more, but with some little endeavors
to extenuate the Crime; as, that the money was sent as a present after the
Causes ended; and confessed, that he had imprisoned some of the Vintners,
because they refused to take off the French Wines; and that it was a great
fault in him that he looked not after his Servants. And then follows these
words, viz. This Declaration I have made to your Lordships with a sincere mind,
humbly craving, that if there should be any mistake, your Lordships would
impute it to want of memory, and not to any design of mine to obscure truth, or
to palliate any thing; for I do again confess, that in the points charged upon
me, although they should be taken as my self have declared, there is a great
deal of corruption and neglect; for which I am heartily and penitently sorry,
and submit my self to the Judgment, Grace and Mercy of this Court. And in the
close he prays, That if they proceed to a Sentence, their Sentence may not be
too heavy.

The Confession being read, the Lords sent twelve Lords to know if it was his
own hand that subscribed the Confession, and whether he would stand to it, or
no? and being returned, they report, That they had showed it to him, and that
he owned it, and would abide by it: Whereupon it was ordered, That the Prince
(attended by some of the Lords) should move His Majesty to sequester the Seal;
which being accordingly done, the Prince reports to the House, That he had
moved the King therein, and that his Majesty had promised it should be done,
and that he intended to have done it if they had not moved it.

The second of May following a Commission was granted to Sir James Leigh Chief
Justice, Vid. Rot. Parl. ejusdem temp.
to Officiate the place of the Lord Chancellor in the Lords House; and the
Great Seal was taken from the Chancellor, There was not a single Lord keeper
from that time until the 10 of July 1621. the Business of the Chancery being
then performed by the Commissioners.
and by Commission committed to be kept by the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
Steward, the Lord. Chamberlain, and the Earl of Arundell.

The third of May the Commons sent a Message to the Lords to demand Judgment
against the Lord Chancellor, to which the Lords returned answer; they were
ready, if They with their Speaker would come to demand it; and the Commons
being come to the Bar of the Lords House, the Chief Justice Leigh pronounced
the Judgment, which was,

1st. That the Lord Viscount St. Albans should undergo a Fine and Ransom of
40000 l.

2d. That he should be Imprisoned in the Tower during the Kings pleasure.

3d. That he should be for ever incapable of any Office, Place or Employment in
the State or Commonwealth.

4th. That he should never sit in Parliament, nor come within the Verge of the
Court.

I have been more particular in relating these proceedings of the late Lord
Chancellor Bacon, because of the great Learning and Eminency of the Man, and
the little need he had to be so Corrupt, he had neither Wife nor Child to
provide for; and if such a man was guilty of Bribery and Corruption, who may we
be sure will not? And therefore great care ought to be taken to have Relief
against such contingencies; for Corruption in a Judge of that high commanding
Power, is far beyond all Robbery, Burglary, Rapine, or other Villainy the World
can invent.

To Err wilfully, and out of a corrupt design; is a greater fault, and more
unpardonable, than to err through mistake; but the hurt is the same to him that
is injured by the wrong Decree; Therefore if we were sure there would never be
any such Corruption any more, yet Provision ought to be made against mistakes,
since those have been very frequent: whereof I shall give some instances, and
for which you shall need to look no further back then to the Journals of the
Lords House in the last Session of Parliament at Westminster, where you may
find that the 17th. of November 1680. a Decree in Chancery was Reversed upon
the Appeal of Crabb against Fenton, and the 22d. of the same Month a Decree in
Chancery was Reversed by the Lords upon the Appeal of Turner against Turner;
and on the 26th. of the same Month, another Decree in Chancery was Reversed
upon the Appeal of one Chute against Dacres, and many more Appeals were brought
in that Parliament, which yet remain undetermined; and since the Lord Keeper
North's having the Seal, he has Reversed several of the late Lord Chancellor
Nottingham's Decrees without any new matter arising since the Decree made, so
that one of them must be mistaken, but which of them, will not appear but by
the judgment of diverse others of as great Learning and Judgment as themselves,
and so it is to be determined; for many may see more than one, and I conceave
the King may give them Authority so to do, without putting the Kingdom to the
Charge and Trouble of convening a Parliament, as by the ensuing part of this
Treatise will appear.

SECT. VI. That an Appeal to the King in the Intervals of Parliament, is an
Ancient, Legal Remedy against mistaken Decrees in Chancery, with the manner of
Proceeding therein.
IT becomes not a single man to be too positive in his own Opinion, therefore I
shall only at present say, that I am most extremely mistaken in my
Calculations, if His Majesty has not sufficient Power in the Intervals of
Parliament, as the Law is at this day, being the 26th. of June 1683. to provide
for his Subjects, and to Relieve them against unjust Decrees in Chancery, if
the matter be duly looked into, notwithstanding the Art and Labor that has
been used to conceal it; Therefore for maintaining of that point, I shall once
more repeat a Sentence out of Bracton, Et defendous generaiment a tout que null
ne eyt poer de amender null faux Jugement de nous Justices sauve les Justices
que suent nous et nostre Court que a ceo sont per nous entitles ou nous mesme
on nostre Council cat ceo reservouns nous especialment a nostre Jurisdiction;
Bracton fol. 3.
and Fleta speaks to the same purpose, Habet enim Rex curiam sua etc. habet
etiam curiam suam and Justiciarios suos tam millites quam Clericos locum suum
tenentes in Anglia coram quibus and non alibi, Fleta l. 2. fo. 66.
NISI CORAMSEMET IPSO ET CONCILIO SUO VEL AUDITORIBUS SPECIALIBUS, Falsa
Judicia and Errores Justiciariorum Revertuntur and corriguntur: Whence it is
manifest that when those Authors wrote the Power of Reversing Erroneous (or
Falsa) unjust Judgments of all other Courts was in the Justices that followed
the King, and his Court being thereunto Authorized by the King; but if they had
Erred, the Error was to be Rectified by his Council or special Auditors, such
as the King should think fit, or by the King himself, the supreme Jurisdiction
and Dernier resort being in the King himself, or where he pleased to place it,
Car ceo reservonus nous especialment a nostre Jurisdiction.

And this is also declared to be so by Act of Parliament in the 52 of H. 3.
cap. 10. which ordains, That noue from thenceforth, except out Lord the King
shall hold in his Court any plea of false Judgments given in the Court of his
Cennants, for such Plea especially belongs to the Crown and Dignity of our
Lord the King.

Though the Supreme Jurisdiction were in the King to use as he saw best, it is
but rational that if the Parliament were sitting at such time as any Complaints
were made to him of any Erroneous Judgment or Decree, that he should refer the
Examination and final Determination of the matter to the House of Lords, who
without any manner of doubt, are, and always were, the fittest Referrees the
King could refer any matter to be determined, they being the chief Assembly of
the Honor, Integrity, Wisdom and Justice of the Nation, and therefore it is
but reasonable the King should take the measures of his final Determination
from their Advice, or refer it to them to determine, which is all one, Better
or Abler Advisors being not to be found; but it is as true they had no power of
Judging by their own innate Authority, but by a delegated Authority from the
Kings, as plainly appears by what is said before, and also by the Parliament
Roll of the 4 of Ed. 3. which is recited in Cotton's Records, In haec Verba,
viz. The Treasons, Felonies, and other misdemeanors of Roger Mortimer are
particularly repeated, a great part of which Roll cannot be read, for that the
Roll is mouldred; but in the end it appears, that the King charged the Lords
and Peers, who as Judges of the Realm by the Kings Assent, adjudged that the
said Roger should be Drawn and Hanged: Whereby it appears it is the Kings
Charge to the Lords, and the Kings Assent that gives them Jurisdiction and
Authority: And so it follows of necessary consequence, that though they are the
fittest for the King to Authorize to determine the mistakes and Errors of his
Chancellors and other Judges; yet, if when they are not Assembled in a
Parliamentary way, there is no reason nor authority against it, nor
inconveniency by it, for the King to Authorize a convenient number of the Lords
of the Parliament and Judges that are near him to take course with Erroneous
Decrees in the mean time until the Parliament sits; And therefore it was that
it was provided by Act of Parliament the 31st. of Ed. 3. cap. 12. That the Lord
Chancellor and Treasurer should have Power upon Complaint to take the Justices,
and such other sage persons as they thought fit, to their Assistance, and to
Examine the Judgments of the Exchequer Court. And if any Error be found, they
may corted the Rolls, and after send them into the Exchequer to make I thereof
Execution: Which thing I conceive the King might have done of himself without
Act of Parliament; and I conceive the Act made it a standing Rule to prevent
often troubling the King upon every particular occasion; and though there be no
provision by that Act for any further Examination of the Judgment of the
Chancellor and Treasurer in that Case; yet it is not so final, but the King may
upon Petition to him, order a Writ of Error returnable in the House of Lords
Assembled in Parliament for a further and more due Examination of the matter if
either Party thinks himself agrieved thereby, and from that time forward, ziz.
the 31 of Ed. 3. there was no standing Order made by Act of Parliament, as to
the Errors of the Court of King's Bench, for by that Name I shall now call the
Successors of the Judges that followed the King mentioned in the aforesaid
Authors, but it stood at the Kings mere pleasure, 27 El. 8.
as formerly, until the 27 of Queen Elizabeth: Yet our latter Kings before that
Statute, for the most part used to refer the Examination and Correction of such
Errors only to their House of Lords in Parliament, insomuch that for want of
oftener referring it to their Council, or to Specialibus Auditoribus, Special
Commissioners, as Fleta affirms the King could do, as is mentioned in the
beginning of this Section; it grew to be an Opinion, that Errors of the Court
of Kings Bench could be rectified no where but in Parliament, as appears by the
Preamble of that Statute of the 27 of Eliz. Therefore and as the Preamble of
that Statute mentions, Because the Court of Parlisament was not in those days
so often held as in ancient time; and because in respect of the great Affairs
of the Realm, such Erroneous Judgments, (meaning those of the Kings Bench)
could not be well considered and determined in time of Parliament; whereby the
Subjects of the Realm were greatly hindered and desayed of Justice. It was
therefore enacted, That the Errors of Judgments in the said Court of
King's Bench in certain Actions therein mentioned, should be examined and
rectified in the Exchequer-Chamber by such persons as in the said Act is
mentioned; and after the Judgment is affirmed or tedersed, the Record, and all
things concerning the same, shall be removed and brought back into the Court of
King's Bench, that such further proceedings may be thereupon, as well for
execution as other wise, as shall appertain. And thereby it is reserved, That
the parties shall not be finally concluded by such Reversal or Affirmation, but
that they may sue in the high Court of Parliament for a further and more due
examination of the said Judgment, in such sort as was thentofore used upon
erroneous Judgments: And the manner thentofore was, that before any Writ of
Error could be brought to examine and correct Errors in Parliament, a Petition
was to be preferred to the King for allowance thereof, and it was to be allowed
by the King before any such Writ of Error could be made, as appears by the
Authorities in the margin; 1 H. 7. fo. 19, 20. Die. fo. 375.
which makes it most plain where and in whom the Supreme Judicative Power lay.
And Judge Jenkins says, Jenk. Lex terrae, fo. 55.
The reason of the Law, and the King's allowance of a Writ of Error, returnable
in the House of Lords, is, for that the Judges of the Land, all of them being
of the Kings Council, and the twelve Masters in Chancery, assist in the Lords
House, by whose advice erroneous Judgments are redrest: So that it appears
plainly, their Judicative Power in that particular is not originally and
fundamentally in themselves, but derived from the King, by his allowance
thereof, who is fons and origo Justitiae; Bract. lib. 2. cap. 4.
and, says Bracton, est enim Coronae Regis facere Justitiam and Judicium and
tenere pacem sine quibus Corona consistere non potest nec tenere, hujusmodi
autem jura sive Jurisdictiones ad personas sive tenementa transferri non
poterunt nec per privata persona possideri nec usus nec executio Juris, nisi
hoc datum fuerit ei de super sicut Jurisdictio delegata non delegari poterit
quin Ordinaria remaneat cum ipso Rege. And I find by the Journal of the Lords
House, that the 10th. of December 1621. a Report was made by a Committee
appointed to search for Precedents touching Appeals to the Lords from Decrees
in Chancery, In the Stat. 37 E. 3.18. by Gr. Council is meant the Privy Council
That anciently all Petitions of that nature were directed to the K. and his
great Council. From whence I gather, it is but a late practice, both to leave
the King quite out of such Petitions, and to neglect praying his allowance,
that the Lords may examine Errors of Judgments and Decrees; And perhaps it may
prove of ill consequence hereafter, if not timely considered and rectified: the
Supremacy of Jurisdiction being the Supreme part of Government, Mir. 232.
and the King's chiefest Dignity.

By the foresaid Statutes of E. 3. and El. and some others since made, there is
sufficient provisions against erroneous Judgments in all Courts at Law in the
intervals of Parliament, by Writs of Error, which are in nature of Appeals;
which course (I conceive) the King might have taken, if no such Act had been
made: But against the Judgments and Decrees of the Courts of Equity in
Chancery, Exchequer Chamber and Counties Palatine, etc. there is no provision
at all by any Parliamentary Act; that matter standing as it did by the
Common Law, no Parliament having intermeddled with it; which if they had, they
had the same reason, or more, to desire the King to constitute a Court of
Appeal from these Courts of Equity, as from other Courts. And it is a great
Argument with me, (if there were no other) that it was conceived by the
Parliament, that there is a Power in the King alone out of Parliament-time to
rectisie the Errors of the Decrees of all Courts of Equity, else the
Parliament, I presume, would have taken care to have provided against those, as
well as against the Errors of the Court of King's Bench; which provision was
made, because they conceived those Errors not to be redressed but in
Parliament; and the same reason that induced the Parliament to constitute
Courts to redress the Errors of the King's Bench and Exchequer, viz. the
unfrequency of Parliliaments, and their being otherwise employed when they fit,
may induce the King to appoint Referrees to rectify Chancery-Decrees.

For the further clearing of this matter, it seems in Queen Elizabeth's time
there was the like doubt made as now, Whether the Queen might relieve against
the mistakes of the Chancellor or Keeper, in making his Decrees? And the Queen
took the right way to be informed, she referred it to the Judges, to certify
to her their Opinion touching that matter: For it appears, Rolls Re. 1 p. 331.
by the Authority in the Margin, that it was certified by all the Judges of
England, in the Cause between the Countess of Southampton and the Earl of
Worcester in Chancery, that the Queen, upon Petition, might refer the matter to
the Judges (but not to others) to examine and reverse the Decree, if there
should be cause; and that the then Lord Chancellor agreed to that resolution.
And forasmuch as it is mentioned in that Report, that the referrence ought to
be to the Judges, and not to others: it is to be understood, that it was a
point in Law was then in dispute, and in such Cases there must be some Judges
amongst them; for, in art sua cuique credendum est; and therefore Judges
(whose profession the study of the Law is) are presumed to be best conusant of
any what the Law is; and the Law is not to be unregarded in judging according
to Equity, but both Law and Conscience are to be so intermixed, as to produce a
just Judgment; a skill of great curiousity, and ought therefore not to be
final, but in the resolution of several men of great knowledge and integrity,
since the least bias of affection or disgust to one side or other, may lead
any single man a great way out of the way.

I presume this may be the meaning of that Report, because I find in the
Year-book of the 27th. of H. 8. so. 15, etc. That the Kings Secretary and Mr.
Fitz-Herbert were joined with the Chancellor to review a Decree between the
Prior of St. John's and one Dockeray, where the Secretary gave rules in the
Cause as well as the Chancellor.

The House of Lords themselves always take the advice of the Judges; and to
leave matters of Equity wholly to the Chancellor alone in the intervals of
Parliament, is to give him a greater power than the Lords take to themselves in
Parliament; which, I humbly conceive, ought not to be.

Besides this resolution of all the Judges, assented to by the then Lord
Chancellor, it was afterward agreed to by the House of Lords themselves, That
it was proper for the King to give authority to examine and correct Decrees in
Chancery, as appears by their own Order, which is as follows, viz.

Die Veneris vicesimo octavo die Maii, 1624.
THe Petition of Will. Matthews of Landast was read, and the Answer thereunto
conceived by the Lords Committees for Petitions (after Council heard on both
sides many several days) was reported to the House by the Lord Houghton, and
read, in haec verba, viz.

The Lords Committees upon the examination of the whole Cause between William
and George Matthews, find William Matthews principal Debt to be Five thousand
two hundred and sixty pounds, which they hold fit to be paid by the said George
Matthews thus: Upon St. Andrews day next, One thousand six hundred twenty four,
2000 l. Upon St. Andrews day, One thousand six hundred twenty five, 2000 l.
Upon St. Andrews day, One thousand six hundred twenty six, 1260 l. The whole
sum, 5260 l.


And that for security for the payment of this Debt according to every several
day and payment here set down, the whole Land to stand bound; and that this be
the better performed, the Lords Committees think fit the execution hereof be
recommended to the Court of Chancery.

Die Veneris vicesimo octavo die Maii, 1624. post meridiem. George Matthews
exhibited his Petition, in haec verba, viz.
To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in the higher House
of Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of George Matthews, Esquire;
Humbly shows your Lordships,

THat your Petitioners Decree now questioned, has been several times submitted
unto by William Matthews, never questioned during the life of the Petitioners
Father; and His Majesty, upon information by Petition on both sides, declared,
That he saw no Cause for questioning thereof; and it was thereupon ordered,
That to hear a Cause after submission, (no Corruption appearing) would be a
dangerous Precedent. In consideration whereof, and for that the Decree stands
questioned only by Petition, nor was your now Petitioner ever party to any
Suit, nor is there any Bill depending in Court; he being informed by Council,
that it has been the course of this Honorable House to reverse Decrees but by
Bill legally exhibited, especially where no corruption is proved: He therefore
most humbly beseeches, That he may have the liberty of a Subject, and that he
may not be concluded, and a Decree submitted unto overthrown, and the small
remainder of his ancient Inheritance taken from him, by Order of this
Honorable House, only upon a Petition. He most humbly submits himself herein
to your Lordships, and will ever pray for your Honorable preservation.

This Petition being read and considered of, these Lords, ( viz.) the Earl of
Montgomery, the Lord Bishop of Durham, the Lord Say and Seal, and the Lord
Denny, were appointed by the House to set down an Order in this Cause between
William and George Matthews.

Die Sabbati, vicesimo nono die Maii, 1624. THe Lords Committees appointed
yesterday in the afternoon to set down an Order in the Cause between William
and George Matthews, reported the same to the House in haec verba, viz.
THe Lords of Parliament do order, That the Cause depending between Will.
Matthews and George Matthews shall be reviewed in Chancery by the Lord Keeper,
assisted by such of the Lords of Parliament as shall be nominated by the House,
and by any two of the Judges whom the Lord Keeper shall name; for which end the
Lord Keeper is to be an humble Suitor unto his Majesty from the House, for a
Commission unto himself and the Lords that shall be named by the House, for the
said Review and final Determination of the Cause, as to them shall appear Just
and Equal: And this the Lords desire may be done with all convenient speed.

The which Order being read, the House approved thereof, and these Lords were
named by the House to be joined in the said Commission with the Lord Keeper,
viz. the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Montgomery, the Earl of Bridgwater, the
Lord Bishop of Durham, the Lord Bishop of Rochester, the Lord Denny, and the
Lord Houghton; and the House ordered the same Cause to be heard and determined
accordingly in the beginning of the next Michaelmas Term.

This agrees verbatim with the Records of the Lords House; and pursuant
thereunto, the matter was reviewed by these Commissioners and a Decree by them
made in reversal of the Chancery-Decree, as appears by the Registers Book of
Orders in Chancery, of Michaelmus and Hillary Term in the 22d. year of King
James.

Sir Edward Cook, in his Jurisdiction of Courts, Anderson 2 part 163. to the
same effect.
Title Chancery, with greatapprobation reports several Cases of Decrees in
Chancery referred to the Judges by Queen Elizabeth, to be examined and amended;
and it is to be noted, that his authority in that Case was sevenfold; for when
he wrote that Book, he was very much incensed against the King for being put
out of his Chief Justiceship, and set himself as much as he could against the
Prerogative, as appears by the whole current of that Book; so that had there
been any color of denying the Queen this Power, he had never cited those Cases
without Objections.

It was not only practiced by Qu. Elizabeth and King James, but also by King
Charles the first, as appears by an Order which I find in the said Registers
Office in the Book of Entry of Orders there of the 22d. of November, in the
7th. year of King Charles the first, between one Sherbourn, the Executor of one
Munford, the Executor of one Challener, Plaintiff, and one Townley and Forest
Defendants; which begins thus:

THe matter upon his Majesty's reference to the Right Honorable the Lord
Keeper, upon the humble Petition of the said Townley, coming this day to be
heard in the presence of Council learned on both sides, before his Lordship,
being assisted by Mr. Justice Hutton, Mr. Justice Jones, Mr. Justice Whitlock,
and Mr. Justice Harvey, the Question appeared to be, Whether, or how far, the
said Townley ought to be bound by the Decree made on the behalf of the said
Munford for the sum of 17000 l. against the Defendant Townley, in Case the
Defendant Thomas Forest should not pay the same? And upon the hearing, a Bill
of Review was ordered to be brought by Townley, either upon matter not insisted
on at the first hearing, or new matter, and according to the course of the
Court, the said Townley was ordered to give security, and in the mean time the
execution of the said Decree, and all proceedings thereupon, as against the
said Townley, was respited and suspended; and whereas by the first Decree
Townley was decreed to pay as well what his Co-Trustee Forest had received of
the Profits of the Estate of Challener, as what he had received himself: Upon
the hearing upon the said Bill of Review, the first Decree was reversed, and
Townley decreed to answer only so much as he himself had received, which
appeared by the proofs to be but three half years Rent, and it was referred to
a Master in Chancery to audit the account touching the three half-years Rent,
and the Recognizance given by Townley to perform the Order of the Court, was
discharged.

In the same Registers Office I find another Entry of an Order of June 1. in
the 12th. year of King Charles the first, between one Pennington and others
Plaintiffs, and one Holmes Defendant, in these words:

WHereas, upon Petition exhibited to the Kings most Excellent Majesty by the
Defendant, supposing some injustice and wrong to have been done unto him by a
Decree made in this Court between the foresaid parties, his Majesty was most
graciously pleased to refer the matter to the Master of the Rolls, to call to
his assistance one of the Judges of the Bench, and to hear what could be
alleged against the said Decree: And this day being appointed for the hearing
of the matter, the Master of the Rolls calling to him Mr. Justice Crook, and
having heard the parties and their Council on both sides, and what could be
alleged against the said Decree, why the same should not be put in execution,
saw no cause to recede from, or alter the same.

Now, after the Opinion of all the Judges of England, assented to by the then
Lord Chancellor for the legality of this sort of proceeding, and the
approhation of the House of Lords, and their direction for humble Suit to be
made to the King for a Commission from Him to proceed accordingly; and after so
continued a series of practice for the Reign of Three of the best Princes that
ever swayed a Scepter, without the least Objection then made against it by any
that I ever read or heard of: I say, after all this, sure one would think there
could be no room for any color of illegality in that sort of Proceeding.

But it is objected, That the Power and Right of this sort of proceeding is
since taken away by the Statute of 16 Car. 1. cap. 10. But I hold, that Statute
does not do it in the least, nor does it carry in it the least color or look
that way; though, indeed, it does take away somewhat too much (as I conceive)
of the King's Power, but not this of referring the examination and correcting
of erroneous and unjust Decrees in Chancery to fit persons for that purpose. I
am sure it is not prohibited by that Statute by any particular words, nor are
there any general words therein contained, that according to the rules of Law,
and construction of other Statutes, can be construed to extend to the taking
away of that course of proceeding. For the clearing of which point, it is
requisite that the Statute should be taken strictly into consideration; the
prohibiting part whereof is as follows:

Be it Ordaiued and Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That
the said Court, commonly called the Star Chamber, and all Jurisdiction, Power
and Authority belonging to or exercised in the same Court, or by any Judges,
Officers and Ministers thereof, be from the first day of August 1641. clearly
and absolutely dissolved, taken away and determined; and that from the said
first day of August, neither the Lord Chancellor, nor the Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, the Lord Creasurer of England, the Keeper of the Kings
Privy Seal, or President of the Council, nor any Bishop, Temporal Lord,
Privy-Councellor, Judge or Justice whatsoever, shall have any Power or
Authority to hear, examine or determine any matter or thing whatsoever, in the
said Court commonly called the Star Chamber, or to make, pronounce, or deliver
any Judgment, Sentence, Order or Decree, or do any Judicial or Ministerial act
in the said Court: and all and every Article, Clause and Sentence in them and
every of them, by which any Jurisdiction, Power or Authority is given, limited,
and appointed unto the said Court commonly called the Star Chamber, or unto all
or any the Judges, Officers, or Ministers thereof, or for any proccedings to be
had or made in the said Court, or for any matter or thing to be drawn into
question, examined or determined there, shall, for so much as concerns the
said Court of Star Chamber, and the Power and Authority thereby given unto it,
be from the said first day of August repealed, and absolutely revoked and made
void.

And be it likewise Enaded, That the like Jurisdiction now used and exercised
in the Court before the President and Council in the Marches of Wales, and also
before the President and Council established in the Northern-parts, and also in
the Court commonly called the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, before the
Chancellor, and Council of that Court; and also in the Court of Exchequer of
the County-Palatine of Chester, held before the Chamberlain and Council of that
Court, the like Jurisdiction being exercised there, shall from the first day of
August 1641. he also repealed and absolutely revoked and made void, any Law,
Prescription, Custom, or Usage, etc. to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding; and that from thenceforth no Court, Council, or place of
Judicature shall be erected, ordained, constituted, or appointed, within the
Realm of England or Dominion of Wales, which shall have, use, or exercise the
same or the like Jurisdiction as is or has haen used, practiced or exercised
in the said Court of Star Chamber.

Be it likewise Declared and Enacted by the Authority of this present
Parliament, That neither His Majesty nor His Privy-Councel have or ought to
have any Jurisdiction, Power and Authority, by English Bill, Petition, Article,
Libel, or any other arbitrary way whatsoever, to examine or draw into question,
determine or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, Dereditaments, Goods or Chattels
of any of the Subjects of this Realm; but that the same ought to be tried and
determined in the ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary course of
Law.

These are all the prohibitory words of that Statute. I will not say any thing
of the reasonableness or unreasonableness of it, but that it was made in 41.
But taking it as it is, I think it deserves no further construction to disable
the King from performing his Oath, that is, to see that Justice should be done
to his Subjects, than the very express words will bear; and for the right
understanding of it, it is to be considered in all the parts thereof, without
relying on any one single Clause alone, and thereby it will appear how far the
whole may be construed to take away any Power that was before in the King.

It takes away the Star Chamber and the Power thereof, and prohibits the
erecting of any Court of the like Jurisdiction, by express terms; but by so
doing it meddles not with this Power of the Kings to refer the examination of
an unjust Decree made in Chancery by One man, to Three or Four, or more men,
fit for the purpose, neither in terms nor in construction: And it is a great
argument that it was never intended to be taken away by that Act, because it is
not taken away by express words; for if it had been intended to have been taken
away, it might have been expressed by particular words, it being no new
invention since the making of that Act, but a course long practiced before that
Act was made, as appears by what is aforesaid, and that without the least
contradiction, but on the contrary, with the greatest approbation that could
be, viz the approbation and direction of the Lords House in Parliament at one
time, and of all the Judges of England at another time, as is aforesaid, and of
all the great Writers of the Law of those times; so that there was then no
apparent reason for taking it away.

The next part of the Statute, and that which seems most to oppose me, is, That
the King nor His Privy-Councel have, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power
or Authority; by English Bill, Petition, Article, Libel, or any other arbitrary
way, to examine, draw into question, determine, or dispose of the Lands,
Tenements, etc. but that the same ought to be tried and determined in the
ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary course of Law.

For the understanding of this, it is to be remembered, the King, for the
execution of the Law, had two sorts of Powers in Him by the Common Law; He had
Power and Authority thority in Person to hear, Ordinaria Jurisdictio pertinet
ad Regem, Bract. fol. 108, 412. Ordinaris Juris. dictio remanet cumipso Rege,
Bract. fol. 55.
determine, and dispose of the Estates of his Subjects, upon Controversy
arising between them, and complained of to him, and this is properly called
Jurisdiction; Designatio Justiciariorum est a Rege Jurisdictio vere ordinaria a
Lege, Co. 4 Inst. fo. 74.
and he had also designatio Judiciorum, a power of nominating and appointing
Judges under him to hear, determine, and dispose of the Estates of the
Subjects, touching which any Controversy did arise, and was brought before
them to be decided, as appears in the beginning of this Treatise; Sect. 2. per
tout.
So that if he should be excluded himself by this Statute from hearing and
determining in person, yet there is not a word that excludes him from
nominating Judges to hear and determine: Therefore, if he could nominate
Referrees to rectify a Chancery-Decree before the Statute, as most apparently
he could, he may do so yet, there being not one word in the Statute that
prohibits it. And whereas it prohibits all arbitrary ways whatsoever of
disposition of the Subjects Estates by the King or his Privy Council, this
course is not to promote Arbitraryness, but to prevent it; for it is more
arbitrary to leave Causes to the final determination of one single man's
Judgment, than to refer it to the Judgment of five or six, it being not so
easy to corrupt or deceive many as one, and that is the reason why a Trial by
Jury of Twelve is so much approved of, and applauded; for they being many,
Fortescue fol. 75.
cannot all be easily corrupted.

And as to that part of the Act that says, The forementioned Estates ought to
be tried and determined in the ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary
course of Law: certainly none can say that have considered the premises, but
that referring the examination of Chancery-Decrees to a convenient number of
sage persons, as is aforesaid, may very well be accounted a proceeding in
Chancery according to the ordinary course of that Court, since the first
practice of the Court was to determine not by the Chancellor alone, but by the
consent of diverse others as is aforesaid. Sect. 3.
And I conceive the House of Lords terming it a reviewing of the Decree in
Chancery, when they directed application to be made to the King for a
Commission, as is aforementioned, and all the Judges of England giving their
Opinion for the legality of such proceeding, and the same consented and agreed
to by the then Lord Chancellor, and the long continued practice of it without
any dislike, (when there was occasion) as I have made appear for several
Princes Reigns, and until an unparalleled Rebellion and Usurpation, put that
(as well as all things else) out of course; may entitle it to an ordinary
course of proceeding, if any proceeding at all in Equity in Chancery can be so
accounted; and the determining Causes there by the Chancellor himself, without
any assistance or consent of others, is more like an arbitrary and an
extraordinary way, and new sort of practice, than that.

For further manifestation of this matter, and that a reference from the King
to examine the injustice of a Chancery-Decree is a proceeding in Chancery, and
no erecting of a new Court, and that as well when the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper is not one of the Referrees or Commissioners, as when he is, it appears
by the proceeding upon the forementioned Reference by the King to the Master
of the Rolls and a Judge of the King's Bench, to examine the injustice of the
Decree between Pennington and Holmes aforementioned: That upon that reference,
the proceedings on the first Decree was staid, and what was done thereupon is
entered among the proceedings in Chancery, as an Act of that Court; And
moreover, Dugd. Orig. Ju. fol. 32. That Etheldred appointed the Office of
Chancellor to be exercised by three Abbots by turns.
it cannot be denied but the King may commit the custody of his Great Seal to
several Commissioners, as King James did upon the outing of the corrupt Lord
Bacon; See the Parliament Roll of that time, and Dugd. Chronological Table of
Chancellors and Keepers.
and in such cases one of the Commissioners keeps the Seal, and is President
amongst the rest, but they have all equal Authority in judging according to the
purport of the Commission, 12 Maii 19 Jac. ordered in Chancery, inter Butler
and Eliot, That the Decree made by the Lord Bacon should not be signed by the
Commissioners of the Great Seal, until notice to the other side, as by the
Registers Book of Orders in Chancery of that day appears.
and do sign Decrees; and if the King may make many Judges in Equity to hear
all Causes generally, what is the reason he cannot appoint many Judges there in
some few particular Causes, upon complaint of mistake by his Chancellor or
Keeper? since he that may do more can do less, and the King is not tied to have
any certain or limited number of Judges in his Courts; for there were in the
Common Pleas, in E. 4.'s time and before, sometimes 6, 7, or 8, and King James
had five Judges in the King's Bench, (whereof my Great-grand-father Sir David
Williams was the fifth) and as many in the Common Pleas, about the beginning of
his Reign, as may appear by Dugdale's Chronological Table of Judges of that
time: So that I cannot apprehend any manner of prohibition, neither express nor
implied, in this Statute nor any other, against the Kings referring the
examination and regulating unjust Decrees in Chancery to others, besides the
Chancellor or Keeper.

This Statute deserves not to be extended beyond it self, it being a penal
Statute, which is never to be taken by Intendment, further then the very
express words of the Prohibition upon a strict and bare construction will bear,
however the Statute it self in the conclusion has by express words somewhat
mended the matter from what is contained in the premises; for in the end of
the Act there is a Provisoe which does in effect restore the King to almost all
his Ancient Jurisdiction, and puts all the seeming Cause of doubt about the
matter of Referring the Examination of unjust Decrees in Courts of Equity quite
out of doors, by confining the meaning and construction of the Statute to the
words of the Provisoe therein contained, which Provisoe is in these words,
Provided always, and be it Enacted, that this Act and the several Clauses
therein contained, wall be taken and Expounded to extend only to the Court of
Starchamber, and the said Court holden before the President and Council in the
Marches of Wales, and before the President and Council in the Northern parts,
and also to the Court commonly called, the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster,
holden before the Chancellor and Council of that Court; and also in the
Exchequer of the County Palatine of Chester, before the Chamberlain and Council
of that Court, and to all Courts of like Jurisdiction to be hereafter Errected,
Drdain'd, constituted or appointed as aforesaid, and to the Warrants and
Directions of the Council Board, and to the Committments, Restraints and
Imprisonments of any person or persons made, commanded and awarded by the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors in their own Persons, or by the Lords and
others of the Privy Council and every one of them. So that here is an
Explanation that no Court or Proceeding in any Court is to be taken away but
the Court of Starchamber and the Jurisdiction thereof, and such like Courts of
like Jurisdiction; and this of the Kings referring the Examination of unjust
Decrees in Chancery to particular Commissioners and Referrees, was practiced
out of the Star Chamber, when that Court was at height, as may appear by the
forecited Presidents; so that it never was a part of the Jurisdiction or
practice of that Court, and therefore declared by the said Provisoe not
intended to be prohibited by the said Act; and as to the King the Provisoe
says, He is to be restrained but from restraining and imprisoning by his own
personal command, he may do every thing else that he could have done before; He
may hear and determine in person, if he pleases, as he could have done before;
and he may appoint all such Judges or Referrees to all purposes, as he could
have done before: But as to the Warrants of Imprisoning, if any cause for such
there should be, he is to leave that to his Ministers; and the King, if he
thinks fit, upon complaint to him made of Injustice or other Error done by his
Chancellor or Keeper, may order his Chancellor to order the parties concerned
to appear before the King in person, and the King himself may require his
Chancellor or Keeper to be present, and his Majesty may call others to his
assistance, whom he may confide in for just and equitable advice, and may
determine what to him seems meet in the Cause, upon conference with them, this
being for advancement, not delay of Justice; and if the Chancellor or Keeper
does not use the coercive part of Imprisonment, and other Process of the Court
of Chancery to compel Obedience to such determination, I conceive he does not
do his duty. I mention this, not that I think it is absolutely necessary the
King should trouble himself to hear all matters in person, but I humbly
conceive it not amiss for his Majesty sometimes to use his Power in Chancery as
well as at Councel-board, lest for want of using his Power, he may be in danger
of losing it, and consequently his esteem in the eyes of the people, may be
lessened; whilst every of his acting Judges (the Chancellor or Keeper
especially) command respect from their Friends, and fear and trembling from
their Enemies.

I am sure Solomon's giving Judgment in the case of the Harlots gained him more
esteem, not only amongst his own Subjects, but all the World over, than any one
other act of Government he did in all his Reign, and the Kings not being
exactly skilled in the Law, or the formal Rules thereof, as a professed Lawyer
should be, should not at all hinder his undertaking it sometimes; for a man but
of common sense, having heard the Case put, the proofs made, and the Arguments
of indifferent men, (not biased Advocates, or Council only) may easily discern
what Judgment is fit to be given in Equitable Causes; and the King has almost
infallible helps; He has his Lords Spiritual and Temporal; He has always at
his call twelve Judges, men skilled in the Laws, and sworn lawfully to counsel
the King in all matters: These, or some of them, he may command to attend him
at such Hearings, and may command them to give their opinion of the matter,
according to the nature of the Cause, and according to the best of their
judgments; and the King at such hearing may give, or cause to be given a
Sentence or Judgment according to the Opinion of the majority of them; and this
course is the best, and was the old way of judging of Equity; and if used some
times, would make Chancellors and Keepers more regard what they do: But if the
King should not be minded to meddle in person with determining any Causes, his
referring of the examination of Chancery-Decrees to persons fit and able, of
judgment and knowledge to do it, may suffice, better then to leave it wholly to
his Chancellors single judgment; For, securius expediuntur negotia comissa
pluribus, and plus vident oculi quam oculus.

There is at this day a standing Commission enrolled in Chancery to all the
Judges of Westminster hall, the Master of the Rolls, and the other Masters in
Chancery, impowering any Three of them, (whereof the Master of the Rolls or one
of the Judges to be one) in the absence of the Lord Keeper to hear and
determine Causes, and that is not thought to be prohibited by any Statute: And
if the King has Authority and Power to appoint Commissioners for the
Chancellor or Keepers ease, why cannot he also give power to Commissioners to
rectify his Decrees when he mistakes? The Chancellor or Keeper of the Great
Seal is but the King's Deputy during pleasure, 9 Rep. 99. and a Grant of that
Office for life is void, Cook 4 Inst. fol. 87.


Upon the whole matter, I must conclude, I can apprehend no warrantable
objection can be made against this sort of proceeding, or that any Statute
does, or intended to take it away: so that I shall take that point for granted,
That it is very lawful for the King to appoint Referrees or Commissioners to
rectify Chancery-Decrees, or Decrees of any other Court of Equity.

The next thing to be considered is, Whether any of the King's Privy-Councel
may be Referrees or Commissioners for that purpose, notwithstanding the said
Statute? For they are men of so great Honor, Knowledge and Integrity, and of
such Fortune and Estates, as to scorn Bribery, and therefore very fit to assist
in this matter; and I hold They may; for the prohibition of the Act extends to
their not acting as being only and barely Privy-Councellors: It does not say,
Privy-Councellors shall not act by virtue of any other Authority. And this
thing proves it self plainly in the Case of the now Lord Keeper, and Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, who are both of the Privy-Councel, yet examine,
draw into question, determine and dispose of the Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chattels of the Subjects, with a witness, by virtue of another Authority
derived from the King; and if They may do it, why may not any other of the
Privy Council act by a lawful Authority in those matters, as well as They?

The next thing considerable, is, if the Lord Chancellor or Keeper ought to
command performance according to the course of the Chancery, of what such
Referrees do order by virtue of such Reference, when he himself is not one of
them; as well as when he is; and I hold he ought; First, for whatever Order is
made in the House of Lords upon determining an Appeal from Chancery-Decrees, it
is sent to the Chancery, to compel Obedience thereto; and in this respect, I
conceive the House of Lords are but the Kings Referrees, and do legally and
truly derive their Authority from the King, as is proved by the due Proceedings
upon Writs of Error, and the ancient form of Petitions against Chancery-Decrees
beforementioned: So that such Referrees do act by Authority derived from the
King, as well as the House of Lords in Parliament. And further, the practice
has been for the Lord Chancellor or Keeper to pursue what is done by such
Referrees; for what was resolved by the Judges upon the References mentioned in
Sir Edw. Cook 4 Institutes, and certified by them to the Chancellor was
complied with by him; and what was decreed by the major part of the
Commissioners joined with the Lord Keeper, in the Case of Matthews and Matthews
before-remembred, was confirmed, and prosecuted by the Lord Keeper, as Lord
Keeper, in and according to the course of Chancery; and so in the case of
Sherburne and Townley; and had been so also in the case of Pennington and
Holmes beforementioned, if there had been any alteration of the Decree; for
the confirmation of that Decree by virtue of the Kings referrence, is entered as
an Act of that Court: so that I think that point is also pretty clear. And (I
presume) the enrolling or performing of a Decree, before Petition to the King,
or before obtaining his Commission or Order of referrence, (which are both as
sufficient one as the other, there being a sufficient number of Precedents of
both sorts) is no hindrance but that restitution may be awarded, if the
Commissioners and Referrees make certificate to the Chancellor or Keeper that
it ought to be so; for the enrollment of a Decree does not make it more
irrevocable then it was before the enrollment, but that notwithstanding it may
be altered in the same Court; for it is not a Record, and in that respect not
so high in the eye of the Law as a Judgment according to the course of the
Common Law, which cannot be reversed in the same Court; and this was so held in
H. 8.'s time, 27 H. 8. fol. 15.
in a Cause in Chancery before mentioned in the 6th. Section, between the Prior
of St. John's and one Dockeray; where upon a review in Chancery before the Lord
Chancellor, the King's Secretery, and Mr. Fitz-Herbert, it was held and
allowed, that a Decree there is but an Order made by the Court for the time;
which upon good consideration, and cause shown, may well be altered,
notwithstanding all the arguments then made by the Council for the first
Decree, to prevent inspecting into it, as that such looking back tended to
confusion, and would make Causes endless, and the like: whereunto the Kings
Secretary (sitting then in equal authority with the Chancellor, as appears by
the Report) made answer, and commanded the formal man that was against
inspecting the injustice of the Decree to forbear disputing the Power of that
Court; and such was the practice of the late Lord Chancellor Nottingham, who
would often rehear and re-hear again and again, upon Councels certifying it
under their hands that there was good Cause, The Cause between Thacker and
Redman was several times heard by the Lord Nottingham, and heard again by the
Lord Keeper North on the 20th. of April, 35 Car. 2. after the Decree enrolled;
and upon that hearing, a Trial at Law directed, which must occasion another
hearing.
as they apprehended, for such rehearing his frequent saying, being, that the
nimbleness of a Clark in enrolling his Decree should not hinder him from coming
at Justice, and that he would leap over Hedge and Ditch to do it; and doubtless
it is the true and proper power of that Court of Equity so to do: And though it
does of descretion entertain some Forms, yet it may, and ought upon occasion to
leave them, rather then tie up its own hands from doing Justice; for it has
Potestatem absolutam secundum probata Judicare; 9 E. 4. f. 15.
and if ever any Chancellor did amiss in that respect, it was in that he would
leap lustily for some, but would not hop over a straw for others: I wish none
in that great place be ever more guilty of the like partiality.

It appears from what is beforementioned, that the Court of Equity in Chancery
is the King's high Court of conscience for moderating the rigor, and supplying
the defects of the Common Law, and he may order it, and limit the Jurisdiction
thereof as to him seems most agreeable to Equity and Justice; a further
instance whereof appears by an Enrollment of a Commission now to be seen in
Chancery, At the Rolls, 6 pars 14 Jac. nu. 25.
beginning thus:

JAMES by the Grace of God, etc.

wherein it is mentioned, That the Attorney General and the rest of the Kings
Council learned in the Law had been commanded to consider and certify to the
King if the Chancery might relieve according to Equity after a Judgment at Law;
and therein is mentioned the consultation had by the Kings Council thereupon,
and their reasons on the point, and the Roll ends thus:

We in Our Princely judgment having well weighed, and with mature deliberation
considered of the said several Reports of Our learned Council, and all the
parts of them, etc. Do will and command. That Our Chancellor or Keeper of the
Great Seal for the time being, shall not hereafter desist to give to Our
Subjects, upon their several complaints now and hereafter to be made, such
relief in Equity, notwithstanding any former proceeding at the Common Law
against them, as shall stand with the true merits and Justice of their cases,
etc. And for that it appertains to Our Princely care and Office only to be
Judge over all Our Judges, and to discern and determine such differences as at
any time may or shall arise between Our several Courts touching their
Jurisdiction, and the same to set and to decide as We in Our Princely Wisdom
shall find to stand most with Our Honor, and the example of Our Royal
Progenitors in the best of times, and the general Weal and Good of Our People,
for which We are to answer to God, who has placed Us over them. Our will and
pleasure is, That Our whole Proceedings herein, by the Orders formerly set
down, be enrolled in Our Court of Chancery, there to remain of Record, for the
better extinguishment of the like Question that may arise in future times.

Decimo octavo Julii, Anno Regni Regis Jacobi quarto. decimo, per ipsum Regem.

But after all I have said, if there be any that have considered the premises,
and will still deny the Kings Power, I must also say, That for determination of
the matter, the opinion of his Majesty's learned Judges is to be the
Touchstone; therefore, for a further inducement to enquire further of them
touching this matter, which is my principal aim hereby, I shall in the next
place give a hint of the inconveniences that do happen for want of this course
of Proceeding.

SECT. VII. The Inconveniences that accrue for want of a constant Relief
against Erreneous and Unjust Decrees in Chancery.
TO apprehend the mischiefs that may ensue for want of a constant and permanent
practical Power to control and rectify mistaken Decrees in Chancery, it is a
necessary to look back to the fourth Section for the Power of that Court, and
how far it extends, which is there set down in some measure.

It is also considerable, how ill some Chancellors have used this their so
great unlimited Power, which appears in the Lord Bacon's Case, herein also
before re-cited in the fifth Section; for it is not Impossible but that some of
his Successors may do the like, which if but any one should, it would be very
hard for many a poor Creature to wait the Convention of a Parliament,
especially if it should happen that another usurping part of a Parliament like
that about 41. should attempt to play the old Game again; so that in such case,
the King must perhaps either leave many of his Subjects utterly undefended
against the corrupt and vicious proceedings of another Bacon, or endanger his
own safety, by letting them sit; in which case, by the Rule of
Self-preservation, the King ought to save himself: But setting aside this
matter of corruption, as if no such would ever hereafter be in the World, if we
consider humane frailty, and the real mistakes every single man may be subject
to; especially when beset with the mercenary Arguments of three or four
Hireling Advocates of a side, who think themselves obliged, when opportunity
serves, to mistake for their Clients, according to the measure of the Fees they
receive, as I have known some of them knowingly do; and sometimes they
prevaricate and omit what they ought to say, if either Feed on both sides, or
not high enough Feed of the side they are of; by means whereof a circumspect
Lord Chancellor or Keeper may innocently be seduced to make an ill Decree, and
by force thereof a poor man must either go to Prison, or part with the best
part of his Substance, so that by both ways, himself and Family are brought
unjustly to want and misery; and if he be a Tradesman, it is ods but he breaks
one or two more, for Tradesmen are like Nine-pins, one seldom falls alone; and
if a Parliament when it meets should find leisure from public business to
examine the matter, and should see cause to alter the Decree, and Award
Restitution, the man that got the Money by means of the ill Decree, may have
spent it all, gone beyond Sea, or dead, without Assets, or twenty such Chances
may happen, that the Money may never be got again by any Art or Industry
whatsoever, which would be prevented if there were a place to Appeal, before
performance of the ill Decree; and moreover, it remains a doubtful case as to
the many Decrees of the late Lord Chancellor Notingham Re versed by the now
Lord Keeper North, which of the two Lords are in the right, he that made the
Decrees, or he that Reversed them, it being not fairly to be decided, but by
the Advice and Opinion of a greater number of as Wise and Judicious men as
themselves, and that is a fair and reasonable way of determining it, for vis
unita fortior; but the greatest inconvenience of all, is that which concerns
the Government; for while this opinion stands, That the King cannot hear the
matter in Person, nor refer it to others, though to some of the self same Lords
that sit in Parliament; but that the matter must wait their meeting in a
Parliamentary way, it may make the people believe that the Supremacy of
Jurisdiction is in the House of Lords, and not in the King, and consequently
lessen him in their opinion; for People Love and Honor them most from whom
they find most Relief against Injury; and how consistent that is with Monarchy,
and how agreeable it is with our Oaths willingly to suffer, let any man Judge
that has Sense and Loyalty. Since all the Courts of Westminster have four
Judges in each Court, men Learned in the Laws, of known and visible Integrity,
and all Sworn, To do equal right to all, 18 E. 3.7. Oath of Just.
and to take no Fee or Roabes of any man great or small, but of the King
himself, during their being Judges; And who in their proceedings are tied to
Rules; and since Appeals by Writ of Error, by special Provision by Act of
Parliament, may be at all times had against their Judgments; and since there
are frequent Appeals from all Ecclesiastical Courts, and from the Court of
Admirality out of Parliament. It is a mighty mystery to me, and the policy of
it is not Intelligible, that any man should labor to prop up this Opinion,
that there should be no Appeal but to Parliament from this Court of Equity in
Chancery, where there is now but one Judge, and his Orders and Decrees
controuling all the Judgments of other Courts, and he therein tied to no other
Rule but his own Conscience, be it good or bad: I think a Chancellor or Keeper
for his own Justification, should not be against the Kings Examining his
Decrees, or Referring them to fit persons to be Examined and Corrected, which
without peradventure is not only the best and surest way for Administration of
Justice in this Case, and so far from setting up an Arbitrary way, or an
Extraordinary Course, that it is but restoring the Court of Equity in Chancery
to its Ancient and Primitive form of Judicature, the definitive Judging there
by the Chancellor alone being but an Innovation upon the Original Institution
of that Court, as appears by what is aforesaid, and to the end there may be no
obstruction in the way, I have inquired how far the King ought by Law to
provide for his Injured Subjects, in case of Appeal to him from Erroneous or
Unjust Decrees in Chancery by a Lord Chancellor or Keeper.

SECT. VIII: Whether the King ought exdebito Justiciae to hear in Person, or to
grant References upon Complaint to him made against Erroneous and Unjust
Decrees in Chancery.
I Have as great Veneration for Kingly Government, and am as Firm and Faithful
to it as any man can be; however I think it no presumption to affirm, that the
King ought to do his Subjects right, by using the best means he may for
administration of Justice amongst them, pertinet ad Regem ad quamlibit injuriam
compescendam competens remedium adhibere. It is no dishnour to him that he is
obliged to it, for it is for that end he is ordained by God and obeyed by men,
it is therein consists the height of his Clory and the luster of his Majesty,
and says Fleta, Fleta fo. 17. par. 15.
Whereas it is so ordained that every man in prosecution of his right, Potius
judicio quam viribus utatur, Should make use of the Law rather than force: The
injured are to come to the King, and having showed him the wrong they have
suffered, he ought to do speedy Justice to his Petitioners; yet the King is not
to be troubled, but when his Ordinary judges fall of their Duty: For, Nemo in
lite Regem appellato nisi quando domi jus consequi non poterit. Orig. Jul. fo.
20.


A Complaint to the King by Petition against the Error and Injustice of a
Chancery Decree, is an Appeal to the King from his Chancellor, from the
Inferior Judge to the Superior, which is very natural; and a Petition to him
for allowance of a Writ of Error, to the House of Lords to inspect and certify
a Judgment of the Court of King's Bench, or Exchequer Chamber; and an Appeal to
the King from his Ecclesiastical Courts, and from the Court of Admirality, are
all grounded upon the same natural Justice; and by reason of the Kings
Supremacy of Jurisdiction, and that as well by force of the Common as Statute
Law.

Of Appeals in general, Sir Edw. Cook cites the Opinion of a Learned Judge of
the Admirality, and some others to this effect, For as much as an Appeal is a
natural defense, it cannot be taken away by any Prince or Power; Cook 's 4
Just. fo. 340.
but if the Appeal be just and lawful, the Superior Judge ought of right and
Equity to receive and admit the same, as he ought to do Justice to the Subject;
and so if the Cause of the Appeal be just and Lawful, he ought to Reverse and
Revoke all mean Acts done after the Appeal brought in prejudice of the
Appeallaent: But I need not much labor that point, for I can Experimentally
say, that His Majesty is very desirous that His Subjects should have the full
and free benefit of the course of Justice, and if any ever fail of it, it ought
not to be imputed to the King, but to his Council, whose advice is the Kings
guide; and if they mis-advise the King, and he follows their advice, he is
excusable; yet he is not bound always to follow their advice, if he be really
satisfied in himself after hearing their reasons, that it ought to be otherwise
than they advise; for as he is placed by God above them, it is to be presumed
God may supply him with a more discerning Spirit than they, and enable him to
distinguish between the best and worst advice, having heard the reasons of
both: Yet they that knowingly advise the King ill, or neglect to advise him
well, when occasion requires, are to blame; therefore I hope His Majesty's
Privy Council will confider of this matter, and advise and desire His Majesty
to take the Advice and Opinion of His Judges, who are His proper Council
therein: For in my poor judgment, and as I have heard from most Judicious men,
the restoring this kind of proceeding aforementioned for Relief against unjust
Decrees in Chancery, and other Courts of Equity, will be as much for the Kings
Honor and His Subjects Good, as any other part of his Jurisdiction: For I say
again, there is no Robbery, Piracy, Burglary, or other Villainy whatsoever, so
mischievous and insupportable, as the unjust taking away of a man's Estate by
color of doing Justice, and therefore most worthy of His Majesty's care to
prevent. Cum Index indulgeat indigno nonne ad prolaptionis contagium provocat
universos, Bract, 107.

I expect to be Censured by some for what is here set down, though I challenge
all mankind to charge me with any misrecital or false quotation; but that which
most troubles me, is my consciousness of my own unability to perform the
matter, least a good Cause should suffer by ill management: However, having
done my best, I hope it will be taken in good part by all Honest men; more I
cannot do, less I durst not for my Oaths sake; and if any be offended with me,
this shall be my Sanctuary,

Fiat Justicia si ruat Coelum. FINIS.

