Nehushtan: OR, A sober and peaceable Discourse, concerning the Abolishing of
things abused to Superstition and Idolatry; Which may serve as one entire, and
sufficient Argument, to evince that the LITVRGY, CEREMONIES, and other things
used at this day in the Church of England, ought neither to be imposed, nor
retained, but utterly extirpated and laid aside: and to vindicate the
NON-CONFORMISTS in their refusal to close with them.

Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3. Ye shall utterly destroy all the places wherein the Nations
which ye shall possess served their gods.

-- Ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their
groves with fire, and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and
destroy the names of them out of that place.

Council. Carthag. 5. can. 15. Item, placuit ab Imperatoribus gloriosissimis
peti, ut reliquiae, non solum in simulachris, sed in quibuscunque locis, vel
lucis, vel arboribus, omnimodo deleantur.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1668.

To the Sober and Ingenuous READER.
IT is the certain and unquestionable duty of every man in his respective place
and calling, to endeavor to the utmost of his power, the preservation and
furtherance of true Religion, and the extirpation and abolishing of what ever
is, or in probability may be, prejudicial thereunto. In consideration and
pursuance hereof, it is that I have penned this Treatise; wherein I have
endeavored from the several Topics and Principles, from which Divines
commonly argue, to evince that all unnecessary things, by whomsoever brought
into the Church, having been grossly abused to Superstition and Idolatry, and by
virtue thereof being apt to scandalize and offend, are for the necessary
preservation of the syncerity of Religion, the safety of men's Souls, and the
peace of the Church, to be abolished and laid aside. This I know, those who are
in love with Popish customs, and stand ill affected to the carrying on of the
work of Reformation, will look upon as Doctrine savouring of Novelty,
Singularity, and Schism; but it is so far from that, that diverse as learned,
Tenenda est haec regula, si quae in abusum venerunt, etc. Zanch. vol. 2. col.
678. Regula est, adiaphora non necessaria, etc. Rivet vol. 1 p. 1346. Laudant
religiosi Theologi regulam, adiaphora non necestaria, etc. Wend Syst. Maj. part
2. c. 6. p. 1641. Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 4. sect. 12. p. (ed. noviss) 115.
sober judicious Divines, as the Protestant Church has afforded, have openly
and constantly maintained it, and still as occasion has been, had recourse to
it, as an undeniable, standing rule, which none without incurring the crime,
laesi principii, may withstand, or gainsay. Nay, some of the most able and
zealous defenders of those scandalous things we have amongst us, have found
themselves so perplexed and tortured with this very Argument, that they have
expressly acknowledged it, the chief weapon made use of against them. Which I
urge not, as if I thought this sufficient to satisfy all dissenters, touching
the validity of it, but as that which I conceive may serve as a proper
expedient, to allay prejudice, and make way for a more ingenuous and candid
weighing of the case; which is all, that I can rationally either expect or
desire. I shall never solicit men to close with this, or any other Principle,
till they are first convinced, and satisfied of the truth and justness of it.
That we must close with the will of God, when revealed to us, there is no
question; but then we must do it, in that method that he has appointed, and in
such a way, as is agreeable to the nature and order of the faculties and powers
he has bestowed on us. We must not first close with a Principle or Opinion,
and then inquire into the soundness of it (that is preposterous) but we must
first inquire into the soundness of it, and then according as the reason
attending it does more or less oblige us, close with it. So that he, who laying
aside prejudice, allows me a serious and fair audience in the present case, and
closes with what I propound in a way proportionable to the reason and evidence
I offer to him, does me all the right I can challenge from him. That this
Argument, has by men both of our own and other Nations, been heretofore urged
against the Relics and Monuments of Superstition and Idolatry yet remaining
in the Church, I readily grant; but by none that I know of, in so clear and
full a manner, as the weight and usefulness of it calls for. Those who have
gone the furthest, and said the most of it, have left it in straights and
troubles, laboring under those obscurities and objections, which their
handling of it in a transient way, in the midst of other Arguments, would not
give them leave to deliver it from. Now these I have taken care to meet with
and endeavored to dispel and remove. I have consulted Saravia, Dr. Burgess,
Dr. Pridoaux, Dr. Hammond, with other of the best Authors that I know of, who
have appeared against it, and perused their exceptions, and there is not any,
if I am not much mistaken, which I have not fully answered. If any upon their
entering on the Treatise, and reading the several particulars, which I contend
upon their being abused ought to be laid aside, think I express my self in too
large and general terms, I desire them to weigh the Scriptures and proofs
alleged: and in case those satisfy not, to suspend their censure till they
come to the limitations, and the answering of the Objections; in the management
whereof, I have endeavored to restrain preceding expressions, that seemed too
full and large, to their just extent and bounds (which I could not well do,
before) and removed all scruples, and exceptions of any weight, that have
preposterously, or otherwise, been taken up against the present truth. The
disadvantage it may undergo through the insufficiency of the instrument, in
whose hands it is, to manage it in that exact way, wherein it should be
handled, must needs be great; however, upon serious inquiry into it, and
impartial weighing of what I find is, or I conceive may be, alleged for, and
against it, I am very confident, that being duly weilded and improved, it will
afford sufficient strength to batter down all the fortifications, those who
preside in the Church, or their Assistants, can erect in defense of those
abused and scandalous things which they do with so much zeal contend for, and
with so much rigor impose on the Ministers and People of these Nations, to the
begetting of most lamentable discords amongst his Majesty's Subjects, and the
exposing of us to the certain undergoing of those evils, which the peaceablest
reception, and highest improvement of them, would never countervail. For my own
part, I am so well satisfied with what I maintain, that were there no other
argument against Conformity than this one (whereas it is well known there are
multitudes more, which never were, nor never will, be answered any otherwise
than the Papists answer us about other things of the like nature, that we have
cast off) I should never, I think, he Conformist. But I shall not offer to
impose my belief on others: let them read, and then do as they find cause. As
for what some may allege, that these matters have been insisted on long
enough: it is a frivolous pretense, savouring of lukewarmness and carnal
oscitancy. How can it be imagined such things have been insisted on long
enough, when as they still remain as stumbling blocks and snares to overthrow
ignorant and unstable Souls? We proceed otherwise, in matters of less danger,
and importance. So long as the wound continues, we apply the plaster; and so
long as the fire remains, we cast on water. And if such constant sedulity, be
allowable and necessary in lower matters, why should it not be thought so in
higher? Let those who have power once remove offensive things out of the way,
and we have done; but till then, they may make account that witness will be
born against them. What opposition has by good men been made against such
things, what influence the retaining of them has had toward the begetting of
our unhappy distractions, who are to be blamed, Non negarim multos initio, pio
studio ad acricrem reprehensionem quorundam manifestotum abusuum impulsos
fuisse, etc. Consult. art. 7. p. 56.
and what course is to be taken for our cure, I shall give you an account of,
in those sober words of Cassander, a moderate and learned Papist. I shall not
(says he) deny but many in the beginning, were by a pious study moved to a
sharper reprehension of manifest abuses, and that the chief cause of this
calamity and distraction of the Church, is to be charged upon those who being
puffed up with ambition of Ecclesiastical power, have proudly and disdainfully
contemned and repelled those who have duly and modestly admonished them.
Wherefore I conceive there is no firm peace to be expected to the Church unless
those begin who have given the occasion of the distraction, that is, unless
those who preside in Ecclesiastical Government, do remit something of their
rigor, and yield somewhat for the Churches peace; and complying with the
desires and admonitions of many pious persons, correct manifest abuses,
according to the rule of the Divine Scriptures, and the ancient Church, from
which they have turned aside. These words Conradus Vorstius, though none of the
soundest men, thought so remarkable, that he has set them down on the back
side of the Title Page to his Enchiridion-Controversiarum. Would those who are
over us resent the maladies, under which we labor, but even as this Papist
did, we might hope our distractions and troubles were nearer to an issue.
However, we must go on in giving our testimony, and offering our requests and
reasons for the removal of what offends; and though the success be not
answerable to our desires, yet we shall have this to comfort us, that we have
done our duty.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect. 1. p. 1. THe Introduction. Of High Places. Two sorts of them. Used by
the Patriarchs. Lawful till the erection of the Tabernacle. Sacrifice limited
to the Tabernacle, except some extraordinary case occurred. Reason for it. The
abuse of the High Places. The abolishing of them. Of Images, or Statues among
the Jews. Two sorts of them. The unlawfulness of the latter sort, with the
removal thereof. Of Groves. Their Original. One eminent above the rest. Both
Jews and Heathens dote on them. In what sense it is said a Grove was in the
Temple. They are cut down. Of the Brazen Serpent. The occasion, use, and
benefit of it. The abuse and removal of it. Nehushtan what. The General
Doctrine. The eminency of Hezekiahs zeal in removing offensive things, held
forth in six particulars.

Sect. 2. p. 20.The Method propounded. The point proved. God deals with his
people by way of precepts, promises, threatenings, commendations, reproofs,
rewards, punishments, to provoke them to remove abused things. The concurrent
judgments of Foreign, Orthodox Writers for it. Musculus, Farell, Rivet, urged
more particularly. The Church of England for it. Bishop Jewel, Bishop Andrews,
the Book of Homilies, the Preface to the Liturgy, for it. The Statute Law for
it. The Canon Law for it. An argument a minori ad majus. Several Officers and
Orders of persons removed upon less grounds, than superstition and idolatry. Of
Love Feasts. Of the Kiss of Charity. How used in Religious assemblies. Of
Vigils. Of Sanctuaries for offenders. All, for their abuse removed.

Sect. 3. p. 44.Idolatrous persons to be punished. Two sorts of them aimed at
in an especial manner by Moses. The Law severe against them. The Chemarims who.
Magistrates are to distinguish betwixt some Idolaters, and others. What course
they are to take with the Papists. Whether Hezekiah executed the Law upon those
who burned incense to the Brazen Serpent.

Sect. 4. p. 51.Abused Names must be abolished. In what sense we may take the
Names of false gods into our mouths. Why God would not be called Baali. Such as
give abused Names to their Children, Horses, Dogs, nay to the Officers and
Ordinances of Christ, censured. What course we must take when we are to speak
of such persons or things, as have abused and scandalous Names. Erasmus,
Politian, Lipsius, Castellio, blamed. Whether the Psalmist in that passage,
Kiss the son, alluded to the Custom of the Heathens? Dr. Sanderson advises to
beware of offensive passages. Aquinas does the like. Bellarm. in his old age,
declared against the use of the word Divus. Pope Sylvester altered the names of
the days, and why.

Sect. 5. p. 60.Abused Times must be abolished. It has been the manner of
superstitious and idolatrous people, to set apart certain times in the honor
of their Deities. So Jeroboam, Belshazzar, the Romans. Why the Apostles
abolished the Jewish Festivals. Why the ancient Church would not observe the
Calend of January, Play-dayes in the beginning of the Spring, nor Easter at the
usual time. Mr. Hookers argument for Holy Days, retorted.

Sect. 6. p. 62.Abused Places, to be abolished. Why God chose the form of an
Ark. The Israelites strictly enjoined to destroy all the places wherein the
Canaanites had committed then abominations. Why God forsook Shiloh. Why he
would not suffer the Jews to come to Bethel, and slew the Prophet for doing it
Why he cast off the Tabernacle. The zeal of the good Kings of Judah in
destroying abused places. Two sorts of Religious High Places The zeal of
Magistrates of latter times in pulling down Heathenish Temples, Popish Abbeys,
Monasteries, commended. Danger in suffering such places to remain, but safety
in removing them. The doubt touching the returning of our Churches, and
Chapels, heretofore abused by the Papists, answered. The case of Cathedrals,
and such unnecessary buildings, different. Beza's judgment. Abused utensils,
such as Altars, Images, and other instruments of Idolatry, to be laid aside.
Express precepts in the Word for it. The practice of good men, both in former
and latter times. Abused rites must be abolished Grotius his opinion about the
abolishing of the Mosaical Ceremonies. Of washing of hands before meat: Of
Trin-immersion in Baptism. The judgment of Pelican, Calvin, Beza, Lyra.

Sect. 7. p. 83.The removing of abused things, does in an eminent manner belong
to the Civil Magistrate. His power in matters of Religion. Some give him too
little; others, too much. Distinctions about authority. That it belongs to the
Civil Magistrate to remove offensive things, proved in six particulars. Why the
Israelites were to bring Idolaters to the gates of the City. The want of a good
Magistrate, the occasion of Micahs Idolatry. Two exceptions against the
Magistrates power, answered. The judgment of diverse Churches, and Persons in
the case. What is to be done in case the Magistrate refuse or neglect to
perform is Office in this particular. Augustines judgment. Pope Sylvesters
decree, censured. What we are to think of Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, Nicolaus,
Theodorus, and others, who without any order from the Civil Power, took upon
them the demolishing of abused things. The judgment of Zanchy, Beza, Voetius.

Sect. 8. p. 98. How abused things must be removed, showed in six particulars.
The readiness of Jacobs family to part with their Earrings. The willingness of
the Jewish Exorcists, to deliver up their Conjuring books. The value of them.
Our ends in such undertakings must be right. Superstitious, Idolatrous things,
must be handled with scorn and indignation. What disgraceful terms the
Scripture gives Idols. We must be impartial. The work must be managed in a way
proportionable to the sin and scandal committed. We must do it thoroughly. Why
Jacob hid the Idols of his Relations under an Oak. The integrity of Moses,
Asah, Josiah, Hezekiah, herein.

Sect. 9. p. 109. When abused things must be abolished. It concerns us to make
haste in the business. The eminent forwardness of David, Hezekiah, Josiah.

Sect. 10. p. 111. Why abused things must be laid aside, showed in six
particulars. They are abominable. Mr. Hooker confesses that Communion with
Idolaters is to be avoided. The opinion of Maimonides, Calvin, Dr.
Stillingfleet, touching the reason of Gods forbidding several things to the
Israelites, that were used by the Canaanites. The distance the
antient-Christians stood at, from the Heathens. Maccovius, peremptory against
communion with Idolaters in indifferent things. Aquinas his reasons to the
contrary, without weight. Mr. Hooker and Paybody answered, by Gillespy. The
holiness and honor of Gods worship, to be maintained. We must labor to
prevent abuses for the future. Manasses his error. Constantine, guilty of the
like. Grotius his opinion, in case the abuse become customary. Abused things
must be removed, lest they entice. Images, why called, strange Gods. Idols, why
called, Lovers. They are apt to entice. What Calvin, and Zanchy thought of the
relics of Popish Idolatry.

Sect. 11. p. 123.The Point limited and bounded. Necessary things
notwithstanding abuse, are to be maintained. Of Gods own Ordinances. Of his
good creatures. Of meat offered to Idols. Scandal must be avoided. Of the
profitable devices of men. Of the Vessels of the Temple, defiled by
Nebuchadnezzar. Of the Temple it self. Of the Jewish water pots. Of our
Churches, and Chapels. Of things slightly abused. Of things more grossly
abused, in case there be no danger for the future.

Sect. 12. p. 131. Objections made by several Authors, answered. 1. Ob.
insisted by Mr. Hooker, concerning the nature of the precepts given to the
Israelites about the extirpating of Idolatry, answered. 2. Obj. insisted on by
Saravia, answered. Its not sufficient that retaining the use of abused things,
we separate them from the abuse. 3. Obj. urged by Dr. John Burgess, answered.
Things that for the present have no bad use made of them, may in time, have.
Whether Solomon did abolish the Idols he suffered to be set up in his life
time, or whether Hezekiah did it, or whether it were done by Josiah. Salianus
his judgment. 4. Obj. made use of likewise by Dr. Burgess, answered. Preaching
against the abuse of things, not sufficient to prevent it. 5. Obj. offered by
Bishop Lindsey, answered. Though the abuse proceed not from the nature of the
things themselves, yet being abused they are to be laid aside. 6. Obj. insisted
on by Bellarmine, and Dr. Hammond, answered. It does not follow from what has
been said, that necessary things, being abused, are to be abolished. 7. Obj.
urged by Bishop Morton, answered. The Scripture does not either directly, or
indirectly hold forth to us a liberty of retaining abused, unnecessary things.
8. Obj. made use of by Dr. Burgess, answered. The Scripture does not afford us
any approved instances of the use of abused, unnecessary things. 9. Obj.
answered. The abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, does not yield us any liberty
to use such things. What liberty we have thereby. 10. Obj. answered. The abused
things amongst us, do offend both Papists and Protestants. 11. Obj. insisted on
by Bishop Andrews, Dr. Burgess, Dr. Prideaux, answered. What has been alleged
obliges us to lay aside not only the same individual, numerical things that
have been abused, but those of the same kind.

Sect. 13. p. 153.The first Use, for confutation, and conviction, 1 Of the
Papists. Why the Holy Ghost calls them Gentiles. Several Writers mentioned, who
have set down their agreement in many things of their Religion, with Heathens.
Their Leaders encourage them therein. Their practice herein, against the
judgment of the Ancients. 2. Of many amongst our selves. As the Papists
symbolize in many things with Heathens, so we symbolize with the Papists. The
2. Use, for exhortation. What has been said should engage our hearts against
such things amongst us as have been abused. Things abused to Idolatry,
abominable. Upon what grounds Moses pretended to Pharaoh, that they were to
Sacrifice such creatures to the Lord as the Egyptians worshipped, when as the
Law about Sacrifices was not yet delivered. We must decline the use of abused
things. Wherefore the Israelites would not Sacrifice to the Lord in the Land of
Egypt, nor the Jews in Babylon. The case of Naamans bowing in the house of
Rimmon, discussed, and he evinced to be a true Convert. In what cases we may
appear before an Idol, showed in 7. particulars. Of Daniels abstinence. The
change Ephraims conversion wrought on him. Tertullians judgment about keeping
at a distance from Idols. The hatred of modern Jews to Idols. We must do our
endeavor to root out abused things. What things amongst us, we are upon the
account of their abuse to endeavor the extirpation of. Of the present Liturgy.
What King Edw. 6. said of it. King James, his opinion of it. What the late
Assembly of Divines alleged against it. A comparison betwixt it, and the
brazen serpent. Of the sign of the Cross, How Voetius, and Mr. Bradshaw,
disputed against it. Of the Surplice. Zanchy thought the abuse, a sufficient
reason, wherefore it should be laid aside. Of Kneeling at the Sacrament. The
principal reason, Voetius alleges against it. Worshipping toward the East.
Voetius his reason against it. Of Holy Days, The reason rendered by Bucer,
Rivet, Capellus, Wendeline, Hospinian, against them.

Sect. 14. p. 187. Considerations tending to excite good men to endeavor the
abolishing of the forementioned abused things. Good men zealous against the
occasions of Idolatry. Godly sorrow is attended with indignation and revenge.
Why Rabanus thought Solomon no true penitent. The opinion of learned men,
touching his state. Not to endeavor the extirpation of such things, is to go
against clear light: and to give offense. The Holy Ghost calls the Idols of
Ephraim (...). The late Bishop Hall contradictory to himself. If we do not
endeavor the abolishing of such things, but make use of them, we shall
occasion good men to separate from us, and God to cast us off. The godly Jews
might not come near the idolatrous Israelites. The divorce of the ten Tribes.
Uncertain what is become of them.

READER,
THou art desired to take notice, that whereas the Author in pursuance of the
Method propounded to himself, intended the having of new Sections in p. 74, 78,
158. the making of them, through inadvertency, was neglected. As for literal
mistakes, thy indulgence is requested. These more considerable ones, thou
may thus amend.

Marg. P. 29. l. 17. for chapter 20. r. p. 20. p. 35. for 2 Cor. r. 1 Cor.

Book. P. 13. l. 31. for as, r. is. p. 21. l. 7. for 2. r. 1. p. 38. l. 3. for
2, r. 3. p. 58. l. 16. for Sun, r. Son.

2 Kings 18.4. He removed the high Places, and brake the Images, and cut down
the Groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent, that Moses had made: For
unto those days, the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it; and he called
it Nehushtan.


Sect. 1.
THough God be the undoubted Lord and King of the World, having imperial and
supreme Dominion over all Nations and Territories whatsoever, yet inregard he
is a Spirit, and of a nature too high and holy, to be conversant in an ordinary
and familiar way, with such stupid, impure creatures, as the sons of men are,
he is pleased, (reserving a due Prerogative, and constant Providence to
himself) to commit the outward Government of it to persons fitly qualified, and
lawfully called thereunto. For the better management whereof, he has framed
many just and wholesome Laws, set down in his Word, which he has delivered
into their hands, strictly charging and commanding them to order all their
administrations and proceedings, in a way answerable to the same. Though he set
them on high, and give them pre-eminence and authority, over their brethren,
yet he lets them know they have their Commission from him, are his servants,
and must be accountable to him; and upon this ground wills them to keep close
to the rule he has given them to walk by, and to lay out themselves with all
integrity and diligence for him. And it is the property of all such amongst
those whom he thus deputes and entrusts, to do it. Considering what obligations
of obedience and faithfulness they lie under, they employ themselves, their
parts, authority, interests, and all for him, endeavoring by all means to
please him, and be serviceable to him. And in order hereunto they take care
that his appointments be observed, that offensive things be removed, that what
is out of order be redressed, and that Religion be set up in its greatest
purity and vigor throughout their Dominions. An illustrious example hereof we
have in this place in King Hezekiah, who no sooner comes to the Throne, but he
falls upon the work of Reformation, with all zeal and diligence. He does not
only purge his Royal Palace, most lamentably defiled with his Fathers
impurities, but he also cleanses the Nation, which was in like manner
overspread therewith, abolishes strange worship, destroys the Instruments and
Monuments of Idolatry, and roots out whatever he finds contrary to the Law.

Having by this brief Prologue, lead you to the words, I shall, before I come
to the point I intend to insist on, say somewhat by way of Explication.

1. He removed the high Places. The word (...) is used in Scripture to denote
two sorts of high places, civil and religious. By the former, we are to
understand such places as being higher than ordinary, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Isa. 58.14.
Hab. 3.19.
and above the common level, had strong and stately buildings erected on them,
both for defense and delight By the latter, we are to understand certain
Mountains and Hills that the Israelites used to perform solemn Devotions and
Services upon. That you may the better conceive of this, you are to note, that
the ancient Patriachs, when neither Temple, Tabernacle, nor Synagogue was
built, did by direction from God himself betake themselves to such places as
these, to celebrate their Sacrifices, Prayers, Thanksgivings, Meditations, and
such like religious duties upon. Some places they must needs have for these
uses, and they rather made choice of these than other, both because they were
nearer to Heaven (to which every good man labors to get as nigh as he can) and
were also freer from those molestations and distractions, that places which are
lower, and of common resort, are liable to. An instance of this, we have in
Abram, Genesis 12.8.
who in obedience to Gods command having left Vr of the Chaldees, the place of
his Nativity, and being come to the Plain of Moreh, in the Land of Canaan, he
removes from thence into a Mountain on the East of Bethel, and builds there an
Altar to the Lord, and calls upon his Name. The like we find done by him and
others, in other places. Genesis 22.2, 9.31.54.
This course God was pleased to allow his people for a season, till he had made
choice of one peculiar place where he would cause his Name to dwell. And this
is alleged as something toward excusing the peoples sacrificing in the high
places in the beginning of Solomon's reign, 1 Kings 3.2.
that till then there was no house built to the Name of the Lord. But though it
excused in part, yet not in whole, and that for this cause, that as soon as the
Tabernacle was built, God expressly forbad it: What man soever (says he) there
be of the house of Israel, Lev. 17.3, 4.
that kills an Ox, or Lamb, or Goat, in the camp; or that kills it out of
the camp, and brings it not to the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation
-- Blood shall be imputed to him. Here he instructs the people concerning
sacrifice, which he limits two ways.

1. In respect of the Person that was to kill and offer it, who was to be a
Priest only. He speaks not here of killing beasts for common food, for that
others might do, as their necessities required: But for sacrifice, and that he
will have none to do but the Priests. And this was a very prudent limitation,
not only for the preserving of order, but likewise for the preventing of
Idolatry; for if every man amongst that people who were so prone to that sin,
might have had liberty at pleasure to have killed beasts, and offered them,
they would have turned almost every place into a Temple, every stone into an
Altar, and every beast into a Sacrifice. For the prevention whereof, God makes
this Ordinance, that whosoever, or whenever any of the house of Israel was
minded to offer a Sacrifice to him, he should bring it to the Priest, and by
him tender it to him.

2. In respect of the place, where it was to be killed and offered, and that
was before the door of the Tabernacle. He would have the people not only take
care that they usurped not the Priests Office, but likewise that they brought
their Sacrifices to the Tabernacle, which was the place he appointed them to
have recourse to, Ps. 110.4. Heb. 9.11. Deuteronomy. 12.13.
and ordained to be a special type of his Son, who is both our Priest and
Tabernacle. Answerable to this is that we find in another place; take heed
(says he) to thy self that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place
that thou s^est, but in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy
Tribes. It Is true, he did after this, allow them in some special cases to kill
and offer in other places, 1 Samuel 11.15. 2 Samuel 24.18. 1 Kings 18.23.
and they adventured upon it. Samuel did it in Gilgal, David on the threshing
floor of Araunah the Jebusite, Elijah upon Carmel, and that without any reproof
or blame, nay with eminent approbation and acceptance. But this I say was only
in some special extraordinary cases, wherein they were both directed, and moved
by the Spirit of God himself (who may when, and as often as he pleases, dispense
with his own Law) and so was no rule for ordinary practice. However the
Israelites either misunderstanding the Law (which yet being so express and
clear, one would think they should scarcely have done) or else out of a
superstitious imitation of their Ancestors, did not only after the building of
the Tabernacle, but the Temple likewise, upon every trivial occasion, betake
themselves to high places, 1 Kings 11.7. Apud Ethnicos quoque Zenonis
Philosophi and Stoicorum. etc. Hospin. de Orig. Temp. c. 1. p. 1. Mundus
universus est templum Solis. Alexand. ab Alexandro, l. 2. c. 22. fol. 92.
offer Sacrifice and worship in them. Solomon himself, who was the very man
that built the Temple, and dedicated it to the peculiar use for which it was
designed, was guilty hereof; and so were many Kings both of Israel and Judah,
to the high provokeing of God, and the drawing down of his just indignation and
wrath upon them.

And if we consult the Ancient Heathens, we shall find that they took the same
course: they did not stand to build Temples as latter ages have done, but
betaking themselves to the open Mountains, they there celebrated their
devotions to their respective Deityes. Nay, they did not only not build
Temples, but thought it unlawful to do it; the reason whereof was probably
this, That worshipping the Sun, which they looked upon as their chief God, they
thought no Temple would comprehend it: nay, they were so far from thinking they
could build an Edifice suitable to it, that they accounted the whole world
little enough to be a Temple for it. Hence that saying; the universal world is
the Temple of the Sun. And though in aftertimes they fell to the use of
Temples, yet they still had them upon high places, from whence their Gods and
Goddesses took their Names, as Jupiter Capitolinus, Mercurius Cyllenius, Venus
Erycina, and the like. Whether the Heathens betook themselves to these high
places in imitation of the Jews, or the Jews in compliance with them, I shall
not here inquire; certain it is that they both used them; and as certain that
Hezekiah out of the zeal he bore to God, did so far as his Dominions extended
remove them: which yet we are not to understand, as if he removed the Mouutains
or Hills themselves, but that he demolished such buildings and works, as were
made upon them, for the carrying on of their Sacrifices, Oblations, and other
Services there performed. The word (...), See Buxt. in voc. Menoch. de Rep.
Heb. l. 2. c. 7.
as diverse show, does not only signify high or lofty places, taken strictly,
but also the Temples, Chapels, Altars, that were erected on them. Hence we
find that some versions of good authority, render it by words of such
particular signification. The Syriack renders it altaria; the Arabic, aras. In
as much then, as it is said that Hezekiah removed the high places, the meaning
is, that he demolished the Temples, Chapels, Altars, with such other works as
were made on them, whereby he rendered them for the future unfit for that ill
use which was made of them.

2. He brake the Images. The word (...) which our Translation renders Image,
Pagnine, Montanus, Tremellius, Junius turn Statuas. Now Statues among the
Israelites, were (as well as the high places) of two sorts, Civil and
Religious. The former were only pillars or heaps of stone, erected for
preserving the civil and necessary remembrance of persons or things. Of this
nature was that which Jacob set up over the Sepulcher of Rachel; and likewise
that which he set up in remembrance of the Covenant he entered into with Laban:
Genesis 35.20.31.45.
And these were both lawful and commerdable. The latter were artificial
representations of God and Idols carved in wood, or cut in stone, or cast in
some metal, such as Brass, Silver, Gold, and after set up in high places.
Temples, and elsewhere, for religious use. Of this sort were the Images which
the Soldiers of Jehu found in the house of Baal; 2 Kings 10.26.
for such was the superstition of the Israclites, that though God had told them
he was a Spirit, 1 Kings 8.27. Deuteronomy. 4.15.19.
infinite and incomprehensible, and that he had not at such times as he most
solemnly spoke to them, taken upon him any visible form; and though he had
charged them, and that in express terms, over and over again, that they should
not make any Image of him, or any other thing, and for this reason, lest they
should thereby be led to the worship of the Creature: Exodus 32.1.
yet they would not be satisfied, but being a sensual people, would have such
Gods as they might see. Instead of contenting themselves with that one God who
had done such great things for them, they must have many, and not only so, but
they must have visible representations of them; they must have their Statues
and Images which they set up in their high places and worshipped. Now these
were utterly uniawful, and therefore Hezekiah lighting on them, takes them and
breaks them in pieces.

3. He cut down the Groves. Our translation following the septuagint and vulgar
Latin, turn it in the piural form, Groves; but the wo^^^ (...) is singular, and
therefore Ing^^ine, Montanus, and others, do render it by a word of that
number. Though Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.1.
as appears from what is elsewhere mentioned, cut down many Groves, yet there
seems to have been one, that had some peculiar eminency in it above the rest,
which the Holy Ghost here speaks with reference to. Though there were many
Images in the house of Baal, 2 Kings 10.26.27.
yet there was one that did in an eminent manner bear his name above the rest;
and so I conceive it was in this case: though there were many Groves that fell
under Hezekiahs religious severity, yet there was one that the Holy Ghost had
his eye upon above the rest, which he intends in this place. Now for the
original of Groves, the ancient Patriarchs, before God had limited his Church
to any particular place of worship, seem to have been the first users of them.
When they were minded to draw near to him, Genesis 18.4, 8.21.33.
and wait on him in the more solemn discharge of duties, they betook themselves
to Groves. Thus Abram diverse times. The advantages they received from these
Groves were various; they secured them from the injuries of the weather,
furnished them with wood for Sacrifice, (in the choice whereof, Genesis 22.3, 6.
they were more than ordinarily curious, as seems to be held forth in Abrams
carrying wood with him three days when he went to Moriah to offer Isaac) and
also rendered their devotions more private and reverent. In imitation of the
Patriarchs, its likely the Heathens made use of them, in the service of their
Idols. The Cananites had of them in such abundance, that almost wheresoever you
find mention of their Idols, you find mention also of their Groves. From them
the Israelites took them, and notwithstanding all that God had said to them to
destroy them, and bring their Sacrifices to the Tabernacle, yet they frequented
them, nay even doted on them. They termed the Prophets of the high places, 1
Kings 18.19.
Prophets of the Groves: And further to express their respect to them they made
Images of them, which they removed from place to place, and upon all occasions
viewed with great delight. Amongst other things that aggravated the folly, and
wickedness of Manasses, this is one, that he set a graven Image of the Grove
which he made, 2 Kings 21.7.
in the house of the Lord. And this makes plain that otherwise dark passage
concerning Josiah, that he brought out the grove, from the house of the Lord.
Genesis 33.19. Job. 42.11.
As the Holy Ghost styles the pieces of Money that Jacob gave to the Children
of Hamor, and Jobs relations gave to him, with the form of a Lamb impressed on
them (...) Lambs, and the Medals that Demetrius made, with the form of Diana's
Temple impressed on them, Acts 19.24.
(...) Silver Temples or Shrines; so he here styles that which was but an Image
of the Grove, the Grove it self. And not thinking it sufficient to have the
Images of them, they yielded worship to them. They did not only serve the Idols
that were in the Groves, but also (...) the Groves themselves. Nay, Judge. 3.7.
how they were besotted with them, and what veneration they had them in, we may
learn from the word (...) it self, derived of (...) signifying blessedness;
intimating that they counted them blessed things, sought blessedness in them,
and looked upon themselves in a sort blessed, in the enjoyment of them. But all
their zeal to them, would not work Hezekiah to a liking of them; no, he was so
far from that, that following the direction of the Law of Moses; he cuts them
down, Deuteronomy. 12.2.
and levels them with the ground.

4. He brake in pieces the brazen Serpent: What this brazen Serpent was, upon
what account it was made, and what use it was of, you may learn from the
History of Gods proceedings with the Israelites in the Wilderness. Number. 21.4.
As they journeyed from Mount Hor by the red Sea, to compass the Land of Edom,
being distressed with the way, they fell to a reviling, not only of Moses, but
God himself, demanding (as they used to do in their froward murmuring fits)
wherefore he brought them up out of Egypt to die in the Wilderness. Herewith
God being provoked and displeased, sends Serpents amongst them, 1 Cor. 10 9.
which so bit and stung them, that many of them died. He sures their punishment
to their sin. Their sin was of an high and grievous nature, and their
punishment was answerable; for they were not ordinary Serpents, they had to
deal with; but such as were of an unusual heat and fierceness, whose sting did
so inflame and burn them, as if fire it self had been got within them; for
which cause the Holy Ghost calls them (...) fiery or burning Serpents. Now
being in this distress, they go to Moses confess their fault, and entreat his
prayers for the removal of this sad judgment, which he no sooner puts up to
God in their behalf, but he appoints him to make a fiery Serpent, that is, one
like to burning fire, and set it upon a Pole before all Israel, promising that
whosoever was bitten and looked up thereunto, should be healed. Moses forthwith
obeys his command, makes a Serpent, sets it upon a Pole, and such as were
stung, looking up, received the benefit promised.

It then being of so much use and advantage to them, there was good reason they
should both respect and preserve it, which they not only did, daring their
continuance in the Wilderness, but likewise after their settlement in the Land
of Canaan, even down to the days of Hezekiah. But herein they missed it, that
not contenting themselves with showing what respect was due to it, as an
instrument and and monument of their miraculous cure, they fell to burn incense
to it, and worship it as if it had been a Deity; which evil Hezekiah taking
notice of, labors to redress it, and in order thereunto takes it, and breaks
it in pieces. Though he knew it was originally of Divine appointment, See
Rainolds de Romans Eccl. Idol. l. 1. c. 2. Sect. 2. p. 69. 72.
was made by Moses that eminent servant of God, was an instrument of many
miraculous cures, and a Memorial of Gods great goodness showed therein, and had
continued so for a long season; though he knew it might have been of great use
to mind them of their former distress, and Gods great goodness showed therein,
and stir them up to love, thank, praise, and serve him; Nay though he knew it
might have been a great means of winning others to their religion, was a type
of Christ; yet when he saw they Idolized it, he took it, and brake it in
pieces. He deals not with it as Moses dealt with Aarons Rod, lay it in the
Tabernacle (for therein, M. Caw drey and Palmer Sabb. Rediv. part. 1. p. 51.
notwithstanding the common opinion, some judicious men think he put it, and
not in the Ark) but takes it, and breaks it in pieces, and calls it Nehushtan.
The Syriack and Arabic render the verb by our Translation turned, called, in
the plural form, as if, not Moses but the Israelites, had called it Nehushtan;
but the Hebrew (...) as evidently in the singular; and therefore Pagnine,
Montanus, and the stream of good Interpreters render it by a word of that
number. See A Lapid. in Number. 21 Estins in 2 Reg. 18 4. Rainolds de Idol. Rom
Eccl. l. 1. c. 6. Sect. 5. p. 244. Rivet. vol. 3. Cath. Orth. p. 169.
Now this Nebushtan is a diminutive from (...) signifying aenulum, or a little
piece of brass; so that Hezekiah in giving it this Name did as much, as if he
had said to the Jews, what a foolish people are ye? do you think such a
despicable thing as this, has any Divinity in it? do ye think this is a God?
do ye think this is fit to have incense burnt to it? Though God who can work
glorious effects by the weakest and unlikeliest instruments, was pleased for a
time to accomplish wonderful cures by it, yet you must not think it was able to
do any such thing it self. It was no more able of it self to do it, than Moses
staff was able of it self to fetch Water out of the Rock. It was no more able
of it self to afford relief to such as were stung, than the very Pole was
whereon it stood. Alas you are quite mistaken in your apprehensions of it: it
is no such thing as you judge it is; it is but a piece of ordinary Metal, it is
nothing but a little piece of brass.

And thus I have not only lead you to the words, but with what brevity I could
conveniently, explained them to you. They contain a summary account of
Hezekiahs proceedings in purging his Kingdom, and restoring true religion which
had suffered so much in the days of his Father. Now what he is here said to
have done, being both approved and commended by God, and so having the force of
a precept, I shall raise from the words this point.

That it is the will and pleasure of God, Doct.
that such things as have been abused and polluted in superstitious and
idolatrous services, should be abolished and laid aside. When Hezekiah came to
the Kingdom, and cast his eyes upon the high places, images, groves, brazen
serpent, with other things of that nature, and saw that they were abused and
polluted in being made instruments of sinful practices, he presently falls upon
them, and destroys them. He stands not making excuses, and pleading that they
were things in themselves innocent and lawful; that though they were abused, it
was not the fault of the things themselves, but of the persons the abused them;
that they had been devised ^^d used in ancient times, and that by good and holy
men; or that if they were abused, care must be taken to separate the abuse from
the use: I say he stands not reasoning thus, as many, who wanting his spirit,
do in the behalf of things of the like, nay of a more despicable Nature; but
judging the abolishing of them the most proper and effectual way to secure the
glory of God, and prevent the evil likely to be committed by them, he removes
them, cuts them down, breaks them in pieces, and thereby rids his Kingdom of
them: which will appear more remarkable if you consider;

1. 2 Kings 16.3.
What kind of person his Father Ahaz was; he was a superstitious, idolatrous,
impious man, who declining the religious steps of his Father Jotham, forsook
the Lord, walked in the way of the Kings of Israel, made his Son to pass
through the fire, sacrificed and burned incense in the high places, and on the
hills, and under every green tree. So far was he from inheriting his Fathers
virtues, that he prostituted himself to all manner of wickedness, in the
practice whereof, he grew in time to such a degree of wilfulness and obstinacy,
that punishment it self would not take him off it, but made him worse; so that
the more he was punished, the more he transgressed. Hereof the Holy Ghost
taking notice, was so highly displeased with him, that he has stigmatized him
with a mark of perpetual infamy, and hanged him up, as it ^^^e in chains, that
so all who read the Scriptures may tremble before Divine Justice, and carefully
avoid the sins he was guilty of; 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
This (says he) is that King Ahaz. Hereby you see what kind of a person
Hezekiahs Father was; he was a man of prodigious wickedness, a mere vassal and
slave to his lusts, idols, nay to the Devil himself. And how hard a thing is it
for a Son to be good that has been brought up in the family of such a Father?
The pravity and corruption we derive from our Parents is so strong and
prevalent, that we readily close with such instructions and examples as are
bad, but vigorously decline those which are good; ard therefore for a good
Father to have a bad Son, is not much to be thought at; but for a bad Father to
have a good Son, is no less than a wonder. What a wonder then have we here
before us? Vt hic omnes Reges Judae impietate superavit, sic ille pietate
excelluit. in loc. Joh. 3.8.
For there was not any King of Judah that had a worse Father than Hezekiah had
of Ahaz, nor any Father that had a better Son than Ahaz had of Hezekiah. As the
one (says Pareus) exceeded all the Kings of Judah in impiety, so the other
exceeded them in piety. What therefore he did, is not to be ascribed to Nature,
which in him, must needs be supposed to lie under the greatest disadvantages,
but to the spirit of God, who like the wind blows where he lists, and works
where and how he pleases.

2. What order the Court and Kingdom were in when his Father died. His Father
reigned sixteen years, during which time, he prosecuted his sinful courses with
great zeal and diligence, omitting nothing whereby he might corrupt his people,
and alienate them from the ways of God. And what influence this had upon them,
its easy to imagine. Which way soever the great Cedars fall, they tear the
litttle shrubs with them. Such as the King is, such is the Kingdom. If Rehoboam
forsake the Law of the Lord, all Israel does so too. 2 Chronicles: 12.1.
If Alexander carry his head on the one side, his Soldiers do the like. Ahaz
therefore reigning sixteen years, and being so wicked as he was, we may well
suppose the Court and Kingdom were in a sad condition, when Hezekiah came to
the Crown.

3. What condition the ten Tribes that were so near to the Jews, both in
respect of alliance and habitation, were then in. Idolatry was not only
permitted amongst them, 1 Kings 12.32.
but established by a royal ordinance, bearing date from the days of Jeroboam
down to this very time, See Helv. Theat. Hist. p. 44.54. Labbe de script. Eccl.
p. 460.462.
which, according to the judgment of Chronologers, was betwixt two and three
hundred years. And this we may well think would be matter of no good
consequence to the Jews, who were so exceeding prone to it of themselves; but
would make them willinger to close with it when it came among them, and lother
to part with it, after they had yielded to it.

4. What age Hezekiah was, when he set upon this great and eminent work: he was
then but twenty five years old; and at that age, daily observation tells us,
men, especially they that are of such high birth and education, as Princes and
Nobles be, are commonly addicted to those youthful exercises, recreations and
delights, that further progress in years, uses to wean them from. Then Nature
is strong and heady, and hard to be kept within its banks. How pious and
upright was Job? Job. 13.26. Psalm. 25.7.
How holy and faithful was David? yet in their Youth they did not govern and
carry themselves as they should, but brake forth into such extravagancies, as
lay heavy upon them in after years. That Hezekiah then should undertake, and
carry on this great work, when he was at such an age, adds much to the glory
and luster of it.

5. What time of his reign it was that he undertook it; it was the first year
thereof, the first month of the year, 2 Chronicles. 29.3.17.
nay the very first day of the Month. He sacrificed not only the prime of his
days, but of his reign to the service of God. When a man would have thought he
should rather have found him in his Palace, congratulating himself in his
Kingly dignity, feasting with his Nobles, and entertaining the cheerful
acclamations of his joyful people, we have him in the Temple purging out his
Fathers superstition and idolatry: which holy speed renders his undertaking
highly commendable. To have set upon such a work only the first month of his
reign, had been praiseworthy, but to do it the very day of his Coronation, is
praiseworthy indeed.

6. It was a work that none, in many material and weighty respects had engaged
in before him. Asa, Jehosaphat, 1 Kings 15.14.22.43. 2 Kings 10.27.
and others did somewhat toward the abolishing of Images and Idols, but for
the high places, the groves, and the brazen Serpent, they stirred them not. As
for such things as were both of bad original and bad use, those they removed;
but as for such as were of good original, and bad use, as those I now named,
they meddled not with them.

You see then Hezekiah had many and great impediments to this holy undertaking.
His Father (whom in regard of his natural descent from him, he could not choose
but reverence) had followed strange Gods all his days; the Kingdom had
generally complied with him; the ten Tribes their near Neighbors and Brethren,
had not only given themselves to Idolatry, but had continued in it so long that
they could plead prescription: Hezekiah himself was a young man, in the prime
and flower of his youth, and so likelier to be carried away after pleasures,
than to mind matters of religion; and which is none of the least, the work he
was to undertake, was such in diverse respects, as none of his Ancestors, how
wise or good soever, had engaged in. Notwithstanding all this, being acted by a
spirit of Heroic and Princely zeal, he sets upon it, and prosecutes it with
blessed vigor and success. Thus much I thought good to suggest ere I went any
farther, to show the difficulties and discouragements that attended this work,
and how eminently Hezekiahs zeal brake forth in the undertaking and management
of it.

Sect. 2.
IN the prosecution of the point I shall make use of this Method. I shall show,
1. That it is indeed, the will of God that abused things should be abolished.
2. What those things are, that upon their being abused, must be abolished. 3.
To whom this work does belong, whether to the civil Magistrate, or every
particular Christian. 4. After what manner it must be carried on. 5. When it
must be done. 6. I shall lay down some Cautions, or restrictions. 7. Answer
Objections. And 8. Proceed to the uses; all which I shall endeavor the
dispatch of with due conciseness and brevity. And,

First, That it is the will of God that things abused in corrupt and false
worship should be laid aside, appears from various grounds.

2. From the many express precepts and commands, he has delivered to us in
Scripture, whereby he has obliged us to udnertake the work, and employ our
selves as often as there is occasion in the management of it. We are not to
look upon it as a thing at our own choice, that we may either do, or not do;
no, it is a thing of another nature, and so in the issue we shall find it. There
is scarcely any duty he requires of us in his whole Word, that he calls for
more plainly and frequently, or urges with greater importunity and earnestness,
than he does this. Exodus 34.13. Numb. 33.52. Deuteronomy. 7.5 12.2. Genesis 35.2. Isa.
30.22. Hos. 2.16.
Ye shall (says he) destroy their Altars, break their Images, and cut down
their Groves. And, ye shall destroy all their Pictures, and all their molten
Images, and quite pluck down all their high places. And, ye shall destroy
their Altars, and break down their Images, and cut down their Groves, and burn
their graven Images with fire. In these and such like places, he has commanded
us to do it, and he will have us look upon his command as a sufficient warrant
to set upon the work. When men deliver their commands to us, we must take them
under examination ere we obey them; but we must not deal so with his, but must
as soon as ever we have received them, set upon the observance of them. This he
requires from us, and we both may and ought to do it. If he command Abram to
kill Isaac, Genesis 22.2. Josh. 6.27. Hos. 1.2.
Joshuah to destroy the Cananites, Hosea to lie with Gomer, they must do it. He
is the supreme Lord, who has the disposal of all persons and things in his own
hands, and therefore he expects we should close with his command as sufficient
to authorize and justify our undertakings in the most harsh and doubtful case
whatsoever. Were there any superior power, then we might stick at his
appointments; but since he is the great and sovereign Lord, we must without any
contradiction, or haesitancy, comply with them, otherwise, we lay our selves
under the guilt of no less than inexcusable disobedience.

2. From the comfortable promises he has made to encourage us to it. Such is
the indisposition of our natures to holy services, that where the naked sense
of duty will not move to action, the hope of reward will; and therefore in
compliance with our weakness, he does not only lay precepts before us, but
likewise promises, wherein he ingages, that if we will do our duty, and be
faithful, he will do great things for us. Numb. 33.52, 53. See Trem. and Jun.
in loc.
And as he deals thus with us in other cases, so particularly in this we have
now before us. Having commanded the Israclites that they should drive out all
the Inhabitants of the land from before them, destroy their Pictures, overthrow
their molten Images, and pluck down their high places, he adds by way of
promise, Ye shall dispossess the Inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein.
And the Prophet Isaiah speaking to the Church in after times, says, Isa.
30.22, etc.
Ye shall defile the covering of thy graven Images of silver, and the ornament
of thy molten Images of gold: thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth,
thou shall say unto it, get thee hence. Then he shall give the rain of thy seed
that thou shall sow the ground withal, and bread of the increase of the earth,
and it shall be fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy Cattle feed in large
pastures, etc. Here we have an accumulation of promises, the substance whereof
is this, that if we will hearken to what he has required in his law, and in
observance thereof, will cordially and vigorously appear against the monuments
of Idolatry, and throw them away from us with scorn and contempt, as a true
hearted zealous people ought to do, then he will open the fountains of his
goodness, and let out streams thereof upon us. Then he will bless us with
plenty of provision both for man and beast, give us victory over our enemies,
and fill our hearts with joy. As far as the light of the Sun exceeds that of
the Moon, or as far as the light of the Sun would exceed it self, were it seven
times brighter, so far will he cause our future joy to exceed our former. And
he does not only promise temporal benefits to it, but pardon of sin,
justification, with the benefits flowing therefrom. Isa. 27.9.
By this (says he) shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the
fruit to take away his sin: when he makes all the stones of the Altar as chalk
stones that are beaten in sunder, etc. q. d. When my people shall heartily and
unfeignedly repent, and evidence as much by their vigorous engaging and
appearing against Idolatry with the monuments and incitements thereof, then
will I purge away their iniquity, and take away their sin. Thus does he out of
the earnest desire he has, we should set upon the work, allure and entice us
to it.

3. From the terrible threatenings he has pronounced against us to terrify and
affright us to it. Sometimes when a promise will not move, a threatening will,
and therefore he uses both. He told the Israelites (and us in them) that if
they would not drive out the Cananites, Numb. 33.55, 56.
destroy their Pictures, break their Images, and pull down their high places,
they should be pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides, and should vex
them in the land wherein they should dwell; nay, that he would do unto them
what he thought to have done to their Enemies, that is, root them out, destroy
them, and make an end of them. He deals plainly with them: he sets before them
life and death, telling them that if they would obey, and do as he required,
they should live and be a flourishing and happy people; but if otherwise, that
they should dye, and perish, and come to ruin.

4. From the solemn and lasting commendations he has bestowed upon such, as
have done it. Such is the contentment he takes in it, Exo. 32.20. 2 Kings 23.4.
Serpens aeneus laudatissimo exemplo, ab Ezechia sublatus suit. Ti^en. Syntag.
p. 256. Rev. 2.14.
that when any of his Servants do perform it, he records the fact, and praises
them for it. Moses, Hezekiah, Josiah, with other of the Hebrew Worthies, did
eminently here^n, and he has set it down in the sacred story, where it is
daily read to their renown and ^raise; so that whiles the names of Jerob^am,
Ahab, Ahaz, and such like idolatrous Printes stink in the nostrils of all good
men, their's ^re as a fragrant ointment poured forth.

5. From the sharp reprehensions he has uttered to such as either through
sloathfulness, timerousness, or the like, have omitted to do it. Amongst other
things that Christ blames the Pastor of the Church of Pergamus for, this is
one, that he tolerated such as were for the ^ating of things sacrificed to
Idols. Though he ^iv'd in a bad place, even where Satan had his ^eat; and in a
bad time, Gillesp. Aarons rod. p. 280. Milton of Civil Power in Eccl. Causes,
p. 53.
even when Antipas ^he Martyr was slain, yet that excused not the neglect of
his duty. He should have exercised himself in the conscionable discharge of
that, and have left the issue to him, who has taken upon him the protection,
as well as the direction of his Church. Whether he failed in the neglect of
discipline or admonition only, I leave to others, whose business it is, to
determine. This is certain, he did not appear against abused things, and those
who were for them, as a faithful Minister ought to have done, and for this he
is blamed. Let our dangers and discouragements be what they will, we must do
our duty, knowing that he who sets us on work, both can, and will bear us out.

6. From the great rewards he has bestowed upon such as have done it. Not
looking upon his approbation or commendation as sufficient, 2 Kings 10.30.13.1,
9.14.16, 29.15.12, 13.
he has bestowed high and eminent rewards upon such as have been active
herein: witness Jehu; though he were but a bad man, yet because he obeyed him
in this business, he promised him the Throne of Israel to the 4th. generation.
And what he promised, he afterward performed; for upon his death reigned
Jehoahaz his Son, then Joash his Grandson, after, Jeroboam his great Grandson,
and after him Zechariah the fourth from him, upon whose decease the Scepter
departed from his family (and passed into the hands of Shallum the son of
Jabesh) and so the promise made unto him being fulfilled, the Holy Ghost cries
out, This was the word of the Lord, which he spoke unto ^ehu, saying, Thy Sons
shall sit on the Throne of Israel to the fourth generation; and so it came to
pass: whereby we see God is so far pleased with the destroying of Idolaters and
Idolatry, that he rewards it even in wicked men, though not with eternal, yet
with temporal blessings, and those of the highest sort.

7. From the severe punishments he has inflicted upon such as have neglected
to do it. Let men be never so d^ar to him, yet if they either refuse or neglect
to do it when they have power and opportunity, he is displeased with them, and
punishes them. Though Solomon was a man greatly respected by him, as his name
Jedidiah imports, 2. Sam. 12.25.
yet in regard he exercised not that severity against Idols he should; but in
compliance with his strange Wives built high places to them, he was so
incensed against him, that he interrupts his peaceable and flourishing reign,
stirs up Hadad, Rezon, and other adversaries against him; 2 Kings 11.4. etc.
nay rends the Kingdom it self from him.

8. From the concurrent judgments of the most holy, learned, orthodox VVriters
the Church of God has had since the Apostles times. Though the best of men not
secured against it by divine inspiration and direction, are (as all ages
witness) fallible, and subject to mistake, yet it is a considerable inducement
to us to believe that what is held forth is the truth, when it is witnessed,
and that upon probable and fair grounds, by the unanimous testimony of such
eminent persons. And thus it is in the present case; the ablest and choicest
men the Church has afforded, have given their express and full suffrage in
behalf of the point in hand. August. Calvin. Martyr, Wolphius, See Lincoln.
Abridg. p. 24.
Lavater, Sadeel, Fulk, Rainolds, Perkins, do all teach, that such things as
have been abused in superstitious and idolatrous services, ought to be
abolished and laid aside; and for confirmation thereof urge the very Text, I am
now upon, which they judged to hold forth so much. These great names Dr. Morton
found in the Abridgement he had to deal with, but choose what was the matter,
thought it not convenient to return any answer. Dr. Burgess his second,
Rejoynd. chapter 4 sect. 6. p. 453.
says, it would have been unreasonable then to have done it. But why so? was
not this instance of Hezekiah alleged seasonably enough in the Abridgement?
and was it not seasonable to give the judgments of such learned men upon it?
and was it not as seasonable for the Defendant, if he could, to make some
answer? But in case the Defendant thought it unseasonable, how as the Rejoyner,
did not undertake it, especially seeing the Replyer charges the Defendant with
the neglect of it? Ames. Fresh Suit. part 2. p. 400.
Some concerned in the business, expected it from him; but in vain. Now this
would shrewdly tempt an indifferent person to think there was more in these
testimonies than either the Defendant or Rejoyner could well tell how to
answer. To these I might by way of supply add diverse others, but shall at
present offer you only two or three, Haec autem non sic dico ut patrociner
Papisticis superstitionibus, etc De Trad. p. 696.
and give you their own words. Musculus having showed what ttraditions are to
be kept, and what not, adds, I speak not these things so as to patronize Popish
Traditions, Rites, and Worships, God forbid: and I call them Popish Traditions,
which either of their own Nature, or by abuse: are serviceable to Popish
impiety, superstition and blindness. And a little after speaking of the
Israelites abusing the brazen Serpent to idolatry, shows how Hezekiah abolished
it. And Farell writing to Calvin about a Popish fellow whose name was Carolus,
says, Cumque Sanctus Rex Hezekias, etc. Ep. Calv. 49. Regula est illa a
diaphora, non necessaria, etc. vol. 1: Expl. Decal. p. 1346.
Princes may learn from Hezekiahs abolishiug the brazen Serpent, what they are
to do with those rites which idle men have set up, and added significations to,
according to their own pleasure. Nay Rivet to mention no more, says, it is a
rule, that things indifferent not being necessary, when they are polluted with
gross idolatry are to be abolished. What authority then, these men are of, it
is wholly ours in this business. They are clear and peremptory, that such
things as are not of necessary use, and be, or have been made serviceable to
corrupt ends and purposes, are not only to be detested, but abolished.

9. From the Doctrine of our own Church, which has openly declared that such
things as have been abused are to be laid aside, Def. part. 1. chapter 20. Sermon. in
Phil. 2.20. p. 316. Def. of Perk. part 1. p. 165. Appeal, l. 1. c. 2. sect. 25.
Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 65.
as being thereby rendered unfit for further use. Bishop Jewel in the common
defense which he wrote in her behalf, speaking to the Papists of certain of
their ceremonies, says, These ceremonies ye have so abused, that unless we
will greatly offend, we cannot any longer retain them. To the same purpose
speaks Bishop Andrews: whatsoever (says he) is taken up at the injunction of
man, when it is drawn to superstition, comes under the compass of the brazen
Serpent, and is to be abolished. Hereunto I might add what is delivered by
Abbot, Morton, Hooker, to the same purpose; but waving such private, though
very considerable testimonies, I shall offer you one or two of a more public
and authentic nature. The Church of England in one of her Homilies, Against
the peril of Idolatry Sermon. 2.
discourses at large both from Scripture and Antiquity, against the Monuments
and occasions of idolatry; and amongst other passages, she alleges that of
Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, who entering into a Church, and finding
an Image on the door, took it and tore it in pieces, willing the Keepers of the
Church to give it to a poor man, who was lately dead, and wind him in it. This
she does not only allege, but approve of, telling us, that what Epiphanius
did, he did it in imitation of good King Hezekiah, who brake the brazen Serpent
to pieces, and burned it to ashes. And as if this were not sufficient, she does
in the discourse prefixed to the present Liturgy, render this as the weightiest
cause of abolishing certain of the ceremonies that they have been so far
abused, partly by the superstitious blindness of the rude and unlearned, and
partly by the unsatiable avarice of such as sought more their own lucre than
the glory of God. Now if abuse either already committed, or likely to be
committed, be a sufficient reason, as she here contends, it is, wherefore
Images and certain ceremonies should be abolished, it must needs be a
sufficient reason wherefore other things of the like nature, in case they
either have, or are in danger to fall under it, should also be abolished.

10. From the determinations of our own Kings and Parliaments, who among the
standing Laws of the Nation have made provision that the relics of Idolatry
should be destroyed. Amongst other Injunctions of Qu. Eliz. this was one,
Injunct. 23.
that all monuments of Idolatry and superstition should be so utterly
extinguished and destroyed, that there should remain no memory of them either
in our Churches or houses. with which the succeeding Laws so far complied, that
the Stat. 3 Jac c. 5. impowers Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, and chief
Officers of Cities and Towns corporate, to search the Houses and Lodgings of
Popish Recusants, for Popish Books and Relics, and if they find any such
Books and Relics, or any Altars, Pixes, Beads, or Pictures, to deface and
burn them. This Law has in part been put in execution, and if it had been
wholly, as it has been in part, the worship of God had been preserved more
pure, and the Protestant interest had been more safe, than now it is; but as
Rome was not built, so neither was it to be destroyed in a day; and therefore
we are not without hope, that notwithstanding present delays, God in time will
persuade and excite our Governors, to go on in the work so happily begun, and
cleanse his house from defilement.

11. From the Concessions of the Papists themselves, who, as all know, are the
greatest retainers and users of abused things of any people in the world,
having in a manner made it their business to gather up almost whatever either
Heathens, Jews, Turks, or others have defiled. Si nonnulli ex praedecessorib.
nostris fecerunt aliqua quae illo tempore potuerunt esse sine culpa, and postea
vertuntur in errorem and superstitionem, etc. Great. did 63. Cap. Quia sancta.
The Canon Law, notwithstanding all the chaff that is in it, tells us from Pope
Stephan, That if our Predecessors have done some things which at that time
might be without fault, and afterward are turned to error and superstition, we
are taught by Hezekias his breaking the brazen Serpent, that posterity are to
destroy them without delay, and with great authority. Which passage holds
forth these two things, containing the substance of what I am pleading for:
First, that things lawfully instituted being abused to error and superstition,
are to be destroyed: and then, that Hezekiahs breaking in pieces the brazen
Serpent does oblige us thereunto. Whence we see, that rather than God will
suffer his truth to want testimony, he will extort it from the mouths of his
adversaries themselves, and make them bear witness to it. Rather than Israel
shall not be blessed he will make Balaam to do it; Rather than the death of
Christ shall not be sufficiently foreshew'd, he will make Caiaphas to do it; and
rather than abused things shall want accusers to appear against them and
implead them, he will make Antichrist the very Patron thereof, to do it. Now if
this Doctrine of the Canon Law were put in execution, what work would it make
in the Papacy? what alteration would it make in Churches, Chapels, and other
places? Tiber it self would scarcely be a sufficient Kidron to receive all the
Altars, Images, Crosses, and other trash that would then fall into the hands of
Justice.

12. From that kind of reasoning which we term a Minori ad Majus; it is his
pleasure that such things should be abolished as have been abused in
miscarriages and proceedings of a lower nature, than such high matters as
superstition and idolatry can reasonably be thought to be. Thus his servants
both in former and latter times, have understood him; and therefore when they
have observed somethings to be abused, though they were not stained with such
high matters as superstition and idolatry, yet they took themselves bound to
lay them aside, and accordingly did it; as I shall show in several instances.

1. The Christian Church leaning too much on her own wisdom, has instituted
and set up several Officers and orders of persons not appointed by the Word;
but after a time seeing the gross and insufferable abuses that attended them,
she thought fit to appear against them, and abolish them. Socrates tells, Hist.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 19.
that the Bishops, from the time the Novatians sepated from the Church, and
refused to communicate with those who under the persecution of Decius, had fallen
from the faith, thought fit to appoint certain Priests to take the confessions
of such as had so fallen: which after they had done, it happened that a certain
Noblewoman coming to a penitentiary Priest, and confessing her post-baptismal
sins, amongst other things which she acknowledged her self guilty of, she told
him that a certain Deacon of the Church, had been too familiar with her. Upon
notice hereof, great stir was made; the business was discussed to and fro, and
the Deacon thrown out of the Church. But this was not all, Eudaemon taking
notice of the disgrace that hereby befell the Clergy, and for preventing of the
like for the future, advised Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople to lay the
penitentiary Priest aside, which was accordingly done. (...). p. 692.
This my Author tells me he had from Eudaemons own mouth. Now if the
penitentiary Priest were laid aside, for the fault committed by the Deacon,
what would have become of him, had he been found guilty in his own person? And
if one fault be sufficient, for the throwing of a person, nay an office of long
standing in the Church, aside, what are many? Controv. part. 1. contra Duraeum
l. 5. p. 134.
Furthermore, Dr. Whitaker disputing with Duraeus of religions orders, minds
him how the selected Cardinals wrote to Paul 3d. acquainting him that the abuse
of them was so great, that they thought all conventual orders were to be laid
aside. Nay the Jesuits themselves, notwithstanding all their plausible
insinuations, have by several Nations, like a company of Vipers been thrown out
from amongst them. Further Discovery etc. Ep. ed. p. 2.
The Jansenist soliciting the States of Holland to rid their hands of them,
tells them, that the Republique of Venice looking on them as a public
contagion, banished them their territories, in these imperious terms; Be gone,
carry away nothing with you, and never return. And he also instances in
England, France, nay the States themselves, as having in times past exercised
no less rigor toward them. And the truth is, so many and great are the
mischiefs which they work in the world, that its a wonder that all Princes and
States, instead of protecting and showing them favor, do not proceed against
them as the known enemies of common peace and honesty. Were it needful I might
multiply instances of this nature, but these I have here set down may serve to
intimate, what opinion great and wise men, of different callings and
persuasions have had of such kind of Officers and orders of persons, and what
course they have taken with them. They judged it most convenient both for the
vindicating of Justice, and the preventing of miscarriages for the future; to
remove and lay them by.

2. The Primitive Christians did for a season to the Eucharist add their Love
feasts, the end whereof was spiritual rejoicing, with the preservation and
increase of charity and friendship; but in time they fell sadly to pervert and
abuse them, turning them into occasions of very great disorders, which Paul
observing amongst the Corinthians, blames them for it, and charges them to lay
them aside. 2 Cor. 11 21, 22.
In eating (says he) every one takes before other his own Supper, and one is
hungry, and another is drunken; what have ye not houses to eat and drink in?
The Jews (and the Heathens likewise) had a double kind of feasting; the one was
wholly, and altogether of a civil nature, having no relation to their
Sacrifices, and was called (...) from the liberal drinking used at it. Ester.
5.6. Isa. 29.1. Dout. 16.14. Quasi char. tatis Christianae Symbola and vincula,
in loc. See. Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 97. Ed. Morell. etc. Tertul. Apol. p. 69.
Ed. Pamel.
The other was in a sort religious, inasmuch as it immediately succeeded their
Sacrifices, whence it was called ^n which signifies both sacrifice and feast.
Now the Corinthians in compliance herewith, still when they had eaten the Euc
harist, celebrated certain feasts, which they called (...), charities, or
loves, for that they were (as Pareus shows) as it were the testimonies and
bonds thereof. The manner of the Christians of those times was to meet every
first day of the week; and when they were come together, they begun their
service with Prayers for the Church, the Emperors, and others; which being
ended, they rose up, and kissed each other. Then he who was Lector read to them
some part of the Prophets and Apostles; and he having done, the Praepofitus, or
President made a Sermon, wherein he exhorted them to faith, piety, and virtue.
When the Sermon was over, they went to prayer again, and so proceeded to the
Eucharist, and then to the collection, part whereof, by the Presidents
appointment, was distributed among the indigent, and the rest laid out in
provision for the love-feast; at which, rich and poor sat familiarly together,
refreshing themselves, not only with the sober use of the creatures, but
likewise with religious conferences and sacred hymns. Thus they managed things
for a space in diverse places, and particularly at Corinth. And had they stuck
here, they had not laid themselves under such censure and reproof as they met
with from the Apostle; Agapas qnamvis d^u and quidem laudabiliter anctoribus
ipsis Apostolis in Ecclesiis usurpat as, etc. Apud Trem. and Jun. Bibl. in loc.
but not contenting themselves herewith, they brake forth into several
disorders, such as preposterousness, contempt of the poor, divisions, schisms,
intemperance and the like, which he being informed of, labors to take them off
those feasts, and bring them back to the first institution of the Supper,
willing them, since they could make no better use of them, to forbear them.

The substance of what I have said concerning this matter, you may take in the
words of Beza. The love feasts (says he) were by the authority of the Apostles
themselves, long and laudably used in the Churches, but because of their abuse,
the Apostle (Paul) judged they ought to be laid aside. We see then, that though
these love feasts were so ancient, of Apostolical institution, and might (had
they been rightly observed) have contributed much toward the advancement of
piety and charity; yet when the Apostle saw them so abused, he takes them away.
See Moulins Nov. of Pop. l. 1. c. 15. Sect. 30. p. 53. Gillesp. against the
Cerem. p. 108, 271.
And if he dealt thus with them, what would he (do you think) have done with
our Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide solemnities, wherein men drown
themselves in all manner of riotousness and licentiousness, as if they were
then at absolute li-l berty, and not under any law, save what either the
emptiness of their purses, or weakness of their appetites do give them? Do you
think such plea's as Mountagu, Seldom, Fisher, use in the behalf of them, would
have prevailed with him to have spared them? I suppose not.

2. The Christians of former times had a friendly kind of salutation, wherein
in token of love, peace, familiarity, and brotherly respect, they kissed each
other. Romans 16.16. 1 Pet. 5.14.
This the Apostles often make mention of, calling it one while, an holy kiss,
another while a kiss of charity. And it being not only an innocent, but in some
respects, a convenient custom of long standing amongst che Jews, from whom they
derived it: they did not only allow the faithful to use it, but exhorted them
to it. What more frequent in the close of Paul's Epistles, than, Romans 16.16. 2
Cor. 13.12. 1 These. 5.26.
salute one another with an holy kiss? which yet we must not understand, as if
that serious, pious, holy, mortified man intended them the liberty of any
salutations that were light or vain, or any way unbecoming the strictness and
honor of the Christian Religion (it were no less than impious absurdity to
entertain such a thought) but that in the same way whereby they were wont to
express their civil respects, he would have them to show their Christian
respect to each other. And for the utter removal of all matter of suspicion and
jealousy in the case, we must know, that it was not his mind that the men and
women should in the sacred assemblies, where this custom did in an especial
manner take place, Genesis 29.13.33.4.45.15.
promiscuously embrace and kiss each other, but that the Men (as was usual
among the Jews) should do it by themselves, and the Women by themselves; for
the Men and Women (as Baronius well observes) did not sit as they do amongst
us, Ad. ann. 45. Sect. 26.
in a mixed way, but apart. It is not to be imagined that he who wrote so much
about abstaining from appearance of evil, shunning occasions of sin, avoiding
of scandal, and labored so much to maintain the honor of the Gospel, should
allow, much less exhort them to express their respect in the assemblies, in the
former, promiscuous way, but in the latter, which as it was common, so it was
less liable to exception and offense. I speak this, the rather, to obviate the
Atheistical, profane vanity of some, who that they may the better disgrace
religion, and bring it into contempt, use to make themselves merry with such
kind of passages.

Well, this custom having this foundation, Ed. Paris. graecol. a Jac. Goar p.
134, etc. Ad. ann. 45. Sect. 26. Com. in Romans 16. De Antiq. Bapt, rit. l. 1. c.
36.
has spread far, and continued long. In the Greek Church it remains to this
day, as several passages in their Euchologium show. And in the West it remained
so long till it became highly abused, which the Pastors of the Church taking
notice of, did for the preventing of scandal, and other evils likely to proceed
from it, prudently dissuade from the further use of it, upon which it was
omitted and laid aside, not without the approbation of Baronius, A Lapide,
Vicecomes, though men as tenacious of abused customs, as most, that their
Church has afforded.

3. It was an use among the Christians heretofore, in the honor of deceased
Saints, who had born eminent witness to the truth, to celebrate nocturnal
vigils, or night watches. Their manner was, the night before such a festival,
to meet together in the Church, and there to employ themselves in holy
communion, and pious devotions; more especially in praises and thanksgivings
unto God, who by the faithfulness and constancy of his deceased servants, Eo
quod saepe sub obtentu orationis scelera, latenter committant. Can. 35. Propter
haec and multa alia inconvenientia quae fiebant hujusmodi vigiliae sunt
interdictae. Ration. l. 6. c. 7 n. 8.
had given them that happy occasion of coming before him. This was a plausible
observation, but after it had been practiced a season, it became attended with
such unhappy abuses and inconveniences, that it lost the reverence belonging
to it, and so was declared against, and laid aside. The Fathers of the Council
of Eliberis in Spain, made a peremptory Decree against it, especially as to
Women, and their watching in the Churchyard; for that under pretense of Prayer,
they secretly committed wickednesses. Durand gives us a more particular and
full account, both of their abuse and abrogation. He tells us, that after a
time, instead of celebrating them with holy rejoycings, thanksgivings, and
praises, they entertained players and singers, passing away the time in filthy
songs, dances, banquets, drinkings, nay fornications; and for these (says he)
and many other inconveniences which attended them, they were interdicted. Nay
and Bellarmine, though he show from Basil, Jerome. and other writers, that these
Night-watches were anciently used, yet he says, that inasmuch as they became
occasions of great abuses, Caeterum quoniam paulatim occasion nocturnarum
vigiliarum, abusus quidem irrepere caeperant, etc. t. 2. de Eccl. Triump. l. 3.
c. 17. Exodus 21.14.
the Church was pleased to intermit them. There are yet in some Churches, some
footsteps of them, but neither the observation nor credit of them is comparable
to what it was.

4. The general and continued use of Sanctuaries or places of refuge for
unwilling Offenders, is well known. The judicial law provided that if any man
flew his brother fortuitously, or without intention, flying to the Altar, he
should there remain secure from the revenge of the pursuer. Thus it was while
the Israelites were in their journey in the Wilderness, and lay in one entire
body round about the Tabernacle; but when they came into the land of Canaan,
where they were to live at a greater distance, God out of his care and
goodness, lest the Altar should be too far from the place where the fact was
committed, and so the Offender be taken, ere he could reach it, did ordain
(...), Josh. 20.6.
certain Cities of refuge, whither the offender fleeing, and continuing till
the death of the high Priest (which typified the death of Jesus Christ our
great high Priest, that was to put his poor exiled ones in the fruition of a
free and safe condition) he was to be discharged and return home. And
answerably hereunto the Heathens had their Temples, Courts, walls, statues, and
such like priviledg'd places, to which the offender fleeing, he remained safe.
Of this sort was the Temple of Mercy at Athens, with several other places
whereof our Polyd. Virgil will give you a particular account. De Invent. l. 3.
c. 12. p. 265.
And when the Emperors embraced the Christian religion, and became Patrons
thereof, they settled this privilege upon Christian Temples. And I think no
body denies but that such places of protection and defense to unwilful
offenders are both lawful and convenient. But the Papists not contenting
themselves with the bounds prescribed by Christian Princes and States in former
times, Si liber fugit ad Ecclesiam quantumcunque gravia maleficia
perpetraverit, etc Decret. de Immunit. Eccl. in l. Imm. l. 1. tit. 49. c. inter
alias. Sunt hodie in orb nostro Christiano, etc. p. 266.
have made their several Churches, Chapels, nay their impure Monasteries such
places, and that not only to the unwilling offenders, but to Traitors,
Murderers, Whoremongers; where contrary to all reason and justice they keep
them from being brought to due trial and punishment. Hear what the Decree
says; If the Offender fly to the Church, how great soever his miscarriages
have been, he is not violently to be taken thence, neither ought he at any time
upon pretense of the fault committed to be sentenced to death,, or any other
corporal punishment: Which how the forementioned Pol. Virgil resented, you may
gather from what follows. There are (says he) in our Christian orb, especially
amongst the English, Sanctuaries every where, which do not only stand open, to
such as fear snares, but to all manner of Offenders whatsoever, till it come to
such as are guilty of Treason; which shows, as it manifestly appears, that we
received not the institution from Moses, who appointed a Sanctuary only for
such as had unwillingly slain a man, but from Romulus, which certainly is the
cause that many take such liberty in wickednesses. What must our Temples every
where be Sanctuaries to such as these? how contrary is this to the institution
of Moses, etc. And that which he thus seriously bewailes and declaims against,
diverse Christian Princes and States being affected with, have wholly abolished
all Sanctuaries for offenders whatsoever, and laid them aside, choosing rather
to run the hazard of some lesser inconveniences in the want of them, than such
great ones, in the use of them,

And thus I have made good what I affirmed, viz. that the Church has not only
thought-fit to lay aside such things as have been abused in Idolatry, but
likewise such as have been abused in proceedings of a lower nature; which I
have insisted on, for this end, to show that if such things are to be laid
aside, then those that have been abused the former way, and so have received
defilement of a deeper and worse die, are much more. Idolatry does not only
argue a neglect of God, but sets up a rival or competitor with him, nay prefers
another before him; and therefore though all sins are offensive and provoking,
yet that is is so in an especial manner: whence it follows, that of all those
things which have been abused those are most offensive which have been abused
in Idolatry, and therefore of all others ought to be laid aside. And so much
may serve for proof of the point; I now proceed to what follows.

Sect. 3.
Secondly, I shall show what things they are that God upon their being abused
to Idolatry would have laid aside. And here I desire you to take notice that I
use not the term [things] in a strict sense as it stands opposed to persons,
Names, Times, as sometimes it is taken, but in a large one, as comprehending
both them, and the other particulars following.

1. He would have such persons, as forsaking true religion and his prescribed
worship, do give up themselves to dunghill Idols, and the service belonging to
them, and therein do abuse and defile themselves to be removed and laid aside.
Though he be a very gracious God, and take no pleasure in casting off and
undoing his creatures, yet such is his purity, and holiness, that when he sees
them go and prostitute themselves to base and filthy Idols that are worth
nothing but scorn and hatred, he is so displeased with them, that he will not
endure them. Such in times past was his zeal to his own worship, that if a man
did but in some circumstances depart from the rule, it was no less than death.
Lev. 17.3, 4.
What man (says he) soever there be of the house of Israel that kills an
Ox, Lamb, or Goat, and brings it not to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, that man shall be cut off from among his people; that is, either
by the hand of God, in case he did it secretly, or by the hand of the Judge, if
it were open. And in observance hereof, Josh. 2.12.
when the children of Reuben, Gad, and half the tribe of Manasses, built an
Altar upon the borders of Jordan, upon a civil account to signify that though
they lived dividedly from their brethren, yet they were Israelites as well as
they, of the posterity of Jacob, in covenant with God, of the number of his
peculiar pbople, interested in his favor, promises, and ordinances; and the
other tribes thought they had done it upon a religious account, with an
intention to offer Sacrifice thereon, contrary to what God had appointed, they
were so affected with it, that they presently gathered themselves together to
go forth to war with them: and if they had not satisfied them that they did it
merely upon a civil account, they would no doubt have put them to the Sword. So
great was their hatred of false worship, that they were resolved rather to
hazard, nay lose their lives than endure it.

And if God be thus impatient of one circumstance in his worship which he has
not required, what may we then think he is of gross and open Idolatry, and such
as are guilty thereof? As for such he every where breaths forth death against
them. So great is his severity against Idols, that he peremptorily decrees,
that whosoever he is that pleads for them, offers to them, or performs them any
service, shall not only be looked on as unfit to approach him, Levit. 20 2.
Deuteronomy. 13.5.
but also lose his life. There were two sorts of Idolaters that in the days of
the Old Testament he required the Magistrates, whom he entrusted with the
execution of the Law, to look after, and destroy; the impenitent Canaanites,
and the apostate Israelites. Concerning the former, he tells them in plain
terms, Numb. 32.15.
that they must utterly destroy them: which yet is not to be taken absolutely,
and strictly, but with this condition, if they persisted in their idolatry,
enmity, and opposition against his truth and people; Josh. 2.14.6.23.9.15. 2 Samuel 22.1.
otherwise they might spare them, as appears not only by the league made with
Rahab, and the sparing of her, but also by the league made with the Gibeonites,
and his punishing the breach thereof by Saul, in the days of David. And then
for the latter, the case is no less plain: He determines peremptorily, that he
that sacrifices unto any, Exodus 22.20. Deuteronomy. 17.2.
save unto the Lord only, shall be utterly destroyed. And he requires of the
Magistrates, that if there were any one amongst them that went and served other
Gods, they should upon the testimony of two or three witnesses, stone him to
death. And in answer hereunto we find that religious Magistrates and such as
had authority, when they met with any that were guilty hereof, did for the
punishment of them, and the terror and caution of others, put them to death.
Thus Moses, when he came down from the Mount, and saw the Israelites dancing
before the Golden Calf, he causes the Levites forthwith to fall upon such as
were the capital Offenders, and slay them. And afterward when he saw how they
joined to Baal Peor, Numb. 25.4, 5.
he in obedience to the command of God to that purpose, calls to his Judges,
and makes them take such as were principal in the action, and hang them before
the Sun. So Elijah, when in that famous contest upon Mount Carmel with four
hundred and fifty Prophets of Baal, 1 Kings 18.40.
and four hundred Prophers of the Grove, he had in a miraculous way before King
Ahab and all the people evinced them to be Impostors and Deceivers, he takes
them down to the Brook Kidron,, and there slays them every man. 2 Kings 10.25.
And Jehu having got a company of Baals Priests together, serves them after the
same manner; he put them all to the Sword, not suffering one of them to escape.
2 Kings 23.5, 20.
But Josiah willing to give Idolatry its deaths wound, and bury it in
everlasting oblivion, does not only fall upon the Priests of Baal, and of the
high places of Judah, but likewise goes to Dan and Bethel, and there destroys
all before him. And whereas notwithstanding his Godly zeal and diligence, some
escaped, and sculking up and down, secretly acted their wonted Idolatry, the
Lord declares by one of his Prophets, who prophesied after this reformation,
that he would have them destroyed as well as the other. I will (says he) cut
off the remnant of Baal from this place, Zeph. 1.4.
and the names of the Chemarims with the Priests. By this remnant of Baal, he
means such as had escaped the zealous severity of the forementioned reformers;
but what these Chemarims were, is not so easy to determine. The word (...)
coming of (...) which in its primary notion, signifying Incaluit, Calefecit,
adustus fuit, the generality of Orthodox interpreters, do by a Metalepsis
render it atrati, which denotes such as go in black or mourning; so that these
Chemarims seem to have been a special sort of Priests pertaining to Baal, who
that they might the better gain to themselves the reputation of seriousness,
mortifiedness, holiness, went in a black or mourning garb. It Is likely they
were his domestic Chaplains, who pertain'd to that which the Scripture does by
way of eminency call his house, 2 Kings 10.26. Those who would see other
instances may read Zepperas de Leg. Mosaic. l. 4. c. 3. p. 244.
and there performed the offices and services belonging to him. Now these, by
how much they were the nearer to Baal, and of greater account, by so much God
takes the more notice of them, and declares more particularly against them.

And thus I have given you some instances of the severity God has appointed
religious Magistrates to exercise toward Idolaters. For the due applying and
improving whereof, we are to distinguish, 1. Betwixt such as are within their
dominions, and such as are not. For the latter I may say as the Apostle in
another case: What have they to do to judge them that are without? 1 Cor. 5.12.
2. Betwixt such as have been drawn to Idolatry through ignorance, evil
education, fraud: and such as have deliberately and of their own accord,
betaken themselves to it. 3. Betwixt such as have had no due means applied to
them for their recovery; and such as after the use of all due means remain
obstinate in their error. 4. Betwixt such as commit Idolatry secretly; and
those that do it openly. 5. Betwixt such as are content with being guilty of
Idolatry themselves; and such as not thinking it sufficient to commit it
themselves, solicit others to it. 6. Betwixt those who out of the simplicity
of their hearts, are followers in that wicked work; and such as are the
ringleaders. Now for such as lying under the disadvantages of ignorance, evil
education, fraud, or the like, have been drawn to Idolatry, Cham. Ep. ad
Cotton. p. 45. Rainold. de Idol. Eccles. Romans l. 2. c. 1. p. 327. Rivet. vol.
2. in Hos. p. 557. Walaeus loc. Com. p 513. Exodus 32.5.
and have had no due means applied for their recovery, especially if they
commit it secretly, and without soliciting others to it, they are to be
instructed, and upon their repentance, received. But then for such as
deliberately, and of their own accord have closed with it, and after the use of
due means, persist in it, and commit it, not only secretly but openly, and
labor to draw others to it, they are by the sword of Justice to be cut off.

How far this concerns the Papists, the knowledge of their ways and practices,
will inform us. That they are Idolaters, the soberest and best of our
Protestant Writers do peremptorily determine. To allege that they worship the
true God, will not relieve them; for so did the Israelites when they worshipped
the Calf; yet no body questions but they were guilty of Idolatry. Though a
people do worship the true God terminatively, and ultimately, yet if they
worship him under any visible representation and similitude, and not as he has
appointed, they do notwithstanding that commit Idolatry. Now the Papists being
evidently guilty hereof, in their use of Images, Transubstantiation, bowing to
the Altar, how we are to deal with them, the forementioned distinctions will
afford some direction. Zepp. de leg. Mosaic. l. 4. c. 3. p. 244.
This I might have been larger on, but the Author in the margent is so clear
and full on it, that I shall only answer an Objection, and so go on to what
follows.

Perhaps you will say, If it were indeed the pleasure of God, that such as
corrupted his worship, and committed Idolatry, should be cut off, how as
Hezekiah did not destroy the Jews, when as they burnt incense to the brazen
Serpent? Answ. Though I reserve the answering of Objections till I come toward
the close of this Discourse, where I intend the doing of it under a particular
head, to which I desire my Reader as often as there is occasion to have recourse;
yet in regard this exception (with some others that follow) is of a more
particular consideration, I shall say somewhat to it now: And, 1. Perhaps the
number of those who had an hand therein was so great, that he could not,
without destroying the body of the people (which in likelihood would have been
a task too difficult for him) do it. It Is said in the Text, that the children
of Israel did burn incense to it; that is, (according to an usual figure,
whereby we put the greater part for the whole) the generality of them; of all
which to have attempted the punishment the Law required, would have been a
business of dangerous consequence. 2. How does it appear that he did not (as
Moses did before him) cut off the principal offenders? Though we may argue from
Scripture Negatively in matters of faith, yet not in matters of fact. The Holy
Ghost has omitted the relating of many things, which he judged unnecessary for
us to know, and who can say but it is so in this case? As I cannot say he did
destroy them, so neither can he that shall oppose me say he did not. 3. Admit
he did not do it, how will it appear he did not sin in it? we see what the Law
required, and what others (some of which were divinely inspired) practiced; and
that must needs be a stronger evidence for the punishing of Idolaters with
death, than Hezekiahs omission, whereof we are yet uncertain is for the sparing
of them.

Sect. 4.
2. HE would have such Names as have been given to Idols, or to such persons or
things as have belonged to them, and thereby have been polluted, to be laid
aside. So far is he from allowing us to own other Gods, or comply with them in
their sacrilegious and profane ordinances, that he will not endure we should
so much as retain their Names. As the King is impatient of the Traitors name,
who has attempted the taking away of his power and life, so is God impatient
of the names of Idols, in as much as they have attempted the taking away, not
only of his power, but also whatever is near and dear to him. How ordinary is
it for him in Scripture to forbid us to take their Names into our mouths? Exodus
23.13
Make no mention (says he) of other Gods. And, make no mention of the name of
their Gods. Josh. 23.7.
And, I will cut off the names of the Idols out of the land. And in obedience
to his will signified in these and such like passages, Zech. 13.2.
his faithful servants have resolved upon the declining of them. I will not
(says David) take their names into my lips. Psalm. 16.4.
Such was the perfectness of his hatred to them, that he would not so much as
name them. And if ever God make us men after his own heart, and bless us with
such sincere and holy zeal, as he had, we shall follow his good example. Name
them indeed we may, as the sacred Penmen themselves did afterward, Vid.
Tertull. de Idol. c. 20 p. 153.
but then we must see that we do it upon some necessary occasion, and with
contempt and indignation, not with any honor or respect to them. We may name
them in historical relations, in confessing our faith, or in such discourses as
we may be called to make in order to the abjuring, refuting, and condemning of
them; but not so as to justify, invocate, commend them, or any way promote
their reputation or service. The Apostle speaking of fornication, uncleanness,
covetousness, Ephesians. 5.3.
charges the Ephesians that they do not so much as name them; that is, by way
of approbation or vindication, so as either to spread or uphold them: which
also is to be said in the present case; we may in discouse name Idols by way of
distinction, not needlessly, or with any show of liking, so as to defend or
plead for them.

And God does not only forbid us to take the names of Idols into our mouths in
the sense expressed, but he charges us, like so many execrable and hateful
things, to extirpate and root out the remembrance of them in all places where
it is. Deuteronomy. 12.3.
You shall (says he) destroy the names of them out of that place. He will have
us to employ our authority, power, interest, and all, for the total abolishing
both of them, and all respectful remembrance of them. Nay such is his
indignation against them, that he will not only have such names abolished as
have originally and solely pertained to them, but such likewise as were
originally his, and do in a way of special propriety and suitableness belong to
him, and yet have been given to them. What name is there in all Scripture more
becoming him than Baal? What may better serve to hold forth his absolute
dominion over his people, or conjugal relation to them? It signifies my Lord,
or my Husband; what name then more proper or suitable for such a purpose, than
it? Yet when it had long been given to Idols, he took up such a dislike of it,
that he forbids them to call him any more by it. Hos. 2.16, 17. Seldom de diis
Syris. Synt. 2. c. 1. p. 195.
Thou shall (says he) call me no more Baali, for I will take the names of
Baalim, out of her mouth. Some very learned men think that the Chaldaeans, and
Phaenicians, first gave this Name to the true God, the Maker and Lord of all:
afterward taking the Sun to be the only God of Heaven, they gave it, to it;
then, out of the respect they bore to their deceased friends, they gave it to
their Images which they set up and worshipped. Rivet. vol. 2. in Hos. 2.8. p.
537. Mede in 1 Timothy 4.1.
Others think it takes its rise from Belus the first Assyrian Monarch after
Nimrod, who governing his people well, they were so affected with it, that upon
his death they deified him; and his Son Ninus out of the respect he bore to
him, set up his Statue. After him, they called all their deceased Hero's whom
they first made, and then esteemed Gods, Baalim. As upon the first Roman
Emperors, being called Caesar, those who succeeded had the same title, so upon
this great Monarchs being styled Baal (or Belus, for they are both one) those
who were deified after him, were termed so to; whereby it came to pass that so
many as were their deified Hero's, so many were their Baals. Hence we read of
Baal Berith, Baal Hermon, Baal Peor, and diverse others, whereof you find
frequent mention in Scripture. The Chaldaeans, out of the high respect they
bore to this appellation, prefixed it to their Names, as Baladan, Balthazar,
Belshazzar; and the Carthaginians, added it to theirs, as Asdrubal, Adherbal,
Hannibal. Now whether this name were given first to God, and then to Idols, or
first to Idols and then to him, is not so material that we should spend much
time about it: certain it is that it was given to both, and as certain, that
when God saw it so commonly and grossly abused, he does notwithstanding the
properness and fitness of it for himself, by an express prohibition, forbid his
people to give it him any more. Menoch. de Rep. Heb. l. 4. c. 1. Sir W.
Rawleigh hist. l. 1. c. 10. Sect. 6. p. 194.
That this was the very reason wherefore he would have it laid aside, is the
judgment of Oecolampadius, Calvin, Danaeus, Zanchy, Tremellius, Junius,
Pareus, Rivet, and other learned men. Such is the purity and holiness of God,
that he will not have any communion with Idols, no, not so much as in their
names, especially when by long and frequent use, they become common to them,
but will have both them and their names utterly abolished and laid in silence.

This being so, what shall we think of those who give the names of Idols to
their children, to months, days, ships, horses, dogs, and ordinarily discourse
of them under the same, without evidencing any detestation or dislike? Nay what
shall we think of those who do not only take this liberty in civil matters, but
also in religious: that declining the names Christ has given to his Officers,
Ordinances, and such things as belong thereunto, use such as have been abused
by Idolaters? Non solum thura, etc. Gratian. Dec. pt. 1. did. 37. c. 15. Sect.
7. See Voetius disp. select. pt. 3. p. 260, 261, 263, 285, 317 These. Salm. pt.
3. Sect. 37. p. 356 Alsted. Encyclop. vol. 1. l. 17. Uran: pt. 1. c. 13. Sect.
15. p. 406. and part. 3. c. 4. Sect. 3. p. 345. Hosp. Fest. p. 27. Numb. 32 38.
Duo illa civitatum Nomina mutata fuerunt, etc. Tremel. and Jun. in loc. Vid.
Bez. vit. Calv.
Thus many call Ministers, Priests; the Supper, a Sacrifice; and the Table,
Altar. What is this but to be guilty of sinful compliance, and needlessly keep
up the remembrance of those things which God would have forgotten? Isidore was
of opinion that to use the phrases of Idols, was no other than to Sacrifice to
them. We do not only Sacrifice (says he) to Devils when we burn Incense to
them, but likewise when we willingly, without any necessity moving us to it,
use their sayings. This is home to the case; but for the further informing and
satisfying your selves touching this matter, I leave you to advise with the
Authors set down in the Margent.

But you will say, when a man comes into a place and finds persons and things
bearing such names, what must he do? If he speak of them under those names, he
sins; if he does not, either the people do not understand him, or laugh him to
scorn: what then must be done? Answ. We must consider whether in the use of
such names in the places where we are, there be danger of scandal, yea, or no;
that is, whether there be any who are likely thereby either to be drawn to, or
confirmed in, their respect to Idols; or whether there be any who are likely to
be grieved at the use of such names. If there be not, then we may take the more
liberty; if there be, then, 1. where we have authority we must take away such
names, and appoint others in their stead. Thus the Children of Reuben dealt
with Nebo, and Baalmeon, two Idolatrous Cities which they repaired. And thus
they of Geneva dealt with Balthazar, the use of which name, they forbade. 2.
Where we have not authority, we must by such arguments, and reasons, as are
proper, persuade them who have, to do it. 3. Where we neither have authority to
alter, nor can persuade those who have, to do it, we may lawfully use them in
historical relations, and by way of distinction. Dagon, Ashtoreth, Milchom, and
diverse others mentioned in Scripture, were the names of Heathenish Idols, and
yet the sacred Penmen did in that way, make use of them. Use them we may, but
then we must do it so, that we make it to appear we do it not out of choice,
Neque puto solida ratione probabis, etc Dissert. de Cerem. c. 9. Sect. 7. p.
90. See Rivet. vol. 2. in Hos. 2.16. p. 558. Voetius select. disp. part. 2. p.
607.
or in a way of approbation, but out of necessity, and by way of distinction
only, that we may signify our minds, and make known what we have to impart.

These being our utmost bounds in this case, how Mr. Ritschel, who thinks, that
though we may lawfully lay aside abused phrases, that yet we are not by any law
bound to it, will justify the Lutherans of Augusta in the voluntary and
unnecessary retaining of the word Mass, which he thought fit to instance in, in
favor of his cause, I leave him to consider.

But to proceed; if God will have, not only the Idols themselves, but their
very names abolished, what shall we think of such Authors as Erasmus, Politian,
Lipsius, with many more of the same stamp, who upon every occasion invocate and
swear by the heathenish deities, mentioning them so frequently, as if they
could not speak elegantly, unless they stuff their discourses with their names?
What more ordinary than Dii Immortales, Propitia Minerva, Mehercule, and a
thousand more such passages unfit to enter into a Christians mouth? what
lightness and vanity of this kind Castellio has showed in his Translation,
Beza, Praef. in def. translat. suae cont. Castle. Praefat. in Nov. test. Grac.
160. Hist. t. 2. l. 35. p. 271. Psalm. 2.12. Ad Christum refer ipsa
absurditate absurdius est: in Job 31.17.
Stephanus, Thuanus, have pretty well told him. That Christians should use
heathenish terms in their ordinary discourse is sad, but that they should bring
them into the Bible, and make the Holy Ghost speak such language, is
intolerable. Drusius speaking of that passage, Kiss the Sun; and of some that
think the Psalmist does in the use of it allude to the manner of Idolaters,
who testified their reverence and subjection to their Idols by kissing their
hands, says, to referr it to Christ is most absurd. He thought it an
improbable thing that the Psalmist should express the honor due to Christ by
a Phrase in use among Idolaters. And there passes a manuscript from hand to
hand, said to be written by that learned man Dr. Sanderson, wherein he advises
us to observe formam sanorum verborum, and to abstain not only from suspected
opinions, but as much as may be also from scandalous and offensive Phrases. Nay
some of the Papists themselves do concur with us herein. Aquinas discoursing
of unfit words and expressions produces a passage out of an Epistle of Pope Leo
to Proterius Bishop of Alexandria, Vnde Leo Papa in quadam Epistola, etc. 22.
q. 11. a. 2.2. Nunquam probavi vocem Divus, etc. init. Beatus Sylvester nolens,
etc. Ration. l. 7. c. 1. n. 11. p. 426. See the Rhemists Annot. on 2 Cor. 6.14.
1 Timothy 6.4. Rev. 1.10.
wherein he tells him that the enemies of the Cross of Christ, do diligently
observe all our words and syllables, that so if we give them the least
occasion, they may improve it against us. And Bellarmine being grown old and
better advised, having in the first book and the third chapter of his
disputations, de verbo dei used the heathenish term Divus; he does in his
recognition of that book, admonish his Reader about it, telling him he never
thought fit to give that title to Saints, not only because he found it not used
by the ancient Latin Fathers, but likewise because the heathens gave it to
their gods, and therefore will have him to know that wherever he meets with
that term in his writings, it either fell from him imprudently, or else was put
in by the Printer without his order. And Durand shows that Pope Sylvester
judging it unfit to speak of the days under Jewish terms, such as prima
Sabbati, secunda Sabbati: or under heathenish terms, such as dies Solis, dies
Lunae: appointed they should speak of them under the terms, feria prima, feria
secunda; which he looked upon as more harmless and inoffensive. Had they taken
the same course in other matters, they had come nearer to the present example
of Hezekiah, and administered less matter of scandal and separation.

Sect. 5.
3. HE would have such times as have been devoted to superstitious and
idolatrous services, and thereby have been defiled, to be laid aside. It has
been the manner of superstitious and Idolatrous people, out of the blind
reverence and indiscreet devotion which they have born to their respective
deities, to set apart some special times in their behalf, which they have
esteemed holy, and spent in the solemnities belonging to them. As the Jews
celebrated feast days in the honor of their God, so did Idolaters in the
honor of theirs. Jeroboam did so in the honor of his Gods, 1 Kings 12.32.
Dan. 5.1, 5.
and Belshazzar in the honor of his. And who has not heard of the Saturnalia,
Bacchanalia, Lupercalia, and such like festivals among the Romans, in the
celebration whereof they committed such horrible wickedness? Now when men do
either appropriate time to false gods, take up superstitious opinions of them,
or employ them in unlawful services, they do thereby imprint such defilement on
them, as renders them unfit for more pious and holy use. The Jews not thinking
it sufficient to give their festivals the sober and just respect belonging to
them, did no less than make Idols of them, in ascribing to them those virtues
and excellencies which were not in them, and thereby cast such filth upon them,
as rendered them unmeet for those who professed the Gospel, and desired to keep
themselves pure, to have any thing to do with them. This the Apostles saw, and
therefore would not give way that the people under their charge should join in
the observance of them. And when Paul took notice that the Galatians,
notwithstanding this, did observe them, he blames them for it: Ye observe
(says he) days, Gal. 4.10
and months, and times, and years. Nay he was so affected with it, that he
tells them in plain terms, he was afraid he had bestowed upon them labor in
vain. The reason wherefore he was so much set against the observing of these
festivals, was not only because Christ was come, and the Ceremonial Law,
whereon they depended, abrogated, Cultum and meritum, etc. in loc.
but because the Jews both had, and did (as Pareus shows) abuse them to
superstition, by ascribing merit and satisfaction to them, which was highly
injurious to the interest of Christ, and the design of the Gospel. Council.
Tolet. 4. can. 10. Great. decret. part 2. cause. 26. q. 7. c. 13. Baron. ad ann.
184.
And if we consult the Records of the Church, we shall find that the Godly
Pastors, Teachers, and Christians of succeeding ages, looked upon the abuse of
such and such times and days, as a good and sufficient reason wherefore they
should decline the observation of them. They would not observe the Calends of
January, nor Playdayes in the beginning of the Spring, nor Easter at the usual
time, and that because Heathens and Jews had defiled them with their
superstitions. And if the grounds whereon some of the ablest defenders of
abused things, amongst us, be sound, they did no more herein than what was just
and reasonable. Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 69. p. 271.
They teach, that the works which God does in times give reputation to them,
and that his extraordinary works have advanced certain times to such a degree
of eminency, that all those who honor God ought to esteem them holy. Now if
this be so, may we not fairly infer, that evil works do in like manner
disparage times, and that the extraordinary wicked works that have been done by
superstitious, idolatrous, profane men, have sunk them down to such a degree
of vileness, that all those who honor God, ought to look upon them as unclean
and loathsome? If the old Maxim, contrariorum eadem est ratio, be true,
certainly we may: for good and evil works are contrary, and therefore if the
former have power to make holy and honorable, the latter have power to make
unholy and disgraceful. Much more might be said on this point, but I shall
have occasion to resume it hereafter, and therefore for the present shall
dismiss it.

Sect. 6.
4. HE would have such structures, buildings, places as have been consecrated
to superstitious and idolatrous uses, and thereby have received defilement, to
be laid aside. All the Temples, Chapels, Houses, Groves, and other places,
wherein Idolaters have celebrated their unlawful solemnities, he would have
demolished and thrown down. As soon as ever he appointed his people to make him
any place for the recording of his name, he declared his dislike of such places
as Idolaters had devised and used. He was so far from being pleased with them,
that he would not have one, though new built, and that for his own peculiar
service, so much as like thereunto. Vasquez says, De Adorat. l. 2. disp. 4. c.
4.
he chose the form of an Ark rather than another thing, for a testimony of his
presence, because it was such as they had not abused. But his dislike to such
kind of places, will appear more evidently from the many express commands he
has given to his people concerning them. Amongst other things which he gave in
charge to the Israelites in the Wilderness, this was one, that when they were
come into the Land of Cannan, they should destroy all places wherein the
inhabitants had committed their abominations, in the service of their gods.
Numb. 33.52. Deuteronomy. 7.5.
Ye shall (says he) pluck down all their high places, and cut down their
groves. This he over and over again required of them, but such was their
remissness and lukewarmness, that they neglected to do it. They took care to
avoid the rage of their enemies, and settle themselves in the Land; but as for
the extirpation of Idolatry, with the relics and occasions thereof, and the
setting up and maintaining of his pure worship and service, they minded it not:
which he taking notice of, sends an Angel to them to expostulate with them
about it, and blame them for it. Judge. 2.2
Upon this, they lift up their voices and weep, as a people sorry for their
neglect, and resolved to reform. But this proves only a flourish, and ends in a
return to their former security: for, the Angel is no sooner gone, but their
zeal is over, and they as far from doing their duty, as every they were before.
Nay so gross was their behavior in this business, that instead of abolishing
of such Idols as they had amongst them, (with the high places, houses, and
other things belonging to them) they fell a worshipping them; Judge. 2.11.
they served Baalim. Notwithstanding all the wonders God had wrought for them,
all that Moses, Joshua, and the Angel had said to them, and all that they
themselves had pretended, yet instead of renouncing Idols and serving the Lord,
they renounced the Lord and served Idols: Which he being highly moved with,
appears to Gideon by night, and bids him go and throw down the altar of Baal,
that his Father had, and cut down the grove that was by it; Judge. 6.25.
build an altar, take the second bullock, and offer a burnt-offering. He will
first have him throw down the altar of Baal, and then set up one for him: first
abolish idolatrous worship, and then set up that which was pure. And this was
no other than what upon good grounds he might command him to do; yet had Gideon
thought it meet to have expostulated, he might have urged many things against
his obedience. He might have pleaded that he was but young, and so less fit for
the undertaking of such a work: that there was a Magistrate in the place, to
whom it did more properly belong, who might manage the business with less
difficulty, and more success: that Joash his Father, whom he ought not to
affront, was the man: that the altar he was to throw down, and the grove he was
to destroy, stood in his ground: and that the ox he was to sacrifice was
likewise his; but having such warrant for his undertaking, he disputes not, but
obeys. He takes ten of his Servants, and goes in the night, and notwithstanding
the difficulty and dangerousness of the attempt, does as he was appointed.
Which heroical act being commanded by God, and ushered in by a special miracle
the Angel wrought, in fetching fire out of the Rock to consume his sacrifice,
one would have thought should have awakened the people, and stirred them up to
the performance of their long neglected duty; yet it prevailed not, but they
still proceeded in their former course, suffering the work required of them to
lie undone.

Notwithstanding this their stupidity and slothfulness, God still goes on, and
a there is opportunity declares his displeasure against polluted places, and
the sin therein committed. Though they were never so dear to him, and
convenient for his service, yet when they were polluted, he took up a
controversy against them. Shiloh was a place he much respected, was convenient
for the residence of the Ark, and the coming of the people from the several
Tribes thither to worship, and was honored therewith for several hundreds of
years; yet when it became polluted with the horrible profaneness and
wickedness that was there committed, he was so incensed against it, that he
removed the Ark from it, Jer. 7.12 1 Samuel 7.1.
and would not endure it should ever come there more. When he brought it back
from the Philistines, he would not (though the Tabernacle remained there)
suffer it to return thither, but placed it in Kirjath-jearim, in the house of
Abinadab. So likewise, Bethel was once dear to him, yet when Jeroboam had
defiled it with his Idolatry, he was so displeased with it, that he puts
another name upon it, denoting the wickedness of it, Hos. 4.15. 1 Kings 13.9,
24. See Dr. Stillingf. Orig. Sacr. l. 2. c. 5. sect. 2. p. 68. Ps. 78.60 1 Chronicles. 15.1.16.1.
and forbids his servants to come at it. And when the Prophet, contrary to his
command, ate and drank in it, he was so incensed against him, that he caused a
Lion to meet him and slay him. Nay the Tabernacle it self, though it was made
by his special appointment, consecrated to his special honor, and had for a
long time been employed in his special service, yet when it became defiled, he
cast it off, forsook it, and never made use of it more. He would neither have
the Ark brought back to it, nor it fetched to the Ark; but caused a new one to
be made, wherein it re^^^'d (...) the building of the Temple.

These you will easily grant, were emphatical intimations of his Mind, and strong
motives to stir up this people both to decline and abolish such abused places;
yet such was either their love to them, or want of zeal against them, that they
still let them alone, to the high provoking of him, and insnaring of
themselves, who were so apt to be overcome by every temptation. And thus
(notwithstanding the many good men that time after time, they had amongst them)
it continued all along down to the days of Hezekiah, who was the first that
undertook their removal. He being acquainted with the mind of God in this
particular, and endued with a Spirit of rare and princely zeal, no sooner gets
the Crown upon his head, but he goes up to the high places and destroys them,
with all the instruments, and incitements of Idolatry, he found in them.
Amongst all the particulars mentioned in his reformation, this is the first,
that he removed the high places. Presently after him, rises up the famous
Josiah, who though when he entered upon the Kingdom, 2 Kings 23.7. etc.
he came short of him in years, yet not in zeal. Such was his indignation
against all false and corrupt worship, that he went through out all Judah and
Israel, and demolished the high places, groves, houses, and what ever had been
an occasion thereof. I say Judah and Israel; for though Israel, at that time
were a distinct Kingdom, and governed by another power, yet the Inhabitants
thereof were then carried away, and those who remained, regarded not what
became of the Idols that were amongst them, which before they had so much doted
on, but gave way to this good Prince to come and do with them what he pleased;
and he having such liberty, went to them and utterly destroyed them. The like
is reported of Asa and Jehoshaphat: though their zeal did not carry them so
far as to remove all such places as had been abused, yet it put them upon
removing all such as had been abused to Idolatry. 2 Chronicles. 14.3.17.6. 1 Kings
15.14.22.43.
Its said both of the one and the other, that he took away the high places.
Indeed in the Kings, its said, they did not take away the high places; but
there the Holy Ghost speaks not ad idem: he there speaks of other high places,
then he intends in the Chronicles. There were two sorts of high places; excelsa
cultus idololatrici, and excelsa cultus divini. The former were consecrated to
Idols, and used in their worship; the latter, to God, and used in his. Now they
should have taken away both these; the former, because they had been abused to
Idolatry, the people having worshipped a false god in them: the latter, because
they both had been, and still were likely to be abused to superstition, the
people worshipping the true God in them, after a wrong manner, inasmuch as they
did it not in the place he had appointed and set apart for that end and
purpose. But they contented themselves with removing the former, suffering the
latter to remain, which the Holy Ghost takes notice of, and blames them for.

Thus you see what God commanded, Julius Firmicus de Err. profan. relig. p. 68.
Ed. Wouver. Enseb. vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 52. Niceph. l. 8. c. 33. l. 12. c. 24,
etc. Socrat. l. 5. c. 15. etc. Sozom. l. 2. c. 4. l. 5. c. 7. l. 7. c. 15.
Ruffin. l. 2. c. 23. Theodoret. l. 5. c. 3. August. Sermon. 241. Cent. Magd.
cent. 4. c. 15. Zanch. vol. 2. col. 406. Com. in Deuteronomy. 12. 2. Colloq. Momp.
part 2. p. 29. Com. in 2 Reg. 10.27. Pol. Christ. l. 3. p. 229. Synt. l. 10. c.
68. vol. 2. col. 711.
and the most pious Kings in the time of the Old Testament, practiced, as to
the present business. They suffered not the Temples, Chapels, Houses, Groves,
and other places that had been abused, to remain; but set upon them, and
demolished them. And if we come in to the times of the New Testament, we shall
find, that such Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, States, as have been tender
of the glory of God, and the beauty of Religion, have taken the same course. No
sooner did the civil powers after our Saviors time, become Christian, but the
Pastors of the Church addressing themselves to them, and acquainting them with
the danger of the reviving of Idolatry, so long as the Pagan Temples remained,
they gave order that they should be demolished. And when God was pleased some
years ago, to begin a reformation of Religion amongst us, the Magistrates of
these and other Nations did the like; they fell upon the Abbeys, Monasteries,
and other places that the Papists had polluted with their Idolatry, and pulled
them down to the ground. And herein they did no more than what was allowed by
Calvin, Beza, Wolphius, Danaeus, Polanus, and the ablest Teachers of the
reformed Churches. Zanchy, who has writ a learned Treatise on this subject, is
so peremptory in it, that he cries out, Quis hunc zelum Domini improbare queat?
Who can be against this zeal of the Lord?

Let such places alone, and there is danger they will in time be employed to
bad uses, as they have been heretofore. Hereof History affords too many
instances. Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 52. Theod. hist. l. 5. c. 20. Socrat.
hist. l. 3. c. 1. Zanch. vol. 2. col. 709. Pet. Mart in 2 Reg. 10.27.
Constantine hated Idols, forbad the worship of them, and destroyed diverse of
their Temples, yet left others standing: and so upon Julians coming to the
Empire, and allowing the Heathens the liberty of their religion, they entered
into them, and celebrated their idolatrous mysteries in them, as in times past.
This Theodosins taking notice of, did not only forbid the worship of Idols, and
destroy some of their Temples, but levelled all before him, and thereby buried
Idolatry, with the instruments of it, in oblivion. Though pious Magistrates do,
by laws, forbid Idolaters the worship of their false Gods, yet so long as they
see their Temples stand, they will be in hopes of recovering of their liberty;
and when they have it, will enter into them, and abuse them as much as ever.
Lavater therefore thinks it meet, that all such places should be destroyed;
Com. in 2 Paral. 12.2. Apis, caeterorumque deorum aedes dirui jubet, etc.
Justin. hist. l. 1.
alleging the saying of the famous Zisca, concerning Monasteries. Non
relinquendos esse nidos ciconiarum, ne eos repeterent. We must not suffer the
nests of these Storks to remain, lest they return to them again. It is to be
feared, that so long as such places remain, the Idolatry committed in them,
will scarcely be suppressed. This the light of Nature taught Cambyses, who
fearing the superstition of Egypt would not be rooted out, if the Temples
wherein it was seated, were not taken away, gave order that the houses of Apis
and Ammon should be pulled down. On the contrary, when men see not only their
Idols destroyed, but their Temples and Houses pulled down, they will despair of
the reviving of their religion, and so be more easily drawn to close with true
piety. Eusebius has writ a Chapter on purpose to acquaint us herewith; Vit.
Christ. l. 3. c. 53.
wherein he tells us, that when the Heathens, upon Constantines demolishing the
Temples of Venus and Aesculapius, saw how little their Idols were able to do
for themselves, and what a desperate condition their religion was in, they fell
to scorn them, and embraced Christianity.

But perhaps you will say, if it be thus, what shall we think of our selves?
either such places as have been polluted with Idolatry, are not to be
demolished, or they are: if they are not, then the forementioned powers erred
in doing it: if they are, then we err, in not doing it. The generality of our
Churches and Chapels, are such as have been defiled with Popish abominations;
how then, if these principles be sound, shall we justify the retaining them?
Ans. We must distinguish, 1. betwixt such buildings, as in respect of their
situation, figure, dimensions, and other circumstances, are, notwithstanding
their former abuse, fit for religious and honest uses; and such as are not. 2.
Betwixt the using of such buildings with their idolatrous ornaments, and
adjuncts, and without them. 3. Betwixt such buildings as stand amongst those as
are scandalized with them, and such as do not. 4. Betwixt such buildings as
stand in places where Idolatry is like to be restored, and such as do not. Now
as for those buildings that have been abused in idolatrous services, and are in
respect of their situation, figure, or the like, unfit for profitable uses, and
remain decked with their Idols attire, and stand amongst such people as are
scandalized with the use of them, and are in such places where there is danger
of the return of Idolatry; such are utterly unlawful, and ought as well as the
high places, and groves, to be removed.

This I speak of the former sort of buildings; then, as for such as in respect
of their situation, figure, and the like, are fit for profitable uses, are
stripped of their Idols attire, stand not amongst such as are scandalized
therewith, neither are in such places where there is danger of the return of
Idolatry, those we may lawfully retain. Numb. 16.39.
As God allowed Eleazar, to take the Censers, wherewith Corah and his
rebellious company offered incense, to make plates for the altar: Josh. 6.24.
and Joshua, to take the gold and silver, and the vessels of brass and iron,
which he found in Jericho, Judge. 6.27.
and put them into the sacred treasury: and Gideon, to take the bullock that
Joash his Father had designed for sacrifice unto Baal, and therewith make a
burnt offering to the Lord: So he allows us in this case, to spare such
buildings, as those I have now mentioned, and convert them to an holy and
profitable use. Herein we have the concurrence of Tertullian, Augustine, De
Coron. Milit. c. 8. Ep. 154. ad Publ.
and other of the Ancients, who notwithstanding their great zeal against
Idolatry, and eminent endeavors to extirpate it, thought such buildings as
these might be retained, and employed in the service of God. Which our Edw. 6.
and other Protestant Kings and States, with the Clergy belonging to them,
taking into consideration, thought it not meet utterly to abolish the several
Churches and Chapels within their Dominions, See Zanc. vol. 2. col. 711.
Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 17. p. 149 Hall against the Brownists, sect. 45.
Gillesp. against Cerem. part 3. c. 2. p. 136. Rutherf. of Scandal, q. 6. p. 62.
though they knew they had been horribly abused by Popish Idolatry; but
stripping them of their filthy Ornaments, they converted them to another and
better use, wherein they have served ever since, and I trust will do still. I
know there have been some amongst us, who have held the retaining and use of
such places altogether unlawful, but the generality of Orthodox Writers are,
and that upon good grounds, herein against them.

This, I would have understood of such buildings as are necessary, commodious
and useful. As for pompous Cathedrals, and such like places, that serve for
little, but to mind us of the superstitious oftentation, and vanity of former
times, and bolster up usurping Prelates, in their Pride and Lordliness, I have
no more to say for them, but that it were well, if with the high places, they
were pulled down, and the materials thereof converted to a better use. That you
may not think I have only the Brownists, and such kind of persons to bear me
company herein, hear what the learned Beza has. Et quod ad me attinet optarim,
etc. Colloq. Mompelg. part 2. p. 29. See also Rutherf. of Scandal, q. 6. p. 77.
I could wish (says he) that those great Temples which in many places do by
their very form testify Popish Idolatry, and are framed rather to walk and
make a noise, than commodiously to receive auditors, or hear the preachers, had
been demolished from the beginning, and others more convenient for Sermons, and
administration of the Sacraments, had been erected. I confess if we were to
revive the Old Testament-administration, turn every Diocese into a land of
Jewry, and have a Church in each of them after the similitude of Solomon's
Temple, there were some reason for their continuance; but being it is
otherwise, as every one knows that is not wilfully blind, it is but fit they
should be taken down, and the materials of them otherwise employed. How well
then those deserve, who instead of appearing against them, expend so much
study, pains, time, treasure in repairing and upholding of them, I leave to all
sober men to judge; I know no other reward they can look for, but that which
the superstitious and hypocritical Jews met with; Isa. 1.12.
Who has required this at your hands?

5. He would have such utensils, as have been devoted to superstitious and
idolatrous uses, and thereby have been defiled, to be laid aside. All such
Altars, Images, Books, Relics, Vessels, and other instruments, as have been
employed to the furthering of false, and corrupt worship, he would have
extirpated and removed. Though in themselves they are never so innocent, rich,
splendid, yet when once they have been serviceable to such wickedness, he would
have them cast away, as things unfit to be retained, by those who profess his
Name, and are addicted to his pure worship and service. This appears by diverse
express precepts he gave to the Israelites to that purpose. Exo. 34.13. Numb.
33.52. Deuteronomy. 7.25.
Ye shall (says he) destroy their altars, and break their images. And, ye
shall destroy all their pictures, and all their molten images. And, the graven
images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou shall not desire the silver
or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee. He would have them not only to
detest the gods of the Heathens themselves, but also the altars, images,
groves, and whatever was serviceable to them; and he would have them not only
to detest them, but abolish them, as things execrable and unfit to be endured
by them. And as if this were not sufficient to evidence his indignation against
such things, he gives it in charge to them, that when any City revolted from
his worship, and turned to Idolatry, they should destroy it, and all that was
in it. Deuteronomy. 13.15, 16, 17
Thou shall (says he) smite the inhabitants of that City, with the edge of the
sword, destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle thereof
with the edge of the sword. And thou shall gather all the spoil of it into the
midst of the street thereof, and shall burn with fire the City, and all the
spoil thereof every whit, and it shall be an heap for ever, it shall not be
built again. And there shall cleave naught of the accursed thing to thine hand,
etc. Oh the heat and strength of divine jealousy! They must smite the
inhabitants, destroy the cattle, demolish the houses, and consume the spoil
without sparing, or reserving any part thereof. Hence we find that the good
Magistrates of succeeding times, when they met with such matters as Idolaters
had abused in their worship, they presently laid hold on them, and abolished
them as things defiled and unclean. When Hezekiah came to the Throne, he took
care that all stumbling blocks, and whatever was disgraceful and unbecoming
true Religion, should be removed; and in order thereunto gave it in charge to
the Levites, 2 Chronicles. 29.5, 16.
that they should carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place; and it is
said, that they in obedience to his command, brought out all the uncleanness
which they found in the Temple. By this filthiness and uncleanness, Quae sunt
impura, aut ad prefanum cultum invecta, etc Trem. and Jun. in loc.
we are to understand those impure and profane things, which being brought
into the Temple, had rendered it filthy and unclean; and these the Levites
brought forth and destroyed. Thus they did in particular with the altars which
were in Jerusalem; for such on the one hand, was the zeal of Ahaz to his filthy
Idols, that he built altars to them in every corner in Jerusalem: and such on
the other hand, was the zeal of Hezekiah to God, that he caused them to be
thrown down and removed. 2 Kings 23.4, 6, 11, 12, 14.
And Josiah who came after him did the like; he took all the vessels that were
made for Baal, and for the grove, and all the host of heaven: also the
pourtraicture of the grove, that was in the house of the Lord, the horses the
Kings of Israel had given to the Sun, with the charrets belonging to them:
likewise the altars, and images which his ancestors had made; all these he took
and destroyed. And if we descend to the times of the New Testament, we shall
meet with the like zeal. Act. 19.19.
The Evangelist in the history of the Apostles, shows that when the evil spirit
had prevailed over the Jewish Exorcists, many of them who had studied the black
art, came and brought their conjuring books, wherewith they had committed so
much superstition and wickedness, and sacrificed them to justice in the fire.
And agreeable hereunto is what we find recorded of the Christians of
aftertimes. Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 52. Niceph. l. 8. c. 33. Sozom. l. 1.
c. 4. Voetius disp. part 3. p. 306.
The good Emperors did not only destroy the Temples of Idols, but likewise the
statues, images, and whatever they could light on that had been serviceable to
them. Constantines severity to the (...), or imperial standard, is well known;
when he saw his Soldiers adored it, and made an Idol of it, he abolished it,
and substituted the Cross in its place. And the States of Vtretcht, lighting in
the year 1609. on the whole fardle of Mass accoutrements, did notwithstanding
the costliness thereof, take it into the Market place, and there publicly burn
it. Of instances of this nature, there is such plenty in all Histories, that I
shall not trouble you with the mention of any more.

6. He would have such rites and ceremonies as have been abused in
superstitious and idolatrous services, See Mr. Gillesp. Disp. of cerem. pt. 3
chapter 2. p. 129.
and thereby have been defiled, to be laid aside. Whether they are such as
consist in vestures, postures, or actions, when they have been employed to
corrupt and bad uses, and thereby have contracted a stain upon them, he would
have them thrown by, as being thenceforth disgraceful and scandalous, and by
virtue thereof unfit to be used, either in his worship, or by his people. The
learned Grotius renders this as one reason of the abolishing of the Mosaical
Ceremonies, that they had been so much abused by the Jews, who overlooking the
design of God in that paedagogical administration, under which they were, made
other use of them than they were appointed. Postquam in illis praecipua pars
pietatis collocari caeperat, etc. Ann. in Johan. 4.23.
After (says he) a principal part of religion began to be placed in them, they
were to be plucked up as tares hindering the Corn. The error of the Jews
consisted not so much in the Neglect, as in the overvaluing of them; they laid
greater stress on them than God would have had them, preferring the observation
of them before the discharge of those substantial, indispensable duties he
required of them: which he taking notice of, did for that and other reasons,
think meet to abolish and remove them. And if he abolished his own ceremonies,
which had a divine stamp on them, and had been so eminently useful, when they
had been abused; we may then fairly infer, he would have humane ceremonies that
have no such stamp upon them, neither have been so useful, when they have been
abused, to be abolished. And this was one, if not the only ground of our
Saviors appearing against washing of hands before meat. It was in it self both
an innocent and convenient rite; but the Jews superstitiously abused it, making
it more necessary, and keeping a greater stir about it than was fit. See Dr.
Hamm. in Mat. 15.3. Mar. 7.4.
The Sanhedrim appointed it to be observed as a standing Ordinance, insomuch
that a man must not eat, till he had performed it. Nay some of their Rabbi's
laid such stress on it, that they counted him guilty of no less than a capital
offense, and worthy of death who neglected it. R. Aquiba says in plain terms,
that he who takes meat with unwash'd hands is worthy of death; and being in
prison, and having water given him both to wash with and drink, and by accident
spilling one half of it, he washed him in the remainder, thinking it fitter to
do so, than drink it: nay to dye rather than to violate the tradition: of his
Ancestors. And R Jose says, that to eat with unwash'd hands, is all one as to
lie with a Whore: which yet their law punished with death. Now our Savior
taking notice of the great and horrible abuse of this rite, charges the Scribes
and Pharisees with it, asserts the liberty of his Disciples, and encourages them
to stand out against it. Though a rite in it self be never so lawful, yet gross
abuse renders it unfit for further use. And thus diverse Persons and Churches in
different ages, See Hommius disp. Theolog. 45. Sect. 4. p. 246.
have conceived, and therefore have declared against, nay wholly abolished
various ceremonies merely upon this account, because they have been abused, and
have looked upon that as a sufficient reason for their so doing. It seems to be
a thing of an arbitrary and indifferent nature whether in the ordinance of
Baptism, Quia nunc huc usque ab hareticis infans in baptismo tertio mergebatur
fiendum apud vos esse, non censeo, etc. l. 1. Ep. 41.
we use a trin-immersion, that is, a threefold dipping, or plunging: or a
single one; yet some ancient Churches have refused to use the former, upon this
account, that it was abused by Heretics and Idolaters. The western Bishops,
taking notice how the Arrians made use of it to signify a trinity of natures
in the godhead, thought those Churches did no other than what was convenient,
who declined it. Gregory the great, writing to Leander one of the Bishops of
Spain, whose manner was to dip but once, tells him that they at Rome did it
three times, and upon what account: partly to represent our Saviors lying
three days in the grave, partly to signify the Trinity of persons subsisting
in the divine Essence, Simplicem teneamus, baptismi mersionem, etc. can. 5.
yet lets him know that in regard Heretics used to do it, he thought they in
Spain ought to forbear it, and to dip but once. And the fourth Council of
Toledo treading in his steps, do in the like manner assert and commend the use
of single immersion, and that for this reason, lest they should seem to allow
of the opinion of the Arrians, who used it to a contrary end. Though the
Bishops of this Council thought trin-immersion lawful, nay in some respects
convenient and useful, yet in regard Heretics with whom they were not to hold
communion, or confirm in their way, both had, and did abuse it, they thought
good to wave it, and content themselves with a single immersion, which had not
been so abused, neither neither would be so scandalous and offensive. And the
Divines, of the reformed Churches, beyond the Seas, do ordinarily in their
writings, show the concurrence of their judgments with them herein. Pelican is
full and vehement; Voluit Deus una lege abominari, and abjici, etc. in Levit.
18.3, 4.
writing upon one of the Levitical precepts against the Jews symbolizing with
Idolaters, he thus delivers himself: God (says he) by this one law would have
them cast away, and abhor whatsoever had in worship pleased the Gentiles; much
more care ought Christians to have of this, who being taught to worship God in
Spirit and Truth, ought first and last to have abhorred the idle, unreasonable,
and deceitful forms and rites of Idolaters: Modo ne superstitio and pravus
abusus eos abolere cogat. Epist. ad Versipell. p. 413
which if the ancient Bishops had well understood, the Church had never been
pestred with so many profane rites and base ceremonies, by which it is come to
pass, that some Christians differ little from the ancient Gentiles, save in the
names of their Idols. To the same purpose writes Calvin; As for ancient rites
(says he) which it is lawful indifferently to use, because they are
consentaneous to the word, we reject them not, provided, superstition and evil
abuse, compel us not to abolish them. Addititias illas innumerabiles nugas,
etc. Disp. Genev. 66, 84. and de Caena adv Hargium. p. 4
Beza goes so far, that I believe there are few Non-conformists in England will
say more. The trifles (says he) which had proceeded to manifest superstition,
we have abolished as will worship; And we affirm that they who retain the
relics of unprofitable ceremonies, and out of preposterous judgment correct
them rather than abolish them, deserve ill of the Churches. Yet some there are
who would have Pastors put on garments, which if not by their first bringing
in, yet by their abuse are Baals garments. The Church of England likewise,
renders this (as you heard even now) as the weightyest reason of abolishing
certain of the ceremonies, that they have been so much abused. Nay Lyra, a
Papist, writeing on the forementioned precept, against symbolizing, says,
Intendit excludere a filiis Israel omnem Gentilem ritum.
that God intended thereby to exclude from the children of Israel every rite of
the Gentiles. And the reason hereof was, partly because they had abused, and
defiled them with their superstitions; and partly because he would not have his
people hold communion with them. And thus I have dispatched the second
particular, and showed what those things be that God upon their being abused,
would have laid aside.

Sect. 7.
Thirdly, HAving in the preceding particular, See this point handled in Zanch.
vol. 2. col. 406, 799
showed what things upon their being abused, are to be laid aside, I shall in
the next place, acquaint you to whom the power, and duty of doing it, does
belong. If such things must be removed, it concerns us to inquire who must do
it, that so in order to the effecting of it, Walae^s, loc. co^^. p. 542.
we may neither usurp what is above us, nor neglect what belongs to us. Now for
the better clearing of this matter, we must consider that the management of the
work, is either more private or public. The more private management of it
belongs to every particular Christian, who in his respective place, is to
contribute his assistance toward the promoting of it. Ministers in their
places, are by preaching, writing, discoursing, to show the scandalousness and
dangerousness of them; people in their places are to decline the use of them;
and both Ministers and people in their several places, are to remove such of
them, as are in their own power. Hence we find that when Jacobs household gave
to him, the strange gods which were in their hands, with the earrings which
either had, or might easily have been abused to Superstition and Idolatry, Genesis
35.4.
he took them and hid them, by the Oak in Shechem. And when the Jewish
exorcists were convinced of their error, Acts 19.19. Quisque enim pater
familias est quidam minor magistratus domi suae; etc. Zanch. vol. 2. de Imag.
col. 405. v. Contz. Polit. l. 2. c. 16. Erastus Conf. These. l. 3. p. 128.
Maccov. Vedelius, Utenbogard, Grotius, and the Belgic Arminians, with diverse
amongst our selves.
they brought those mischievous books which they had abused in their profane
divinations, and burnt them in the fire. This is a more private management of
it, belonging to every good man, who so far as his propriety and dominion does
extend, is to endeavor the removal of such defiled and offensive things. The
more public management of it, belongs to the Civil Magistrate, who by virtue
of the power wherewith God has entrusted him, is to take a view of his whole
Dominions, extirpate and abolish whatever is prejudicial and injurious to Gods
pure worship and service.

Concerning the Authority of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion,
Writers discourse variously. The Jesuits on the one hand, give him too little;
Erastus and his followers, on the other, give him too much. The former, look
upon him, as such a terrestrial animal, that they allow him no more, than only
a power to defend and execute the Popes determinations, and impositions, that
is to say, to be his Vassal and do what ever he will have him. The latter, take
him to be invested with such power, that they think he may devise new forms of
government, make new laws, institute new officers, appoint new ceremonies, and
do great matters. It is not necessary here to undertake the deciding of this
controversy; yet for the better clearing of the matter in hand, I shall in a
few words, intimate to you, my apprehensions concerning it. Estius in 4. sent.
did. 18. sect. 1. p. 258.
There is (as the Schoolmen distinguish) a twofold authority; the one of
order, the other of jurisdiction. The former consists in a power to preach the
Word, dispense the Sacraments; and belongs only to Ministers, who are duly
qualified for, and lawfully called thereunto. The latter consists in a power to
govern the Church, and rule all persons, and things therein. And this likewise
is twofold, spiritual and temporal; the one, consists in a power to apply the
keys, exercise Ecclesiastical censures, suspend, excommunicate, absolve; and
this as well as the authority of order belongs only to Ministers. In the time
of the Old Testament, Numb. 18.7. 2 Samuel 6.7. 1 Samuel 13.13. 2 Chronicles. 26.18.
Heb. 5.4.
the power both of order and spiritual jurisdiction pertain'd only to the
Priest. Vzzah, might not touch the ark; Saul, offer burnt offerings; Vzziah,
burn incense. And, as it was then, so it is now: No man (says the Apostle)
takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron.
Necessity indeed varies the case; but in an ordinary way, none may meddle
therewith, but only such as by a legal and fit designation, are set apart for
the Ministry. The other, consists in a power to oversee, See Salmas. Apparat.
ad lib. de Primat. p. 303. ed. Lugd. 1645.
regulate and dispose in a political way, of all matters in the Church to the
advantage thereof; and this belongs to the Civil Magistrate, who though he has
not any formal Church power, yet he has such a power as he is to exercise for,
and in the behalf of it. Though he has not any power privative, or contrary to
that of the Church, yet he has a power cumulative, and auxiliary, which he is
to exert, improve, and lay out in the behalf of her. Constantine told his
Clergy, Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 24. p. 397.
that God appointed them Bishops, (...), of the things within the Church, or
Temple; and him (...), of the things without it. Though the Magistrate have not
power in sacris, so as to preach the Word, administer the Sacraments, and
dispense censures; yet he has power circa sacra, so that he both may, and
ought to do many things in relation thereunto. He is to defend the Church from
the rage and violence of persecutors; back divine Laws with his Civil sanction,
that so they may be of more authority with his people; see that all Officers in
the Church do their duty; when there is occasion convene Synods, and if there
be need preside in them; take care that such Constitutions be made in them as
may help to maintain unity and order, and prevent division and confusion; see
that Ministers have competent maintenance; erect Schools of learning; Mr. Nigh
of the Oath of Supremacy, p. 16. Mr. Tombs his Supplement, p. 3.
and purge his Dominions of superstition and idolatry, with all such things as
have been abused therein, that so God may be purely worshipped, and true
Religion may flourish and prosper. And, if it were not a despotical,
nomothetick, arbitrary, but only a subordinate, diatactick, auxiliary power
that was aimed at in the Oath of Supremacy, as some reverend men from good
testimonies prove it was not, I see no reason wherefore the Centuriators,
Calvin, or others, Cent. 7. praefat. Com. in Am. 7.12 In what sense the
Christian Magistrate may be allowed, and called the head of the Church: See in
Wendel. System. Maj. l. 1. c. 28. p. 1307. Isa. 44.28.49.23,
should so exclaim against it. It seems to me to be no more, than what the
Scripture does allow; and therefore I am apt to think it was misinformation,
that put those excellent men into such indignation. However, to prove here that
the Magistrate both may, and ought to perform all these particulars, is more
than the orderly prosecution of my present theme does require. It is sufficient
for me in this place, to make good that branch of the last particular which
concerns the removal of such things as have been abused in superstitious and
idolatrous services; and that I shall endeavor to do, in these following
particulars.

1. God in Scripture gives the Magistrate such appellations, and titles, as
show he ought to do it. He styles him Shepherd, Father, and the like; and that
not only as to the Commonwealth over which he is, but as to the Church within
his Dominions. Now though we must not stretch metaphors too far, yet this we
may safely conclude, that as Shepherds, Fathers, and such like relations are to
provide Necessaries for their flocks, children, and those who are under their
charge, and remove stumbling blocks, and whatever may be hurtful to them; so
Magistrates are to provide necessaries, for the Church over which they are, and
remove such things as have been abusd in corrupt services, and whatever else
they meet with that tends to infect, or ensnare.

2. He charges the punishing, suppressing, and purging of Idolatry and false
Worship, in a peculiar manner upon him. Deuteronomy. 17 5.
The judicial Law required of the Jews, that if there were any amongst them
guilty of Idolatry, they should bring him to the gates of the City, and there
upon his being convicted by the evidence of two or three witnesses, stone him
to death. The reason wherefore they were to bring him to the gates of the City,
was because the places of public judicature, where offenders were tried and
received their sentence, were there. And if the Magistrate were thus to take
cognizance of, sit in judgment on, and remove idolatrous persons, we may
reasonably infer, he was to do the like with idolatrous things.

3. He imputes the rising up, and practice of Idolatry, to the want of a
Magistrate. When he has given us an account how Micah had an house of Gods, an
Ephod and Teraphim, how his mother had a graven and molten Image, Judge. 17.6.
he immediately adds, that in those days there was no King in Israel. Where we
a^^ not to take the word (...), translated King, strictly, for a particular
kind of Magistrate passing under that name, (for in that sense the Israelites
never as yet, either at one time or other, had any King) but largely, for a
supreme Magistrate in general, without respect to this, or that particular
kind. And so the meaning is, that it was a time of Anarchy, and confusion,
wherein the people having no better guide than their own corrupt and licentious
natures, broke forth into sad extravagancies, such as superstition, idolatry,
profaneness; whereas if there had been a good Magistrate, he would have kept
them in awe, and restrained them. He would either have prevented Micahs
Idolatry, or else presently have gone and suppressed it.

4. He takes it well from Magistrates, when they employ their power, Exodus
32.20. Josh. 22.20. 1 Kings 15.12. 2 Chronicles. 17.6. 2 Chronicles. 33.15. 2 Kings 23.4.
1 Kings 15.4.22.43. 2 Kings 15.4.
and interest in rooting out Idolatry, with all the instruments, memorials, and
occasions thereof. Moses, Joshua, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Manasses, Josiah,
did all eminently lay out themselves herein, and he accepted of their zeal, and
commended them for it.

5. He is so far from being displeased with them for engaging in such matters,
that he is offended with them that they proceed no further, and blames them for
it. He reproves Asa, Jehosaphat, Azariah, that when they threw down the Idols,
which they found in the land, they did not with them destroy the high places,
but suffered them to remain, and the people to burn incense in them. Here two
exceptions are made: 1. It Is said, that what is alleged from these instances,
concerns the Kings of Judah, who were types of Christ, and therefore though
they had, and exercised such a power, it does not follow, especially now, the
Messiah being come, that others may do it. Answ. 1. Diverse of the forecited
places did not only concern the Kings of Judah, as it was a divided State, but
also the Kings of Israel, and all Kings and Princes whatsoever. Not only the
Kings of Judah, but the Kings of Israel, and other foreign Princes, Ezr.
5.13.6.1. Neh. 2.8
such as Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes, did as much in the matter of Religion, as
the thing in the present discourse amounts to, and yet the Holy Ghost is so far
from blaming them, that he records it to their praise, and commends them for
it. 2. How does it appear that the Kings of Judah were types of Christ? It does
not follow that because they were his predecessors, or bore some resemblance of
him, that therefore they were types of him. 3. Admit that in some respects they
were types of him, yet that in it self without divine commission, could not
empower them to do any more, than those who were no types at all of him. It is
not the being types, but the having a command, that invests men with power to
undertake and perform services. But 2. It Is further said, that the condition of
Kings, in the Old Testament, was different from what it is now. They had
Prophets to advise with, and receive directions from, which in these days they
have not. Answ. 1. Their engaging so far in Religious matters, was not from
hence that they had Prophets to consult with, 2 Kings 23.24. 2 Chronicles.
16.40.30.16.31.3, 21
but from this, that the Law required them to do it, the directions whereof
they preferred before any particular suggestions whatsoever. Though they had
Prophets by them, nay though some of them were Prophets themselves, yet unless
it were in some special, extraordinary cases they kept to the Law, and followed
the directions thereof. 2. What is here objected against the power of
Magistrates in the time of the Old Testament, may also be objected against the
power of Priests, concerning whom it may as well be said, that they had
Prophets to advise with, and that therefore what they did in reforming the
Church, is of no force to us. Which consequence I know will be thought unsound
and weak, and yet if we admit the former, I see not how we can withstand it.
Will it be said, that the Priests had a standing Law, to authorize and warrant
their proceedings? I answer, so had the Magistrate as well as they. Or will it
be said, that that Law was granted to the Magistrate with respect to the
Prophets, with whom he was to advise: What hinders but I may say the like of
the Priests? These Exceptions being thus removed out of the way, I shall go on
with my Discourse.

6. The Church of God has all along acknowledged and taught, that this work
belongs to Magistrates; and thereupon has still as there has been occasion
and encouragement, Quomodo igitur Reges serviunt Deo in timore, etc. t. 2. Ep.
50. ad Bonif.
called upon them to perform it. Augustine in that known place of his, is very
clear and full. Speaking out of the second Psalm, of the duty of Kings, he thus
expresses himself. How therefore do Kings serve the Lord in fear and trembling?
No otherwise but by prohibiting and punishing those things which are done
against his command, He serves him after one manner as he is a man, and after
another, as he is a King. As he is a man, he serves him by living religiously:
as he is a King, by establishing such kind of Laws with convenient rigor, as
do command things just, and forbid things unjust; even as Hezekiah served him,
by destroying the groves, and the temples of the Idols, and the high places
which were built against his commandment; t. 10. de Sermon. Dom. in Mont. Hom. 6.
Item placuit ab Imperatoribus gloriosissimis peti, etc. Conc. Carth. 5. can. 15
See Corp. Conf. ed. Genev. 1654. part 2. p. 38, 90, 198. pt. 1.60, 146, 107 124.
as Josiah served him, by doing the same things which Hezekiah did; as the King
of the Ninivites served him, by compelling the whole City to make their peace
with him. Thus that grave and judicious Father; and yet as if this were not
sufficient, he speaks more fully in another place, to which I refer you. Some
years after this, the Bishops assembled in the Council of Carthage, decreed,
(as you have before heard) that the most glorious Emperors should be entreated,
that Relics not only in Images, but in all manner of places whatsoever,
groves or trees, should be utterly demolished. And the whole stream of
Protestant Divines, in their public Confessions, Bodies of Divinity,
Commentaeries, Controversies, do still assert and maintain, that the defense of
Religion, reforming disorders in the Church, extirpating false worship, with
all the appurtenances thereof, does belong to the Magistrate, and that he is to
take care truly and faithfully to perform the same. To this purpose speak the
Augustan, Saxon, Helvetian, Bohemian, Dutch, Scotch, English Confessions. To
this purpose likewise, speak Pet. Martyr, Zanchy, Bucan, Baldwin, Loc. com.
class. 4. c. 13. sect. 31. vol. 2. col. 788. Loc. com. p. 763. Cas. l. 2. c. 6.
p. 177. Synops. pur The. disp. 50. sect. 40. t. 1. expl. decal. p. 1372.
System. Maj. p. 1307. Defen. p. 519, 610 Tortura Tort. p. 364. De Jud. cont. p.
91. Against Milit. p. 109. Conf. with Heart, p. 586. Cas. l. 5. c. 25. Due Right
etc. p. 393. Jus Divin. p. 69. Ed. Rainolds Sermon. of the Peace of Jerusalem, p.
28.
Polyander, Rivet, Wendeline, Jewel, Andrews, Davenant, Bramhall, Rainolds,
Ames, Rutherford, with diverse others of the greatest and eminentest lights that
these latter ages have afforded: which I mention the rather, because there are
some amongst us, who look upon the Magistrate as a mere civil Officer,
appointed only to take care of, and secure men's civil rights and interests,
having nothing at all to do in matters of Religion. A great deal more might be
said in confirmation of the thing asserted; but what I have in these
particulars briefly hinted, may suffice.

But perhaps you will say, in case the Magistrate either though ignorance, error,
slothfulness, wilfulness, or the like, refuse to remove offensive things, what
course then must we take? Must we without his consent, go and remove them our
selves, or must we let them alone, and suffer them to remain as Snares and
Engines, to entrap people, and draw them to sin? Answ. As for those things to
which we have jus dominii, a civil right, and over which we have a lawful power
to dispose of them as we please, we may remove them our selves; but as for
those to which we have no right, and over which we have no power, we may not do
it. We may indeed, and ought to declare our dislike of them, decline the use of
them, admonish, persuade, and entreat those to whom they do belong to do it,
showing them out of the word, how unlawful they are, what others have done in
the like case, and of what ill consequence the retaining of them may be;
withal, praying that our admonitions, persuasions, entreaties, may be
effectual, and that God would open their eyes, to see the vanity of such
things, and incline their hearts to abolish them. This doubtless we may do, but
to go and take them forcibly out of the Proprietors hands, and dispose of them,
as we see good, unless we have some special order, either from God, or the
Supreme Magistrate under whom they live, we may not do it. What is ours, we may
dispose of as we please; but what is another, we may not meddle with it, Genesis
31.19. In modo peccare videtur primo quia aufert rem alienam quod est contra
legem, etc, Pareus in loc. Dan. 3.18.
except we be in some special manner empowered thereunto. Though Labans Images
were (as the septuagint calls them) (...), Idols, yet was it not justifiable in
Rachel to take them from him. Nebuchadnezzar's Image likewise, was an Idol, yea
an abominable and filthy one, and upon that account Shadrach, Meshech, and
Abednego, justly refused to worship it, but yet they might not lay violent
hands on it, neither did they offer to do it. And when Christ had offered up
himself in Sacrifice to his Father, and thereby abolished the ceremonial law,
how many things in the Temple, did thereupon become useless and dangerous, and
how sadly did the Jews abuse them every day, to the great prejudice of the
Gospel? Yet did not the Apostles for all that, Furiosorum Circumcellionum est
ubi potestatem non habent, saevire. t. 10. de Sermon. dom. in Mont. Hom. 6. Judge.
6.25. Si in alicujus presbyterio in fideles, aut facultas ( I suppose it should
be faculas) accenderint, aut arbores, etc. Can. 23.
run into the Temple amongst them, and demolish them, but contenting themselves
with the discharge of their duty, let^ that work to whom it belonged. To go,
and seize upon other men's rights, because of their abuse, is (says August.)
the property of the furious Circumcellions, who rage where they have no power.

Indeed Gideon though a private man, went into his Fathers ground, threw down
the Altar of Baal, and cut down the Grove that was by it; but he did it not of
his own head, but by immediate and special direction from God, whose bare
command is sufficient warrant in the most harsh and doubtful case whatsoever.
Neither can it be denied but the second Council of Arles celebrated under Pope
Sylvester, made this decree, That if Infidels set up lights, or worship trees,
fountains, or stones, in any Ministers Presbytery, and he neglect to demolish
them, he shall be guilty of Sacrilege. But this for ought that appears, was
without foundation, either of Scripture, or right reason. As Religion does not
create dominion, so neither does it destroy it. Though men by their abuse of
Gods creatures do forfeit them to him, yet not to us. Till he by a special
grant had given the Israelites power over the Cananites and their Idols, they
might no more destroy the one, than the other. And if men's own abuse of their
enjoyments do not give us any power over them, how can we in reason think that
others abuse of them should do it? It would be thought strange Doctrine, if a
Minister should teach, that upon an Heathens or Papists passing through his
Neighbors ground, and worshipping his tree or well, he either ought or might
thereupon go and demolish it. Should such kind of Doctrine take place, it would
make strange work in the world. And therefore I conceive the Council supposed
the having either of order from authority to do it, or the consent of the
persons whose goods upon their being abused, were to be demolished; otherwise,
I know not how the Canon will be justified.

Notwithstanding, Ecclesiastical History makes mention of many zealous and bold
attempts of this nature, concerning which, men's opinions are various. Ad ann.
362. sect. 34.318. sect. 5.304. sect. 12.
Baronius tell us of Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, who in the reign of Constantius
the Emperor, demolished an Heathenish Temple, which rather than at the command
of Julian, he would rebuild, he endured great torments; of Nicolaus, and other
Bishops, who threw down several Idols, with the buildings belonging to them;
nay of Theodorus, a Christian Soldier, who out of indignation to the Temple of
the Mother of the Gods, Acts and Mon. ad ann. 1552.
went and set it on fire. And Mr. Fox gives us an account of one William
Gardener an Englishman, who in the year 1552, being at Lisbon, and there
seeing a Cardinal in the presence of the King, Prince, Nobles, and a great
assembly of people, lift up the Host, and toss it to, and fro about the
Chalice, make circles, and play the fool with that Sacred Ordinance, he stepped
to him, and with one hand took the Host from him, and trampled it under his
feet: and with the other, overthrew the Chalice; all which, notwithstanding his
severe tortures, he justified and defended to the last. These were high and
bold attempts, but whether warrantable or no, Haec privata exempla in regulam
trahenda non sunt, vol. 2. col. 406. In Galliis autem agnosco non tantum
imprudentia sed, etc. Colloq. Momp. part. 2. p. 19. Condemnarunt tunc temporis,
etc. Select. disp. part. 3. p. 310.
I leave to graver judgments to resolve. As I would not ecclips the pious zeal
of any of Gods faithful servants, who have with such eminent resolution,
patience, and constancy, appeared in behalf of his truth, so neither would I
have an hand in defending what is not according to the word. Zanchy says,
these private examples are no rule to us. Nay, diverse learned and judicious
Writers, who yet were far from allowing Idolatry, or any occasions of it, have
openly protested against, and condomned such kind of proceedings, as irregular
and unjustifiable. Upon the reformation in France, the people not waiting for
the conduct of authority, ran into the Churches, and there pulled down images,
altars, with other things of that nature: but Beza confesses there was much fin
in it, as there uses to be in such preposterous actions, undertaken in time of
War. And upon the reformation in the Low Countries, the rabble there did the
like: but Voetius declares against it, and says, that the Dutch Churches did
then, and do to this day, condemn it as seditious and disorderly. We must take
care that our zeal transport us not, beyond the bounds of discretion, and
soberness. We must prosecute good ends by good means. To violate the law our
selves, whiles we are endeavoring to vindicate it from the contempt and
profaness of others, is to pull down with the one hand, what we build up with
the other.

Sect. 8.
Fourthly. IT being made out to you, what things upon their being abused, are
to be laid aside, and to whom the doing of it does belong; namely to all of us
in one respect or other: I shall here show after what manner we must do it. And

1. We must do it willingly and cheerfully. Though the things we have before
us, be of great value and dear to us, yet as soon as we find they are such
either in themselves, or by accident, that it may not consist with the safety
of religion to retain them, we must with all readiness abolish them. We should
be as willing to part with them, as a man is to part with fire out of his
clothes, or a viper out of his bosom. When Jacob set upon the purging of his
family, Genesis 35.4.
and willed them to put away the strange Gods that were amongst them, they with
all readiness delivered them to him, with the Earrings which were in their
Ears. Acts. 19.19.
And when the Jewish exorcists upon the Apostles doctrine, and miracles
believed, they of their own accord, brought their Magic Books, and burned
them. Qui minimi aestimant, judicant excrescere hanc summam ad septem mill,
etc. Apud Bibl. Trem. and Jun. in loc.
Though the value of them was so great, that it amounted to fifty thousand
pieces of silver, which the lowest estimate (as Beza shows) raises to eight
hundred pounds of our English money, or thereabout; yet considering they had
been abused already, and that they might be so no more, they brought them
forth, and threw them into the fire. Whereby we see, on the one hand, how far
this impious art had prevailed, that at that time there should in Ephesus be so
many books to teach and promote it; and on the other hand, the prudent care and
religious zeal of these New converts, that rather than suffer such pernicious
books to go abroad, or remain any longer, to the insnaring of the world; they
would, notwithstanding the great price and value, thus freely bring them forth,
and commit them to the flames. How far are these to be preferred before the
obstinate Papists amongst us, who notwithstanding all the light and evidence
offered to them, are yet so far from bringing forth their Images, Crucifixes,
Agnus Dei's, Relics, and other things they have most lamentably abused, that
they do not only retain them, but prosecute their abuse of them?

2. We must do it holily, in obedience to Gods will, and in order to his glory.
We must see that both the ground upon which, and the end for which we do it, be
sound and good. We must not do it out of selfishness, covetousness, ambition,
revenge, or any such low and base account, but out of unfeigned piety toward
God, and that we may perform his will, (...) Adag. p 79.
and be serviceable to him. Drusius tells us, that amongst other of the Eastern
Proverbs, this was one, that, whatever we do, we must do it for God; which, as
we must observe in other matters, so particularly in this we have here before
us. We must either aim at God therein, and do what we do upon his account, or
else we shall fall short both of our duty and reward. 2 Kings 10.25, 26, 27.
See Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1.
Jehu destroyed the Priests, Images, and house of Baal, but he aimed at no
higher a mark than his own private interest, and that spoiled all. And who
knows not the story of Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily? Having a covetous desire
of the rich coat that hanged upon Jupiters Image, made all of beaten gold, he
took it from him, and gave him a Cotton one instead of it, alleging it was too
heavy for Summer, Damnantur qui potius avaritia quam zelo, etc. vol. 1. Exerc.
in Genesis 35.4.
and too cold for Winter, but that the other was suitable to either season. Had
his end been good, both the fact and jest had done well; but the lowness and
baseness of that, marred both. Rivet speaks with much displeasure, against
such, as remove abused things, rather out of covetousness than zeal, that they
may convert them to private uses: And well he might, for what is this, but to
make religion a stalking horse to the world, and commit wickedness under the
disguise of holiness? Let a man's undertakings, and performances be never so
high and noble in themselves, yet if his aims be not right, they are worth
nothing.

3. We must do it with zeal and indignation. They are such things as are
enemies to true Religion, and therefore we must appear with an holy rage, and
fury against them. Thus God requires the Jews to deal with such monuments of
Idolatry, as they found amongst them. Ye shall (says he) defile the covering
of thy graven Images of silver, Isa. 30.22.
and the ornament of thy molten Images of gold: thou shall cast them away as a
menstruous cloth; thou shall say unto it, get thee hence. When we set upon the
purging out of such things, we must remember how they have been the mischievous
instruments of Gods dishonor, and therefore we must not handle them with any
reverence or respect, but with greatest ignominy and disgrace. It was foretold
of Ephraim, that when he should repent, he should be so far from following
those things, that before he doted on, that he should loath and scorn them.
Hos. 14.8.
Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols? This he speaks not
by way of inquiry, as if he would learn how to dispose of his Idols, but by way
of indignation and contempt, as being impatient of having to do any more with
them. And it has been the manner of good men, when they have had to do with
such things, Deuteronomy. 9.21.
to carry themselves toward them in that manner. Moses did not only take the
molten calf from the Israelites, but in holy fury and disdain stamp it under
his feet, as fitter to be trod upon, than have the respect that was given to
it. 2 Kings 23.8.
Josiah did not only demolish the high places, but in token, both of his
displeasure and scorn, defile them. Not, that he did any way abuse them, or
make them worse than they were, but that in just severity, he let the world see
what indeed they were, by casting dung, and filth upon them. And, Hezekiah did
not only break in pieces the brazen Serpent, but in way of derision, call it
Nehushtan. As if he had said to the people, this thing which out of a vain and
superstitious humor, you thus adore and reverence, is so far from meriting the
respect you give it, that it is no other than a piece of brass, fitter to lie
rusting in a corner, nay to be beaten to powder, than be worshipped as a Deity,
as by you it is, to the high provoking of that God, who ordained it for another
use. And to give you one other instance, Ezekiel. 8.10.14.4.22.3.
the Prophet Ezekiel, that he may the better express his contempt, and scorn of
the heathenish Idols, does up and down his Book, speak of them under most
disgraceful and reproachful terms. He calls them (...), which Tremellius and
Junius render stercoreos deos, that is, dunghill, filthy, stinking gods. By
these instances, you see how the faithful servants of God, heretofore carried
themselves toward those abused things they had to deal with; they appeared
against them with a vigorous zeal and indignation. And if ever we will be
thought sincere and cordial to his interest, we must do the like.

4. We must do it impartially, without respect to any persons or things
whatsoever. We must not connive at this man, because he is great, or that man,
because he is mean; this, because he is a relation, or that, because he is a
stranger, but over-looking all such outward considerations, we must endeavor
the purging of the Church from whatever may be occasion of offense, or
prejudice thereunto. Such was the integrity of Levi, that in matters of
Religion, he regarded not his own relations, or allies, how near or dear soever
they were to him, but went on in his duty, faithfully executing the judgment
of the Lord. He said unto his father and his mother, Deuteronomy. 33.9.
I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor know his own
children. And herein Jesus Christ, who was the Antitype, or person prefigured,
exactly agreed with him. He preferred his Fathers will, and the publication of
the Gospel, before any relations whatsoever. When one, as he was preaching to
the people, came and told him that his mother and brethren stood without
desiring to speak with him, Mat. 12.47.
he stretching forth his hands toward his Disciples, said, Behold my mother
and my brethren: adding, that whosoever does the will of his father, the same
is his brother, sister, and mother. And the Apostles, being acted by the same
spirit, walking by the same rule, and minding the same thing, proceeded after
the same manner. Henceforth (say they) know we no man after the flesh. 2 Cor.
5.16.
They respected not those they had to deal with according to kindred, wisdom,
honor, wealth, or any such secular matters, but according to their grace,
holiness, and usefulness in the Church, which render men far more amiable than
any outward accomplishments or privileges can do. And after this manner must
we behave our selves in all religious performances; particularly, in our
endeavoring the removal of abused, offensive things. Let that which we have
before us, be whose it will or what it will, if it have been abused in false
worship, and is thereby rendered unfit to remain, we must endeavor the
extirpation of it. Herein many great and holy persons, whose proceedings are
recorded in Scripture for our instruction, Exodus 32.20. Judge. 6.27. 1 Kings
15.13. Ne patris quidem mei famae parcerem etc. Molin. Apol. l. 2. p 137.
imitation and encouragement, have lead us the way. Moses, notwithstanding all
the reverence he had for Aaron, both as he was his elder brother, and the high
Priest, took the calf he had made, and burnt it in the fire. And, Gideon,
notwithstanding all the filial respect he bore to his Father, both as he begat
him, and as he was a Magistrate, demolished his altar, and cut down his grove.
And Asa, notwithstanding the dutiful respect he bore, both to his Father and
his Mother, took their Idols, and destroyed them. And this holy impartiality
and indifferency, we must use; we must not say, this is my Fathers image, and
therefore I Will winck at it; or this is my Mothers Crucifix, and therefore I Will
let it alone; but shutting our eyes against all such carnal respects, we must
manage the work of God with uprightness and faithfulness. The interest of
religion must be dearer to us than any relations, or friends whatever; and
therefore when we meet with any thing prejudicial thereunto, we must endeavor
the removal of it, let the authors, or owners be who or what they will.

5. We must do it publicly and openly, that so all may see, and take notice.
Indeed, if the abuse of things be only private, then we may without making any
noise, or stir, abolish them privately; but if it be public, we must do it
publicly, that so the testimony given in against them, being correspondent to
the sin committed by them, we may obviate the scandal, and secure the truth.
Exodus 32.20. 1 Kings 18.40. Acts 19.19.
When Moses destroyed the golden calf, he did it not in a corner, without
spectators, but before Aaron and all Israel. When Elijah flew Baals Prophets,
he did it not in secret, but before King Ahab, and all the people. And, when
the Exorcists burnt their books, they did it (...), before all men. Pious zeal
is bold and resolute, and will appear for the truth, and endeavor the
preservation of it, and the removal of what is contrary to it, before the
greatest multitudes. It Is no matter what men think or say either of us or our
endeavors, all the while we do nothing but our duty; let us see we keep to
that, and then we need not fear, but he that set us on work, will both own us,
and bear us out.

6. We must do it thoroughly and fully, not leaving so much as any remainder, or
memorial of them; unless it be such as may serve to render them more vile and
hateful. So great is the proness of men to superstition, that if after they
have laid it aside, there be but the least occasion offered them, they are
ready to resume it, and fall to it as fresh as ever they did before; and
therefore, God will have us wholly to remove all the monuments and instruments
of it, and what ever is apt to incite, or provoke to it. Deuteronomy. 12.2.
Yoe shall (says he) utterly destroy all the places, wherein the Nations,
which ye shall possess, served their Gods upon the Mountains, and upon the
Hills, and under every green Tree. Vid. Sixth. Amam. de recta lect. p. 84.
In the Original it is (...), perdendo perdetis, which as all know that have
any acquaintance with the Hebrew dialect, imports as much as, ye shall
mightily, or exceedingly destroy them, so as utterly to overthrow them, and
make an end of them. Such must be our severity against Idols, that we must take
them, with all the utensils belonging to them, and beat them to dust. We must
make all the stones of their altars, as chalk stones, Isa. 27.9.
that are beaten in sunder. As we beat chalk stones into dust, that we may make
thereof lime mortar, plaster; so we must deal with Idols, and their
appurtenances: We must put them past all cure, we must dash them in pieces, nay
beat them to dust. Thus Jacob dealt with the Idols of his relations; Genesis 35.4.
he took them, and hid them under the Oak which was by Shechem. Where we have
two things observable. 1. It Is said, he hid them; but though there be no
mention of his breaking them, Quod tamen fecisse probabile est. in loc.
yet (as Rivet says) its probable he did it. He well knew the proneness of his
relations to abuse them, and therefore it is likely for the better preventing of
it, he brake them in pieces. 2. It Is said, he hid them under an Oak. The
idolatrous people of those times bore great respect to trees, especially the
Oak, which either to cut down, or dig up, they held to be no less than
sacrilege and profaneness. Jacob therefore, that he might the better secure
his relations from their wonted idolatry, did not only take their Idols, and
break them, but bury them under an Oak, where he thought, if it should happen
that they should come to the knowledge of them, they would out of their
superstitious reverence to that tree, rather let them lie, than offer any
violence to it.

Thus Moses dealt with the golden calf; he did not only break it, but burned it
with fire, ground it to powder, Exodus 32.20. Deuteronomy. 9.21.
strawed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.
Whereby, on the one hand, he let them see the impotency, baseness and
ridiculousness of the God they had set up and worshipped, that could not save
himself from the Hammer, Fire, Water; no, not from passing into the draught,
and being turned into filthy excrements: and on the other, he utterly disabled
it, from being an instrument for the future, of such wickedness as had been
committed by it. 1 Kings 15.13.
Thus Asa dealt with his Mothers Idol, he destroyed it, burnt it, turned it to
ashes. Thus Josiah dealt with all the Idolatrous stuff he met with; 2 Kings
23.4, 6, 11, 12.
he brake down, beat into dust, consumed and burned all before him. He fetched
out of the Temple the vessels that were made for Baal, and for the Grove, and
for all the host of Heaven, and burnt them without Jerusalem, in the fields of
Kidron, and carried the ashes of them to Bethel. He brought the grove out of
the Temple unto the brook Kidron, burnt it there, stamped it small to powder,
casting the powder thereof upon the graves of the children of Israel. He seized
on the charet of the Sun, and burnt it with fire. He also took the altars which
Ahaz, Manasses, and other Kings had made, brake them down and beat them to
dust, casting the dust thereof into the Brook Kidron. Thus likewise dealt
Hezekiah; 2 Chronicles. 29.16.30.14.
he caused the Priests to take the altars which were in Jerusalem, and the
uncleaness they found in the Temple, and carry them into the Brook Kidron. And
as he dealt thus with other things, so particularly with the Images and brazen
Serpent mentioned in the Text; he brake them all to pieces, so that he turned
them into dust; for though our translation hold it not forth, yet the hebrew
words (...) and (...) being in that conjugation wherein they are, import as
much. He utterly disabled them from being serviceable to such bad ends for the
future, as before they had been. Hereby you see the zealous severity that these
eminent worthies exercised toward those instruments and occasions of Idolatry,
Memoriam vult penitus delere. Calvin. in Isa. 27.9. Memoria Idololatriae
totaliter delenda. Lyra in Deuteronomy. 12.3.
which they found amongst them; they pulled them down, brake them all to
pieces, and made them for ever after incapable of the ill use to which they had
been put. The very memory of Idolatry, (as not only Protestants, but some of
the very Papists teach us) is wholly to be blotted out; and what course so
likely to do it, as that which these worthies took? when reasons will not take
men off it, the utter ceasing of the visible memorials thereof which they have
amongst them, will do it.

Sect. 9.
Fifthly YOu have heard in what manner we must every of us in our several
places endeavor the removal of abused things; I shall in the next place show
when we must do it. And we must do it spesdily, without loytering or making any
delay. It is that wherein the glory of God, and the safety of men's souls are
concerned, in matters of which nature delays are intolerable; and therefore as
soon as ever an occasion or opportunity presents self, we must without making
any excuses or evasions, fall upon the work and dispatch it. We must not stand
looking on abused things, and wishing they were removed, or resolving that
hereafter we will endeavor it; but forthwith lay our hands to the work, and
get it done. Such was the holy vigor of David's zeal, that he cried out, I will
early destroy all the wicked of the Land. Psalm. 101.8.
His upright soul could not endure either such persons or things as made
against the honor of God, and beauty of Religion; and therefore girding
himself with pious courage, answerable to his Kingly power; he resolves, nay
presently falls upon the rooting of them out. He stands not to see what others
would do, or what issue things would work themselves to; but being utterly
impatient of their continuance, he forthwith betakes himself to the suppressing
of them. 2 Chronicles. 29.3.17.
So Hezekiah, how loath was he to lose any time in this business? The very first
thing that at his coming to the throne, he falls upon, is the reformation of
religion, the purging of the Temple, and the rooting of all false worship out
of his Dominions. So likewise Josiah, what have did that illustrious and
flourishing youth make in this holy work? 2 Chronicles. 34.1.4.
when he was but sixteen years old, did he undertake it, and purge Judah and
Jerusalem from all false worship, with all the instruments and occasions
thereof. Whiles other young Princes were merry in their Palaces, following
their recreations, and bathing themselves in their royal delights; he was
consulting with the Priests and Levites about the reformation of religion,
weeping over the neglected Law, and endeavoring to put away what ever was
contrary to it. Oh that all Christian Kings and and Princes would tread in his
steps! What Churches, Kingdoms, nay what a world should we then have! And as
Kings and Princes, so every of us in our several places, must make have herein.
The glory of God, the purity of religion, the sincerity of Divine worship, and
the welfare of men's souls, are all concerned therein; and therefore we must
not, like the Sluggard, lie folding our hands, but up and be doing.

Sect. 10.
Sixthly. HAving showed that it is the pleasure of God that abused things
should be abolished, to whom the work does belong, how and when it must be
done; I shall now give you the reasons of the point, and show you wherefore he
will have it done. And he will have it done,

1. Because they are abominable and odious to him. Before they were abused,
they were as acceptable and pleasing to him, as other things; but now being
abused, and thereby polluted, they are no less than detestable and hateful.
Deuteronomy. 7.25.
He commands the Israelites to burn the Images of the Heathenish gods, with all
the silver and gold upon them, without taking ought thereof, telling them it
was an abomination to him. Before this silver and gold was abused, it was no
more displeasing to him, than the innocentest of his creatures: no more, than
the lilly of the field, upon which he puts forth so much of his wisdom and
care; but after it was abused, it was no less than abominable, nay abomination
it self. And thus it is with all other such things abused in false worship;
they are no less than abomination. Let them be as rich or lovely as they will,
yet being abused therein, they lose their excellency, and become vile. As for
those things (says Mr. Hooker) whereon, Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 17. p. 148.
or else wherewith superstition works, polluted they are by such abuse, and
deprived of that dignity which their nature delights in. For there is nothing
which does not grieve, and as it were even loath itself, whenever iniquity
causes it to serve unto vile purposes. Now if abuse does thus pollute things,
deprive them of their dignity, and make them loathsome, no marvel if God will
have them laid aside. Would we our selves have any thing employed in the
service given us, that is loathsome to us? We may not wonder then, that since
such things as have been abused in sinful worship, are loathsome to God, he
will not have them employed in the service given him, but laid aside.

2. Because he will not have us to hold communion with superstitious and
idolatrous persons, which we should do, if we used those things they have
abused in their sinful practices. So great is his detestation of them, and all
such enemies of his truth and glory, Exodus 20.25, 26. Lev. 19.19, 22,
28.18.3.20.23. Vid. Maimon. More Nevoch. l. 3. c. 37, 48. Calvin. in Lev.
19.27. Gill esp. disp. against Cerem. l. 3. c. 3. p. 149. Dr. Stillingf. Orig.
Sac l. 2. c. 7. sect. 10. p. 219. Fresh Suit, part 2. p. 438, 443.
that he will not endure we should have any fellowship with them. As the father
cannot endure to see his children, familiar with those that seek the ruin both
of himself and them, so neither can God endure to see his servants, familiar
with a sinful and idolatrous people. The reason wherefore he forbad the
Israelites many things in themselves lawful, was because he would not have
them like the Nations; white, he cast out from before them. He would (...) have
them make him an Altar of hewn stone; go up to it by steps, wear a garment of
woollen and linen, round the corners of their heads or beards, make cuttings
in their flesh, print any marks upon them, or do other things of the like
nature, because the superstitious and idolatrous Nations did so, whom he would
by no means have them imitate or resemble. And if we consult Christian Writers,
we shall find, they teach the unlawfulness of using diverse things in themselves
innocent and harmless: and dissuade from it, merely upon this ground, that the
Servants of God ought not to hold communion with a superstitious and idolatrous
people. Dr. Ames shows, that some of the Ancients would not have Christians to
wash their hands by way of ceremony, lay aside their cloaks before prayer, sit
upon their beds after it, wear a laurel Crown, fast on the Lords, day or
Friday: because the Heathens did so.

And as this is the reason wherefore God forbids his people the use of many
things in themselves lawful, so this is the reason wherefore he commands them
to endeavor the extirpation of them. Having told the Israelites how the
Heathenish Nations served their gods, and that they must destroy all the places
wherein they served them, overturn their altars, break their pillars, burn
their groves, hew down their images, and root the very Names of them out of the
Land; Deuteronomy. 12.5.
he adds, ye shall not do so to the Lord your God. Which implies as much as if
he had said, ye shall not worship as they worship, ye shall not serve me in the
use of such things as they make use of, but in the way that I my self have
prescribed. They worship their gods in the use of groves, images, and the like,
but I will not have you to follow their ways; I will not have you to worship
me in the use of such things, but will have you to destroy and overthrow them,
that so you may be preserved from it. You have a peculiar God, are a peculiar
people, and must worship after a peculiar manner; and for this reason, will I
have you to destroy the monuments of Heathenish Idolatry, Non licet mutuari aut
retinere res aut ritus sacros, etc. Loc. Com. p. 860.
lest you should do otherwise, and so become like to those Nations, with which
I will not have you hold any fellowship. And with this agrees that of
Maccovius; It is not lawful (says he) either to borrow or retain, the things
or sacred rites of Idolaters, whether Heathenish or Popish, although
indifferent in themselves, because we are taught to decline all conformity with
them. Aquinas indeed, handling this question, Vtrum infidelium ritus sint
tolerandi? 22. q. 10. a. 11.
Whether the rites of Infidels are to be tolerated? holds it affirmatively; but
how little he has said toward the satisfying an intelligent Reader, I leave
those who are fit to judge. We must neither receive, nor keep such things,
though in themselves lawful, as Idolaters of what sort soever have abused, and
that, as for other reasons, so for this in particular, because we must have no
communion with them, which we must needs have, in case we use those things,
which they in their snperstitious solemnities do abuse. As for what is said by
Hooker and Paybody, to the forecited Texts, Disp. against Cerem. p. 150.
it is so solidly and fully answered by Mr. Gillespy, that I judge it needless
to spend time about it.

3. That he may maintain the holiness, and purity of his worship, and preserve
it from the pollutions and defilements, that otherwise it would lie open to.
Should we mingle things holy and pure, with those that are profane and
unclean, what an heterogeneous and uncomely miscellany, would his worship then
consist of? For the prevention whereof, he will not have such things as have
been defiled in false worship, to be used by us, but to be abolished, and laid
aside. When Nadab, and Abihu, had defiled both the worship of God, and
themselves, in offering strange fire, he immediately destroys them, saying,
Lev. 10.3.
I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me. Wherein he holds forth as much
as if he had said, I am an holy God, and have commanded you to witness as much
in celebrating my worship after an holy manner; and since these men that I
appointed to wait at mine altar, have not done it, but have defiled it, by
adding that which is of man, I have asserted the holiness both of my self, and
worship, in this just degradation and destruction of them. And be it known to
you all this day, that whosoever of you, do approach, or come near me, I expect
holy worship from you, which if you refuse to give me, I will make you examples
of my severity. Holy I am, and the holiness of my self, and worship I will
maintain, and if you will not sanctify me actively, you shall do it passively;
if I must not be sanctified by you, I will be sanctified upon you. This
destruction then of these sons of Aaron, happened not through a casual flash of
lightning, falling from the contending Elements, but from the special hand of
God, who inflicted it on them, partly to punish them for the sin past, and
partly to secure his worship from defilement for the future.

4. To preserve his worship from the dishonor, and contempt attending abused
things. Such matters as have been abused in corrupt worship, when they are
employed in the worship of God, do dishonor it, cast contempt upon it, and
bereave it of that just veneration and reverence that otherwise it would have.
The wickedness of the sons of Eli, did not only disparage them, but the service
of God, 1 Samuel 2.17.
which they were employed in the celebration of, insomuch that they caused men
to abhor it. When those who wait at his altar, manage his worship according
to rule, and with that reverence, gravity, and seriousness, which the nature of
the work calls for, men honor both them and it; but when they break forth into
arbitrariness, levity, and profaneness, then they abhor both the one, and the
other. When the Priests in after times, grew corrupt and profane, they drew
disgrace both upon themselves, and that holy Law they were to walk by; they
then became contemptible, Mal. 2.8, 9.
and base before all the people, and caused many to stumble at the Law. When
the people saw the corruptness of their administrations, and disorderliness of
their lives, they knew not what to think; they began to call in question their
function, and the Law it self, and to despise both them, and whatever was done
by them, or belonged to them. And how many are there at this day, that abhor
the public assemblies, nay the offerings themselves that are made in them,
merely upon the account of the insufficiency, and profaneness of Teachers, and
those scandalous things that are made use of by them? Now God to preserve his
worship from this contempt, and keep up the honor of his house and ordinances,
has given order that all abuses, and abused things shall be laid aside, and
his work carried on with all accurateness and exactness. Upon his destroying
Nadab and Abihu, Lev. 10.3.
he does not only say that he will be sanctified, but that he will be
glorified: that is, he will either be glorified in the sincere and holy
management of his worship, or else in the severe and due punishment of those
that do neglect it; and he executes the latter for this end, that he may obtain
the former.

5. To prevent their being abused in such manner for the time to come. Not
judging it sufficient to tell men they must not abuse them, that if they do
they will dishonor him, and incense him against them, he will have us utterly
to abolish them, and root them out. And no marvel, for such is the proneness of
men to superstition, and the restlessness of Satan in exciting them to it, that
if we remove not the occasions of it, it is a thousand to one they fall to it
again, and become as bad as ever. Hereof History, both divine and humane,
affords store of instances. The Holy Ghost tells of Manasseh, 2 Chr. 33.15, 22.
that upon his repentance he took away the strange gods, which he had
worshipped, with the altars and other things belonging to them, and cast them
out of the City. He should have burnt them, as the Law required, and as his
religious Grandson Josiah did, and then he had made sure work, but he only cast
them out of the City. And what comes of it? why his eyes are no sooner closed,
but Amon his son succeeding him, brings them in again, and so they are abused
as much as ever. And Constantine (as you heard even now) though he were (the
times considered) a good man, and zealous in suppressing the Religion of the
Heathens, yet he suffered some of their Temples and Groves to stand, and so
upon Julians coming to the Empire, they enter into them again, and make as bad
use of them, as ever they did. In this respect Zanchy says, Vol. 2. col. 709.
Loc. Com. p. 544.
he came short of Theodosius; nay, in this respect, Walaeus says, he sinned,
that he only shut the Temples of the Heathens, and did not overthrow them, with
the altars, statues, and other instruments of Idolatry, that they made use of.
It is to little purpose to forbid Idolatry, or endeavor the suppressing it,
except we destroy the instruments of it. While we suffer them to remain, we do
not only preserve it in peoples memories, but give them hopes that in time it
will be restored, and then they have no more to do, but to take them up, and so
they are statu quo prius, as ready to dishonor God in the use of them, as if
nothing had been done against it; whereas if we would utterly abolish them, we
should not only blot Idolatry out of their memories, and take away the hopes of
restoring it, but disable them, in case it be restored, from practicing it with
so much readiness and solemnity as otherwise they would. And therefore God
requires, whenever we set upon the reformation of the Church, to take all the
instruments, monuments, incitements, furtherances, and occasions of Idolatry,
and utterly destroy them, leaving no more than the very dust or ashes of them
to tell posterity what formerly they were. Grotius tells us, that good things
ought not to be condemued, because there are which abuse them: Non debent
quidem res bonae damnari quia sunt qui iis ab^tuntur, etc. De Imp. c. 11. sect.
12. p. 361.
yet in case the abuse become customary, to intermit the use of such things (he
says) is not unusual. Moses his Serpent, if we respect the thing it self,
might have remained without superstition: but Ezekiah taking notice, the sin of
the people became settled, that he might take away the superstition, he took
away the Serpent. Whereby you see, that in his judgment, the use of things in
themselves, not only indifferent and lawful, but good and necessary, when they
become abused, ought to be waved, and that for this reason, to prevent the
abuse of them for the time to come; which is the thing contended for under the
present head.

6. That they may not remain as snares to entrap us, and draw us away from God
and his service, Idolatrous, images, vestments, and such like things, though
they seem innocent and harmless, yet through the deprivation of our natures,
they have an unhappy aptitude to draw away our hearts from God, and estrange us
from him. The Holy Ghost speaking of the Images of Jacobs family, calls them
(...), strange gods; and that as some think, because of their estranging the
heart from God. Genesis 35.
Such things being laid before us, and presented to our senses, and thereby
getting access to our hearts, do secretly solicit and entice them from him.
Moses disswades the Israelites from coveting the silver or gold upon the
heathenish Idols, and for this reason, Deuteronomy. 7.25.
lest it should be a snare to them. And when the Angel took notice that they
did not throw down their Altars, as they should have done, Judge. 2.3.
he tells them that they should be a snare to them. And what he foretold came
to pass; for the Psalmist tells us in express terms, Ps. 106.36.
they were a snare to them. Had they observed Gods command, and demolished
them, they had been secure; but they let them alone, and so were entangled by
them. They were thereby corrupted in their affections, and drawn away from God
and his pure worship. Men are apt to say, what danger is there in an image,
vestment, altar, or any such trivial thing? what hurt are they like to do to
any, that have not lost their reason? But they know not what they say. What a
famous man was Solomon? what a Cedar was he in the Church of God? and yet such
things as these, as innocent as some take them be, 1 Kings 11.5.
brought him down from his excellency, and fastened such a blot upon his name,
as will never be wiped off while the sacred history remains. So Gideon, what a
worthy man he? how courageous and resolute in the behalf of God? and yet a
silly Ephod, or Coat, Judge. 8.27.
became a snare to him and his house. The Scripture does often speak of Idols
under the term of Lovers; and that for this reason, that as Lovers draw away
the heart, Hos. 2.5. etc.
so they carry away the affections of the soul from God. Calvin writing to the
Lord Protector about some relics of Popish Idolatry remaining amongst us,
(...) e^im aliud fuerunt quam totidem, etc. Ep. 86. Sunt pompae istae omnes and
Ceremoniae Papisticae nihil aliud quam fuci meretricii, etc. Ep. l. 1. col. 244.
demands of him what such things were, but so many allurements drawing
miserable souls to sin. And Zanchy afterward, writing to Queen Elizabeth to
purg her dominions of such things, tells her in plain terms, that chey were
nothing else, but whorish devices, invented to entice men to spiritual
fornication. And upon this ground God hates them, and will not endure that his
people should have any thing to do with them. As the jealous Husband cannot
endure his Wife should have any thing to do with a known adulterer, who makes
it his business to corrupt and alienate her conjugal affections; so neither can
God endure his people should have any thing to do with those things that tend
to the corrupting and alienating of their affections from him; and therefore it
must be our care to avoid and remove them. You hear what happened to the
Israelites in general, and to Solomon and Gideon in particular; and it such as
they were not able to stand before such temptations, how can we without the
guilt of vain confidence and presumption judge our selves secure against them?
It concerns us then, that in pursuance both of the will of God, and our own
safety, we take such things and utterly abolish them.

Sect. 11.
Seventhly, THe point being thus explicated, and the reasons given, I shall
here set down some cautions or restrictions, whereby (comparing them with what
has been said) you may come to see the just extent, and bounds of the truth we
have before us, and so be secured from mistakes. Though it be the pleasure of
God that such things as have been abused in superstitious and idolatrous
services, should be laid aside, yet

1. This hinders not, but that though his own Ordinances have been abused in
such kind of services, we both may and ought still to make use of them. They
are not only such things as he has appointed, but likewise such as are of
perpetual use; and therefore though men do never so much pervert or injure
them, yet we must still retain them. This rule (says Zanchy) is to be held,
Tenenda est haec regula, etc. vol. 2. col. 678.
that if those things which are necessary in Divine worship happen to be
abused, and contaminated with superstitions, they neither ought, nor may be
taken away; but in case those things which are indifferent are abused: they
both may, and sometimes ought wholly to be taken away, as Hezekiah dealt with
the brazen Serpent. There are many things necessary in Divine worship that be
grossly and sadly abused, and yet we must for all that retain them. The Jews
make a plain Idol of the Law; they do not only bow to it, and kiss the clothes
wherein it is wrapped: but if it happen to fall to the ground, they presently
institute a Fast, lest the World thereupon should be reduced to its primitive
Chaos, and all turned into confusion. The Papists most lamentably abuse prayer;
not contenting themselves with praying to God, the only object of all religious
worship, they pray to Angels, nay to Saints, and such too, as we have good
reason to think, are so far from being able to relieve others, that they stand
in need of relief themselves. And after the same manner do they deal with the
Sacraments; they do most lamentably abuse them: partly by giving them more
respect than is due, partly by giving them too little; one while by adding,
another while by diminishing. Of the one, they make a God, by teaching the real
presence; of the other, a mere bawble, by applying it to Bells and such like
things: and both of them, they cloth with such a company of superstitious
ceremonies, See what Comenius says of Ordination. Annot. ad Rat. Ord. and
discip. fratrum Bohem. p. 76.
that they bury what is of God in the midst of the devices of men's. Now though
these and other Ordinances, be thus abused, we must not upon this lay them
aside; that, were to bereave our selves of the benefit God offers to us in
them, and encourage Satan and his instruments in their work.

2. Neither does this hinder but that though Gods own creatures have been
abused in such kind of services, we may notwithstanding, make use of them.
Those he has by our very constitution and frame made necessary to us, and by
an act of gracious indulgence granted us the free use of; and therefore though
men do either one way or other abuse them, that is no sufficient reason,
wherefore we should thenceforth lay them aside. 2 Kings 17.16.
The Israelites worshipped all the host of heaven: yet we must not upon that
account turn our backs on them, and reject their light and influence; that were
to equal their Idolatry, with an unrequired, ridiculous preciseness. Numb.
22.40.
The Heathens offered Oxen and Sheep in Sacrifice to their Idols, yet did not
Moses, or the Israelites, thereupon lay them aside, but still made use of them,
both for the service of God, and their own necessary food. Judge. 6.25.
Gideons Father designed his Ox for Sacrifice to Baal; yet Gideon for all that,
took him, and offered him to the Lord. And the Apostle teaches, that though
such and such meat have been offered to an Idol, yet when it is brought into
the Market, we may lawfully buy, and eat thereof. 1 Cor. 10.25.
Speaking of things offered to Idols, says he, Whatever is sold in the
Shambles, that eat, asking no question for Conscience sake. To go into the
Idols Temple, and eat it there, See Voetius select disp. part 3. p. 263.
whiles it remains sub sigillo Idoli, and in statu Idololatrico, under the
Idols Seal, and in idolatrous state, that we may aot do; but when it is reduced
ad statum usumque communem, to common state and use, in which, and for which it
was given us of God, the Author, and Conserver of nature, then we may do it.

But then we must take care that what we do, be without scandal: Should we by
eating such meat, grieve, discourage, unsettle our weak brother; or rejoice,
encourage, confirm Idolaters, we should for all its being reduced to a common
use, become culpable. When Moses delivered the ceremonial Law, every creature
of God in its own Nature, was then good, and nothing to be refused, as well as
afterward, when that Law was abrogated: and yet he forbad the use of many of
them; and that for this reason (as several learned men think) that they were so
much abused by the Egyptians, See Morney de verit. c. 26 p. 520. Grotius de
verit. l. 5. p. 248.
and that the Israelites might thereby be brought to abhor and abominate their
idolatries. Had he allowed the Israelites the free use of all creatures without
any limitation or exception, there would in all likelihood have fallen out these
two evils: the Egyptians would have been more confirmed in their own religion,
and the Israelites would have been readier to have complied with them in it.
And for Paul, notwithstanding his vigorous asserting of Christian liberty, yet
he was so tender in the case of scandal, that he passes his word, 1 Cor. 8.13.
that if eating of flesh make his brother to offend, he will eat none, while
the World stands.

Having thus by the way, signified what care we must take to avoid scandal, and
what abatements of our liberty we must make upon that account, I shall add thus
much more; that God does not only allow us the use of such creatures as the
Heathens sacrificed, but of such likewise as they have sacrificed to. How
grossly the Egyptians abused the ox, or calf, multitudes of Histories make
mention. Amongst all the gods which they worshipped, one (and the principal, as
some think, Bell. t. 4. de Imag. l. 2. c. 13. Rainolds de Romans Eccl. Idol. l.
2. c. 3. sect. 7. p. 368.
but others deny it) was Apis, who taught them husbandry, upon which account
they yielded divine honor to him, under the form of an ox. Notwithstanding,
God when he delivered the Ceremonial Law to the Israelites, did not forbid the
use of that creature, either in religious or civil matters, neither did they
decline it. The result then, in the present business is this: that as for those
creatures, which are of a supeior nature, such as those were which he allowed
the Israelites, without whose use we cannot well subsist, it is none of his
pleasure, that we should upon their abuse lay them aside; but as for those
things which are of an inferior nature, such as those were for the most part
which he forbad them, it seems to be his pleasure, that upon their abuse,
especially if there be ^pparent danger of scandal, we should forbear the use of
them.

3. Neither does this hinder, but though the necessary and profitable devices
of men (whether framed by direction from God, or without) be abused in such
kind of services, we may notwithstanding make use of them. As for such devices,
as are unnecessary and unprofitable, we must when they become abused lay them
aside, for the use will not countervail the abuse; but when such devices as are
both necessary and profitable are abused, we may notwithstanding that, retain
them. Nebuchadnezzar profaned the Vessels of the house of the Lord, by
dedicating them to his gods, yet did not that hinder Zerubbabel from carrying
them back to Jerusalem, Ezr. 1.7.
and restoring them to their former use. Manasseh defiled the Temple by his
idolatrous altars and sacrifices, yet did not Josiah, 2 Kings 21.5.
who came after him, and went so far in purging out Idolatry, offer upon that
account to demolish it. Antiochus Epiphanes afterward did the like, when he
entered into the Temple, Joseph. Antiq. l. 12. c. 7.
and there offered swines flesh, and sacrificed to his own gods; yet did not
the Jews upon that offer to pull it down, or our Savior blame them for the
neglect of it. The Jews following the tradition of the Elders, abused their
water-pots to superstitious and unlawful purifications; yet did not that
hinder our Savior from making use of them to glorify God, Joh. 2.6.
by the miracle, which he wrought in turning water into wine, for the supply of
the guests which were at the marriage. See Chemn. Harm. in loc. Mr. Bradsh.
Disc. of Cerem. p. 15.
Yet we must not think that these waterpots were of such little value, as our
ordinary small pitchers be; they were of a more considerable nature. They were
(as the Evangelist shows) not of earth, but stone; and so large, that they were
not upon every occasion carried about, but set in places meet for them, where
the water was not poured out of them, but drawn, as the manner is with greater
Vessels. The quantity they held, was two or three Firkins apiece: From which it
is evident, that they were not ordinary, trivial pots, but such as were of more
value and benefit, and being such though they were abused, our Savior makes
use of them. The Papists have abused our Churches by their Will Worship,
superstition, idolatry, yet did not that hinder our godly Reformers, from
retaining them and converting them to the use, wherein they are now employed.
There are many other devices, and works of men which have been variously
abused, yet being necessary and profitable, it is no other than reasonable,
that being separated from their abuse, they should be retained. I confess if
they are such as may with any tolerable inconvenience be spared, and the evil
that is (either already, or likely to be) committed by them, be such as does
overbalance the advantage we receive from them, we ought to abolish them as
Hezekiah did the high places, groves, and brazen serpent; but if it be
otherwise, we may retain them, and go on in the comfortable use of them. And
when it is once proved that the controverted Ceremonies, and other things
imposed on us, are not only lawful, but necessary and profitable: so
necessary, that they cannot with any tolerable inconvenience be spared; and so
profitable, that the evil committed by them, does not overbalance the
advantage received from them, I shall say as much of them; but till then, I
must needs be of this persuasion, that we lie under an obligation to lay them
by.

4. Neither does this hinder but that though things (especially if they are in
any competent degree useful) are in a slight manner abused, they may
notwithstanding be retained, and made use of. For instance; suppose a man
should be so simple as to bow to the Pen, I am now writing with, I see not but
having told him of his folly, I may go on to use it as before: Or suppose, one
should be so silly, as to bow to Angel or Saint standing for a Sign at an
Innkeepers door, I do not think but the owner of it may for all that, let it
stand. Indeed, if such a thing should become customary or frequent, it would
for the prevention of sin, be his duty to take it down, but for one single act
I think it may stand.

5. Neither does this hinder, but that those things that have been more grossly
abused, in case there be no danger for the future, may be spared, and employed
either to civil or religious uses. Had I one of the Knives wherewith the
ancient Heathens killed sacrifices for their gods, I would keep it by me, and
if there were occasion employ it to honest uses; and I question not, but I
might do it without sin. This I would do as to some instruments of Heathenish
idolatry, but as to the instruments of Popish idolatry, I would not have an
hand in preserving them; For though I hope God will never so far forsake these
Nations, as to suffer it to be restored, yet we are not altogether without
danger; and where there is danger caution must be used.

And thus I have showed you what things God upon their being abused would not
have laid aside. The sum of all is this, that for such things as are necessary
either by institution or use, without which we cannot well, either serve God,
or live comfortably in the world: that have been ab^s'd but slightly, Amabo si
auferat tibi Deuteronomy quibus abuteris omnia, quid tandem reliquum fiat? Morney de
verit. c. 17. p. 343.
or though more grossly, yet are now in no danger, we may, notwithstanding their
abuse still retain them. If we must use nothing that has been abused, we must
go out of the world; for what is there which has not one way or other been
abused. But then, for those things that are no way necessary, and have been,
and are still grossly abused, we must lay them by, and not needlessly keep them
up, to the scandalizing and indangering both of our selves and others.

Sect. 12.
Eighthly, HAving in the preceding particulars, confirmed, cleared, and limited
the point, I shall in the next place answer such Objections as I have either
found, or may (as I conceive) with any color, or show of reason be made
against the present truth.

Obj. 1. A great part of the strength of this discourse, is taken from those
precepts, which God gave to the Israelites concerning the Cananites, and the
extirpation of them and their religion, which concern us no more, than other
positive commands relating to them, accommodated to the occasional special
circumstances that then took place. Thus Hooker; What God (says he) did
command touching Canaan, Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 17. p. 148
the same concerns not us, any otherwise, than only as a fearful pattern of
his just displeasure and wrath against sinful Nations. It teaches us how God
thought good to plague and afflict them: it does not appoint in what form and
manner we ought to punish the sin of idolatry in others, unless they will say;
that because the Israelites were commanded to make no Covenant with the people
of that Land, therefore leagues and truces made between superstitious persons,
and such as serve God aright, are unlawful altogether, or because God commanded
the Israelites to smite the Inhabitants of Canaan, that therefore reformed
Churches are bound to put all others to the edge of the Sword.

Answ. 1. Should it be granted, that much of the strength of this discourse
were taken from those precepts God delivered to the Israelites touching the
Cananites; and that they are of a positive Nature, and so concern not us; yet
there are other Texts enough cited, both out of the Old Testament and the New,
to justify what has been said. But, 2. all that will not be yielded to; for
though it cannot be denied, that much of the strength of this discourse is
taken from those precepts God delivered to the Israelites touching the
Cananites; yet withal it is to be noted that those precepts were not of a mere
positive nature, intended only to direct the Israelites, in the extirpation of
the Cananitish idolatry, as is suggested, but in the extirpation of the
Idolatry of their own Nation, or any other Nation or people, over whom they
should have dominion. This appears several ways. 1. The reasons on which those
precepts are founded are universal and common; and therefore the precepts
themselves must be so; for where the reason of a precept is common, the precept
it self is so, except the authority whence it comes, do some way or other limit
it. Now that the reasons on which these precepts be founded, are common, is
evident. God would have the Israelites destroy the monuments of the Cananitish
idolatry, because they were an abomination to him, and that they might not be
snares to them, etc. and what is there in these reasons, but what is common to
all monuments of idolatry whatsoever? 2. What the pious Kings of Judah did in
the extirpation, not only of the Cananitish idolatry, but all other idolatry
whatsoever, they did it in pursuance of these precepts. Josiah did not only
suppress the idolatry of Judah, but of Israel also; which the Holy Ghost
represents as done according to the Law of Moses. 3. 2 Kings 23.25.
Those Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and States, that have duly purged
their Dominions of Idolatry, of what kind soever, have looked upon themselves
as both authorized, and obliged by these precepts to do it. See Zanc. vol. 2.
col. 387. Walaeus loc. com. p. 540. Alting. Theol. Elenct. p. 417. with such as
have commented on the Books of Moses.
4. Protestant Writers who discourse concerning the extirpation of Idolatry,
urge these precepts as serving not only to authorize and oblige, but also
direct us therein. By these reasons, to mention no more, it appears, that these
precepts are not to be looked upon as being of a mere positive nature,
concerning the Canaanites only, but as common, and extending to all Nations
whatsoever. Which yet I would not have so understood, as if I thought that all
those precepts which God gave to the Israelites touching the Canaanites, were
of such a latitude; but that those which he gave to them for the extirpation of
Idolatry, are (as to the substance of them) so, which is sufficient for my
present purpose, as serving to repel what is urged in this Objection.

Obj. 2 But what needs all this ado? what reason is there that the sin of
others should hinder us of our just liberty? why should we abolish lawful
things, because others have abused them? It Is sufficient that retaining the
use, N. Fratri and amico art. 17.
we separate them from the abuse. Thus Saravia; he thinks it not reasonable
that the superstition, and abuse of the Cross, should take away the use.

Answ. 1. Just after this manner, the Papists proceed with us. When we tell
them of the abuse of many things in their Church, and thereupon urge them to
lay them aside, they answer us after this manner. So Cassander; See Calv. Ep.
ad Versip. See Rushworth, Dialog. 1. p. 68.
abusus non tollit bonum usum. And what more ordinary, than Maneat usus,
tollatur abusus; and, corrigendus abusus, usus non est damnandus. So that, if
those against whom I here dispute, know how to answer the Papists, they need
not seek for an answer to themselves. 2. It Is no good arguing which gives the
lie to the Spirit of God, and yet such is this we have here before us. The
Spirit of God tells us, See Genesis 3.14. Lev. 20.15.
that abused things are unfit to remain, and that therefore we must lay them
aside; but this kind of arguing, says there is no danger in them, that we need
not lay them aside, that it is sufficient to separate the abuse; than which what
can be a plainer contradiction to the authority and wisdom of the Spirit, I
know not. Non uti, quam non abuti facilius. de Coron. Milit. Vt facilius est,
it a tutius quoque omnes imagines e templis submovere, etc. in Catec.
3. We should choose to do that in all cases, and in this, in particular, which
is easiest, and safest; now the laying aside of abused things, is both. 1. It Is
easiest; it is a far easier matter to lay such things aside, than retaining them
to preserve them from abuse. So Tertullian; It Is easier (says he) not to use,
than not to abuse. 2. As it is easier, so it is safer. In removing them there is
no danger, in retaining them much. In both these, we have the suffrage of the
great Erasmus, who speaking concerning Images, says, as it is easier, so it is
safer, to remove them all out of Temples, than to obtain that the mean be not
exceeded, nor superstition mingled. And were not men wilfully, and affectedly
blind, one would think that living in an air so much thinner, and purer than
his was, they might see as much. 4. If this be good reasoning, how as Daniel
did not make use of it? How as he refused the Kings meat? How as he did not
sanctify it by the word, and prayer, and thereby restore it to its right use?
5. If this kind of reasoning be good, now as Hezekiah did not use it in behalf
of the high places, groves, and especially the brazen serpent: for the
continuance whereof, I am sure far more might have been said, than there can
for many things yet retained amongst us? Nay, 6. If this kind of reasoning be
of any force, how as we have not retained more of the Popish utensils that are
in themselves lawful, but have thrown them away, to the high provoking of an
enraged enemy, who perhaps would otherwise have been more propitious to us? 7.
Zanchy is so far from conceiving this Objection to have any strength in it,
that he looks upon it as impertinent, and frivolous. Propositio illa, etc. vol.
2. col. 403.
As for that Proposition (says he) that good, and useful things are not to be
taken away because of abuse, it is nothing to the purpose, for that takes place
only in things of themselves good and necessary, such as the preaching of the
Gospel, the administration of the Sacraments, confession of the name of Christ;
for though many abuse these things to bad purposes, as gain, hypocrisy; yet
are they not to be removed out of the Church. But for such things which both of
their own nature, and by the law of God are indifferent, and which without
prejudice to salvation may be omitted, though they were in the beginning
instituted for good uses, yet if we after see them converted to pernicious
abuses, piety toward God, and charity toward our neighbor requires they
should be removed. And he instances in Hezekiahs breaking the brazen serpent;
which though it do not prove that necessary things, upon their abuse, are to be
abolished, yet it proves that unnecessary must.

Obj. 3. There is difference to be put betwixt such abused things as are
dangerous, and likely to do hurt, and such as are not. As for the former sort,
its good to remove them; Rejoinder, chapter 4. p. 448.
but as for the latter, there is no need of it. To this purpose writes Dr. John
Burgess, who in behalf of this pretense alleges that Hezekiah did not abolish
the Idols which Solomon suffered to be set up in favor of his strange Wives,
because they were at that time neglected. Existimamus vivo Solomone omnom illam
daemonum officinam disruptam fuisse, etc. Salian. ad ann. 3309.


Answ. 1. Those things which for the present are neglected, may (as it has too
often fallen out) in time become idolized; for the prevention whereof, it is good
to remove them. 2. How will it be proved that Hezekiah did not abolish the
Idols that Solomon suffered to be set up. As for what is alleged from the
proceedings of Josiah, that he destroyed the high places which Solomon made;
from whence the Author of this Objection, inferrs they continued all along till
Josiahs time: it may be answered, that for all that, Solomon himself might
destroy them, or if he did not, yet Hezekiah might: and yet they being rebuilt
by Manasseh, or Amon, might yield matter for Josiahs godly zeal to work upon,
still passing under Solomon's name, in as much as they were first erected by his
command, at least by his connivance, and allowance. But 3. Admit that Solomon
demolished them not in his time, and that Hezekiah neglected to do it in his,
how will it appear that Hezekiah did well in it? nay must it not needs be
granted that he did very ill in it, in as much as his neglect was accessory to
the horrible wickedness committed by them in after times? and if so, this
Objection falls to the ground.

Obj. 4. The reason then wherefore abused things are to be removed, is that
they may not be abused in time to come; but that may be prevented without
removing them: that may be prevented by preaching; by holding forth the nature
of them, and dissuading from the abuse of them. Rejoynd. c. 4. sect. 6. p. 456.
Thus also Dr. Burgess.

Answ. 1. It is better to follow the counsel of God, than to lean to our own
wisdom. Now he advises us rather to remove offensive things, than stand
admonishing people to beware of them. Exodus 21.33.
In the time of the Law he required, not that a man should be set to warn
passengers from falling into the pit, but that it should be covered; Deuteronomy. 22.8.
nor that one should stand to caution such as went up to the top of the house,
that they fell not down, but that there should be battlements. 2. If preaching
or teaching were sufficient, how as Hezekiah did not make use of it in behalf
of the brazen serpent, and other things, but went forthwith and removed them.
It is worth the consideration which Naogeorgus has: Efficacius and plus movent
etc. in 1 John 5.21.
Those things which are presented to our eyes, move more efficaciously and
strongly than those which are presented to our ears. Hezekiah might have
admonished the people that they worshipped not the brazen serpent, but he chose
rather to break it, and wholly remove it out of sight, and therein he did
better. Thus he.

Obj. 5. We must consider whether the abuse of such a thing proceed from the
thing it self, or from the opinion of the agent: if it proceed from the thing
it self, it is to be abolished, Proc. in Perth. Assembly, part. 2. p. 120.
otherwise not. Thus Bishop Lindsey.

Answ. The proofs I have alleged in behalf of the present truth, show
abundantly, that whether the abuse arise from the nature of the thing it self,
or otherwise, if it be not necessary, it is to be abolished.

Obj. 6. If we must abolish what ever has been abused to superstition and
idolatry, Si argumentum aliquid valeret, etc. t. 3. de effect. Sac. l. 2 c. 32.
then we must abolish all those things we have to do with, not only such as are
of a lower nature, and may better be spared, but such as are most excellent and
necessary, even the Word and Sacraments themselves. After this manner reasons
Bellarmine; speaking in answer to Calvin, who charges the Papists with the
imitation of Heathens and Jews, he thus defends them against him. If (says he)
this kind of arguing availed any thing, we must take away Baptism and the Lords
Supper, for that both Heathens and Jews have abused them. View of the Direct.
p. 76.
After the same manner likewise reasons Dr. Hammond in behalf of the Liturgy.
The Assembly urging that it had been made an Idol, he answers, that Preaching
had been so too, and yet (says he) we hope you think not fit to abolish
Preaching on that suggestion, and consequently that it will be as unjust to
abolish the Liturgy on the like, though it should be proved a true one, this
being clearly the fault of men, and not of the Liturgy.

Answ. This is a most frivolous exception, utterly unworthy the defense or
countenance of any learned man; and yet its ordinary for such as appear in the
behalf of abused things to insist on it. Into this error fell that great man
Pet. Martyr, who writing to Hooper Bishop of Gloucester, who, with other things
which he alleged against the ceremonies, Sed jam aliud argumentum expendamus,
etc.
urged their being devised by Antichrist, and abused by him, he makes this
answer; I do not (says he) see here upon what ground, it can be said, we may
not do any of those things which use to be done among the Papists. Certainly
our Ancestors seized on the Temples of the Gentiles, and converted them into
holy Churches for the worship of Christ; and took the revenews belonging not
only to them, but to Stage Plays, and the Vestal Nuns, for the maintenance of
the Ministers of the Church, whereas these things did belong not only to
Antichrist, but to the Devil himself. And he afterward makes mention of bread,
wine, learning, and other things, which (says he) we fear not to employ either
to religious, or civil user. Now I wonder this worthy person, should use so
many words to so little purpose. We must sure put a difference betwixt the
standing Ordinances of Christ, with other necessary and profitable things: and
the needless and useless devices of men. When the former are abused, we must
endeavor to vindicate and free them from the corruptions and defilements
attending them; but when the latter are abused, we must in compliance with the
forementioned precepts, examples, and reasons, abolish and root them out.
Herein our Savior has lead us the way. When he saw how the Jews abused the
Temple, John 2.15. Mat. 15.3.
making it a Den of Thieves, he abolishes it not, but vindicates it: but when
he saw how they abused washing of hands before meat, laying greater stress on
it, than the substantial parts of Religion, he vindicates it not, but abolishes
it, checking them for their vanity, and justifying his Disciples in the refusal
of it. And according to this pattern we must proceed; what is either divine, or
necessary, we must, notwithstanding its abuse, retain it, but what is
otherwise, we must upon its abuse reject it. Cens. Liturg. Angl. c. 9. p. 472.
Herewith agrees that prudent and wary determination of Bucer; We must (says
he) abolish all matters abused, unless they are of those things, words, or
signs, that the Lord has commended to us. To argue from the abolishing of the
devices of men, to the abolishing of the Ordinances of Christ; from the
abolishing of what is unnecessary, to the abolishing of what is necessary, is
most absurd and unreasonable. It is no less than to equal men with him: their
appointments with his: what is unnecessary, with what is necessary: than which,
what can be more improper? Much more might be said, but to what purpose should
words be multiplied in so plain a case?

Obj. 7. See Dr. Burgess Rejoynd. ch 4. sect. 26. p. 608.
But what the Scripture holds forth, we may safely assent to, and own, as being
unquestionably just and lawful. Now it holds forth, that such things as are
defiled may be purged, and rendered fit again for use. Thus Bishop Morton; a
man, or woman (says he) legally unclean, might become cleansed or purged.

Answ. This pretense, has so little weight in it, that it is scarcely worth an
answer, yet because I would vindicate the present truth, from what ever has
any appearance of strength against it, I shall say somewhat to it. And 1. there
is sure difference betwixt reasonable creatures, having intelligent, immortal
souls; and unnecessary useless things. Its not fit we should argue from the
course taken with the former in case of uncleanness, to what is to be taken
with the latter. That is to infer, that because a man might take the captive
woman to wife, Deuteronomy. 21.12.
therefore he must not shave her head, pair her nails, and put off the ^arments
of her captivity; or, because we may not cut off the leprous man's head,
therefore we may not burn his clothes; or, because we my not slay a man, who
has the Plague, therefore we must spare the clouts that have ^ay'n upon his
Sores, than which, what can be more absurd and ridiculous? 2. There is sure
likewise a difference to be put betwixt ceremonial uncleanness and moral;
betwixt what results from the touching of a dead body, or the like: and what
results from the committing of Idolatry. The punishment of the former, was more
gentle and easy: the latter, capital, and severe; as appears from the
instances before mentioned.

Obj. 8. But waving persons, the Scripture affords instances of several things,
which though Idolaters had abused them, the Church made use of them. Rejoynd.
chapter 4. sect. 4. p. 587.
Thus the same Dr. Burgess, who instances in the wood that Gideon ^ook out of
his Fathers grove, the silver and gold of Jericho, that Joshuah appointed to be
brought into the Treasury, kneeling, and other gestures of the body, veiling
the head, preserving trophies of victory, and several other things.

Answ. We must distinguish 1. Betwixt what the common light of Nature (without
any contradiction from the word) does direct to, as proper to express the
resentments and workings of our minds and hearts; and what some particular men's
head drawn away to superstition, have thought fit to use and impose upon
others. 2. Betwixt what men d^ by divine appointment, and what they do o^ their
own heads. 3. Betwixt what is necessary, and profitable, and what is otherwise.
4. Betwixt what is used in the same outward visible form it passed under
before, and what i^ used in another, wholly distinct and different. 5. Betwixt
civil, harmless customs, practise^ without scandal; and innovations in Religion
practiced with scandal. As for those things that are of the former sort, that
is to say, either suggested (as I told you) by the common light of Nature, as
the bowing of the knee in prayer: or appointed by God, as Gideons taking wood
out of his Fathers grove: or are necessary and profitable, as the reserving
trophies of victory, such as Goliahs sword: or pass under another outward
visible form, as the silver and gold taken in Jericho, which, to say nothing of
the necessity and profitableness of it, Numb. 31.22, 23.
was in all probability, according as the law required, first melted, and then
put into the Treasury: or are civil, harmless customs practiced without
scandal, as veiling the head: I say as for those that are of this nature, they
may (nay some of them are, as I showed in the limitations) notwithstanding
their abuse to be retained. But then, for those things that are neither
suggested by the common light of Nature, nor appointed by the Word, neither are
necessary and profitable, nor are changed from their ancient form, but are
innovations (...) with scandal, See this (...) answered by Dr. Ames Fresh suit,
part. 2. p. 491.
they (...) Scripture (...) formerly was (...) use, and (...) without any (...)
(...) of (...) 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.
(...) out that notwithstanding (...) may freely make use (...) Mar. 7.15.
(...) they that defile the (...) And, I know (says Paul) and (...) by the
Lord Jesus, Romans 14.14.
that there is (...) unclean of it self: but to him that (...) any thing to be
unclean, to him, it is unclean. What need we then to trouble our selves with
any such caution, or scrupulousness, as this discourse seems to aim and Lets
see that all be right within, and as for the free use of things in their own
nature lawful, there is no danger.

Answ. What the Holy Ghost says in these plac^^ he speaks concerning meats,
which the common^^^ (...), that limited the Church of the Old (...) to several
kinds thereof, being (...) ^^^ely and lawfully used by us, provide (...) her to
our (...). And winds is this to the (...)? What is this to things (...) in
(...) ^^lives, and offensive in their use (...) all the liberty refultin^^ to
(...) broughtion of the ^ecremon^^^^ Law, yet (...) teaches us to hate even the
garme (...) sported by the flesh. Jude 23.
Nay Paul himself who went so far in asserting Christian liberty, and speaks so
much concerning the free use of meats, tells us that it meat make our Brother
to offend, 1 Cor. 8.13.
we must eat no flesh while the world stands.

Obj. 10. It is not then the unlawfulness of things abused in themselves, but
the scandal which renders them unfit for use; but what danger is there that any
of the abused things amongst us, should offend any? It is therefore needless we
should make any stir, or trouble our selves about them,

Answ. How can any without blushing, pretend there is no danger of offending:
when on the one hand, the watchful Papists being in hopes of our return to
them, are upon the use of them, so much confirmed and encouraged; and on the
other hand, those that be for the parity of Divine worship, and the sincerity
of Religion, are so much displeased and grieved? As for the former, hear a
triumphing Jesuit; Protestanism (says he) waxes weary of it self, the
Professors of it, they especially, See Chillingw. Pref. sect. 20.
of greatest worth, learning, authority, love temper and moderation, and are at
this time more unresolved where to fasten, than at the infancy of their Church.
Their Churches begin to look with a new face, their walls to speak a new
language, etc. When they see us set our Communion tables Altar-wise, rail them
about, deck our walls with hangings, and our windows with Images, what hope do
they thereupon conceive of our return to Egypt, Quid vero de privatorum
fidelium conscientiis dicam, etc. vol. 3. Ep. ad Reg. Eliz. col. 246.
and going back to the state from whence we came? And as for the latter, hear
the mourning Zanchy; What should I say (says he) of the Consciences of private
believers? It is manifest that they are greatly troubled with this commandment
about putting on these linen garments. For they do so greatly complain that
their lamenting voices, and groans do reach unto, and are heard in Germany. And
the Gospel has not been preached so long amongst us, to so little purpose, but
that the trouble, o^ people, upon the use of them now, is as great (...) as
ever. If therefore we will av^yd either the confirming of the Enemies of the
truth on the one hand, or the grieving of such as are friends to it, on the
other, we must lay such things aside.

Obj. 11. Grant that what has been alleged did oblige us to lay aside the
same individual, numerical things that have been abused, yet what is that to
those of the same kind that have not been abused? It does not follow that we
must upon that account, lay them aside. This is urged by many; particularly, by
Bishop Andrews, Disc. of Ceremon. p. 6. Rejoynd. c. 4. sect. ^1. p. 561. Doct.
of Consc. p. 157, 158.
Dr. Burgess, Dr. Prideaux; the last of which discou^^^ng in the behalf of the
Cross in Baptism, thus expresses himself. It cannot (says he) weigh with any
rational man, what is buzzed in the ears of men, to amuse them, that it is an
(...), and has been abused to Idolatry, in which charge, the Popish Cross is
concerned, not (...) 'Twill be no good reason, that because the (...) have
abused the Cross to Superstition, therefore we should be denied the lawful use
thereof. Neither can they be lead thereunto from that instance (so much used)
of the brazen Serpent, whence it may only be inferred that the same individual
thing idolized, is to be destroyed, but not their whole kind. We may not burn
all trees because one tree or grove has been abused to idolatry.

Answ. I have said enough in another Treatise, in answer to this Objection, and
therefore shall spend less time about it now. 1. God has instituted several
Ordinances, as preaching, praying, baptism; Now I demand when he instituted
these, whether he intended only one single prayer, sermon, baptism, or diverse
of the same kind? If only one, how shall we justify the use of more? if
diverse, what hinders but we may understand his commands touching the abolishing
of abused things, after the same manner. 2. The Holy Ghost in Scripture, does
in plain terms forbid the use not only of the same individual things, which
idolaters have abused, but also such as are of the same sort. He forbids the
Israelites not only to use the same things that the Egyptians, and Canaanites
had abused, but such as were like to them. Lev. 18.3.
After the doings (says he) of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye
not do: and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall
ye not do, neither shall ye walk in their ordinances. More particularly, to
prevent their compliance with idolatrous Nations, Lev. 19.27.
he forbids them to shave their heads, and cut their beards; not sure because
their heads and beards were the same individually with those of the Egyptians
and Canaanites, but that he would not have the Israetites to use customs, and
practices of the same kind with them. It was unlawful for Ahaz, 2 Kings 16.10.
not only to sacrifice on that altar which he saw at Damascus, but on one of
the same fashion with it. What then shall we say in defense of our selves, who
though we have not the very same individual fashions of Heathens and Papists;
yet we have of the same kind, so like them, that he must do little less than
divine, who distinguishes the one from the other. What beholder, seeing two
Priests, the one a Papist, the other a Protestant, making the sign of the
Cross, can without knowledge of the persons tell which is Popish, and which is
Protestant? Or cast two Surplices into a corner, the one used in England, the
other in Italy, and who is he that upon the seriousest view, can say this is
Popish, and this is Protestant? Dr. Ames tells of a Minister in Qu. Elizabeth's
days, Fresh Suit, part 2. p. 435.
who being urged by his Ordinary to wear the Surplice, alleged that the
Surplice offered to him, was the very same the Mass-Priest was wont to
Sacrifice in. The Ordinary admitting that excuse, commanded another to be made;
which being done, and brought to the Minister into the Church, he took it and
spoke thus to those that were present. Good people, the Bishop himself
confessed that the former Massing Surplice was not to be worn by a Minister of
the Gospel, and judge you if this be not as like that, as one egg to another:
let this therefore go after the other; and so he cast it away. 3. The method of
Christian Churches in abolishing abused things, shows they did not only hold
that the same individual thing which had been abused ought to be abolished, but
also others of the same sort, though never stained with any miscarriage
whatever. Observing (as you heard before) the abuse attending the office of the
Shriving Priest, they did not only remove the particular person that had
offended, but the office it self; and observing likewise the abuse attending
certain Religious Orders, they did not only appear against the particular
persons that had transgressed, but put down the Orders themselves. 4. The
Author of this Objection himself, a little before, even in the preceding page,
says the Cross has been a laudable rite, and very ancient in the Church of
Christ; from which he endeavors to justify the present use of it. Now I would
know what Cross it is that has been such a laudable rite, and so ancient in
the Church. Does he mean the same individual Cross that we use every day? No,
that he cannot, for that receives its birth the very instant wherein it is
made. What then does he mean? why, only the same in kind; and if we may argue
from the use of some to the use of others of the same kind, why may we not
argue from the abuse of some, to the abolishing of others of the same kind? The
Church of England heretofore thought we might, and therefore (as I have before
told you) renders this as the principal reason of the abolishing of diverse
things upon the Reformation laid aside, that they had been so far abused; which
I do much wonder this great Doctor, whiles he is writing in defense of the
Liturgy, (to which that passage is prefixed) should so far injure both the
truth and himself, as not to remember. And then, 5. As for what he alleges
concerning the burning of all trees, because of the abuse of one tree, or one
grove, is nothing to the purpose, unless he had made it appear, that there was
never above one Cross abused, or at least that it has been far less abused,
than lawfully used; whereas he could not but know, that it has been a thousand
times over more abused, than it either has, or is ever like to be lawfully
used; admitting that use which he himself here pleads for, in England, were
lawful. Let the case be but rightly stated, and I am content to stand to this
instance. Suppose then, 1. that all trees were indifferent, that is to say,
needless things, as the cross and other ceremonies are confessed to be. 2. That
for one time they were rightly used, they were a thousand times abused, as
every one knows the cross is, that understands what an Idol the Papists make of
it; whether would it not be our duty (as the Doctor here says) to burn them
every one, and so prevent the mischief, that otherwise would be committed by
them? I think there is not any man truly pious and zealous, but would subscribe
to the affirmative. Sure I am such was the spirit of Hezekiah, that though the
brazen Serpent was of higher original, more profitable use than the cross can
be pretended to be, and had never been so much abused as the cross has been,
yet he took it and brake it in pieces.

Sect. 13.
^^^nthly, THe objections being thus answered, and the Doctrinal, or
Explicatory part of this difcourse, therewith dispatched, I shall now pass to
the uses. And if ^^is be indeed a truth, that it is the pleasure of ^^^od that
such things as have been abused in ^^perstitious, and idolatrous services,
should be ^^id aside: then it serves,

1. For confutation and conviction of (...) great many in the world, who,
Divine authority of ^^e Scripture, even from the beginning to the ^^^d, and
pretned to believe what is delivered ^^erein, yet think they may embrace, and
^^ake use of, and that not only in civil, and ^^mmon transactions, but also in
the worship ^f God, such things as have been abused in the ^rementioned kind of
services, and therewith ^ave been polluted and defiled. And of these it ^ay
serve more particularly, for the confutation and conviction;

1. Of the Papists, who though they pre^end to have left the tents of the
Heathens, and to abhor their false gods, worship, and ^ayes, yet think they
may observe the ordinances and rites abused by them. Rev. 11.2. See Pareus in
loc.
Upon which ground the Holy Ghost does in plain ^erms call them Gentiles. The
court (says he) which is without the Temple leave out, and measure it not, for
it is given to the Gentiles. Here doubtless, by Gentiles he means the Papists,
whom he so calls not in respect of their descent or extraction, but in respect
of their observations and practices, wherein they do so much agree with the
Gentiles. And here I might give you an account of many particular customs and
practices, which they have derived from them, and wherein they symbolize with
them, but diverse have done it already, and therefore I shall forbear. Moresinus
a Scotchman, has written a Discourse entitled, Origo Papatus, wherein, after
the order of the Alphabet, he shows at large what I here insert. And Francis de
Croy, a Frenchman, has written a Discourse of the like nature, called, The
three conformities of the Romish Church, with Gentilism, Judaism, and ancient
Heresy: turned out of French, into English. Oliver Ormerod likewise many years
ago, put forth a piece in English, De Invent. l. 5. c. 1. p. 405. De Orig. err.
l. 1. c. 33. Conf. with H. p. 495. Disc. of Cerem. p. 16, etc.
called Pictura Papistae, wherein he does in multitudes of particulars, give us
an account of the Papists agreement both with Mahometans, and Heathens,
especially the latter. Nay some of the Papists have done it themselves; St.
Choul, put forth a piece i^ French to that purpose. If you have not these
Authors at hand, you may consult Pol. Virgil, Bullinger, Rainolds, Du Moulin,
Andrews, who will give you some account of the proceedings of the Papists as to
this particular. Did you see them sometimes in their solemnities, you would
think they had received their Religion rather from some such person as Numa,
than Christ. Lud. Vives (as the Author last named tells us) confesses there is
such agreement betwixt their worship, and that of the Heathens, that waving
names and titles; there is no difference to be showed. Vid. Hos. pin. de Orig
Imag. p. 200.
Nay the case is so plain, that Pope Pius 5. acknowledged that Rome did more
Gentilizare, quam Christianizare; that is, did savor more of Heathenism, than
Christianity. This is sad; and yet to aggravate the matter, their teachers who
should acquaint them with the unwarrantableness of such courses, and dissuade
them from them, do instead thereof, openly countenance them therein, Acts
14.14. Consulto introductum videtur, etc. ad ann. 200. sect. 5. Gentilium
imagines adoramus, etc. in Thom. t. 1. disp. 54. sect. 7 Instit. chap. 57.
nay labor to vindicate them against such as find fault. Whereas they should
(as Paul and Barnabas dealt with the men of Lystra) rent their clothes and run
in amongst them, crying out, and saying, Sirs, why do ye these things, they
stand up and plead for them, and thereby encourage and settle them in their
way. Thus Baronius; It was ordered (says he) on purpose, that the offices of
Heathenish superstition should be employed in the service of true Religion.
Thus Suarez; We worship (says he) the Images which the Gentiles worship, not
in a way of imitation, but correction. Thus likewise Cotton; As the Temples
(says he) dedicated unto Idols, were turned into Churches dedicated unto God,
so the Ceremonies which of themselves are indifferent, have been with good
reason transported to Gods service. Now if this be justifiable, what meant the
Council of A^^^^ra, Can. 7.
approved by the General Council of Nice, to decree against it? Can. 10. Omnem
afflatum ejus vice pestis etiam de longinquo devitemus. de Idol. c. 13. O
melior fidei Nationum in sectam suam, etc c. 14. Ep. 11, 44, 119. Orat. 1.
Cont. Jud Cont. Haeres. l. 3. Orat. de Sanct. Epiph. luminib. t. 3. q. 65.
Disp. 15. sect. 2.
Or what meant the (...). Council of Toledo, celebrated diverse years after, to
do the like? Or what meant Tert^^^^an to appear with so much heat and
indignation against it? Speaking of the Gentiles, he says, We must neither in
habit, food, nor any other practice comply with them, but avoid, and that at
the greatest distance, all their pomp as the very plague it self. And
afterward, speaking of some in his time that complied with them in their
solemnities and observations, he thus exclaims and cries out against them. Oh
the far greater faithfulness of the Nations about us to their own way, not
meddling with any of our Christian solemnities, neither the Lords day, nor
Pentecost! Though they had known of them, they would not have communicated with
us, lest they should seem to be Christians, but we fear not lest we be
accounted Heathens. Or what meant Augustine, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Nazianzen
to discourse after the same manner? Nay, and Suarez tells us, that the ancient
Church diligently avoided omne consortium and apparentem similitudinem, all
fellowship and appearing likeness with Jews, or other Infidels. Now either such
testimonies as these are of weight or not: If not, what a miserable condition
are the Papists in, who build their religion upon the reports of the ancients;
If they are, then what a world of sin have they committed in taking up so many
customs of Heathens and complying with them in the use of them? Let them turn
(...) whether hand they please, they will find themselves (like Abraham's Ram)
caught in the briars.

Of many amongst our selves, who though they would be thought to have separated
from the Papists, and cry out against them as Superstitious, Idolatrous,
Antichristian, yet think they may take up such things as they have abused,
bring them into the house of God, and there employ them in his service. As the
Papists employ such things as the Heathens have abused in their proceedings, so
These employ such things as the Papists have ab^^'d in theirs. Looking upon
Jerusalem as insufficient to furnish them with convenient and proper utensils
for the service of God, they go to Babylon, and supply themselves there. In how
many particulars they agree in their Worship, Discipline, Ceremonies, and other
things, with the Church of Rome, was showed in a Treatise published above
twenty years ago, Entitled, A Parallel betwixt the Mass Book and the book of
Common Prayer. This is unwarrantable dealing; yet when their Brethren who would
see the Service of God, managed in a more pure and holy way, complain to them,
and urge them to wave the use of such scandalous and offensive things, they are
so far from yielding them just satisfaction, that they answer them with scorn
and disdain, nay inveigh against them, and persecute them, as a company of
precise, schismatical, factious persons, (...) of any thing, but the
fulminations of their provoked authority. Now, what is this but to hender
themselves guilty of, abominable and ^^thy compliance? What is this but to lick
up the vomit of Antichrist, and feed on his very excrements? What is this, but
to imitate, encourage, and settle him in his way, See Mr. Cartw. Eccl. discip.
l. 1. p. 132. l. 3. p. 178, 180.
whereas they should stand at the utmost distance from him, and do all they can
to convince him of his abominable departure from God and his truth? What is
this but to give him occasion to beast that the Protestants are his Apes, and
know not how to manage the business of Religion, but by his direction, than
which, what can be more to their reproach. What is this but with those impious
ones the Scripture cries out against to make the heart of the righteous sad,
Ezekiel. 13.22.
and strengthen the hands of the wicked that he should not raturn from his
wicked way? Whether (...) kind of dealing be justifiable, let all sober (...)
indifferent men judge?

2. It serves for exhortation, advise and persuade us all in our respective
places, to perform the several duties that such a truth calls for. And,

1. Let this engage our hearts against such things amongst us, as have been
abused in superstitious and idolatrous services. They are detestable and
abominable, and as such we are to esteem them, and carry our selves toward
them. Though in themselves they be never so innocent and lawful, yet having in
such kind of services been abused, they are no less than hateful and loathsome.
Such creatures as Oxen, Calves, and the like, are in themselves good and use
full, yet inasmuch as the Egyptians adored them, and made Idols of them, the
Holy Ghost (as many think, who take the word (...) in a passive senfe)
represents them as abominable, nay as adomination it self. Exodus 8.26. Passivam
significationem multi amplectantur, Rivet. in loc.
When Pharaoh would have had Moses and Aaron to have contented themselves with
the land of Egypt, and Sacrifice there, Moses answers, It is not meet so to do,
for we shall Sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord our God:
Lo, shall we Sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and
will they not stone us? His answer is by way of Dilemma, implying as much as if
he had said, if we should follow thy advice, and Sacrifice in his (...), we
must do it, either after the manner of the Egyptians, or the Israelites; if
after their manner, it would be displeasing to God, if after our own, it would
be displeasing to them, inasmuch as we must Sacrifice those very creatures
which they adore as deities.

But you will say, how could Moses pretend to Pharaoh that the Israelites were to
Sacrifice such creatures as the Egyptians worshipped, when as the Law
concerning Sacrifices was not yet delivered, Exodus 10.26.
and when as he himself tells him afterward, that they knew not with what they
must serve the Lord, till they should come to their own land. Answ. Though the
Law concerning Sacrifices was not yet delivered (...) what God revealed to
(...), might (...) what creatures would (...). Fortassus sacrifica turi sumus,
etc.
(...) there (...) to the (...) we (...) of the Egyptians to the Lord our God;
but (...) Rivet dissents from him, Non (...) etc. in loc.
rendering (...) reason, that (...) from the (...) the difference be(...) (...),
what was to be offe^^^, and what not, what would please, and (...) that which
(...) knew not (...) he speaks (...) not of the (...) but (...).

(...) of my present (...) to take no^^^ (...) the creature (...) in their
worship, (...) Egyptians; not (...) to the Egyptians (...) God, who had been
dishonored (...) them in their abominable worship: upon which he took up such
a dislike of them, that they became no less than hateful to him, so that though
the Israelites might use them for their ordinary food, yet not for Sacrifice,
or though they might use them for Sacrifice in their own land, when they were
at a distance from the Egyptians, yet not amongst them.

And the same language the Holy Ghost uses here concerning abused things, the
same he uses also in other places. Deuteronomy. 32.16. 1 Kings 11.5.
Speaking concerning the Israelites and their Idolatry, he says, they provoked
him to jealousy with their strange Gods, with abominations provoked they him
to anger. And speaking of the Idol which the Ammonites worshipped, he calls it,
Deuteronomy. 7.25.
the abomination of the Ammonites. Nay speaking of the silver and gold that was
upon the Cananitish Images, he calls them (as you heard before) an abomination.
Whereby we see, that not only such things as have been made Idols, but
likewise, such as have been abused in their scrvice, are an abomination to him.
And if they are so to him, there is good reason they should be so to us. As we
must not hate the things that he loves, so neither must we love the things that
he hates; Ephesians. 5.1.
but following him like dear children (as he has commanded) we must love what
he loves, and hate what he hates.

2. Lets utterly decline, and forbear the use of them. Lets beware how we bring
them into the house of God, Lev. 19.19.
and employ them in his service. He gave it in charge to the Israelites, that
they should not let their Cattle gender with a diverse kind: sow their field
with mingled seed: nor put a garment mingled of woollen and linen upon them.
Wherein he plainly forbids the mingling of things impure, with those that are
pure: men's inventions with his institutions: Non sunt cum dei praeceptis
aniscenda hominum commenta, etc. Pareus in loc.
idolatrous relics with his holy ordinances. Munster (as the Author quoted in
the Margent shows) tells us, such is the averseness of the present Jews, to a
garment of diverse kinds, that if they find but one linen thread, wrought in a
linen garment with a Needle, they do no less than abominate it. And such
averseness must we exercise toward mixtures in the worship of God. We must
keep close to his institutions, declining the use of unwarrantable inventions,
and all such things as have been abused in false worship, and thereby have been
defiled. God is so far from allowing us to respect, or use them, that he will
not have us to touch them. Isa. 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17.
Touch not (says he) the unclean things. We must be so far from declaring our
unfeigned assent and consent to them: from an hearty embracing of them, and a
full closure with them, that we must not so much as touch them. Touch them
indeed we may, as Hezekiah, Josiah, and other good Kings did, in order to the
removal of them, but not so, as own them, show respect to them, Levit. 5.2.
or make use of them. As in the time of the Levitical Law, he that touched any
thing that was forbidden, became himself unclean; so we, if we touch these
things in any way of allowance, or respect to them, shall become unclean: and
therefore it concerns us as we would observe the Apostles command of keeping
our selves pure, 1 Timothy 5.22.
to avoid them, and have nothing to do with them.

And if we inquire into the proceedings of former times, we shall find the
Servants of God, have still evidenced their dislike of such things, kept at a
distance from them, and thereby born witness against them. See Pareus in Exodus
8.25. Mr. Anth Burgess his Sermon upon Judge. 6.27, etc. p. 11. P. Mart. in 1
Reg. 18.30. 2 Kings 5.17, 18.
The Israelites, would not sacrifice to the Lord in the land of Egypt, because
it was polluted. The Jews in Babylon, would not do it there, for the same
reason. Elijah would not do it upon the Altar of Baal, but chose rather
(though, he that while kept the people in suspense) to repair the Altar of the
Lord: upon the same account. And Naaman the Syrian, upon his turning to the
Jewish Religion, would not make the Lord an Altar of any Earth, but that of
Israel, upon the very same score. And calling to mind his former bowing in the
house of Rimmon, the Idol of his Country, he was greatly troubled at it, and
begged of God to forgive him. In this (says he) the Lord pardon thy Servant,
etc. Concerning this case of Naaman, Expositors and Casuists, discourse
variously; I shall therefore for the better clearning of the truth, and making
out what I have in hand, inquire a little into it. Becan. Manual. l. 5. c. 6.
p. 455. Tho. a Jesu de Convers. Gent. l. 10. c. 3. Sanchez. com. in 2 Reg. 5.
Estius in loc. Baldwin. Cas. l. 2. c. 10. Cas. 6. p. 387. Bishop Hall of Consc.
p. 186. Ed. 3. Tremel. Junius Pareus, in loc.
Some think his going into the house of Rimmon, and bowing there was lawful,
and warrantable, for this reason, that it was not religious but civil, not out
of choice, but necessity, not out of respect to the Idol, but the King his
Master, who there leaned upon him. But if so, wherefore did he acknowledge it
as a fault, and beg forgiveness? Certainly, he either missed it in bowing, or
else in begging pardon; and then, how as the Prophet did not acquaint him with
it, and tell him that he was too forward: that he confessed before he had
offended, and begged pardon before he was guilty, both which are unnecessary
and improper? As for the Prophets valediction (...) go in peace; it argues not
his approbation of his former practice, but of his succeeding repentance.
Others think that though he sinned in going into the house of Rimmon, and
bowing there, and was convinced of the unlawfulness of it, yet he still
retained a resolution to do it. But this I conceive is an error as well as the
former, proceeding from an apprehension that the words are to be taken in the
future tense, whereas being in the Gerund, they may as well be rendered in the
praeter-tense, and then they run thus; in this thing the Lord pardon thy
Servant that when my Master went into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and
leaned on my hand, and I bowed my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon
thy Servant in this thing. The reasons wherefore I conceive the words should
rather be taken thus, than otherwise, are these. 1. Its ordinary with the
Sacred Penmen, to put the Gerund for the Praeter-tense. To go no further than
the word here rendered, go: its ordinary with them to put (...) for (...) and
(...). 2. Being taken thus, they best a gree with the context. 1. With Naamans
profession. Behold now I know there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel.
And knowing this, he must needs know that he was not to show respect, to any
other God but him. 2. With his promise. Thy Servant will henceforth offer
neither burnt Offering nor Sacrifice unto other Gods, but unto the Lord. Under
which he comprehends not only Offering and Sacrifice, taken in a strict sense,
but all devotion, and respect whatsoever. 3. With the Prophets valediction; go
in peace. Which I can hardly think he would have said to him, without any
insinuation at all of dislike, if he had understood by his words, that he
intended to go and show the same respect to the Idol, he used to do. By this it
appears how much Baldwin, Cas. l. 2. c. 6. Cas. 6. p. 198.
is out of the way, when he says that Naaman obtained leave of the Prophet to
accompany the King his Master into the house of Rimmon. He was so far from
obtaining leave of the Prophet to do it, that he never so much as desired it
from him. He asked not leave to sin for the time to come, but pardon for the
time past. The sum then of all this is, that Naaman whilst he was of the
Syrian Religion, in pursuance of the civil office which he owed to his Master,
used to go with him into the house of Rimmon, and there bow with him: which
upon his conversion, being convinced of the unlawfulness of, he confesses his
fault, is sorry for it, and craves pardon. That the words are to be taken only
in this sense, I shall not be so peremptory as to affirm, but this I am sure
of, that not only many good Authors go this way, but also whereas the taking of
them in other senses begets diverse scruples, this does not, but presents us
with an eminent convert, and a remarkable instance of abstainng from Idolatry,
with the occasions of it.

But you will say, may we not at all appear before an Idol, or be present at
idolatrous worship? Answ. Yes, we may; but then we must see, 1. That we be not
ignorant, weak, unsettled in Religion, but well-grown, firm and stable. We must
see that we have senses capable of discerning betwixt good and evil; that we
have strength to encounter with a temptation; that we are able to stand out
against the allurements of glistering and pompous vanities. And hereof, we are
to have good assurance: otherwise we must forbear. Many good and holy men have
been ensnared, and therefore we had best beware how we venture. 2. That we do
it, not rashly, or of our own heads, but have a call from God for it. We must
keep the places and stations we supply, and not depart from them. The story of
Origin is well known; Hearing of some Christians, that under the Persecution by
Decius, were carried to an Idols Temple, to be enticed to Sacrifice: out of an
indiscreet zeal ran to them, and being urged to it himself, unhappily, and
sinfully yielded; whereby he made such a wound in his conscience, as he could
not get cured of a long time. Thus does God many times in a way of just
severity, punish our vain confidence, by letting us fall before those
temptations, we through our indiscretion and rashness cast our selves upon. 3.
That we do it not with doubting, concerning the lawfulness of it, but with full
persuasion and satisfaction. Whatever business we are about, Romans 14.5, 23.
we must be satisfied, touching the warrantableness of it, ere we undertake it.
If therefore we doubt of the lawfulness of going to the Idols Temple, we must
forbear it. It may be unlawful to go, it can hardly be unlawful to stay. 4.
That we do it not out of vain curiosity, but to inform and satisfy our selves
of the folly, madness and wickedness of Idolaters, who having forsaken the true
God, give up themselves to the worshipping of mere shaddows and vanities.
Ezekiel in his Vision, Ezekiel. 8.3
goes from place to place to take a view of the abominations of the Jews; but
this he did not out of curiosity, but to acquaint himself with what he was
either wholly ignorant, or uncertain of. Paul beheld the devotions of the
Athenians, Acts 17.23.
but he did it not to gratify his fancy, but upon the same account that
Ezekiel did, to inform his judgment, that so he might the better know how
things were carried on amongst them. 5. That we do it not with respect to the
Idol, but with detestation, and that we may the better show the vanity thereof,
and undeceive such as we see addicted to it. 1 Kings 18.27.
Elijah stood before Baal, while his Prophets called on him; but this was not
out of any respect he bore to him, but that he might the better have an
opportunity to mock him, convince the halting Israelites of the vanity of him,
and draw them away from him. 2 Kings 23.15.
Josiah in like manner, went to the calf at Bethel, not to worship it, but to
break it in pieces, that so the deluded people might no longer commit idolatry
to it. 6. That we do it not to the offending of any, whether good or bad, but
to their edification and advantage. We may eat meat sacrificed to Idols, Romans
14.21. 1 Cor. 8.9. Vid. D. Coelest. Hist. August. Commit. part 1. f. 82.
but then we must see that we do it neither to the confirming of such as
respect them, nor the grieving of such as hate them. Though the Protestant
Electors and Princes, being met together at the Diet of Augusta, were ready to
perform all those civil Offices, they owed to the Emperor, yet they would
neither go with him to the Mass, nor accompany him in the Processions on Corpus
Christ's day, lest they should confirm the Papists in their abominations, which
they came thither to bear witness against 7. That we do it not at such a time,
when it is likely to bring us into trouble, but when we may do it with safety.
Indeed, when God calls us forth to appear in the behalf of his truth, we must
do it, let the danger be what it will; but till he call us, we must avoid it,
and not through curiosity, affectation of novelty, precipitancy, or the like,
expose our selves to it. If we be present at Idolatrous services, we must
evidence our dislike; if therefore we may not safely evidence our dislike, we
must not, except we have some special call thereunto, be present. To this
purpose is that of Baldwin; Vbi public dissensum declarare non licet, etc. l.
2. c. 6. Cas. 6. p. 197.
where (says he) we may not publicly declare our dissent, it is better to
abstain, lest we either beget a scruple in our own consciences, or danger from
the adversary. If then, we are of good progress in religion, have a call from
God, are satisfied in our own consciences with what we are about, have need of
informing our judgments, will do what we do with an evidence of our dislike,
Of Communicating with the Lutherans in the Eucharist, See Alting. Probl. Theol.
pt. 3. p. 164. Jo. Crocius Ant. Weigel. p. 152.
and may do it without giving offense to any, or bringing our selves into
needless trouble, then we may appear before an Idol, and be present at the
worship given to it; otherwise, not. As for Naamans going into the house of
Rimmon, it makes nothing against what I have here said; for, as he sinned in
it, so (as you have heard) upon his conversion, he confessed his error, and
begged pardon.

Another example of this abstinence from abused things, we have in Daniel (a
man of far higher seize, than such a new Convert as Naaman was, can be
presumed to have had) who when Nebuchadnezzar by the hands of Ashpenaz the
Master of his Eunuchs offered him of his royal meats, and wines, he refused
either to eat, or drink thereof. He purposed in his heart that he would not
defile himself with the proportion of the Kings meat. Dan. 1.8
The King had such high esteem of him, that he was desirous to win him to his
religion, and in order thereunto, he judges it meet to treat him with such
meats and drinks, as he had consecrated to his Idols, thinking, that when he
had inured him to feed on the one, he should bring him to own the other. Hunc
hamum subesse cibis regiis vidit Daniel, etc. in loc. Dr. Burgess Rejoinder, c.
4. sect. 6. p. 446. Ne illa quidem quorum usus permittitur lege, integra erant,
etc. Trem. and Jun. in loc.
This bait he made use of to take him; but Daniel (as Pareus notes) espying the
hook, declines the inticement, and so escapes the danger. Being aware of the
design that was laid against him, he first purposes abstinence in his heart,
and then exercises it in his practice. I know it is said, that he refused to eat
of the Kings meat, not because it was abused, by being offered to an Idol; but
because it was forbidden by the ceremonial law. But 1. some writers of very
great authority, say he refused to eat it, not only because the ceremonial law
forbade the Jews to eat such kind of meat, but because the King had abused it
to superstition and idolatry. 2. Admit the immediate reason of his refusing to
eat the Kings meat, was because it was forbidden by the ceremonial law, yet
that does not at all mend the matter; for the reason wherefore that law forbade
such meats, was, that they had been abused by the idolatrous Nations. So that
though the immediate reason of Daniels refusing to eat the Kings meat, was
perhaps ceremonial, viz. that that law forbade it, yet the remote and more
principal was, that his meat had been offered to an Idol, and thereby had been
abused.

In like manner Ephraim, upon his return, declines the use of those things, he
had before so much doted on. Nay, he is so far from respecting them as he did,
that he speaks of them with disdain. Hos. 14.8.
What (says he) have I to do any more with Idols? Being sensible of his having
followed them too long already, he resolves he will have no more to do with them.
Tertullian holds it unlawful, De Coron. Milit.
either to give any thing to the service of an Idol, or take any thing from it.
As we must not take furniture from the house of God, to beautify the Temple of
an Idol, so neither must we take furniture from the Temple of an Idol to
beautify the house of God. (...) Cujus aedes contiguae sunt templi
idololatrico and collapsae fuerint eas aedificare prohibitum. Shulchan Aruch,
part 2. number. 143
He will have nothing common with Idols; neither must we. The Jews in times
past, were extremely addicted to heathenish Idols; but latter years have taught
them more wisdom: such is their hatred to them, that they will not have an
house stand near one of their Temples. It is forbidden (say they) that those
houses which stand contiguous to an Idolatrous Temple, if they fall down, to
rebuild them. They have found by sad experience, that Idols are but bad
Neighbors, and therefore they think it not good to live near them. And
whenever God opens the eyes of men, and shows them the vanity and danger of
Idols, they will have little mind to meddle with them, or any thing belonging to
them.

3. Lets all do our parts toward the abolishing, and extirpating of them.
Whatever persons, names, times, places, utensils, ceremonies, we find amongst
us, that have been grossly abused in superstitious and idolatrous services, let
us endeavor the rooting of them out, and the laying of them aside. We must not
only stand looking up to authority, and waiting to see what they will do, but
we must every of us, so far as may consist with the keeping of our places,
endeavor the doing of it. Magistrates are often more backward in reforming the
Church, and purging out such things, than otherwise they would be, because
their people are not more forward. The reason wherefore Jehosaphat took not
away the high places, 2 Chronicles. 20.33.
was because the people were not yet prepared. He was willing to have set upon
the work, but he saw the people who hankered after their old superstitions,
were averse to it, and therefore he let it alone. Had they but gone to him, and
desired the removal of them, the work had been done. And I am persuaded, that
if the people of England, who are unsatisfied with those monuments of Popish
Idolatry, that are amongst us, would but acquaint his Majesty therewith, and in
a proper, becoming way, solicit him to remove them, he would gratify them in
it. Let us not therefore, any longer sit still in the midst of such defilements
and snares, but discover our hatred of them, decline their use, and in such
ways as prudence, justice, and order do allow, endeavor the rooting of them
out. Let us not like Rachel, Genesis 31.34. Judge. 18.14. 1 Samuel 19.13.
Micah, Michal, keep them by us, but cast them away as filth out of our houses.
It is but a womanish, weak part, to preserve, or give any countenance to such
things, and therefore lets not be guilty thereof, but engage against them, and
root them out.

Now for the better directing of your course, I shall in a few words, point at
some particular things amongst us, which have been abused in superstitious and
idolatrous services, and that in so high a degree, that wise, learned, and good
men of different persuasions, have judged they ought to be laid aside. I know I
shall be censured for appearing against such things, they being of such esteem
with diverse amongst us, and being backed and fenced with Authority and Law.
Some, will charge me with malice, and ill will to the public establishment:
others, with indiscretion and rashness; but that is no sufficient reason
wherefore I should not do my duty. Christ blames the Pastor of the Church of
Pergamus, Rev. 2.14.
for being silent in this case, and therefore I understand not how we may,
without rendering our selves liable to the like reproof, hold our peace. Its no
great matter what men think, 1 Cor. 4.3.
or say of us, all the while we do nothing, but what we may not omit. We must
appear against the corruptions amongst us, and endeavor the securing of Gods
glory, and the souls of people, let the issue be what it will. And if those who
upon the reading hereof, do censure me, will but lay aside sinister respects,
and seriously weigh the reasons and authorities, I have on my side, they will
perhaps see cause to resent things better.

1. The present Liturgy, though there be many good and useful things in it, yet
it has been so much abused, both heretofore among the idolatrous Papists from
whom we had it, and since amongst our selves, that it has for many years been
the desire of several thousands of sober and godly people of all degrees in
these Nations, that it should after the other Popish trash, thrown out of the
house of God in the beginning of the Reformation, be laid aside. What relation
it has to the Papists, and of what nature it is, we may learn from the message
sent by King Edward the 6th. to the men of Devonshire and Cornwall, Acts and
Mon. vol. 2. p. 667.
who upon that pious Kings casting off Popery, and setting up Protestanism,
rose up in arms, and made several impudent demands to him, telling him, amongst
other things, that they would not receive the New Service, but would have their
Old Service of Mattins, Mass, Even-song, and Procession in Latin, as it was
before. To which he returns this answer; As for the Service (says he) in the
English tongue, though it may seem to you a New Service, it is indeed none
other than the Old. You have the self same words in English which were in
Latin, saving a few things that are taken out, which were so fond, that it had
been a shame to have heard them in English, as all they can judge who list to
report the truth. And how can this with reason offend any reasonable man? If
the Service in the Latin Church was good in Latin, it remains good in
English, for nothing is altered, but to speak with knowledge, what was spoken
with ignorance. See Mr. Ball against Separation, p. 149.
Thus that Religious King. And King James, who came after him, spoke to the
same purpose. In a Speech of his in Scotland, he said in plain terms, that the
English Liturgy, was an ill said Mass. And hence it is that the Papists
themselves have such a liking to it. Pope Pius the 4th. sending Vincentio
Parpatia, Abbot of St. Savior, to Queen Elizabeth, offered to confirm it, if
she would yield to him in some other things. And when the Popes intelligencers
had seen Service solemnly sung and said in Canterbury and London, with all
their pomp and procession, they wondered that their Master would be so
unadvised, as to interdict a Prince or State, whose Services and Ceremonies so
symboliz'd with his own. Nay, so well were the Papists of our own Nation
pleased with it the first eleven years of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, that they came
to the Church, and joined themselves with Protestants in the use of it. Hereby
you see whence it came, and from whose hands we received it, even from the
Children of Babylon; and coming from such impure hands, its easy for any that
know what Antichristianism means, to guess what usage it had amongst them. And
if we come amongst our selves, and take a view of it since it spoke English,
what a strange reverence have the ignorant and superstitious people it in? How
do they admire and adore it? What an Idol do they make of it? This is so well
known, that there are none, setting out such as are as ignorant and
superstitious as they, but they are acquainted with it. And upon this and other
grounds, there have been various and eminent oppositions made against it, and
endeavors used for the abolishing of it. Voetius takes notice that it has met
with various contradictions from first to last. Ea semper contradictiones
varias passa est. Pol. Eccl. pt. 1. l. 2. tract. 1. c. 1. p. 349.
Who has not heard of the Admonition exhibited to the Parliament, Ann. 1572.
of the Petition of the thousand Monisters presented to King James 1603. of the
Declaration of the Lincolnshire Ministers? The very Names of the Addresses,
Remonstrances, Complaints, and other Discourses that from time to time, ever
since the beginning of the Reformation, have been made against it, would amount
to no less than a just Volume. But waving other Testimonies, I shall only offer
to your thoughts, what upon the advice of the Assembly of Divines was urged by
the late house of Lords and Commons, in order to the satisfying of people
touching the abolishing of it. Amongst other reasons which they render for the
taking of it away, Pref. to the Direct. p. 5.
this was one, that the Prelates and their faction had labored to raise the
estimation of it to such in height, as if there were no other worship, or way
of worshipping God amongst us, but only it, to the great hindrance of the
Preaching of the Word, and (in some places of late) to the justling of it out
as unnecessary, or at least, as far inferior to the reading of the Common
Prayer, which has been made no better than an Idol, by many ignorant and
superstitious people, who pleasing themselves with their presence at that
Service, and their lip-labor in bearing a part in it, have thereby hardened
themselves in their ignorance, and carelesseness of saving knowledge, and true
piety. I produce not this, or other testimonies of the like nature, for the
sakes of those high flown gallants, that have sacrificed their reason to humor
and prejudice; but for the sakes of such a are sober and moderate, and will
listen to truth when it speaks. And to these I appeal, whether the Service book
being no institution of God, but a device of man: nor of any such necessary
use, but that it may well be spared: and so many of the Nobles, Gentlemen,
Ministers, together with so many thousands of private Christians, being
offended with it, and crying out against it, as a thing horribly abused, and
made an Idol, it should not, as well, as the brazen Serpent, be abolished and
laid aside? What reason can any render wherefore the former should be
abolished, and not the latter? Is it pleaded, that the latter is in it self
lawful (which many question, and others deny) so was the former. Will it be
said that the latter has been, is, and still may be, useful; the like may be
said as to the former. Cannot the latter be removed without giving offense to
many whose satisfaction is to be endeavored as well as others, neither could
the former. Turn you which way you will, you shall find that the reasons for
sparing the brazen Serpent, were as many and strong, as those alleged in the
behalf of the Service book; nay, far more, and stronger. The Service book, is
not of divine institution, but the Serpent was. The Service book was never any
instrument of miraculous cures, but the Serpent was. The Service book was never
any figure of Christ, either being to come, or being already come, but the
Serpent was. Hereby, to proceed no farther, it appears, that the reasons for
sparing the Serpent, were of as much, nay more weight than those be, which are
produced in behalf of the Service book; yet Hezekiah considering it had been
made an Idol, did in observance of the Law of God, take it, and break it in
pieces. Why then the Service book should not be dealt with after the same
manner, I understand not.

2. The sign of Cross, has been long used in the Church; if the account that
some give of it be true, Dr. Burgess Rejoynd. chapter 1. sect. 15. p. 61.
near sixteen hundred years: during which time, it has by several sorts of
persons, especially the Papists, been so abused, that its thought fit by many
it should be laid aside. Voetius, debating this Problem, Whether the ceremony
of the Cross used in some places in the administration of Baptism, do symbolize
with Idolatry, determines it affirmatively, the reason whereof I shall give you
in his own words. Quia est ceremonia abhominibus instituta, etc. Disp. part. p.
266.
It is (says he) a ceremony instituted of men, and not of God, and has been
polluted with idolatry in an horrid manner, even as it is yet polluted at this
day; yea it is the universal instrument, and standard (as it were) of all
idolatry and superstition in the Papacy, and therefore ought wholly to be
abolished. The reason (you see) wherefore he thinks it should be abolished, is
that it has been so much abused, especially in the Papacy, where it serves as
the grand instrument of their superstition, folly, and madness. And this reason
is urged by many; particularly, by that most learned man Dr John Rainolds,
Conf. with Heart. c. 8. divis. 4. p. 509. See his Opusc. p. 113.
who argues from Hezckiahs breaking down of the brazen Serpent, to the
abolishing of the sign of the Cross; but especially by the reverend and
judicious Mr. Bradshaw, who has written a particular Treatise upon it, which
in the Title page, we find contracted into this syllogism. No religious use of
a Popish Idol in Gods public Service is indifforent, but utterly unlawful, but
the use of the Cross in Baptism, is a religious use of a Popish Idol in Gods
public Service, Ergo, the use of the Cross in Baptism, is not indifferent, but
utterly unlawful. Thus his Argument runs; with how, and with what strength he
manages it, I leave to every one upon his own inquiry to judge. For my part, I
never saw any competent answer to it, neither do I expect it.

3. The Surplice is in it self an innocent Vestment, but has been so abused,
that it is become unfit for Religious use. Though it signify Purity, yet
experience tells us, it is so far from being able to work or preserve it, in
those whom it covers, that it cannot secure it self. Ergo etiamsi nullo alio,
hoc saltem nomine obtrudendae non sunt Ecclesiae Christi id genus, vestes, etc
vol. 3. Epist. ad Reg. Eliz. col. 244. See Hooker cited by Mr. Jeanes in his
treatise of Abstain. from app. of evil, p. 143.
Having fallen into fowl hands, it is so sullyed and defiled, that it is fit
rather for an Hostler, than a Minister of the Gospel: for a Stable than the
House of God. Zanchy speaking to Qu. Elizabeth of it, and such like garments,
tells her that the very abuse thereof considered in it self, is a sufficient
reason, wherefore they should not be imposed. Though for no other (says he)
yet for this very cause, such garments ought not to be thrust upon the Church
of Christ, because the Harlot of Rome has abused them, and does still at this
day abuse them. Some have been of opinion, that the washing of them in the
water of new Doctrine, differing from that of the Papists, touching their
necessity, holiness, efficacy, willpurge them from their defilement, and render
them fit for use again. But it is not with moral filthiness, as it is with
natural. All the water of Jordan would not have served for the cleansing of
Gideons Ephod, when once defiled from its idolatry. And thus it is in the
present case; when we have done all we can to our polluted garments, they will
still remain filthy. Though we should wash them with Nitre and Soap, yet they
would still retain their spots, and cry out with the Leper, unclean, unclean.

4. Kneeling at the Sacrament of the Supper, is a rite contended for, and
^^^tised by many, but has been so pollu^^^^ with Antichristian Idolatry, that
it is judged fit it should be waved, and another more proper, as well as
ancient, used instead of it. Beza looks upon it as a sufficient reason
wherefore it should not be used, that it has been the occasion of such
Idolatry in the Papacy. Quoniam ex hoc font orta est, etc. Ep. 12. Mist. Iniq.
ad an. 1209. p. (ed. lat. fol.) 343
Because (says he) from this fountain rose that detestable worshipping of the
bread, which yet cleaves to the minds of many, it seems deservedly to be taken
away. Whether Kneeling, proceeded from the worshipping of the bread, or lead to
it; whether it were the effect of it, as Morney thinks, or the cause of it, as
Beza here suggests, I shall not now inquire. It is manifest to all the world it
has been abused in it, and that is thought sufficient reason wherefore it
should be laid aside. This is not the judgment of a single. Beza only, but of
others. Voetius disputing concerning it, amongst other reasons which he renders
against it, this is one, and the first in order, Ritus quo homines excellenter
abust sunt ad idololatriam, etc. Pol. Eccl. part 1. p. 815.
that it has been so much abused. His argument runs thus; that rite which men
have highly abused to Idolatry, and which neither divine nor natural right has
made necessary, is not to be held for a sacred matter, or for any thing
belonging to a sacred matter, but is to be removed from divine worship; but the
rite of Kneeling is such as men have so abused, and which neither divine nor
natural right has made necessary; Ergo. His major he proves from several
places of Scripture, particularly from the example of Hezekiah, who upon the
account of abuse, did not only take away the high places, but likewise the
brazen serpent, though such an illustrious testimony of antiquity, (as he fitly
calls it) made by the express command of God himself. The former branch of the
minor, he proves from this, that the Papists have used this gesture, and do yet
use it, to their horrid breadworship, or adoration of the Host. The latter
branch of the minor, he proves from this, that there is no command touching
Kneeling at the Supper, nor any reason, nor natural necessity to induce, or
lead us to it. Of what force Dr. Sandersons arguments are, though managed with
so much subtilty, you may gather from the particular answers he afterward
returns to them. Ezekiel. 8.18. Cum idclatrae eum ad idololatriam and
superstitionem per agendam appropriant, etc. Disp. pt. 3. p. 267.


5. Worshipping toward the East, is (as the Scripture it self shows) of very
ancient use, yet in regard diverse Nations have, and do so much abuse it, many
have judged it meet that we should decline, and forbear the use of it. Though
it be indifferent, and at our own free choice, which point of Heaven to worship
toward, yet in regard standing toward the East, has been so much abused by
Idolaters, with whom we must not in any unnecessary things, have communion, we
are taught to worship another way. Thus the forementioned Voetius directs us.
Inasmuch (says he) as Idolaters do appropriate it to the carrying on of their
idolatry and superstition, Adoratio ad Occidentem introducta fuit in lege ad
excludendum idololatriam, etc. 12. q. 102. a. 4.5. De Idol. l. 2. c. 3. tantis
superslttionibus contaminata illa festa fuerunt ut mirer si quisquam
Christianus sit qui ad nomina eorum non exhorrescat. in Mat.
we ought to abstain from it, lest we seem in outward show to communicate with
them; especially, if our adversaries improve our using it to the defense of
their cause. Nay Aquinas himself shows, that the reason wherefore the Sanctum
Sanctorum stood West, and wherefore the Jews were to worship that way, was
because the Gentiles in reverence to the Sun worshipped toward the East. And
if God would not have the Jews to use an abused posture, or comply with
Idolaters therein, what reason have we to think he will allow us to do it.
Those who would see more of this, may read Vossius, and what our Writers have
said in answer to Bellarmine on this subject.

6. There are diverse Holy Days observed amongst us, which with the
forementioned things, have been so abused, that its thought high time they
should be let alone, and employed to another use. What opinion the reformed
Churches beyond the Seas are of, concerning this business, I might show you by
a multitude of testimonies, but I shall only offer to you a few, from some
Writers amongst them of prime note, whereby you may guess at the judgments of
others. Bucer speaking of Holy Days, says, they have been so tainted with
superstition, that I wonder we tremble not at their very names. Rivet
discoursing of them, and their observation in England, urges the abuse of them,
and the act of Hezekiah mentioned in the Text, for abolishing of them upon that
account. Inter Orthod^xos c^nvenit, etc. Vol. 1. Expl. Decal. ad 4. Praec. p.
1346, etc.
It is (says he) agreed amongst the Orthodox, that they are celebrated by the
Papists with manifest idolatry. And afterward; We could wish (says he) that
as Hezekiah abolished the brazen serpent because some abused it, so they would
abolish those Holy Days which are polluted with so many superstitions and
idolatries in the Papacy. Cappellus is of the same mind; speaking of the
keeping of Holy Days, such as Christmas, Id est quod nec Christus, nec
Apostoli, Ecclesiae Christianae necessarium duxerunt etc. These Salm. pt. 3.
sect. 7. p. 647.
Easter, Whitsontide, says, it is that which neither Christ, nor his Apostles
thought necessary for the Christian Church; for if they had thought it
necessary, doubtless they would not have omitted it, for they were not
destitute of wisdom and prudence to see what was profitable and fit to be done
in this case; yet there is not in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles,
so much as any footstep, word, or letter touching that particular. And having
showed the rise, and progress of the observation of Holy Days, he tells us, it
had been more advisable and conduceable to the welf are of the Christian
Church, not to have admitted that destination and peculiar observation of
days, because as the event shows, from thence proceeded the superstition and
idolatry which has for so many ages possessed and overspread the Popish
Church, from which leaven those Churches are not altogether safe, which retain
the primitive use of Holy Days; insomuch that others fearing lest they should
from such use contract contagion, chose rather in their reformation wholly to
abolish it. To the same purpose writes Wendeline; discussing this Question,
What is to be thought of Holy Days, which the Papists have instituted, and do
yet celebrate in the honor of Saints, he thus determines the case. They are
full (says he) of Idolatry, Cultu scatent idololatrico, etc. Syst. Maj l. 2.
c. 6. p. 1641.
and therefore Christian Churches may not approve of them, no more than they
may of the invocation of Saints, which is manifest Idolatry. This is plain
dealing; and yet as if this were not sufficient, he goes on, and puts the case
further; Whether (says he) may Holy Days dedicated to the memory of Saints,
be rightly retained and celebrated, in case the Idolatry be taken away, and the
honor of the Holy Day terminate, not in the Saint, but in God. To this he
answers, with that standing rule, allowed by Orthodox Writers, adiaphora non
necessaria, horrenda idolomania polluta sunt abolenda; that is, things in
themselves indifferent, and no way necessary, being polluted with horrible
Idolatry, are to be abolished; but Holy Days are such, and are polluted with
horrible Idolatry in the Papal Church, An ad campanae pulsum, etc. De Templ. c.
26. p. 337.
(and expose to much danger, no less than Statues and Images) and therefore
ought to be abolished. With these agrees Hospinian; answering this Question,
Whether the Protestants beyond the Seas, upon the tolling of the St. Mary Bell
at Noon and Evening, ought to betake themselves to their Prayers; he resolves
it Negatively, giving this reason, that those hours were instituted by John 22.
and Calixtus 3. to a superstitious worship, which no good man should have any
hand in countenancing, or encouraging. Such as would see more, may at their
leisure consult Zanchy, Martyr, Hyperius, Didoclavius, Willet, Vol. 2. in 4.
Praec. col. 678. Com. in 1 Reg. 19. Opusc. Theol. t. 1. de Bacch. Altar. Dam.
c. 10. p. 644. Com. in Romans 11.4.
whom for brevity sake I only refer you to. Those whose words I have here
given you, may in the mean time, suffice to hint to you the judgment of the
Churches abroad, in this matter. They say that the forementioned Holy Days are
tainted with superstition and idolatry, that they are as bad as invocation of
Saints, that they have been as ill abused as the brazen serpent, and that upon
that account we should forbear to observe them, nay that we should be so far
from observing them, that we should tremble at the very name of them. It
remains then that in imitation of King Hezekiah, and in concurrence with the
judgment of these learned and eminent men, we lay aside those Festivals yet in
use amongst us, that have been, and are still so much abused both to
superstition and profaneness, and in the observation of some of which we do not
only open the mouths of our brethren beyond the Seas, but of the Papists
themselves. See Voetius disp. part 3. de Quadrag and Bacch p. 393.
Hosius, A Lapide, Froymundus upbraid us herewith, that having cast off diverse
feasts and fasts of their Church, we do celebrationem Bacchanalium aliorumque
hilariorum retinere; retain the celebratian of Shrovetide, and such like jovial
times. Whether they, or we, are more guilty of symbolizing with Heathens, and
honoring their Deities, they may learn from Pol. Virgil, Lud. Vives, and other
of their own Writers. However its sad, that by the practice of such
extravagancies, we should furnish them with such matter of accusation, and give
them such advantage against us.

Thus I have in a few words, given you an account of some of those things which
in regard of their great abuse, we are to endeavor the extirpation of. In the
management whereof, to prevent the charge of singularity, I have mainly
insisted upon the judgments of others: and those no mean ones, but such as are
of chief authority and note; who you see, took the abuse of the abovementioned
things, for a sufficient reason wherefore they should be laid aside. In
consideration whereof, and the grounds I have before alleged, let it be your
study, care, and endeavor in such ways as Christian prudence shall direct, to
promote the abolishment of them, and all other things amongst us of the like
nature.

Sect. 14.
NOw that I may provoke you hereunto, I shall as an addition to those grounds
you have already heard, offer you some few considerations, and so conclude.

1. It is the property of all such, as seeing the evil of superstition and
idolatry, do thereupon unfeignedly dislike and turn from them, to do it. 2 Cor.
7.11.
The Scripture shows, that godly sorrow is attended not only with care, fear,
and zeal, but also with indignation and revenge. And as it stands thus affected
toward other sins, so particularly toward superstition and idolatry. When a
man sees what mischief they have done him, and is duly sorry for the same, he
does all he can to be revenged on them: and the better to accomplish his desire
herein, he roots out whatever either has been an occasion of it for the time
past, or may be an occasion of it for the time to come. 2 Chronicles. 33.15.
When Manasseh became a new man, he presently took away the strange gods, the
Idol out of the house of the Lord, and all the altars he had built in the mount
thereof, and in Jerusalem: and cast them out of the City. So the Jews; upon
their turning to God and his pure worship, Isa. 31.7.
every man casts away his Idols of silver, and his Idols of gold, which their
hands had made to them for a sin. They do not dote on them as they used to do,
but throw them away with contempt and scorn. And wherever there is true
repentance from superstition and idolatry, Solomon de admisso idololatriae
scelere nunquam perfect paenituit, etc. in 2 Reg. 23.
it uses to be thus; and where it is not thus, we have canse to fear there is
not true repentance. Rabanus thinks Solomon was no true penitent, and that upon
this ground, that he did not abolish those things in his Dominions, which had
been abused to Idolatry. Solomon (says he) never truly repented of his
idolatry: for if he had yielded fruits worthy repentance, he would before all
things have taken care to remove the Idols which he made, Aug. in Ps. 126. and
alibi. Bell. t. 1. de verb. l. 1. c. 5. See what Voetius says to the contrary,
disp. part. 2. p. 1044 And Prideaux Lect. 6. sect. 17. p. 90.
and not (being so wise a man) have left them to stand as stumbling blocks to
fools, as if what he erroneously devised, had been wisely and well done. But
though what he and some others have said concerning his condition, be some what
too harsh, yet this is certain, that his neglect in the present case, renders
his repentance and salvation far more disputable than otherwise it would have
been. If we will be accounted the friends of God, we must declare our enmity
against those things that stand in opposition to him, which we cannot,
sufficiently, be thought to do, whiles we suffer the occasions of his
dishonor, peaceably to abide amongst us.

2. If we do not do it, but instead thereof make use of them, we shall go
against the clear light of Scripture which teaches us otherwise, we shall go
against all those precepts, promises, threatenings, commendations,
reprehensions, rewards, punishments before mentioned, which do in a very high
degree oblige us thereunto. Now this we must by no means be guilty of, lest
with those Job speaks of, Job. 24.13.
we be found rebellious against the light, and wilfully accessory to our own
ruin. It is sinful to withstand the obscurest truth the Scripture offers to
us, but to withstand that which shines with so much evidence and brightness is
sinful indeed, Luke 12.47.
and therefore will no doubt be punished with many stripes.

3. If we do not do it, but make use of them, we shall give great offense to
those amongst whom we live. We shall offend some by confirming them in their
idolatry, others by drawing them to it, and others by grieving and making them
sad with our unwarrantable carriage herein. The Holy Ghost according to the
septuagint, terms the Idols of Ephraim (...), scandals, or offenses; and indeed
that is the nature of all Idols, Hos. 4.17.
with the ornaments and utensils belonging to them: they tend to the offending
either one way or other, of all that have to do with them. Balak enticed the
Israelites to eat meat sacrificed to Idols, and how does the Holy Ghost
interpret it? Rev. 2.14. Hall Cases of Consc. p. 183. Ed. 3.
why he calls it a casting a stumbling block before them. And a late Bishop
discussing the case, whether reserving your conscience to your self, you may be
present at Idolatrous devotion, answers it negatively. Your presence (says he)
is unlawful upon a double ground: of sin, and of scandal: Of sin, if you
partake in the idolatry; of scandal, if you do but seem to do it. The scandal
is threefold: you confirm the Offenders in their sin, you draw others by your
example into sin, you grieve the spirits of those wise Christians that are the
sad witnesses of your offense. How we must reconcile this with what he says
after in defense of Naamans bowing before Rimmon, I see not; unless we must say
that in so doing, he neither partak'd in the idolatry there committed, nor any
way seemed to do it, and if so, then (as I said before) what need was there of
a pardon? Certainly whether he partak'd in it really, or no he did in some sort
seem to do it, which afterward being convinced was unlawful, he is sorry for
it, and resolves against it for the future. And if the seeming to own, and make
use of abused things be thus offensive, what remains then, but that denying
them any countenance, or room amongst us, we take them and bury them in
obscurity.

4. If we do not do it, but make use of them, we shall occasion our godly
brethren to separate and withdraw from us. God has charged them, that when
they see us fall in with superstitious and idolatrous courses, to stand at a
distance, and keep off from us. When the Israelites were fallen to such
courses, he requires the godly Jews to have nothing to do with them. Come not
ye (says he) to Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven. Hos. 4.15.
Before the Israelites fell to such courses, the Jews might lawfully enough
have gone either to Gilgal or Bethel (here for the wickedness of it, called
Bethaven) and there have held communion with them, but afterward they might
not, without the guilt of sinful Symbolizing and complying. And what he
required of the Jews, he requires of all his faithful Servants, whom he has
obliged to the like abstinence; and therefore if we mean to have their
communion, we must refrain from such courses, and walk more inoffensively. Nay

5. If we do not do it, but go on to make use of them, we shall provoke God to
cast us off and forsake us. If we will preserve his worship and ordinances
sincere, and keep close to him in the regular use of them, he will favor us
with his presence, and abide amongst us; but if otherwise, he will withdraw
from us and leave us. When the Israelites fell to Idols, he proceeded with them
after this manner: he claps a Loammi upon Hos. 1.9.
their heads, divorces them from him, and leaves them. Before, he owned them in
an high degree, blessed them with rare and singular privileges; but when they
forsook his pure worship, and fell to superstitious and idolatrous courses, he
suspends his wonted kindness, delivers them into the hands of the Assyrians,
See Voetius disp. part. 2. p. 145, 146
drives them out of their own land, and does so disperse and scatter them; that
it is become a dispute, whether there be such a people at this day in the world.
As then, we would enjoy the presence of God, which is the greatest blessing any
creature can possibly possess, let us throw away all our Idols of what sort
soever, and cast from us every polluted and unclean thing; otherwise, there is
nothing to be expected, but utter abdication and rejection, of which what good
man, can think without horror and trembling?

FINIS.

