AN ANSWER TO Mr. FITZ-GERALD's State of the CASE Concerning the PATENT OF
Making Salt Water Fresh.

Licensed,

Jan. 16. 1694/5. D. Poplar.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1695.

A Preliminary to the Work.
MR. Fitzgerald 's Publishing his State of the Case, shows the Necessity
that it should be Answered, and sufficiently Justifies the Design of the
following Discourse, which needs not any Recommendation. When there is an Art
found out by some person, which might be Infinitely Advantageous to the
Public, and is known to be Demonstratively True in it self; and (though the
Secrets thereof are yet undiscovered) many are arisen up Pretenders to it, who
sharply Contend to Enjoy to Themselves the Exercise of it, whether they
understand it or not, carrying the Noise through several Nations, and Troubling
the World about it, Few persons are so extraordinarily Employed, but will
probably spare some of their Minutes to be satisfied in the Truth of this
matter; to be able to judge whose the Right is, and who do the Wrong, that the
Right Person may be Encouraged cheerfully to proceed, and the Wrong be
restrained wholly from meddling. They may be known, both the one and the other,
by their Proofs and past actions: It is too well understood that Mr.
Fitzgerald, with his Partners, had long ago Obstructed Mr. Walcot 's Letters
Patents granted for his Art of making Seawater Fresh, Clear and Wholesome, by
procuring a Patent for themselves, and had taken great Freedom of the Press to
Prejudice W. W. And the two last Sessions of Parliament set themselves to
oppose the Passing of his Bill, and brought in their state of the Case (as they
termed it) to the Committee of the Lords, March 1692, (which is placed Entire
on the next following side.) This forces a Necessity of giving an account of
the Truth, and to unravel the whole matter, which they would on purpose make
perplexed, and unintelligible. They ever since their first appearing to
Contend, have incessantly busied themselves in Soliciting Great Personages to
maintain their Interest against W. W. And if by their Specious Pretenses they
have so far Prevailed with any as to give them Countenance, W. W. is apt to
believe, that those Honorable Persons they have presumed to Apply to, when
rightly informed of the very Truth of the Case between Him and Them, and their
Manner of Dealing, will soon withdraw their Favor, and leave them to
themselves. But if Mr. Fitzgerald with his Partners can still succeed in
Freventing W. W. to obtain an Act of Parliament, the Benefit of the Art will be
Lost to the Nation, which is obvious in the subsequent Narrative. It is not
intended to anticipate the Minds of any Persons, but to open the Matter
gradually, only as Mr. Fitz Gerald offers the Occasion, that thereby a true
Judgment may be made, by any Person, on the Whole.

The State of the CASE concerning the Patent of making Salt Water Fresh, as it
stands between Mr. Walcot of the one part, and the Lord Falkland, William
Bridgman Esquire Mr. Fitzgerald, and several others on the other part.
KIng Charles the Second, about sixteen years since, Granted to the said Mr.
Walcot, a Patent for making Salt Water Fresh, with a particular Clause, That he
should put the same in Execution within seven years, or some less time, or his
Patent should be void; and with this farther Condition, That if at any time
hereafter it should appear to be inconvenient or prejudicial to His Majesty's
Subjects, and made so to appear to six of the Privy Council, it should for that
reason be void, and his Patent soon after to be Cancelled; His Majesty soon
after this Grant, was invited by Mr. Walcot, to see the Operation of his Engine
and Invention, which was of too great Dimension, and so extremely hot, and for
other Causes then appearing, it was not found Practicable at Sea, and about six
years after the said Grant to Mr. Walcot, Mr. Fitzgerald, upon the
Encouragement of the late Mr. Boil, made a Discovery of a new, easy and
practicable way of making Salt Water Fresh and Wholesome at Sea and Land, having
obtained great Credit among Sea men, Physicians and others; the King Granted a
Patent to Mr. Fitzgerald and others; to oppose which, Mr. Walcot entered a
Caveat, and after full hearing by the Council, learned on both sides, the
Patent of Walcot was laid aside, and a Patent granted to Us the said Patentees,
which has been since put in practice both by Sea and Land, to the satisfaction
of all Persons who have not been influenced by their particular Interests.

There being a Bill brought in by the said Mr. Walcot, to destroy the Right of
our Patent, in which there are about five years unexpired.

It is therefore Humbly Prayed the said Bill may not pass, to the prejudice of
the said Letters Patents of Mr. Fitzgerald and his Partners, the said Mr.
Walcot having consented to an Agreement under them, as will be ready to be
produced.

If Mr. Walcot can obtain an Act of Parliament in prejudice of this Patent,
which seems unreasonable, it is hoped it will be with a saving to Mr.
Fitz-Gerald's Patent, that of Mr. Walcot's being expired as to time, and
vacated by his own Consent, as will appear on the Hearing.

An Answer to Mr. Fitz-Gerald's State of the Case, concerning the Patent of
Making Salt Water Fresh, etc. Wherein appears Whose the Right is to Exercise
the Art.
WHen the Committee of the Lords, appointed by the Right Honorable the House
of Lords, had taken into their Consideration, a Bill which had Passed the House
of Commons, and was Carried to the Lords for their Concurrence; entitled, An
Act, for making Seawater Fresh, Clear, and Wholesome, and their Lordships in
the Committee had also Passed it, and was by Mr. Fitzgerald and his Partners
Petition Recommitted, as will be shown more at large; Mr. Fitzgerald gave in a
Paper Printed, Entitled, The State of the Case concerning the Patent, etc.
which was the Substance of what his Council vehemently urged; wherein the True
Case between Them, and Mr. Walcot, was wholly Misrepresented; wherefore now the
Business is to inquire into it, by every Part thereof severally as it falls in,
as well the Title, (which ought not to be passed by without some Censure) as
His State of the Case; and what the Truth is, shall be laid open. Both the
Title and Case are all along Distinguished from the Answer by a Line
Intervening, and so may be Read apart from the Answer.

1. 1. The State of the Case concerning the Patent of making Salt water fresh.
The First Patent being Granted to William Walcot Esquire in the Year 1675. Robert
Fitzgerald Esquire and his Partners precured an Order of Council, October the
30th. 1683. that it should be Conditionally made Void, On a Condition they
never Performed.

And in Prosecution of that Order, it was by Six of the Privy Council made Void
accordingly.

Another Patent was Granted to Robert Fitzgerald, Esquire and his Partners, June
in the Year 1683. which, (though Wm. Walcot his Patent was in Being, he calls
The Patent,) is supposed to be void in Law.

2. 2. As it stands between Mr. Walcot of the one part, and the Lord Falkland,
Will. Bridgman, Esquire Mr. Fitzgerald, and several others, on the other part.
Here Mr. Fitz Gerald is pleased to Leave out the Names of some that were the
Patentees, and to bring in an Honorable Person to Advance and make great his
Title of the Case, who was not one in their Patent; so that the Case concerning
the Patent stands not between Mr. Walcot, and the Lord Falkland, for the First
Patent was Granted to Mr. Walcot solely, and the other to Mr. Fitzgerald, and
other Pretenders, that call themselves the Patentees, who were five, viz.
Robert Fitzgerald, Theophilus Oglethorp, William Bridgman, Patrick Traunt, and
Thomas Maule, Esquires. And Articles of agreement were proposed to W. W. in the
Names of these five only, and no other. These five. Persons drew in others of
great Power and Interest, (perhaps to give great Sums of Money) to be of their
Party, or to be admitted to Shares under them; whom Mr. Fitzgerald would
engage to Employ their whole Interests against Mr. Walcot: Who have no Reason,
if they are come in under a bad Title, and have made but ill Bargains with his
Adversaries, whose Skill has failed them, and their Money is lost) to oppose
his Right. Neither can they have any just Hopes or Possibility ever to Restore:
themselves that way; Wherefore some Persons concerned who are Partners in the
Profits of Mr. Fitz-Gerald's Skill, have since acknowledged they have been
extremely disappointed in their Expectation, and have shown that they have
given off their hopes of Success therein; and have withdrawn themselves from
that Interest.

3. 3. King Charles II. about 16 years since, granted to the said Mr. Walcot a
Patent for making Salt water fresh.
Here begins Mr. Fitz-Geralds and the Patentees State of the Case, as he
Represents it. It appears, he was very Careless in giving in the Compute of the
Time of the Grant to Mr. Walcot, seeing he undertook to do it in the First
Place, which is much mistaken in his Calculation: It being really in October
1675. Yet herein he does acknowledge that W. W. had his Patent granted many
Years before they had ever pretended to the Invention.

4. 4. With a particular Clause that he should put the same in execution within
7 years, or some less time, or his Patent should be void.
And it is Remarkable, that he should now in the next place, be so Particular
in putting down the exact time Limited, when it appears by the very Patent,
there is no such Clause, so that it is only their Pleasure to assert it.

5. 5. And with this further condition, That if at any time hereafter, it
should appear to be inconvenient or prejudicial to his Majesty's Subjects, and
made so to appear to six of the Privy Council, it should for that reason be
void, and his Patent soon after to be Cancelled.
Here they speak of a General Proviso, which W. W.'s Council told the
Committee, is in all Patents, and is not to be doubted but is in theirs as well
as in this; and if their Patent had been of force, would have been the bane of
it, and undoubtedly have destroyed it, whenever it should have been brought to
the Test, either before the Council or otherwhere: The words of the Proviso,
they speak of, are: Provided always, and these our Letters Patents, are and
shall be upon this Condition; that if at any time during the said Term -- It
shall be made appear to us, our Heirs or Successors, or any six or more of Our
or Their Privy Council, That this our Grant is contrary to Law, or prejudicial
or inconvenient to our Subjects in general; or that the said Invention is not a
new Invention as to the Public Use and Exercise thereof within our Dominions,
where the same shall be used, practiced, or exercised then, etc -- But it was
not made appear to his Majesty and his Council at the hearing before them, that
W. W. his Invention was not new (which Mr. Fitz. G. and his Partners by their
Council labored to prove, tho it was against themselves) neither could they
make it appear, that this his Majestys Grant to W. W. was any way contrary to
Law, or prejudicial, or inconvenicent to his Majestys Subjects in general, or
to any of them; but only was apprehended inconvenient to Mr. Fitz G. and his
Partners, they having wrongfully obtained a Patent, which by reason of this
former Grant to W. W. could not take place. His Majesty at the hearing in
Council, vindicated W. W. his Art, from all the aspersions they would have cast
upon it, owned and justified those extraordinary Clauses in his Patent that
were not in theirs, those being then read in his presence: And declared that he
highly approved of W. W. his Water, which he had seen him prepare and perfect;
and that on his own knowledge W. W. had attained to the true Art, but gave no
such testimony what his Opponents could do.

6. 6. His Majesty soon after this Grant was invited by Mr. Walcot, to see the
Operation of his Engine and Invention.
W. W. would not presume to invite his Majesty; but his Majesty merely upon his
own inclination came and saw W. W.'s Experiment.

Here is by Mr. Fitz G. a particular care taken to give People to understand,
that it was after the Grant to W. W. of his Majesty's Letters Patents that his
Majesty came to see his Operation, to the intent that what Objections his
Majesty made when he came, might stick and expose his Art to contempt; whereas
it is manifest, that his Majesty's seeing the Operation, was not after, but
before the Grant of his Letters Patents to him; which appears by the Judgment
that his Majesty in his Grant gave of it, in declaring Some Evident
Demonstrations whereof, we have seen to our great satisfaction, and do believe,
etc. which could not have been said or insetted if he had not first seen it.

7. 7. Which was of too great Dimension, and so extremely hot, and for other
Causes then appearing, it was not found practicable at Sea --
It having been already made manifest, that his Majesty's seeing W. W's.
Operation was before, not after (as is so confidently affirmed) his Patent was
granted. It cannot but be necessarily concluded from thence, that his Majesty
was fully convinced and satisfied, in whatever Objections his Majesty could
make, before he would grant his Letters Patents, and commanded to be inserted
such extraordinary Clauses as before mentioned. But yet however, a further
account shall be given; His Majesty had good reason to enquire, and might well
say as much as all this, and yet it might be no way to W. W.'s disadvantage:
For His Majesty at his first tasting of W. W.'s Water, which was above a year
before he came to see the Experiment, liked it so well, that it was his
pleasure to say, he could without further proof declare it to be undoubtedly
good; and ordered him to improve his Experiment by further trials, till he
should bring it to a practical use and a perfect Art, (and to inform him from
time to time how he proceeded.) When his Majesty had Received an Account that
this was done, he signified his Pleasure was to see the Experiment himself. At
that time by reason of the haste, that was necessary to have all things as soon
as might be in a Readiness to satisfy his Majesty, W. W. bespake to be made
(having found that Copper would Injure the Water) a Small Light Iron Furnace,
or Kettle, not much differing from such as are made for ordinary uses: (he
despairing to have any molded at first, without his continual attendance,
agreeable to any of his models) such an one he gave order for, that might be
hit on without any hazard, to serve only for this occasion, that his Majesty
might not be disappointed; but this Furnace proved to be cast of larger
dimensions, and far more thick than was directed; besides that it was unsound:
And to have another molded more suitable to the purpose, required a long
delay. Wherefore W. W. was obliged on necessity to show with this what could be
done, which was placed within the Partition of a Cellar: whither his Majesty
came attended by the late Lord Rochester, and by several now Living, and
presently made these very material Objections. One was, that the Fire would not
be safe in that manner, but be too hot for a Ship to endure; besides the
cumbersomeness of the Furnace as it then stood, could not do well in a Ship.
Whereupon W. W. Answered, that no provision was made there, for security from
danger of Fire, it being in a Cellar, but in a Ship provision should be made
accordingly against Danger of Fire; that what was here done, was Intended only
to satisfy his Majesty in the goodness of the Water, and that great Quantities
might be Completed in a short time. He not having the Opportunity (since he
Expected his Majesty, and not knowing how soon His Majesty might come) to get
Things made ready to be used there, which might be proper for Sea Service; and
that neither that Furnace, nor any of those Materials there placed, were
Intended for a Ship, but far more Complete, more Commodious; and especially
fitted for the Purpose. And another Objection that his Majesty made, was, that
there was a Joint which could not bear the motion of a Ship at Sea; to which W.
W. answered, thas he had contrived his Furnaces each of them to be molded all
of a piece, that where that Joint was should be none. And that he would
Endeavor to have such made, as soon as he could have leisure, and find fit
Iron, and able Workmen to do them; which was after done, and His Majesty had
an account thereof.

By the means of what His Majesty there saw done, and his Enquiries and
Objections being Answered, His Majesty was so well satisfied in all respects,
having some of the Water that he saw completed, brought to White Hall to be
kept, that there upon he granted his Letters Patents, declaring therein, as
beforementioned.

His Majesty declared likewise, that when He could hear that W. W.'s
Instruments were fixed in a Ship, he would come to see them, and then would
give what Directions he should think fit. So that His Majesty's asking
Questions was not upon any Dislike, but that He would be further informed in
the matter, and showed that his mind was intent upon it, that He was well
pleased with what He had seen, and that his desires were to advance the success
of so excellent an Art.

Now this Argument that Mr. Fitz G. puts such a Stress upon, might be retorted
upon himself, if his Argument were worth any thing; That because his Engine and
Invention at Hull (or formerly elsewhere at Land, whilst they were suffered)
was of too great Dimension, and so extremely hot, and for other causes then
appearing, it was not found practicable at Sea: It seems he cannot imagine that
he who can have greater Furnaces provided, can have less; whether W. W. can
have greater Furnaces Cast some may possibly doubt, but whether he can have
less (besides Mr. Fitz-G.) none; Or whether W. W. could have other of a
different shape from that, or whether he could have materials made up different
from those, none can doubt.

Concerning the convenience of the Instruments, and their manner of placing,
see the account given by Mr. John Shish, etc.

The Testimonial of Mr. John Shish, Chief Master Builder of his Majesty's Yard
at Deptford, concerning the working of W. W. his Instruments in Ships.
WHereas William Walcot Esquire has often discoursed with me about his setting up
of his Furnaces and Instruments in Ships for his Invention of making Good Fresh
Water, and has let me see his Furnaces, Instruments and Materials, and one
Furnace in particular built upon Boards in a Room, which I see has been much
used with security from Danger of Fire: I do Certify, that it does appear to
me, that he has taken great Care, made many Industrious Contrivances, and good
Provision, for safety and Convenience of Working in Ships, and that he has
brought his Furnaces, Instruments, and other Materials (accommodating them to
Ship-Service) and manner of Placing them to a great Perfection. I do Certify
likewise that they may be set up in a Ship without Damage or Injury to the
Ship, with Security from danger of Fire, and able to endure the Motion and
Tossing of a Ship at Sea. And that, in my Opinion, it will be of great Use to
Navagation, as well to His Majesty's Ships, as to others.

May the 13th. 1681. John Shish.



This agrees with the Original.

Which, He being sent for to Give his Personal Attendance, not only Owned, but
also declared before the then Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, that He
would undertake to set them up in the same manner in any of His Majesty's
Ships, if they pleased to assign him a Ship for that Purpose, so that thereby
they were become Witnesses to his Testimonial. 8. 8. And about Six Years after
the said Grant to Mr. Walcot Mr. Fitzgerald
Hereby it appears, that Mr. Fitz. G. acknowledges himself and his Partners
not to be the First and True Inventor, it having been declared in the Grant
that W. W. had given Evident Demonstrations of his Art, which was six years
before he pretended to go about it, as himself says, tho it was longer.

9. 9. Upon the Encouragement of Mr. Boil made a Discovery --
That while Mr. Boil gave great Discouragements and Discountenance to W. W.
whom he knew had obtained Letters Patents, by his making Proofs before his
Majesty, and had his Bill once read in the House of Lords, which remained
there; who was the First and True Inventor.

And Mr. Fitz G. had need of some great Persons Patronage, and Recommendatory
Letters, to Introduce and Prefer him, since he came so over-late, and so far
out of season, as to go about to make a Discovery of what was certainly
discovered by another person six years before, as himself confesses; and
Evident Demonstrations thereof shown, and Letters Patents granted thereupon
declaring the same, and when a good stock of Instruments and all sorts of
materials were made ready for the work.

10. 10. Of a New, Easy, and Practicable way, of making Salt Water Fresh --
How New their way is, see afterward.

11. And so Easy and Cheap, that their Engines and other Instruments, before
they had at any time been used, were Exposed to Sale, and offered for Old
Goods, through want of having a vend for them to Sea, tho once, when first
there were Trials made with them, and before their effect was well known, they
were dear enough.

And if Mr. Fitzgerald means by practicable, that their way is sometimes used,
it may well be granted, for they have done no otherwise than what many years
past has been done in Ships, in times of necessity, but not at other times
used; The water having never been found to be good and wholesome: See the
States of Hollands Patent.

If he means by practicable, generally, constantly practiced, there seems but
little sign of that, Mr. Fitzgerald himself speaks modestly in this; he told
the Committee of the House of Commons, that he was thousands of pounds out of
Purse; yet did he plead that W. W.'s Bill ought not to pass for this reason,
because Mr. Walcot never got any thing by his Art, when Mr. Fitz Gerald himself
is the person that has chiefly made it his business to obstruct him, and has
thus long prevailed. So that the very reason that he urges for stopping his
Bill, is a strong reason that it should pass with as much speed as may be; it
being high time he should get something now toward his former Charges, who
has been so long most injuriously obstructed.

He did persuade some persons to buy their Engines and Ingredients for Sea, and
be at the Expense of Trying to use them, but those were too few to clear their
Reckonings; what they gained this way could never countervail the charge they
put themselves to; and they had great sums from his Majesty for their Engines
and Work at Land, whatever their performance was: All which it seems could
not make them gainers in the whole. But although Mr. Fitz G. might get nothing
clear in the main, by the practice of his Skill or work of his Engines, yet the
while perhaps he might have found it encouraging and advantageous enough, to
admit others to buy shares of his profits, which might yield an ample
Recompense for what his pains and trouble herein could deserve.

12. 12. And wholesome at Sea and Land.
Some that have drank of their Water, and seen it prepared their way, say, and
made proof of it before the Committee, that their Water was rough, harsh,
fiery, Corroding, and tormenting the Body when constantly drank of; that they
could know it by the smell, and that after some time it will putrisy, be base,
and offensive: whereas they say they find W. W.'s Seawater to be smooth, soft,
cooling, healing, and so pure, that they have known it last many years, and
never saw in it any signs of Decay. Several Bottles of W. W.'s Water, were set
on the Table before the Committees, both of the Lords and of the Commons, which
were tasted by their Members, and much approved of; but Mr. Fitz Gerald would
not produce any. There was brought before the same Committee, at the same time

The Lord Chandos his Testimonial concerning his long Experience of VV. VV. his
Sea Water.
THese are to Certify All whom it does or may Concern, That before I was
Honored with the Character of Ambassador from His Late Majesty of Blessed
Memory to the Grand Seignior of the Turks, I had the Satisfaction of several
Tastes of my Worthy Friend William Walcot Esquire his Seawater made Fresh, and
Sweet, and to all Intents and Purposes equally made useful with the best
Spring Water that e're I drank of in England for Land or Sea Service, as, upon
above seven years Experience thereof at home and in Foreign Parts, I am verily
persuaded. For of the said Water I took with me some Quantity to
Constantinople, and there upon Trial thereof in the Presence of several Persons
of Credit, found it exceeding Sweet and Good, insomuch that I had the Curiosity
to try how long it would so preserve it self in that hot Climate: And in that
Experiment also it so well answered my Expectation, that after near seven years
keeping of it abroad I brought of it home again with me: And now at this very
time have of it, (viz. The water I took out with me from the said Mr. Walcot)
Right, Sweet, and Good.

In VVitness whereof I here Subscribe my Name
this 25th of May, 1688. Chandos.


This agrees with the Original of his Lordships own Handwriting.

13. 13. Having obtained a great Credit among Seamen, Physicians and others.
If they mean by Credit, such a Belief that drew in great sums of money for
purchasing Shares of their Profits of them, perhaps they may find some that can
at their Cost witness for them; but if they mean by their great Credit, such a
full Belief of the Sufficiency of their way, as generally for men to trust
their Lives and Fortunes to the use of it, they could not before the Committees
by any means make that out, the extent of their Skill seems to be too well
known. No doubt, by such plausible means as they used to recommend and magnify
their Skill, the Credit they gained by Assuming to themselves the Honor of W.
W.'s Invention had continued very great, if they had been so cautious never to
have shown the Proof of their own: But herein their Policy failed them, for
hereby they bewrayed their Skill. To raise the Credit of it, some Physicians
Names they produced in Print, but produced not their own Hands; neither could
those be brought before the Committee to testify any thing for them, but many
whose Names they produced have decryed it. Though a Testimonial under the Hands
of many of the Physicians of the College in the year 1683 had been given to W.
W. he had otherwise such abundant Ocular Testimony, that he had no occasion
before the Committee to have it mentioned: wherein are these words, We Do
Declare, that We are (upon Examination of it, viz. Seawater prepared by W. W.)
fully and sufficiently satisfied that the said Water is made very Fresh, Clear
and Wholesome, and Agreeable to the Body of Man. Their Testimony may be seen at
large, when required. But had as many persons as they had ever Importuned,
subscribed to the Wholesomeness of their Water, yet it cannot be denied but
that its Corrosiveness is obvious and offensive both to the Taste and Smell,
and pernicious to the Body when constantly drank of, it being in many respects
defective; concerning the Deficiency of the way that Mr. Fitzgerald pretends
to render Salt Water wholesome, there is a Scheme drawn to be seen upon
occasion; and another drawn of the Sufficiency of W. W.'s Art.

And that what they can do may be further known, the Lords of the States
General of the United Netherlands (upon a Petition presented to them on the
behalf of W. W. that He and his Opponents might be ordered to appear before
them, to make public proofs of their Arts, and the States to judge whose Art
was the best) and the Members of the States of the several Provinces, saw Mr.
William Fitzgerald deputed by Robert Fitzgerald Esquire and his Partners, and W.
W. each of them apart, thrice make their Trials before them; whose approbation
seems sufficient to satisfy in this matter. The States General granted
thereupon to W. W. Their Letters Patents; and each of the States of the other
Provinces of Holland, Zealand, and Frizeland granted him their Letters Patents
severally; all of them were To him alone, with exclusion of all others, wherein
may be seen their judgment hereof, especially and more at large in the Patent
of the States of Holland. See the Preamble of their Patent; Mr. Fitz Gerald and
his Partners are there taken notice of, and an ample account is there given,
what they found their skill to be; Our Seamen also to whom they appeal, and
others ha ve had experience of their Trials, and well know the Credit their
work is of. As well these as the States of Holland do aver, that any that will
but distill Salt water shall find the Salt water so prepared in every respect,
to be at least equal, if not exceeding theirs. So that whatever their Helps and
Encouragements have been, by what they have shown and done, it appears that all
they have found out, or made a Discovery of, is, That Water may be Distilled,
(and certainly those that know this, may know but little of the true Art) so
that what Ingredients they add upon the consideration of Salt water, does not
at all improve, but rather make the Water the worse.

Yet nevertheless Dr. N. G. put out a Treatise, dedicated to King Charles,
undertaking to prove the Truth and Sufficiency of their Art (upon which there
have been made Observations) concluding, That what those Patentees have done
will justly be accounted a Miracle. Mr. Boyle's long Letter, and also his
Nicety, as he is pleased to call it, wherein he begs the question, have been
Re-published in recommendation of it. And there was sent to the Lord Mayor,
closed in a Silver Box, sealed up (with great selemnity) the Recitpts of the
several Cements used by the Patentees for making Seawater fresh, as also the
Receipt of their Metalline Composition and Ingredients, certified under the
hands of the Honorable Mr Robert Boil, to be kept so sealed up by the present
and succeeding Lord Mayors, lest a Secret of so great importance to the Public
might come to be lost, if lodged only in the knowledge of a few Persons therein
concerned. See Londons Gazette, January 23, 1684. -- Or lest whilst themselves
are busy, taken up in the practicing of their Art, they should forget their
Secrets wherewith they do it. A voluminous Song or Panegerick in Verse was
published in their Commendations; and Medals engraven and cast in silver,
Representing and Illustrating their Art, in Celebration of the last new
Inventor. And whilst they would have held all the World in admiration of their
new Invention, (which some say in Gallens time was not known) they demand, by
Virtue they say of an order of Council, that W. W. (the first and true Inventor
of making Sea water fresh, etc.) should pay, according to one of their Articles
which they proposed, after the hearing before his Majesty in Council in this
manner. Item, It is agreed between the said Parties to these Presents; that the
said W. W. his Executors or Administrators, shall pay and allow out of the
first Profits arising by the said Art, the sixth part of the Sum of fifteen
hundred Pounds Sterling, which the said Patentees have engaged to pay unto Mr.
Jacob Kuffler, for his Assistance given them in the Invention of their Art, and
Contrivance of the Engine proper for the same. -- Whom King Charles took
occasion himself to mention (when he was seeing W. W.'s Experiment) saying that
he was very sure that Mr. Kuffler had not the Art, which His Majesty said, when
those Persons that attended him thither were in his presence, who can witness
it. In the Dedication of the Book to His Majesty, owned by Mr. Fitzgerald, it
is said -- If the Fruits of your Royal Grant has not been hitherto derived to
us, it is partly by some Obstacles we met from the Suggestions of a private
Person. And at the Council they pleaded that W. W. had no Art. And their
Articles proposed after the Orders of Council began thus -- Whereas the said W.
W. having obtained (as he has suggested) the Art and Knowledge of making
Salt Water of the Sea Fresh -- Calling into Question His Majesty's Testimony;
yet however, the last of those very Articles runs thus -- Item, The said
William Walcot does Covenant and Promise, to and with the said Robert
Fitzgerald, Theophilus Oglethorp, William Bridgman, Patrick Traunt and Thomas
Maule, and every of them, That in Case by his Skill and Knowledge in the said
Art, found out by the said Patentees, that may make the Operation of Freshning
Sea Water more Easy, Commodious or Profitable, He shall at all Times upon
Request of the said Patentees inform and instruct them, or any of them therein,
and give his Assistance in all manner of wars to the Promoting the Interest,
and Profit of the said Patentees in relation to the said Art. -- And in a
Proposal dispatched December 2d, 1684. they say thus -- Upon Condition that He
the said W. Walcot shall Join with the Patontees both his Skill and Endeavors
-- So that though they are pleased to Style his Art but only his Suggestions,
yet it is such, that They think necessary He should instruct them in.

14. 14. The King granted a Patent to Mr. Fitz Gerald and others, to oppose
which, Mr. Walcot entered a Caveat; and after a full hearing of the Council
learned on both sides, the Patent of Walcot was laid aside, and a Patent
granted.
Here they Jumble together confusedly, to be done as they Pretend at Once, what
was done in a great Distance of Time, for they had Obtained two distinct
Hearings near Five Months asunder; the former before the Lord Keeper North, to
have their Bill pass the Great Seal; the latter before his Majesty and his
Council, to Vacate W. W. his Patent, so that the Caveat was entered to stop
their Bill, many Months before W. W. his Patent was on Condition Vacated.

Hereby also they would make the world believe that W. W. had no Patent when
their Patent was granted, that they might thereby create some Pretense, if it
had not been then in Being. But Mr. Fitz-Gerald's Patent was granted near five
Months before W. W.'s patent was ordered to be made void; for Mr. Fitz-Geralds
Bill passed the Broad Seal, and was thereby made a Patent, June (...) in the
year 1683 at the Lord Keepers; but W. W.'s Patent was not ordered to be made
void till at the Hearing in Council on the 30th of October following, in 1683;
so that till this time the Patent of Walcot was not laid aside, as they are
pleased to term it.

15. 15. To us the said Patentees.
Here Mr. Fitz Gerald would again bring in the Lord Falkland to be one of the
five Patentees, for the honor of their pretended Invention, who was not, as
was said before, one of the five Patentees, but came in unto them long after,
to be of their Party. When his Lordship came to understand arightly the Affair,
he was dissatisfied in their Proceedings, and has since given W. W. good
assurance in his life time, that he would not countenance their Interest
against him; and others have done the like. And he hopes that none (whatever
their concerns are) will, to oppose him, maintain a wrong.

16. 16. Which has been since put in practice both at Sea
Many Trials were made at Sea, but by the seeing the proof of them, they were
left off and their Skill so much Rejected, or to use their own Term, laid
aside, as it is. It was made appear by many Witnesses before the Committee,
that the Persons who had dealt with them, and bought their Instruments, and
were at the Charge of Fixing them to put them in Practice, lost their Money,
being wholly deceived in their Expectation. At the same sitting of the
Committee, when their Work and the Practice of it came into question, Mr.
Fitz-G. applied himself to Sir M. A. Member of the Committee there present,
Telling Him that He had Bought of their Engines, and asked Him to give His
Account to the Committee of their Working; This being urged several Times
without Notice taken, at last was Answered thus, or to this Effect. I do wonder
Mr. Fitzgerald, That you should Choose to Ask me to Give an Account, for I
doubt I shall say little to your Satisfaction. I bought several of your Engines
which cost me (...) Pounds, and set them to work all at my own Charge, but my
Money was all Thrown away -- and more to that Purpose. This Disappointment made
the Committee very sensible of their Skill, and to Observe how they had managed
their Affairs.

17. 17. and Land.
At Sheerness Mr. Fitzgerald and his Partners, had put up their Engine, which
worked there for some time, for which it has been said, they Received from the
Tower large Sums of Money, having put the Crown to very Great Expenses.

But after their Water had been much Experienced there, the Work was
Discontinued, and bath been left off ever since, it being now since it had been
their carried on many years, what the Lord Dartmouth his Judgment and Account
giving of it was, may be seen by the following Certisicate.

I do hereby Certify, that I was at the Board of Ordnance, when Mr. Walcot was
sent for in by the Lord Dartmouth, who then Tasted of his Water, and Declared
his Approbation of it, and that He had formerly given his Opponents Countenance
to set up their Work at Sheerness, but now He had found that their Water was
not good.

Witness my hand, Cha. Bertie, H. Alured.
Febr. 10th, 1692.



Concerning their Water prepared in Lothbury, at the end of Bartholomewlane.
See the following Account.

I do certify that I had some of Mr. Fitz Gerald 's Water from his Office in
Lothbury, which I found to be ill tasted, and having kept it by me for Trial,
in a few Months it putrified, grew thick and green, to which I subscribe my
Hand,

From Clarkenwell-Green the 15th. of February, 1692. W. Savage.



Dr. M. upon Examination before the Committee, gave an account that he went
with Dr. Fielding to Lothbury, at the end of Barhtholomew-Lane, on purpose to
try Mr. Fitz.-Gerald's Water prepared there, and they found it to be of an ill
taste and smell, fiery, harsh and corroding, and not wholesome for the Body of
Man.

And it is now well known, that their Work and Engine at the Garrison at Hull,
the only place perhaps where then it was suffered to be, which they made such
Ostentation of in the Session of Parliment 1692. was then found fault with, and
soon after openly disliked, and run into the contempt of many, where they have
put Their Majesty's to great Charge, which there was little occasion for; when
better Water might be had not far from the place, or by employing the True
Inventor.

They stiffly insisted (at the Committees) on their Work there, to prevent the
passing of W. W. his Bill, as an Argument that they would soon after themselves
highly Advance the Practice of the Invention, and the Public Benefit, but the
whole Year after in 1693. they had done nothing further worth the taking notice
of, which seems, when this Matter is considered, a Reason sufficient of it
self, that they should be no longer hearkened unto.

And now when their Work has been so often rejected at Sea, and sometimes on
Land, rather then give it utterly off, they again attempt to set up their Work
at Land, in such places where they may be paid by Their Majesty's for their
Engines, and the Work be done at Their Majesty's Charge. Presently after the
Session of Parliament in the Year 1692. wherein W. W. had his Bill passed the
House of Commons, and the Committee of the Lords; an Order came from the
Council. That the Invention of making Seawater fresh and wholesome, ( viz. Two
Engines for the same,) should be set up at the Isles of Jersey and Gurnesey,
this Order Mr. Fitz-G. and his Partners got into their Hands and brought to the
Tower, and let it lie dormant, neglecting to proceed upon it about a Year, from
1692. till March 1693 when VV. VV. brought in his Bill again to the House of
Lords, and was read; but then they move to get an Order from the Board of
Ordnance upon the Order of Council to the end, that they might make a present
advantage, they receiving 400 l. Advance Money, and that by the Pretense and
Reputation of being employed, and up held in Their Majesty's Service, they may
for the future prevent W. W. his gaining an Act of Parliament, vainly hoping
thereby to force VV. VV. to discover to them the Secrets of his Art, that they
might for ever supplant him of his Right.

18 18 To the satisfaction of all Persons.
By what they have done, and has been already said, it is believed that most
Persons are satisfied what the extent of their skill is, the Seamen, and
Physicians, and others whom they themselves have appealed to, having rejected
their Work, and Foreigners as well as those of this Nation, and after such
Trials made; To have it rejected, there can be no hopes left, that they
withtheir Work should be ever received.

If in eleven years and a half, that they have already had their Patent granted
to them, and they having given the most Public Notice they can of the
usefulness of their Invention, and had the liberty to do what they pleased
without being obstructed; this be the Progress they have made, and the height
of the Practice they have brought their Invention to, viz. To have one Engine
at the Garrison at Hull yet remaining there not plucked down, and one for each
of the Islands of Jersey and Guernesey but newly set up, this will hardly
conduce to the satisfaction of all Persons whose expectations they have raised.
And what satisfaction can they give to all Persons for depriving them by such
practice of the benefit of W. W. his Art all this while, which ought to be
considered.

And what can it avail them, to bring any late Certificates of their skill to
show now: when it is visible they perform the Work no better, nor in other
manner than they have done formerly; neither do they petend to more skill now
than heretofore, for they have this very year proposed and contracted to make
their Work at Jersey and Guernsey, answerable only to what they have done
otherwhere, and no otherwise, and undertaken to Instruct Persons to Work
according to the same manner only, as they have shown to do it long ago.

19 19 Who have not been instuenced by their particular Interests.
If their Work had proved according to their Pretenses, and the expectation
they had raised, People might have perhaps been influenced by their particular
Interests to have received it; but particular Interests could not have
Influenced the World to throw it off, if once it had been well received upon
Proofs.

This they venture to say when they well know the House of Commons did utterly
disallow of their Practice and Art both at Sea and Land, and that also the
Committee of the Lords were but little satisfied therein.

20 20 There being a Bill brought in by the said Mr. VValcot
W. W. having first obtained leave, brought his Bill into the House of Commons,
and had good Reason to do it, seeing the Law does greatly countenance new
Inventions, taking a particular care that they may be preserved. Wherefore the
very Statute in the 21st. year of King James the I. made against Monoplies
(which are mischievous to the State by raising Prizes of Commodities at home,
or hurt of Trades, or generally inconvenient) does in an especial manner,
provide that new Inventions may be encouraged; therein declaring the King's
Power to grant his Letters Patents for such: And oftentimes by Act of
Parliament, the sole Benefit of a new Invention has been granted to the first
Inventor for a long term of years, as sometimes for thirty one years, and
sometimes given to the Inventor and his Heirs, as being no way mischievous to
the State, but the product of his own Industry for the Public Good. The House
passed W. W. his Dill, wherein all Persons are wholly left to their Liberty,
whether they will make use of his Invention or not.

21 21 To destroy the Right of our Patent.
Their Patent never had any Right, by reason that at the time when their Patent
passed the Broad-Seal, which was June 1683. there was a former Patent dated in
October 1675. granted to W. W. then in Being, declaring that His Majesty had
seen evident Demonstrations of W. VV. his Art, as has been mentioned; besides
there are able Lawyers, that say His Majesty had Power to grant a Patent but
once for the same Invention, and their Patent was gained but by specious
Pretenses, viz. That VV. VV. had made delays, and had utterly diserted the
business (which now might be retorted truly upon them ut antea:) Whereas he had
endeavored, both in Town and Country with all his power constantly to advance
it, being employed in having Instruments completed of Cast Iron that would
file, such as himself had Invented, and all sorts of Materials made up proper
for Ships, when all Workmen were unexperienced therein, and was extremely
delayed by long attending the then Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, for a
Ship to set up his Work in, and could not procure any from them at all, or
otherwhere, till he had agreed upon a price to buy one; at which time Mr. Fitz
Gerald with his Partners arose up, whereby he was prevented, who have
obstructed him ever since. They likewise alleged that they could perform the
Work better than W. W. the True Inventor, which has since appeared both in
respect of the Water and way of Operation notoriously otherwise. But if they or
any other Persons should have attained to W. W. his Art, after he had made such
Evident Demonstrations before so many Persons, and in the presence of Such
Testimony, and had also publicly formed, and made large Provision of
Instruments and other Materials for the Work, none else can in Justice ever be
accounted the Proprietors without him, or take the Advantages from him.

Neither had their Patent any Right, because Mr. Fitz G. and his Partners were
not the first Inventor, who knew not the Art at the time when first it was
found out, which Mr. Fitz G. and his Partners could not pretend to, but have
acknowledged the contrary; nay, he is so far from being the first Inventor,
that he has shown, and it iappears by his Trials, and Proofs that he has not
yet attained to the True useful Art.

22 22 In which there are about five Years unexpired.
Their Patent was dated June 1683. So that in less than Two Years and an half,
the Fourteen Years therein expressed, will be ended; but since their Patent was
thus wrongfully begun and wrongfully carried on ever since, as is proved, no
time can remain unexpired.

23 23 It is therefore
By reason of so many unwarrantable Suggestions.

24 24 Humbly prayed the said Bill may not pass
They did thus humbly pray the House of Commons by their Petition, that they be
admitted at the Bar of this House, or before a Committee thereof, to offer
their Reasons. (See what they were, page 3.) Against the intended Bill, and
that they may be allowed the Benefit of an Act to themselves -- To enable them
to do what by their pretended skill, they cannot, to practice the Art, they did
not understand; and to exclude him that invented the Art. Which Petition was
committed with the Bill, so that there was no danger of their being surprised,
when what was ordered, was according to their own Petition, yet when the
Committee sat, they were not ready to appear without further Summons, but
contrived delays, as much as possibly they could; and when the Committee had
given them long time of Summons, Mr. Fitz G. came without his Council,
alleging that his Council were not mentioned in the Summons.

25 25 To the Prejudice of the said Letters Patents of Mr. Fitz Gerald and his
Partners.
The passing of the Bill could not have been to the prejudice of their Letters
Patents, seeing they were not grounded upon any Right as is already proved; nor
to themselves since they never had attained to the true Art, nor could longer
propose ever to do themselves any good by their own; wherefore it is manifest
they would rather totally suppress the Art, than not be themselves the Masters
and Managers of it. And because they cannot force VV. VV. to comply so far with
them, as to instruct them in the Secrets of his Art to undo himself, they are
inveterate against him, thence stilling him a Person refractory; making
themselves by their opposing him, both Accessaries and Principals to all the
Misfortunes that shall ever happen in the World, through the want of the
Exercise of the true Art.

26 26 The said Mr. Walcot having consented to an Agreement.
Here they not trusting to all their preceding matter, start from it to that of
another kind.

If they mean hereby that Mr. Walcot consented to the getting out their Patent,
the contrary is Apparent: For he had Addressed himself to the Lord Keeper
North, to oppose the passing of their Bill under the Broad Seal, and entered
(as Mr. Fitz-G. acknowledges) a Caveat likewise that it should not pass him
unwittingly. See p. 7. And this W. W. made his especial care to prevent, and by
his Council withstood it all he could.

Neither had he agreed ever to impart to them his skill without the knowledge
of which his right could not be transferred by him to them.

Neither did he ever Seal or enter into any Articles with them.

27 27 Under them.
Neither did he ever give his consent to any Agreement to condescend to be
under them (which therefore they can never produce as they pretended they were
ready to do) he having by his own industry achieved and become an absolute
Master of his Art, would not submit his skill to come under them who were
ignorant of it.

So that there was never any Agreement made with them that they can pretend to,
otherwise than a short Writing merely in order to a Treaty, or that he and they
should Treat, which in some Sense may be called an Agreement, as being in order
thereunto: He and they agreeing only so far, That they should by a tendering of
Articles (to each other) endeavor to make an Agreement (though such Agreement
could never be effected;) and that was yielded to on other grounds quite
different from what they would Represent, and made to other Purposes, and
cannot bear any such meaning as what they urge but quite the contrary, as would
have appeared by the Writing if they had produced it, which they kept in their
own Custody from the time it was Wrote, and would never suffer W. W. to have a
sight of it ever since, which they were pleased much to insist upon, neither
would they produce it at any sitting of the Committees, though they were urged
to it, least it might detect their manner of Dealing. And therefore e of the
Writing, and how it was observed, it is necessary there should be some Account
given.

At the time that they brought W. W. a Summons to appear before the Lord
Keeper, to the end that their Bill might be made a Patent (in or about April in
the Year, 1683.) there was something written on a Scrip of Paper, in Order as
was said be fore, to a Treaty, the Substance whereof was, That all things
should stand in the same Condition and Plight as they were at that time as to
the Title, viz. That Mr. Walcot's Patent should remain, and that their Bill
should be stopped, and that no further endeavors should be used to have it
pass the Great Seal. That Mr. Fitzgerald with his Partners should have a very
considerable part granted by Articles to be agreed on out of the profits of Mr.
Walcot his Patent for seven years yet to come, (from the time the Writing was
made) in case other Covenants should be likewise Proposed, and in case such
should be agreed upon. And that all Mr. Walcot's Charges and Expenses should be
deducted, which he valued at, and at that time demanded for, four Thousand
Pounds.

This Writing to the end that W. W. might be sure to prevent their Bill ever to
be made a Patent, he contented himself to comply with, and proceeded according
to the Contents of it, desisting from his usual way of Proceedings, in
Advancing his own Concern solely for himself, and on the occasion thereof
endeavored to bring the matter to a perfect Accommodation between them, by
delaying his work waiting for, and taking into consideration their Articles
which they a while after tendered (though his Council thought not fit he should
allow of them because of their unreasonableness: some further Account is given
of them, page 15.) and then by offering Articles that himself had caused to be
drawn in Pursuance of that Writing, performing on his part according to the
Contents thereof whatsoever it required of him; wherein W. W. proposed to give
Mr. Fitzgerald and the other Patentees each of them such a part out of the
profits of his Patent, as the Writing had mentioned, as may appear by those
Articles, which Articles were by them rejected. By the tendering of those
Articles VV. VV. has reason to believe he had discharged himself from the
Writing, they having had the Effects of it; and that he was no way obliged
further, when they had rejected such Articles as were drawn by Eminent Counsel
upon consideration of the Writing, conformable thereunto.

But soon after the Writing was made, and before Mr. Fitzgerald had brought in
his intended Articles, an Advertisement was put into the Gazette, that Robert
Fitz Gerald Esquire, and some other Gentlemen had found out the Art of Reducing
Salt Water of the Sea into perfect and wholesome Fresh Water, etc. withot VV.
VV. his Name or Consent. Mr. Fitz Gerald and the other Patentees on their part,
notoriously brake this their Agreement (as they call it) by their acting
seperately from VV. VV. in carrying on their Design without him; in applying to
the Physicians for their Hands without him; or acquainting him with it by
publishing a Book to advance themselves and to obstruct him; wherein Mr. Fitz
Gerald undertakes to give an Account who the Gentlemen concerned were, (wherein
there is no mention of VV. VV. at all) who do intend to agree with all such as
are willing to deal with them, etc. and otherwise by their further opposing him
from time to time.

And they also brake this their Agreement, by their taking out their Patent
June 1683. Which Patent (as that Writing expressed) is now Passing the Great
Seal of England, but stopped there by a Caveat entered by the said Mr. Walcot
(which Bill, after the Writing was subscribed, was also stopped by themselves
by force, they said, of that Agreement) so by getting out their Patent, they
put Things in another Condition and Plight, than they were in at the time of
the making of the Writing; whereas to have all things kept in the same
condition as they were then in, was the chief Cause and Consideration of W. W.
his yielding thereunto, as is manifest by the Preamble: And therein they
impugned his Right and the Title by his Patent (as since they have done before
His Majesty and his Council) which was Paramount, and the Foundation, on which
this Writing did depend, and an essential Part, which according to the Writing
they ought to have Acquiesced in.

And (on the 30th. of October, in the same Year 1683.) by their procuring his
Patent to be vacated (it being the Title which by that Agreement, they were
necessarily to come under,) they did not only break this their Agreement, but
absolutely put an end to it, wholly destroying it in the Foundation; by making
thereby their Agreement utterly impossible to be performed; because as was said
before, when this Writing was made, they could no otherwise derive any Title to
the Profits, but by W. W. his Patent; as appears by the Writing, and the time
it was made; and also because W. W. his Patent was an essential Part of it. And
the Vacating of the Patent must necessarily determine any such Agreement which
related thereto, and wholly depended thereon. So that by the very Order that W.
W. his Patent should be made void, and that the Agreement should be Performed:
The Agreement (according to the same Agreement) was made void and destroyed.

The Order for Vacating of his Patent, they had brought about and effected in
Council, by their having misinformed His Majesty and His Council concerning the
Writing; by rendering it to the Council in a Sense quite otherwise than the
True Sense that was manifestly intended therein, or what it could possibly bear
(as by the other Contents may be seen) to be the Meaning; altering and
perverting the Sense, and not only wresting the Sense, but the very Words too
out of their Places, by their misrepresenting the Matter in evasive Words,
varying from the Writing, insomuch that His Majesty's Order by their means, was
made upon a wrong Ground, as will appear by the Recital of that part of the
Writing that is in the Order, if compared, it palpably differing from, if not
directly contrary to the Writing. And the next Words following in the Order
are, His Majesty thought sit the said Agreement should be performed; and so the
latter part of the Order after the Recital, by their means runs all along upon
wrong Suppositions. And W. W. his Patent was declared, should be made void, as
being inconvenient to His Majesty's Subjects, that theirs might take place upon
their pretending to the same Invention, as convenient.

According to the Account they gave of the Words of the Writing, they were
these as recited in the Order -- The said Mr. Walcot is to be allowed a sixth
Part of the clear Profits arising by the Practice of the said Art, after all
Charges and Expenses about the same shall be deducted -- Let us see how Mr.
Fitzgerald makes this out. To be allowed by whom? By Mr. Fitzgerald and his
Partners. Out of what? Out of the clear Profits arising by the Practice of Mr.
Fitzgerald 's Art. But Mr. Eitz G. and his Partners could not allow any thing
so arising from the Practice of their Art, for they had not any Right, as first
Inventor, nor had, when the Writing was made, a Patent, nor had then the Art,
as they have since given full Evidence, that they never had. Why then if Mr.
Fitz G. has no Right as Inventor, nor gotten the Art himself; he can however
allow to Mr. Walcot a sixth Part of the clear Profits arising out of the
Profits of Mr. Walcot's own Art, Mr. Fitz G. reserving the other five Parts of
Mr. W. his Art to himself and his Partners -- But besides that Mr. Fitz G. has
no Right to W. W. his Art, he does not know his Art, and then how can he allow
to W. W. clear Profits arising by the Practice of the Art, he did not
understand himself? Mr. Fitz G. has obtained his own Patent to pass the Seal,
notwithstanding the Caveat, and the Writing made to prevent it, and has
procured W. W. his Patent to be vacated, and will bring him to comply, and to
instruct him in his Art, and if W. W. will not, with the King's Order he will
force him. But Mr. Fitz G. was shrewdly mistaken in this, the King would never
Order that W. W. should be forced to impart to Mr. Fitz G. his Secrets, and to
teach him his Art, who His Majesty knew had so difficultly attained to it, by
his own Charge and Industry, and Perfected it by His Majesty's Special Command;
and then when W. W. his Patent was ordered to be Vacated, W. W. could not
himself Proceed, and so Mr. Fitz G. could have no Profits that way, nor any
thing to settle or dispose of, arising from the Practice of the Art in any
manner. Yet though no such thing was mentioned in the Order, Mr. Fitz G.
however hoped therewith to affright him into a Discovery of the Secrets of his
Art to him.

Where it is said in the Order, after all Charges and Expenses about the same
shall be deducted, Mr. Fitz G. would have it intended that all his own Charges
should be allowed to him, and to the other Patentees theirs; but that none of
W. W. his Charges should be allowed to him whatever these have amounted to, and
how much soever these have exceeded all theirs.

By the next Words following in the Order, viz. His Majesty thought fit the
said Agreement should be Performed. It appears His Majesty had been made
believe that W. W. had not Performed what the Contents of the Writing had
required, or had done any thing that might discharge himself from it. See page
13. What W. W. had performed; which if His Majesty had known, it is not to be
immagined that he ever would have condescended to such an Order; But Mr. Fitz
G. and his Partners succeeded herein, by reason that W. W. had not instructed
his Counsel in any thing concerning the aforementioned Writing, since it could
not be expected, that they would have, before His Majesty and His Council,
insisted on that which W.W. had so discharged himself of, and they had departed
from long before, and had acted so contrary thereunto. See page 13. Neither did
they mention it, till they found that not any thing they had alleged, could
avail them; when His Majesty himself had defended W. W. his Cause, and had
answered their Objections.

It appears that besides a wrong Account given concerning the Writing, upon
which the Order was made, it was granted also upon the Presumption, that Mr.
Fitz G. and his Partners had gained the True Art, else it could not possibly
have been yielded unto; which proving otherwise, His Majesty was in that
respect also deceived in His Grant.

Yet, notwithstanding all this, His Majesty declared at that time in Council,
that his Inclinations then were to Grant again to W. W. Solely His Letters
Patents, for Fourteen Years, if he had Power to do it. Then being put in mind
that he had newly granted to Mr. Fitz G. and his Partners a Patent; His Majesty
presently intended that W. W. should enjoy the Benefit of Fourteen Years from
thence, which was the Reason that Prevailed with His Majesty to yield to that
Order. But they contrary to His Majesty's Gracious Intentions and Royal
Pleasure, by that means would take Advantage to thrust him out of all.

The Words of the Order which they thus obtained are -- That Mr. Walcot 's
Patent should be made void, as being inconvenient to His Majesty's Subjects,
and the Petitioners are by their Instrument to settle a sixth Part upon the
said Mr. Walcot, according to the said Agreement, and if the Parties differ,
they are to attend the Attorney General, who is to settle the Conveyances
between them -- So that they were not to attend the Attorney General till the
Petitioners had first tendered to W. W. their Instrument of Settlement, and
that then they could not agree; which they never did at any time offer, nor any
part of their Profits to this day: But instead of making a Settlement, or
bringing any Profit, they only tendered most unreasonable Articles for him to
sign, the same which he had rejected before they had their Patent; and
afterward they tendered those more enlarged for their Interest, and several
new ones were added to them, whereby he could not but have been inevitably
ruined, if they could have inviegled him to have subscribed them, for thereby
he had made himself many Thousand of Pounds worse than nothing; but he never
subscribed to those, or to any Articles of theirs, as has been already said;
the Recital of a small part of one of their Articles is enough to evidence
this, -- That there shall some able and sit Person be elected and appointed by
the said Parties to these Presents, or the major Number of them, whereof always
the said Robert Fitzgerald, his Deputy or Assign to be one to attend -- in
nature of a Clerk, or Register who shall be Authorized -- under the Hands and
Seals of the major part of them, whereof always the said Robert Fitzgerald,
his Deputy or Assign to be one -- who shall keep one or more Book or Books --
and shall in such Book or Books, enter down all such Votes as they the said
Parties, or the major Number of them shall agree upon. Which Votes being
entered down and signed by the said Parties to these Presents, or the major
number of them; whereof always the said Robert Fitzgerald, his Deputy or
Assign to be one, shall be as obliging to them the said Parties, and every of
them, as if the said Votes and Resolutions were contained in these Presents --
So that they might from time to time impose whatever Sums of Money they pleased
upon VV. VV. to pay. In the same manner all Servants and Officers he would have
to be chosen, and such as shall go into Foreign Parts, or be otherwise employed
for promoting the said Concern, shall have such Allowance as the major Number
of them, whereof always the said Robert Fitz Gerald, his Deputy or Assign to be
one, shall think fit and appoint. This Clause (whereof always the said Robert
Fitz Gerald, his Deputy or Assign to be one) put in the latter Articles which
they tendered, sometimes is introduced three or four times in an Article, which
Mr. Fitzgerald assumed from those Articles that VV. VV. had formerly proposed
to him; and changed the Name for his; Inserting his own Name in the place of W.
W. This Clause was absolutely necessary for W. W. to use (he being the only
Person in the Articles on the one part, and they being five on the other) the
better to secure himself from any unjust Impositions; but very improper, and
most unfit for Mr. Fitz G. to appropriate to himself, and to take the advantage
of, without any to counterpoise him; whereby W. W. should have been wholly
exposed to their Arbitrament and Mercy. Another Article is this -- Item, The
said William Walcot does Covenant to and with the said Patentees and every of
them, that he the said William Walcot, his Executors and Administrators shall
advance and pay in one full sixth part of all such Charges, Disbursements, and
Expenses, as have been already, or hereafter shall be laid out, or expended in
or about the Premises, before and until sufficient do, in by the Art and
Mystery to defray the Charges of the same. Under this Head, he would have
understood, and comprised so many Editions of his Books, that he sent over the
World to obstruct W. W. his Proceedings; and to make a City Feast, and such
like. This was the use they would have made of His Majesty's Order.

When Mr. Fitzgerald, and his Partners had found that W. W. had upon the
Demonstrations of his Art, obtained Letters Patents from the States General,
and other from the States of Holland, whereby their Services were rejected, and
themselves excluded; And when VV. VV. was in Holland, they made this further
Proposal.

2d. December 84.
REsolved, That Mr. Bridgman with two or three more of the Patentees or
Commissioners, do wait upon Sir Thomas Walcot and show to him the Readiness of
the (a) They had reason to be ready since VV. VV. had a Patent seven Years
before theirs.
Patentees to take into their (b) What their readiness was to obey King Charles
his Order, they show in their Proposing the following Conditions as well as
their former.
Partnership his Brother William Walcot Esquire if he will recede from his
proceedings abroad.

That they will admit him to a full (c) Viz. A sixth part of the profits of his
own Art, reserving the other five parts for themselves.
sixth Part of the whole, as well for (d) All the World over which they herein
are pleased to assume to themselves, and to pretend a Title to, though they
were excluded Holland and all the Dominions thereto belonging.
all Foreign Parts, as for His Majesty's Dominions.

That he shall have a (e) Of what effect it were for W. W. to have one Vote
amongst them all, is already said. page 16.
Vote and all Rights and Privileges as any one of the (f) When they themselves
had not justly any Rights or Privileges therein.
Patentees, upon Condition that he the said William Walcot shall join with the
Patentees both his (g) Whereby it appears they found it necessary for
themselves to have the benefit of these.
skill and endeavor for the (h) They would enjoin VV. VV. with his skill to
endeavor the general Good of the Concern in all Foreign Parts, by receding
from his Proceedings abroad.
general good of the concern; and that the drawing up the Articles to this
Effect be referred to (i) Who drew their Bill when W. W. his Patent was on
Record, and who was after their Council to defend it.
Mr. Attorney General.

This their Proposal W. W. did not think fit to admit of.

28. 28 As will be ready to be produced.
After all the stir they made about being ready to show an Agreement, they did
not produce any, either before the Committees of the Commons, or of the Lords,
(although often pressed thereto) as has been said; so that what Mr. Fitz G.
and his Partners most injuriously would have suggested, viz. That W. W. had
given up his Right to them, they could no way make out before the Committees.

The Year after that such Agreement as they pretend was made, and after they
had procured their Patent, Dat. June 1683. And the Order of Counsel in October
next following, and when VV. VV. had taken his Voyage into Holland, having
heard in England that they were then endeavoring to gain a Patent there also,
a Writing was produced in Holland that began thus. -- De Heeren Rob. Fitz
Gerald, Col. Theophil. Oglethorp neffens hunne undere ge associerden hebbende
Constable bevorden Zee water andere brack water tot sout water te Maecken bequaem
om te Drincken, etc. -- Translated thus, The Gentlemen Robert Fitzgerald, Col.
Theop. Oglethorpe with the rest of their Associates, having found out the Art
of making Sea, and brackish Water wholesome, and fit to Drink, -- Deputeers even
afgesonden Mr. Wilhelmus Fitzgerald even vande gejnteresseerde -- Deputed and
sent Mr. William Fitzgerald a Person interessed therein -- who did in the
Year, 1684 give in this Writing from them to the States, wherein they attempted
extremely to vilify both VV. VV. himself and his Art, therein they say, -- Het
is waer dat even Genaemt VValcot die geene interest met Genaem Heeren en heeft
gepretendeert dat hij de voors Constable Hadden gevonden. -- It is true, that there
is a Person named VValcot, who is not concerned with the above named Gentlemen,
has pretended to be the finder out of the said Art, -- so that they renounce
any pretense to any agreement, and thereby also they showed, they did
absolutely Contemn and Reject His Majesty's Order in Counsel, which had
enjoined them to be concerned with that VValcot in their making their Intrument
of Settlement upon him, the Order having been granted them and declared to be
on that very Condition; See the words of the Order before recited page 15.
which it was manifest hereby that they were resolved not to Observe. And in the
same Writing, they gave an unwarrantable Account of the Proceedings of the
Counsel in this Affair, and accused VV. VV. as a Criminal in these Words, --
Siine Majeste Van Gr. Brita. door bestuijt van Siien Rect van stacten de
brieuven van Octroy aen voorn VValcot geaccordeert beeft ingetrocken end te
niet Gedaen, om dat hij Strijdick was tegons de VVetten van Engeland end
tegens de Goede Zeeden; -- His Majesty of great Britain with the Advice of his
Privy Counsel, has nullified and drawn in the Letters Patents granted to the
said VValcot, because he was Refractory to the Laws of England, and against
Civil Policy. -- And likewise, many groundless Assertions, they would have
suggested therein, to magnify themselves and their own skill, and to detract
from him and his Art, which they could not justify, the matter being extremely
misrepresented, as may appear by this foregoing Discourse, wherein those are
sufficiently disproved.

29 Mr. 29 If Mr. Walcot can obtain an Act of Parliament, in Prejudice of this
Patent.
Fitz G. and his Partners brought their Bill into Parliament in the Year 1685.
to the end that VV. VV. might be Excluded in England, and that when the secrets
of his Art should be discovered in Holland, where he then was, they might be
sure to grasp the advantages thereof. To defend his Right therefore he was
forced to come abruptly out of Holland, and could not return thither since to
the Public Exercise of his Art.

30 It seems not unreasonable, 30 Which seems unreasonable.
that he that hazarded his Time, Charge and Labor to Invent an Art so
Beneficial to Mankind, by denying himself the gain that might have arisen from
his other Studies, and through observance of His Majesty's especial Command,
wholly applied himself to the advancing and bringing it by infinite of
Experiments to Rules of a perfect Art, accomplished at his own constant and
grievous Expenses, and had also given to His Majesty undoubted Evidence of the
Reality thereof, should have at length reaped suitable Benefit; but it seems
very unreasonable, that others should presume to supplant him after all this
was done, to snatch from him, and grasp all the advantages to themselves; when
they ought rather to have endeavored him what satisfaction they could for the
infinite injury they had done him, though to have made him just Recompense had
been utterly impossible, who at last, in laboring to cause his Bill to be
stopped, would maintain and justify all their former Wrong by doing Greater.

It seems not at all unreasonable that those that have thus long obstructed the
true Inventor in the Exercise of his Art, and therein the Public Benefit
should be now ordered to Cease.

31 Mr. 31 It is hoped it will be with a saving to Mr. Fitz Gerald's Patent.
Fitz G. and his Partners had contrived delays all they could as is before
mentioned to the House of Commons, and so now they do to the House of Lords.
They were always ready to attend till the time came that they were called for,
but then were gone aside, and neglected it, loytering till they might have
Summons given, on pretense that they should not be surprised, whereas their
Petition was committed with the Bill by the Commons, as has been said, and
they were well aware the Bill was passed, and could not but know that the Bill
was sent to the Lords. However, the Committee of the Lords Deferred their
Proceedings till they might have Summons given them; yet would not Mr. Fitz-G.
submit to what the Commit had done, when they had passed the Bill, but
Petitioned presently to the House of Lords, Humbly complaining for want as they
pretended of due Summons (though they were given them the day before) that the
Bill might be Recommitted which was granted, and leave was given by the
Commit to bring in a Proviso next Morning; which the Lords met on purpose
(where VV. VV. attended by Order) to see what it was. But Mr. Fitz-G. came
without bringing in any Proviso, but instead thereof offered to their Lordships
a Proposal in Writing, that Mr. Fitz G. would allow to Mr. VValcot a sixth Part
of the Profits arising by the Practice, etc. which could be no other than
giving him the sixth Part arising by the Practice of his own Art, which by
their Contrivance is nothing whilst they hinder his Working; and then he would
have imposed this, which their Lordships would not meddle with.

But what Confidence can VV. VV. put in those Persons whose Dealings from time
to time he has had this Experience of; his harkening anew to any Proposal from
them, may be ill resented by all those, who upon his Demonstrations made, had
owned his Cause and asserted his Interest. And by those who had known the
extent of his Adversaries skill, and what their Right is, and had rejected both
to accept of his; and should draw upon his Art the Censures of all the Errors
and miscarriages they have run into by their Inadvertency, and want of Skill;
and should by such an interposition Eclips the Honor his Art has justly
gained, and trust himself to the Fortune of theirs. And what Proposals can be
hearkened unto, or Agreement can possibly be made with them, who took no care
to observe King Charles his Order in Counsel, which was made so much to their
Advantage; But instead of the Uses His Majesty intended, inverted it to other
ends to thrust him out of all, insomuch as a sixth part of the clear profits
that His Majesty Ordered long since in 1683. they would not vouchsafe to settle
upon him in so many Years; but VV. VV. has great Reason to believe by the
Account the Patentees themselves, and others have given, that they have
received from some few Persons such large Sums for Shares, that long ago not a
sixth part of the whole Gain, according to their own Division and Valuation of
it has been left undisposed of, they having dealt with many; All perhaps made
away by their dividing the future profits which might have been raised by a Man
of skill into Shares, and Selling them; though they had in Truth not any thing
themselves to dispose of, having neither Right to the Benefit (as is proved)
nor Ability in point of skill to perform the Work, whence the profits should
arise as by the Event does appear. Wherefore by their Dealing it is plain, that
they had never any intention of observing any Agreement with VV. VV. but
designed to involve him in perpetnal Delays and infinite Disappointments, and
by their trifling pretenses always to take advantage, and at length to draw him
into those destructive Articles they had proposed.

And it is not now to be expected, neither is it possible that ever any
Agreement of Partnership can be made with them, unless VV. VV. should
prostitute himself and his Art to the Mercy of their Debts and Humor, by
exposing his Art to be liable to pay all those Shares which they have for great
Sums of Money long ago sold, and satally charged upon the Fund of their own
Skill. Those shares they can never acquit themselves of, except they can
transfer them upon him; so that his agreeing with them were no less than
agreeing that all should be swept away from him, besides himself be
irrecoverably ruined by their Debts and Impositions. And it were very vain to
imagine that VV. VV. should neglect to discharge his Obligations to those that
have kindly assisted him, and at the same time plunge himself under the Burden
of those Persons Debts that have cruelly opposed him. That he should allot out
of his own Art those shares that his Adversaries have been paid for, or should
undertake to repay those Sums of Money his Adversaries have received for
themselves, and those which perhaps by due, ought to have been his, but were
contrarily employed to cause his Expense and to force his Ruin. And it were as
vain to imagine he should pay for their being instructed in the Art they never
knew, but only pretended to, that thereby they might Usurp his Right who was
the true Master of it. Wherefore Mr. Fitz Gerald has no Reason to delude
himself, or to trifle VV. VV. with such Fantasies.

So that upon the whole matter, it is plainly Evident, that Mr. Fitz Gerald and
his Partners cannot have any pretense to expect VV. VV. should any way comply
with them in this Affair, nor to obstruct the passing of his Bill by reason.

That VV. W. had obtained Letters Patents solely to himself many Years before
they had any Patent.

That W. VV. performed on his part whatever he had agreed to, and that though
he agreed that Articles should be offered, which (he having allowed them
therein those Advantages they had insisted upon) were tendered accordingly; yet
he never entered into Articles of Agreement, such being rejected; so that he
never gave up his right to them, as they had pretended.

That W. W. the Inventor has given evident Demonstrations, and had the
Greatest Testimony to bear him Witness, that he can certainly perform the true
Art; But, by what Mr. Fitz G. and his Part ners have done, they have shown they
have not attained the knowledge, but are ignorant of it.

That their Patent was obtained by wrong, and was wrongfully continued ever
since.

That they can take no benefit of the Order of Counsel, by reason they never
performed the necessary condition therein Required. And the King was deceived
in his Grant by their misrepresenting the matter, neither were they permitted
by the order to enjoy their Patent, or to practice their Art, except they had
first made their Instrument of settlement upon W. W. which they never tendered.

32. 32 That of Mr. Walcots being expired as to time.
Whether W. W. his Patent was expired as to the time, is nothing at all to the
purpose, since by Mr. Fitz G. and his Partners, it had been obstructed, and by
their means ordered to be vacated; for the Prayer of W.VV. his Petition to the
House of Commons, and the intent of the Bill was, That W. W. might be restored
to his Right, (viz. restored by having an Act of Parliament, not by having his
Old Patent in Force again;) And have his Term which has been interrupted,
renewed, and enlarged; wherefore his Bill was to renew his Term, as well as to
enlarge it; because of their getting a Patent to themselves, and their
procuring an Order, that his Patent should be vacated, whereby they obstructed
his Proceedings: So that he having once obtained a Patent, and having before
his Patent granted, had the grand Right of an Inventor, which is still
surviving, and is always to continue, the Obstructions of his Right by their
procuring a Patent, and by their otherwise opposing his Patent, and causing an
Order to vacate it, and the necessity of passing the Act for the Public
Benefit, not the first limited time of the expiration of his Patent, were the
Ground of the Bill.

33 W.W. 33 And vacated by his own consent.
was Summoned to appear before the King and his Counsel, and had Counsel
learned, who strongly opposed the vacating of his Patent, and the other
Contents of His Majesty's Order, till His Majesty had put an end to the
Hearing; so that Mr. Fitz G. urges directly contrary here to what he has
acknowledged in this his State of the Case. See page 7. and his own Knowledge,
for he being present, saw that VV. W. did withstand the vacating of his Patent
by his Counsel, as long as they were suffered to stay till the Hearing was
over, and that both W. VV. and his Counsel, and all that attended on his
Account by Command, had withdrawn.

34 34 As will appear at the hearing.
No such thing did or could appear at the Hearing either before the Committee
of the House of Commons, or before the Committee of Lords, as all that were
there can testify.

Let the World therefore judge whether these Insinuations are not frivolous and
unjust pretenses.

Mr. Fitz-G. by the liberty he usually takes in his Expressons concerning VV.
VV. and by his Reflections upon him, labors to alienate Men's minds from the
desire of employing him, and would make them believe that he deserves not to
have any Encouragement given him; but it is well known W. VV. has been often
put to the severest proofs of his Temper, of the truth of his Words, and the
sufficiency of his Experiments, yet therein was never found to come often with
Dishonor, wherefore he hopes, he has given no occasion for others upon any of
these persons Allegations, or on whatever account else, to distrust his Credit,
or sincerity in any thing.

NOW if notwithstanding all the Cares, Toyls, Charges, and Difficulties W. W.
has himself labored through, whereby he has accomplished so Excellent an Art
for the Public USE; and notwithstanding the Invicible Evidence given of the
sufficiency of his Art; and such Testimony at home and abroad declaring it: W.
W. cannot be received and restored to his Right; but still meet with powerful
opposition, and still lie under mighty discountenance to discourage, and force
him to give off his hopes of proceeding; his Spirits and Strength will at
length fail, that he must retire and submit to his Fate, and then the Art will
be lost: Together with the Knowledge and Experience he has gained by many
Experiments and curious Disquisitions in several kinds, chiefly for the
completing of this Art; which if well digested into a methodical Discourse,
and made known, might also be highly useful to the Public in many different
respects: But if none do regard the benefit, these may bring, it is not for him
further to put himself after so much loss sustained, to the Labor and Cost to
expose his Notions to the public Censure.

William Walcot Humbly desires that those Honorable Members of both Houses of
Parliament, that have spent so much Time, and taken such care to Examine the
matter, and to pass his Bill, will not at length suffer all to be lost; that
the Honorable the House of Commons, that so unanimously Voted for the Bill,
and recommended it to the Lords for their Concurrence, will give it new
Encouragement. And that the Right Honorable the House of Lords; the Committee
of the Lords having in the same Session 1692. Passed his Bill, will take it
again into their Consideration, That they may give their Consent, especially
since it is manifest, it may be for the Public Benefit of the Nation.

To speak of the mighty Advantages W. W. his Art might yield at Sea, and Land
requires a Treatise by it self.

