The Building, Beautifying, or Repairing of Churches, an Act of Religion.

A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of St. HELENS, London, On Sunday,
August 8. 1697.

At the first opening of that Church after it had been Repaired.

By Tho. Willis, M.A. Vicar of St. Helens.

LONDON, Printed for John Southby, at the Harrow in Cornhil. MDCXCVII.

To my Worthy and Loving Friends, the Parishioners of St. Helens.
Gentlemen,
I Heartily bless Almighty God for that Station, which, by his Providence, I
have amongst you, where I have no need to rack my Invention to study Arguments
of Persuasion, but rather proper terms of Praise: you generally doing of your
duty, without giving me time or opportunity as your Minister, to recommend it
to you.

This last Act of yours which occasioned this ensuing discourse, which is now
humbly presented to you, will, I doubt not, make you famous and eminent for
your Piety and Zeal, throughout this great and populous City.

That such a small number of Persons (as you are) should repair such an old,
large, decayed Church, at your own proper cost and charges, without assistance
from the Public, must needs redound much unto your honor in the Eyes of your
fellow-Citizens.

God Almighty grant, that this, and all your other Works of Charity and
Religion, (which are many) may be rewarded an hundred fold in this World, and
in the World to come with Eternal Life.

This is, and shall be, the daily and hearty Prayer of

Gentlemen, Your unworthy, But most Faithful Minister, and Servant, Tho. Willis.

1 Chronicles XXII 5. The house that is to be builded for the Lord must be exceeding
Magnifical, of Fame and of Glory throughout all Countries.


REason is the distinctive Character of Man, and Religion is his Crown and
Glory. Religion (which is the Holy Worship of God) is the great end of man's
Life and Being in the world. By Religion it is, that man gives to God that
Glory and Honor which is due to his great Name. Now God is a Being infinite in
all Excellencies and Perfections; and by a hearty acknowledgment of his
infinite Excellencies, man gives Honor to God. But then this acknowledgment
must be manifested by agreeable Actions. God has given man a body and a soul,
and he ought to be, and will be honored by both. Man rightly honors God by an
internal estimation of his excellencies, demonstrated by his external Actions.
And amongst these actions sure not any more tends to the divine honor, than
the having of a house erected to the Lord, especially such a house, as by its
amplitude, splendour, and beauty, may be a visible demonstration of a very high
esteem of God; and such was the design of holy David, here mentioned in my
Text, for the house to be built by his Son Solomon. The house that is to be
builded, etc.

Here in these words we have;

1. Mention made of a house to be built for the Lord, i. e. for the name, the
honor and service of the most high God.

2dly, We have an account given us of the excellency and pre-eminence of this
house above other Houses The house that is builded for the Lord must be
exceeding magnifical; i. e. it must be magnificent to the height: and then
lastly

3dly, We have the reason or end of this Magnificence assigned; it must be for
a name, renown, and glory throughout all Lands, throughout the whole habitable
World. That thereby the name of God, and the fame of his excellent Greatness
might be extended to the ends of the Farth.

The greatest works of men should be designed to the highest honor of God. Man
cannot exceed in magnificence, in those things that tend to the honor of the
Divine Majesty. Man should not satisfy himself in bringing a small tribute of
praise to his Maker: But he should endeavor to lift up his glory to the
Heavens, and to extend his honor to the ends of the Earth.

But the one thing, which, upon this our first meeting in this place, after the
great cost you have been at, for the repairing, beautifying and adorning this
house, (which is set apart for the honor of God Almighty's Name) I shall now
endeavor in a short discourse to demonstrate in this, that it is a proper act
of natural, and rational Religion to have a house, a stately and magnificent
house, to the honor and glory of God, which will lead me in the close of my
discourse, to take notice of, and commend your piety and zeal, which has
rendered this place, we now once more are assembled in, such a one.

Religion is the holy Worship of God. God is a Spirit, and (as our blessed
Savior told me woman of Samaria) is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth.
Joh. 4.23.
And this worship is acceptable to him, as well in a Clay Cottage, as in a
Marble Palace. Three Wise men or Kings, Matt. 2.
(as some will have them) we read worshipped Christ in a Stable; and sure it
was no less acceptable than if they had done it in a Glittering Court Nay, give
me leave to say, that it was a higher Act of Religion in them to adore Christ
in a Stable, lying in a Manger, than it would have been to have done so, had
they found him in a Royal Palace, sitting in Princely State upon a Throne of
Gold. Though when these Princely Sages of the East came to him, there was no
appearance of any humane Greatness in him; yea, notwithstanding the
extraordinary meanness of his Condition, they acknowledged his Royalty and
Divinity with humble Homage and Adoration: They Address to him as a King, they
Worship him as a God.

But yet after all, I must say, that though this Spiritual Worship be
acceptable to God in every Place, as being indeed the very Soul of Religion; it
must not be without a Body. I mean it must demonstrate itself (when occasion is
offered) by some visible Acts to the Honor of God: and so it is an eminent Act
of Religion, to have a Stately and Magnificent House to the glory of his Name.

God we all know is an Invisible Power, an Immense Being. The most High
dwells not in Temples made with hands, (as says the Prophet) Heaven is my
Throne, and Earth my Footstool; what House will ye build me, says the Lord? or
what is the place of my Rest? Has not my Hand made all these things? Yet to
this the Apostle premises, Solomon built him a House, as you find Acts 7. from
verse 47th to the 50th, And our Blessed Savior sufficiently vindicated the
Honor of his Fathers House, by scourging the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Courts of the Temple, Matt. 21.12, 13.

To have a Stately, Beautiful, and well adorned House to the Honor of God, for
a Renown and Glory amongst men, is a proper Act of Religion: an Act of
Religion, I say, not of Jewish, Paganish, or Popish Superstition; but of
Natural, Rational and Real Religion. Which is no less proper and agreeable to
Christians under the Gospel, than to holy and good men under the Law.

This I shall endeavor to clear and prove, 1. By the Nature and Reason of the
thing; 2dly, By its agreeableness to the Nature and Reason of man; and 3dly, By
the Approbation and Acceptance of God.

for a Renown and Glory amongst men, appears to be a proper Act of Religion, by
the Nature and Reason of the thing. What is Religion, but the right Worship of
the only true God? It is a giving him the Honor due to his great name, by an
acknowledgment of his infinite Excellencies. And this acknowledgment must be
open and visible (as it were) to the Eyes of the World, by some eternal
Temstimonies and Actions. Thus in Levit. 10.3. we read that the Lord spoke,
saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the
people I will be glorified. Now this must either be done by words, as in
Prayers or Praises; or by some certain actions and gestures.

And indeed by the self-same Actions by which we pay our Respects, and give
Honor to men, we must testify our acknowledgments of the Divine Excellencies
to the Honor of God, as particularly by uncovering the Head, and bowing the
Knee.

Now how can a Subject be supposed more to honor his Prince and Sovereign,
than by erecting a magnificent Palace, or repairing and beautifying a decayed
stately structure to his Honor? And thus may a man honor the great King of
Kings whose Subject he is, the most high God I mean, by either building,
beautifying, or repairing a Temple, or Palace, (as David calls it, 1 Cron.
29.1. when he says, the Palace is not for man but for the Lord God) to the
Glory and Honor of his great Name. By such acts as these a man makes a
visible, and practical acknowledgment of the Majesty, Greatness, and Royal
dignity of God. He that acknowledges the divine Excellencies in words, (such as
Praises are) truly honors God, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 50.23.
Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me; but he that does such Works as these, by
doing so may be said to honor God, much more than the other, who only chants
forth his Praises.

A stately, and well adorned Palace is for the honor of the King: and a
beautiful Temple, as that of Solomon's formerly was, is for the honor of
Almighty God Praises we know are but cheap acknowledgments; but he that repairs
an old decayed Temple to God, (such as we all know this lately was) cannot be
said to honor him with that which costs him nothing. The Pious man by his
Praises acknowledges God to be a good God; but he that does this latter,
acknowledges him to be a great King.

And thus I have showed you how to have a stately, magnificent, and well
adorned House, wherein to serve God, and to attend upon all the ordinances of
his Worship, is an act of natural, rational, and real Religion; from the nature
and reason of the thing, I proceed now then to prove it to be so.



Such was the Temple of Jupiter in a certain City of Mysia, Cizicus.
the Pillars of which were four Cubits thick, and in height fifty: The whole
was of polished stone, and each stone was joined to the other with no meaner a
cement than a line of Gold. But that which Queen Semiramis erected to the same
supposed God in Babilou, was far more sumptuous and costly, and richly
beautified and adorned with Gold and Silver. The Temple of Diana was twenty
years in building, and above one hundred and fifty in adorning. The temple of
Peace in Rome was built by Vespasian, three hundred Foot in length, and in
breadth two hundred; and all the rarieties of the golden House of Nero, were
bestowed as Ornaments for this Temple.

Now, though these Persons, who built such stately Fabrics, and so richly
adorned them to the honor of their supposed Divinities, grossly erred in the
object of their Worship; yet by this it is apparent that it is agreeable to the
dictate of Nature, and consonant to the reason of Man, to have a Magnificent
and Beautiful House or Temple to the Divinity we adore, as an expression of
that Honor which is due from us to God.

It is not consistent with the high and honorable thoughts which men ought to
have of God to be content to attend the solemnities of his Holy Service, in a
mean and sordid House. He is not worthy of the honorable Title of God
Almighty's Servant, who has less regard to that House which is dedicated to
his Service and Honor, than he has to that of his own Dwelling and Abode; and
can willingly lay out his Wealth for the furnishing and adorning the latter,
and be well satisfied, though the former lies in a desolate and ruinous
condition.

The Nature of Man cannot in the most corrupted state but be so ingenuous, as
to dictate this Truth; that that Being, who gives the best, most certainly does
deserve the best. So that if God gives the best Blessings to us, he deserves
the best returns from us. What matter is it if we offer our earthly Treasures
to him, from whom we expect Grace here, and everlasting Glory when we go hence?

It is true, God is not taken with any shining or beautiful Adornments as men
are; but yet it is very meet and fitting that by such things as these we should
testify our high esteem of him, and great Love to him. That man who has a due
apprehension of the Greatness and Majesty of God, and of his mercy and goodness
to man, will think no cost too great, or Ornament at any time too rich, for
that House which is set apart for the Honor of his Name.

That this is not a stranger or screed Conception, but the natural thought and
sentiment of Mankind, is further apparent, in that the famous Temple of Solomon
formerly was built, according to the dictates of Natural Reason in King David,
for it was in the mind of that Pious Prince to do this, before the will of God
concerning it was declared and made known. For it is said 1 Kings 8.17. that it
was in the heart of David to build a House for the name of the Lord God of
Israel. And yet if you turn to 2 Samuel 7.7. You find that in time past God never
had spoke a word to any of the Iribes of Israel, saying, why build ye me not a
House of Caedar?

So that the first contrivance of this was, the natural product of that holy
man's own Breast, which renders the Action agreeable to a man's natural reason
and understanding. And seeing this was no act of Ceremonial Service, it is
equally agreeable to the times of the Gospel. And after the Abolition of Legal
Sacrifices, the Apostles made use of the Temple thus built for evangelical
services; for as we read, Acts 2.46. They continued daily with one accord in
the Temple.

But as thus to erect or beautify a House to the Honor of God, wherein to
perform the offices and services of Religious Worship, appears to be agreeable
to the nature and reason of man, so

King 8.18. that the Lord said unto Dadid, Whereas it was in thy Heart to build
a House unto my Name, thou did well that it was in thine heart; and if you
peruse the 2 Samuel 7. throughout; you will find God by his Prophet Nathan,
approving of David's Religious purpose, and promising great Benefits and
Blessings to his seed upon that account. (...). Antiq. Jud. 15. Cap. 14.
And it is very memorable what Josephus writes, that during the time of the
building of this Temple, (or the repairing it rather and eight years in doing)
it never rained by day, but by night only, so that the Workmen were not let or
hindered. God who commands the Clouds, by thus ordering and disposing of the
showers of Heaven, approving of the re-edifying of his House on Earth.

The Temple I grant indeed was typical of Christ, and Prayers were directed
toward it, and sacrifices to be offered only at it. But the building of it, I
say, was a proper act of Natural Religion, for it was as (worded in my Text)
for the honor of the most high God.

I know Origin says, the Christians have no Temples, and Arnobius, we, i. e.
Christians, do not Honor God by building of Temples to him, but yet I find the
word Temple was used by some Christians in early days, for Ingatius tells the
Magnesians, All of you meet together in one place, and go as one man to the
Temple of God. It is true, that the generality of the Primitive Christians did
shun the name of Temple, partly in respect of the typical use of the Temple of
Solomon, to which the moral service was directed, and much of the Ceremonial
was confined. And this upon the Account of the or divine Presence. But now God
who is every where graciously present in his Church, is every where acceptably
worshipped.

Again, the primitive Christians generally shunned the name of the Temple,
partly too in opposition to the Temples of the Heathens, in which they shut up
the worshipped their Divinities; whereas the Christians acknowledged Gods
immensity, and declared Heaven it self could not contain him: According to that
of Acts 7.48, 49. The most high dwells not in Temples made with hands, for
Heaven is his throne, and earth is his footstool.

But though for these reasons the Name of Temple was by the primitive
Christians generally avoided and shunned, they yet called their places for
public Worship (...) Churches, and the more stately structures that were
erected for the honor of God and the Christian Religion, (...) Royal Palaces,
acknowledging by doing so, Gods Sovereign Majesty and Supreme Authority, as
King of the Church, which to do I hope you will allow to be a proper Act of
Natural and Rational Religion, and both these they called (...), Houses of God,
as being dedicated to his immediate service and honor.

The House of John, Grot. in Acts 7.4
Surnamed Mark, being the place of our Savior's eating the last Passover, and
instituting his Holy Supper, the place where the Disciples afterward assembled,
and Christ came to them, and where the Holy Ghost descended; this Houses, I
say, was afterward, made a fair Fabric, and a famours Church, as St. Hierom,
and venerable Bede, both tells us.

Under the Emperor Severus the Christians began to build Churches to God, but
when Diclesian came he beat them down, thinking at one and the same time to
demolish Churches, and to destroy the Christian Religion. Taylor's life of
Christ. p. 242.
Maximinus when he ascended the Throne gave leave that the demolished Churches
might be rebuilt. Upon this the Christians presently were overjoyed, and
quickly raised them to an incredible Height, and an incomparable Beauty.

Lucian calls the Christian Church (...), the Golden-roofed House. This we must
say was more for Ornament than Service: for the honor of God, rather than the
necessary use of Mon.

The Temple, and every Basilica, or stately Christian Church is, properly
speaking, a Type of that Heaven where the Holy Angels incessantly attend the
most high God in Glory; for herein is God adored, so far as man's meanness can
attain, in a way agreeable to his Greatness and Majesty. Thus St. Chrysostom
chiding his people of Antioch, for walking and talking in the Church, says, the
Church of God is not a Shop of Merchandise, but the place of Angels and
Archangels, the Court of God, and an Image of Heaven; and St. Gregory calls
the Church (...), Heaven on Earth.

And thus have I endeavored, according to my promise, to clear it to you, that
it is a proper act of Natural and Rational Religion to have a House, a stately,
magnificent, and well adorned House, or Church, to the Honor and Glory of God.
And now, my Brethren, instead of recommending your Duty to your Practice, in
the close of my discourse. I cannot but applaud you for having done it.

How can I choose but commend your Piety and Zeal for the Honor of the Lord
our God, evidenced in the Reparation of this (lately ruinous) House, wherein we
now are? and the Reduction of it (at your great cost and charge) to a due
decency and fitness for the use for which it is appointed, I mean the solemn
Worship and Service of Almighty God? This is a work I believe you are all
satisfied was necessary to be done, and now it is done, I must tell you is
honorable and acceptable to God.

The solemnity of Gods Service, and the Public exercise of Religion, is
certainly the most necessary and honorable Work in the whole World. It is so
esteemed by all Nations, as well Heathens, who worship false Gods, as
Christians that adore the true.

The solemn acts of Religion are designed to a twofold end, which renders the
public Worship of God, of such mighty concern to all men, and so very
necessary, that nothing in the world can be more so, or of greater concern to
any man. Now these are the Honor and Glory of God, and the Salvation of the
Souls of men. This is the great end of man's Life and Being, and better indeed a
man had never seen the Light or had a Being in the World, than that neglecting
the means of the Salvation of his Soul, he should dye in his Sins, and lie in
the tormenting Flames below for ever.

Now there is so necessary a connection of these two, that the one cannot
possibly be separated from the other. No man that does not give to God the
Glory that is due to his Name in the Duties of his Holy worship, can secure the
Salvation of his own Soul: For Gods glory is the great end of Man's Salvation,
and therefore that man that gives not Glory to God, must himself expect no
interest in his saving Mercy. God should seem accessory to his own dishonor
(which is not imaginable) if he should bring that man to a State of Honor and
Happiness in Heaven, who refuses to give to him the Glory due to his Name,
whilst he is here on Earth.

But now, that man that gives glory to God, by an humble attendance on the
Ordinance of his solemn Worship and Service, uses the most proper means to
secure the Salvation of his Soul; and if his Life carry not a contradiction to
his Religion, he shall certainly be saved. For he that gives honor to God in
the duties of his Worship, and gives not a lie to himself in his Life and
Conversation, is in the right and direct way to Heaven and Everlasting
Happiness.

Now if it be thus necessary to give Glory to God, and to take care of the
Salvation of our Souls, by a due and reverent attendance upon God in Duties of
his public and solemn Worship and Service, then it must needs be necessary
that there be some place where we may conveniently meet for this end and
purpose.

Now this is the place appointed for this purpose, this is the House built for
this end; but how unfit not long since it was for the Holy Worship of Almighty
God, your selves well know. But now, (to your honor and praise be it spoken)
it is reduced to a due decency for so sacred and solemn a Service, for so
Divine and Glorious a Presence as that of God is.

This is done like your selves, who I will say always appeared persons of brave
and generous Spirits, whenever the Cause of God or Religion gave you an
opportunity of showing your selves. By this act of yours you have showed your
fellow-Citizens how high a Regard you have for that great Majesty, that
glorious God, whom we adore.

This is Work which tends to the glory of God, the honor of Religion, and the
special Renown of this Parish. But then, my honored and well beloved Brethren,
let me, as your Minister, make one humble Request to you, which is this: that
you would let this great Work of Piety be accompanied with the Actions of a
good Life, and the exercise of the Graces of Christianity.

I would, indeed, have every Christian Church well adorned with beautiful
Pictures. Be not amazed, for the Pictures I mean are Pious Christians, the
lively Pictures of God and Christ on Earth. Nothing can be more unagreeable
than the Picture of the Devil in the Temple of God, and yet such I will say, is
every wicked man; an Abomination in the Holy Place whenever he appears there.

To conclude then, be we holy in Heart and Life, and we shall be companions of
Angels, have Communion with God and Christ in his Holy Ordinances; and
hereafter be admitted into the Temple of Glory, there to celebrate the Praises
of our God to Eternity.

To him be Glory, Might, Majesty, Dominion, and Praise, both now and ever, Amen
Books Printed for John Southby, at the Harrow in Cornhil.
1. MR. Warren against Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, in 3 pts. complt. 2.
His Family Devotions, containing Morning and Evening Prayers. 3 The Unworthy
Non-Communicant, a Treatise showing the danger of neglecting the Blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and Rectifying the mistakes of many in this Age,
with Prayers. 4 The Benefit of early Piety, fit for youth. Both by Mr Smythies
of Cripplegate. Price each 1 s. 5 A short view of the duty of Receiving the
Sacrament, with Prayers, 24 s. Price six pence. 6 Two Sermons by Dr Blagrave
before the late Queen. 7 Piligrims Guide. Price one shilling 8 A Treatise of
Contentment. Price six pence. 9 The Charter of the City of London. 10
Malbranche of Nature and Grace.
FINIS.

