TWO DISCOURSES CONCERNING The Soul of Brutes, Which is that of the Vital and
Sensitive of Man.

The First is PHYSIOLOGICAL, showing the NATURE, PARTS, POWERS, and AFFECTIONS
of the same.

The Other is PATHOLOGICAL, which unfolds the DISEASES which Affect it and its
Primary Seat; to wit, The BRAIN and NERVOUS STOCK, And Treats of their CURES:
With Copper Cuts.

By THOMAS WILLIS Doctor in PHYSIC, Professor of Natural Philosophy in OXFORD,
and also one of the Royal Society, and of the renowned College of Physicians in
LONDON.

Englished By S. PORDAGE, Student in PHYSIC.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the Harrow near Chancery Lane End in
Fleetstreet, Chapter Harper at the Flower-de-Luce against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street, and John Leigh at Stationers' Hall. 1683.

To the most Reverend Father in God GILBERT (By Divine Providence) Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all ENGLAND, and one of the Privy
Council to His Sacred Majesty CHARLES the Second, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, etc.
Most Renowned Prelate,
IN that I still become troublesome to your greater Cares, by this Kind of often
repeated Duty, I must also repeat my former Excuse. For that these my
VVritings, with those formerly Published, for the most part consist of those
things which I have delivered in my Academical Readings, by a necessitated Duty
belong to you, for that I received them from your Favors; and indeed, neither
these had ever seen the Light, nor perhaps my self had ever been in the number
of Authors, unless I had been made at first your Sidlie Professor at Oxford;
yours I say, both for the ancient Honor with which you had advanced me, and
also for the more fresh magnificent Liberality, which has obliged the whole
Academy, and all its Gowned Company. All the Schools partake of what is imputed
to your Theater; and moreover all the Professors, whilst every one of their
private Patrons are acknowledged, Celebrate Sheldon; who exceeds, by your gifts
that of other Macaenatuses, and Crowns the whole.

But as these Disquisitions are indebted to your Munisicence, so they require
your Patronage, and we offer them not more in Duty to your Grace, than for the
Cause of your Tutelage. Concerning the Soul, I have entered upon a great and
difficult thing, and full of hazard; where we may equally fear the Censures of
the Church, as the Schools. For that I assert a Man (as the Madman in the
Gospel possess't with a Legion) to be endued with many distinct Souls, and
design sometimes a legitimate Subordination of them, and sometimes wicked
Combinations, troublesome Contests, and more than Civil Wars; yea, and in that I
importunately describe, the Manners and Affections, the Mutual Exaltations,
Dejections, and Productions of either, and their state after Separation: These,
I say, some not only Philosophers, but Theologists perhaps may find fault with.
And although I have a place of Safety, in that the Arguments and Reasons fight on
my Side, and that I have got the Suffrages of the ancient Philosophers, and the
holy Fathers (and especially of St. Hierome and Augustine, and among the
Moderns of Gassendus and our Hammond) yet suffer your Grace for my greater
Safety, to extend your help to me, and grant that I may profess in the Entrance
to this Discourse, that I am

Your Graces Most humble and devoted Servant Tho. Willis.

To the Most LEARNED and WORSHIPFUL By me ever Respected The Vice Chancellor,
Doctors, and Masters, who diligently Profess, greatly Adorn, and happily
Promote good Letters in the most Famous University of Oxford, Health.
EXcuse me, Learned Men, if you, who were once my Auditors, I now desire to be
my Readers, and you whom I ever found Propitious and Favorable, that I
therefore wish you may be my Judges and Patrons. Your singular Humanity has
formerly enflamed my Industry, in this Physiological Undertaking, and given me
Life and Strength; so that if that any thing of Praise be due to me, it ought
to be imputed and referred to you. I know indeed how great difference there is,
betwixt the flying words of Speakers, and those impressed upon lasting Papers;
but it seems of great Authority, that they have not been displeasing to your
most Curious Judgments, in their utterance, and I hope they may now pass any
Examen, having already passed your Critical Ears. It therefore belongs to you
to defend, if not these my Endeavors, yet at least your own Judgments; and if
perchance, the litterate Thrasoe's of this Age, who are wholly ignorant in
Philosophy, every where wandering about, attempt to overthrow me with their
Clamors, which is their chief Eloquence, to oppose your Authority against them,
by which, if they are not put to Silence, it will be however an high Confidence
and inviolable Security to

Honored Sirs, the Admirer of you all, THO. WILLIS.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have here given you what I had long promised, the Pathology of the Brain and
Nervous Stock, and with it the previous Physical Meditations of the Soul of the
Brutes, which is that inferior one of Man. This difficult task, when at first
denied leisure and retirement, it could not be performed; after the Death of my
Dear Wife, being lonely, with frequent and unseasonable Studies, that I might
the less think on my Grief, I have at last finished this, according to my
flender Capacity. But indeed in these Disquisitions (which the Anatomy of the
Brain, and its Appendixes, has lately and more exactly shown) as we have
entered into a by-way, and not before trodden, there was a necessity to lead
thee, through some sharp and stony ways, beset with bushes and thorns, which
might offend thee. And indeed I know not, whether it will be pleasing to all,
that instituting the something Paradoxical Doctrine of the Animal Soul, that I
should assign to that Soul, by which the Brutes as well as Men live, feel,
move, not only Extension, but Members, and as it were Organical Parts, yea
peculiar Diseases, and proper means or methods of Curing them; and that
moreover, I should form this, which is merely Vital, and different from the
Rational, and subordinate to it, and so Man, a Two-soul'd Animal, and as it
were a manifold Geryon.

That I may remove out of the way these little rubs, I do not at all doubt to
overcome them, and evince the Corporeity of the Soul, by Reasons not to be
contemned, and also by the full suffrage, both of the Ancients and the Moderns;
and besides, that it is Bipart or Twofold, I have already, in another place, by
a necessary Consequence deduced, from the Life of the Blood, as it were a
flame, and from the existency of the Animal Spirits, and as it were lucid or
aetherial Hypostasis, asserted and proved. For granting to the Soul, one Vital
Portion living in the Blood, to be a certain inkindling of it, and another
Sensitive, to be only an heap of Animal Spirits every where diffused through the
Brain and Nervous Stock; it follows from hence, that Brutes have a Soul
Co-extended to the whole Body, and Parts not only many and distinct, but after
a manner dissimilar. But that some object, that the Soul of the Beast; because
it perceives, or knows that it feels, to be immaterial, for that Matter seems
to be incapable of Perception, that indeed, had been likely, if that Perception
should pass beyond the limits of Material things; or higher, than what inspires
them, which things are usually attributed to Natural Instinct, or Idiocrasie or
peculiar Temperaments, that I may omit Sympathies and Antipathies. But who
should be the Betrother? I profess the great God, as the only Workman, so also
as the first Mover, and auspiciously present, every where, was he not able to
impress strength, Powers, and Faculties to Matter, fitted to the offices of a
Sensitive Life? The Pen in the hand of the Writer, Disputes, Entreats, gives
Relations of things, and is in the midst between things past and things to
come; and why should we not believe that greater things than any of these, may
be done, when the Skill of the Deity is present? Lastly, If any one shall
affirm, that most subtle Substance, and wholly Etherial, which serves for the
Vital Economy or Government to be immaterial, for that it enters upon the
sluggish Disposition of inanimate Bodies, let him remember to be indulgent to
me, if by chance I call it material, for that it subsists very much below the
Prerogatives of Reason.

But I shall not stand upon these things, for truly I have prepared a far
othergates defense; to wit, I speak not from the Tripos like an Oracle, nor
from the Chair, but as one of a low form: I play not the Prophet, or Dictator,
but the Philosopher, neither do I plant an Opinion, but propose an Hypothesis,
and open my Judgment. Geometry has its Demonstrations in it self; we are
Skilled in that part of Philosophy, where it abundantly suffices to have
brought Logical Proofs: Surely he only certainly pronounces, who professes his
Errors, and whilst he Philosophizes about Man, remembers himself that he is a
Man.

But that according to the Adage, that I should declare some to be rather sick
in Soul, yea first, and chiefly than in Body; otherways than the Schools of
Physicians, which refer the Primary Seats of all Diseases, into solid Parts,
Humors, and Vital Spirits, or innate Heat: I say from our Hypothesis, to wit,
that this Soul has a material Subsistence, extended equally with the Body, and
pecul^ar Parts, Powers, and Affections; may be concluded, that it is found
obnoxious also to preternatural Diseases, and not seldom wants Medical help.

Moreover, That the Corporeal Soul does extend its Sicknesses, not only to the
Body, but to the Mind or rational Soul, which is of an higher lineage, and that
it oftentimes involves it with its sailings and faults, I think is clear
enough in our Pathology or Method of Curing. Further, for the proving these two
distinct Souls, to be together and subordinately in Man, as much as Authority
and the force of Reasons can, I think is there proved; which Opinion is so far
from that I need to fear it should be censured for Pernicious or Heretical;
that on the contrary, we hope it is altogether Orthodox, and appears agreeable
to a good Life, and Pious Institution: from hence the Wars and Strivings
between our two Appetites, or between the Flesh and Spirit, both Morally and
Theologically inculcated to us, are also Physically understood; for that, I see
and approve the better things, and follow the worser; and this, The Flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh. So generally comes to
pass in us, for as much as the Corporeal Soul adhering to the Flesh, inclines
Man to Sensual Pleasures, whilst in the mean time, the Rational Soul, being
helped by Ethical Rules, or Divine favors, invites it to good Manners, and the
works of Piety. Further, from hence, the chief Arguments is brought against
Epicurism, and Atheism, for that it is moved by the force of Reasons, our
Sensitive Soul even as that of the Brutes, miscarrying, the other perpetually
survives; for truly being persuaded of an after and Eternal State, why does it
not make it its whole business, that it may live more happily in it, or at
least not miserably?

But also, that it may be objected, that there cannot be therefore two Souls in
Man, because many forms cannot actuate at once the same Matter; It may be
answered: that the Supreme form of the same Subject, does sometimes
subordinately include many others, but specifies it only a Compound. Also, the
Corporeal Soul being subordinate to the Rational, subsists immediately in the
Humane Body, and this Superior is in the same, that mediating. It would be a
much more difficult solution of this hard Business, if the Inferior Soul of
Man, common to that with the Brutes, should be also affirmed to be immaterial;
for by what knitting together, can two independent Souls subsist in the same
Body; being from thence separated and Combined, by no common Bone, into what
place can they depart severally? Certainly as to reason, it is more probable,
and to the Humane government more agreeable, to affirm that one most subtly
Corporal Soul, is joined immediately to the Body, and is intimately united, and
that by the intervention of this Soul, another immaterial, residing in its
Bosom, inhabits the Body, and is the supreme and principal form of the whole
Man: But that after Death, the Corporeal Soul being extinct, this survives and
is Immortal.

That the Corporeal, Flameous, and lucid Nature of this Soul, and its Parts and
Affections, may be the better known, I have thought it necessary to describe
the Vital Organs, both of all Kinds of living Creatures, by the Action of which
the Lamp of Light is maintained; and also to show plainly laid open, even to
their intimate recesses, and least and secret Passages, the Brains, both of the
more perfect Brutes, and also of Man. The Anatomy of which being manifold; not
being able to perform it only with my own hand, and Skill, being also almost
continually interrupted by my Practice, the Famous and Skilful Anatomist and
Physician Dr. Edmond King was much helpful to me, by his assiduous and notable
assistance and labor. Also that learned Man, and my most intimate Friend, Dr.
John Masters, Skilful in Physic and Anatomy, employed much of his Labor and
Diligence in the same Business. Out of his various Zootomie or Anatomy of the
more perfect Beasts and many-flower'd dissection, the wonderful things of God
are very much made known, for as much as in every the smallest and vilest
little Animals, not only the Face and Members, but also the inward Parts, as it
were the Hearths and Altars for the continuing the Vital Fire, show them to be
of a most Elegant and Artificial and plainly Divine Structure.

As to our Pathology or Method of Cure, I must confess, that in delivering the
Theory of Diseases, leaving the old way, I have almost every where brought
forth new Hypotheses: but what being founded upon Anatomical Observations, and
firmly stablished, better solve all the Phoenomena of the Sick, (viz.) They
declare more aptly the Causes of the Symptoms, and show the Reasons of Curing,
more accommodate to every Disease. But as to the Remedies and Therapeutic
Method, although we follow not exactly, after the manner of others, the Ancients,
we have nevertheless rejected nothing ratified by grave Authority, or approved
by daily Experience; and besides, we have added many things found out
Emperically and Analogically by the Moderns; Although it is neither our Hope or
Ambition that these should be pleasing to all; yet (what is my last wish) I
doubt not, but that this may be an help to many for the illustrating the
Medical Science, and for the more happy Curing of Cephalic Diseases. Farewell.

OF The Soul of the Brutes, The First Part PHYSIOLOGICAL, SHOWING, Its NATURE,
PARTS, POWERS, and AFFECTIONS.
CHAP. 1.
The Opinions of Authors both Ancient and Modern are recounted.

WIth what Pleasures, The Contemplation of the Soul pleasant but difficult.
and with what Delight, beyond other things, the Contemplation of the Soul has
drawn to it self the Wits of Men, and most profoundly Exercised them, appears
even from hence, that almost none of the Philosophers, of whatsoever Sect they
were, and of every Age, who have not labored in the search of it: But indeed,
how hard and abstruse it is, and with what dark Blackness, not less than the
shades of Hell it self, this Knowledge of the Soul is over-shadowed, may be
gathered from this; because they are opposite and uncertain, concerning it;
yea, almost as many Men as there are, so many several Opinions have they
Published; that truly it is no unjust Complaint of the Soul, that she
understands all things but her Self. Nevertheless, in this Age, most fruitful
of Inventions, when that so many Admirable things not before thought on, as it
were another Ancient World unknown, are discovered, about the building of the
Animal Body, when new Creeks are daily found out, new humors spring up, and
altogether another Doctrine than what has been delivered by the Ancients,
concerning the use of many of the Parts, has been instituted; why may we not
also hope, that there may be yet shown a new disquisition concerning the Soul,
and with better luck than hitherto? Therefore, however the thing may be
performed, I shall attempt to Philosophise concerning that Soul at least, which
is Common to Brute Animals with Man, and which seems to depend altogether on
the Body, to be born and dye with it, to actuate all its Parts, to be extended
through them, and to be plainly Corporeal; and that chiefly, It Conduces to the
knowing of the Manners of Men, and the Diseases of the Soul.
because, by the Nature, Subsistence, Parts, and Affections of this Corporeal
Soul rightly unfolded, the Ingenuity, Temperament, and Manners of every Man may
be thence the better known; as also the Causes, and formal Reasons of many
Diseases, as of the Frenzy, Lethargy, Vertigo, Madness, Melancholy, and
others, belonging rather to the Soul than to the Body, as yet hidden, may in
some part be discovered: Then Secondly, because the ends and bounds of the
aforesaid Corporeal Soul being defined, the Rational Soul, Superior and
Immaterial, may be sufficiently differenced from it; nor is that Argument
admitted so easily, confounding them together, whereby some deserving very ill
of themselves, have affirmed the Souls of Man and the Beasts only to differ in
degrees of Perfection; and so that either alike must be either Mortal or
Immortal, and alike propagated ex traduce or from the Parent. It distinguishes
the Rational Soul of Man, from that other of the Brute.
Wherefore that the Dignity, Order, and Immortality of the Rational Soul,
discriminated from the Corporeal, may be vindicated, and likewise that we may
make a way to the remaining Pathology, or Method of Curing of the Brain and
Nervous Stock, in which not only Parts of the Body, but often the animal
Spirits, yea, sometimes the whole sensitive Soul, seems to be affected, (although
we have formerly unfolded according to our slender Ability, not after this
manner, the Descriptions and Uses of the Brain and Nerves,) Therefore at
present, we shall endeavor to deliver a certain Doctrine of the Soul, previous
to the showing the Doctrine of the Diseases of those Parts. But here it will be
first expedient to rehearse the Opinions of others, or at least the chiefest
and most noted among them: From which, being put together, if not what the Soul
truly is, may be made known; yet what many considering it have thought of it;
and from thence a little more certain search of it, we may enterprise.

And indeed if we would grow wise concerning the Soul only out of the Pleas of
Authors, and the Writings of Philosophers of every Age, we should be entangled
in a Labyrinth of Opinions, following for truth mere Phantasms, and for the
genuine Idea of the Soul, as it were the Apparitions of diverse Specters. But
that we may reduce the various Opinions, whatever have been declared, both of
the Ancients and Moderns, to some certain Heads; it will be fit that we
observe, some did affirm it to be Corporeal, others Incorporeal. In either Kind
we meet with great diversity of Opinions. For first of all, among those who
thought it Incorporeal, Some have affirmed the Soul of the Beast to be an
Incorporeal Substance; to wit, the Platonists, and the Pythagoreans.
some affirmed it to be a Substance existing of it self and immortal, others
without Substance having only an accidental form. Those who believed the Soul
an Incorporeal and Immortal Substance, differed also among themselves. The
Platonists and Pythagoreans said, the Souls of all living Creatures, to be a
certain Part of the Universal Soul of the World, and that they were depressed
or immerged in this lower Body, as in a Sepulcher; and therefore, the Soul,
when the Animal received Life, was not born but dyed; for as much as by this
inferior Birth, it was divided from the simple and undivided fountain of
Nature. Further they thought, that the same Soul so demersed, did wander from
one Body being dead, to another, and so by a various Metampseuchosis, did
inhabit or was a guest sometimes in the Bodies of Men, and sometimes of Beasts.
The Manichees asserted, That all Souls being taken out of the Substance it self
of God, did actuate Terrestrial Bodies, and going from hence again, returned
into God himself. The Origenists different from either, taught that Souls were
Created from the beginning of the World, and at first to subsist of themselves,
then as occasion served, that Bodies being formed, they entered into them being
begun, and actuated them during Life, and that at length they returned to their
private or singular Substances. The state of which Souls, tho some attributed
it only to Humane Souls; yet there were others, who granted the like
Immortality to the Souls of the Brutes, yea and of Plants.

Cap. 2. de Not. Hom.
On the contrary, Nemesius (but untruly) says, That Aristotle affirmed the Soul
to be Incorporeal, but without Perfection and Mortal, when he had designed the
Entelechia or Perfection of every living thing; as to wit, She as it were
arising up of her own accord, from Power only of matter rightly disposed,
Others an Incorporeal form as the Peripateticks.
understands nothing else, but its own Crasis or Temperament, resulting from
the mixture; which as it adds nothing substantial to the praeexisting Matter,
the Soul it self seems to be from thence a mere Ens of Reason, and only an
extrinsical denomination. Further, when the Peripateticks, from the Soul raised
up out of the Grave of Matter (which they affirmed to be a simple form, without
Extension and divisibility) do contend that the Members of the same Body, do
perceive many things at once and together, they have introduced into the
Schools that Plea or rather Riddle, to wit, That it is whole in the whole, and
whole in every part. To this Opinion thus unfolded, that of Dicaearchus was
Akin, who said the Soul was Harmony, and also that of Galen, who called it a
Temperament.

Others affirm the Soul to be Corporeal, and either something out of the
Elements or the Blood, etc.
Nor do we meet with a less diversity of Opinions, among the Philosophers of
every Age, delivering that all Souls, or all others, the rational excepted, are
Corporeal. To pass by those who have affirmed the Soul to be either Fire, or
Air, or Water, or something made out of many of these Elements; some, as
Critias and Empedocles have said, that it was Blood. Which Opinion the Sacred
Scriptures in some places plainly favor, where the eating of Blood is
forbidden, because it is the Life or the Soul: Moreover, there are not Reasons
and Arguments wanting, which conclude this to be very near, or very like to
Truth; as shall be shown anon.

The Opinion of Epicurus, that the Soul is made out of Atoms.
To these may be added, the Opinion of Epicurus delivered of old, and of late
revived in our Age, which introduces the Soul plainly Corporeal, and made out
of a knitting together of subtle Atoms, and asserts, citing Laertius, (...),
etc. which according to the mind of Gassendus, is as much as to say, That the
Animal is as it were the Loom, in which the Yarn is the Body, and the Woof the
Soul. From thence Laertius describing more fully its Corporeity, says, (...),
etc. which is, that the Soul is Composed of most light Atoms, and round, not
much different from those out of which fire is. Other Epicureans describing the
Nature of the Soul, otherways, depaint it as from something hot, flatuous, and
airy, we need not to unfold any further this Opinion, nor show out of Laertius
and Lucretius, by what Rite the Assertors of the Epicurean Philosophy, do
accommodate such an Atomical Composition of the Soul, to all the Actions and
Affections of the Function, or Animal Government, which are to be performed.

Upon this Hypothesis of the Epicureans, The late followers of the Philosopher
Epicurus have affirmed the Soul to be made of Atoms.
as it were its basis, the Philosophers of this latter Age have built all their
doctrines of the Soul, tho very diverse, and I may almost say opposite. For as
the soul of the Brutes, is affirmed by most of them, to be Corporeal and
divisible, yet she is by some of them deprived of all Knowledge, Sense, and
Appetite; in the mean time, not only Sense, Memory, and Fantasy is granted to
her by others, but the use of a certain inferior Reason. And what is more to be
wondered at, the same end of their Assertion is proposed by either Sect; to
wit, That the Soul of the Brutes, both as it may be deprived of its gifts, and
also as it is most notably adorned by them, may be very much distinguished, or
(that I may use the Idiom of the Schools) diversified from the humane Soul.

The first Assertor of the former Opinion was Gometius Pereira, Others of them
deny it to have Sense and Perception, as Gometius Pereira.
who affirmed that Beasts wanted all Knowledge or Perception; whom in our latter
Age, the Famous Men Cartesius and Digby, with others Exactly followed; who
endeavoring as much as they could, to discriminate the Souls of Beasts from
the humane, affirmed them, to be not only Corporeal and Divisible, but also
merely passive; that is, that they were not all moved, unless that they were
moved by other Bodies, striking some part of the Soul; from whence it followed,
that every action of the Brute Consisted in it, as it were an artificial Motion
of a Mechanical Engine, to wit, that first some sensible thing affecting the
animal spirits, and Converting them inwards, stirs up sense; from which by and
by; the same spirits being moved, as it were by a reflected undulation or
wavering, return back again, and being determined for the fitted order of the
organs and parts of the Fabric it self, in certain Nerves and Muscles, they
perform the respective motions of the Member^: For otherwise, if Cognition be
granted to the Brutes, you must yield to them also Conscience, yea and
deliberation and Election, and a Knowledge of universal things, and lastly an
incorporeal and rational soul.

Whilst these famous Philosophers suppose Brute Animals to be only certain
Machines wonderful made by a Divine Workmanship; to wit, which without any
Knowledge, Sense, or Appetite, perform only Corporeal Motions, and the Acts of
their Faculties, according to the fitted structure of parts, and the precise
direction of the spirits, within Certain measures or bounds of the Animals; yet
some of them differ in their Opinions, about the structure and model of the
Machine or moving Engine; to wit, for as much as the figure and properties of
the Atoms, out of which the same is supposed to be made, are assigned one way
by these, and after a diverse way by those. The most illustrious Cartesius,
Cartesius.
unfolding all things by matter and motion, asserting the Souls of Brutes to
consist altogether of round and highly moveable Atoms, which he Calls the
Elements of the first Kind; affirms, That nothing else is requisite for all its
acts to be performed, than that the fibers and nervous parts being struck by a
stroke of a sensible thing, they receive a motion after this or that kind of
manner, and transfer it by a Continued affection of the sensitive parts, as it
were by a Certain undulation or wavering, into the respective parts: Digby and
Others.
But our Digby supposing mobility of the particulars of this kind, out of which
the Soul is made, adds further, That certain most thin Effluvia's, falling away
from the sensible Body, do not only affect the Exterior sensories, but entering
into the more interior recesses, mix themselves with the spirits, and moving
them into Various fluctuations, do produce sense, and diverse sorts of local
motions: Moreover, that out of these Extrinsical Atoms, so entering into the
nervous parts, and the Brain it self, do proceed not only Extempory Actions;
but out of those left in the feeling body, and retaining the former
Configurations, are Constituted the remaining Idea's, in the memory of things
formerly done. It would be too prolix a business to recount particularly what
appertains to the aforesaid Hypothesis, concerning the souls of Brutes, or
animal Actions; or to Examine the Reasons of each; also to show by what manner
of Solutions of that Kind, those operations of the Brutes, which seem to be
made by a Certain Judgment and Ratiocination, are wont to be unfoulded.

But indeed these Solutions of difficult Phaenomena's, and the Reasons for the
mechanical provision of living Creatures, and their Souls, tho artificially
formed by these Authors, seem not to satisfy a Mind desirous of Truth: Others
attribute to the Corporeal Souls sense and Perception; and further, the use of
an inferior Reason; as
And whilst every one expounds so the Works of the Creation, according to the
model of his Wit, they seem to say, That God is not able to make any thing
beyond what Man is able to Conceive or Imagine. Wherefore others, also renowned
Philosophers, both Ancient and Modern, professing themselves no less adverse to
Atheism than the former, Challenge in the behalf of the Beasts, not only the
operations of an external and internal Sense, with Perception, Appetite, and
spontaneous motions; but besides, grant to them a certain use of Judgment,
Deliberation, and Ratiocination.

Nemesius an ancient Philosopher, Nemesius.
discoursing of the Cognation or Propinquity of all Created things, after he
had showed from Minerals, that some things came near toward the natures of
Vegitables, De Not. Hom. Cap. 1.
and some of Plants, and Animals, (...) (says he) (...), etc. which is, The
Common Architect passing from irrational Creatures to that rational Animal Man,
has not effected this suddenly, but first has referred certain natural
Knowledges, and Artifices, and Subtilties to other Animals, so that they appear
near to rational Creatures.

Phys. Sect. 3. Membr. post Lib. 8. Cap. 4.
Peter Gassendus, a most Skilful and Cause-Expressing Man, in his late
Experimental Philosophy, when he had enumerated very many Instances, by which
the Cunning and Wonderful Sagacity of brute Animals were declared; and also the
Epithets, whereby these kind of Animals are noted by Philosophers, to wit, that
some are called Excelling in Knowledge; others Artificial, these Dexterous and
Complete, or Crafty and Wise, at length the Author adds, that, These things
could not deservedly be attributed to them, unless they granted them a certain
kind of Reason. However it be, we may seem at least to be able to distinguish,
by a ready way, that as Commonly a twofold Memory, To wit, a Sensitive and
Intellective, is distinguished, so nothing forbids to Call Reason Sensitive and
Intellectual. And truly, as we understand by the Name of Reason, the faculty or
beginning of Ratiocination, and that to Reason is nothing else, than to
understand one thing by the Knowledge of another thing, there is nothing more
Easily to be observed, than that Brutes do Collect one thing out of another, or
what is the same thing, do reckon or recount, and therefore are endued with
Reason. From these we may easily understand, what dignity, and beyond the
powers of any Machine, causing its Efficacy, he affirms to be in the Souls of
Beasts. But in the mean time, if it be marqu'd, what Hypostasis, or formal
Idea, he has assigned them; it does not so Easily appear, how that such Choice
Privileges, do agree with those Souls, so slenderly gifted, as to their
Substances. Who asserts the Soul, to be a little flame, or a Certain fire.
For when from the Opinion of Epicurus he had shown these to be Corporeal, and
their Bodies to be made up of most light and round Atoms, out of which sort
fire and heat is Created; at length he Concludes; The Soul therefore to be a
Certain Flame, or a Species of most thin fire, which as long as it lives, or
remains inkindled, so long the Animal lives; when it no longer lives or is
Extinguished, the Animal dies. But indeed, concerning his Hypothesis, he ought
to have unfolded, by what means this Fire Intelligent and Artificial (to speak
like the Stoics) could be; or how a flame within certain bounds and Organs of
the Body, however framed with the most excellent artificie, being inkindled and
dilated, can be able to produce the Acts of the animal Faculty; This I say,
most difficult Problem, this most Learned Man came to, and passed over its Knot
as it were purposely in that place.

CHAP. II.
The Opinion of the Author Concerning the Soul in General, That the Soul of the
Brute is Corporeal and Fiery.

AFter having thus recited the chief Opinions of others, It now remains that we
propose our own Opinion, or rather Conjecture, in so hard a matter. Where in
the first place, I am not easily led to believe, That the Soul of the Beast is
an Incorporeal Substance, Why the Soul of the Beast seems not to be an
incorporeal, and immortal substance.
or Form: For as to what relates to that Platonic Fiction, concerning the Soul
of the World, that, and also the Heresy of the Manichees, has already been
refuted and clearly exploded, both by the Ancient and Modern both Philosophers
and Theologists, that there remains no further dispute about it. Further,
neither can I Consent to those Origenists, who have affirmed the Souls of all
Living Creatures to be immaterial, and also to subsist before and after their
Bodies. For, tho I should be little solicitous, for the almost infinite
multitude of the more perfect Beasts, which have lived, and do live, yet where
do so many Myriads of Souls, even innumerable, of Insects and Fishes, which are
daily produced, subsist, and what do they? The Bodies of very many of these
serve only for Food to other Creatures. And for that the Souls to these Bodies,
serve chiefly to preserve them only for a little time, and as it were pickle
them to keep them from putrefaction, there is no need that these should be
therefore immaterial and immortal. Besides, when of old, Egypt was infested by
Divine Punishment, with Swarms of Fleas, Flies, and other Various Kinds of
innumerable Insects, and that the same also abounded every where, it is not
easily to be Conceived, from whence so many Souls were so suddenly Called, and
into what places, the same being by and by separated, could be placed.
Moreover, as Heaven, the Kingly Palace of the Great God, challenges for it self
Angels, Genesis 2. and pure Souls, free from all spot, to be its Inhabitants: but
the Earth, as it were a Certain sink, draws forth and extracts the feces of
things, and from its bulk, ruinous Bodies; it seems more agreeable to the
fitted Oeconomie of the World, that all immaterial things (with the humane
Soul, which we have noted to be placed in the Confines of Nature, that it might
be the fastening and knitting of either System) should be ascribed to the Air;
but the other Animals, Condemned to the belly, and prone to the Earth, to this
Glebe; so that the Souls of those, may be said to be born and dye with their
Bodies, and to be altogether Corporeal. Yea if that Reasons and Arguments of
greater weight, fight for this Opinion, than those we have seen on the opposite
side; wherefore should we not rather follow this, and pass farther on into its
parts?

And indeed, It is shown that it is Material and Coextended with the Body.
that the Soul of the Brute, even as the inferior of Man, Is material and
divisible, yea Co-extended with the whole Body, seems to appear from many
things; both first, because we perceive many and diverse animal Acts, to arise
at once, from diverse members and parts of the Body: For Examples sake; in the
same instant, that the Eye sees, the Ear hears, the Nose smells, the Tongue
tastes, and all the Exterior members Exercise the sense of feeling and motion,
and in the mean time, all the Inwards and the Praecordia perform their offices.
Wherefore, since there is no medium between the Body and the Soul, but that the
members and parts of the Body, are the Organs of the Soul; what can we think
else, or affirm, but that many and distinct portions of the same Extended Soul,
actuate the several members, and parts of this Body? Besides, it is seen in
several living Creatures, whose Liquors, both the Vital and Animal (in which
the Soul as to all its parts immediately subsists) are viscous, and less
dissipable, that the Soul is also divided with the Body, and exercises its
Faculties, to wit, of Motion and Sense, in every one of the divided members,
laid apart by themselves. So Worms, Eeles, and Vipers, being cut into pieces,
move themselves for a time, and being pricked will wrinkle up themselves
together.

But that we have affirmed the Soul of the Brute to be not only Corporeal, The
Suffrages and Reasons of very many Authors, persuade that the Soul of the
Brute, is not only Corporeal, but Fiery.
and Extended, but that it is of a certain fiery nature, and its Act or
Substance is either a Flame or a Breath, near to, or Akin to Flame, besides
the large Testimonies of Authors, both Ancient and Modern, Reasons and
Arguments almost demonstrative, have also induced me to it. Some of the Chief
of these, we have of late Exposed in the Treatise concerning the Inkindling of
the Blood; there remains many others of no light moment to be added hereafter.
As to what appertains to the suffrages of others, that I may not seem to stand
upon the Authority of one Gassendus, who has maintained this Hypothesis; I
shall here Cite many both Ancient Physicians and Philosophers. The more Ancient
Philosophers and Physicians have so affirmed.
For not to mention Democritus, Epicurus, Laertius, Lucretius, and their
followers; Hippocrates, Plato, Pythagoras, Aristotle, Galen, with many others,
tho disagreeing about other things, in this Opinion, to wit, That the Soul was
either a Fire, or something analogical to it, they all shook hands; to whom
also have joined themselves of the Moderns, Fernelius, Heurnius, Cartesius,
Also many Moderns of great Note. Hon. Faber. Tract. de Plantis et gener. anim.
etc.
Hogelandus, and others: and lately Honoratus Faber, has delivered in Express
words, That the Soul of the Brute is Corporeal, and its Substance Fire it self:
But indeed he far otherwise Explicates his saying, than is propounded in our
Hypothesis. For having shown this Soul to be material, and supposed all
sublunary matter to be nothing else but the four Elements, he therefore
Concludes the Soul of the Brute, because it is not seen to be any thing
Compounded out of the rest of the simple Elements, or of many of them, That it
is mere Fire, Tract. 2. l. 2. pr. 33. ad 38. I shall take notice of one or two
of our Countrymen. The most noble Verulam, chiefly distinguishes animals from
inanimals, in this respect, for that the spirits of those are otherways
inflamed and inkindled, than the spirits of these. Nature. Histor. Cent. 7. The
most Learned and Famous Physician George Ent, in his Apology against Parisanus,
That Blood even as Fire, desires two things, to wit, Food and Ventilation, has
most clearly demonstrated. Wherefore, Arguments and Reasons persuade the same
thing.
after so many Learned Men, it will be no Paradox to affirm, That the Soul
lying hid in the Blood, or Vital Liquor, is a certain fire or flame; which
Opinion agrees well enough with right Reason, as appears by what follows.

Indeed if Fire and Flame are to be defined or unfoulded, not by those External
accidents of burning, glowing, and of heat, (which are not its proper Passions)
but by intrinsic Causes; The diffinition of Fire and Flame by its Causes and
Essences, agrees also with the Soul of the Brute.
we conceive very easily, the substances of them to be even as the Souls of the
Brutes, or altogether of the same sort. For truly, Fire, if we would describe
it according to its Essence, it signifies an heap of most subtle Contiguous
particles, and existing in a swift motion, and with a continued generation of
some, renewed by the falling off of others; which indeed Conserves both its
motion and substance; for that its Food, on which it continually feeds, is
perpetually supplied from the subject matter, which is Sulphur or some other
nitrous thing in the Air, that Compasses it about; for from thence, out of the
Food of either, the Particles being most minutely resolved, and agitated with a
most rapid motion, the forms of Fire and Flame (which differ only in more or
less) result. Since we have in another place discoursed largely enough of these
things, it will not be needful to add any more here.

The Souls of all Brutes after the manner of Fire, want a twofold Food, to
wit, a Sulphurous and Nitrous.
What if we should in like manner say, That the Souls of Brutes, are an heap of
these sorts of most subtle Atoms, heaped up together, and extremely moveable?
To wit, which being stirred up with Life into motion, as it were an infiring,
Continue the same, and likewise its subsistence, so long as Nutriment, out of
the apposite matter, which is by degrees Consumed, within Sulphurous, and
without Nitrous, from the ambient medium, is granted to it. For that we say,
That the Souls of all Brutes, so long as they live, and flourish after the
manner of fire, do want Constantly either kind of aliment; to wit, Sulphurous
and Nitrous: That this is true, is showed hereafter, as well concerning Insects
and other bloodless Creatures; also concerning Fishes, and the more frigid
bloody Creatures, as well as in the more hot and perfect Creatures, that have
blood: Which Conditions however, are required to the Act and Subsistence of no
subject besides. But no motion, either of Fermentation, Ebullition, Vegitation,
or of any other thing, (besides Life and Fire) is immediately suppressed, by
reason of the taking away of the Air.

There are three things to be Considered of Concerning the Soul of the Brute.

Its Subsistence or Hypostasis.


Concerning the Corporeal Soul in general, these Three things first fall under
our Consideration: viz. First, What kind of Subsistence or Hypostasis it is of.
Secondly, In what its Life or Act consists: And Thirdly, What are its primary
Offices or Operations.

As to the first, we may believe, That the Brutal Soul does consist of
Particles of the same matter, out of which the organical Body is formed, but
that they are choice, most subtle, and highly active, which, as a flower
arising out of the grosser mass, do mutually come together, and do constitute
fit passages, which they produce through the whole frame of the Body, having got
one continued Hypostasis, to wit, very thin, and as it were Spirituous, and
equal, and extended to the whole. For indeed, so soon as any matter is disposed
toward Animation, by the Law of Creation (and not by a Fortuitous Concourse of
Atoms) at once, the Soul, which is the form of the thing, and the Body, which
which is called Matter, begin to be formed under a certain Species or Kind,
according to the Model or Form impressed upon them. Wherefore, the more nimble
and Spirituous Particles, rolling away from the rest, heap themselves together,
and by leisure grow Turgid. These being thus moved, stir up others more thick,
and dispose them into destinated places, where they ought to stay and to
increase, and so they frame the Body, according to its destinated Species. In
the mean time, this heap of subtle Particles, or the Soul, which explicating it
self more largely, and insinuating its Particles into other more thick, and
weaving them together, frames the Body, and is exactly formed according to the
dimension and figure of that Body, is Co-extended with it, and fitted exactly,
as to a little Box or Sheath, actuates, inlivens, and inspires the whole, and
all its parts: Further, on the other side, the same Soul, being apt presently
to be dissolved from it self, and to vanish away into Air, is Conserved by the
Containing Body in its Subsistence and Act.

So indeed, the Soul, although most thin, yet Corporeal, seems to be as it were
the Specter, or the shadowy hag of the Body: Further, this arising together
with the Body, out of matter rightly disposed, receives its Hypostasis or
Subsistence, no less than the Body, according to the Idea or Pattern
foreordained to it, by the Law of Nature; But although intimately united to the
Body, and is as its prop or stay, Yet being made of a most subtle texture, and
as it were of a most slender third, it cannot be perceived by our Senses, but
is only known by its Effects, and Operations. Moreover, when as by reason of
hurt happening to it, or to the Body, that the Life of the Soul perishes is
destroyed, presently its Particles being snatched away from the Concretion, or
its mutual adhesion, they are altogether dissipated, without any footsteps or
marks left: In the mean time, the Body being made exanimat or Soul-less, by and
by tends to Corruption, but indeed, if it be more gross and more Compact, its
Principles waisting or unrolling themselves leisurely and by degrees, it is not
Corrupted but of a long time.

In its Life or Act.
2. The Existency of the Corporeal Soul, depends altogether on its Act or Life;
and in this respect it seems most like to Common Flame, and only like it; to
wit, for as much as the substance of either, as soon as it Cease from all
motion, it is no more, and can by no means be made whole again in the same
number. Wherefore, the Essence of this begins altogether from Life, as it were
the infiring of a Certain subtle matter; to wit, when many active, and chiefly
spirituous, and sulphurous Particles, with some other sal^e, being
praedisposed to Animality or Life, come together, in a fit Furnace or
fireplace, take Life, sometimes being as it were inkindled by another Soul,
sometimes of their own accord, which, from thence being supplied, constantly
(as we have said) by a sulphurous food within, and a nitrous without, Endures
for some time; until at length, by the defect of Either of these, or by reason
of some Violence or Injury happening outwardly, the same as it were being
Extinct, perishes quite. The Act of the Corporeal Soul, or the inkindling of
the Vital matter, in the more perfect Brutes, being endued with an hot Blood,
appears so clearly and openly by noted heat, by the Exhalation of its fumes or
sut, with other Accidents and Effects proper to the Kitching flame, that any
one Considering or weighing them, may well believe that the blood does truly
flame forth, and that Life is not so like to flame, but even a flame it self,
as we have formerly showed at large: But indeed in others less perfect or
frigid Animals, although we do not say the Soul is properly flame; yet (which is
next to it) we say it is a most thin heap of subtle Particles, and as it were
fiery, to wit, a certain spirituous breath; this being shut up in the Body,
agitates its thick bulk, actuates all its members, and arteries, and in some
with wonderful agility, goes through and inspires the same, more than in the
more perfect animates, as appears in some Reptils and Insects. Further, that
there is a firey Vigor in these Kind of Souls, may be even Collected from
hence, because, whilst they live and do not lie asleep, they have no less need
of Food and access of Air, than the more hot living Creatures; as shall be
declared anon.

3. As to the Operations in General of the Corporeal Soul, In its Offices and
Operations.
we say, That as soon as it Exists in Act, that it performs chiefly these two
offices; viz. First, to frame the Body as it were its domicil or little house,
and then that Body being wholly made, to render it apt and fitted to all the
Uses necessary both to the Kind, and to the Individuum: for which Uses it is
furnished with a manifold Guard or Company of Faculties or Powers; also
according to the Various instincts and suggestions of Nature, it exerts or puts
forth as it were predestinatedly the Acts of a Various Kind, although almost after
the same manner. It will not be an easy matter here to rehearse, all the
natural Powers and Habits with which all Corporeal Souls are wont to be gifted,
to wit, because they are not in all after the same manner; But as living
Creatures are more or less perfect, some than others, also according as they
being destinated for the Various Scene of this worldly Theater are diversely
figured, and ought to live, their Souls also are furnished by a diverse manner
of provision of Faculties: The speculation of these things, tho very pleasant
and profitable, is too copious and large for us to divert our selves within
this place; But for the illustrating of our Psychelogie or Doctrine of the
Soul, it may not be amiss to recite the chief Kinds of Living Creatures, and to
reduce them as it were into certain Classes or Forms, and then to describe
their Chief Species, together with the Various degrees of the Souls, that
inhabit them.

CHAP. III.
The Various Kinds of Brutes, together with their respective Souls, and the
chief Species of each of them, are rehearsed and described.

FOr as much as the Brutal Soul ought to be proportionate to the Organical
Body, it easily follows, that as there are Various kinds of Bodies, in the
diverse Habitacles of this world, and offices of those Bodies destinated to
life, so also Various Souls, by which they are actuated, do exist, and are
endued with a Diverse Gift of Faculties. If we would consider the perfect Sense
of these, it were first needful to write the History of all Animals, and to
deliver the Anatomy of each of them. But as that will be a business of an
immense and tedious labor, it seems much more to the purpose, to reduce here,
all the Bruits to certain Kinds, according to some certain affections in many
of them, and thence to describe some chief Species of those Kinds, and their
Various Compositions and Structures, Animals are reduced into Classes either
according to the Organs of Respiration, Or according to the Vital Humor; and
they are either without Blood, or of frigid Blood, or hot Blood.
in respect of the Vital parts.

Living Creatures may be distinguished or reduced into certain Classes, either
First, according to their Various Organs of Respiration, which in some are
numerous Branchiae or Gills, and these dispersed through the whole Body, as in
many Infects, or they are appropriated Branchiae or Gills, in Fishes; or
lastly, Lungs, common besides to diverse animals, with Man. Or secondly, the
rehearsal of the Brutes may be made according to the Various Constitution of
the vital Humor, in which respect, they are either First, without Blood, or
Secondly, of a less perfect or frigid Blood, or Thirdly, of a more perfect or
hot Blood: And to this partition, as the more Known, insisting here, we shall
run through the several members of it in Order, and briefly Notify in them the
Fabrics of the chief Vital parts of the Body, and the Constitutions of the
Souls, Inhabiting them.

Bloodless Creatures are either of the Earth or Water.
First, Bloodless Creatures, are either belonging to the Earth, in which number
are very many Insects; or belonging to the water, of which Kind, besides some
certain Kinds of Insects, are also found various Fishes, which are wont to be
divided into Soft, of which sort are the Cuttle Fish, the Sea Woolf, etc.
Shelly, as Oysters and Cockles, etc. And Pargated or other thinner shell'd
Creatures, as the Lobster and Crab: We will examine in either sort, some chief
Species of these Bloodless Creatures, as to the States of their vital Parts,
and their Souls.

First, Therefore in earthly Insects, although endued with a small bulk that they
have great Souls, their Actions testify, which indeed are performed by some of
them, as the Silkworm, the Be, It appears that Insects have fiery Souls,
because they want Sulphurous and Nitrous food.
the Ant, or Emmet, the Spider, to admiration: Further, That the Souls of these
are of a certain fiery nature, no less than those of the more hot and perfect
Brutes; we from hence deservedly suspect; because they stand in need of a
Copious Food, after the manner of an inkindled Flame, and of the access of much
Air. The first appears by common Observation, for as much as Insects often
devour all the Corn, and Leaves of Plants, and so take away the grateful
greenness of the Summer. Besides, it appears from hence, that their Lives
require a constant afflux of Air, because as it has been experienced by our
noble Mr. Boil, Insects being put into a glassy Globe, quickly dye, Malpigius
de Bombyce, p. 28.
after the Air is sucked out. This the Learned Malpigius has more fully
declared in his most ingenious Tract of the Silkworm: where he Observes, That
Insects have not only Lungs, but so abound in them, that every little ring or
section of them is endued with two, yea and that every part also of the Viscera
or Inwards, delight in the derived Lungs. For as in the sides of Insects, the
whole length of the Body on both sides, black spots or pricks appear, he has
found, that these were indeed tunnels or breathing holes, leading from so many
Wind-pipes or asper Arteries, which by and by, being branched forth into the
Heart, Ventricle, Spinal Marrow, and all the other Inwards, and Internal parts,
carry in and out air to and from them all. These have Lungs, or numerous
wind-pipes, the Orifices of which, if stopped up by Oil, presently death
follows.
Moreover* if these orifices be all smeared over with Oil, or Honey, the Worm
presently dies; but if only a part of those breathing holes be so stopped, the
neighboring parts being by Convulsed, and then resolved or loosned, sink down
or flag, the rest keeping their motion: But if the orifices of the Trachea or
Windpipe be untouched, and that the Head, Mouth, Belly, or any other parts be
sprinkled with Oil, neither death nor any trouble of the Sense will be induced;
and what is yet more wonderful, the Insects that have oil or the like poured
into their Wind-pipes, so suddenly dye, that tho the Heart keep a motion for
some space, yet they can never be revived. These Phenomenon happen alike not
only in the Silkworm, but in Wasps, Bees, Grass-hoppers, Locusts,
Caterpillars, and other the like Insects, which certainly, I believe, gives
very much Light concerning the use of Lungs, in every Animal: But first let us
inspect some other Parts of Insects, described by a most accurate Anatomy.

The Heart of the Silkworm is long, unequal and stretched forth through the
whole Body.
Therefore he says in the Silkworm, and the like in others, That the heart is
placed all along the Back, between the Muscles and the Lungs, here and there
appending, and that it is stretched forth from the top of the Head to the
extreme part of the Body; This consisting of their Membranes, as appears as it
were one Tube or Pipe, but unequal, to wit, sometimes broader sometimes
narrower, continuing from the Tail to the Head, so that for their inequalities,
they seem as so many Eggs, or little Hearts, one laid by another* and continued
by one passage. These little Hearts, or the aforesaid parts of the Heart, do
gently drive forward, not at once but successively and slowly (after the manner
of their membranes) being bound and dilated from heart to heart sometimes
upward, sometimes downward, the contained vital humor, which is limpid or
clear, and so (as we may believe) a certain portion of the vital humor, being
squeezed forth into the Arteries (which are so small and few, that they cannot
be seen) is agitated by the Circulation of the rest, contained almost only
within the oblong Cavity of the Heart.

The Brain is wanting, the Spinal Marrow being sufficiently large.
As to the head, this most diligent searcher observed, that Insects had no Brain
within the Skull, its Cavity being filled with the Muscles of the Eyes, and
some others, but its spinal Marrow sufficiently large, and divaricated in many
places, for the going out of the Nerves, and as it were protuberated with
knots, is extended from the Head to the Tail; and what is worthy to be noted,
in the whole passage, branches of the Trachaea or Lungs were superinduced to
this spinal Rope, and inserted to it in very many places. I omit what he most
learnedly discourses of the members, ventricle, and other Inwards of Insects,
lest it should seem impertinent, or too much Plagiarism: But that the
discourses may be the better understood, concerning the vital parts of Insects,
it will be convenient here to borrow the draughts of the heart of the
Silkworm; and of the Trachaea or Wind-Pipes, both of that and of the
Grass-hopper, and Locust (in which the Trachaea or Wind-pipes are like to other
Insects) most diligently delineated by Malpigius; which shall be added at the
end of this Chapter, with other Figures of other Animals; but these the first
Table shows. Further, as to what belongs to the Doctrine of the Soul, we may
with the Authors lieve Philosophize, or at least conjecture, concerning the
Phenomenon of the Heart and Lungs by him described.

Therefore, The Use of the Parts is exposed.
for that Insects first having such copious Lungs dispersed through all the
Viscera or Inwards, Heart, and spinal Marrow, to which that each might come
distinctly, they have many distinct Trachaeas or Wind-pipes, with so many
gaping orifices, on the superficies of the Body, it appears from hence, that
the use of the Lungs in these little Animals, is not for the refrigeration of
the Blood, or its exact mistion, nor for the suscitating the motion of the
Heart; because, neither the Vessels carrying the Blood or Vital Humor,
accompany the Trachaea or Wind-Pipes, nor is such a humor to be rapidly
Circulated, but seems to be only carried and placed gently into all the parts.

But that the orifices of the Wind-pipes being stopped, Why such numerous
Wind-pipes.
presently Life is extinguished in these (as also in a glassy Globe empty of
Air) what can one imagine else, but that this access of Air, is required for
the sustaining of the Vital Flame, as it is wont to be for that of the Chimney?
Wherefore, because the vital humor (which is not at all or only slowly
Circulated) cannot be carried all quickly to one Fireplace of accension, as in
more perfect Creatures, therefore very many Lungs gaping every where outwardly,
and dispersed every where inwardly, are framed for the bringing of Air to the
several portions of the vital humor, planted on all sides; for that not only
the Heart, but also the Ventricle, Genitals, spinal marrow, and all the other
parts of the Soul dispersed, growing with a kind of silent Fire, are inspired
with the admitted Air, to every one a part.

Besides, Wherefore the Heart is so long.
when as the vital humor cannot be Circulated into all the other parts, and
from these into that, with a rapid motion therefore, instead of a Conick
Muscle, which receiving the watering juice, may be able to explode it
presently, and to cast it forth a great way on every side, a Tube or as it were
a membranaceous Sack or Bag is made, to wit, which by a long tract stretching
it self nigh to all the parts, and to which it might by degrees bestow what
might suffice, and in the mean time gently moving the provision chiefly
contained in it self, preserves from stagnation or putrefaction. Further, the
little Branches of the Trachaea, deeply inserted into the Membranes or Coats of
this, inspire or rather inkindle the humor contained with vitality.

As to the aquatick bloodless Creatures of the other kind, Bloodless Creatures
belonging to the Water.
viz. some soft Fishes, also many, perhaps all shelly and crusty Fishes; I have
not yet happened to see the former, but Severinus being my Author, the Sepia or
Cuttle Fish is made with an heart and gills, and the Polypus or many feet with
it and Lungs: what is to be met with that is more curious in the framing of
them shall be omitted. Soft Fishes.
Concerning the other two Fishes, to wit, the shelly and crusty, we shall add
some Anatomical Observations, such as we have searched out in their vital
parts, and other beginnings, truly weighed, and what the souls are of these
sort of bloodless Creatures.

Of the testaceous or shelly, The Anatomy of the Oyster.
though it has been dissected by many, we shall make choice of the Oyster. The
body of this Fish, though it seems rude and wholly without shape, yet it has
all its Viscera and parts, and especially the Praecordia, for, as it were the
hearth and Tunnel of the Vital Fire, most curiously framed. As we shall
describe some of the chief of these, we will begin with the shells, which are
born with them, from Eggs, The Muscles opening and shutting the shells.
and are first soft, and as they increase in bulk they are by degrees hardened:
A robust Muscle being implanted in the middle of the Oyster, grows by its
tendons to either shell. The moving Fibers of these (which seem as it were a
little bundle of Chords or Strings) ascending rightly, whilst they are drawn
together, strictly shut up the shells; but being relaxed, they suffer them to
be opened and lifted up; to which Office of opening the shells, another Muscle
adjoined to this, is required. Besides these upright Muscles, and perpendicular
to the planes of the shells, there are two Circular, stretched forth by the
brims of either shell; which in the same place comprehending in themselves
Gills, serve chiefly for their motion; as we shall show by and by.

On the top of the Oyster, Circular Muscles moving the Gills.
the Circular Muscles being united, make a thing as it were a Vail for the
covering of the head; then being a little divided below, they include four
superior Gills: The Mouth of the Oyster.
In the middle of which, a gaping chink leads by an oblique process to the
mouth of the Oyster. From the Mouth there is a short and strait passage to the
Ventricle. The Ventricle of the Oyster.
The Cavity of this large enough, is endued with little holes, leading into
darkish bodies, fixed on either side of it. These bodies seem to be in the
stead of the Mesentery and Liver, The Liver and Mesentery.
and to perform their offices; to wit, for that they receive the more pure part
of the Chyle, by and by from the Ventricle, and deliver it, being made clear
from dreggs, to the vital humor. The like is in crustaceous Fishes, and
perhaps in some Brutes; to wit, in such as a simple and only Intestine, without
folds and Meseraick or milky Vessels, is produced from the Pylorus to the great
Gut or Ars-hole.

The Intestine.
For so in the Oyster, the Intestine beginning from the bottom of the Ventricle,
descends with a plain and equal Tube, toward the right Angle of the straight
Muscle, where being rolled and retorted in it self, it ascends again toward
the Ventricle and Liver; being from thence demersed, and bending back toward
the left side, goes toward the border of the strait Muscle, till it ends in
the great Gut or Ars-hole: After this manner in the Oyster, a simple and only
Intestine is carried about, with a most long compass, more than in many other
Animals, by which indeed they may be able the longer to retain their Dung; to
wit, lest that when they are dry, that being more importunely put forth should
polute (by mixing with it) the water, for the food of life, included in the
shell.

An Intestine in an Intestine. Which perhaps is the Spinal Marrow.
This intestine being dissected and opened longways, in the bottom of it arises
an hardish and almost round body, which ascending from the Arse to the
Ventricle arises there, and stretches under the Oesophagus toward the Head:
The like to this is found in a Worm, which hollowness in it we think to be in
the place of the Mesentery and milky Vessels: but otherwise in the Oyster, this
hard and compacted body being less apt for such an office, seems not unlike to
the spinal Marrow: But we shall show the Chyliferous passages do supply the
darkish bodies, hanging to the Ventricle.

Its Pericardium with the Heart and Vessels.
Below the Ventricle, the Pericardium is placed, including the Heart, being
whitish with a large black ear, which being opened, that is beheld to beat, and
at every Diastole to admit the vital humor, our of the hollow vein, into the
little ear; then at every Systole, to drive the same forward into the Aorta,
placed on the contrary side; then by tripartite branches of this Vessel, a
certain part of this humor tends upwards, toward the Head, Liver and Stomach;
also a certain portion is reflected into the strait Muscle; in the mean time a
great part of it being delated from the great Trunk of the Artery, to the
Branchiae or Gills, it is there unfolded, within most small and numerous
passages, The Gills.
as it were little Rivers, that it might enjoy, according to all its parts,
little nitrous bodies inspired from the water. And that this may be the more
plentifully done, we observe that the water, as in bloody Fishes, did not only
wash the outward superficies of the Gills; but that it every where did enter
all the more intimate recesses, The Description and use of them.
and deeper passages; yea these Gills expansed largely through the Hemisphere of
the Oyster, exceed in bulk, all the other Viscera, also almost the parts. So
that in Fishes, because they breath but little in the water, it is so provided
that in many places together, the food of respiration should be afforded them.

There are Four hairy tufts of Gills, and as it were two Lobes of either of
them; to wit, the upper more broad and thicker, and the lower which is thinner
and a little more contracted; in all the passages of them, every one is
twofold, and contains two series of little Finns, seen to grow together; to
the several Gills belong two Vessels, the Artery and the vein; which being
deposited in the heaps of the hairy tufts, dispose the small shoots of either
kind through all the borders. But besides these Four orders of Vessels, there
are found also so many series of little breathing holes, lying between these
Vessels; which also by manifest passages open in the places between the Finns:
and from thence they deduce the waters supped up by the inferior mixture or
joining of the Circular Muscles: The like is in crustaceous Fishes, as we shall
show by and by.

The motion of the Gills depends upon the Circular Muscles.
As to the motion of the Gills, it is clear by ocular Inspection, that the
Circular Muscles, which are knit to either shell, for the shutting them, when
relaxed, do reach to the extreme brims of the shells; whereby at that instant,
also the Gills being relaxed, they imbibe the Waters, and together from them
draw the nitrous food; and by and by being contracted, they are drawn inwardly,
and together compel the Gills, to the pressing forth the Waters newly admitted.

Shelly and crusty Fishes, contain waters in their whole bodies, to wit,
whereby they may be able to live out of the Waters.
If the Reason is asked, why shelly Fishes (which also holds with the
crustaceous, as we shall show anon) have besides the Vessels carrying about the
vital humor, also Passages or open Channels, by which the Waters are carried to
their most intimate recesses; it seems to be because both these sorts of
Animals, though they reside at the bottom of the Sea, yet oftentimes they
happen to remain dry, therefore that they might then breath (the most wise
Creator so providing) they contain plenty of water within their own frame, as
it were reposed in Wombs; by the during provision of which, they live as well
in the open Air, as in the Waters; But these Waters being taken away, shed, or
evaporated by heat, both these sort of Fishes quickly dye: By reason of these
Waters, these live longer then others out of the Waters. Further, as the Noble
Mr. Boil has observed, the Oyster and the Sea-Crab, being put into a Glassy
Globe, after the Air was sucked forth, did not presently expire like many other
Animals; to wit, because part of the Intestine Water being ratified, quickly
supplied the defect of the exhausted Air; at least, that being detained within
the proper frame of the Fish, affords an inkindling or matter for respiration.
It is sufficiently known, that the Oyster, when it is taken out of the Waters,
has a great quantity of Waters shut up within its shells: as also the Lobster
(which we intend to consider of among the crusty Fishes) does the same thing,
as shall be declared. In the mean time, for the illustration of this our
Anatomy of the Oyster, Tab. 2 d, shows the Figures of its parts aptly
represented.

The Lobster and other Fishes Akin to it, The parts and Viscera of Fishes
swiming backwards are inversed.
viz. the Crab, Sea Creevish, Shrimps, etc. As they retrograde, or rather
swiming backwards, so their parts and Viscera in respect of other Animals, seem
to be inverse or opposite: For as to the members and moving parts, the bones
are not covered with flesh, but the flesh with bones: wherefore, almost all the
Muscles of the Feet, Arms, Head, Back, Tail, and other parts, either moveable
or moving (excepting those that are temporal) are shut up every where with a
crusty covering: Indeed it is so ordained by Divine Providence, that as these
Animals inhabit among Rocks and sharp Stones, lest they should be in danger of
being dashed too hard by the force of the Tides, they are fortified with Bones,
planted outwardly, as it were with Armor: Moreover, lest that the crusty
Covering should more sharply compress the Membranes, or the Flesh underneath,
or should rub against them, the same is every where covered within with a thick
Purple Muck or Stuff, as it were lined with a soft cloth: I do believe this
purpuling in crusty Fishes, otherwise than in soft (who also are besmeared with
muck) to happen through the greater plenty of Sulphur.

As their Bones and Flesh, so their Praecordia and Viscera, are observed to be
Histeron Proteron, topsie turvie; for the Liver, Stomach, and Womb is placed
above, and the Heart below, yea contiguous to the Back: yea, and the spinal
Marrow lies not close to the Back, and above the Viscera, but under them, and
to the prone part of the Body, in its whole passage; and is included in the
bones or jointings of the Sternon, or meeting of the Breast.

But that the Parts and Viscera of the Lobster may the better be beheld, The
Brain of the Lobster.
let the armed coat with the red Muck and Membrane lying under it, be taken
away; then in the top of the head, appears the Brain but meanly large, of a
greenish color, and as it were twofold; The Nerves and spinal Marrow.
from which the mammillary Processes, and the Optic Nerves ascend, and two
shanks of the oblong Marrow descend into the spinal Marrow, and in its whole
process, they are sometimes divided, and sometimes placed togethe^, now united,
and then again separated one from another.

The Oesophagus tends from a twofold mouth, The Oesophagus.
by a strait and short passage, into the Ventricle, this large endued with a
thick and strong Membrane, has three Teeth within its Cavity, by which its
aliments are chawed or bruised: further, for the work of Chawing and brusing,
two pair of muscles are framed, in the neighboring parts, to wit, one temporal
or belonging to the Temples, The Ventricle from which there is a passage into
the Liver and Messentery.
and another hanging to the sides of the Stomach; from the sides of the Stomach
or Ventricle, grow too glandulous Bodies, stuffed with many Vessels and various
passages, as it were certain little thin Intestines, and from thence being by
degrees sharpened with two Lobes, they descend into the lowest Trunk of the
Body; from the Stomach into these Bodies, on either side, passages lie open, so
that wind being blown into it by a Pipe, presently it runs into these and makes
them swell up: These parts in crusty Fishes (as also in the shelly) are
commonly called the Liver, and indeed they seem to perform the Offices both of
the Liver and Messentery; to wit, for as much as they receive the more pure
portion of the Chyle fresh digested in the Ventricle, and commit that by and
by, being made purer, to the vital humor. De Bombie. p. 40.
Malpigius observes in the Silkworm, and in other Insects, that certain
diversified Vessels, analogical to these Bodies, are stretched out through the
back of the Ventricle, and from thence to reach lower upon the Intestine; which
(as he probably thinks) receive the more thin portion of the meat already
macerated and loosned in the Ventricle; and deliver it, the juyces perhaps
being not much changed, to the Heart, Things answerable to the Liver and
Messentery in Insects.
or at least to the Skin and other parts of the Body. Truly by observation,
after what manner these parts which supply the place of the Liver and
Messentery, in some Fishes and Insects are made; something may be thence
gathered concerning the uses of the Liver, and of the Vessels both Miseraick
and Milky, in bloody Brutes.

Spermatick Bodies.
In the Male Lobster, above the beginnings of the aforesaid parts, on either
side, from the sides of the Oesophagus, the spermatick Bodies begin, which
being sent down toward the bottom of the Trunk, and there being more compacted
and made smoother, after the likeness of the Epididimis or thin covering of the
Testicles, Two Yards in the Male.
are terminated in two Yards; the Tops of which have their going out through
holes forged in the last little feet but one. In like manner in the Female
Lobster, two nests of Eggs on either side of the sides of the Oesophagus and
Ventricle are placed, and pass into two Wombs planted in the lowest Trunk of
the Body, and into those, through the holes forged in the last little Feet but
one, there lies a passage to the genital Members, also a passage from the Womb
for the laying of Eggs: Two Wombs in the Female.
so that it appears how these living Creatures are most fruitful, with a
multiplied Issue, when as nature seems to be careful and industrious about
their genital parts, being double and greater than in many other Brutes; to
wit, that as they being both at once double, they might produce both by the
works of Generation, Conception, and bringing forth not only always Twynns, but
almost Miriads of Twynns.

The Pericardium and Heart.
Below the Ventricle, yea and lower also then the beginnings of the other
Viscera, the Pericardium, in which the beating heart is included, is placed in
the bottom of the Back; the Systole and Diastole of the heart are strong and
swift, as in Creatures of Blood; this appearing of a whitish Color, is indeed
a Conick Muscle, whose Cavity being sufficiently large is framed with Fibers or
Columns, also with many strong and various little Furrows: The Aorta.
The Aorta going forth from its top, is cleft presently into two Branches,
which go toward the Gills; The venae cavae, one ascending, the other
descending, meet together from the bottom of the Heart, and there enter into
its little ear. The Heart whilst it is relaxed, receives the vital humor from
the vein, and by and by when it is contracted, drives it forward into the Aorta.

The Gills.
The crusty Fishes, even as the shelly although without Blood, are endued with
numerous and large Gills, which are instead of Lungs; to which, that all the
Vital humor may be frequently carried, therefore not as in earthy Insects, are
they dispersed through the whole Body, but on either side, under the brim of the
armed coat, and being gathered together in one place, are made into certain
little bundles: The inferior and utmost part of the Gills, which are broad and
obtuse, is fixed to the Sternon or meeting of the Breast, with hanging little
feet; the upper part ascending under the Coat is loose and free, and by degrees
grows sharp; otherwise than in Fishes with Blood, whose Gills are tied
together, being solid at either end.

The Gills of the Lobster have three Bosoms.
In all the Gills of the Lobster, Three Bosoms are found, of which two seem to
be made for the carrying in and out of the vital humor; because a black Liquor
being injected into the heart, passes to the Gills, and there passing first
through one Bosom, returns by and by through the other. We will speak by and by
of the third: from these Bosoms appear productions of small Vessels, as if it
were feathery, arising on every side, thick set and short, like jagged welts or
fringes; which being spongy, sup up the Waters continually flowing to them, Two
of these carry about the Vital Humor.
at every turn of the Diastole, and press them forth by Systole: to wit, for
the end, that whilst it is there unfolded within the small passages, the food
for the vital humor may be inspired. The Third Bosom being carried from the
top of every Gill, to its Basis ends in the common Channel, in all the Gills of
the same side, which nigh to the insertion of the highest Gill (which beats
perpetually) gapes with a large gap; Any one may easily perceive this, in a
live Lobster, The third receives, and casts out the Waters flowing to it.
whilst it breathes out of the water; for in every Systole or pulse of this
supreme Gill, one may see a bubble of water break forth out of that hole.
Further, if into that hole a black Liquor be injected, by and by entering under
that Common passage, it passes through from thence, both into all the Gills, and
the small and feathery Bosoms of them, and also into the Arms, and all the
little feet (the Cavities of which the Muscles do not fully stuff) yea, and
into the Cavity of the Body. In like manner wind being blown into that hole,
all the aforesaid parts will be inflated or blown up.

Shelly and Crusty Fishes receive the Waters, that when they remain dry, they
may be able to live.
From hence we may guess, that hole, with the common channel, and the three
bosoms of Gills, to be a certain Trachea or Windpipe, into which plenty of
water entering at every Diastole, is returned back at the next Systole: In the
mean time, these waters in this passage, do not only Communicate with the Vital
Humor, abounding between the Gills, but besides, are laid up between the
Cavities of the Members and the Trunk, that they may supply these Fishes,
whilst they are kept dry with matter for respiration; and therefore, they not
only longer subsist in the open air, but also live for some time in a place
void of all air.

In Crusty Fishes, for that, for the agitating the Gills as it were with Lungs,
the Ribs belonging to the Sides, the Muscles of the Breast, and other things
are either wanting, or by reason of the stiffness of the neighboring parts,
are made unable; it is performed by an admirable artifice, The Gills of Crusty
Fishes, hanging from the Sides or Ribs, are moved as it were by shaking
Pendulums.
as whilst the Gills, for the most part being loose, and are left easily
moveable, the several little bundles of them, about the basis of the bony
little Foot, being included with the Muscles, within their Cavities, as it were
so many hanging Ribs, are fixed, being drawn forth far beyond the Trunk of the
Body; which, as so many distinct Pendulums, by the help of the Muscles, which
they include, being almost continually shaken, cause also continual Systoles
and Diastoles, for the inspiring and exspiring of the Gills.

But it may well be doubted, Whether there be fiery souls in bloodless
Creatures.
whether we ought to assign Souls of the nature of fire, to these bloodless
Creatures inhabiting the waters; because they rejoice in an Element that is
deadly to fire it self, and to the Lives of more perfect Brutes: But this
Problem shall be satisfied by and by, when we have first discoursed of the Use
of the Gills in Bloody Fishes, as also concerning the Praecordia of these, and
others, of a more frigid blood: In the mean time, the Third Table shows the
Figures, representing to the Life the parts of the Lobster.

Secondly, From whence the vital humor becomes bloody.
After the bloodless Brutes, their second Class, and of a little higher degree,
is that of the more cold bloody Creatures; in which for that the vital Humor
or Liquor, being dyed with a reddish tincture becomes bloody, it seems to
proceed from a greater plenty of Sulphur, and chiefly destinated for living
Creatures, for the increasing their bulk and strength: For where blood is,
though in a mean Plenty, their Muscles, Inwards, Praecordia, Brain and more
strong and complete Organs of the senses exist. We have observed it otherwise
among most Insects, whose little Bodies being ordained to subtle and small
actions only, are made up of very little Sulphur, as their Analysis or the
unfolding them shows, but of plenty of Spirit and of volatile Salt.

But that among the Bloody Brutes, Why the bloody Brutes, are some of them more
hot Animals, others more cold.
some are hot in Act, and others are frigid or cold, the reason may be, both
from the quantity of Sulphur, to wit, with which they are only meanly or very
much imbued, also from the Kind of life which they live, either in the Air, or
in the Waters, or within the Earth: Wherefore, the Inhabitants of the latter
Regions do not grow hot in the Act, yea it is scarce possible they should; for
how, or which way should heat subsist, where it is in danger to be damped or
overthrown by a more potent Cold? Wherefore, the blood of Animals destinated to
these places, is tempered with little Sulphur, lest otherwise growing hot above
measure, it should be forthwith suffocated; yea and we suspect the Souls of
these, tho of a fiery nature, to have not a flamy Hypostasis, but a breathy, to
wit, which consisting in Vapor, hardly or not at all inkindled, like an ignis
fatuus or false fire, is destitute of sensible heat.

The more Cold bloody Creatures, Why some are endued with an heart, with a
twofold Belly, and Lungs; others with one Belly, and Gills, or Wind-pipes
dispersed.
although all of them have a Conic Heart, very fibrous and thick, to wit, that
being strongly Contracted, it might drive forward the Vital Liquor, by a
certain Circulation, into all the parts, and from them into it self: yet this
Heart in some is two bellied, and to it always the Lungs are hung; in others it
has but one belly; and in many, in the place of Lungs are Gills, but in some
there are numerous Wind-pipes, and dispersed through the whole Body: We shall
consider the different ways and buildings in each of these.

Among the Brutes of Cold blood, The Earth-Worm, tho of the lowest order, may
be rightly placed; Description of an Earth-Worm.
for that its humor appears by occular inspection to be bloody: This little
living Creature, tho it be esteemed Vile and Contemptible, has allotted to it
vital organs, as also other Viscera and Members, made most admirably by a
Divine Workmanship; the frame of the whole Body (even as of many bloodless
Insects) is a chain of ringie Muscles, the orbicular fibers of which being
Contracted, render every Ring first large and dilated, Its local motion.
and then more narrow and longer. For then, when the superior portion of the
Body being made long and stretched forth, is extended to a further space, and
is there affixed to the plane, the inferior portion of the Body, being relaxed
and abbreviated, The little Feet.
is easily drawn to it, as to its Center. A fourfold series or rows of little
feet are placed through the whole length of the Worm; with these, as it were
with so many hooks or claws, Its Snout.
he fixes now this part, now that, to the plane or superficies, whilst he
stretches forth the other, or draws it after him. Above the opening of the
Mouth, he is endued with a snout, with which he diggs through and thrusts up the
Earth.

The Earth-Worm, being laid on its back, and fixed with Bodkins to a Table, let
it be cut up long ways, It Is Brain.
then the Sides being laid apart, its parts from the head to the tail easily
show themselves to your view. Above the opening of the Mouth, the Brain appears
in a very little Bulk, and whitish like a bubble: Then a little lower, the
Oesophagus being placed with the Muscles, Oesophagus.
descends thence with a straight passage to the Ventricle.

Pericardium and Heart.
Nigh to the top of the Oesophagus, the Heart beating is placed, having
reciprocal turns of Systole and Diastole or pulses, as in more perfect Brutes:
from either side of the heart, and from thence a little lower, are framed
whitish Bodies, and something globous or round, and on either side
distinguished as it were into Three Lobes. The Two superior of these, shine
more bright and are smaller; the lowest little Globe, White Globes which are
Spermatick Bodies.
greater in a double measure then either of the other, is long and like a
Sawsage; between these whitish Bodies, and more backward, other lesser little
Globes as they were small and little yellowish whelks, are placeed in a
twofold series, to wit, on either side, now Four, now Five, or more. Noted
Blood-carrying passages go through the midst of these Bodies, and in them a
notable pulsation, as it were in the neighborhood of the heart, is beheld.

By what names I should call the aforesaid parts, and for what uses they
served, I was a long time in doubt, because in the dissection, or by blowing
them up with a Pipe, I could find no Cavity in them; but some of the little
globes being opened and squeesed, there dropped out of them a milky humor, from
whence I presently suspected, that they were spermatick Bodies; which seemed
likely, because these parts were not formed after the same manner in all the
Earthworms. Further, it was sufficiently obvious, that Earthworms Coupling
together, do not strain themselves as most of the other Brutes, by a direct
planting of either Sex about the Tails, but on the contrary, by mutual embraces
about the Head. At length, after I had often and narrowly inquired into the
matter, it appeared past doubt: For by chance dissecting a certain bigg-bellied
Worm, I found the greater white shining Bodies, and the longish like a Pudding
or Sausage, stuffed with very many Eggs: Moreover on the other side of these
Bodies, in the Breast of the Earth-Worm, appeared two white shining little
Paps, with holes, which seemed to be the privy members of the Earth-Worm.
Malpigius has observed, in some Insects, The like to these in other Insects.
and especially in the Beetle and Imperatus's Mole, certain little whitish
Globes about the Ventricle (like as it seems to these in the Earthworms) to be
found, and a portion of it, to be encompassed with plenty of them: It is very
likely that these Bodies are also spermatical in them.

The Ventricle, of which there are three Bellies etc.

The Intestine.


Below these whitish shining Bodies, the Ventricle, of a noted bulk, is placed,
endued with a large Cavity, and divided into three Regions or Bellys. From the
lowest of these, the Intestinum proceeding, is carried by a straight and long
passage, even to the Tail, and in the whole space is so compressed, by the
several interspaces of the anulary Muscles, that it appears like the Colon or
Arse-Gut in perfect Animals, divided as it were into very many little Cells.
This Intestine being dissected long ways, and the dung removed, in its bottom
was placed a vessel, in its whole passage, of a yellowish Color, from the Tail
even to the Ventricle; but in the same place arising up, and creeping through
the walls of the Stomach, is stretched forth even to the Head: This Vessel is
in truth a Tube, which being blown up by a Pipe, showed an ample Cavity; and
that which Malpigius noted to be stretched forth upon the Ventricle and
Intestines of Insects, An Intestine in an Intestine, which is in the place of
the Liver and Mesentery.
seems answerable to these passages and vessels, and we may well suspect it to
be in the place of the Liver and Mesenterie. In some Earthworms about the
Tail, on either side of the Intestine, we found sometimes very many Eggs, ready
to be laid, which indeed were seen to have descended thither, from the genital
parts, and were cast out by the Passages lying open into the Arse.

The holes in the back of the Earth-Worm, which seem to be Wind-Pipes.
So much concerning the internal parts of the Earth-Worm, opened with its Belly
upwards: If the same be held down with its Belly downwards, on the top of the
Back, near the brim of every Ringlet, little holes are continued; almost in the
whole Passage, from the Head to the Tail; into which, if you blow with a Pipe,
presently the underlying parts swell up, the dung of the Intestine being driven
up and down here and there, backward and forward: From these holes, if they are
pressed, a white, viscous, and sometimes a milky Humor drops forth, which
seems to be muck or stuff besmearing those Cavities, and fortifying them
against the inclemency of the Air.

Without doubt these little holes are so many Wind-Pipes, which as in bloodless
Insects, being numerous and dispersed through the whole Body, supply the place
of Lungs, and draw in the nitrous Air for the inspiring the Vital Liquor, and
by and by sends it forth being spent. But against this it may be objected, That
little and sometimes almost no respiration serves the Earthworms. Because they
sometimes lie hid in the depth of the Earth, for above three Months, and are
able so to ly and to live; yea, if the holes of the Wind-Pipes be smeared over
with Oil, they do not presently die like the bloodless Insects; but being
immersed in Oil they swim in it unhurt, and live a long while; but if you apply
heat to them, tho moderate, they die presently: The same thing we have observed
almost of Fishes, and especially of the Shelly and Crusty, who bear the defect
of Air or Water, better than the presence of Fire, or Heat.

The reason of this (that we may defend our Hypothesis) we shall endeavor to
show; we have shown in a late Tract, That although Fire and Flame necessarily
require, besides Sulphurous food from the matter of the Subject, something
nitrous from the Air, which being denied or withdrawn, they are suddenly
extinguished; yet, if that the matter be inkindled of Sulphur and Nitre (as is
wont to be in Gunpowder) together mixed with the Concrete, that Fire or Flame
will burn in the midst of the Waters, or in a place Empty of Air; to wit,
because either food being contained within, they do not presently desire
supplies from without. In like manner we suppose it may be concerning the
Hypostases and accensions of Brutal Souls: For although many of these being
inkindled in their vital humor, draw in altogether from the ambient Air, a
Nitrous, and from within a Sulphurous Food; Yet in the blood of some of them,
which are destinated to the Waters or to the Earth, Earthworms and Fishes,
abound in nitrous Salt, being almost wholly destitute of a fixed and Volatile
Salt.
much of Sulphur thick and Earthy, with little of Nitre, and very little only
of spirit and volatile Salt, may be so tempered that it being inkindled into
Life, may burn with a silent and almost suppressed fire; neither requires from
without the access, either of much or continued nitrous Food, but, as it has a
certain intestine task, its burning is more securely performed in the Earth or
Waters, than in the open Air: For that indeed from this, there is danger of too
much inkindling the sulphurous Particles, and so quickly of overturning the
Crasis or disposition of the Soul: Wherefore, these kind of Animals greatly
abhor fire or external heat, which may make the internal Sulphur to work, and
too much to burn. However, although the Souls of these are not contented with
fire, and it sometimes as it were hid in the Ashes, suffers them to be nummed
or stiff; yet notwithstanding, Organs of Respiration are given to them all, for
the continuing it as long as it pleases, and as occasion serves for the
increasing or repressing it. And indeed the Creatures of a more frigid blood,
appear to be constituted or imbued with plenty of Sulphur, tho sparingly
inkindled, because Earthworms and Fishes, quickly putrefying, yield a most
stinking smell; and the putrified flesh of some of these, by reason of the very
many Effluvia's of Sulphur, shine in the dark like a live Coal. Moreover, it
hence appears, that the saline Particles, which make up the temperament of
these, are for the most part nitrous, and bestowed for the food of Life;
because from the bodies of these, dissolved by Chemical operation, you can
neither draw a Volatile Salt, as out of all Other Animals, nor a Fixed. The
Images of the Earthworms, showing their Anatomy, are described in the Fourth
Table.

In the next degree of the more frigid bloody Creatures, In the next degree of
the more frigid bloody Creatures are Fishes.
above Earthworms, Fishes are placed, endued with one bellied Heart and Gills.
If indeed Lungs be wanting to these, the other bosom of the Heart were
superfluous. But most Fishes want Lungs, both for as much as living in the
Waters (whose medium is not fit for sounds) they have neither voice, They are
endued with an one Bellyed Heart and Gills.
nor make a noise, and chiefly, because the water ought not to be emitted
through the Windpipe, into all the Cavities of the Lungs, if they had them; for
that by watering them, or overflowing them, it would presently overthrow them,
and fill them to a stiffness: But as in Brutes with Lungs, the Air being
admitted within it, slides through all the blood-carrying Passages every where;
that entering the little mouths of the Vessels, every where gaping, it inspires
the Blood with nitrous food; so the Gills in Fishes, which are substituted as
so many Lungs, or rather inverted, are so placed without the Cavity of the
Thorax, that the Waters continually flowing to the Passages of the Vessels, and
their little Mouths being outwardly planted, whilst the Gills are enlarged,
they inspire something nitrous, or what is like it, to them; the remains of
which, being by and by spent, the Gills being contracted, is sent away again;
and so by Continued reciprocations of Inspiration and Expiration as in hot
Animals, the Life or the Flame of the Blood is Conserved.

We have not much to say concerning the structure of the Gills, The Structure
and use of the Gills.
they being already sufficiently described by several: As to their fabric,
they are bony semi-circles, planted on both sides of the bottom of the Mouth,
nigh to the opening of the Gill holes, which are made hollow quite through, with
little ditches, as it were quilly, that they may receive the Vessels sent to
them and much branched forth, and defend them against injuries.

The Vessels belonging to the Gills, are Arteries, and Veins; which in the
Sturgion, Salmon, and Cod, are found to be made after this manner: The Aorta
going forth of the Heart, and ascending toward the Chin, or end of the lower
Jaw, sends forth branches to the right and the left; some of these presently
growing forked, accommodate an Artery to two Gills of the same side, which by
and by being again divided, puts through two arterous shoots, through the Bow of
every Gill, near to the bony Basis; then from them, others smaller thick set
shoots, tend into the sides and midst of every Come-like Finn: After the Gills
being passed through, all the arterous Branches meet together again, and
Constitute the same Trunk, which being by and by reflected, has a prospect to
all the other parts. The Trunk of the Vena Cava or hollow Vein descending,
applies it self and enters near into the Aorta ascending into the Gills.
Further, in the several Finns of the Gills, lesser shoots, as in the Bows,
answer the greater passages of the Venous, with so many Arterous shoots.
Besides, from the several parts on both sides the Gills, a veinous branch is
inserted into the descending Trunk. This plainly appears, because if you open
the branches both veinous and arterous, lying on the Bows of the Gills, there
will appear a series or row of holes leading into the Finns; Moreover, a black
Liquor being cast into those Arteries, will return by the Veins. Yet I have
observed, part only of that injected Liquor to turn aside through the holes into
the Finns, but another part to pass directly through into the Channels, and
thence to flow into the descending Trunk of the Aorta, Not all the Blood, but a
part only, is carried through between the Gills, at every Circulation.
which the Gilly Branches being at length all united do frame: From hence I
gather, That the Blood in Fishes, (not as in Brutes with Lungs) is carried at
every Circuit, or passes through the Vessels, between the organs of respiration,
not all, or whole, or is carried from the Arteries into the Veins, whereby the
hole might be inspired anew of the Air; but for that they, as we have shown,
enjoy in themselves a nitrous food partly intestine, therefore it suffices
them, that the blood only be by parts exposed to the External Nitre flowing to
it.

Fishes breath by the Gills.
From these also it seems to appear, That Fishes do breath by the Gills, or draw
what is nitrous from the Waters, and do enjoy it as it were the necessary food
of Life; which also many other Reasons do manifestly declare: To wit, for that
the Waters where Fishes dwell, standing still a long time, tend to
putrefaction; or if by too much Heat or Cold, or other means, by which the
nitrous Particles are wont to be driven away or perverted, they be affected,
they Choke their Inhabitants. Further, if Fishes be shut up in little water, or
with too strait limits, also if more than should be in the same Fish Pond, tho
large enough, tho they have plenty of food, they will dye for want of the
nitrous food, which also argues the Cause of their death, for before they dye,
they will shoot forth of the waters, putting forth their mouths and heads, to
take in the naked Air: so that it may from hence be Concluded, That there are
also in these Inhabitants of the waters fiery Souls; to wit, the Hypostases of
which are an heap of most subtle Atoms, which being stirred up into motion, by
a certain inkindling, do require, for the Continuing of their substance,
besides the Sulphurous Aliment within, which they feed on, another nitrous
from the ambient Medium.

wherefore Fishes rejoice rather in the Waters, than in the Air.
But that Fishes rejoice in the region of the Water instead of the Air, where
any one would think that their Flame should be rather extinguished, than
inkindled, we gave the reason of it but now, to wit, as certain Animals are
destinated to these places, their Souls were so tempered, that as the matter
made up of Sulphur and Nitre mixed together, they burn or grow hot under the
waters, yea they there live more securely; to wit, for as much as there is in
them plenty of Sulphur, it is suffered to be only sparingly inkindled, and to
burn forth. Further, although some nitrous Particles seem to enter into the
intrinsic and ordinary food of the vital fire, and lest the flame, by the
defect of these, should expire, new suppliments are daily instilled through the
Gills: yet indeed, by reason of the diverse Constitutions of Souls, living
Creatures do respire after a several manner, and some require this medium more
thick, others moderate, and others more thin. And for this Cause, some living
Creatures, whilst they remain in the same number, sometimes change their sphere
or ambient medium, and sometimes go out of the Waters into the Air, and
sometimes from this into them. A certain Insect called the watery Phryganion,
Certain Animals change the Regions of the Air and Water.
in some places in England a Caddis, at the first of the Spring is clothed
with a Coat of a sprig or small rind of wood, and creeps into the depth of the
Rivers, in the shape of a Mite or rather a Maggot; afterward, when its Soul
begins to be sublimed, he gets to the tops of the Bulrushes, and in the Month
of May, rising up to the superficies of the water, puts off its Coat, and
having wings, flies into the Air, and there lives during Life. Who knows not
that Frogs live at first in the Waters, in the shape of a Tadpole, altogether;
then all the Summer do leap about in the Meadows, and that at last in the
Autumn, returning to the Waters, do bury themselves in the Mud? After this
manner, many more Insects, do not only change the Region, but also vary their
Species or Kind, and of Reptils become flying Creatures.

Brutes of a more cold blood, which are framed with a Heart with a twofold
Belly, and with Lungs.
Thirdly, A little more superior degree of Creatures of a more frigid or cold
blood, is those who are gifted with a doubled bellied Heart, and with Lungs; of
which sort are Serpents, Lisards, and some Amphibious Creatures, that is such
as live on Water and Land, as the Frogs, and some Fishes, to wit, the Polypus,
the Sea-Calf, with many others. To these former, Lungs are necessary, because
they oftentimes live in the open Air, which always ought to be deeply admitted
into the Praecordia themselves; Moreover, because they put forth a certain
sound, for which a Windpipe is required; but for as much as Lungs are granted
to them, so also a twofold bellied Heart, without which the blood passes not
through the Lungs. As to what respects the Amphibious Creatures, which at their
pleasure now live on the Land, and now in the Waters, tho it appears that these
cannot stay always, or very long under the water, yet it is to be wondered at,
how in the mean time they breath; for if they open the Windpipe, the Waters
rushing presently in, would drown the Lungs. Bartholinus easily untyes this
doubt, by asserting, That in these Brutes, an Oval hole as in Embrio's, is kept
open all their lifetime. Cornelius Consentinus affirms it after the same
manner to be in Diverse, or such as dive under the waters; and he shows the
manner whereby some men may be made able to dive; to wit, if whilst they are
Infants, they be provoked often to Cry, they are suffered a long time to
restrain the spirit, from hence there will be a necessity of casting forth the
Blood through the oval hole or navil, and for that reason will hinder its
Coalition or Closing up.

But indeed in these Brutes, as to such a Conformation of the Praecordia, the
most skilful Anatomist Doctor Walter Needham did doubt, and desired to have
found it in some of them by an ocular search, after many dissections.

However it is, we are to suppose these living Creatures do not breath, whilst
they are under the Waters; On which the faculty of diving depends.
and from thence the Course of their Blood is by and by made more flow, and
smaller: In which Condition it matters little, whether it so growing torpid or
sluggish, creeps from the hollow vein into the Aorta, by the navil hole; or
whether lying quiet, it creeps forward by a gentle or slow pulse of the Heart;
for either way, there will be a necessity, that the Vital fire, for defect of
aerial food, would be presently diminished, and as it were depressed into a
halituous or breathy substance: Notwithstanding in the mean time, that it may
not wholly Expire or be Extinguished, these two things are done, viz.

First, Because in these Animals (and as in all Fishes) the Vital fire,
together with a certain Sulphurous and also Nitrous food within (as we have
showed) is enjoyed; therefore it is able a long time to want its external
supplement from the Air.

Then Secondly, in some of them the Hypostasis it self, or Constitution of the
Soul, consisting of less subtle Particles, is not so suddenly dissolved; but
that its parts stick together more strictly among themselves: nor are they wont
to be dissipated presently, by any force, as in more hot Animals. Further, as
their Souls, as to the greater part by much, subsist in the Brain and Nervous
stock, more than in the Blood, it comes to pass, that however this fire being
diminished and almost suppressed, the Animal faculties remain still lively
enough: and indeed, far otherways than in hot Living Creatures, whose blood
being obstructed about the Praecordia, presently there follows an Eclipse of
the Animal faculties. Notwithstanding, Frogs, Eeles, and Serpents, after their
Hearts are taken forth, will live for some time, and leap about; yea, by reason
of the animal spirits being entangled with a viscous matter, and not easily
dissipable, retain for a little while motion and sense, after their Bodies are
cut in pieces, and the several portions divided, and laid apart; as we have
showed before.

The Third and highest Form of Animals, Is that of Creatures of an hot Blood,
all which are framed with a two-Belly'd Heart, In the highest form of Animals
are those of an hot Blood.
and Lungs. The Anatomy of these being already so accurately performed by many,
and commonly known, there needs not any description of the History and Uses of
the Vital or Animal parts, in these kind of Creatures or Brutes.

The chief Species of this Kind, They are furnished with a two fold bellied
Heart and Lungs.
are Fowls and Four-footed Beasts, and in the same Class or Rank, we place with
the Souls of the later, also the Inferior or Corporeal Soul of Man; and that
rightly, because there is the same Conformity in either of their Praecordia, of
their Brain, and also of their nervous Appendixes; which notwithstanding
differs from that of Fowls or Birds. What kind of difference this is, between
those and these, as to their Animal parts, we have formerly declared at large;
and now we shall notify what difference happens between them, as to their
Vital parts.

The Lungs of Men and Four-footed Beasts are every where shut in the outmost
superficies, How the Lungs differ in Birds and four footed Beasts.
that the Air entering by the Trachea or Windpipe, and by and by entering into
its Channels, quickly blows up all the Lobes of the Lungs, and distends them,
but it goes no further: But in Fowls, the Lungs being full of holes, admit the
inbreathed Air into the whole Cavity of the Belly, which by the Muscles of the
Abdomen or lower part of the Belly, is exploded thence. The reason of this I
suppose to be in some part, that there may be a greater plenty for singing, and
(in some) for the longer tuning of the Voice, For what end the Lungs are
perforated in Birds.
or for the more strong or longer breathing forth of the Air. Besides, (for
that all are not singing Birds) it is so provided for, in these Brutes, that by
reason of the Trunk of the Body being filled, and as it were extended with Air,
they may the more easily fly, and are more easily held up, by the outward Air,
by reason of that within. Indeed Fishes, that they may the more lightly swim in
the Waters, have in their Bellyes Bladders blown up with Air. In like manner
Fowls, by reason of the Trunk of their Body, being full and as it were blown up
with Air, whilst they rely on the open Air, become less heavy, and so fly more
lightly and faster. Hence it comes to pass, that men being in danger of
drowning, whilst they swim, receive great help by restraining the spirit, and
inflating the Breast as much as may be: yea Dead Carcasses being drowned, after
the breath or fumes begotten by the inward putrefaction, and shut up within,
blow up the fallen Cavities of the Viscera, and extend them more, rise up
again, and swim on the surface of the Water.

If we inquire into the Souls of the more hot Brutes, without doubt, it was at
first in respect of these, That the Souls of the more hot Brutes is chiefly
Fire.
that the Ancients did declare the Soul to be Fire, and the more modern Fire or
Flame, these placing it in the Heart, those making it to be inkindled in the
Blood: And indeed, since we have granted Souls, as it were fiery, to Bloodless
Creatures, and those of a more cold Blood (which also the Lord Bacon grants to
Plants) it is not for us to deny the same dignity, in Creatures of a more hot
Blood: For besides, that the Souls of those, like Flame, require absolutely
either sort of Food; viz. the Sulphurous and the Nitrous, and cannot be a
minute without them, the very hot Blood also, is seen, by mere accension (for
as much as we cannot show how it can become so hot after any other way) to boil
up, yea and the Lungs, hanging to the two-bellyed Heart, to be the fireplace,
chimny, or breathing hole, of the Flame cherished within them. In Man the
Corporeal or fiery Soul is subordinate to the Rational.
Therefore, as the Soul of the Brute of a more hot Blood, being the perfectest
in its Kind, is as it were a Rule or Square, by which others more inferior
ought to be measured, and as the same actuating and vivifying the humane body,
is sabordinate to the Animal, and is the immediate substance of it, (as shall
be more fully shown) it remains now, that we inquire into its Nature and
Essence, and first of all, that we search into, The parts of the Corporeal Soul.
what parts, powers, and affections she has, which shall be the chief Members
of our Psycheology or Discourse of the Soul.

The Explanation of the Figures.
The First Table,
Contains certain Figures taken out of Malpigius, in which the Vital Organs of
the Silkworm and of other Insects are represented.

The First Figure
Shows the Navil-hole, of which two being planted in the sides of every Section
or little Ring (except in the three uppermost) are the Doors or Openings of the
Wind-Pipes.

A. A. The Extremity of the hole, which being black and a little reflected, is
united to the Contained Head of the Windpipe. B. B. The Head of the Windpipe,
filling the Hole, in whose middle is a Cleft. C. To which little fibers, like
an hairy space, being brought, draw together the gap, or dilate it, that the
Air may go out and in at its pleasure.
The Second Figure
Shows some interior Branchings in the Silkworm.

A. A. A gaping, where the head of the Windpipe opens into the oval hole or
Navil. B. B. B. C. C. C. The foldings or ramifications of the Windpipe,
distributed into the Viscera and other neighboring parts. D. D. Greater
Branches, reaching from the lower and upper head of the Trachea or Windpipe,
toward the other infoldings.
The Third Figure
Shows the Ramifications of the Trachea or Windpipe in a Grasshopper.

A. The head of the Windpipe opening outwardly into the Hole, by and by is
branched forth inwardly into various shoots. B. The greater shoots of the
Windpipe, being extended by degrees into the Ovals, as it were into bladders.
C. C. The lesser shoots going from those greater.
The Fourth Figure,
Expresses the Heart of the Silkworm, which seems to be made oblong and
unequal, as if into many little oval Hearts.

A. The upper part of it nigh the Head. B. The lower part nigh the Tail. C. C.
The broader part of the Heart. D. D. Its narrow portions.
The Second Table,
Of which The First Figure
Shows the Oyster taken forth and whole from the shell, that his parts may be
seen as they are in their natural situation.

A. The Head of the Oyster, in the Corners of which, B. B. The Circular
Muscles, going about the whole Body are terminated. C. The gaping or Chink
leading between the Muscles and Gills to the Mouth. D. The superior portion of
the Liver, of a brownish color, leaning to the Ventricle. E. E. The Oesophagus
leading from the Mouth to the Ventricle. F. F. F. F. The Intestine, descending
from the Ventricle toward the Corner of the strait muscle, which being from
thence bent inward and rolled about, ascends above the Liver, being there
hidden, arises again in G: and is terminated in the Arse. H. H. H. The skin
with the g^andulous flesh and fat hiding and lying between the Viscera. I. The
Cavity in which are the Pericardium, Heart and Vessels. K. The strait Muscle,
with the perpendicular fibers, opening the shells. L. The other strait Muscle,
the Tendons of which growing to either shell shut them. M. The thickness of the
same Muscle, and the altitude of the fibers, are denoted. N. N. The Circular
Muscles including the Gills from the right side. O. The superior Circular
Muscle leaning to the Gills, being rolled out of its sight, that the Gills may
be beheld. P. The inferior Circular Muscle lying under the Gills. Q. Q. R. R.
The Parts of the same Muscles placed on the left side of the Oyster. S. The
Bosom, where both the Circulary Muscles, and their right and left parts coming
together, Constitute the Passage, for the admitting the waters to the Gills,
and for the shutting them forth from thence. T.T.T.T. Four inferior Tufts of
Gills which are thinner and broader. V.V.V.V. Their superior Tufts thicker and
more contracted.
The Second Figure
Represents the Oyster open, and unrolled, that its Viscera and internal parts
may be seen.

A. A. Two Gills dissected from the uppermost, and removed out of their places,
that the Mouth of the Oyster may be plainly seen. B. The Mouth of the Oyster.
C. The Veil or Covering of the Mouth. D. D. Two other superior Gills in their
proper site with the Creeping Vessels. E. The superior brownish portion of the
Liver under whch the Ventricle lies hid. F. The Heart made bare from the
Pericardium with the broad and blackish Ear of it. G. The Aorta, by and by from
the going forth of it from the Heart, divided into three branches. H. The first
Branch ascending toward the Head. I. The second toward the strait Muscles. K.
The third Branch tending into the Gills. L. The Trunk of the hollow Vein,
entering into the little ear of the Heart. M. M. M. M. The Inferior Gills, with
the Circular Muscles, cut off from the Body of the Oyster, where they stuck to
it, and spread forth, that their Passages and Cavities might be beheld.
N.N.N.N. The yoakings or beginnings of the Gills on which lie the several
Vessels, viz. Veins and Arterics, O.O.O.O. and the holes lying between,
P.P.P.P. Q.Q.Q Q. The Extremities or fringes of the same Gills. R. R. The
Inferior Circular Muscle of the right side, out of its site and inverted, that
it may be seen. S. S. A portion of the same by which it sticks to the bottom of
the Oyster. T. T. A portion of the same which Compassing the left side of the
Oyster-sticks to the portion V. W.W. The upper Circular Muscle of the right
side, folded and contracted, that it may not hide the Gills. X. X. A Portion of
the same which Compassing about the left side of the Oyster, sticks to the
Portion Y. Z. Z. The superficies of the Gills; in which the Finns or streaked
Passages, for the ingress and egress of the Vital humor and the waters,
appear. 1. The lower border of the Oyster, from which the Yoakings and the
Circular Muscles are cut off. 2. A Portion of the Intestine ending in the Arse.
3. The Arse.

The Third Table.
The First Figure
Shows the Lobster open in the back, that the Brain, Viscera, Vital, Genital,
and other interior Parts may be seen.

A. A. The Brain double, the Hemispheres of which being distinct, are separated
one from the other, also a little from the oblong Marrow. B. The Head of the
oblong marrow, out of which the optic Nerves b. b. and the Mammillarie
Processes under them, proceeds. C. The Cerebell. D. D. Two shanks of the Oblong
Marrow, which pass into the Spinal, and as it were two greater Nerves, meet now
and then in their descent, and now and then separate, and then again come
together. E. The Carotis Artery. F. F. A portion of the Oesophagus. G. The
Opening of the Ventricle. H. The upper Orifice. I. The Bottom and Lower Orifice
near which are three Teeth. K. The Temporal Muscles out of their place. L. L.
Muscles appendixes of the former. M. M. Bodies stuffed with pipes and
Glandula's or little Kernels, into which passages lie open, from the Ventricle,
to whose Sides they grow; these seem to be in the place of the Liver and
Mesenterie. m. m. m. m. The same Bodies brought lower from either side, and
ending in the processes, (...). n. n. Spermatick Bodies arising on both sides
of the Ventricle, which descending under the Pericardium, are terminated in the
processes, n. n. o. o. Processes out of the Spermatick Bodies, like to the
Epididymis, from which are two Yards. p. p. Two Yards, in the tops of which,
through the holes made in the last little feet but one, a passage-lyes open. q.
The hole in the little Foot for the going forth of the Yards. R. The
Pericardium, with the Heart included. S. The little Ear of the Heart into which
the Vena Cava enters. T. T. The ascending Trunk of the Vena Cava. V. The Aorta
going out of the Heart, cleft into three branches. W. The first Branch to its
Head. X. X. Two other Branches in either Side sent thence to the Gills. Y. Y.
The Tops of some of the Gills in view. 1.2.3.4.5.6. Some portions of the
Muscles. (...) Ligaments from the Pericardium to the Muscles of the Breast.
(...) The Muscles of the Belly, and Breast. (...) Muscles belonging to the
Tail. (...) The Intestine from the Ventricle to the Arse. (...) Tubes or Pipes,
within which, the Optic Nerves are brought to the Eyes.
The Second Figure
Shows the Womb of the Lobster, and its Neck, and Privy Member, or aperture
made through the hole in the last little Foot but one, together with the little
Foot it self, and the affixed Gills.

A. A portion of the Womb or place of Eggs, full of Eggs. B. The neck of the
Womb. C. Its Orifice in the hole of the little Foot. D. The Basis of the little
Foot. E. The little Foot, the shaking of which moves the Gills fixed to it. F.
F. Two Gills fixed to the basis of the little Foot, with Finns or spongy
borders. G. The appendix of the Gills, which like a bladder or membranous bagg,
may be blown up and distended.
The Third Figure
Expresses a portion of the Gill cut off, that its three Passages or Cavities
may appear.

The Fourth Table.
The First Figure
Shows an Earth-Worm laid with its belly upwards, the greatest part of it
dissected and laid open, that the Brain, Praecordia, Viscera, and other Parts
may be seen.

A. The Mouth and Chin of the Worm. B. The Brain, in the superficies of which,
an Artery Expansed or stretched out, descends to the Heart, and from thence to
the Tail. b.b.b.b. Annulary or ringie Muscles opened and unfolded with their
Tendons. C. A portion of the Oesophagus. D. The Heart. E. e.e.e.e. The upper
little white shining Globes, both the greater and the lesser. F. F. Two lower
Globes, bigg and full with Eggs. G. The Stomach, of which there are three
Bellies, 1. 2. 3. H. The Intestine, descending from the Ventricle, which being
bound by the Tendons of the ringie Muscles, appears like the Gut Colon in
perfect Animals. I. A portion of the same Intestine opened, that the Body
included in it, or the Intestine in the Intestine may be seen. K. That interior
Body, which seems to be in the place of the Liver, and Mesenterie.
The Second Figure
Expresses a portion of the same Earth-Worm, with the Tail cut off, that the
rows of little Feet, which are 4, to wit, a. a. a. a. may be seen.

The Third Figure
Shows the whole Earth-Worm prone, or with its back uppermost, that the ringie
Muscles, and the Wind-Pipes in them, may be seen.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Parts or Members of the Soul of the Brutes.

A double Subject of the brutal Soul.
THE Corporeal Soul in more perfect Brutes, and common to Man, is extended to
the whole organical Body, and vivifies, actuates and irradiates both its
several parts and humors, so it seems to subsist in both of them eminently,
and to have as it were its imperial seats; But the immediate subject of the
Soul, are the Vital Liquor or the Blood, The blood or vital Liquor.
Circulated by a perpetual Circulation in the Heart, Arteries, and Veins; and
the Animal Liquor or Nervous Juice, flowing gently within the Brain and its
Appendixes: The Nervous juice or animal Liquor.

From hence two parts of the Soul.

Flamy and light.


The Soul inhabits and graces with its presence both these Provinces; but as it
cannot be wholly together at once in both, it actuates them both, as it were
divided, and by its parts: For as one part living within its Blood, is of a
certain fiery nature (as we have shown) being inkindled like flame, and the
other being diffused through the animal Liquor, seems as it were Light, or the
rays of Light, flowing from that Flame; which from thence being Excerpted, and
manifold ways reflected and refracted, by the Brain, and Nerves, as it were by
Dioptrick Glasses, are diversely figured, for the Exercises of the Animal
Faculties.

There are therefore Corporeal Souls, according to its two chief functions in
the Organical Body, viz. the Vital and Animal; two distinct parts, to wit,
flamie and Iucid, for what belongs to the said natural function, that indeed is
involuntary of the Animal, and is performed by the help of the Animal spirits.

But besides these two members of the Soul, fitted to the individual Body, a
Certain other portion of it, To which may be added another the Epiphysis or
dependence of the whole Soul, viz. the Genital part.
taken from both, and as it were the Epitomy of the whole Soul, is placed
apart, for the Conservation of its Species: This as it were an Appendix of the
vital flame, growing up in the Blood, is for the most part Lucid or Light, and
Consists of Animal Spirits: to wit, which being Collected into a certain band,
and having got an appropriate humor, viz. the genital, are hidden within the
spermatick Bodies; to the end indeed, that, when opportunity shall serve, that
Band of spirits, as it were a little Brand not yet inkindled, may be able from
thence to be drawn into fit fire, and to be inkindled into another Vital Flame,
the formatrix of a new animated Body.

The parts or Members of the Soul.
Concerning these three Members of the Corporeal Soul, two, to wit, the Vital
and Animal, fiery by Act, and the other, viz. the Genital, laid up for a
future siring, it should have been particularly and fully here treated on: But
since we have already sufficiently discoursed of the two former, I shall only
add briefly, by way of Suppliment, the Sum of what I have said before, and
then we shall also briefly discourse of the begetting part of this Soul.

The Flamy part of the Soul in the Blood.
First, It appears, that the part of the Corporeal Soul rooted in the Blood, is
truly flamy, as to which we need only to refer you, to what we have wrote
lately in a particular Tract of the Accension of the Blood: For there having
shown, the heat of the Blood to be necessarily required, to wit, whereby a
greater plenty of spirits may be instilled into the Brain, from its frame being
very much loosned; by and by we prove, from those three ways, by which all
Liquors whatsoever are only made hot, none can agree with the blood, besides
accension or inkindling: For neither by heat put to it, nor by reason of Salts
and Sulphurs, which are Corrosives of a diverse Kind being put together, can the
blood be made to boil; wherefore it follows, that it is inkindled like the
spirit of Wine, and so as it were flames forth and boyls up. Further we showed,
that it is truly inkindled in hot living Creatures, because the proper Passions
of Fire and Flame, are found only besides in the Life of the Blood; for in like
manner both to this, and to them, there is need constantly of an Internal
Sulphurous Food, together with the External nitrous; Which we have showed to
be truly inkindled.
yea, and either Flame, alike, to wit, the Kitchen and Vital, whilst they burn
desire Eventilation. To these may be added, that the Life and Flame of the
Blood, as to their Various ways of production and extinction, there
particularly described and rehearsed, are wholly after the same manner. Lastly,
the analogy or agreement of either Flame, being sufficiently unfolded, we have
declared, by what beginnings, the Vital Flame arises, by what degrees it
increases, and, after its hight, is diminished; Further, we have shown
reasons, wherefore this is not visible and destructive as the common Flame, but
as it is Subordinate to the Corporeal Soul, as to a Superior Form, it
admitting a proper Species, and serving to the uses of Nature, destinated by
the Creator, silently burns with a gentle and friendly heat, like a Fire shut
up in Balneo Mariae, apart by it self; and as it so destroys not the Blood, but
inkindling the Liquor even so its Superficies, wholly dissolves the frame of
the whole mixture; it follows thence, that some particles being burnt, others
of a various Kind being manumitted or let go, they are Variously employed in
the offices of the others; but of these, those which are chiefly Subtle, as it
were Beams of Light sent from a Flame, are, as it were distilled into the Brain
and Cerebel. These most subtle particles are called the Animal Spirits, and
first of all entering the Cortical Substances of those parts, and from thence
flowing into the Meditullia or middle parts of either of them, and into the
Oblong and Spinal Marrow, and further into all the Nerves and Nervous Fibers,
dispersed through the whole Body, Constitute the other and more noble part of
the Corporeal Soul, commonly called the Sensitive, by us the Lucid or Etherial;
into whose Nature, as also into the ways of its Subsisting, Acting, and
Suffering, we shall now in the next place inquire.

Secondly, The sensitive part of the Soul divisible and extensed.
The sensitive part of the Soul, even as the Vital, is extensive and divisible;
whose Hypostasis when as the Animal Spirits, as to the Integral parts, do
Constitute, a great and difficult question arises, concerning them; of what
sort of substance they are, and from whence they are endued with so notable an
Energy or Power? I shall say nothing to those, who wholly deny these Spirits,
for that the existencie of which, is almost palpable, and may be proved
demonstratively by the effects; nor am I much solicitous of those, who arguing
Contend, that the Senses and Faculties of living Creatures, however perceptive,
The Animal Spirits constitute its Hypostasis.
cannot be but from an Immaterial and Immortal Substance, and therefore without
any necessity, multiply almost to Infinity; and I know not for what end, not
only Essences, but also immortal Souls of Brutes, yea, of Fleas, Flys, and of
other more vile Insects. Against these Opinions there needs no other Argument,
than that any one may consider truly in every Brute or Man, the Organs of the
Animal Faculties, than which certainly nothing in the whole nature of things,
can be made more Mechanically, and with a more neat Artifice. The Brain and
Cerebel, the two Roots of the Lucid part of the Soul, or rather the Fountains
of the Primary Spirits, are placed in the top itself of the Body, into which,
when the Animal Spirits are distilled, from the Blood, The Brain and Cerebel,
two roots of the sensitive Soul.
placed above and round about, as it were by a descent; they from thence flow
forth through the Medullary and nervous Appendixes, as it were by Bills or
Pelicans placed here and there, into all the inferior parts. Either head
consists of a double Substance, viz. a Cortical or Barkie, which for the most
part serves for the reception of the Spirits; and a Medullary or Marrowy, which
serves for their dispensation and exercise.

Further, The substance of them twofold viz. Cortical and Medullary.
as the Animal Spirits, for diverse uses of the Animal Faculties, ought to
obtain Tendencies or Stretchings-forth of a diverse sort, within their distinct
and peculiar passages, either Medullary part being wonderfully Divaricated, is
cut every where into Various tracts of Labyrinths, as it were so many Conclaves
and Chambers; all which Medullary tracts, the Cortical part every where lies
between and fortifies; From these, as it were Primary Palaces of the Soul, the
Oblong and Spinal Marrow, like spacious Courts are stretched forth, To them are
belonging the oblong Marrow, the spinal Marrow, Nerves, nervous Fibers.
which also are furnished, by reason of the Medullary substances variously
lying between, with many Porticoes and Walks, planted here and there, for the
necessary works of the Animal Function: From these Marrows, the Nerves arising,
are carried to the several parts of the whole Body, as it were so many distinct
paths; then from these many other small Shoots or nervous Fibers, being on
every side sent forth, as it were so many smaller or lesser Paths, are almost
innumerable; at the ends of which, others secondary Fibers, Membranaceous and
Musculous, are disposed, though thick Series, as it were so many martial
Fields, in every one of which is placed a Maniple or Band of Spirits. Both
Membranaceous and Muscular.
In this most ample and highly intricate Labyrinth of Cloisters, and Animal
passages, the Medullar or Nervous Processes, how small soever, being most
thickly set, variously implicating one another, and ordinarily cutting cross
one another, yet all of them distinct, and designed to certain offices, allways
agree mutually between themselves, and intimately conspire together; So that
every Impulse or Instinct, is carried from one end to another presently, yea,
from every part to all the rest, A most quick Communication between all these
Parts.
sooner than in the twink of an eye. Further, from the effects it is
demonstrated, that within these several tracts, some subtle particles do flow,
and cause Animality or Life in all; which tho they be most thin, invisible, and
nimble, we rightly call the Animal Spirits, and the Constitutive parts of the
sensitive Soul.

Although it appears plain, that such like Spirits are the Authors of the Animal
Function, and do constitute the Hypostasis of the Soul it self; What the Animal
Spirits are.
yet what they are according to their proper essence, seems hard to be
unfolded; because we can hardly meet with any thing in Nature, They are not
well compared to spirits of Wine, Hartshorn, Turpentine, etc.
to which they may be compared in all things.

The comparing of these, with the Spirits of Wine, Turpentine, and Hartshorn,
and such like, does not quadrate or agree. For besides, that those Chemical
Liquors, neither represent the Images of their Objects, nor are endued with any
Elastic Virtue, as the Animal Spirits; those also are less Subtle than these,
and less Volatile, for as much as they may be powered forth out of one Vessel
into another, or may be distilled; but the Animal Spirits presently vanishing,
after life is extinct, leave no Footsteps of themselves. Wherefore, Better to
the Rays of Light interwoven with the Air, or the Element.
it is better, according to our Hypothesis, that we liken these Spirits sent
from the Flame of the Blood, to the Rays of Light, at least to them interwoven
with the Element and the Air. For as Light figures the Impressions of all
visible things, and the Air of all audible things; So the Animal Spirits,
receive the impressed Images of those, and also of Odors, and tangible
qualities, and stay them at the first Sensory. But the Air, or Aerial
particles, whilst free and unmixed, create nothing of force or tumult, yet they
being more strictly pressed together, shut up in Clouds or Instruments, or
imbued with Sulphurous, and other Elastick Bodies, being become presently
raging, they often break forth into Meteors, viz. Winds, Hurricanes, and horrid
Thunder. After the same manner, the Animal Spirits, whilst pure, are carried in
the open spaces of the Head, and its Appendixes remain quiet enough; but they
being shut up within the Muscles, and there being mixed with Sulphurous
Particles from the Blood, and sometimes in other places, with an heterogeneous
matter, become very impetuous, to wit, Elastick, or Spasmodick or Causing
Cramps, as we have declared formerly at large.

The Animal Spirits abound both in an Objective and an Active Virtue.
Therefore the Animal Spirits, according to this Analogy, (to wit, which thing
of them happens chiefly and almost only with other things) we say are most
subtle Bodies, and highly active, instilled from the inkindled Blood into the
Brain, and its Appendix, which partly of their own nature, for as much as they
are lucid and aerial, and partly from the agreeable furniture of the Organs,
for that they are shut up within Passages, as it were Pipes and other Machines,
abound with both an objective Virtue, by which many rays of Light promptly meet
together in the Images of all sensible things, and effect the sension of every
Kind, and also, an Active, by which the loco-motive powers, and also the acts
of the Spasmodic Affections, are performed, beyond the forces or Instincts of
wind, or any blast shut up in machines.

In Mechanical things, Fire, Air, and Light, are chiefly Energetical, which
humane Industry is always wont to use, As Fire and Light in Mechanical things
so in Animals, they are chiefly Energetical.
for the greatly stupendous, and no less necessary works. This the Furnaces of
Smiths, Chemists, and Glass-men, and of other boylers of several Kinds,
Dioptrick Glasses, Musical, Warlike, Mathematical Instruments, with many other
Machines, never enough to be admired, do testify. In like manner we may
believe, that the Great Workman, to wit, the Chief Creator, from the Beginning,
did make the greatly active, and also the most subtle Souls of Living
Creatures, out of their Particles, as the most active; to which he gave also a
greater, and as it were a supernatural Virtue and Efficacy; from the Excellent
structure of the Organs, most Exquisitly labored, beyond the Workmanship and
artificialness of any other Machine.

A twofold Action of the spirits in the Brain and its Appendix, 1. Of
begetting and dispensation, 2. Of Exercise and Government.
We have described these Parts formerly in Plates, so that we need not here
repeat their Anatomy, but only add a few things that were omitted. In the
Animal Government, although the Spirits are disposed, as it were an Army spread
abroad through the whole Field, yet we say, that they obtain Orders and Offices,
one thing in this part, and something different in that. In every one of these
we have noted, as it were a double Aspect or Gesture, in the Provinces in the
Medullary shanks of the Head, in the Nerves and also nervous Fibers, to wit,
one of Begetting and Dispensing, and another of Exercise and Government.

As to the first, we have shown, that the animal spirits being procreated
wholly in the Cortical or Barky substances of the Brain and Cerebel, The reason
and manner of the former.
do descend by and by into the middle or marrowy parts, and there are kept in
great plenty, for the businesses of the Superior Soul; in the mean time, a
sufficient stock of these, gently flowing from this highest Province into the
oblong and Spinal Marrow, and thence into the Nerves and Nervous Shoots,
actuates all these passages, and blows them up into a certain Tensity. Lastly,
a sufficient plenty of Spirits, distilling forth from the ends of the Nerves,
enter into the nervous Fibers, planted in the Muscles, Membranes, and Viscera,
and so constitute them, the proper and immediate Organs of the Sense and
Motion. After this manner, the Region of the whole Sensitive Soul being viewed,
if we would describe its Idea or Image, we must altogether represent the same
Figure and Dimension, and the whole Head with its System and Appendix; so that
as we may behold all these parts, shaddowed in the same Image, we ought to
frame at once, the Hypostasis of this Soul, adequate and Co-extended to them.

As to the several sorts of Offices and Exercises of the Spirits, so planted in
distinct Provinces, The distinct Offices of the spirits in various Provinces.
First, we deservedly attribute to them a twofold Aspect, to wit, inward for
Sense, and outward for Motion: But more particularly, we may conceive the
middle or Marrow part of the Brain, as it were the inferior Chamber of the
Soul, glased with dioptric Looking-Glasses; The perception of Sensions in the
streaked Bodies.
in the Penetralia or inmost parts of which, the Images or Pictures of all
sensible things, being sent or intromitted by the Passages of the Nerves, as it
were by Pipes or strait holes, pass first of all through the streaked Bodies, as
it were an objective Glass, and then they are represented upon the Callous
Body, as it were upon a white Wall; and so induce a Perception, and a certain
Imagination of the thing felt: Which Images or Pictures there expressed, The
Imagination, Fantasy, and Appetite, in the Callous Body.
as often as they import nothing besides the mere Knowledge of the Object, then
by and by further progressing, as it were by another waving, from the Callous
Body toward the Cortix or shell of the Brain, and entering into its folds, the
fantasy vanishing, they Constitute the memory or remembrance of a Thing: But
if the sensible species being impressed on the Imagination, promises any thing
of Good or Evil, The memory and remembrance of a thing or reminiscency within
the folds of the Brain.
presently the spirits being Excited, respect or look back upon the Object, by
whose appulse they were moved, and for the sake of embracing or removing it
away, by other spirits flowing within the Passages of the Nerves, and
successively by others implanted in the Members and moving Parts, they swiftly
give their Commands of performing the respective motions. So the Sense brings
in the Imagination; this the Memory or the Appetite, The series and order of
their powers.
or both at once, and at length the app^^it^ stirs up local motions, performing
the prosecution or driving away of the appeari^g Good or Evil. For the several
Kinds of these sort of Animal Functions, yea for the Various Acts of either
Kind to be performed, the Animal Spirits, who are the immediate Instruments of
them all, obtain peculiar and distinct tracts or paths; within which, if there
be any let or bar to hinder, presently some function is hindered, or some member
of the sensitive Soul, being as it were cut off, becomes impotent.

Who can sufficiently admire the innumerable series of nervous Fibers, The
tracts or paths of the Spirits, are distinct within the head it self, even as
within its nervous Appendix.
distributed in a most wonderful order through the several parts of the whole
Body; in which the animal spirits, like Soldiers sent abroad, perpetually
running up and down, on this side and on that, perform the offices of Sense and
Motion. Further, those who dwell within the Head it self, the superior Legion
of the sensitive Soul, although more freely ranging, yet lie not disorderly or
loosely, but its numerous Company, being limited with certain Bounds and
Cloisters, as it were within the narrow space of One Chamber, perform infinite
Variety of Actions and Passions.

Concerning these, discoursing formerly more fully in our description of the
Brain and Nerves, we did distinguish the Seats of all the Faculties, yea we did
show the Commands of the Animal Function voluntary and involuntary, to be
diverse in themselves, also to belong to diverse Governments of the Brain and
Cerebel, with their respective appendixes of the Nerves. Every where the
various Medullary tracts, are distinct from the Cortical.
Further, we showed that those Spirits, the Authors of either function, not
only within the narrow Channels of the Nerves, but also in the large meeting
places or Emporiums of the Head, have peculiar paths, to wit, the medullary
tracts, as it were intrinsic Nerves, most curiously stretched forth here and
there. But indeed, because it is objected, that I have not described all, and
perhaps not exactly enough; therefore, that those medullary Passages may be the
better beheld, we have lately instituted another more accurate anatomy of the
Brain; A more exact Anatomy of the Brain, through its Cortication or Shelly
part.
to wit, by gently scraping with the point of a Penknife its parts, we removed
every where the softer and brownish substance, Akin to the Cortex of the
Brain, the whiter and more hard being left; by which means, in several places
of the Brain and the Oblong Marrow, many Medullary Chords or Strings, as it
were distinct Nerves, wonderfully Communicating among themselves, and with
other white or medullary Bodies, were brought into sight. For as much as this
Anatomical Administration, The Common passages, and the private paths of the
Spirits.
rendered the more secret passages of the Spirits, and the motions belonging to
the Arcana's of the animal Government, very Conspicuous; we shall here show a
new Figure or two of the Brain rolled forth, and the flesh when taken off in
the chief places; in which are plainly beheld, both the Common Passages, and
the Private paths of the Spirits, and which carry them backward and forward,
immediately through the beaten way of the medullary tail, and which lead through
the bypath of the Prominences, into the streaked Bodies.

Therefore, in the Brain taken out, and rolled abroad according to our Method,
let there be a dissection so made, To wit, which through the orbicular
prominences, are the Testes and Nates.
between the Orbicular Prominences, to wit, between the Testes or Testicles,
Nates or Buttocks, that when they being whole, and divided in the middle of the
Pinal Glandula, the parts are laid by themselves, the streaked Cavity of
either may be laid open. (As in the 6 th Table, Fig. 1. A. b, E. A. b. c. c.
D.) Then it it will easily appear, that the said Prominencies, called the
Testes, are marrowy Epiphyses (or additions) of the oblong marrow, which
sticking to the tails of the Cerebel, from thence look toward the Brain, and a
Commerce is seen to be maintained between this and that.

This last Ephiphysis, passes from the parts of the Brain, into the next
natiform (or of the form of a Buttock) B. which is an adjunct, or some
Augmentation of that: To this Medullar a.a. in a Sheep, Ox, and many
four-footed Beasts, grows a Cortical substance B.B. But otherways in a Man,
Dog, Fox, and other more sagacious Creatures, it is marrowy through the whole;
the reason of the difference, I have showed in another place.

The description and use of them.
This medullary Epiphysis reaching above the Testes and Nates, and going under
the Pineal Kernel, tends toward the Chambers of the Optic Nerves; approaching
which ( F.) by and by it is cleft into two Branches, as it were Nervous, one of
which G, is carried to the Cone of the streaked Body, and the other H. toward
its Basis, and in its oblique passage, sends a shoot into the midst of the
Border of the streaked Body: this Branch going to the basis of the streaked
Body, behind the root of the Fornix, is inserted into an Angle of the streaked
Body.

As to the Use of these Parts, we have proposed our Conjectures in our Tract of
the Brain; From these; Medullary tracts into the streaked Bodies.
and truly nothing seems more probable, than that by this side-path of the
Prominences, and by the Passage of the Medullary Passages, there are Commerces
held between the Brain and the Cerebel; for as often as it happens, that
Impressions or Instincts merely natural, follow spontaneous Affections and
Motions, or are joined to them, all that, within those private Tracts, is
occupied. See our Anat. of the Brain, p. 176. Further, And wherefore.
whereby every such Impression from the Viscera or Precordia, by the mediation
of the Cerebel, are carried from them in the same way forward and backward,
into the streaked Bodies, and on the contrary every force and perturbation; The
Medullary passage, which is for their commerce, enters in three places, viz. In
the middle, and at either end, into the streaked Bodies.

To the orbicular Prominences, succeed the Chambers of the Optic Nerves.
To the Prominences which are called Nates and Testes succeed the Chambers of
the Optic Nerves E. E. as also above the Medullary Trunk, certain Epiphyses or
Additions, serve for a private office viz. only for the visive Function. For as
the sight is a most noble faculty, and as the Organ of the eye is highly
curious, so it obtains a very spacious Furniture or Porch, and also a very
strait, to the common Sensory, viz. the streaked Bodies: Because the Optive
Nerves coming together, under the Trunk of the oblony Marrow, and being by and
by disjoined, they climb up his sides, where going under the appropriate
Protuberances, they go into a numerous company of hairy threads, which are
every where interwoven with the cortical Substance. The description of them.
Fig. 2. Tab. 6. These Medullary or Nervous structures or bindings, which
without doubt the visible Species pass through, are all parallels, which being
stretched forth Strait, are brought to the streaked Bodies, every where,
through their whole Compass. Fig. 2. Hence it is probable, the causes of the
Sandy drops or Spots, The use.
yea, and of the sight otherways depraved or lost, do lie hid, not only in the
Eye and Optic Nerve, but sometimes in these parts; for as much as those
Filaments or Nervous threads, being obstructed or bound together, the visible
Species are not able to beam themselves to the streaked Bodies. I knew one,
being affected, by his Imagination and Memory being grievously hurt, that those
diseases vanishing, fell into blindness: The reason of which accident seems to
be, that the morbifick matter occupying at first the superior frame of the
Brain, being slid thence lower by the Cortix, The Mamillary Processes, are
carried by a private passage, to the streaked Bodies.
at length entered into the Optic Chambers.

There remains yet a private passage of another sense, to wit, of the smelling,
to the common Sensory, viz. the streaked Bodies; The mamillary Processes being
entered into the Prominences of the Inferior Brain, go under its Basis till
they come to the border of the streaked Body on both sides, then being a little
bent inwards: they proceed by an oblique passage toward its Basis, where they
are inserted. Fig. 1 Tab. 6.

The common passage of the Spirits, to the streaked Bodies, is made by the
shanks of the oblong Marrow.
As to the Impressions of the other Senses, and to the force and Instinct of
every Spontaneous motion, carried up and down, there is a necessity, that all
these Kinds of Commerces, between the streaked Bodies and the Nervous Appendix,
should be made by the Shanks of the longish Marrow: The tops of these being
large and broad, Stick to the hindermost borders of those, so that from these
into those, and so on the Contrary, a going and returning is easily performed.
Further, that the many and diverse motive and Sensible Forces and Impressions
together, may be carried without confusion, by this beaten and common way, the
whole frame of the Medullary Shanks, appears through the whole to be made with
Nerves or Medullary strings compacted together; as if they were so many
distinct paths, in this common passage of the Animal Spirits, for the
inculcating the Various acts of the Senses and of Motions. The Sixth Table
represents these parts to the Life.

An accurate description of the striated or streaked Bodies.
The chamfer'd or streaked Bodies, consist of a most exquisite and greatly to be
admired Fabric: The figure of either, coming something near the Cone, appears
like a Cone reflected and bent inward; the outmost and superior Superficies is
round and Barkie, through which creep Blood-carrying Vessels, and a portion of
the Choroedal Enfolding hides it; The middle and Inferior frame of them
consists of a Medullary Substance, with a Cortical mixed between. Tab. 8 th l.
m. The sides or either border of these, both the Superior and Inferior, are for
the most part Marrowy, and look white like the greater Nerves; n. K. Between
these streaks or Marrowy strings, thick set, and of a diverse magnitude, being
stretched forth like the greater Nerves, Knit together, both the Borders: The
anterior Border n. n. is every where knit to the Callous Body; so that
whatsoever is to be carried forward and backward by either, viz. from one to
another, we suspect they have for it this passage between those Medullary
passages. The hindermost Border of the streaked Body, in its upper part,
receives the Medullary Processes sent thither from the round Prominences, and
also the Optic Chambers, into its Bosom: In the middle and lowest part,
either Border is fixed to the Shanks of the oblong Marrow; and nigh to the
Basis of the Fornix, the inferior Border of one streaked Body, is continued
into the other Border; to the end, that these Bodies also might have between
themselves a mutual Commerce, which is also observed almost of all the rest of
the Parts of the Head, that they are double, and do communicate among
themselves, by certain passages; so that if one part should be faulty, its
defect might be made up by the other being whole.

As to the Offices and Uses of the streaked Bodies, The use or Offices of the
streaked Bodies.
though we can discern nothing with our eyes, or handle with our hands, of
these things that are done within the secret Conclave or Closset of the Brain;
yet, by the effects, and by comparing rationally the Faculties, and Acts, with
the Workmanship of the Machine, we may at least conjecture, what sort of works
of the Animal Function, are performed in these or those, or within some other
parts of the Head; especially because it plainly appears, that the Offices of
the Interior Motions, and Senses, as well as the Exterior, are acted by the
help of the Animal Spirits, ordained within certain and distinct Paths, or as
it were small little Pipes.

As therefore it appears from what we have said, They receive the Impressions
of sensible things: and convey the Instincts of Motions.
that the chamfered or streaked Bodies are so placed, between the Brain and
Cerebel, and the whole nervous Appendix, that nothing can be carried from these
into that, or on the contrary be brought back hither, but it must pass through
these Bodies; and as peculiar passages lead into these most ample Diversories,
from the several Organs of Motions, Sense, and the other Functions; and
further, as Passages lie open from these into the Callous Body, and into all
the Marrowy Tracts of the Brain, nothing seems more probable, than that these
parts are that common Sensory, that receives and distinguishes the Species, and
all Impressions, transferrs them, being ordained into fit Series, to the
Callous Body, and represents them to the Imagination there presiding; that also
transmitts the Force and Instincts of all spontaneous motions, begun in the
Brain, to the Nervous Appendix, to be performed by the motive Organs. By reason
of these manifold and diverse offices, so many Marrowy streakes or internal
Nerves are produced within the streaked Bodies, for the Various Tendences and
Beamings forth of the Animal Spirits, it may very well be concluded that the
Sensitive Soul, as to all its Powers and Exercises of them, is truly within the
Head, as well as in the nervous System, merely Organical, and so extended, and
after a manner Corporeal.

The Explanation of the Figures.
The Fifth Table,
Shows the Figure of the Brain of a Sheep roled forth, and derased, and as it
were made bare of the Flesh, in many places, that the Marrowy Tracts may be
seen.

A. A. The Medullary Protuberances called Testes, which being certain Epiphyses
or excrescences of the oblong Marrow, and joined to the Trunks of the Cerebel
look thence toward the Brain. B. B. The Natiform Protuberances, the Substance
of which in a Sheep, a Goat, and many others, is partly Cortical, a. a. partly
Marrowy, b. b. in a Man, Dog, Fox, and others it is wholly Marrowy. C. The
Cavity or Ventricle, lying under the Prominences, which is laid open, these
being dissected and opened. D. D. Two Marrowy Chords or strings of the
Medullary Trunk, going strait to the streaked Bodies. E. E. The Chambers of the
Optic Nerves. e. e. The parts of the pineal Kirnel, cut through the midst, and
laid apart. F. F. The Medullar or nervous passage proceeding from the
Prominences, which presently becoming forked, sends forth one branch G. to the
Cone of the streaked Body, and the other H. to its Basis. I. A shoot from the
medullary Branch, going toward the Basis of the streaked Body, reaching into
the midst of its Border. K. The latter border of the streaked Body, receiving
the nervous passages, and under the root of the Fornix, united to its like
Border of the other side. L. The whole streaked Body with its Vessels creeping
through its Cortex or shell. M. The other streaked Body, with the shell scraped
off, that the Nerves or marrowy Tracts may appear. N. N. The foremost border of
both the streaked Bodies, Conjoined to the Callous Body. O. The Basis of the
Fornix. P. The Trunk of the Fornix Cut off, and with the Brain rolled out,
removed at a distance. Q. Q. The two roots of the Fornix. R. R. The interior
superficies of the Callous Body, noted with transverse medullary streaks. S. A
medullary hedge or mound, dividing the streaks of one side, from those of the
other. T. T. Portions of the Brain Cut off and rolled forth, which (as also its
whole Frame) appears with a marrowy, and a Cortical substance intermixed. V. V.
Portions of the divided Cerebel laid apart. W. The Portion of the Oblong
Marrow situated beyond the Cerebel.
The Sixth Table,
Shows the Basis of a Sheeps Head, in certain parts of which Derased, and in
others Exposed naked, the Streaks or Medullary Tracts, as so many Nerves,
appear.

A. A. The Mamillary Processes carried to the Basis of either Streaked Body,
and inserted into them. B. B. Some remaining portions of the Brain cut off from
it greater bulk. C. C. The streaked Bodies derased, and as it were made bare of
flesh, that the Medullary streakes may appear also in its lower parts. D. D.
The Chambers of the Optic Nerves, in which the strait and thick-set Medullary
streakes, are reached forth, toward the streaked Bodies. E. A Tract leading to
the Tunnel of the Brain. F. A Kirnel placed behind the Tunnel, which is twofold
in man. G. G. The Trunks of the Optic Nerves divided, and removed, from their
joining together before the Tunnel. H, H. f.f. The Shanks of the oblong Marrow
lying under the Orbicular Prominences, in which strait and most thick streakes
are also stretched forth toward the chamfer'd Bodies. I. I. I. Transverse
Medullary Tracts distinguishing the regions of the oblong Marrow. K. K. Ringy
Processes compassing about the oblong Marrow, nigh the Cerebel. L. The
extremity of the oblong Marrow going into the Spinal. M. The Top of the Spinal
Marrow.
The Seventh Table,
Shows the orbicular Prominences, and the Optic Chambers Erased, and as it
were made bare of Flesh that their inward Frames may be beheld.

A. A. The Testes, which through the whole being Medullar, are marked with
strait Fibers. B. The Nates, one of them being Derased, in which the strait and
thickest Medullary streakes, are stretched forth toward the Brain. C. The
Medullary Hedge or Mound, dividing the Natiform Prominences from the Optic
Chambers, and from which, one Medullary Process is carried into the Basis of
the streaked Body, and the other into its Cone. D. One Optic Chamber scraped,
that its straight and most thick-set streakes, stretched forth toward the
streaked Body, may appear. E. The hinder Border of the streaked Body, receiving
the Optic Medullar streakes, and other Medullary Processes. F. The streaked
Body decreased, whose little Medullary Nerves and Passages, are explained in
the 5th. Table. G. The foremost border of the streaked Body. H. The Bosom,
leading from the Mamillary Process into the Ventricle of the forepart of the
Brain. I.I. The Hemisphear of the Brain opened and separated by it self.
The rest here described are explained in the former Figures.

CHAP. V.
The Beginnings and Increase of the whole Corporeal Soul; also some Innate
Habits and Inclinations of it are noted.

FRom what has been said, concerning the Hypostasis and Members of the
Corporeal Soul, or of the more perfect Brutes (which is also the inferior Soul
of Man) it will be easier to trace out the Original, and the Increase of the
whole. From hence also we may collect its figure and dimensions, as also the
proportion, habits, and inclinations of its parts, in respect of it self, and
the members of the Body, together with its Various ways of acting and suffering.

As to the first beginnings or original of the Corporeal Soul; this, (like as a
Shellfish forms and fits its shell to its self) exists something a little
sooner, The beginning of the Brutal Soul.
and so more nobler than the organical Body; Because a certain heap of animal
Spirits, or most subtle Atoms, or a little Soul not yet inkindled, lies hid in
the Seminal humor; which having gotten a fit cherishing or Fireplace, and at
length being inkindled from the Soul of the Parent acting, or endeavoring, or
leaning to it, as a flame from a flame, begins to shine forth, and to unfold it
self, a little before the Foundations, or first groundwork of the body is
laid: Frames it self before the Body.
This orders the web of the conception, agitates and inkindles the applied
matter, disposes, and by degrees forms the Figure, designed by the Archetypal
Law of Creation. In this stupendous Fabric, together with its bodily bulk,
being daily increased, and Imaged into the due Species of each animal, the Soul
also takes its increase, and still renders it self like to the Body, which it
forms. For when as the more thick particles, And increases likewise with it.
from matter continually put together, are bestowed in the Corporeal Organs; in
the mean time, the more subtle and spirituous being loosned, and more rarefied,
by the burning of the others, they dilate the Hypostasis of the Soul, and
together with the Body unfold, and equally extend it. But that after this
manner, the Seeds of the Soul being laid, from the beginning, together with
those of the Body, do rise up to a due figure and bulk in either, it ought not
to be attributed to the fortuitous concourse of Atoms, nor to the proper
Energie of the Soul it self; but the beginning of all things, proceeds wholly
from divine Providence, directing Generations, to the Ends and Ideas of Forms,
according to the original Types primitively ordained by the same.

Secondly, As the Increase of the animated Body, and the first marrying
together of the Elements proceed from this Soul, The duration also of the Body
depends upon the Soul.
informing and disposing the matter; so the duration and subsistence of the
same Soul, is the Bond of its Mixture o^ Concretion. For the flame of the Soul
being extinct, or the inkindling and motion of the subtle particles ceasing,
presently the frame of the Body it self begins to be dissolved and loosned, so
that in a short time, the Elements being loosned and laxed one from another,
fly away, and by degrees break their Concretion: wherefore this Soul, as it
were salt or pickle preserves the fleshy bulk of the Body from putrefaction;
yea, the ^ame is almost in an animated Body, as the Flower or Spirit in Wine,
which indeed being present, and unfolding its spirituous Particles through the
whole, the Liquor continues still generous and flourishing; but as soon as this
Spirit of the Wine flies away, forthwith the remaining water or liquor
degenerates into an insipid and dead thing.

Thirdly, So long as this Soul subsists in the Body, according to an ancient
saying of Hypocrates, The Soul always Born.
It is always Born, even till Death; In which respect also, it seems to be most
like flame, or rather the same thing, which is continually renewed almost every
moment: Some parts of eithers subsistence, in like manner are consumed by
burning, and fly away, and others in the mean time are laid up anew, from the
Food continually laid in: For as the more Crass or thick Particles of the
nourishing juice, wrought in the Viscera, fill up the losses of the Corporeal
bulk, so the more subtle make up the layings forth or wastings of this Soul;
which, as they come to the blood, are as it were Oil to a Lamp, and being
perpetually inkindled within its bosom, restore to the Soul both Flame and
Light, The Offices of the Organs and Faculties, are reciprocal toward one
another.
which would otherways perish. For whilst the purer part of the nourishing
Liquor, cherishes the flame of the Blood, and sustains it, the most spirituous
Particles falling off by its burning, are instilled into the concavity of the
Head, which there propagate and nourish the other part of the Soul, to wit the
Sensitive: So the making of Blood, is owing very much to Chylification, or the
making of the Chyle, and Animality or like to this; notwithstanding which
offices, the Animal Function pays back to the Vital, and both to the Organs of
Chylification; for as much as the Animal Spirits, bestow a pulsifick force to
the Heart and Arteries, whereby the Blood may be agitated and carried about, to
the places of accensions or inkindlings: yea, the Viscera of Concoction,
receive heat which they want, from the flame of the Blood, and a motive and
sensitive virtue, which they have need of, for their Offices, from a Constant
afflux or flowing in of the Animal Spirits; so the Brain is indebted to the
Heart, and both of them to the Stomach, yea, and on the other side, this Region
to that, and both to the third. To the end that the Hypostasis of the whole
Soul might the longer continue, the Tributes of all the Parts are Compensed
with mutual Offices one to another, and so at once the members both of the Body
and of the Soul being conjoined, by a Circular necessity, they desire and show
their mutual Labor.

It is natural to the Soul to defend it self, and to propagate its species.
Fourthly, The Soul of the Brute, as it is Fire, according to Philosophy, has
these two innate Dispositions by the Law of Creation, to wit, that it should
defend it self, or delay its proper inkindling long, for whose sake it is still
careful of taking of food; and also, that it might propagate its Species, or
produce other Souls; for which end, it Continually lays up from its provision,
an incentive matter, and Continually desires to expose it to an inkindling.

Hence the young one as soon as it is born, seeks for food.
It is natural for every Animal, without guide or example, to take its proper
food, and to Swallow it down, both that the web of the Body being daily
increased, might grow to its due magnitude, and also that the Soul, as it were
its woof, being daily supplied with new plenty of Spirits, may be able to be
Coextended or stretched forth equally with the Body, and able to perform lively
the Acts of its Functions. Then as soon as the Lineaments, both of the Body and
the Soul, being sufficiently drawn forth, and the Compass and Bulk of each
Completed, When the In divid^^^ is made the genital humor, for the propagating
the Species, is laid up.
some Animal Spirits, superfluous from the individual work, begin to abound,
and so separate into the genital parts, with a Subtle humor, picked from the
whole Body, as it were into a Storehouse, destinated for the propagating the
Species, and there being laid up, form the Idea of the Animal, which
afterward is transferred into a fit Matrix, for to be perfectly formed.

The genital Humor, is not, as Hippocrates formerly taught, and as now
commonly believed, The Genital Humor, not from the Brain, but from the Blood.
carried from the Brain into the Spermatick Vessels; for no peculiar passages
lie between that, and these Bodies far remote; but without doubt, the bloody
mass it self, sends its most noble part into the Genitals, as well as into the
Brain. Wherefore, when as there are no Nerves that reach to the Testicles, and
that there are noted Arteries sent, and admirably made through wandering
Passages and frequent engraftings of the Veins; to wit for that End, that they
may carry the most pure flower of the Blood, as it were through the winding
Channels of an Alembick, distilled by a long passage, and so wrought and made
most highly subtle, into those parts: what is superfluous of this or less
clarified, the Veins do not only receive and carry back, but also because from
the much Spirit, a great quantity of Serous water (which serves always for its
Vehicle) abounds, therefore the Water-Carryers are produced in these parts
abundantly more than in any others.

why the loss of seed disturbs the Brain and Nerves.
But that a great loss of the genital Humor does hurt very much the Brain and
the Nerves, and bring to them a notable debility; the reason is, because the
blood as it makes up the losses of the seed, destinated for the propagating its
Species, carries thither and bestows whatsoever is most precious of its own; in
the mean time, as the Brain is defrauded of its due provision, by the great
plenty of Spirits being carried into the Spermatic Bodies: yea as the blood is
not able sufficiently to impart to the Genitals, out of its proper store, it
remands or snatches its Tribute from the Brain and other parts, that it might
be there bestowed; so that not seldom the strength of the whole Soul and Body
is consumed, on the mad insatiate fulfilling of Lust or Venus; and in these
desires, everyone, or the unskilful, complains of Flames, and feels the blood
not only to flame forth, but a greater fire increasing, to make hot the marrow,
yea oftentimes it is known to burn up the Flesh, Inwards, and Bones, and to
reduce them to a rottenness.

As to that most quick and Intimate Commerce of the brain, From whence is this
Wonderful Commerce of the Brain, with the Genital Members.
with the genital Members, for as much as the Venerian imagination Causes
presently an insurrection in these parts, and on the other side a swelling up
of the seminal humor, stirs up the Venerial Imagination, the Cause is, not an
Instinct through the private passages of the Nerves, (which are wholly wanting)
reciprocated from this to that; but, because for the Act of Generation, greatly
necessary, and performed with a most vehement Affection, one part of the soul
by it self, or one part after another is not moved, but the whole Hypostasis,
together, and on a sudden, and is inclined or snatched toward the Genitals;
hence every most light incentives of Lust, are most swiftly powered forth through
the universal parts of the Soul, The Soul, like Flame, has in equalities
Trepidations etc.
fiery of themselves, and Extremely perclive or apt for such fires.

Whilst this Corporeal Soul, being inkindled like flame, in the animated Body,
on every side diffuseth Heat and Light, we may take notice of its various
tremblings, shakeings, inequalities, and irregular Commotions; these sorts of
Irregularities, to be observed, concerning the phasis or appearance of this
Soul, of which we treat, tho they are more perspicuous in Man than in Brute
Animals, yet they altogether respect the inferior Soul of Man, which is Common
to him with the Brute Animals. But that we may briefly handle some of these
Affections of the Corporeal Soul, first it is to be noted, that its flame does
not always flame forth equally: For besides that its food is sometimes afforded
more plentifully, and too sulphurous, sometimes more thinly and less
inflameable, so that the Flame is enlarged or Contracted, The Flame of the Soul
is sometimes enlarged by passions.
its accension also, in the praecordia, tho of it self moderate and equal, is
wont to be variously shaken, by the fanning of Passions, so that it is carried
sorth sometimes into an Excessive burning, as from Anger and Indignation;
sometimes this vital flame is in danger to be always blown out, as by sudden
Joy, and another time almost suffocated, as by sudden fear or sadness; In like
manner the Systasis or Constitution of the Soul, from the rest of the
Affections, being exposed as flame to the winds, is diversely changed in its
appearance, as will more clearly appear, when we shall speak particularly of
its Affections. Sometimes Contracted


Nor do these sorts of Inordinations only proceed from the sudden impulses of
Passions, but sometimes, the Vital flame, habitually becomes decayed, weak, and
as it is were half exstinct, The same habitually is now decayed.
as by intemperate Cold, and also as is observed in the phlegmatic disea^e,
the dropsy, longing of maids, and other diseases; in whom the Blood being too
watery, like moist and green wood, sends forth but a small and inconstant flame
and almost overwhelmed with fume and vapor: But sometimes the bloody Liquor
being more sulphurous than it ought, Now intense or strong.
is almost wholly inkindled, as happens in a Choleric Complexion, and in an
intemperate Feavor: According to either of these hights, as the inkindling of
the vital flame is altered, so the lucid particles, which flow from it, to wit
the beamie texture of the Animal spirits, Also the lucid part of the Soul
shines diversely.
diversely shines, and breaths forths from the decayed or bound up inkindling of
the Blood, the sphere of the sensitive soul is seen to be straightened, and to be
drawn in, within the limit of the Body, and to be immerged or sunk down so that
it does not sufficiently actuate or illustrate the whole frame of the Brain,
and its Appendix: On the Contrary, when the Vital Fire is very strong (so it
does not burn forth too much and feavourishly) the Constitution of the Animal
Spirits being made greater in it self, is much enlarged forth far beyond the
Compass of the Body, And is altered on the part of the Fame.
so that any one exulting for Joy, or blown up with pride, is seen to grow very
great, and not be able to be contained within its proper Dimension.

Besides these Kind of Alterations, which the Soul properly sensitive, or the
lucid part, receives, Also from the Various affection of the Brain and Nervous
stock.
from the Vital and flamie, variously changed; many other things happen, which
disturb its Systasis or Constitution, and its wonted manner of Order,
immediately both from a certain affection of the Brain, and Nervous stock, and
also from external Objects because in the night, the Brain it self, from a too
great infusion of the nutricious Juce, or from the black darkness, or vapors,
is filled, so that the lucid part of the Soul in sleep, is wholly obscured, as
it were with darkness; not seldom from a morbi^ic matter somewhere gathered
together, and as it were obstructing the Spirts, or the ways of their Beams,
there arises an Eclipse of some or more of their faculties; sometimes the
Animal Spirits themselves are not light or airey enough, but are infected with
heterogeneous effluvia's, to wit, either Saline, Vitriolic, Nitrous, or
otherwise Cloudy, which deform the sensible species, change them into some
affrightful thing, and excite inordinate Motions: Hence it comes sometimes that
the whole Soul suffers various Metamorphoses or Changes, and puts on strange
species's; as often happens in Melancholy di^ea^es, or to mad men.

As to the various gestures of the Soul, Also from the various incursions of
sensible things.
by which for the variety of sensible objects it expresses now Joy and
Pleasure, by and by loathing and trouble, it is observed, that sometimes it is
allured more outwardly by the Organ of this or that sense, and as occasion
serves almost wholly to wander into the Eye or Ear, Palate or any Sensory
meeting with something pleasant; sometimes on the Contrary, for the sake
shunning or flying away from some approaching evil, that she retires inwardly,
and leaving her watch, hides her head; so that we think or Imagine nothing
without being touched, but that the whole Soul almost is moved, and trembles at
every apprehension of the sensible object, and its Systasis is variously
agitated, as it were the leaves of a Tree, exposed to the blasts of Winds.
Alterations of the Flamy part of the Soul impressed by the Lucid.


Nor do these sensible Impressions induce Metamorphoses only to the sensitive
soul, or the beamy Texture of the Animal spirits; but undulations or waverings
being brought to it, presently they go forward, an impress alterations on the
vital Soul, lying in the blood, and move about its flame, as ^ were with
blasts, driving it hither and thither, and unequally inkindling it. For as we
mentioned before, the same moment, in which an object carried from the sense or
memory, stops at the Imagination, as that Comes under the show of good or evil,
it affects the Animal Spirits destinated to the Motion of the Precordia, and
causes the Precordia, by the influx of them, to be variously Contracted or
dilated, and for that Cause it is, that the inordinate motions, and inkindling
of the Blood, are so performed. But of these there will be a more opportune
place of treating, when we shall speak especially of the Affections of the Soul.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Science or Knowledge of Brutes.

WE have hitherto spoken of the Original Nature and manner of the Soul of the
Brutes, subsisting in the Body, as also of its various degrees or species, and
as it has in the more perfect Living Creatures Parts or Constitutive Members.
Further, the Hypostasis figure; and dimensions of the same Soul, being rightly
delineated, we have Considered, how that she is capable of Impressions from
outward Objects, also to what passions and alterations besides she is
obnoxious: yet from all this furniture of the Corporeal Soul, and of its powers
being put together, it does not plainly appear, what the same is able to do
beyond the Virtue or force of any other machine, and to perform by its own
proper Virtue or strength. The Soul of the Brute is strong in sense and motion
as a Machine.
For although an Impression of an Object driving the Animal spirits inwards, and
harmonizing them by a certain peculiar manner, causes sensation; and the same
spirits, for as much as they leap back from within outwardly, as it were by a
reflected undulation or waving, stir up local motions; yet it is not declared
how this Soul, or any part of it, perceives it self to feel, and is driven
according to that perception into diverse Passions and Actions, directed to the
Appetite or desire of this or that Action; and sometimes, as we have generally
observed in some Beasts, for the prosecution of the desired thing does pick out
and choose Acts, which seem to flow from Council, or a certain Deliberation. In
Man indeed it is obvious to be understood, that the Rational Soul, as it were
presiding, beholds the Images and Impressions represented by the sensitive
Soul, as in a looking Glass, But wonderful how by perception.
and according to the Conceptions and notions drawn from thence, exercises the
Acts of Reason, Judgment, and Will. Yet after what manner in Brutes,
Perception, a discerning or discrimination of Objects, Appetite, Memory, and
other species or Kinds of Inferior Reasons as one may say, are performed,
seems very hard to be unfolded; therefore, when some could not solve this Knot
or difficulty, they attributed to Brutes Immaterial Souls, and subsisting after
their Bodies. Which if that were true I Know not why Four footed Beasts should
not be endued with reasoning and understanding as well as man, yea and might
learn Sciences and Arts; for as much as in either, besides their immaterial
souls alike, there is altogether the same Conformation of the Animal Organs;
upon which indeed it appears, that the Rational Soul whilst in the Body, If the
Soul of the Brutes be immaterial, it is also rational.
hangs or depends as to its acts and habits, because the Organs being hurt, or
hindered, a privation or an Eclipse of these succeeds: wherefore that the Soul
of the Brute using the same Organs as man, can Know nothing clearly, nor rise
above the Acts and material Objects, it planly follows, that she is different
from the Rational Soul and also that she is much inferior and Material.

But that it is objected, that all matter whatsoever is not only insensible and
sluggish, but also merely passive, therefore incapable of sense and animal
activity, omitting here many instances of aequivocal productions, the
Epicureans affirm to be equally stupendous and inexplicable, of which we shall
discourse anon; we shall propose as to the former, this one thing, as very
Consentaneous to our Hypothesis; to wit, that there is not much more difference
between an insensible and a sensible Body, than between a thing uninkindled,
and a thing kindled; and yet we ordinarily see, this to be made from that; why
therefore in like manner, may we not judge a sensible thing, or Body to be made
out of an insensible? A sensible thing or Body, is produced from an insensible,
as an inkindled Body from one not kindled.
Every matter, as it is not Burnt, so not animated; but being disposed, by
either of the active Elements, it behooves it to be endued with Spirit chiefly,
with Sulphur and Salt: Combustible things, as Oil, Rosin, Wood, and the like,
of themselves torpid and sluggish, lie unmoved without fire, heat, or some
agitation of the parts or particles: But as soon as they have taken flame, from
some incentive being put to it, by and by their Particles being rapidly moved,
and as it were animated, produce a shining with Heat and Light; and not only
make light all about them, but Create innumerable Images, of all things that
are seated near them, and thickly object them on every side: In like manner,
the Vital humor in an Egg, remains torpid and sluggish in the beginning, and
like to unkindled matter; but as soon as it is actuated, from the Soul being
raised up, presently like an inkindled fire, it excites Life with Motion and
Sense, and in the more perfect Creatures with heat. Further, the Animal Spirits
as Rays of Light, proceeding from this Fire, are Configured according to the
Impressions of every of their Objects, and what is more, as it were meeting
together with reflected irradiations, cause diverse manner of motions.

Then what is vulgarly delivered, That matter is not merely passive.
that Matter, out of which Natural things are made, is merely passive, and
cannot be moved, unless it be moved by another thing, is not true; but rather
on the contrary, Atoms, which are the matter of sublunary things, are so very
active and self-moving, that they never stay long, but ordinarily stray out of
one subject into another; or being shut up in the same, they cut forth for
themselves Pores and Passages, into which they are Expatiated.

Yet it may be argued, But sometimes too active.
That if the Soul of the Brute be Composed out of these, whilst the same is
Extended and is Corporeal, it cannot perceive. For it admits the Species of the
Object into its whole self, or into some part of it self, not the first,
because then neither the Senses would be distinguished one from another, nor
any of them by a perception or common sensation of these: But if (as indeed it
is) it shall be said, that all the sensible Species being received by
appropriated Sensories, The common Sensorie is not the whole Soul, but a
certain part of it.
to a certain part of the Soul, to wit, the first or common Sensory, where they
are perceived: Then it may be again objected, That so manifold and diverse
Species or Images of sensible things, which at once are Conceived, from
Objects, cannot be painted forth in a certain small part of the Brain, but that
some should obliterate or blot out, or at least Confound others: I say none
ought to wonder, who has beheld the Objects of the whole Hemisphere, admitted
through an hole into a dark Chamber, and there on a sudden upon Paper exactly
drawn forth, as if done by the Pencil of an Artist: This receives all species
without Confusion.
Why then, may not also the Spirits, even as the Rays of light, frame by a
swift Configuration, the Images or Forms of things, and exhibit them without
any Confusion or Obscuring of the Species?

But yet, How this perceives that her self feels or knows.
tho it be granted, That the Images of sensible things are represented in a
certain part of the Soul, to wit, actuating the Brain it self; to which there
happens a most speedy Communication, with the whole, and also with the several
Parts: however, we are yet to inquire of what Kind of power that is, which sees
and knows such like Images there delineated, and also according to those
Impressions there received, chooses Appetites, and the respective Acts of the
other Faculties.

That we may go on to Philosophize concerning this matter, I profess indeed,
whilst I consider the Soul and the Body, to wit, either of them by it self and
distinct, I cannot readily detect, in this, or in that, or in any material
subject, any thing, to which may be attributed such a Power, with a self-moving
energy: But indeed, when I consider the animated Body, made by an Excellent and
truly Divine Workmanship, for certain Ends and Uses, nothing hinders me from
saying, That it is so framed by the Law of Creation, or by the Institution of
the most Great God, that from the Soul and Body mixed together, the same Kind
of Confluence of the Faculties does result, by which it is needful for every
Animal, to the Ends and Uses destinated to it.

In most Mechanical things, or those made by humane Art, the Workmanship Excels
the matter: As in mechanical things, so much more in an animated body the work
is more excellent than the matter.
who would think there could be an Instrument made out of Iron or Brass, being
most fixed and sluggish Metals, whose Orbs like to those of the Celestial,
without any external Mover, should observe almost continual motions, the
Periods of which being renewed at a constant turn or change, should certainly
show the spaces of Time? No Body admires that a rude and simple sound is given
by wind, blown into a Pipe; but indeed, by Wind sent into musical Organs, and
that being carried variously through manifold openings of Doors, into these or
those pipes, that it should create a most grateful Harmony, and Composed
Measures of every Kind; this I say deservedly amazes us, and we acknowledge this
Effect, far to Excel both the matter of the Instrument, and of the hand of the
Musician striking it. Further, although the Musical Organ very much requires the
labor of him playing on it, by whose direction, the spirit or wind being
admitted, now into these, anon into those, and into other Pipes, causes the
manifold harmony, and almost infinite Varieties of Tunes; yet sometimes I have
seen such an Instrument so prepared, that without any Musician directing, the
little doors being shut up, A self moving musical Organ.
by a certain law and order, by the mere Course of a Water, almost the same
harmony is made, and the same tunes, equal with those Composed by Art. And
indeed Man, seems like to the former, in which the rational Soul, sustains the
part of the Musician playing on it, which governing and directing the animal
spirits, disposes and orders at its pleasure, the Faculties of the Inferior
Soul: But the Soul of the Brute, being scarce moderatrix of its self, To which
the soul of the Brute is like.
or of its Faculties, Institutes, for Ends necessary for it self, many series
of Actions, but those (as it were tunes of harmony produced by a water Organ,
of another Kind) regularly prescribed by a certain Rule or Law, and almost
always determinated to the same thing.

This indeed holds good, concerning the more imperfect Brutes, in whose Souls
or Natures are inscribed the types or ways of the Actions to be performed by
them, which they rarely or never transgress or go beyond; and that according to
the vulgar saying in the Schools, They do not so much act, as are acted: yet in
some more perfect Brutes, whose Actions are ordained to many and more noble
Uses, there are far more Original Types, and to their Souls there ought to be
attributed a certain faculty of Varying their Types, and of Composing them in
themselves; for the Brutal Soul it self, being so gifted naturally, as she is
Knowing and Active, concerning some things necessary for it; she is taught
through Various Accidents, by which she is wont to be daily affected, to know
afterward other things, The more perfect Brutes are endued with knowledge.
and to perform many other, and more intricate Actions: But how all this may be
done, (without calling an immaterial Soul into play) to wit, by what helps,
whether innate or adventitious, or acquired, the Science of the Brutes is
gotten or pollish'd, will be worth our Labor to show a little more fully: that
it may appear at length, what is the utmost thing that living Brutes can know
or do, and how far that is below the power of the Rational Soul.

Therefore, that we may seek out as it were the several footsteps, by which all
brute Animals are imbued with the Knowledge of things; we ought first to
distinguish here, that some of their Knowledge is born with them, as we but now
hinted, to wit, for some Uses needful for the lengthning of Life, That is
either inbred.
being infused by the most high Creator, and impressed like a Character, from
their first formation, on the beginnings, or on their very Natures themselves,
which is wont commonly to be called Natural Instinct: But others acquired, to
wit, which by degrees is learned, by the incursion of sensible things,
Imitation, Or acquired.
humane Institution, and other ways, and is carried to a greater degree of
Perfection in some than in others; yet in some, this acquired Knowledge, as also
Cuning, depend wholly on the natural Instinct, and being polished by frequent
use and habit, and Carried a little further, seem to be certain additions only.

What natural instinct is.
First, As to what regards natural Instincts, it is a great and most ancient
Notion, That there is in all Living Creatures, an innate Conservation of
themselves, to wit, that every Individual might preserve it self as long as it
can: This is a Law of Divine Providence, inbred in all Creatures, which gathers
together the Principles of Life like a Bond, otherways apt to be dissipated and
to depart one from another, and on which, as the Basis, the Duration or
Continuance of the whole World stands.

What it brings to the Brutes.
This being supposed, it necessarily follows, that all Animals ordained for this
end, are furnished also with certain fit means, for following the same,
wherefore they ought to know by Natural Instinct, whatsoever things are
Congruous and benign, and what are incongruous or hurtful to them, and that
they should follow these with hatred and aversion; and those with Love and
delight. Hence it is, that every one of them are able to choose Food proper for
themselves, and to seek it being absent, and remote from their Eyes; And from
an implanted disposition of their Nature, are skilful to know and oppose
Enemies, to love their Friends, to get a female fit for themselves, and to make
ready whatever may conduce to the Procreating and Cherishing their Young;
besides many other Kinds of powers and habits, granted to us not without
Learning and Study, are originally fixed on the Praecordia of the Beast.

And truly, if we look upon the Ingenuity and Proprieties of all Animals, we
shall find these Kind of Effects after a manner in all: Some examples and
instances of it.
For many of them are no sooner brought to light, but they seek and greedily
embrace remedies against hunger and Cold, without any guide or shower; then
being somewhat grown up, tho Carefully Kept from all their Companions, yet
without any one to show them, or any example, they of their own accord perform
the peculiar Actions of their Kind. A Lamb just brought forth, and scarcely out
of the afterbirth, presently snatches at and sucks the Duggs of its Dam. A
Chicken, as soon as out of the shell, will pick up grains of Corn, hides it
self under the wings of the Hen, and flies from the approach of the Kite.
Cattle feeding in the Pastures, are more Skilful than Men, about the Virtues of
Herbs; Natural Instinct dictates to Brutes, what is wholesome and what
unwholesome.
for they easily discern at the first taste, what are for food; what for
Medicine, yea, what is to be shunned, being imbued with poison and death; when
we in the mean time, unless taught by experience, are wholly ignorant of their
Virtues or poisonous force: so that Pliny Complained, that it was a shame, that
all Animals Knew what was healthful for themselves, besides Man.

Neither does what some object otherways determinate this matter, that the
means of these Kind of effects, depend only upon the similitude or the
dissimilitude of Patricles, which are in the sensible and the Sensory, without
any intention of the Beasts, or End of their Acting; because we have observed,
that Brute living Creatures, by the Virtue of natural Instinct, perform not
only simple actions, stirred up by one Impression of the External agent, as
when the heat of the Sun invites to take the Cool of that shade, but they
perform and do manifold works, and Continued by a long Series. Birds by reason
of the Influence of the Spring, being instigated to the begetting others apply
themselves to that business, Leads not only to simple Actions but also to very
Complicate Actions.
without any other provoker or director, as it were Consultingly and
premeditated; for they enter into wedlock, as it were by a solemn manner of
Espousals, they choose a fit place for the building their nest or habitation,
where they make it most artificially beyond the skill of humane Architecture;
then they lay Eggs, and by sitting on them bring forth young ones, and then
carefully nourish them with food which they get for them. We might here also
take notice of the most admirable Republiques of Bees and Ants, in which,
without any written Laws or promulged Right, the most perfect ways of
Government are exercised. But as in all these without any Variety, one thing is
always and wholly after the same manner administered, it is a sign, that these
Kind of principles or beginnings of the Brutes, are nor stirred up either by
external objects, whose Impulse is still various and diverse, nor from an
internal proposition of the Mind, which is more mutable than the wind; But
excited from a more fixed and Certain principle, determinate always to one
thing, which can be only Natural Instincts: The World is full of Examples of
this sort, But yet those always, and in all, of one Kind only.
which testify the native indowments and implanted Ingeny of Brutes: For in
all Animals, there are by Nature a Certain Ingeny and habit born with them, by
which they are instigated through a secret impulse and blind power to the
performing of Actions, which respect both the Conservation of themselves, and
the propagation of their Kind; and these Gifts being originally granted,
constitute as it were the first lin^aments or groundwork of practical
Knowledge, with which the Soul of Brutes are wont to be imbued: then an
acquired Cognition being superadded to those rudiments, fills up the vacuities
of those things drawn forth, and adds a perfection to the former foundation.

For Secondly, Brutes, in some things, are taught by the Impressions of
sensible things.
besides the natural Instincts, living Brutes are wont to be taught by sensible
species, to wit, to profit in the Knowledge of several things, and to acquire
certain habits of practice: But this happens not equally to all nor at all
times. For in many Animals newly brought forth, natural Instinct is of some
force, but then the Impressions of sensible things little or nothing affect the
sensitive soul: Because, although the flamy part of the Soul is enough inkindled
in the Brain, yet because the Brain and its Appendix, abounds with much
humidity, therefore the Spirituous Effluvias, or the lucid part of the Soul
which ought to irradiate these Bodies, is very much obscured, as the beam of
the Sun passing through a thick Cloud: Wherefore at this time, the strokes of
sensible things, being not deeply fixed, are presently obliterated, and in them
local motions hardly follow: yea in some Beasts, in whom the Blood being
continually and habitually thick, and who have a less Clear Brain, tho through
their whole Life some acts of the Exterior Senses and Motions are performed,
yet few Characters are left, of any interior Knowledge. Wherefore, we shall
here inquire only concerning Brutes, that are more docil, to wit, in whom are
besides local motions, and the five Exterior Senses, Memory, and Imagination;
and in these we may conceive this kind of Introduction, or Method of
Institution, concerning the Exquisite Knowledge, by the sense with which they
are wont to be imbued.

Therefore, The direct sensible Species creates in them the Fantasy and the
Memory.
as soon as the Brain in the more pefect Brutes grows Clear, and the
Constitution of the Animal Spirits becomes sufficiently lucid and defecated,
the exterior Objects being brought to the Organs of the Senses, make
Impressions, which being from thence transmitted, for the continuing the Series
or Order of the Animal Spirits inwards, toward the streaked Bodies, affect the
Common Sensory; and when as a sensible Impulse of the same, like a waving of
Waters, is carried further into the Callous Body, and thence into the Cortex or
shelly substance of the Brain, a Perception is brought in, concerning the
Species of the thing admitted, by the Sense, to which presently succeeds the
Imagination, The reflected be Appetite.
and marks or prints of its Type being left, constitutes the Memory; But in the
mean time, whilst the sensible Impression being brought to the common Sensory,
effects there the Perception of the thing felt; as some direct Species of it,
tending further creates the Imagination and Memory; so other reflected Species
of the same Object, as they appear either Congruous or Incongruous, produce the
Appetite, and local motions its Executors; that is, the Animal Spirits looking
inwards, for the Act of Sension, being struck back, leap toward the streaked
Bodies; and when as these Spirits presently possessing the Beginnings of the
Nerves, irritate others, they make a desire of flying from the thing felt, and
a motion of this or that member or part, to be stirred up: Then, because this
Kind, The Appetite stirs up local Motion.
or that Kind of Motion succeeds once or twice, to this or to that Sension,
afterward, for the most part, this Motion follows that Sension as the Effect
follows the Cause: and according to this manner, by the admitting the Idea's of
sensible things, both the Knowledge of several things, and the habits of things
to be done, or of local Motions, are by little and little produced: For indeed,
from the beginning, almost every Motion of the animated Body is stirred up by
the Contact of the outward Object; to wit, the Animal Spirits residing within
the Organ, are driven inward, being stricken by the Object, and so (as we have
said) constitute Sension or Feeling; then, like as a Flood sliding along the
Banks of the shore, is at last beaten back, so, because this waving or inward
turning down of the Animal Spirits, being partly reflected from the Common
Sensory, is at last directed outward, and is partly stretched forth even into
the inmost part of the Brain, presently local Motion succeeds the Sension; and
at the same time, a Character being affixed on the Brain, by the sense of the
thing perceived, it impresses there, Marks or Vestigia of the same, for the
Fantasy and the Memory then affected, and afterward to be affected; but
afterward, when as the Prints or Marks of very many Acts of this Kind of
Sensation and Imagination, as so many Tracts or Ways, Which being often stirred
up produce an habit of Acting.
are engraven in the Brain, the Animal Spirits, oftentimes of their own accord,
without any other forewarning, and without the presence of an Exterior Object,
being stirred up into Motion, for as much, as the Fall into the footsteps
before made, represent the Image of the former thing; with which, when the
Appetite is affected, it desiring the thing objected to the Imagination, causes
spontaneous Actions, and as it were drawn forth from an inward Principle. As
for Examples sake, The Stomach of an Horse, feeding in a barren Ground or
fallow Land, being incited by hunger, stirs up and variously agitates the
Animal Spirits flowing within the Brain; the Spirits being thus moved by
accident, because they run into the footsteps formerly made, they call to mind
the former more plentiful Pasture fed on by the Horse, and the Meadows at a
great distance, then the Imagination of this desirable thing, (which then is
cast before it, by no outward Sense, but only from the Memory,) stops at the
Appetite: that is, the Spirits implanted in the streaked Bodies, are affected
by that Motion of the spirits flowing within the middle part or Marrow of the
Brain; who from thence presently after their former accustomed manner, enter
the origines of the Nerves, and actuating the Nervous System after their
wonted* manner by the same Series, produce local Motions, by which the hungry
Horse is carried from place to place, till he has found out the Imagined
Pasture, and indeed enjoyes that good the Image of which was painted in his
Brain.

After this manner, the sensible Species being intromitted, by the benefit of
the Exterior Organs, in the more perfect Brutes, for that they affix their
Characters on the Brain, and there leave them, they constitute the Faculties of
Fantasy and Memory, as it were Storehouses full of Notions; further,
stirring up the Appetite into local Motions, agreeable to the Sensions
frequently, they produce an habit of Acting; so that some Beasts being Taught
or Instructed for a long time, by the assiduous Incursion of the Objects, are
able to know and remember many things, and further learn manifold works; to
wit, to perform them by a Complicated and Continued series and succession of
very many Actions. Moreover, this Kind of acquired Knowledge of the Brutes, and
the Practical habits introduced through the Acts of the Senses, Brutes are also
taught by experience.
are wont to be promoted by some other means, to a greater degree of perfection.

For in the third place, it happens to these by often Experience that the
Beasts are not only made more certain of simple things, but it teaches them to
form certain Propositions, and from thence to draw certain Conclusions.
Because, draught Beasts, having sometimes found water to be Cooling, they seek
it far as a remedy of too much heat; wherefore, when their Precordia grow hot,
running to the River they drink of it, and if they are hot in their whole Body
they fearlesly lie down in the same. In truth, many Actions which appear
admirable in Brutes came to them at first by some accident, which being often
repeated by Experience, pass into Habits, which seem to show very much of
Cunning and Sagacity; because, the sensitive soul is easily accustomed to every
Institution or Performance, and its Actions begun by Chance, and often
repeated, pass into a Manner and Custom. So it happens sometimes by Chance,
among Hounds, that one had caught the prey, not exactly but by following a
Shorter way; this Dog afterward, as if he were much more Cunning than the
rest, leaves the Hare making her turnings and windings, and runs directly to
meet her another way.

Living Brutes are taught by Example, By Example, Imitation, and Institution
also
by the Imitation and Institution of others of the same or of a diverse Kind, to
perform certain more excellent Actions. Hence it is that the Ape so plainly
imitates Man, that by some, it is thought a more imperfect Species of him. For
this Animal being extremely mimical, as it is endued with a most Capacious and
hot Brain, it imitates to an hair, almost all the Gestures that it happens to
see, presently with a ready and expeditious Composing of its Members, and is
furnished with a notable Memory, and retains all its tricks which it has once
acted very firmly afterward, and is wont to repeat them at its pleasure. They
are very admirable habits, which Horses, Dogs, and Birds get, being carefully
instructed by the Discipline of Man; and not only from Men but being taught
first by their Companions, they imbibe altogether new and more Excellent
Customs: so one Dog ordinarily teaches another to hunt, and one Bird another to
compose harmonious notes and various tunes. It were an Easy matter to bring
very many Instances of this Kind. But we shall hasten to other things.

Having thus enumerated the Chief Helps from Nature and Art, by which living
Brutes do profit in the Knowledge of things, How far it is that Brutes are able
to Know.
and are instructed by the Habits of Acting, we shall now inquire, to what
hight most of them or all of them put together, can arrive.

First, from what we have said it is clear, that Living Brutes are directed to
all things which belong to the Defense and Conservation of the Individuum, and
that are to be done for the propagation of their Kind, by a natural Instinct,
as it were a Law or Rule fixed in their Hearts: when as therefore we behold for
these ends, ordained by Divine Providence, Brutes to order their matters
wisely, and as it were by Council, no man Esteems this the work of Reason, or
of any liberal faculty; yea they are led into these enterprises, by a certain
Praedestination, rather than by any proper Virtue or Intention.

Secondly, How natural Instinct i^ wont to be Compared with acquired Notions.
The Natural Instinct of Brutes, happens, not rarely, with notions acquired by
the sense, and being Complicated with them conduces to the Propositions or
Assumptions to be done, Concerning many things, and the Deductions to be drawn
from thence. A Dog being by a staff struck, or by the flinging of a stone,
perceives the hurt received by the senses, and easily retains the Idea in his
Memory, but the Instinct dictates to him that the like stroke may be shunned
afterward, With the Impressions of sensible things.
wherefore, when he sees a staff held out before his eyes, or a stone taken up,
fearing thence the like hurt, he hastily flies away.

Thirdly, With Habits learnt from Example or Institution.
sometimes Instincts, and also all other acquired Knowledges, are mixed
together, either with the Example of Habits, or with the general Institution of
things learnt: And when as notions so arising from one faculty or power, answer
to Actions drawn from another, from thence is produced a certain Kind of
Discourse or Ratiocination, and often times it is continued by a certain Series
or Third of Argumentation. Many admirable Histories are reported, concerning
the Subtilties and Craft of the Fox, which he is wont to perform for the
getting of his living. This Creature, that he might allure the Hens within the
Compass of his Chain, with which he was tied, lying all along, his legs
stretched forth, feigns as if he were dead, then they coming near him, he
readily leaps upon them. Moreover, I have heard it told, that a wild Fox, that
he might get into his clutches a Turkey Cock roosting in a Tree, running round
the Body of the Tree, with a swift Motion, continually beheld the Bird with an
intentive Eye, by which Means, as the Turkey still followed the Fox thus
running Round with his eye, carrying his head about till being infected with a
giddiness, he fell down from the top of the Tree, into the mouth of his Enemy:
I say, it was natural to the Fox, that he should desire domestic Fowl, as his
prey; but that he should frame these Kind of Snares for them, this he must have
by former acquired Knowledges, from Sense, Experience, and Imitation, and
complicated with natural Instinct. It is very likely that the Fox had learnt by
former Experience, With notions learnt from Experience and Imitation.
that the Hens did not fear him lying as dead, which might happen by Chance,
when being wearied, or to sleep, he had laid himself on the ground: In like
manner, perhaps, when he had run about the Tree, seeking some way to get up
into it, the Prey might fall down into his mouth; Wherefore afterward when he
would take his prey, he repeated the Series of the same Actions; because, what
he had known to be done before, he presumed might be done again. In both Cases,
and in others like them, the reason of the whole thing done, or the Endeavor,
is resolved into these Propositions; The Fox thinking, now to take the Prey,
that is before his eyes, after what manner he may, remembers how he had taken
the same formerly, by these or those sort of Cunning ways or Crafts, The
Syllogisms of Beasts.
found out by some chance; These are the Premises, the former of which is
suggested from Nature, and the second from Sense and Experience, from whence a
Conclusion follows, Therefore Foxes for the taking of their Prey, use again the
same Wiles. According to this sort of Analyzing, the most Intricate Actions of
Brutes, which seem to contain Ratiocination, may be explained, and reduced into
Competent notions of the sensitive Soul.

CHAP. VII.
The Corporeal Soul, or that of the Brutes, is Compared with the Rational Soul.

FRom what we have said is to be understood, how much it is that Brute Animals
are wont to do with the whole furniture of the Corporeal Soul, and to obtain
toward the use of Reason: But now we shall endeavor to show, how far they are
below it, Three heads of this Discourse viz. 1. It is shown that the Rational
Soul far excels the Brutal.
and how much less they are able to do than Man, endued with a Rational Soul.
The means of observing the difference between these Souls are commonly to be
had, being noted by diverse Authors both Ancient and Modern and both
Philosophers and Theologists, till it is almost worn threadbare, yet we will
take leave to show you only some few select things, which for Methods sake, we
shall reduce to these three Heads: viz. 1st. It is shown, That man using
expeditiously and freely the Powers of the Superior Soul, of the Intellect,
Judgment, Discourse, and other Acts of Reason, shows them far excelling any
Faculty or Science of the Brute, How both Souls are joined in Man, and
and the whole power of the Corporeal Soul. 2. By what Knitting the Corporeal
Soul, and the Rational are joined together, in the Humane Body, by what means
they agree in the same habitation; also what offices they perform each. How
they frequently disagree among themselves.
3. Shall be declared, for what means, and for what occasions these Souls
differ among themselves, yea sometimes are wont to dissent and move more than
Civil Wars.

The Priority of the Rational Soul as to
The eminency of the Rational Soul above the Brutal or Corporeal, shines clearly
by comparing either, both as to the Objects, and to the chief Acts or Modes of
Knowing. As to the former, when as every Corporeal Faculty is limited to
sensible things, and every one of these to certain Kinds of things, The Objects
which are Every Ens.
the object of the humane Mind is every Ens, whether it be above, or sublunary,
or below the Moon, Material or Immaterial, true or fictitious, real or
Intentional; wherefore Aristotle, who seemed to hesitate something about the
Nature of the Rational Soul, hinting its acting Intellect as if it were
Immaterial and Immortal, does pronounce it not only separable and without
Passion, but also unmixt because it understands all things. Lib. de Anima 3.
Cap. 4.

The Acts of Knowing. The first Act of either Soul is simple Apprehension.
Secondly, The Acts or degrees of Knowledge, Common to either Soul, are Vulgarly
accounted these three. To wit, simple Apprehension, Enunciation, and Discourse;
how much the Power of the Rational, excells the other Corporeal in each, we
shall consider:

The power of this in Brutes is Fantasy or Imagination.
First, The Knowing Faculty of the Corporeal Soul is Fantasy or Imagination,
which being planted in the middle part of the Brain, receives the Sensible
Species, first only impressed on the Organs of sense, and from thence by a most
quick Irradiation of the spirits delivered inwards, and so apprehends all the
several corporeal things, according to their Exterior Appearances; Which is
often deceived.
which notwithstanding, as they are perceived only by the sense (which i^ often
deceived) they are admitted under an appearing, and not always under a true
Image or Species. For so we Imagine the Sun no bigger than a Bushel, the
Horizon of the Heaven and the Sea to meet, and then the Stars not to be far
distant from us in the Horizon, and that in respect of us, there are no
Antipodes; further we may think the Image in the Glass, or in a Fountain
delineates it self, that the Echo it self is a Voice coming from some other
place, that the shore moves being on the water, yea and many other things,
being received by the Sensories, whilst Fantasy is the only guide seem far
otherways than indeed they are: In man it is the Intellect presiding over the
Imagination.
But indeed, the Intellect presiding over the Imagination, beholds all the
Species deposited in it self, discerns and corrects their obliquities or
hypocrisies the Fantasy there drawn forth sublimes, and divesting it from
matter forms universal things from singulars; Which discerns the errors of
this.
moreover, it frames out of these some other more sublime Thoughts, not
Competent for the Corporeal Soul: so it speculates or Considers both the nature
of every substance, and abstracted from the Individuals of Accident, Sublimates
its notions, and divests them from Matter.
viz: Humanity, Ratiotinality, Temperance, Fortitude, Corporeity,
Spirituallity, Whiteness, and the like; besides, being carried higher, it
Contemplates God, Angels, It self, Infinity, Eternity, and many other notions,
far remote from Sense and Imagination. And so as our Intellect, in these kind
of Metaphysical Conceptions, makes things almost wholly naked of matter, or
carrying it self beyond every sensible Species, consider or beholds them wholly
immaterial, this argues certainly, that the Substance or Nature of the Rational
Soul is Immaterial and Immortal: Contemplates immaterial Substances.
Because, if this Aptness or Disposition were Corporeal, as it can conceive
nothing Incorporeal by Sense, it should suspect there were no such thing in the
World.

Secondly, The Second Act of either Soul is Enunciation.
It appears clearly, from what was said before, that Fantasy, or the Knowing
faculty of the Corporeal Soul, does not only apprehend simple things, but also
Compose or Divide many things at once, and from thence to make enuntiations:
Because living Brutes, in various objects together, which are for food, discern
things Convenient from others Inconvenient or unfit; moreover, they choose out
of these, things grateful before others less grat^ful, and get them sometimes
by Force, sometimes by Cunning, and as it were by stealth. A Dog knows a Man at
a great distance; if he be a Friend, he runs to him and fawns on him; If an
Enemy and fearful, he barks at him or flies at him, but if armed or threatening
him, he flies away from him. These kind of Propositions the Brutes easily
conceive, What and how slender this is in Brutes.
for as much as some Species of the sensible thing being newly admitted, meets
with Species of one thing or other before laid up in the memory, or being
suggested by a Natural Instinct, associates with them or repulses them. But
indeed, how little is this, in respect of the humane Intellect? which not only
beholds all enunciations conceived by the fantasy, but judges them, whether
they be true or false, Congruous or Incongruous; orders and disposes them into
Series of Notions, accommodated to speculation or practice: Moreover, it
restrains the fantasy it self, being too instable and apt to wander through
various fantasies; it calls it away from these or those Conceptions, The
rational judges, discerns, and directs the propositions of the Fantasy.
and directs it to others, yea it keeps it within certain limits at its
pleasure, lest it Should expatiate or divert too much from the thing proposed:
Which out of doubt is a sign that there is a Superior Soul in Man, that
moderates and governs all the faculties and Acts of the Corporeal. But the
Intellect, not only eminently Contains every Virtue of the fantasy; It
deduces from these others more sublime thoughts.
but from the Species perceived in it, deduces many other thoughts altogether
unknown to the sense, and which the Fantasy of it self could no way Imagine.
For Besides, that it conceives the formal notions of Corporeal things,
abstracted from all matter, and attributes to them praedicates merely
Intentional yea and understands axioms or first principles alone, and as it
were by a proper Instinct, It beholds it self by a reflected Action.
without recourse to Corporeal Species; the humane mind also beholds it self,
by a reflected Action, it supposes it self to think, and thence Knowing a
proper existency, not to be perceived neither by Sense nor by Fantasy; when
in the mean time, neither Sense nor Imagination (of which no Images are extant)
do perceive it self to know or imagine: And Contemplates other things remote
from sense, as God etc.
Besides these, the Rational Soul comprehends, as it were by its own proper
light, God to be Infinite and Eternal, that he ought to be Worshipped, that
Angels or Spirits do inhabit the World, Heaven, and places beneath the Earth,
that there are places of Beatitude, and Punishment, and many other notions
merely Spiritual, by no means to be learnt from Sense or Fantasy.

3. The perogatives of the Rational Soul, The Ratiocination of the Brute, what
and how vile.
and the differences from the other Sensitive or Corporeal, may be yet further
noted, by Comparing the Acts of Judgment and Discourse, or Ratiocination, which
it puts forth more perfectly, and often time demonstratively, when these Kind
of Acts, from this power in the Brutes, are drawn forth imperfectly, and only
analogically, we have already declared the utmost that Brutes can do, and how
far they can go toward the exercise of Reasoning and Deliberation, through
innate faculties, The humane Mind immensly more excellent.
and acquired habits; which truly, if the whole be compared with the functions
of the humane Intellect, and its Scientifick Habits, it will hardly seem
greater than the drop of a Bucket, to the Sea. For to say nothing of that
natural Logic, by which any one endoued with a free and perspicacious mind, Is
imbued with a natural Logic.
probably and sometimes most certainly concludes, Concerning all doubtful
things, or things sought after, if that we mind how much the humane mind being
adorned by Learning, and having learnt the Sciences and liberal Arts, is able
to work, understand, and search out; it would be thought, tho in an Humane
Body, to be rather living with Gods or Angels. For indeed here may be
Considered, the whole Encyclopaedia or Circle of Arts and Sciences, which
excepting Divinity) has been the Product or Creature of the Humane Mind, and
indeed argues the Workman if not divine, It has Created all Arts and Sciences
(except Theology)
at least to be a particle of Divine Breath, to wit, a Spiritual Substance,
wonderfully Intelligent, Immaterial, and which therefore for the future is
Immortal. It would be tedious here to rehearse the Subtle Wiles of Logic, and
the extremely curious web of Notions, Logic.
or of the Reason of Essences, or Beings, where the things of Natural
Philosophy being unfolded by their Causes, Physic.
are dissected as it were to the Life; the most pleasant Speculations, the
profound Theorems or rather Celestial, of the Metaphysics or supernatural
things; Metaphysics.
yea and the grand Mysteries of other learning first found out by humane
Industry. But above the rest, is it not truly amazing to see the most certain
Demonstrations of the Mathematics, Mathematics.
and therefore Akin and greatly alluding to the Humane Mind, its Problems and
Riddles how difficult soever to be extricated, with no labor, yea and many
things of it attained, and most glorious Inventions. Algebra.
What is it below a Prodigy, that Algebra from one Number or Dimension, which
at first was uncertain and unknown, being placed, should find out the quantity
of another altogether unknown? What shall I say concerning the Proportions of a
Circle, a Triangle, a Quadrangle, and other Figures, and of their Sides or
Angles variously measurable among themselves, being most exactly computed? what
besides, that the Humane Intellect having learnt the Precepts of Geometry and
Astronomy, takes the spaces of inaccessible places, Admirable things of
Geometry and Astronomy.
and their heights, the floor or breadth of any superficies, and the contents
of solids, yea the dimensions of the whole Earthly Globe: measures exactly the
spaces of hours and days, the times of the year, the Tropicks, by the progress
only of a shadow? yea it measures the Orbs, Magnitudes, and Distances of the
Sun and Stars, for a long time to come, Calculates, and exactly Foretells,
their risings and settings, motions, declinations, and Aspects one to another;
we should want time, should we go about to enumerate the several portentous
things, either of the practice or speculation in the Mathematics. The humane
Mind does wonders in mechanical Things.
Then, if passing over to Mechanical things, We shall consider the several
Works and Inventions of Workmen, and the artificial Smiths-Works wonderfully
made, there will be no place for doubting, but that the humane Soul, which can
so famously understand, invent, and find out, and effect, I had almost said,
Create things so stupendous, must needs be far above the Brutal, Immaterial
and Immortal; especially because Living Brutes obtain only a few and more
simple Notions and Intentions of Acting, yea and those always of the same Kind,
and not determinated but to one Thing, altogether ignorant of the Causes of
things, and know not Rights or Laws of political Society: further, they make no
Fires or Houses, nor find out any mechanical Arts, they put not on clothes, nor
dress their food, yea unless taught by Imitation, they know not how to number
Three. In respect of Man, how little is it that the Soul of a Brute Can do?
When therefore we have plainly detected in Man, besides the Corporeal Soul,
such as is Common with Brutes, the prints of another superior, merely
spiritual, we shall next seek out by what bond, and by what necessitude, these
twins are conjoined, and intimately come together, in the same Body.

Some of those, who have showed the difference, between the Souls of the Brute
and of Man, affirming the Irrational or Corporeal peculiar to them, would have
the Rational Soul of Man, to perform not only the Offices of the Intellect and
Discourse, but also the other Offices of Sense and Life, yea to do and
administer the whole Economy of Nature: To which opinion (however it may have
prevailed in our Schools) the opinions of most learned men of every Age has
been clearly opposite. That there are two distinct Souls in Man besides many
other of latter Time there are for Authors
That I may not be tedious, in rehearsing of many, I shall cite only two
Authors (but either of which is worth a Multitude) in the Confutation of this
Assertion. One is, that famous Philosopher, Peter Gassendus, who Physic. Sect.
3. lib. 9. Cap. 11. differencing the Mind of Man, as much as he could, from
that other Sensitive Power of his, by many and very remarquable notes of
discrimination, yea (as it is said in the Schools) by Specific Differences,
Gassendus
he has (as they say) divided the whole Heaven between: Because when he had
showed this to be Corporeal, Extensive, and also Nascible or that may be born,
and Corruptible, he says that the other was an Incorporeal Substance, and
therefore Immortal, which is Created mediately by God, and infused into the
Body; which opinion he shows Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and many ancient
Philosophers, besides Epicurus, very much to have favored; excepting however,
that they, for as much as they not knowing the beginning of the Soul they
judged Immortal, affirmed it, taken from the Soul of the world, to slide into
the humane Body, and it to be refunded again either immediately into that Soul
of the World, or mediately at length, after a Transmigration through other
Bodies. The other suffrage concerning this matter is, of the most Learned
Divine, our Dr Hammond, who unfolding that Text of St Paul to the
Thessalonians, And Hammond.
1 chap. 5. v. 23. The whole Body Soul and Spirit: says, that man is divided
into three parts, to wit, First into the body, which is the Flesh and Members:
Secondly, Into an Animal Life, which also being Animal and Sensitive, is common
to Man with the Brutes; And Thirdly, into Spirit, by which is signified the
rational Soul, at first Created by God, which being also Immortal, returns to
God, Lib. Annot. on the New Testament, p. 711. He Confirms this his Exposition,
by Testimonies taken from Ethnic Authors, also from the Fathers. And truly it
is most evidently plain, from what has been said, That Man is made, as it were
an Amphibious Animal, or of a middle Nature and Order, between Angels and
Brutes, and does Communicate with both, with these by the Corporeal Soul, from
the Vital Blood, and heap of Animal Spirits, and with those by an intelligent,
This also Reason dictates.
immaterial, and immortal Soul. And indeed, Reason persuades us plainly that
it is so, to wit, for as much as we find in our selves, as by and by shall be
more fully shown, the Strifes and Dissentions of one Soul with another,
sometimes this, The Rational Soul does not exercise the Animal Faculties.
and sometimes that getting the Rule, or being in Subjection. But as it is
said, That the Rational Soul does exercise of it self all the Animal Faculties,
is most improbable; because the Acts and Passions of all the Senses, and Animal
Motions are Corporeal, being divided and extended to various Parts; to the
performing which immediately, the incorporeal and indivisible Soul seems
unable, so that it would be finite. Then as to what respects that Vulgar
Opinion, that the Sensitive Soul is subordinate to the Rational, and is as it
were swallowed up of it, as that which in Brutes is the Soul, is mere Power in
Man; Obliterates not the Sensitive Soul by its Coming.

Nor transmutes it into a mere Power.


these are trifles of the Schools. For how should the Sensitive Soul of Man,
which subsisting at first in Act, was material and extended, foregoing its
Essence at the coming of the Rational Soul, degenerate into a mere Quality? if
that it should be asserted, That the Rational Soul by its coming, does
introduce also Life and Sensation, then Man does not generate an animated Man,
but only an inform Body, or a rude lump of Flesh.

Therefore, By what Bond the Rational Soul is united to the Body.
supposing that the Rational Soul, does come to the Body first animated by
another Corporeal Soul, we shall inquire, by what Bond or Knitting, since it is
pure Spirit, it can be united to it, for as much as it has not Parts, by which
it might be gathered to, or cohere with this whole, or any of its Parts.
Concerning this, I think we may say, That the Corporeal Soul is the Subject of
the Rational. Gass. Physic. Sect. 3. Memb. Post l. 9. c. 11.
with the most Learned Gassendus, That the Corporeal Soul is the immediate
Subject of the Rational Soul, of which, as she is the Act, Perfection,
Complement, and Form by her self, the Rational Soul also effects the Form, and
Acts of the humane Body. But for as much, as it seems not equal nor necessary,
that the whole Corporeal Soul, should be employed by the whole Rational;
therefore we may affirm, this purely Spiritual, to sit as in its Throne, in the
principal Part or Faculty of it, to wit, in the Imagination, made out of an
handful of Animal Spirits, most highly subtle, and seated in the Middle or
Marrowie part of the Brain: Because, when as the Species, or every sensible
Impression, of which we are any ways Knowing, being inflicted any where on the
Humane Body, is carried to the Imagination or Fantasy, and there all the
Appetites or Spontaneous Conceptions, or Intentions of things to be done, are
excited, the Intellect or Humane Mind, presiding in this Imperial seat, easily
performs the Government of the whole Man. Gassend. Ibid.
For (as Gassendus properly has it) As there is no necessity for a King, to be
in his whole Kingdom, but only in his Palace, to which place, are carried
whatever happens in the Kingdom; The Seat or Palace of the Humane Mind, is in
the Fantasy.
so the Fantasy is the Kingly Palace of the Intellect, to which may be
brought whatsoever are acted Spontaneously and to our Knowledge, in the whole
Body. But as to what has relation to the Functions merely Natural, which being
done by a constant manner of Economy, as it were by a Law from the Creator,
are performed unknown to the Animal, it were not fit, that the Imagination,
much less the Intellect, should attend on these lower Offices: although also, the
faults of these, as often as they are amiss, lying hid to the Imagination, the
Intellect most often finds them out, and procures them to be amended. The
manner by which the Phantasms are behold by the Intellect, viz. Intuition, not
Perculsion.

The Rational Soul is inclined to the Body.


As to the Mode of the Intellect, by which the Phantasms of all sensible Things
being drawn in the Imagination, is beheld, it may be said, That this is done
not by perculsion from the Corporeal Species, (for this is repugnant to the
Corporeal Faculty) but by an Intuition into it self, expressed in the
Fantasy. But as the Rational Soul, will stay and preside in the Court of the
Fantasy, there is no need that she should be shut out from thence, or bound
by any Bond; because destinated to this by the most high Creator, to wit, that
it should be the informing Form of Man; and also her self is very much
inclined, to the Inhabiting this House; because, whilst in the Body, it
depends very much, as to its Operation, on the Fantasy, without the help of
which, it can know or understand nothing. The Intellect depends upon the
Fantasy.
For it draws its first Species and fundamental Idaea's, by which it rears all
its manner of Knowledge, from the Imagination; wherefore, that the Mind of one
Man understands more, and reasons better, than that of another, it does not
thence follow, that Rational Souls are inequal, but every disparity, concerning
the Intellect, proceeds immediately from the Fantasy, but mediately and
principally from the Brain, being variously disposed. For as this being
affected, by an Intemperate or Evil Conformation, By reason of the various
Constitution of this, and the Brain, Souls seem unequal.
the Spirits being made more dull, or hindered, cannot irradiate and actuate in
their due manner; therefore the Phantasms are difficient or distorted, and the
Faults or Vices of these infects the Intellect. Hence it very often happens, by
reason of some hurt coming to the Brain, that the Faculties or Habits, or
Ratiocination or Reasoning, howsoever strong, are diminished or taken away:
Because, as the most Skilful Gassendus tell us, That the acquisition and loss
of an habit, stands in the Power of the Brain and Fantasy, a subject purely
Corporeal; but that the Intellect, as it wants Parts, cannot be wrought upon by
Parts, but that it is from the beginning, and of its own Nature, a full and
perfect power of understanding; which understands, not more by the coming of
any Habit, but is rather it self an Habit, always ready to understand:
wherefore he says, How the Habits of Reasoning are acquired and performed.
that Aristotle has hit the mark, when he says, that his Agent having its
Intellect, as it were a Light, had it therefore as it were a certain Habit: to
wit, when this Intellect, as it were a Light, is ever ready to illustrate;
therefore it would have it self like to an Habit, in a Workman or Artist, to
whom, when you give an Organ or Instrument, as an Harp to an Harper, he is
presently ready to Play; by which it comes to pass, as he says, the Intellect
also to come under such a Reason, like as Art comes under Reason, as to Matter:
So we may say, As an Harper has in himself the Skill of Playing on the Harp,
and if he shows not his Art, there is a defect, not of himself, but by reason
of the absence or the depraved disposition of the Harp; Gassendus, Ib.
after the same manner, the Intellect is abundantly Instructed, in its own
Nature, that it understands, and uses Fantasies, and if it may not do it, the
cause is not in it self, but is either in the absence of the Phantasms, or
their Imperfection. For indeed, as the same Author afterward adds, The chief
Function of the Humane Intellect seems to be like that of the Angels, that it
is of its own Nature, merely Intelligent, that is, Knowing things by a simple
Sight, not by Ratiocination; But that darkness is poured on it dwelling in the
Body, that it does not perceive all that it understands, simply, nakedly, and
as it were through the means of Intuition; but attains it very much by
reasoning, that is, successively, and proceeding as it were by degrees.

From these we may probably Conclude, or at least Conjecture, after what manner
the Rational Soul remains in the other Corporeal, and using as it were its
Eyes, and other Powers, understands; yea, and this mediating or coming between,
she is said to be united to the Body, and to be its informing Form. As to the
first yoaking of the one Soul with the other, tho the Rational Soul it self,
and this, is altogether ignorant of its Birth, we may affirm notwithstanding,
That the Rational Soul is Created and poured in^o the formed Body.
what is Consonant to Holy Faith, right Reason, and to the Authority of
Divines, who were of the chiefest note; That this immaterial Soul, for as much
as it cannot be born, as soon as all things are rightly disposed for its
Reception, in the Humane formation of the Child in the Womb, it is Created
immediately of God, and poured into it.

Not propagated Ex traduce.
But that some have said, That the Rational Soul is propagated Ex traduce or of
its Kind, for as much as oftentimes the Son, in respect of Wit, Temperament,
Ingenuity, the Affections, and other Animal Faculties, is exactly like the
Father, it follows not; because these Gifts and Offices proceed immediately
from the Corporeal Soul, which we grant to be begotten by the Father, together
with the Body, but not the Rational Soul. In what State this at last exists,
being freed from the Body, and what Kind of Understanding and Knowledge it
enjoys, is not easy to be determined; but since we shall be like the Angels,
Separate States.
we may think, that the separated Soul does see all Objects with a Simple
sight, and by no Corporeal Species, and wants no Ratiocination, for the
discovering any thing lying hid in them. But this Speculation being let alone,
as too airy, we shall further Consider, other Gestures and Manners of the
Rational Soul, whilst it lives in the Body; and as hitherto we have seen the
Marrying together of it, with the Corporeal Soul, and the mutual Commerces and
Friendships as to the Knowing Faculties of either, we will now consider the
Disputes and Wranglings of these, A Plurality of Souls in Man, is manifest by
their differences.
which in respect of their Powers, often happen: because the Intellect and
Imagination, do not agree in so many things; but that it, and the Sensitive
appetite, are wont to disagree in more: from which Strifes may further be
argued, the distinct means of the aforesaid Souls, both as to their subsisting
and working.

In Man a twofold Knowing Power, and a twofold Appetite.
3. As there is said to be in Man a twofold Knowing Power, viz. The Intellect
and the Imagination, so it is commonly affirmed, that there is a twofold
Appetite, viz. The Will, which proceeding from the Intellect, is the Handmaid
of the Rational Soul; and the Sensitive Appetite, which cleaving to the
Imagination, is the Hand or Procuress of the Corporeal Soul. Which Opinion, tho
it be founded on the Sayings of the Ancient Philosophers; for that by Plato and
Aristotle, The Will is attributed to the Rational Part, and to the Irrational
Lust and Wrath; yet it ought not to be so taken, as if the Rational Soul, for
that it is immaterial, and therefore esteemed without Affection, should be
obnoxious to the Affections of desires or aversations, from every shaking
approach of Good or Evil, The Rational Soul of it self without Affections; how
it g^verns and orders the Fantasy and Affections.
of that being turbulent; for this indeed is repugnant to its incorporeal
Nature, and to its Dignity and Prerogative above other Powers. Without doubt,
in the Contemplation of Truth and Goodness, and especially of that which is the
sum of either, in the doing of good Works, in the Knowl^dge of things by their
Causes, and in the Exercises of Habits, both Scientifick and Practical, great
Complacency happens to this; and on the contrary a certain displeasure for the
want of these. Moreover, the Love of God, of Virtue, and of all that is good,
and the detestation of Vices, and of wicked Men; yea, and other pure
Affections, and such as are Simple, coming without perturbation or trouble,
belong to the Rational Soul: In the mean time, That she (according to Plato)
like the top of Olympus, might enjoy a perpetual Serenity, has the whole ^eap
of Perturbations below it self, and in the irrational part, placed like Clouds,
Winds, and Thunder, in an inferior Region, and under its feet. And truly, all
the vehement Affections or Perturbations of the Mind, by which it is wont to be
moved, and inclined hither and thither, for the Prosecuting the Good, or
shunning Evil, belong wholly to the Corporeal Soul, and are seen to obtain the
same seat with the Fantasy, within the middle or marrowy part of the Brain:
(by what means the Passions also affect the Praecordia by consent, shall be
declared afterward) in the mean time, the Intellect, even as it beholds all
the Phantasms, and Orders and Rules them at its pleasure; so it not only
perceives, but whilst it is its self, governs and moderates, all
Concupiscences, and Floods of Passions, that are wont to be moved also within
the Fantasy; and so, as it approves these Affections, and rejects those, now
excites others, now quiets them, or directs them to their right ends, the
Rational Soul it self is said to exercise certain Acts of the Will or Power, by
these kind of Dictates of hers, and that she her self wills or wills not, the
same thing, which by her Permission or Command, the Sensitive Appetite desires
or hates.

But the Corporeal Soul does not so easily obey the Rational in all things, In
things to be Known, the Corporeal Soul obeys the Rational, but not in things to
be done.

The Corporeal Soul inclining her self to the Flesh,


not so in things to be desired, as in things to be known: for indeed, she
being nearer to the Body, and so bearing a more intimate Kindness or Affinity
toward the Flesh, is tied wholly to look to its Profit and Conservation: to
the Sedulous Care of which Office, it is very much allured, by various
Complacences, exhibited through the Objects of every Sense: Hence she being
busied about the Care of the Body, and apt by that pretext, its natural
Inclination, and indulging Pleasures, most often grows deaf to Reason,
persuading the contrary. Further, the lower Soul, growing weary of the yoke of
the Other, if occasion serves, frees it self from its Bonds, affecting a
License or Dominion; and then there may plainly be seen the Twinns striving in
the same Womb, or rather a Man clearly distracted or drawn several ways, by a
double Army planted within himself; to wit, -- Where Ensigns Ensigns meet,
Fights against the Rational.

And where with Arms, they one another threat;
This Kind of Intestine Strife, does not truly cease, till this or that
Champion becoming Superior, leads the other away clearly Captive. Although in the
mean time, to the Establishing the Empire of the Rational Soul, also for the
Vindicating of its Right and Principality, from the Usurpation of the Sensitive
Soul, the Precepts of Philosophers, and Moral Institutes are framed; and when
these can do little, Sacred Religion gives far more potent helps, whose Laws
and Precepts being rightly observed, are able to carry Man, How it is reduced
to Obedience.
not only beyond the Brutes, but himself, to wit, above his Natural State; for
as much as they subject the Sensitive Soul to the Rational, and both to the
most high God. But yet, such a Divine Polity is not erected in Man, without
great Contention: Because, whilst Reason using its proper force, and also
Institutes and Sacred Ethics, endeavors to draw the Faculties of the
Corporeal Soul to its Party, she rising against it, adheres pertinaciously to
the Flesh, and is hardly pulled away from its Blandishments; yea, It often
seduces the Mind.
what is to be lamented, it seduces in us the Mind or Chief Soul, and snatches
it away with it self, to role in the Mud of Sensual Pleasures: So that Man
becomes like the Beast, or rather worse; to wit, for as much as Reason becoming
Brutal, leads to all manner of Excess. But indeed, it is not always so with the
Empire of the Mind, but that she returning at length, sometimes on her own
accord, or awakened by some occasion, and knowing of its ^all, arises up
against the Sensitive Soul, as against an Enemy or Traitor, Wars are moved
between them.
casting her out of her Throne, commands her to Servitude; yea, sometimes by
reason of some wickedness committed, it compels it to torment it self, and its
Lover the Flesh, and so to expiate as much as it may, its faults, by inflicting
on it proper Punishments. Indeed, Affections of Conscience nigh to Man.
these kind of Acts and Affections of Conscience, near to Man, plainly shows,
that there is in him either two Souls subordinately, or at least the Parts of
the same are far different; to wit, when one of which oppos^s the other, and
either strives for the obtaining of Proselytes, it happens that Man is hurried
into contrary Endeavors, and is acted little less than like a Daemoniack
possessed with a Legion. But having proposed these things, concerning the
Rational Soul, (which we have touched only by the by, as besides our purpose)
we will return to the Corporeal, and as we have illustrated its Essence,
Hypostasis, and Integral Parts, we shall now descend to the Explaining of its
Affections, or Passions.

But in the mean time, as we have shown, by comparing the Corporeal Soul of the
Brute, with the Rational of Man, what vast difference there is between them,
perhaps it might be to the purpose, to compare the Brains of either, and to
observe their differences. But this Anatomy being elsewhere made, we have noted
little or no difference, in the Head of either, as to the Figures and Exterior
Conformations of the Parts, the Bulk only excepted; that from hence we
concluded, the Soul Common to Man with the Brutes, to be only Corporeal, and
immediately to use these Organs. But as we have shown the description of a
Sheeps Brain, dissected within the Cortex, and as it were made bare of Flesh,
whereby all the Interior Parts might appear, we shall here also, to Crown the
work, give you the Figure of an Humane Brain; so as all the inward Parts may be
laid open.

The Eighth Table,
Contains a new Anatomy of the Humane Brain, where, by a Dissection with an
Instrument made through the Bill, the Callous Body, and the Fornix or Arch, and
their Parts being taken away and separated; the streaked Bodies, also the Optic
and Orbicular Prominences, one side erased, and the other whole and plain, are
Exhibited.

A. A. A. A. The Hemisphear of the Brain divided and separated by themselves.
B. B. B. B. Portions of the Callous Body with the Fornix cut off, and removed
apart. C. The Basis of the Fornix, with its Roots, which cohered with its Trunk
Y Y; divided Portions of which, with Cuttings off of the Callous Body, are laid
apart on the right and left hand. D. One streaked Body scraped or Erased, that
the Medullary streakes or nervous Tracts may appear. E. The foremost border of
this Body, sticking to the right Hemisphear of the Callous Body. F. G. The
Basis and the Cone, of the same Body. H. The hinder Border of the same, in
which the Optic streaks, yea and other Medullary Processes, are sent from the
Orbicular Prominences. I. The streaked Body of the left-side plain, with the
Vessels creeping through them; whose Borders and Ends are made after the same as
in the right. K. The right Optic Chamber erased, whose Medullary streaks,
being strait and thick set, K.K. are stretched forth, into the Border of the
streaked Body. L. The right Nati-form Prominence in like manner erased, with
streaks stretched forth into the Medullary Process M. M. The Medullary Process,
which proceeding from the Testes, and compassing about the Nates, sends from
thence other Medullary passages into the streaked Body, as more plainly appears
in the left side being whole. N. The Pineal Kirnel in its proper place. O. O.
The Orbicular Prominences called Testes, Marrowy through the whole. P. The left
Nati-form Prominence plain and whole, which is smaller in Man, and for the most
part Marrowy. Q. A Medullary Process, Compassing the Nates, from which is sent
one Medullary Pipe or passage R. toward the Cone of the streaked Body, and
another S. toward its Basis; of which by and by a forked branch goes forth,
one r. to the middle of the streaked Body, the other s. to the corner of its
Basis. T. A Transvers shoot knitting together the aforesaid Branches. V. The
hinder Borders of the streaked Bodies, joined together among themselves. W. The
Gap or Chink leading to the Tunell. X. The Gap or Chink, leading into the
Cavity, lying under the Orbicular Prominences. Y. A Medullary Process, leading
from the Oblong Marrow, into the Cerebel, which seems to be the root of this.
Z. Z. Separated Portions of the Cerebel cut off, that its Tracts both Marrowy,
and Cortical or Barkie, may be seen. X. The Cavity or hollowness lying under
the Cerebel.
(...) 44 Tabula VIII


CHAP. VIII.
Of the Passions of Affections of the Corporeal Soul in General.

THe whole Corporeal Soul, A Twofold state of the Corporeal Soul: Tranquil or
Quiet,
so long as she is quiet and undisturbed, she is fittted to her proper Body
equally, as to a certain Chest or Cabbinet, and waters all its Parts gently,
both with little Rivulets of Blood Circulating, and actuates and inspires them
every where with a gentle falling down of the Animal Spirits; But it sometimes
happens, that the whole Constitution of this same Soul, is so shaken and moved,
that both the Blood being interrupted in its equal Circule, And Disturbed.
is compelled into irregular Excursions, and Recursions, and various
Fluctuations; and also, that the Animal Spirits being snatched hither and
thither, In which either part of the Soul is moved.
inordinately perform the Acts of their Functions: yea, the Animal Spirits
themselves, whilst being moved irregularly, do shake the Praecordia, and flow
into them in an undue manner, cause the Course of the Blood more to be
perverted. Further, from the Corporeal Soul being disturbed, not only the
Animal Spirits, and Rivers of the Blood, are driven into disorders, but they
induce alterations both to the other Humors, and to very many Parts and Members
of the Body, and to the Rational Soul it self, in Man. As there are manifold
Examples of these kind of Perturbations, by which, the Corporeal Soul being too
much swelled up, or Contracted, or otherways distorted, it becomes as it were
unequal, and not Conformable to the Body, the Chief of them may be referred to
these two Heads. And is either too much enlarged,
To wit, First, Sometimes this Soul, as it were leaping forth, erects and
stretches out it self beyond measure, and so dilating its Hypostasis, desires
to reach it self beyond the bound of the Body: Hence the Animal Spirits, being
respectively moved, in the Brain, enlarge the Sphere of their Irra^iation, and
as they so shake the Praecordia, by a more full inflowing, they Compel the
Blood therefore to be snatched together, Or Contracted.
and to be poured forth more freely into all the Parts. Secondly, Sometimes on
the contrary, this Soul being struck, is more narrowly Compressed within it
self; so that being drawn inwardly, and sinking down within its wonted Compass
of Emanation, becomes less than the Body; wherefore, the Animal Faculties
wonderfully flagg, and their Acts are either sluggishly or perversely performed:
Moreover, the Praecordia also being destitute of their due influx of Spirits,
almost sink down, and suffer the Blood to stay too long there, and to stagnate
oftentimes. There are besides some other Gestures of the aforesaid Soul, by
which the same departing from its equal Expansion, becomes not Congruous to the
Body; and in these kind of Cases, chiefly the Sensitive Power, according to the
received Impressions, affects a new Species, and brings the Brain and
Imagination into its Party: The Trouble of the Soul, impressed on the Sensitive
Part, by and by is Communicated to the Blood.
Then by and by, by the passage of the Nerves, it affects the Praecordia, as it
were with a certain stroke, and determinates them after her measure; so that
according to the Idea received from the Imagination, the Motion of the Blood is
Composed, as it were after the measures of a Dance: we shall add anon Instances
and Examples of these, when we shall treat of the Passions particularly.

In the mean time, that we may inquire into the Causes of the Passions in
general, it plainly appears from what has been said, that the Corporeal Soul
is found under a twofold state, to wit, either of Quiet or Commotion: That she
is like a Calm Sea, with a smooth Superficies, and squared altogether gentle
and serene; or she becomes troubled, like water shaken into various Circles,
and wavings by the blasts of the Winds, or by some solid things cast into it.
The former state of the Soul is perceived, not only in Sleep, when the Spirits
are bound up, or lie quiet of themselves; but often in Waking, to wit, The
quiet of the Soul happens not only in sleep, but often waking, when pleasing or
unhurtful things are met with. On the Contrary when from the Objects, Good or
Evil is promised:

Then first the Imagination afterward the Appetite is m^^ed.


as often as objects or sensible things, being brought from without, or
imaginary things conceived within, do import nothing of Good or Evil to us, and
that we only know and apprehend them: for so, without any Trouble or
Molestation, they pleasantly slide into the common Sensory and Imagination, and
thence quickly pass away; but if the object is offered under the Species of
Good or Evil, presently the Sensitive Soul prepares for the embracing or the
avoiding it; and not only procures to its Endeavors the Animal Spirits, but
also the Blood and Humors; yea, draws the solid Parts to help her. For as soon
as the Imagination conceives any thing that is to be embraced or shuned,
presently the Appetite is formed by the Spirits inhabiting the Brain, ordered
into a Series; then by an impression sent to the Praecordia, as they are either
dilated or contracted, the Blood is carried into various Motions of
Fluctuations, and then by an instinct of the Appetite transmitted to the proper
Nerves, the respective Motions are drawn forth: And upon these kind of
Furnitures and Affection of the Spirits and Humors, and of the solid Parts, the
Affections or Passions of the Mind wholly depend, we have elsewhere showed,
after what manner, and by what Trajection or Irradiation of the Spirits, within
the Nervous Processes, such quick Commerces are made, between the Brain and the
Praecordia, and between both these and other Motive Parts.

But that we may yet more fully describe the Affections or Passions of the
Corporeal Soul, as they are chiefly to be found in Man, it is here to be noted,
That not every Species or Appearance of Good or Evil, does excite these
Commotions of the Soul: because we behold undisturbed the prosperous or adverse
things of others, not related to us: But further, it is requisite that the
Goodness or the Malice of the Object belongs properly to a Man, although what
happens to our Friends or Relations, is as if it happened to our selves. Also
besides, The Reason of Good and of Evil, either concerns,

The Corporeal Soul by it self. Or her united to the Body,

Or her subjected to the Rational Soul.

Hence Passions are called either Physical, Metaphysical, or Corporeal.


Good and Evil happen to the same Man after various ways, and under a diverse
reason, both in respect of the Object, and also in respect of the Subject.
Concerning the former we shall speak anon: As to the other, Good or Evil being
brought to Man, either respect the Corporeal Soul by it self, and as it were
abstracted from any other Relation; or they respect her as conjoined to the
Body, and intimately dear to her: Or lastly, they respect her, as subdued by
the Rational Soul; so indeed, although the Affection is continually poured into
the Corporeal Soul, yet it respects Good or Evil, either of this, or that, or
of another Subject, and is excited for the sake of that: And according to this
threefold Relation of the Sensitive Soul, the Passions by which she is
affected, are called either Physical, or Metaphysical, or Corporeal or Moral;
we shall discourse singly, and a little more plainly of these.

First, Therefore, as to the Passions merely Physical, we say, That the
Sympathies and Antipathies of a diverse Kind, which are as it were proper and
intimate Affections, seem to belong to the Corporeal Soul by it self, and
abstracted from all Relation: Besides, the highly attractive Species of Beauty
and Fairness, Passions merely Physical, are Sympathies and Antipathies.
by the sight of which this Soul is wont to be ensnared, most certainly; so
that neglecting the Care of the Body, and laying aside the dictates of Reason,
cleaves most closely to her Lover: Also sometimes less fair things which every
whole Man would forsake, snatches this Soul, drawn as it were by Witchcraft,
and leads it Captive; as indeed, lost Lovers, though they see better things and
approve them, yet follow the worse; the reason of which is, that the Sensitive
Soul enters into Friendships, of which the Affections are not knowing, with
certain things in Secret, and inseparably and firmly loves them. Concerning
Antipathies we meet with many things to be admired, as some sensible Objects,
innocent of themselves, yea and grateful enough to many Men, and sought with
delight, become most horrid to some others, and more Killing than the Head of
Medusa at the sight only: So some abhor the presence of a Cat, Some Instances
of Passions merely Physical.
others an Eel, or Toad, and others this or that Dish of meat made ready. Nor
do they only fly things by the sight, but also received by the smell, yea, when
they lie hid, and are not at all suspected, they suffer Swounings and Fainting
of their Spirits, by their secret Influence: These Kind of Affections without
doubt, proceed from occult Enmities of the Sensitive Soul; for when it happens
this Systasis or Disposition of the Animal Spirits, by the meeting of some
Object, to be driven into Confusion, it ever after that abhors the coming of
the same, or its Contact by its Effluvia's.

Passions Metaphysical.
Secondly, Sometimes the Sensitive Soul receives the Superior Rational Passions,
which we call Metaphysical; and solicitously busying it self concerning their
Good and Evil, it either draws forth or shortens the Compass of its Expansion.
For indeed, the Rational Soul relying on the help and familiarity of the
Spirits dwelling in the Brain, aspires to Metaphysical Notions, which having
more fully learnt, it not only falls upon higher Speculations, but also exerts
a certain Superior Appetite, to wit, the Will, and implicates it with certain
Affections, as it were inspired of God; the exercise of which sort of Sacred
Affections are not performed by the mere Conceptions of the Mind: By these
first the Rational Soul.
But their Acts being delivered from the Rational Soul into the Sensitive, do
first employ the Brain with the Fantasy, then being transmitted from the
Brain into the Breast, there, for that they produce in the Heart and Blood
variety of Motions, Then the Sensitive and Sanguineous part of the other are
affected.
receive their Complement or Perfection: Wherefore, in the Worship of God,
Piety and Devotion are attributed very much to the Heart: Hence Repentance, the
Love of God, and Hate of Sin, Hope of Salvation, Fear of Divine Vengeance, and
many other acts of Religion, are wont to be ascribed to the work and endeavor
of the Heart. The reason of which seems to be, for as much as the whole
Corporeal Soul is Commanded by the Rational Power, that in Adoring God, she
should very much bow her self before the Deity, and as it were lie prostrate on
the Ground; therefore, presently both Parts of it, viz. both the Sensitive and
Flamy, do repress themselves, and restrain their wonted Emanations; hence
plenty of Animal Spirits being drawn from the Fantasy, for the more full
actuating the Organs of the Senses, they bestow the Operations of the Nerves on
the Praecordia, which whilst they are more straightly drawn together, and as it
were constrained, cause the Blood to stay longer within the bosoms of the
Heart; and so inhibit it, lest it should be too much inkindled within the
Lungs, and lest being inkindled by the Heart, in the whole Body, and chiefly
should be carried rapidly into the Brain. For indeed, the Blood containing Life
as a most precious Jewel in it self, is not only heaped up more plentifully
about the Praecordia, in all Fear and Danger, and is there laid up as it were
for defense sake, Wherefore, and how the Praecordia are esteemed the seat of
Holy Affections.
that it might better preserve its Flame: But further, in devout Affections,
whilst the Rational Soul orders the Spirits inhabiting the Brain into sacred
Conceptions and Notions; by the Influence of the same Spirits, the Bosoms of
the Heart are also so affected, that they cause the Blood to Center, and to be
more fully drawn into them, and there longer retain it, as it were an Holocaust
to be offered to God: so as often as we Pray most earnestly, we endeavor
nothing less, than that our Life with the Blood, be laid upon the Altar of the
Heart. For truly, almost every body experiences in himself that in strong
Prayer, the Blood is more and more heaped up in the Bosoms of the swelling
Heart: wherefore, that the Vacuities of the Lungs might be supplied, we breath
deeply, and so the Air being more fully drawn in, the Muscles of the Breast,
and the Diaphragma, are detained almost in a continual Systole, or more often
iterated; to wit, for this end, that the Vital Blood, to be offered as it were
a Sacrifice to God, should be there kept, nor suffered to go from thence, or to
be enlarged, till as it were by a long immolation, together with Prayers, lieve
may be had from the Godhead. Yea, it is to be observed, that those religiously
affected, are apt at all times to call back the Blood toward the Praecordia,
and to repress it from a more plentiful Excursion, which may give a loose to
Delights or Mirth: Because it is just, that this Vital Humor should be
Conserved, even Holy and Pure for God; and as it is so restrained in the
Praecordia, lest it should grow too luxurious, nor be carried toward the Brain
with too impetuous a Rapture, the Conceptions also of the Mind, without much
heat and distraction of thoughts concerning Divine things: What it is to have
the Heart hardened.
Hence it is, that Drinking of Wine, Banqueting, and every Kind of Dissolute
Life, because they render the Blood lawless, and not able to be restrained or
bridled, are said to make hard the Heart, and to obstruct the Duties of
Religion. Further, not only the devout Acts of Religion, and Pious Affections,
are attributed to the Breast and Praecordia; but also the sober Counsels of
Wise men, yea, and the Exercises of Virtues and Moral Habits, are ordinarily
ascribed by Philosophers to this Seat or Subject: Hence Wise men are said to be
Cordati, Hearty, or sage of Heart; but when one that is unwise or plainly
foolish, does a thing, it is said, That there is nothing leaps in the left part
of his Breast: Wherefore the Praecordia are called also the seat of Prudence
and Wisdom.
The reason of which seems to be, that when as the Animal Spirits (which are
the immediate Instruments of thoughts) are procreated altogether from the
Blood, not only their more excellent disposition, but their right and timely
Dispensation, depends chiefly on the Praecordia. For to these are owing, that
the Blood be inkindled in its due manner, and also Eventilated, that it may
give to the Brain firm and stable Animal Spirits, which however Subtle and
Active, yet may not be volatile beyond measure; and hence the Solidity of the
Mind, and the sharpness of Judgment are produced: When on the contrary, by
reason of the Blood more slowly passing through the Praecordia, or more swiftly
than it should do, the Animal Spirits become too fixed, or volatile above
measure, and therefore either a stupidity or lightness of Mind arises. But in
truth, Wisdom is much rather ascribed to the Heart, for as much as from thence
r^ins are put upon the Blood, apt for fiercenesses and Impetuosities, lest that
rushing into the Brain, with an inordinate rapture, should not only disturb its
serious Cogitations, but stir up enormous Motions of the Appetite, and mad
Lusts. For truly, whilst the Spirits inhabiting the Brain, are disposed by
the Intellect, from thence presiding within the Imagination, into Series and
Orders of Notions, the Blood about to break forth from the Heart, ought very
much to be restrained, lest that growing luxurious, it should confound all
things by an importune evasion of the Brain, and should agitate the Spirits,
called away from this work into Commotions, and various Fluctuations;
wherefore, from the immoderate drinking of Wine, for as much as by it the Blood
is made more headstrong, and will not be repressed or contained by the Heart,
Men become not only unable for Exercising the Acts of Judgment and Reason; but
are found very prone to all manner of Wickedness and most filthy Desires.

As to the Moral Passions, Three Corporeal or Moral Passions.
or by us called Corporeal, we may observe, that the Sensitive Soul is more
often and easilyer affected, by reason of Good or Evil, which is of its
Subject, that is of its Body, which includes its good Habit. Although also, she
has her proper and occult Loves and Aversations, and is bound to show due
obsequiousness to the Rational Soul; for as much as it is united to the Body,
as it were by a Conjugal Compact; therefore, all other relations being laid
aside, it minds only this; Concerning the Care of it it is mostly solicitous,
and by reason of its prosperous or adverse Affairs, it is wont to be affected
with Pleasure or Grief, and other Passions depending on either of these.

For indeed (as we mentioned before) there are two Chief and Primary Gestures
of the Sensitive Soul, as often as it is moved from its wonted and Natural
State or Condition; to wit, either she stretches forth her self into a greater
Compass, by profuse Pleasure, as if it affected to be dilated beyond the bounds
of the Body: or being overthrown by Sorrow or Grief, she is contracted more
narrowly, and runs her self within the wonted Sphere of her Emanations: from
this twofold Affection of the Sensitive Soul, all the other Passions take their
Origin. For truly Pleasure, or an Elation of the Soul, is its most pleasing
Constitution, which desiring to gain for it self by any means, it follows all
Objects promising it, with Love, Desire, Hope, Faithfulness, Boldness, and
other means of getting it; The two Primary Gestures or Affections of the Soul,
are Pleasure and Grief.
On the contrary, Sadness or a Contraction or Dejection of this Soul, is a
Gesture most ungrateful to it; what things then soever threaten or induce it,
we endeavor to remove away far, by Fear, Hatred, Anger, Desperation, Shame,
Pusillanimity, and other motions of shuning it. In the first place therefore,
we will speak briefly of Pleasure and Grief, which are according to Aristotle,
as it were a forked measure of the Sensitive Appetite, for the double Ladder of
Affections, flowing thence, by which she is carried to this or that.

First, Pleasure and Grief, because they bend or incline the whole Corporeal
Soul after a diverse manner; therefore its two roots, to wit, the Brain and
Praecordia, are chiefly affected. They affect the two Roots of the Soul, to
wit, the the Brain and the Praecordia.
When the Soul is stretched forth in Pleasure, and is drawn to its utmost
Sphere of Irradiation, the Animal Spirits being carried within the Brain, stir
up most pleasant and pleasing Imaginations; and further, they actuating lively
the Nervous System, Cause the Eyes, Face, Hands, and all the Members to shine,
and as it were leap forth; Further, then more fully shaking also the
Praecordia, by the Influence of the Brain, delivered by means of the Nerves,
they thrust forth the Blood more rapidly, and as a Flame more brightly
inkindled, they pour it forth with strength through the whole Body. On the
contrary in Grief, whilst the Soul sinks down, contracted into a more narrow
space, the Spirits inhabiting the Brain, as it were struck down by flight, and
troubled, put on only sad and fearful Imaginations, from whence the Countenance
is cast down, the Limbs grow feeble, and the Praecordia being contracted or
bound together, by reason of the Nerves carrying the same affection from the
Brain, restrain the Blood from its due Excursion, which being therefore heaped
up in the same place, with a weight, brings in a troublesome oppression of the
Heart, and in the mean time, the Exterior Parts being deprived of its wonted
afflux, languish and Contract a paleness.

Grief and Pleasure first of all arise from the Sense.
The aforesaid Affections of Pleasure and Sadness, which is wont, the
Imagination being employed, to be poured from thence on the Praecordia, and by
and by from that double Root into the whole Corporeal Soul; as to their first
Originals, wholly depend upon the Sense. For from the beginning, Sensible
Objects affect the Sensory with a certain sweetness or asperity, and there
bring to the Spirits a certain Ovation or Triumph, or Confusion: from whence
presently the Impression, like a waving of Waters, being Communicated to the
Brain, excites the Spirits inhabiting it, into a consent either of the delight
or trouble; and this Affection, being delivered from the Sensory to the
Imagination, if it be short, there ends, and is not carried to the Praecordia:
but if the stroke, being carried from the Sensible Object, is, like a more
strong waving of Waters, impressed more vehemently, it reaches from the Sensory
to the Brain, and presently thence to the Breast, that the Motions of the Heart
and Blood, are entangled together with the disorder of the Animal Spirits, so
as to the first Conceptions of the Affections, as well as Notions, there is
nothing in the Imagination, or I may rather say, there is nothing in the Brain
or Heart, Afterward, both from this, and also from the Fantasy, and Memory.
that was not first in the Sense: But afterward, when many Idea's of Pleasures
and Griefs, are impressed on the Fantasy and Memory; then very often without
any previous Sense, or feeling of Pleasure or Sadness, the Imagination being
repeated, is wont to excite a Passion of the pleasant or troublesome thing; for
when at any time we conceive in our Mind Good or Evil things belonging to us,
not only present, but also past, or to come, that Conception employs the
Fantasy, and not rarely very much exercises it: Further, being thence
transmitted to the Breast, it inordinately either Contracts or Dilates the
Breast, and so pours forth the Affection, together with the disturbed Blood, on
the whole Body. A Wise and Strong man easily moderates the passions of Pleasure
or Grief, lest these being brought, either from the Sensories, or suggested
from the Memory, should affect the Fantasy and the Praecordia, by too great a
waving; For the Brain and Heart, Some are more Pathetical, or moved than others.
which are the supports of the Soul, ought not to be moved much, by the more
light Objects of the Senses; nor are these principal Powers, at leisure to be
present at every small thing: Hence some have born the torture of the Body, or
the cutting off a Member, beyond Stoical Patience, undisturbed; whilst others
(in whom the sensible Species, being above measure increased, vehemently shakes
the Praecordia) the Skin scarce wounded, swoon away, or fall into fainting
Fits. In like manner it is observed, that some are carried away by a most light
Pleasure of the Senses into softness and Luxury, in the mean time others are
scarce moved with any Pomp of Delights, or Exquisite Blandishments of
Pleasures. It is observed in the fruition of a pleasing Object (which also
holds of the appulse of a pleasant, or a painful sensible thing) there happens
a certain reciprocation, between the Spirits of the Brain, and the Inhabitants
of the Sensory. We imagine the Drinking of excellent Wine, with a certain
Pleasure, then we indulge it; the Imagination of its Pleasure is again sharpened
by the taste, and then by a reflected Appetite drinking is repeated: So as it
were in a Circle, the Throat or Appetite provokes the Sension, and the Sension
causes the Appetite to be sharpened, and iterated; this Kind of mutual
reciprocation of the Animal Spirits from the Brain to the Sensory, How the
Affections are wont to be iterated, also how allayed or obliterated.
and on the contrary, persists for some time, till the same, like ^waving of
Water, either leisurely vanishes, or is obliterated, by the exciting of a new
waving: So indeed, Passions and Desires wear out themselves, or are consumed by
time, or they are blotted out by the coming of some other Passion. When the
Animal Spirits, desiring too much a sensible Delight, do often, and for a long
time iterate and intend the Appetite, and Act of the pleasurable Sension, there
is need of Reason to come between, whereby they being changed into Sacred and
Moral Meditations, may be called away from their Carnal Genius; which Avocation
however, they obey not but difficultly and unwillingly; for as much as to be
expanded, and to enjoy pleasing Objects, is the Recreation and Food of the
Spirits; and to be restrained or kept in, and very much to be employed about
the works of the Mind, is to them a Labor, and a difficult task.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Passions Particularly.

COncerning the Number of the Passions, The Number of the Passions uncertain.
as it has been variously disputed among Philosophers, so in famous Schools,
this Division into Eleven Passions, long since grew of use; to wit, the
Sensitive Appetite is distinguished into Concupiscible and Irascible, to the
first, are counted commonly six Passions viz. Pleasure and Grief, Desire and
Aversion, Love and Hatred; but to the latter five, viz. Anger, Boldness, Fear,
Hope, and Desperation, are wont to be attributed: But this distribution of the
Affections is not only incongruous, for that Hope is but ill referred to the
Irascible Appetite, and Hatred and Aversion, seem rather to belong to this,
than to the Concupiscible: But it is also very insufficient, because some more
noted Affections, as Shame, Pity, Emulation, Envy, and many others, are wholly
omitted: Wherefore, the Ancient Philosophers did determinate the Primary to a
certain Number, then they placed under their several Kinds, very many
indefinite Species. Truly the Sensitive Soul, like a Proteus, is wont to be so
diversely disturbed and altered, into manifold Kinds, with the various
Fl^ctuation, and diverse sorts of Inclination of the Animal Spirits, Blood, and
other Humors, that a cense or view of all the Passions, Pleasure and what
Affections are subordinate to it. Love, Hope, Boldness, etc.
can scarce be had; But however, that these, if not all, at least the chief of
them, may be in some measure discovered; we will here ordain Pleasure and Grief
for the extremes, or the opposite bounds of the Inclinations of the Corporeal
Soul, then we will consider, after what manner, the Objects belonging to
either, by what means soever may be applied, and what sorts of Impressions they
are wont to fix on the Spirits, Blood, and solid Parts. The Corporeal Soul
therefore, affecting Pleasure as the greatest height of its felicity, in which
it would acquiesce, is moved at the appearance of any Good: if it be to come,
and contrary to opinion, by and by for the getting it, Desire or Love arises;
if with Opinion, Hope and Boldness; if Opinion esteems Fruition hopeless,
Desperation is raised up; if this Good be past, or should be lost by our
default, Shamefacedness or Repentance is brought in; if it be possessed by
others, Emulation, and Envy; Love is busied about it being taken absolute,
without respect to time or possession. Besides also there are other respects
and habitudes of appearing Good, able to excite many other Affections with
ease. Grief with the Affections subordinate to it.
In like manner on the contrary side, Grief or Trouble, is a Sickness of the
Sensitive Soul, and a Disposition very much ungrateful to it; wherefore, at all
the Objects apparently threatening its Induction, the Soul variously Contracts
her self, and is inclined hither and thither, that she might shun the
approaches of the threatening Evils: wherefore there are so many Affections
respecting Grief, and Subordinate to it, as there are means by which the
Sensitive Soul, or the Disposition of the Spirits, composes her self for the
shaking off or the shunning of any Evil. Hatred, Aversion, Fear, etc.
Hatred is busied about Evil taken absolutely; that being absent, we prosecute
with Aversion, by and by about to come with Fear; and unworthily brought, with
Anger; falling upon our selves, we sustain it with sadness; inflicted on our
Friends, with Pity. There are besides, many other Appearances of approaching
Evil; for the shuning of which, the Soul is compelled into many Metamorphoses,
and at the same time draws into the like Gestures, as it were Mimical, the
Humors and Members of the Body, and oftentimes the Rational Soul it self: As it
would be a business very tedious, and of immense Labor, to rehearse all the
Kinds of Passions, and to unfold them, we have designed therefore to speak only
of the Chief Species of the Passions, with their manner of affecting, in
respect both of the Body, and also of the Superior Soul.

Next to Pleasure and Grief, are Love and Hatred.
Love and Hate follow next, and as it were at the back of Pleasure and Grief:
because the Sensitive Soul, being greatly prone, as has been said, to
Pleasure, Prosecutes all things apparently Good, without respect to
Circumstances, with an Universal and most ample Affection of Love; in like
manner, shunning Grief or Trouble; it hates and detests all things apparently
Evil, which may seem to induce Evil by any manner of way.

The Good exciting Love, is objected after a twofold manner; to wit, either to
the Sense, The Objects of these, are Sensible or Imaginary things.
or the Opinion: As to the first, Objects which consist of Particles Congruous
and Curiously fitted to the Sensory, so that they stroke gently the Spirits
there flowing, and cause them to run and to rejoice together, these bring forth
a desirable Sension, whose Impression being transmitted, by the passage of the
Nervous Processes to the Brain, by pleasing there in like manner the Spirits,
stirs them up into a pleasant apprehension of the sensible thing, and a desire
of it: Hence these Spirits inhabiting the Brain, for the fruition of this
Object, try several or manifold Endeavors, viz. Some being reflected toward
the Sensory, desire to cleave more closely, and to be united to this Good: in
the mean time, others flowing toward the Breast, sometimes dilate and open the
Bosoms of the Heart, that they may more plentifully receive the Blood, imbued
with a certain Virtue of the Object, By what means desirable things affect the
Spirits, and the Blood.
and enjoy it; and sometimes the Spirits draw together these receptacles of the
Heart, and drive outwardly the Blood, as if about to seek something more
largely of Good, from the Object, with which being filled at last, it is
received by the heart, by and by dilated. Further, in this Affection of Love,
concerning the sensible Object, if that it be very strong, the whole Sensitive
Soul, or the whole Systasis of the Spirits is inclined toward the beloved
thing, lifts up to it the whole Nervous System, and together with the solid
Parts, draws, and leads the Humors; so, when we are indulged with a fair
Aspect or Melody, A Pleasant Sensation is described.
the whole Soul seems to go out at the Eye or the Ear, and neglecting the other
Sensories, Conspire with their proper Offices into those Acts of Sension.

Love is excited by Opinion.
It is somewhat otherways in Love excited through Opinion, because in this, the
Species of the Object being represented by the Imagination, is erected as an
Idol in the Brain; about this many Spirits being employed, at first they weigh
the noted Beauty, and its various Ornaments, then they worship it; for
whatsoever we love, we imagine it fair, profitable, pleasant, and far above
what in truth it is; then by reason of these kind of feigned Attributes, we
more earnestly fall in love with the thing beloved; Further, the Spirits
inhabiting the Brain, The Object of this, is set up, like an Idol, in the
Fantasy,
invite all the rest, flowing in the whole Nervous stock, to the worship of the
Idol erected by themselves: wherefore the Inhabitants of every Sensory,
watching for the works of the Senses, look hither; here also they wait for the
Motions, Executors of the Limbs and Members; but they chiefly inspire the
Praecordia with the Love of this Imaginary Good; And Worshipped.
wherefore, these being variously dilated, and thrust together, greedily
receive, sometimes the Blood imbued as it were with the Character of the thing
loved, and as it were imbibe its Influence, sometimes they cast forth that
Humor from themselves, toward the Brain, as it were to pick out something from
the Image of the Good: This Kind of Image exciting Love, is impressed on the
Imagination, either from the Intellect, or from the Memory and Fantasy, to
wit, one of them only, or both together; and from thence a Passion of Love is
brought in, either Metaphysical, or merely Sensitive, or mixed.

Hatred excited, by the Sensible or Imaginary Species.
Much after the same manner as we have said of Love, the evil Appearances also,
which excite Hatred or the Aversation of the Soul, are objected to the Sense or
Imagination: As to the former, when any incongruous and improportionate Object,
is brought to any Sensory, that distracts and drives the Animal Spirits into a
certain Confusion; therefore afterward, when such an Object comes again to the
same Sensory, the Spirits mindful of their former hurt, abhor the Contact and
approach of this Evil, Contract as much as they can the Organ, and shut up the
Passages and Doors; if they are strong they endeavor to remove the Enemy from
themselves, How the first of these Affects the Spirits and Blood.
by sudden and iterated Excursions; but if they are not able for such Assaults,
they convey and hide themselves within, and reject the embraces of the hateful
thing, by every manner of way. A rejection of the sensible Object happens, when
stinking Odors of very unsavory Meat strike the Palate, or Nostrils; and the
like when incongruous things are offered to the sight, or hearing: But
especially, when the breaking of the Unity happens to be inflicted by Fire, or
a Sword, on the Skin or Flesh. Concerning these repulses of the approaching
Object, not only the Spirits flowing in the Sensory, but oftentimes also by the
consent of these; others inhabiting the Brain, are irritated into Fury; so that
the Imagination conceives a detestation of the thing; and the Praecordia being
therefore disturbed, sometimes draws back the Blood, sometimes drives it
outward toward the driving away the Evil, and stirs it up to its Expulsion.

When an Object apparently Evil, appears therefore hateful to the Imagination,
presently the Fantasy fixes on it a Monstrous and very deformed Image; The
Imaginary Evil affects both the Blood, and Spirits.
then stirs up all the Spirits, implanted both in the Brain and the Nervous
Appendix, into a Detestation of this Imaginary Spectre, from hence the Brows
are contracted, the Teeth gnash together, and the Face is writhed; but
especially the Praecordia, variously open and shut themselves, that they might
Eventilate the Blood, by driving in up and down, and Conserve it free from
every Influence or Tincture of this Object.

After this manner, the Passions of Love and Hatred are employed about Good and
Evil, taken absolutely, and almost Indifferently; or rather about their Idea's:
to wit, the Sensitive Soul, beholding the Image of appearing Good, received
from the Sense or the Imagination, and admitting it into it self, presently she
embraces it with a certain strictness, as it were with open and infolded Arms,
and endeavors to be intimately united to it: Love and Hate, are transitory
Passions.
But it rests not long in this fruition; for if this Image of Good be only
Imaginary, and being embraced, vanishes like a Cloud, taken for Juno, the Soul,
sensible of her Error, quickly lets go her empty Embraces: yea, if that Good
were solid, after some time, its fruition brings forth a loathing, and the
Complacency of the Object at first amiable, grows cold, by the enjoyment; and
it is esteemed troublesome. For indeed it is so ordered, that we esteem nothing
long in this Life, but being always wanting, whatsoever is obtained, we esteem
less, seeking after new things; wherefore, we are perpetually incited to the
desiring of absent Good, and to the flying from Evils hanging over us. Quickly
changed into Desire* and Aversion.
Love or lasting Charity, is a Divine Passion, almost proper only to Heaven, as
Hatred, standing and endless, is an Affection merely Diabolical, and ought to
be esteemed peculiar to Hell. But in most Mortals, these are presently changed
into Desires or Aversions; because the desire of any absent Good, which we seem
to want, or the declining of any approaching Evil, obliterate the Idea of any
Good or Evil before affixed to the Sensitive Soul, and adhering to it; even as
the following waves sup up the former.

In truth the Sensitive Soul is chiefly employed with Desires and Aversions;
The Soul is chiefly employed by these.
these are perpetually suggested by heaps from our wants, either true or
imaginary, and a very infinite Company or Succession of them exist. Concerning
our Indigencies, from which these Passions are drawn, it is to be observed,
that they proceed either from the Sense, or from the Opinion, Both proceed,
either from the Sense, or Opinion.
and so peculiar Desires or Aversions are excited: As to the former, the Animal
Spirits in every Sensory, watch as so many hungry Guests expecting the Approach
of an Object congruous to them, as it were food; to the meeting and snatching
of which, they are often wont to go as it were to meet it, and be carried quite
beyond the Confines of their Subject. The desire of a sensible thing, is
excited, either from Natural Instinct, or from Custom.
But that the Spirits residing in the Organ of every of the Senses, do greedily
Covet after this manner the sensible Object, as their Prey, happens by the mere
Instinct of Nature, or is procured by Custom: The former is discerned, when
hunger or thirst require the Supplies of Meat and Drink, and when the Coldness
of a naked Body requires Clothing: These sort of Desires, which Necessity puts
upon Nature, are easily satisfied, and what are sufficient for the maintaining
of Life, and obtained after this manner; The former is moderate, and easily
satisfied.
to wit, the Animal Spirits laboring under a defect, in this or that part, do
variously Contract, and so affect with a sense of trouble the Nervous Bodies,
in which they flow, which Impression being presently Communicated to the Brain,
it stirs up the Spirits inhabiting it into an Appetite or Desire, and then an
inflowing being made into the appropriate Nerves; into a Prosecution of the
desired thing; all this is performed without the Image of the Object, increased
by the Imagination, also without any Perturbation known in the Praecordia, or
the Blood.

Desire got through Custom, despising moderate things aspires to new things.
It is much otherwise concerning sensible Desires got by Custom; for when as a
Fruition once happens to the Spirits inhabiting this or that Sensory, of a more
pleasant Object, having moderate things in Contempt, afterward desire the
same, and being not long Content therewith, still aspire to others more
pleasant; so the Palate being accustomed to more delicate Victuals, loathes
every thing unless spiced Aliments, and prepared with most exquisite Sauce: In
like manner may be observed, concerning the Smelling, Sight, Hearing, and other
Sensitive Functions; to wit, that the Appetite, proper to any of them, (for as
much as it once exceeded what sufficed Nature) is always carried to more
excellent Objects, and they for the most part only fresh; the reason of this
seems to be, that the chief Pleasure of the Sensitive Soul, consists in a more
lively Motion, and larger Expansion of the Spirits implanted in every part; but
such a Motion of them, depends very much upon the Excellency, also the Variety,
and Change of the Objects. For whatsoever moderate or too familiar thing
happens to the Spirits, The reason declared, Because the Agent and Patient,
ought to be unlike.
it little affects them; for every motion supposes a Superior, and a Virtue of
the Object, somewhat unlike to the Agent; wherefore, when any Object by daily
use obtains a Similitude, or Equality with the Spirits, that is less apt to
move them: therefore that the Activity, or the lively unfolding of the Spirits
(which is the Effectress of Pleasure) may be continued a long time, leaving the
Fruition of every old and worn-out Good, it always tends to new and more high
things: After this manner, tho every Organ of Sense puts forth Desires,
peculiar and proper to themselves, it reiterates them with a perpetual change;
but for as much as Objects applied through Corporeal Contact, rather than by
Effluvia, affect more vehemently the Sensory; therefore the greatest Company of
Desires, arising from the Sense, are wont to be referred to Luxury, or Lust.
The Desires of the Spirits dwelling in the other Sensories, The Desires of
sensible things, tend chiefly to Luxury or Lust.
for as much as they take only the Species, or the little Bodies, falling off
from sensible things, and less thick Embraces; therefore they are more
temperate, and are often directed to better uses.

Phantastic Desires are immense.
But our wants are chiefly Imaginary, and proceed from Opinion, and from hence a
most plentiful Crop of Desires grows up. For indeed, every Man breaths after
Felicity, or after a certain Divine State; wherefore, it seeks very much things
apparently Good, which are said to Conduce to this State, and endeavors to
obtain them; But having followed certain Goods, it finds not the desired
Satisfaction in them; therefore it seems to want others, and then again others.
So, for as much as Men always tend to the highest Good, or last end, and that
he attains it not in his lifetime, there is a Necessity of infinite Wishes,
and Desires concerning the intermediate Goods: Hence it is, that whatsoever
another has, yea, whatsoever of Good the Fantasy can conceive or feign,
presently we believe we have need of it, and therefore we desire it, and wish
for it. So, though there is an immense Company of Concupiscible things, But are
chiefly carried to Riches or Honors.
yet as most Men place their felicity in Riches or Honors, hence the Chief
Species of Desires arising from Opinion; and therefore not to be satisfied, are
Covetousness and Ambition.

Aversion is excited either from the Sense, or from Opinion.
As to Aversion, this Passion seems only to be the former inversed, and in like
manner, to take its Original, either from a certain Defect, perceived by the
Sense, or taken from Opinion; for a Sense or Opinion of want, calls to either,
a declination of the same manner of State: Wherefore, when the Animal Spirits
in the Sensories, are deprived of the Enjoyment of a necessary Good, or of what
they were before accustomed to, they either conceive, or set before them the
approach of its Contrary, and these being very unquiet, let go the Embraces of
every present Object, and set themselves to perform, or enter into a new
Confederation; until either the Sense or the Opinion, shall detect some
apparent Good, to the desire and following of which, the same Spirits are
busied; This Passion being frail, is soon changed into Desire.
And so Aversion, being for the most part a Passion of it self Vain, and
quickly perishable, terminates in the desire of Good, that may supply the
Defect so Carefully shunned.

Having shown after this manner for what Causes, and upon what Preparations or
fore Occasions, the Sensitive Soul enters into Passions of Desire and Aversion:
Let us now see after what manner or ways of Gesticulations or Gestures, she is
Composed in either Affection. Sensible Desire affects both the Spirits and the
Blood.
As to Desires begun from the Organs of the Senses, it is observed, that
whilst the Spirits there implanted, are carried toward the absent Object, all
fruition being left, they, as it were naked and destitute of all helps, like
Beggars ask an Alms, which as they most greedily desire, as it were about to
take by force that Good, they exceed the limits of their Subject; and
oftentimes, when the Desire is vehement, almost the whole Soul is drawn into
Parties, and by a certain going out from the Body, wanders toward the desired
thing, or at least emits a Portion of it self. That it is so, it plainly
appears, in that mad affection of Lust, in which the genital Humor, containing
Fragments picked from the whole Soul is poured forth. In like manner, in a
pleasant Sight, Sweet Odor, and most pleasing Harmony, the Animal Spirits, as
it were lifted up, role together out of the Sensories toward their Objects:
but on the contrary in Aversion, they betake themselves inward, and sometimes
forsake the Sensories themselves.

As to desires excited by reason of the Opinion of want, What Alterations
Imaginar^ Desire brings upon them.
the Sensitive Soul being impatient of a Lot so poor, becomes very instable and
unquiet, all the acquired Goods of its Body, it neglects and disesteems, also
refuses to hearken to the dictates of Reason; yea being altogether precipitate
in desires, she always looks outward, and as it were with wings is ready to fly
to this or that apparent Good; hence, by the disorder of the Spirits, flying
hither and thither the Nervous Parts are variously distracted, and Men betray
their desires by their Countenance, and going; also the Breast and the
Praecordia being moved together, the Blood, like the Sea working with the
winds, is compelled into various Fluctuations, that those affected sometimes
grow Pale, and sometimes are overspread with redness; also, from the same
Blood, entering inequally and impetuously the Confines of the Brain, The
Fluctuation of the Mind.
succeed inconstancy of Judgment, and frequent Changes of a thing proposed; as
sometimes they will do this, anon that, as if ten Minds were together by the
Ears in one Man. Pla^t. Hope and Fear.


According to the aforesaid Characters or Scheams, the Sensitive Soul is
composed, about absent Good and Evil, and not quickly about to come; but when
these seem to be at the Doors, the Soul alters her Position, and is
respectively urged with Hope or Fear: Concerning which, First it is observed,
that these Passions do not as the forementioned proceed equally from the Sense
and the Imagination, but are founded only on Opinion; from whence, after
entering into the desire of any thing, the Spirits being Solicitous concerning
the following of it, and as it were depressed, when they upon some other
Occasion, as the Drinking of Wine, are a little elevated with the fruition of
another pleasing Object, and they begin to strengthen Opinion, forthwith
doubtful desire is changed into a certain Confidence, that we hope shortly to
possess the desired Good: In like manner, when as Aversion beholds the absent
Evil a long way off, the depression of the Spirits places it near, Succeed to
Desire, and Aversion.
and by and by Causes a fear of its being about to come upon them. Indeed, Hope
and Fear, are very near of Kin to Desire and Aversion, and either of these
Symbolical Affections, denote only the more near, or more remote approach of
the same Object.

As to what appertains to the Provision and Exercise of Hope, The Provision of
Hope.
when we desire greatly any absent Good, and that an Opinion arises, that we
shall shortly obtain it, presently the Animal Spirits, who first like Soldiers
sent before, carefully seek after, and observe the willed thing, forthwith
returning toward the Soul, bring News of the Coming of its Guest, and prepare
a Reception for it; wherefore the whole Soul is presently brought into an
Expectation of its coming; all the Doors of the Senses are opened, that this
Good, Its Ob^ect, both the Sense, and the Imagination.
with all its Train, might enter through open Gates: In the mean time, the
Spirits inhabiting every Sensory, are prepared to go forth to salute this
approaching; the Imagination does forestall its Entrance; to wit, this frames
an Idea of the wished for and coming Good, which it places within its Borders,
as in a Throne, and confers on it Adornments and Splendour, borrowed from the
Fantasy. Moreover, the Praecordia are Careful for a part of its Reception;
for they being actuated with a more full Influx of Spirits, send forth the
Blood more lively into the Exterior Parts, as it were for the meeting of this
new Guest; hence, any one being full of Hope, feels in his whole Body, a
certain Inflation, Affects both the Spirits and the Blood.
with the Spirit and Heat plentifully poured forth: Then, if by any accident,
an occasion of fear or doubting is brought in, presently a sudden girding
together in the whole, with a certain putting down of the Spirits, and a
sinking of the whole Soul, ensues.

For in the Passion of Fear, A Character of Fear.
the Sensitive Soul being first stretched out, being struck by the nearness of
the approaching Evil, and being as it were pricked on every side, for as much as
she conceiving her self taken by the Enemy, cannot fly away into this or that
Part, she enters into her self, and that the Animal Spirits may be pressed
together, she is Contracted most strictly; if the Affection be vehement,
whilst the Animal Spirits suddenly go back, from the Superficies of the Body,
they greatly bind up at the same time the Pores and Passages, as it were
fastening the Doors, to shut out the Enemy: from this Constriction, How it
Affects the Spirits, and all the Faculties.
the Pores of the Skin being drawn inward, oftentimes succeeds an erection of
the hairs, or the hair standing an end; then the same Spirits being acted into
Confusion, they are inhihited from performing the wonted Offices of their
Functions, and not only want the helps of Reason; but sometimes the Locomotive
Faculties fail, yea by a resolution or loos'ning of the Nerves, made in the
Bowels, oftentimes the Excrements involuntarily flow out. Further, when the
Animal Faculty languishes so much, the Motion of the Praecordia is tired; How
the Blood*
hence the Blood stagnating within the Bosoms of the Heart, oftentimes a
swonning follows: and when therefore it is not carried lively enough into the
outward Parts, a Coldness and Paleness succeeds in them. In a sudden fear, we
feel a certain stiffness, whence it is commonly said, that the Blood is curdled
in the Body; but this happens, because, whilst the Nervous Parts compassing
about the Blood-carrying Vessels, are suddenly bound together, they at the same
time repress the Blood from its Excursion, and so stop or plainly invert its
Circulation.

It often passes into Desperation.
In the midst of fear, lest the Spirits being driven too much into flight, the
Sensitive Soul should be wholly loosned, Reason is wont to interpose something
of Hope, and so by degrees to lift up the dejected Spirits, and to animate them
to stay, so that this Passion being alleviated by such a remedy, may more
easily pass over; but if by the strong Evil falling on one, all means of Hope
be cut off, then a greater Affection, to wit, Desperation, comes in the place
of Fear, in which for the most part, this Soul yielding her self overcome,
wholly sinks down, and being half dead, is drowned in her proper Body, as in a
Sepulcher, of if she retains any strength, presently being carried into
Confusion, all things being turned upside down, she Contracts, Melancholy, or
Madness.

In like manner Hope into Audaciousness.
As Desperation follows Fear, all helps being cut off; so Hope, when it is
joined to more, and more certain, of the same, passes in Audaciousness: And in
this Affection, the Sensitive Soul swells up, and opposes her self dauntless to
any ensuing Evil; wherefore, the Spirits Guardian, by a more strong Connection
of themselves, every where extend the Muscles, and strengthen them, by a more
full Inspiration, to the bearing or resisting any thing; hence the Breast being
enlarged, and then strongly bound together, a bigger Voice is sent forth; the
Fists being Contracted, the Arms lifted up, the Head erected, the Face grim and
threatening, the Neck swollen, and the rising up, or the stretchings forth of
other Parts, show the Animal Spirits in the whole Body, unfolded and prepared
for Battle, as if about to enter into Conflict: In the mean time, the
Praecordia being moved most strongly, by a more full influx of the same
Spirits, notably rarifie the Blood, and like Lightning, send it forth
impetuously, and drive it into the outward Parts.

To which Anger is of Kin.
Anger is of some Kin to Boldness, in which the Sensitive Soul, by reason of the
Evil unworthily brought to it, at the same time is made sad, and grows hot;
wherefore, as she Contracts her self by reason of Sadness, so presently girding
her self for Revenge, she is dilated; therefore, as here diverse Contractions
come together, this Passion is performed with a mighty Perturbation of Spirits,
and of the Blood: for those affected, at the beginning wax Pale, The Character
of Anger.
by and by they are overspread with Red; the Forehead is wrinkled, the Lips
quiver, the Tongue murmurs, the Countenance is sometimes cast down, sometimes
lifted up, and threatening, but the Praecordia are especially agitated, with a
notable heat and boiling up of the Blood: which kind of Various, and sometimes
Contrary Symptoms, may easily be resolved; to wit, that the Soul at once
conceiving Sadness and Indignation, like the Sea working with opposite winds,
has Floods excited from every Coast, and striking one against another among
themselves.

There are more than Eleven Affections.
Besides the Eleven Affections even now recited and unfolded, according to the
Vulgar Opinion, there remains some others, excited according to the other
manifold Affections and Gestures of the Corporeal Soul; the chief of which are
Pity and Envy, Glory or Boasting, and Shame; which however are very near
related to the before recited, or are Composed out of them. Pity, Envy, Boasting,
For Pity is made out of Love and Sadness, by reason of the Evils of a Friend:
On the contrary, Envy out of Hatred and Sorrow, by reason of the Good things of
an Enemy: Glory or Boasting, is a certain kind of Joy and Exultation, Shame,
etc.
conceived by reason of an Opinion of our Good, had from others; and Shame is a
certain Sadness and Consternation of the Soul, by reason of an Opinion of our
ills conceived by others. A Character of Shame.
Further, Concerning this Passion it is observable, that when the Corporeal Soul
being abashed, is enforced to repress its Compass, she notwithstanding being
desirous, as it were to hide this Affection, drives forth outwardly the Blood,
and stirs up a redness in the Cheeks, to wit, the Sensitive part of the Soul,
as it were hiding its head, puts before her self a Portion of the Vital or the
Bloody Soul, under whose wings somewhat stretched forth, the Confusion might be
hid.

Besides we take notice, that the Corporeal Soul is not only affected by
Objects, and their Impressions, and compelled into various Gestures, and the
aforesaid Passions; but besides, she has certain innate Dispositions, by
reason of which, by the mere instinct of Nature, without any Influence of the
Object, she puts forth her self, and is excited into certain Emanations or
Spontaneous forces: Innate Affections.
Of which sort are first an amplification or enlarging the Individual Person,
and then a Propagation of its Kind. It is Natural for every Animal without
example or teaching, to seek for, and swallow down its food, both that the Body
may be daily increased to its due Magnitude, and also that the Soul, being
daily supplied with a new Score of Spirits, Viz. An Enlargement of the
Individual,
may be co-extended to the Body, and be able lively to perform the Acts of her
Functions. Then, as soon as the Lineamen^s both of the Body and Soul being
sufficiently drawn forth, and the Bulk and Compass of either are Completed; A
begetting of its Kind.
some Animal Spirits flowing over from the work of the Individual, begin to
abound, and then being separated into the Genital Parts, with a subtle Humor
picked from the whole Body, destinated for the Propagating the Species, as it
were in a Storehouse, and there laid up, they form there the Idea of a new
Animal; which afterward is transferred into a convenient Womb, to be perfectly
formed. When the Seeds of a new Animal are so laid, the whole Corporeal Soul
is drawn with all its Powers into this work of Propagating the Species, more
than of the Conserving of the Individual: wherefore the Blood supplies the
Testicles, no less than the Brain, with a most subtle and noble Matter for the
store of Animal Spirits: and when after too great Expense, the Spirits are
deficient in them, that presently the loss may be made up, oftentimes the Brain
and Nerves are defrauded of their due Pension, and are suffered to languish,
that in the mean time the Blood may pour forth more plentifully spirituous
Particles into the Spermatic Vessels. Venus an Enemy to the Brain and Nerves.
Yea it is thought, that it does sometimes snatch the Animal Spirits from the
Brain it self, which it bestows on the Genitals, in the Act of Venery: For it
appears so, when by immoderate Venery, the Brain presently labors with a want
of Spirits; for as much as from thence there is no passage for them, to the
Spermatick Vessels, but by the Blood; if that the Animal Spirits superabound
with a Prolifick Humor, Swelling up within the Genital Parts, presently the
whole Corporeal Soul, as it were incited, to the begetting of a young one, is
inclined to Concupiscence or Lust: The madness or fiery of Lust.
The Incentives of Lust, even against the Mind, are sought for, and they are
laid hold on, however brought by any Sense; the Blood boils up, the Marrow in
the Back grows hot, the Eyes are inflamed, the Genitals are inflated, so that
there wants little (unless Reason coming between recalls her, and Prohibits her
from the Beastliness of it) but that the whole Corporeal Soul, on every
occasion, should be dissolved in Lust. In these kind of Affections of
Concupiscence, may be most clearly discerned the distinct Strivings, and
contrary Endeavors of two Souls: because, whilst the Corporeal Soul being
incited to Lust, inclines her self wholly toward the Genital Members, and
Compels thither greater floods of the Blood, and greater store of the Animal
Spirits, the Heart and Brain being left wanting of Provision; Reason suppresses
its flowing.
on the contrary, the Superior Mind, rising up, and showing the Commands of
Reason and Religion, shows a receipt to the other, and Commands that the Animal
Spirits return to their tasks, to be performed within the Brain, and also that
the raging Blood should be recalled toward the Praecordia, and being there
suppressed, might be restrained from disorderly Excursions; Hence, the flame of
Lust being re-extinct for a time, and the Powers of the Inferior Soul being
reduced into Order, the Acts of Sobriety, Prudence, and of other Science, and
Discipline may be exercised; but if the reins of Reason be let loose, or new
incentives of Lust are brought, the Corporeal Soul, shaking off the yoke,
snatches her self again to the like Enormities.

There remain yet some other Affections of the Corporeal Soul, as Sleep and
Watching, Grief and Pleasure, excited in private Members; which, for as much as
they respect not the whole Soul at once, but this or that Portion of the Body,
or Peculiar Powers of it, and chiefly the Sensitive or Locomotive; therefore we
shall handle these anon, and shall next proceed to the Sense and its Kinds.

CHAP. X.
Of the Sense in General.

THe Vital or Flamy part of the Corporeal Soul, The Blood is animated, but
hardly sensible.
being rooted in the Blood, seems not much to know or perceive what things are
offered outwardly to, or acted inwardly in the Body: So, alth^ the Blood have
life, yet it is scarce sensible or knowing, for this which ought to be always
employed, with a perpetual Motion, and even inkindling, for the Offices for the
sustaining of Life, cannot be at leisure to mind any smaller Matters, or
outward Accidents. Indeed great Passions also in some measure disturb the
Blood, and pervert and variously drive it from its wonted Course, and like
violent Blasts, shake not only the Leaves or Body of the Tree, but also
sometimes pull up the Roots out of the Earth: So whatsoever mutations or
alterations happen to the Blood, proceed either from the Complexion of its
Liquor being changed, or from the impulse or incitation of the containing
Bodies. The lucid part of the Soul, feels or perceives the impulse of all
Objects, and is moved by them.
But the other Sensitive part of this Soul, which being diffused within the
Brain and stock of Nerves, is Co-extended or equally stretched forth with the
Organical Body, and almost with all its Parts, is affected with every Contact,
or with the meeting of other Bodies, she perceives all Impressions either
outwardly objected, or raised up within; and as she is moved by these, every
where diversely inflicted, she indues according to the various impulse of the
Objects, various Gestures and Species in her self, and also draws the Members
and Parts of the Body it self, with her wholly into the same Figures and
Motions. For indeed it is the Energie or the Act of the Soul it self, from
which every Function of the animated Body primarily and chiefly arises. If at
any time any Stroke or Impression be inflicted any where to the animated Body,
presently a certain Fluctuation or waving is stirred up in the Hypostasis of
the whole Soul, or of the struck Member; by which, some Animal Spirits or
subtle Particles, shut up in the Organical Parts, as a blast of Wind in a
Machine, being struck, run hither and thither, and so produce the Exercises of
Sense and Motion in the whole Body, or respective Parts.

Truly, among the various Gestures of the Corporeal Soul, by which, she
altering her Species or Hypostasis, brings a change to the containing Body, the
Sensitive and Locomotive Powers obtain the chief place; for as much as they are
Common almost to all living Creatures, at least to the more perfect, to which
also all the rest of the Faculties may easily be reduced. Sense and Motion, are
the chief Advancers of the animated Body.
These are the chief Advancers of the animated Body, upon which all the other
Wheels of this Self-moving Divine Machine depend.

But the Internal and next efficient Cause, both of Sense and Motion, are the
Hypostasis of the Sensitive Soul, or the Animal Spirits, instilled from the
inkindled Blood into the Brain, The efficient Cause of either, are the Animal
Spirits.
and from thence diffused into the Nervous Stock* which being distributed from
the Brain, as the Fountain through the Nerves to the whole Body, imbue,
irradiate, and blow up all the Parts, and bring a certain Tensity or stretching
forth to each; so that the passages of the Nervous Bodies, like Cords stretched
forth straightly on every side, from the Brain and its dependencies, reach forth
into all the Exterior Parts, by which, so stretched forth, and actuated by a
certain Continuity of the Soul, if one end be struck, presently the stroke is
perceived through the whole, so that every Intention conceived within the
Brain, presently performs the designed work, in every Member or Part; and on
the other side, every impulse or stroke, which is inflicted from without to any
Member, or to the Sensitive Body, is communicated instantly to all Parts within
the Head. A most swift Communication of them, implanted within all the Parts.
If that an Impression or force tends from the Brain outward, through the
Nerves into the moving Parts, Motion is produced; but if they being made
outwardly, are directed inwards toward the Brain, Sense arises. But whilst
either of these are performed, it is not so to be understood, (as is commonly
asserted) as if the same Spirits make have, and leap back presently, as it were
from one end of the Course or Circuit to the other; but as the Soul is
stretched forth, through the whole, with a certain Continuity, its Particles,
viz. the Spirits contiguous one with another are set like an Army in Array; for
they after a Military fashion, whilst they move not from their station, and
keep Order, perform their Offices; and whether they be set in Battle Array, or
on the Watch, they perform the Commands carried outward from the Brain,
themselves being almost immovable, and effect Motion, and deliver presently to
the Brain the news of any sensible thing impressed, An opposite tendency of
them, effect both Sense and Motion.
whereby Sensation is made. So indeed, the same Animal Spirits, tho with an
opposite and inverse tendency, and aspect of them, cause Motion and Sense: But
both Faculties, as to the Exercises of their Acts, require something diverse
Organs; yea, the Animal Spirits planted within the same; for the performing the
diverse Offices of their Faculties, are ordered with a various Affection, and
with a different manner of Orders. That each of these may be the more clearly
illustrated, we shall first of all speak of the Sense, and of whatsoever
belongs to it both in General and in Special, and then afterward concerning
Motion.

What the Sense is.

The approach of the sensible Object, is made either by Contact, or by
Effluvia's sent forth, or by reflected and repe^^^ssed Particles of the Air,
Breath, or Light.


The Sense, as it is taken in a more strict acceptance ( viz. for the proper
Function in animated Bodies, and by which they are distinguished from
inanimates) is wont to be described after this manner; That it is the faculty
of perceiving Sensible objects. Because, the Sensitive soul, as has been said,
being apt to be affected or moved by every Contact or Impulse of an exterior
Body, forces its constitution to vary in the whole, or in part, according as it
is struck: But exterior Bodies, because they consist of Particles, of a various
Kind, and diversely figured, therefore, when some are applied to others, their
approaches one among another, are not always made after one and the same
manner, but after a manifold manner, and with notable variety; to wit, either
by Corporeal Contacts, or by Effluvia's falling from them, or by Particles, of
Air, Breath, or Light, reflected from them, issuing from them on every side
like Darts. Further, and to every one of these Kinds, many Species are
attributed: Because, not only Concretes, but also various little Bodies of the
same Subject, show and impress manifold Types of their Contacts; several of
which, as they are received and so known distinctly, by living Creatures, As
these several are made manif^ld, they requi^e diverse Sensories.
the Sensitive Soul using Corporeal Organs, has many Sensories, fitted for
such variety of Objects, and diverse representations of things; in which
several, both the Conformation of the Pores, as also the disposition of the
Animal Spirits, are proportionated to the little Bodies, sent in from the
Object, which are only of one Kind, fitly to be received. By this means
sensible Impressions, at least that may be of use to any Animal, are perceived,
and from this manifold way of Sension, proceeds the Knowledge of all things,
All Knowledge from Sense.
according to that of the Philosopher, All Knowledge is made by the Sense; when
on the contrary, if Bodies and their Particles, should strike the Systasis of
the naked Soul, or part of it, always after one and the same manner, nothing at
all would be known, because one thing or parts, from another, or these from
those Members, would not be distinguished. Wherefore, that all the chief
Objects and their Accidents, might be distinctly noted, it is so provided, that
some Particles strike this Organ and not that; so that they affect their
several respective Sensories only, the rest being untouched.

From hence it is clear, In Perfect Animals, there ought to be many Senses.
that it is necessary that there should be many Sensories in perfect Animals;
which may perform diverse Actions, both for the preserving of Life, and
propagating the Kind, and also for the knowing many things, and chiefly for the
embracing of what things are Congruous to themselves, and for the shunning all
incongruous things; for this things it is needful, that the Sensitive Soul
should be affected by the Objects, after a various manner, and so perceive
their manifold Influencies. How vile their Condition is, and how hard their
Lot, that are gifted with the only sense of the Touch, That one of the Touch or
Feeling, suffices not.
appears from the Life and Operation of the more imperfect Animals, as Oysters
and Lympins; then besides, how false is the Opinion of some, who say, That
every Sense in all Animals is the feeling only; for although every Affection is
made by Contact, from the Object to the Soul; yet neither is the same thing
still employed, nor received after the same manner; but how many types soever
of sensible things are to be found, so many Counterfeits remain in the
Sensories.

Nevertheless it may here be rightly Quaeried, How it may be? for as much as
the whole Hypostasis or Contexture of the Soul, is made up of most subtle and
also most highly moveable Particles, How the same Spirits receive sensible
Species so very diverse.
that every one of them wheresoever implanted, are not indifferently moved, by
every sensible stroke; when especially the Interior frame of the Soul, which is
Common to all the Sensories, receives ths Affections of every one, and so is
mediately affected by every sensible thing: I say, why the Spirits implanted in
the Eye, do not equally perceive Sounds and Smells, as they do Colors? for as
much as they inhabiting the streaked Bodies, discern both these, and all other
sensible things.

For the resolving of this Problem, Than this may be done are required,
these two things are to be supposed, to wit, first, That the Structure of
every Sensory is so made, according to its Pores and Passages, that Particles
only proportionate to them may be admitted in: wherefore as Light, and the
Images of things, pass through Glass, and clear Bodies; not dark Bodies; so the
same are received only by the Eyes, First, a Structure of the Organ* after a
diverse manner.
and not by the other Sensories: The same Reason holds of all the rest. For we
may observe, when in the Circumambient Air, or in the Atmosphere, there are
Bodies of a various Nature, and of a diverse Configuration, that some things
affect this, others that Sensory, and so the things which are of a several Kind
affect the particular Organ of the Sense. As for Example, the Particles of most
thin Air or Light, which seem to be of a Sulphurous Nature, being reflected
from Bodies, Convey (as was said) their Images into the Organs of the Sight or
Seeing; the little Bodies of Air which seem to be saline, being repercussed
from Solids, shake the Drum of the Ear, by their leaping back; yea, and the
same being made clammy by a sweet dew, or moistened, affect the taste; the
Particles of the same Air, filled with sweet Exhalations, strike the Nostrils:
And lastly, The same stuffed with warm or cold Effluvia's, move the Sense of
Feeling: But in the mean time, the Particles of the same Air or Element, which
are proportionate to one Sensory, are incommunicable to the rest.

But Secondly, Secondly, a Various Constitution of the Animal Spirits.
the Animal Spirits themselves, which reside in the Organs of the Senses, and
that are like Watchmen, are furnished for the respective meetings of the
Objects, with a certain peculiar Provision, and an appropriate manner of
Disposition: for when some Spirituous Particles, more pure than others, and
more subtle exist, some more dull or blunt, others notably moveable, these
Naked, those smered with Humor, and marked with many other Affections; it is so
provided, that as the Naked Spirits, or those less gifted suffice for the Sense
of Feeling, these without any farther indowment are disposed every where in the
Membranes, and fibrous Flesh; but the most pure Spirits, and as it were
Chrystalline for the Sight, flow into the Eyes; those that are highly moveable
are fitted for the Hearing, and the more Viscous, which are fused with a
requisite Humor, for the Taste, and Smell.

After what manner Sension is made.
These things being thus premised, concerning the Multiplicity and Difference of
the Senses, and the Organs, we will now inquire into Sension it self; by what
means, and after what manner it is performed. Concerning these we thus say in
general, that the Object being applied to the Sensory, (whether it be done
immediately, or the Particles of the Air or Element coming between) does
impress its Idea or Character on the Spirits implanted in that place; and in
the same instant, by a continued Series of the Animal Spirits, as it were an
Irradiation, the Type of its Impression does pass from the Sensory to the Head;
and whilst the Spirits actuating the streaked Bodies, are in like manner
affected by it, a perception of Sense, begun from the Organ, is formed.

All sensible Impressions do beam forth from all the Organs, into the streaked
Bodies.
That Sight is so performed, Dioptrick Experiments do plainly show, by which,
the same Species of any Body, by a Glass artificially placed, may be Carried or
Reflected hither or thither, and may be figured and beheld at once in several
places: why in like manner, may we not Conceive the Image of the Object
represented in the Eye, as in a Glass, to propagate its likeness from thence
further to the streaked Bodies? But as to the other Sensories the Business
seems more hard to be unfolded, because the sensible Species, for as much as
they are more Corporeal or thicker, cannot be conveyed to the Head with so
quick a passage, and almost unperceiveable like Lightning; but as to these, it
is to be understood, that although the Smell, Touch, and Taste, require more near
and more Corporeal approaches of the Object, than either the Sight or Hearing;
yet the Animal Spirits, which as it were internuncii, are placed within every
Organ, and the chief Sensory, equally and as easily transmit the stroke or
impulse of every Kind: Because as the Spirits are diffused through the whole
Nervous System, and through the Head it self, as it were with a continued
beaming, every Impression by the stroke of the Eye gets sooner from one bound
to the other; yet the Character of the Object, is conveyed by the like Motion
of their Neighbors, and as it were by a certain waving, even to the streaked
Bodies.

In every Sension is required, First, That the Species be impressed on the
Sensory.

Secondly, That it be carried thence, by the passage of the Spirits to the
Common Sensory.

How the diverse sensible Species are distinctly represented, in the same Common
Sensory.


Hence it follows, that for the Act of Sension, these two things are required.
First, That the sensible Species be expressed, so as it may be impressed on the
Sensory: And Secondly, That the Idea of the same Impression, be carried thence,
by a like Affection and Motion, by the Spirits flowing in the intermediate
passages, to the Common Sensory; for otherwise Sension is not performed, as it
appears, when being intent on other things, we take not any notice of any
Objects, tho they approach near to the Eyes, or the other Organs.

But here we may have a Cause of Doubting, how the manifold Species of sensible
things, for the receiving of which, many Organs, and those diversely framed, are
required; do all come together within, and are discerned in the same Common
Sensory; For it is a wonderful thing, that the same streaked Body, consisting
of a make not much unlike, should admit, and know distinctly in it self, the
universal Idea's of Objects. As to this we may say, that the Images of things
to be perceived by the Sense, are not distinctly painted in the Common Sensory,
as on a Table; but every Impression there shown, depends on the Motion, as it
were by a certain waving, of some Spirits separate from others, and within
these or those peculiar Tracts of them* Nor is it irrational to affirm, that
some Spiritual Particles are moved within the Hypostasis of the Sensitive Soul,
and her the same Portion of it, whilst others lie quiet, lying between them;
for it plainly appears, and which afterward is more largely shown, that within
the Body of the Air, It is shown by an example of the Air, whose diverse
Particles have diverse carryings forth.
the lucid Particles are agitated, whilst the rest lie at ease; yea also, that
Sonorifick, yea and odorous little Bodies, and perhaps many others of another
Kind, are moved by a distinct and peculiar Agitation apart by themselves, from
the other texture of the Air; for both Images pass through, Sounds are poured
out, Odors flow, warm or cold Effluvia's, and other little Bodies are variously
carried; yet notwithstanding, others in the mean time are neither driven by
force by some others, nor is the Consistency of the whole Air disturbed by some
Singulars. Yea, various Impressions, not only pass through the Air unchanged,
Also by the example of Water, in which, many wavings being at once made, are
all distinct.
but also the Superficies of the Water; for we have observed in a River, or a
Fish Pond, when many wavings have been stirred up, by various and diverse
strokes together, that all of them, however they meet one another, pass through,
or cut one another, continue still distinct, and inconfused; why then may we
not suppose, that in the Airy Systasis of the Soul, (which is also is founded
in a Watery Humor) there are Particles of a various and unlike make, and that
manifold Species, by their passing through, may be at once brought to the Common
Sensory, without Confusion? As for Example, The like is in the Airy Hyposiasis
of the Corporeal Soul.
Suppose that for seeing most Subtle and as it were Aetherial Particles, others
almost Saline and notably moveable for the Hearing, and so for the other
Senses, Spirits endowed after this or that manner, to be interwoven together,
and every peculiar Sension to be produced, by a particular affection of them;
to which it happens, that for the various passing through of the Spirits of so
diverse a Nature, diverse Tracts or Paths are produced, both in the Organ it
self, and in the Common Sensory: and so, For the diverse Perceptions of which,
together, in the Common Sensory, there are many and distinct Tracts produced.
when the Animal Spirits are affected, which are of this or that Nature apart
from others, which are of another Nature, and as there are beamings forth of
several kinds, as it were within various Inlets or Passages; it is no wonder, if
in diverse Organs* distinct Acts of Sensions are performed; and that all of
them, however different in Kind, and coming together from many ways, are shown
within the same Common Sensory, to wit, the streaked Bodies; because in this
Marrowy Part, Spirits of every kind abound, and also passages of every sort of
Conformation are found; therefore, every Impression impressed on any Organ from
without, may be distinctly represented in this same Body. That it is so, it
more clearly appears from hence, because both the streaked Bodies, and the way
leading to these, consist of many white Ligatures, which seem as so many soft
Nerves, or marrowy Tracts, for the diverse ways of receiving the Impressions of
sensible Species.

When a sensible Impression is brought through the Animal Spirits, Sensible
Impressions, as they are stronger weak stir up other Powers, either more or
fewer.
being affected by a continued Series, from the Organ to the Common Sensory, if
it be light it is there terminated, and the perception of the External Sense
quickly vanishes, without any other Affection; but if (which more often
happens) the impulse of the Object be stronger, the Sense excited from thence,
like the vehement waving of waters in a Whirl-pool, both partly passes through
the streaked Bodies, and going forward to the Callous Body, it oftentimes
raises up two other Internal Senses, to wit, the Imagination and Memory, either
one of both of them; and also is partly reflected from them, and from thence,
by a declining of the Spirits, leaping into the Nerves, local Motions are made.

For indeed Impressions of sensible things, All the other Powers of the Soul
proceed at first from Sension.
from the beginning, furnish both the Imagination, with the Memory and
Appetite, and induce the first attempts of local Motions. It is first effected,
for as much as the sensible Impulse, is often propagated beyond the streaked
Body, into the marrowy part of the Brain, or the Cortex, or the extreme
Confines of it. But local Motions ordinarily succeed to Sension, for as much as
the Animal Spirits being struck back from the bolt or stay of the streaked
Bodies, spring up outwardly, and as they enter these or those Nerves, by a
certain Consequence, or by chance, they excite fortuitous local Motions, or
depending on the previous Sense; for in the reciprocal exercise of these
Faculties, to wit, of Sense and local Motion, (before Animals are imbued with
Fantasy and Memory) almost the whole Animal Function consists; because Brutes
or Men, whilst they as yet know not things, want Spontaneous Appetite. So long
therefore, they being destitute of the Internal Principle of Motion, move
themselves or Members, only as they are excited from the impulse of the
External Object, and so Sension preceding Motion, is in some manner the Cause
of it.

Therefore in every Sension, The Animal Spirits pass through the sensible
Species; and not the Effluvia of the Object, penetrate even to the head.
the Animal Spirits are moved; and their Motion being excited, in the utmost
Sensory, from the approach of the Object, and harmonised according to its
Impression, turns inwards, and (as has been said) is conveyed to the first or
Common Sensory: wherefore it is not to be thought, that the little Body's sent
from the Object, do penetrate deeply, and enter the inward parts of the Brain
it self (as some have asserted); but it suffices, that they being cast forth
like Darts from the sensible thing, do affect the Spirits placed in the
forefront; and then, they from thence most swiftly pass through, by their
Irradiation, the impressed Motion. As to the Parts, within which the Animal
Spirits dwelling, do carry through, as it were by Pipes and Dioptrick Glasses,
the impressed Species of sensible things; they are the Fibers, Nerves, and the
Oblong Marrow, The bounds and passages, by (...), and into which the Species
pass through.
and chiefly the tops of it, to wit, the streaked Bodies. The Fibers being
stretched forth in every Sensory, as it were Nets spread abroad, take the
Particles of the Object, diffused and entering here and there, from which,
whilst the Spirits implanted in those Fibers, are affected, and are marked
with the type of shadow of the Objected thing, forthwith the same Character
being expressed, by a continued Series of Spirits, passes forward, through the
little Pipes of the Nerves, and the Medullary Trunk, into the streaked Bodies,
and is there represented as upon a white well; But the Rational Soul, easily
beholds the Image of the thing there painted; or perhaps carried forward beyond
into the Callous Body, the Imagination and Fantasy being excited, But after
what manner Brutes perceive themselves to feel, and by reason of that Sension,
they either imprint it in their Memory, or draw forth the Acts of the Appetite,
we have shown elsewhere.

The Number of the Senses is well affirmed to be Five.
Concerning the number of the outward Senses, we shall not recede from the
vulgar Opinion, affirming them to be Five; for although in some imperfect Animals,
perhaps one Sense or two are only found; and tho it may seem, that the more
perfect living Creatures may exercise many more than Five; because it is
possible, that the Kinds of sensible things, far exceed that Number; yet it is
seen, that those Five Organs of the Senses do abundantly enough supply the
wants of all living Creatures: at least it seems good to the great Creator, not
to grant to Man more than these, nor perhaps better than brute Beasts have
obtained: So many, and not more, are requisite.
Hence we may argue, that whereas the first Notions of all Simple things, are
acquired only by the showing of the Sense, and that Man, notwithstanding, is
wont from thence to form Complicated Orations and Discourses, beyond what
Brutes are able to do, that this is done by the Virtue and Operation of the
Rational Soul in him, of which indeed Beasts are wholly destitute.

As to the Order or Method, by which we should treat of the Senses,
particularly to be considered, if their worth or dignity be respected, it is
confessed by all, that Seeing, and then Hearing should by right have the
Prerogative; but indeed, because Knowledge more easily, and always more
happily, proceeds from more Known things, to things less Known; therefore, I
think to begin with the Touch or Feeling, as the most Common Sense; also for
that the formal Reason of which seems to be most easily unfolded.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Senses in Particular, and first of the touch or Feeling.

The Sense of Feeling is more thick, but the most ample or large.
THe Touch or Feeling, tho it seems a Faculty of a lower Order, and as it were
of a more gross Nature, because it apprehends not the object, unless it be
brought near, and as it were pressed with its Arms; yet in some respect, it is
more excellent by far than the rest; because this Sense beyond all others,
receives and knows the Impressions of many sensible things, and those inflicted
with greater variety; and so obtains a most large, and as it were a general
Province. For since that the Sensible Qualities so called, are manifold and
diverse, to wit, Heat and Cold, Moisture and Dryness, Hardness, and Softness,
and other Modifications of Bodies, their Make, Motions, Influences and Types,
or Figures of Appearance, which in Concretes result from the mixtures and
divorces, or the various Transpositions of the Elements, the greatest part of
them by much, are the proper Objects of Feeling, and are discerned only by its
Judgment, and as it were by its Will. Exhibits Signs of Judgment to the rest of
the Senses.
Further it is observed, That the Touch or Feeling, gives notes of Judgment to
all the other Senses concerning uncertain Objects: for when the Sight cannot
distinguish a Ghost or Spectre, from a solid Body, by the trial of Feeling,
presently the thing is put out of doubt; so likewise of the Smelling and Taste,
which oftentimes put away sensible things brought to them, and fear their near
Embrace, unless first tried by handling.

It has a mighty diffusive Sensory or Organ.
But this Power, as it enjoys great variety, as to its Objects, so it has a
most ample Sensory, and equally extended almost with the whole Body; That
indeed few Parts, either within or without, but partake of this Sense. Further,
this Faculty, for that it is of a general and common use, insinuates it self
into the Organs of the other Senses, destinated to the private Office of every
one: For both the Tongue and Nostrils, also the Eyes and Ears, perceive heat
and cold, hardness and Softness, and other tangible qualities, no less than
their proper Objects. If that we should further inquire, what the immediate
Organ of Feeling is, in the several Members, or Parts? it may be said, that it
is the Nervous Fibers, every where stuffed, and as it were distended with a
Company of Animal Spirits; Which are the Nervous Fibers.
which as the Strings of a Lute, as often as they are struck by the strokes of
Tangible things, propagate the Impulse every where received, by the passages of
the Nerves, forthwith to the Common Sensory. For as much Fibers being thickly
set, are interwoven in the Skin, the fleshly Pannicle, the Membranes, and
Musculous Flesh, yea, and with some of the Inwards, so that the Approaches of
outward Tangible things, are not only felt in the Palm of the Hand, or the
Superficies of the Body, but as often as sharp Humors are brought within into
the Bowels, In all the Parts, both External and Internal.
or that Preternatural Contents cause a pulling or hawling; a troublesome Sense
of it is felt; wherefore the proper Organ of Feeling, is neither the Skin, nor
the Flesh, nor the Membranes, as has been asserted after this manner by some,
and after that manner by others; but the Fibers are that Organ, implanted in
the whole frame or make of these or those Parts.

Although many sensible Fibers are placed every where through the whole Body, also,
tho there are diverse and manifold Tangible qualities; Which Fibers, tho every
where of the same Conformation;
yet it is not to be thought that these Fibers, that they may be the better
fitted for those qualities, are of a different Kind or Conformation; for
neither are there some Fibers, by which heat, or others* by which cold, or
others different from either, by which other Tangible things are perceived; but
the same Fibers, are every where alike, and receive and distinctly carry the
approaches of every Object, for neither do the sensible Fibers, planted in
diverse places or parts, acquire a diversity of Office, so that one Member
should be the Index of heat, another of cold, or another of a several Tangible
thing, but every one indifferently feel almost all Tangible things, Yet Exhibit
various Species, according to the various approaches of tangible things.
from every Fibrous Part. The reason of the difference is, because the Fibers,
tho of the same nature and frame, enter into diverse ways of Contractions or
wrinklings, from the various strokes of sensible things; even as the strings of
an Harp, from the various strokes of the Musician, give forth different Sounds;
so also, the Fibers, which are the Instruments of Touching, are affected after
a different manner, by the various impulse of Tangible things. For it seems,
that these are irritated or provoked one way, with heat, and another way with
cold, and so from the rest of the Qualities, after a manifold manner;
therefore, the Animal Spirits implanted in them, enter into a peculiar way of
Gyration or turning round, or of undulation or waving, according to which, the
Spirits being harmonized, which flow within the passage of the Nerve belonging
to those Fibers, do propagate the same Figure or Type of their carrying forth,
to the Medullary Stock, and by its means, to the Common Sensory.

The Tangible Species being impressed after this manner, Tangible Species
immediately carried either to the Cerebel, or to the streaked Bodies.
on the Nervous Fibers, or the outward Organ of the Touch, are not always
carried from thence, or at least not immediately to the same Common Sensory;
for we have showed elsewhere, that some Nerves spring from the Parts of the
Brain, and others from those of the Cerebel; wherefore, when they direct the
Impulse, hap'ning outwardly immediately to the striated or streaked Bodies,
these latter convey the Sension from the Fibers, which are planted somewhere
more inwards about the Viscera to the Cerebel; from which (without Knowledge of
the Animal) oftentimes involuntary Motions are retorted: as when Vomiting
follows upon an Emetick Medicine, unknown, and against our Minds. If that this
private Sension belonging to the Cerebel be a little stronger, and vehement
passing through the same Cerebel, goes further even to the streaked Bodies; as
when Medicines provoking the Stomach, more sharply, induce a Sension or trouble
about the Heart, or otherways molestious, which they plainly give notice of.

Further, And from thence goes forward, sometimes to the other Faculties, Viz.
the Imagination, Memory, and Appetite.
when the Tangible Impression arrives first and immediately at the streaked
Bodies, if the same be light, it is there terminated, and the sensible Species
presently vanishes; but if the Impulse of the Object be somewhat stronger, it
passes further to the Callous Body, and oftentimes to the Shell of the Brain;
and therefore their Affections, Imagination, and sometimes Memory, gathered
from the touch of the thing, succeed: and when, the sensible Species being also
dilated to the Common Sensory, a divergency or bending down of the Spirits,
from thence is reflected into the same Nerve, or others related to it, so it
stirs up local Motions. These sort of Effects are sufficiently known by the
Common Proverb, Where the Pain is, there the Finger will be: for it is
implanted by Nature in every Animal, to rub or press the place with its finger
or foot, where any sense of Trouble or Pain is.

As to the Kinds and Differences of Feeling, The Kinds and Differences of
Feeling, are either, In respect of the Object;
both are taken, either from the Objects, or from the various affection of the
Sensory: the ways or means of the former, are so manifold, that they cannot
easily be recounted; for hither ought to be referred (as we said but now) the
universal Tangible Qualities; By Tangible Qualities we understand here, the
various habitudes of Natural Bodies, which arise from the Crasis and
Disposition of the Elements, of which they are made; as also from their
Intestine Motion, or Effluvia's variously appearing in themselves; which kind
of Modifications of Bodies, the Sense of Feeling chiefly finds out, and makes
their knowledge or marks so certain, that when we do not believe the Scrutiny
of the other Senses, we are wont to rest satisfied with the Examination of this.

Concerning the Species of Feeling, In respect of the Sensory.
Constituted in respect of the Sensory, we showed even now, that the sensible
Impression was immediately derived from the External Organ, either to the
streaked Bodies, or to the Cerebel: Therefore, for that Reason, Sension is
either manifest, And so it is either manifest or private.
and knows plainly every thing; or private of which the Animal is scarce
knowing: but the Consequence declares this Kind of Sension to have been stirred
up: for a Motion being made in any inward unseen, argues a previous sense of it
to have been; as from the change of the Pulse, or a failure of Spirits, shows a
certain Malignity to have affected the Praecordia, or the Cerebel.

Pleasant or Sad.
In either of the aforesaid Kinds of Sension, to wit, whether the same be
manifest or private, the Tangible Impression, either coming pleasantly to the
Fibers, gathers together the Spirits implanted in them, and more nearly
delights them, and strokes them with a soft and gentle rubbing, whence pleasure
arises; or the Impulse of the same, pulling and wrinkling the Fibers, distracts
and dissipates the Spirits one from another, and so Grief, Pain, or Trouble
Succeeds: But concerning these Affections, viz. Grief and Pleasure, we shall
have hereafter a more fit place to speak of them; so that it next remains, for
us to proceed, from the Sense of Feeling, to its nearest Neighbor and Relation
the Taste.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Taste.

The Taste a Kin to Feeling.
THe Taste is so like to the Sense of Feeling, that it seems to be a certain
Species of it; and certainly the Object, in either Organ, ought to be brought
near, and laid upon it; yea in tasting, to be admitted more deeply within the
Pores and its passages. Upon this Sense, The Sensory of the Taste discerns its
Objects, and is delighted with those things that are Convenient.
depends chiefly both the Life and Vegetation of Animals; for this chooses and
takes in Juice for nourishment convenient, and that by this Office it might be
constantly and rightly performed, it is furnished with a faculty, or a certain
implanted Judgment, whereby some wholesome and agreeable Aliments, fit for
every Individual, are discerned from those that are disagreeable and hurtful;
also further, as it were in reward of its work, it is delighted after a notable
manner, with the Exercise of its Function; For unless convenient agreeable
things, ^it to be Eaten, move Spittle, and as it were prickle them with a most
grateful pleasantness of Taste, the appetite of desiring or taking of Food is
quickly extinguished, Venus or Pleasure is necessary for the preserving of the
Individual.
with oblivion or tediousness; so for the preserving the Individual, no less
than the Species, Desire and Pleasure ought to be had.

The Sensory of the Taste is not so diffusive, and almost Co-extended with the
whole Body, as that of Feeling, but is limited to one part only: yea, and its
Sensible is of one Kind only, to wit, a Savoury thing, nor does it include, as
the Tangible Quality, the Subjects of many Catagorical things. Indeed the chief
and almost only Organ of the Taste is the Tongue; to which, after a manner, but
obscurely, do consent the Palate and the Upper part of the Throat; But in all
of them, the Nervous Fibers are the immediate Instruments of Sension; The Organ
of the Taste, is the Tongue, with the Palate, and Throat.
wherefore it is observed, that the Tongue is notedly more Fibrous than any
other part, also consists of a very porous Contexture; for this end, that the
savory Particles of the thing, might be more plentifully, and more deeply
admitted, into the passages of the Sensory, and so meeting at once with many
Fibers, might excite a more acute Sension: yea, it may be suspected, that
whilst the subtle Particles of the savory Humor are imbibed so deeply by the
Tongue, Eating is a certain Solution;
the Animal Spirits do in some measure snatch the same, for their nourishment,
and convey them inwardly, by the passages of the Nerves, toward the Brain; for
it plainly appears, that in great Fastings or want of Food, and swouning or
failure of Spirits, that a refreshment of them immediately follows, upon the
first tasting of any noble Liquor.

Eating is a certain Kind of Solution, whereby the savory Particles may be the
better taken in, Wherefore one savor, oftentimes excludes another.
from the Food by the Sensory: Because, whilst solid eatable things are
reduced into bits, by Chawing, the Tongue, and other parts of the Mouth, and
Throat, pour forth as it were a certain Menstruum, which washing and as it were
Elixivating the savory little Bodies, carries them into the Sensory, and
insinuates them into the Pores of the Tongue: Further, The savory Particles,
because so impacted in the Sensory, do employ its passages, hence it comes to
pass, that one savor not rarely excludes another; so sweet things being
tasted, because they are clammy, and very obstructing, hinder or pervert the
more exact taste of Wine; wherefore, that the hindered Faculty might be again
restored, salt or sharp things are eaten, which may open the Pores of the
Tongue, and clear away the sticking Viscousness.

As to the Nerves, The Nerves sent to the Organs of the Taste, proceed partly
from the Fifth pair.
which serve to the Fibers of the Tongue, thickly interwoven with it, and which
carry the Impressions of Savours, to the chief Sensory, it seems, that they are
of a double Kind: for as Nerves are inserted in the Tongue from both the Fifth,
and the Ninth pair, and are every where distributed through its whole frame,
with a most thick Series of shoots, it is very likely, that they are both
Sensitive. Concerning the Nerves sent hither from the Fifth pair, the thing is
out of doubt; and as from the same pair, other shoots are sent into the
Nostrils, hence we may say, the reason is, of that Consent, which is between
both these Sensories; but indeed, as to the Nerves bestowed also on the Tongue,
from the Ninth pair, it may be something doubted, because it is commonly
believed, that the Office of these serve to the Motion of the Tongue, and to
Speech; Partly from the Ninth also, which serve for the Motions of the Tongue.
wherefore, from the same pair are sent certain branches into the Muscles of
the Tongue, and of the Bone called Hyoides, which without doubt are destinated
for their Motion: Nevertheless, the it be granted, that the Nerves of the
Tongue and its Appendix, inserted from the Ninth pair, do bestow on them the
moving Power (which indeed is necessary to this Part, as well for Tastings as
for speaking; to wit, as the Tongue is very versatile, it takes in with delight
the Savours from every corner or recess of the Mouth) yet what hinders, It is
in like manner observed of the Touch, that the same Nerves serve both for
Sense, and Motion.
that however the same Nerves should not serve for both, to wit, Motion and
Sense? For it appears, that many Nerves which serve for the Sense of Feeling,
do in like manner serve for the performing of the Motions of those Parts to
which they belong. Wherefore, as Tasting is a certain Species of Feeling, it is
probable, that it enters in some measure through the moving Nerves of the
Tongue it self; neither does it appear otherwise, for what end Branches of the
Nerves, derived from the Ninth pair into the Tongue, disperse such thick-set
shoots into its whole frame, unless they should serve for the receiving of the
Particles of Savours, coming from every Part. But for as much as after this
manner, two Nerves of a distinct Original belong to the Tongue, Wherefore from
the Taste of a pleasant thing, the Imagination and the Praecordia, are wont to
be affected.
and one of them arises from the Parts of the Brain, and the other from the
Cerebel: Hence a Sension being carried inwards by the same, it is stayed from
either at the Common Sensory, and so according to the diverse Nature of the
Object, a pleasant and delectable fruition, or an ungrateful and sad Aversion,
at once in either Government the Imagination and the Praecordia are affected.

There is a sufficient indulgement to the Taste, for a reward of its necessary
work, to wit, Eating; therefore its Objects are sought far and near, through
the Regions of the whole World, yea and all the Elements are employed. Further,
as to its Ministry, all the rest of the Senses serve to this, The rest of the
Senses, wait upon the Taste.
for nothing pleases the Palate unless the Sight, and Hearing, Smell, and Touch
approve it. It Is fit it should be so, for this Sensory, by which Food is
conveyed for Humane Life, and that it might enjoy great variety, for the
shunning of nauseous things; and use a guard upon the rest, for Discrimination;
lest instead of Food, it might unawares take Poison.

The Speculation of Savours, Savours the Object of Tasting. Simple or Compound:
A Threefold Consideration of them, to wit, which are, 1. Whose Original are
natural. 2. Artificial. 3. The Alteration or Abolition of either.

(which are the next Object of Taste) contains in it self very many Pleasant,
and no less Profitable things; wherefore I think it will not be from the
Matter, to turn aside here a little into this Theory; and as we shall divide
all Savours into Simple and Compound: First, we shall rehearse what Nature
suggests of that Kind particularly, according to their several differences,
both of themselves, and of the Subjects in which they are; Then secondly, we
shall add the Parallels, by what means, and by what service of Art, the same
Savours in Subjects are produced anew, in which they are not by Nature;
Thirdly, After what manner Savours both Natural and Artificial, are any way
altered and changed in their Subjects, or wholly perish. It will be worth our
while to discourse briefly concerning these, and lastly, somewhat of Compounded
Savours.

Savours called Simple, Nine Simple Savours.
are commonly counted to be Nine, viz. Sharp, Bitter, Salt, Acid or Tart,
Astringent or Biting, Sour, Sweet, Oily, insipid or without Taste.

The first is sharp or biting Savor, Sharp Savor.
such as is felt in Pepper or Pellitory, being chewed; which probably arises,
as often as the Particles of any Body are smooth, and sharpened, and after that
manner figured, like the stings of Nettles, that they may prick and very much
dig into the Sensory. In Subjects endued with a sharp biting Savor, a volatile
Salt, or an Alchalisat, or suffering a Flux from Fire, very much exceeds other
Elements.

First, Which are sharp or biting of their own Nature.
Concretes, which have by Nature Particles, so figured, are accounted among
Vegetables Hearts-ease, or Trinity-Herb, Pepper, Aron, Country-Mustard,
Sea-Lettice, or Milk-thistle, Mustardseed, Pellitory, Ranunculus, etc. Of
Minerals Arsneck, Sandara^h, etc. Among Animals it is scarcely met with, nor
among their Parts, a savor of this Kind, unless perhaps some Insects, as
Cantharides, etc.

Secondly, Which are so produced by Art.
Sharp biting Bodies produced by the help of Art, are Mercury Sublimate, Butter
of Antimony, Strong Water, and Causticks, the fixed Salts of Herbs, made by
burning to Ashes, Calcined Vitriol, the Rust of Brass, etc. The oftener things
suffer Calcination, and Fusion in the Fire, the more biting sharp they are
made; because, by this means, the Pricks and Spears of the Particles are
sharpened. An Example is in the fixed Salts of Herbs, calcined Vitriol, the
Infernal Stone, etc. Bodies which are biting sharp, and Corrosives mixed
together, and committed to the Fire, acquire a most sharp force of burning. An
example is in Mercury Sublimate, and Stygian Waters, the reason of which is,
because Salts of a like Kind, being mixed together, join their forces or edges,
and are at the same time very much sharp'ned by the fire. It happens otherwise
to Salts of a diverse Kind, as are Spirits of Vitriol, and Salt of Tartar, mixed
together; Sugar and Honey subjected to distillation, exhale a Caustic Water;
also the Spirit of Wine highly rectified becomes biting sharp, and burning;
because the Saline or Spirituous Particles, in both Substances being deprived
of the sweetness of the others, put forth their Spears and Pricks.

By what means the biting sharpness is wont to be taken away, or altered.
Thirdly, Which was the Third Proposition, the biting sharpness in Bodies, both
Natural and Artificial is put away or altered after various ways. Mercury
Sublimate highly Corrosive, if another quantity of live Mercury be added and
sublimed, it takes away all acritude or biting sharpness, and it becomes
insipid or without taste. The reason of which is, that when the Particles of
the added Mercury, do grow to the little Spears of the Salts, they do thereby
become more thick and obtuse. The Spirit of Vitriol and Salt of Tartar, being
melted (which two are biting sharp and corrosive of themselves apart) if they
be put together, lose all acritude; to wit, these Salts being of a diverse Kind,
viz. Fluid and Alchalisat; being put together, work mutually one upon another,
by which means, the little Spears and Pricks of both are broken; even as if the
edge of one Knife, should be rubbed against the edge of another. Plants and
Herbs, which are naturally biting sharp, if they be macerated in White Wind,
(or perhaps in any other Liquor) put away all their sharpness; and yet the
Liquor becomes not at all sharp. In these sort of Concretes, all the acritude
depends upon the volatile Salt, which being loosned, by the mixture, presently
flies away. For the same Reason, these sort of Herbs, being subjected to
distillation, exhale almost an insipid water, and the dreggs of the Herbs
remaining after distillation, is also insipid: Hence also some Herbs, which
being green, abound with a sharp biting juice, being dried, lose very much of
their acritude; as Scurvy Grass, Watercresses, and Brooklime, etc.

Bitter Savor.
Secondly, The bitter Savor or Taste, such as is principally in Gall and
Wormwood, seems to be made, for as much as the Particles of its Body are
planted with forked Pricks, which digging into the Sensory, not deeply, but
only on the Superficies, cause a sad or sorrowful Sense; just as if the
sharp-pointed fruit of the Teasle, should be sharply handled with ones hands.
In Subjects endued with a bitter Savor, Salt, associated with Sulphur, and
suffering an Adustion with it, Predominates.

Which are bitter of their own Nature.
First, Subjects which exhibit this kind of Savor naturally, among Vegetables,
are Wormwood, Southernwood, Centaury, Colocynthida, Agaric, Fumitary, and
almost all Herbs which grow in dry and mountany places; then G^mms, and
Concrete juices, as Myrrh, Aloes, Opium, Ammoniac, etc. Among Minerals they are
not easily met with. The Excrements of living Creatures, as the Gall, and Dung,
the Liquor contained in the Bladder of the Gall; and so the Skins of some Birds
are bitter.

After what manner, the bitterness may be produced anew.
Secondly, As to the second, Things which draw bitterness anew, they are
Compounded Liquors; if in Cooking they are burnt, or are made too thick by
Evaporation; hence Soot is bitter, and whatever things suffer adustion or
burning. Sugared Aliments and sweet things are most easily Corrupted in the
Stomach, and degenerate into a most highly bitter Humor.

By what means it is wont to be taken away, or altered.
Thirdly, As to the Third, a bitter Savor is most difficulty taken away,
without the Destruction of the Subject, in which it is; as appears in Aloes,
and Colocynthida, and Medicines prepared out of them. Yet New Beer, being
something bitterish, by the boiling of Hops in it, grows sweet by clearing and
a long fermentation: the reason of this we have showed elsewhere. Further,
Liquors, which grow bitter by reason of their Contracting an Empyreuma or
burning to, if they be exposed for a long while in a moist Air, or distilled
over again, mixed with Calcined Salt, they will partly lose their Empyreuma, or
smatch of Fire, and bitterness.

Salt Savor.
3. Because Experience shows, that Salts for the most part do grow together,
into many pointed, and diversely cornered Figures, it is most likely, that the
Salt savor is produced, when Particles of any Body, pointed with many Angles
and Edges on all sides, do as it were cut into the Sensory, like as if little
bits of broken Glass be strictly pressed in ones hand. In these Kind of
Subjects, the Saline Principle excells the other Elements.

Salt things naturally.
First, Bodies naturally Salt, are scarce met with in the family of Vegetables,
although Plants and Herbs, almost all, owe their rise and growth to Salt. It is
seen however that Sea Scurvigrass, and Capers have something of a salt Savor.
Salt obtains the chief place among Minerals, and salsitude or saltness is
chiefly eminent in Sea Salt, in Salt that is dug up, Nitre, and Sal Gemmae. The
Excrements of Animals, to wit, the Dung, the Sweet, the Serum, are Salt; Blood
also participates something of the Nature of Saltishness.

Secondly, Things which are so made by Art.
Those Salts which are made by an artificial means, are the fixed Salts of
Herbs, made by incineration or burning to Ashes: Compounded Salts, to wit,
Borax, Sal Ammoniac. A volatile Salt is drawn forth of Amber, Bones, Horns, and
also out of the Blood of Animals, by Sublimation,

Thirdly, By what means saltness is want to be taken away or altered.
As to the Third, all natural Salts, if they be distilled often over again,
pass into acetous or tart Liquors: The reason of which is, because these kind
of Concretes suffer a divorce of the other Principles, by the fire, and so come
more near to the Simple and Elementary Nature of Salt. Volatile Salts, at first
white, if exposed to the Moisture of the Air, do melt into a reddish Liquor,
not very Salt, and besides smelling like the stink of smoke or soot; because
the mixture being loosned by the moist Air, the Saline Particles, for that they
are volatile, many of them fly away, but in the mean time, the Sulphurous
Particles, before subjugated, get the Dominion.

Fourthly, The Acid or tart savor.
The Acid, or sour, or tart Savor or Taste, seems to be made, when the
Particles of any Body are four pointed or cornered (to wit, which appear with a
smooth and acute point, and with a sharp Body, like a wedge made into a bigger
bulk) so that which way soever applied to the Sensory, they prick it, and by
pressing it, something bind it up; and therefore they leave in it larger
Incisions than any other Savor. This Kind of Savor, for the most part depends
upon a fixed Salt, carried forth into a Flux.

First, Natural Acids.
Bodies naturally acid or sower, are among Vegetables, Pomecitrons, Oringes,
Lemons, Berberries, Sorrel, Tamarinds, etc. Among Minerals scarce any to be met
with, as I remember, nor is it easily to be found among Animals, unless perhaps
the Melancholy Juice, the ferments of the Stomach, and Spleen, the Pancratic
Juice, and also the fasting spittle of a Man, may be said to be something Acid.

Secondly, Made Acids.
Made Acids, are Vinegar, and the Spirit of it, or the Liquor distilled: The
Melanchollic Humor preternaturally begotten in the Body, which often like the
Spirit of Vitriol, becomes Acid, and almost Corrosive. Vitriol, Salt, and
Sulphur, being whole, and tasted in their solid substance, show no kind of
acidity, if they be made subject to Chemical Operation, send forth a Liquor
highly acid; the reason of which was showed but now.

Thirdly, By what means an Acid savor is wont to be taken away, or altered.
As to the Third, Chemists say, that acetous Spirits, to wit, of Sulphur, Salt,
Vitriol, etc. by a long Digestion and Circulation, do grow sweet. All acetous
Mineral Spirits, also distilled Vinegar, and the juice of Vegetables; if they
dissolve any Body, by knawing or corroding it, as Corals, Pearls, or any
Precious Stones, put away their acidness; because the Particles of the fluid
Salt, in the acid Stagma or Menstruum, are fixed to the Alchali Salt in the
mixture. Moreover, these Kinds of Spirits, and acetous Liquors, if they are
mixed, either with Oil of Tartar, or with the fixed Salts of Herbs, loosed by
Deliquium, loose their acidity. The Spirit of Vinegar being poured upon Salt of
Tartar, and drawn off by distillation, becomes insipid. Spirit of Vitriol
poured upon Quicksilver, and drawn off by distillation, putting away its
acidity, acquires a taste like Alum; and if we may believe Helmont, passes by
Coagulation into true Alum. Distilled Vinegar impregnated with the solution of
Minium, or red Lead, grows wonderfully sweet.

5. The Sower, Austere or sower Taste.
austere, or binding or astringent Savor, arises in Bodies, whose Particles
are stuffed with very many little Spears and Hooks, which in chewing, being
rolled upon the Sensory, are fixed to it, and greatly draw together, and pull
its Fibers; not much unlike, as if a Comb, which Cards Wool, should be drawn up
and down upon the hands. In substances endued with an austere savor, a fixed
Salt, enwrapped with the Particles of the earthy Element, predominates.

First, Naturally austere things.
Bodies naturally austere, among Vegetables, are the Fruit of the Medlar-Tree,
of the Dog-Bryer, of the Cypress-Tree, Flowers of Pomegranat, Galls, Slows,
Sumach, etc. Among Minerals Alum, Iron, Vitriol. Among living Creatures, or
among their Parts, there is not as I remember, any austere savor to be met
with.

Secondly, Made austere savours.
Bodies Artificially produced, which have an austere, sower or rough savor,
are all made Vitriols, to wit, the Vitriol of Silver, of Steel, of Tin, of
Copper, etc. The reason of which is, because in these Minerals, the Saline
Particles, are very much entangled with Terrene, and they continue in the same
state, when they are drawn forth from their Substances, by the soluted Mixtion.
Spirit of Vitriol being drawn from Mercury, by frequent Cohobations, acquires a
Pontick or Aluminous Savor.

By what means an austere or rough Taste, is wont to be taken away, or altered.
Thirdly, As to the Instances, by which an austere, sower, or rough taste, may
be taken away out of all Substances, it is to be observed, that Vitriol of
every Kind, by long distillation and circulation with the Spirit made of Wine,
grows sweet, and loses its astringent force. If waters impregnated with
Vitriol, be poured into Oil of Tartar, there will be precipitated a certain
thickish Matter wonderfully sweet. Steel, Tin, or Lead, being dissolved in
Vinegar, and Coagulated by Evaporation, go into sweet Salts. Further, it is a
common Experiment: If having before tasted Vitriol, you take the fume of
Tobacco at your Mouth, the austere taste at first impressed on the Sense, is
changed into a plainly honied sweetness; the reason of which is, because the
Sea Salt Particles, such as are in Vitriol, being mingled with the Sulphurous,
out of the burnt Tobacco, create a sweet Savor: from whence also we may
Collect, that Sugar and Honey, are of a Sulphureous-saline Nature; which also
clearly appears, by their distillation, for as much as they, like Salt
Minerals, yield an Acid and very Corrosive Stagma.

A sower Taste.
6. Of Kin to be the austere, is the acerb or sower taste, the Particles of
whose subject, are endued with little Tenters or Hooks, or Claws, but which are
more dull and blunt, and with which they strike the Sensory, and stop up its
little Pores, and being once fixed, they are not easily removed; whence a
stupor or numness in the Teeth and Palate is caused; not unlike Burdocks, which
being fixed to the Skin, become troublesome, and are not easily shaken off. In
acerb or sower biting Bodies, a fluid Salt, implicated with an earthy Matter,
excells.

Bodies naturally acerb or sower.
First, Bodies naturally sower among Vegetables, are unripe Fruits; as Grapes,
Pears, and Apples, and most of all Wildings, Crabs, or wild Apples, tho kept
till they are mellow: also sower Herbs: Among Minerals, or Animals, there is
nothing easily to be met with, that has a sower Taste.

Secondly, Bodies that are made sower anew, are chiefly Wine and Beer,
degenerating into a deadness, Made sower things.
through Age or Thunder; also Leaven, or Bread too much leavened. Broths and
Milk-meats, if they Contract a settlement and hoariness, become sower: because
in all those Concretes disposed to Corruption, the Saline Particles being
exalted, and tending toward a Flux, carry forth also earthy Particles involved
with themselves.

Thirdly, As to the taking away of this Taste, we have observed, That sower
Fruits do grow sweet, By what means to sower Taste, is wont to be taken away,
or altered.
either by the goodness of the Air, and Sun; in sower Fruits brought to
maturity: or by the goodness of the Ground or Soil, as when wild Apples
translated to a good Soil grow sweet; the reason of either is, because the
Spirituous and Sulphurous Particles before subjugated, at length Predominate
over the Saline. If Wine degenerated into deadness, is impregnated with new
Lees of Tartar, it shall recover its Vigor: The like happens, if a Can of good
Wine be poured into a Vessel of sower Beer or Ale. Wine growing dead, if it be
distilled, often yields a sweet Spirits, and in no less quantity, that if the
Wine had been in its full strength: because the Spirits before subjugated in
that Mixture, recover their Dominion by distillation.

The sweet savor.
Seventhly, The sweet savor seems to be made, for as much as the Particles of
any Body are so figured, into soft prickles, that they tickle the Sensory, with
a soft rubbing, and from thence stir up a delightful Sense of Pleasure; like as
if feathers were applied to the Sides, or the Soles of the Feet. In these the
Saline Principle seems to be associated, with Sulphurous and Spirituous, and
when they are, in like manner are carried forth.

First, Those which are naturally sweet, are among Vegetables, first Sugar, and
Manna; then Cassia, What are naturally sweet.
ripe Fruits, Grapes, Raisons, some Roots, as Parsnips, etc. Among Animals,
some ascribe Honey, but others more rightly, say that is swet out of Plants,
and gathered by Bees. Among Minerals nothing (that I know) has naturally a
sweet Savor.

Secondly, The things which have a sweet Taste, and are made by Art, are the
Sugar of Lead, Sweets prepared by Art.
Salt of Steel, Lythargites, yea, and out of many other Bodies, Vinegar
extracts a sweet Salt. Tasting Vitriol beforehand (as was said) and then
taking a Pipe of Tobacco, the smoke grows sweet like Honey. In this, and in the
former instances, whilst the Saline little darts grow to the Sulphurous
Particles, or Saline of another Kind, both of them become more blunt. An
Alchalisat Spirit, and the fixed Salt of any Body, being mixed, and circulated
by a long digestion, acquire a sweetness. Barley soaked in Water, when it
begins to sprout, and dried with a gentle fire, grows exceeding sweet: And
Wheat in like manner also, if being wet, it sprouts yields a wonderfully sweet
Meal; the reason of which is, because by that Artifice, the Sulphurous and
Spirituous Particles, overthrown by the Earthy, get their Liberty.

Thirdly, By what means sweetness is taken away, or altered.
There are many Instances, by which sweetness is abolished; for all sweet
things too much boiled, grow bitter. Sugar or Honey, by distillation, yield at
first an insipid Phlegm, then sharp and burning Spirits; In the dead Head
remaining after distillation, is a burning Salt, and an insipid Earth, and
whatever is sweet perishes. Further, Sugar or Honey being mixed with a great
quantity of Common Water, and distilled through a Bladder, yield a burning
Water, like the Lees of Wine distilled after the same fashion. In both these,
and in the following Instance, the additional sweetnesses are bruised, by the
saline little darts, Sugar of Lead being fused by the fire, melts into mere
Lead; if it be distilled in a Retort, if we may believe Beguinus, it will
produce a burning and sweet smelling Spirit.

8. The unctuous or oily savor, An Oily Taste.
seems to be produced, when the Particles of any Body are very Spherical and
round, which neither hawl, prick, nor tickle the Sensory, but only stroke it
with a gentle and soft coming to it. In these, the Sulphurous Principle
predominates.

First, In which it is by Nature.
Bodies naturally Unctuous or oily, among Vegetables, are ripe Olives, the
Turpentine-Tree. The Larix, and some sweet smelling Gums naturally sweating
forth. Among Minerals, Asphaltum, Bitumen, Amber, Sperma Ceti, and some fat
Earths, and Ochers: Of Animals, and their Parts, the Sewet, Marrow, and Fat.

Secondly, In (...) things it is wont to be produced by Art.
Unctuous things prepared by Art, are Butter, Cream, Oils, pressed out of
Fruits and Seeds, as Oil of Nuts, of sweet Almonds, also Oils drawn out of
Seeds, Woods, Gums, and Refines by distillation.

Thirdly, How it is taken away or altered.
Although unctuosity is most difficulty taken away from the Subjects, yet it is
wont to be lessened: for so Unctuous Bodies, if they grow stale, or are too
much boiled, or otherways grow hot by shaking, losing their smoothness, become
rank, and prick and dig the Sensory. Further, Sewet and Fat, if they be long
exposed to a moist Air, contract a settlement, and become hoary, and then are
resolved into Water, or a corrupt Earth. In this, and in the former instance,
whilst the mixture of the Body is resolved, some Sulphurous Particles fly
away, in the mean time the remaining lose their Dominion.

9. An insipid Savor or Taste, An insipid Savor.
seems to be made, when the Particles of any Body, are endued with superficial
little Darts, not at all sharp, but smooth and discharged; which enter not into
the Pores of the Sensory, and no ways dig or hawl it. In these, the Principle
either of Water, or Earth, predominate over the rest.

First, In what things it is by Nature.
Bodies naturally insipid or tastless, are Common Water, especially Rain Water,
some cold Herbs, the raw white of an Egg, etc. Although in the whole world, there
is nothing insipid simply, yet Speech is wont to apply it to them things, in
which some one of those Savours, are not eminently, which we have before
recounted.

Secondly, That Savory things may become Unsavory, the more acute Particles
ought wholly to fly away, How it is wont to be produced.
or be very much broken. Herbs long kept, also many more things, if they be
distilled by a moderate heat, yield almost an insipid Liquor.

Thirdly, By what means it is taken away.
Insipidness it self, sometimes is taken away; for insipid Water, if it stand
long, that it putrify, acquires a stink and moldy Savor: The white of an Egg
boiled hard, has something a sharp taste. In these kind of Instances, some
active Elements, being before subjugated, get strength.

Besides these Kinds of simple Savours, which are as it were the Elements of
the rest, there remain yet many Complications of these simple ones, Compounded
Savours.
as the Savours rehearsed are conjoined one among another: And for as much as
by the Wisdom of Nature, to satisfy all Palates, and by the Luxury of Art,
that she might please the Throats of some, manifold mixtures of Savours have
been produced, that almost nothing to be eaten, is found simple and without
Sauce or Condiment. The several Compositions of these, is a thing almost
impossible to enumerate; it shall suffice for the present, that we note some of
the more noted Conjugations, and their Affections, as they are grateful or
ungrateful to the Palate.

The first Conjugation, Compositions of Savours, which are more or less
grateful.
and that most grateful to the Palate, is of acid and sweet, of which sort are
generous Wine, Confections prepared out of Citron, Wood Sorrel, Berberries,
etc. Sugared things, and sharp things pickled, with Sugar. Secondly, Sweet and
Astringent, as also sweet and sower, are well Consociated: as in Marmalade of
Quinces, Candied Bulloes, Cider drunk with Sugar, etc. Thirdly, Sweet and oily
yield a grateful Savor to the Palate, but that brings a nauseousness to the
Stomach, as in Milk-meats, Sugar'd-meats, and Pasty-crust, etc. Fourthly, Sweet
agrees not with biting, bitter, or salt Savor. Fifthly, nor does a bitter
Savor of it self, agree with any other: it is grateful to the Palate,
well-tempered with the sweet. Sixthly, Salt-savour best agrees with the biting
sharp, as in flesh seasoned with Salt and Pepper, it is an ungrateful Sauce
with the oily. Seventhly, The Acid, Astringent and Sower, are well associated
with the sweet, not with the rest.

There are more Kinds of some other Compounded Savours, which we have no time
now to recount. But there are in respect of the Taste, as the Compounded Tunes
of Harmony in respect of Hearing, in both sensible not simple Species of one
Kind, but are carried manifold, and variously Complicated to the Sensory. It
now remains for us to pass from the Taste, the Object of which we have largely
handled, to the other Species of the Senses.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Sense of Smelling.

IT seems that the Smell is a more Excellent, and a little more Sublime
Faculty, than either Tasting, or Touching; to wit, because its Object is more
subtle, and comes to the Sensory, with a thinner Consistency: for there is no
need to put upon the Organ, the more thick substance of the mixture; but it
suffices, that the Effluvia's or Breath, sent from odorous Bodies, tho at
something a remote distance, be inspired into the Nostrils, together with the
Air.

Living Creatures are furnished with the Sense of Smelling for this end, to
wit, that agreeable and wholesome Aliments may be known, and discerned from
disagreeable and hurtful; The use of the Smell, to discern Aliments at a
distance.
for because it were an incongruous and dangerous thing, to take in presently
into the Mouth, all things offered to be eaten, and to be examined by the
Taste, lest perchance Venomous and Stinking things, carelessly taken in by the
Palate, should bring loathing or hurt to it, the Smell examines first the thing
at a distance, and refuses those rotten things, or guilty of any other very
infestous quality, without receiving any hurt by the Contagion.

This Kind of Primary use is seen more excellently in brute Animals, than in
Man; for they by this Index only, This is more excellent in Brutes than in Man.
most certainly know the Virtues of Herbs, and of other Bodies, before unknown,
yea hunt out, and easily find their absent Food, tho hidden from them, by the
Smell. But that the Noses of Men are less quick or sagacious, it ought not (as
some would have it) to be ascribed to the abuse of the Faculty, but the Cause
lies in the defect of the Organ it self; for this is not so accurately required
for the distinction of Humane Food, where Reason and the Intellect are present:
For that Reason the inferior Powers in Man, exist less perfect by Nature, that
there might be a place left, for the exercise and dressing of the more superior.

The Organ of the Smell described.
As to what belongs to the Organ of Smelling, we have largely enough unfolded it
in our Discourse of the Nerves; to wit, we have showed, that within the Caverns
of the Nostrils, are placed tubulated Membranes or like Pipes, which contain
sensible Fibers, most thickly interwoven. Into these Membranes, very many small
Nerves are sent from either Mamillary Process, passing through the holes of the
Seive-like Bones; but those Mamillary Processes, as they are plainly soft
Nerves, arise in the Medullary Trunk, nigh the streaked Bodies; wherefore, when
the odorous steams, strike upon the Fibrous, and very sensible Membranes,
forthwith an impression of the sensible thing, is carried by the passage of the
Nerves into the Mamillary Processes, and from thence into the streaked Bodies.

Further, We have formerly declared, why the Smelling Nerves, divided without
the Skull are harder, but united within it are not only softer, but also
tubulated or like Pipes, and for the most part in Brutes, filled with clear
Water: There is no need to repeat it here again, nor what we have declared
there, concerning other Nerves, coming from the Fifth pair, and inserted also
into the Organ of Smelling: Of which certainly the Office is, to cause a
certain Sympathy and consent of action, between the Smell and Taste, and
something also between the Sight and it.

Nerves of a several Kind, serve for Smelling.
I know some attribute the office of Smelling altogether to these Nerves,
arising from the Fifth pair, denying it to the Mamillary Processes, and from
hence they render a reason, not only of that consent, between the Nose and the
Palate, from whence it comes to pass, that the same Objects are embraced or
refused, but also, wherefore it happens, that one Sense being lost, that
oftentimes the other perishes; to wit the Cause of this they say is nothing
else, than that both Sensories do borrow the branches of their Nerves, from the
same Trunk of the Fifth pair. But this Objection is easily overthrown, because
the Nerves of a twofold Original, are bestowed not only on the Sensory of the
Smell, but also of the Taste. For the Tongue receives more and greater Branches
from the Ninth pair, than from the Maxillary Trunk of the Fifth pair: to wit,
that if the Nerves of one Kind be obstructed, the Animal Function may be
performed, by those of the other Kind. Concerning this then we may say, that
the Principle Nerves serving to the Organ of Smelling, are derived from either
Mamillary Process, also, that the Nerves on which the Sense of Tasting chiefly
depends, are sent from the Ninth pair: Nevertheless, some secondary Nerves, or
that are as it were taken in, are distributed to either Sensory, (as also to
the Eye) far fetched from the Fifth pair: for this end, that there might be an
affinity or mutual respect, between the Taste and the Smell, and between both
and the Sight: hence therefore the Taste almost admits of no Object, unless
that the Smell first approves of it: but both Faculties do require, that
sensible things do first stand to the examination of the Eyes.

But that the loss of one of them, Hence the reason is had, of that Consent,
between the Smell and the Taste.
oftentimes brings in the defect of the other, as it is sometimes observed in a
Pose, or Stopping of the Head, that losing the Smell, the Taste is lost also:
the reason of it is, because either Sensory, being planted near, are both at
once overthrown by the same serous Matter, poured forth from the Blood, and apt
to be too much stopped: for both the tubulated Membranes of the Nose, and the
frame or substance of the Tongue it self, are made of a very rare, and as it
were spongy Texture: wherefore, Why one being wanting, the other for the most
part is Defective.
the Pores and Passages of either Organ, are wont to be overflown by the serous
flood, and the sensible Fibers in both, in like manner to be obstructed, which
happens, because when as the Nostrils and Tongue ought to be moistened, with a
continual Humor, either of them are punished more grievously than other Parts,
by the shower of the Serum issuing forth, so both on every light Cause, become
obnoxious to the same Evil.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Sense of Hearing.

AFter the Smell and Taste, The Excellency of Hearing, as to Use and Activity.
of which we have already treated, we shall next speak of Hearing; which as to
the use, is far more Excellent than the other Senses; for as much as by its
help chiefly, Sciences and Learning are acquired, also by whose instinct, the
Passions are excited; yea, and are wont to be governed and allayed; further as
to Activity, this Sense is much more Efficacious, because having got a larger
Sphere, perceives its Objects at a great distance, and admits not the sensible
Species, unless brought in a more thin consistency: For that it is the Interest
of living Creatures, to know some remote things by Contact, and often placed
out of Sight, because they may be timely prevented, if they should be inimical
and disagreeable, but if thought amicable, that they may be come to, and
apprehended; the Hearing serves for either Intention, and by its sign, the
Marks and Symbols of approaching Bodies are received afar off.

Because the Hearing is always performed at a distance, Is performed at a
distance, by reason of the Activity of the Medium.
and a sound comes often farther than the Effluvia's of a sounding Body, can be
admitted; therefore, this Sense is supposed to be made even as Sight, by reason
of a certain activity of the Medium it self, or by a Motion, and as it were a
certain waving of little Bodies, which flow in it; so as the sounding Body,
moves by its Vibration or shaking the Particles diffused in the intermediate
space, and they being moved, at length affect the Sensory; but they conceive a
certain Figure of their carrying forth, according to the Particles first
agitated, and they propagate the same in others, and then in others, or move
forward, as it were by undulation, and so the sound, still retaining the
Character or Type of the first Impression, is continued even to the Ear.

Although by the consent of all, The Medium carrying sounds in the Air, but not
the whole frame of it.
the Air is said to be the Medium, that carries the sounds, yet this ought not
to be understood of the whole Atmosphear of the Air, and Breaths; for neither
is the audible Species poured forth, by the Motion of this most fluid Body, as
it were by a waving of Waters; because this much sooner runs through, than the
Body or Consistency of the whole Air is wont to be moved, and propagate its
Fluctuation, as may be discerned plainly by the successive blowing of the
Winds, and bending of Trees, and the tops of Corn, which happens, because any
sound, whether great or small, whether it comes with or against the wind, is
carried to a certain place, always with an equal time; which would be otherwise
if it obeyed the waving of the whole Air, or should depend upon that: Further,
That the whole frame of the Air does not wave, by reason of the transmission of
the sound, appears by this; because, if a Lamp be held in a little Bell,
whilst many other Bells being struck together, yield a mighty sound, its flame
will hardly shake, much less will it be moved up and down hither and thither,
by the moved Air.

The Sonorifick Particles seem to be Saline little Bodies, interwoven with the
Air.
Hence it follows, that some Sonorifick Particles, or Causing sounds, are
diffused through the Air, and as they are more subtle than the little Bodies of
the Air, and are endued with a more rapid Motion, the Transmission or
Propagation of the sound, depends upon the peculiar motion and waving of these,
made apart from the inclination of the whole Air. We have elsewhere shown, in
the texture of the Atoms of the Air, that there are contained Luminous or
Nitrous Particles, by the inkindling, and by the most swift trajection, and
reflection of these, Light, the appearances of Colors, and the Images of all
things are produced. And besides these most thin and moveable Bodies, which
seem to be of a certain fiery Nature, and interwoven with the Air, and by the
private waving of which, the visible Objects are carried to the Organ, it is
likely, that certain other Particles of another Kind, and those perhaps Saline,
are diffused through the rare and most fluid Constitution of the Air, by which,
whilst they are stricken and swiftly moved, and apt to be figured, according
to the Idea's of Sounds, the Organ of the Hearing is also affected, and by this
means receives the Impressions of sensible things. For it seems, that the
Sound-causing little Bodies swimming in the Air, and interwoven with a certain
Continuity in its Pores, and thickly set in its passages, are placed after that
manner, that when a Motion is impressed, in any Portion of them, by the
striking against a solid Body, they being agitated according to the Character
of the Impressed Motion, move or shake others planted round about, and they
again others, which are next to them, and so, when the same Motion is
propagated round on every side, by a successive affection of the same
Particles, (as when a Stone being cast into a smooth water, many little Circles
beginning after one another, and unfolding themselves, create an Impression of
the first stroke in every part) lesser types of the sound, and almost
innumerable, take the place one of another, or fill up the room of the first
Prototype sound, excited according to the solid Body, and from thence on every
side waved, according to the Symbolical Particles successively moved; even
after the same manner, as when the rays of Light are reflected from an Opacous
or shaddowy Body; The Prototype of a sound, by and by stirs up innumerable
Ec^ypes.
for as much as they being sent at hand from every part of the Object, do meet
together in a most thick Series of Cones, in every place, and so create
infinite Images of the same thing, visible in all places: In like manner also,
whilst the Sonorific Particles leap back from a solid Body, they cause the
audible Species to be every where represented, according to the stroke there
made upon them, in the whole Sphere of Vibration, whether by a like Contortion,
or Gyration, or any other ways of Conformation in Motion, of the symbolar
Particles.

But although there are found Sonorific little Bodies something like the luminous,
they are differenced notwithstanding in many things; How the Sonorifick
Particles, differ from the luminous.
for first of all, their Motion is much more slow than the luminous, which
clearly appears from a Gun being discharged at a distance, for it is sometime
after the flash reaches the Sight, that the report comes to the Ears. But the
luminous Particles, tho they easily pass through the more solid Diaphanous
Bodies, yet not through thick shaddowy or Opacous Bodies, tho they are made of a
more thin or rare texture; or stick in the chinks: On the contrary the waving
of a sound, These are carried only in strait-lines, those in all.
does not so easily pass through Glass, but the same is often heard within a
Chamber, that is impervious of Light, or where Light cannot enter. Hence it may
be conjectured, that the rays or beams of Light, how subtle and thin soever
they be, are carried only in strait Lines; for whether they at first stream
forth, or are broken in the altered Medium, or are reflected from an objected
Body, they every where pass forward, and observe the Line or direction, and
pass through the oblique and winding passages, not with a turning passage or
going through; but the sounding Particles, being excited into Motion, insinuate
themselves within the bending pores and blind holes, like the flowing of
Waters; but these Kind of little Bodies, which are the Vehicles of sounds, Why
they seem to be Saline.
I suspect to be of a Saline Nature, for this reason; because the Particles of
this Element, are most of all Moveable and Active, next to the fiery and
Nitrous Sulphurous; for it is seen, that Glass, and Metallic Bodies, which
abound with very much Salt, being struck, yield a sound excelling all others:
Also it makes for it, for as much as in a great Winter Frost, when the
Atmosphear of the Air abounds with Saline Particles, a sound becomes more
clear, and is carried farther.

So much concerning the Sonorifick Particles, as much as we are able to get by
Conjecture; concerning their Nature, Subsistence, and ways of carrying forth,
or of waving. As to these, what at first was propounded, concerning the Sense
of Hearing it self, there remains yet to be unfolded, by what means, and for
what occasions, these Particles interwoven with the aerial Body, are stirred up
by a sounding Body into Act; then how the same being moved affect the Sensory.

As to the former, By what mean Sonorifick Particles are stirred up into Act.
there are infinite ways, whereby the aforesaid Particles are stirred up into
Act, or by which sounds are wont to be produced; whatsoever percussion of a
solid Body, yea and almost every vehement Compulsion of the Air, when resisted,
yields a sound. There are very many Varieties of these, but the Universal, or
at least the chief Causes of sounds, may be not improperly reduced to two ways
of being u^de^; to wit, either that a solid Body being struck, and so affected
with a Vibration or shaking, drives together the Air, and with it the Sonorific
Particles, and the ^^r^ke being most swiftly repeated, causes them to shake or
to wave; Or secondly the Air, and with it the Sonorific Particles, being driven
into a more narrow space, whilst they go forth by Compression, are struck
against the solid Body, and are driven by it into a vibration or shaking. Or
how sound is caused, and stopped.
By reason of the former way, all solid Bodies, struck by solids, yea and
hollow Metallic Bodies, a Drum, the strings of an Harp, and other Musical
Instruments, furnished with strings, when they are stroke, yield a sound; in
all which, a vibration being excited from the stroke and shaking Body, and
impressed on the Sonorific Particles, is the whole Cause of every produced
sound, or of long Continuance, and also tho but of a minutes durance or
sounding. For both Metals, also Stones, and Wood, and other solids, being
struck, make the Air to tremble and yield vibrations or shakings, in some
measure like Bells, and the strings of an Harp: Wherefore, when by the Finger
or any soft Body being laid upon them, that shaking is stopped, presently the
sound is intercepted. In the latter Rank, to wit, where the Air is compelled or
strained, whilst it strives for liberty, striking against the solid Body,
produces a sound, ought to be placed sounds, which are excited by speaking,
wind Instruments, letting off of Guns, and the passage of winds through strait
places.

As it thus appears, The Motions* o^ spreadings of an excited sound.
by what means the Sonorific Particles are stirred up into act, there remains a
no less difficulty, concerning the way, whereby they affect the Organ of
Hearing, that by it a Feeling or Sension is produced. We showed before, that by
reason of the aforesaid Particles being interwoven with the Air, and
successively moved with a continued Series, the Impression of a sound is
diffused every where, into a Round or Orb; Further, we Note, that if their
waving promotion meet with any stop, the same being thereby reflected, or
forced by another thing, it in like manner affects other Particles, wherever
met with, and so is still broken into more sounds, which are carried hither and
thither into every part; which is the reason that sounds climb over Houses,
being sent forth at hand, return back, enter into every hole and chink, and
easily propagate themselves into secret places and recesses, where light cannot
enter: In the mean time, all sounds, both direct and reflected, and which are
diverted aside, and which become less and numerous, from greater refracted and
divided sounds, and variously result, exactly bear the Character of the
Prototype of the same sound: Hence it comes to pass. that the Hearing being
planted in every place, it receives the same sound in specie, and oftentimes
articulate.

But as to the second Proposition, The Organ of (...) Hearing described.
for the manner of doing, whereby by the Sense of Hearing is performed, we
think that first of all, the Structure of the Organ it self ought to be
considered; in which, that which being utmost receives the first strokes of the
sound is the Ear: This part being largely spread, by degrees grows narrow, till
the hole made more narrow, The Ear and its uses.
leads inward to the den of the Ear. The use of the Ear is to gather together
the Sonorific Particles, coming to it spread abroad and dispersed, and so many;
that the Impression may be made more sensible, to direct it inwards toward the
Sensory. In imitation of this natural Instrument, are wont to be made the
Artificial whispering Instruments, which like a Pipe or Trumpet, by introducing
many Sonorifick Particles, supplies the defect of Hearing. The Ears in most
Beasts are moveable, that they might be turned every way, to any noise, and
might receive a more certain notice of the sound, otherways uncertain; yea, it
is probable, that men's Ears are moveable by Nature, because they have hanging
Muscles, but that by the continual use of the Head-bands, which they make use
of in Infants, this faculty is taken from them.

After the Ears, The Den of the Ear and its uses.
follows the Cave or Den of the Ear, leading obliquely toward the inward
Parts. Whilst the Sonorifick Particles pass through the turning and winding
passages of this, the same, by reason of the frequent strikings and refractions
against the sides, increase the sensible Species; after the same manner, as is
seen in Cornets, and wreathed Instruments, by which the sound is very much
strengthened. Also this further appears, for that the Hollows or Cloisters in
some Walls, are wont to be so artificially made, that a low Voice whispered,
being transmitted by the same, may be heard at a great distance. Moreover, the
aforesaid Den of the Ear ought to be oblique and turning, that its more inward
parts might be defended from the easy meeting with of Injuries; and for this
reason, there is there placed a bitter Wax, sweat forth from the little
Arteries; so that if any little living Creatures, should by chance creep into
the Ear, they might be there entangled, or at least driven away by the
Bitterness, as Worms by Gall. This yellow stuff without doubt is of the same
Nature with that which is destinated for the Bladder of the Gall.

The Drum.
Nigh to the most intimate recess of this Den, a thin Membrane is placed, with a
Circular Bone, fitted to the same, which wholly shuts up the Cavity of the Ear,
and distinguishes the Interior Cloister from the Exterior; so that the Impulse
of the sound, shaking this Membrane like a Drum, delivers the Impression to the
Sonorifick Particles planted beyond, and they being moved, affect the Fibers,
with the Auditory or Hearing Nerve.

Three little Bones about the Drum, with the Muscle and Ligament.

The Hammer.


About this Membrane, three little Bones, with a Muscle and Ligament, and some
other Parts, are placed; from which being thoroughly viewed, and truly
considered, the Use and Offices of the Drum, and its whole Appendix, are
clearly learnt. The first of these is a little smooth Bone, lying upon the more
inward part of the Drum, and sticking to it, this is commonly called the
Hammer, either from its figure, or rather because it is thought to strike and
knock against the Drum; when indeed, this Bone affixed to the Boss or Shield of
the Membrane, strikes not against it, but bends inward, and draws it with it.
Also, besides this little Bone, is united with many other little Bodies, for
the Tendon of the Muscle, which lifts it up, and bends it inward, is inserted
into its sharp Process, and the other more blunt extremity of the Hammer, is
ingrafted with the Anvil, so that the Hammer may be able to move round about
upon the Anvil. This Anvil is a Bone almost round, The Anvil.
which leaning into the Cavity, has two proper Shanks, one whereof being fixed
to the Cartilage, is fastened by the same to the stony Bone; but the other shank
of the Anvil is joined by the Cartilage to a third Bone, called the Stirrup; so
that the Anvil being joined by the Cartilage to the Stirrup, The Stirrup.
is also moveable; and the two shanks of the Stirrup are affixed to the
Ligament, and by it stick to the stony Bone. The Muscle.
As to the Muscle, which lifts up the Hammer, (although at first sight only its
Tendon appears) if it be farther searched, it is seen to be big enough and
round, planted in its proper Cavity, the Tendon of which is inserted into the
sharp process of the Hammer, and lifting it up, and drawing it inwards, bends
and distends the Drum within; notwithstanding, The Ligament.
lest this Muscle (if it should happen to be pulled) should be brought too near
to the Drum, a smooth a transverse Ligament, is placed before the acute process
of the Hammer, which strictly leans on the Hammer, and binds it; and lest it
should be drawn beyond measure, by the Muscle, contains it in its due site.

The use of the Drum.
From these it is easily to be understood, what use these Parts are for, which
we described: For it is seen, that the Drum is the Preliminary, and as it were
Preparatory Instrument of Hearing, which receiving the first Impression of the
sound, or sensible Species, directs them in due proportion, and apt conformity
toward the Sensory, which is placed more inward: It performs the like office
in respect of the Hearing, as the Coats of the Eye, constituting the Pupel or
Apple, in respect of the Sight; either Membrane break and as it were soften the
sensible Species, and deliver them to the Sensory in proportion, to which if
they should come naked, they might hurt or destroy easily its more thin
Constitution. Indeed the Drum does not hear, The Drum hears not.
but contributes to the better and safer hearing. If this Part should be
destroyed, the Sense may be still continued for a while, tho after a rude
manner: because it appeared by an Experiment made in a Dog, that having boared
both the Drums of his Ears, Hearing remained still for a time, which after
three Months wholly ceased, to wit, after the Constitution or Crasis of the
Sensory, suffering by outward Injuries, was overturned.

The use of the little Bones, as also of the Muscle, and Ligament.
But that the Drum might truly perform this sort of office of a Porter about the
Hearing, its stretching forth ought to be bound or loosned, as occasion serves,
to wit, as the Pupil of the Eye is wont, as the matter requires, to be either
contracted or dilated. Wherefore, certain Machines or Braces, like to a Drum of
War, are appointed for the Drum of the Ear, which render its Superficies
sometimes more stiff, and sometimes more loose: For this, the three aforesaid
little Bones, with the Muscle and Ligament, effect. The Muscle lifting up the
Hammer, whilst it Contracts it self, the Drum is distended, when it remits its
endeavor, that is suffered to be loosned; but the Ligament moderates the
action of the Muscle, and hinders, lest the Hammer being too much drawn up,
should distend the Drum till it break: But that the Rod or Beam (which is a
part of the hammer) affixed to the Membrane, and drawing it to the Motion of
the Muscle, is not one Bone, but three little Bones joynted in one another; the
reason is, both that the drawing of the Membrane be not too hard and stiff, but
with a certain ceasing and flexibility of the Beam, without which the Drum, for
that it is a most thin little skin, would be in danger to be broken; also, that
by so many joyntings of the Beam, the motion of drawing might be determined, as
occasion serves, into various parts, hither and thither: This part has almost
the same use as the Hyodes Bone, which is made of many little Bones joynted
together.

As to the Action of the Muscle lifting up the Hammer, The involuntary Action
of this Muscle.
it seems that it is chiefly involuntary, and that it is acted by the instinct
of Nature, according to the indigencies of the Bone; for when a sound too
vehement strikes the Ears, this Muscle remits its endeavor, that the sensible
thing might strike more strongly the soos^ed Drum; but if a smaller or duller
sound enters, the Muscle being contracted, distends the Drum, that the
Impression otherwise obscure may become more sensible: If that many voices and
confused sounds approach the Ears, it is probable, that the Drum disposes the
Species brought to it, after a diverse manner of Action, and as it were admits
them in, with a certain Choice.

Although Hearing is not made by the Drum, Deafness sometimes proceeds from the
looseness of the Drum.
as the proper Organ of Sense, yet this so much depends upon that, that
oftentimes the Action of the Drum being hurt or hindered, a privation or a
diminution of that Sense follows. For we meet with a certain kind of Deafness,
in which those affected, seem wholly to want the Sense of Hearing, yet as soon
as a great noise, as of great Guns, Bells, or Drums, is made near to the Ears,
they distinctly understand the speeches of the bystanders, but this great
noise ceasing, they presently grow deaf again. I heard from a Credible Person,
that he once knew a Woman, tho she were Deaf, yet so long as a Drum was beaten
within her Chamber, she heard every word perfectly; wherefore her Husband kept
a Drummer on purpose for his Servant, that by that means he might have some
converse with his Wife. Also I was told of another Deaf Person, who living near
a Ring of Bells, as often as they all rung out, he could easily hear any word,
and not else. Without doubt the reason of these is, that the Drum of it self
being continually loose, by the impulse of a more vehement sound, is compelled
to its due tensity or stretching forth, by which it might in some measure be
able to perform its office. But we will proceed in Order, to the other Parts of
the auditory Organ.

Behind the ^^um, The Cavern containing the Air, placed behind the Drum.
the Den or Cavity subsists, in which the Ancients placed the inplanted Air,
which received the impressed sound from the Drum: which thing indeed is not
unlikely; for, because the waving of the sound ought to be conveyed still
further toward the Sensory, it seems that the Sonorifick Particles, which are
their Vehicle, are contained within this Den; From this Den a Passage into the
Palate.
and because it is needful, that the Sonorific Particles, included in this Den,
should be in some measure consumed; therefore from this hidden place, there
lies an open passage into the Palate; but yet after that manner, that little
doors being placed in its upper part, it admits the Air fetched from ^he
Palate, as often as there is need; but the same being admitted into the Den of
the Ear, its passage out by the same way is hindered. By reason of this Channel,
it is, that the sound becomes rather sensible to the Palate of some deaf
People, than to their Ears; to wit, when the office of the Drum is spoiled, the
sensible Impression is carried, in some measure, to the Sensory, by this other
way.

But from the aforesaid Den, Another Passage from this Den (called the Navel
hole, or the Window) leading into the Shell.
placed behind the Drum, another passage leads toward that part, which is
properly the Organ of Hearing; to wit, in the extreme side of that Cavern,
beforementioned, there is a door, or certain round hole, covered with a thin
Membrane, commonly called the Window, and beyond that hole, to wit, in the end
or sharp process of the stony Bone, is the Shell contained: from whence we may
think very well, that the impression of the sound brought through its next
Chamber from the Drum, is from thence propagated, by an impulse made above the
Window, into the Shell.

But the Body of the Shell is an admirable Structure, The Description of the
Shell.
which being framed in a peculiar recess of the stony Bone, is called by some
the Labyrinth, by others the Shell; because its passage or hollowness, after
the manner of a Snails shell, is carried about with a turning or spiral
Convolution. There are two parts of this, or rather there are two Shells, the
former being nigh the chief Oval hole, is less'ned by degrees, from the Spire
or more broad Capacity, and ends in a very little one, then from the end of
this, another Shell, beginning with a very small spire, is enlarged by degrees,
in its progress, and its extremity opens with a greater aperture, into another
Den or Chamber, placed beyond, with an open mouth; this is without any Membrane
covering it.

As to the Shell, The Use of it.
the use of it seems to be, that the audible Species being brought through such
turning and winding Labyrinths, and so receiving an augmentation by reflection,
and manifold refraction, it may become more clear and sensible; then further,
that every Impression, carried about by this winding and very narrow way, may
come more distinct to the Sensory: because by this means, care is taken, that
many confused Species together, may not be brought in. After the example and
similitude of this Shell, artificial Caverns, and arched Meanders, are wont to
be framed by Architects, for the increasing of sounds, and for the distinct
propagating of them to a wonderful distance. Further, there is another use of
the Shell, no less noted, to wit, that the audible Species may be impressed on
the Fibers and the ends of the sensible Nerves, inserted in this place, not at
once or at large, but by little and little, and as it were in a just proportion
and dimension.

The auditory Nerves.
We have elsewhere discoursed concerning the Hearing Nerves, which receive the
sensible Species, and carry it toward the Common Sensory, and we showed, that
the softer process of either of the seventh pair, is destinated to this office;
wherefore the end of this Nerve is terminated in the nearest Chamber of the
Shell, whence it is manifest, that the sensible Impression, being disposed from
the Shell into this Chamber, is conveyed thence toward the Head, Two Processes
of the softer auditory Nerve, one tends into the next Chamber of the Shell.
by the passage of this Nerve. But moreover (which we took not notice of
before) it is observed, that this softer auditory process is cleft into two
branches: one whereof is inserted after the manner we have here described, into
the aforesaid Chamber; but the other, no less noted branch, is implanted in the
Shell it self, about the midst of it, or nigh to the meeting of either
Labyrinth; so that this branch seems to receive the Depositum of the foremost
Shell, and the other aforesaid of the latter Shell.

The other into the Shell it self.
The extremity of either auditory Nerve, which are implanted about the end of
either Shell, ending in slender thrids, seems to cover over the places of
Insertions, every where with Nervous Fibers spread abroad, as it were into a
certain little Membrane; whence it follows, that toward the end of either
shell, the proper Sensory of Hearing ought to be placed; for there is the
Sense, where the Nerve receiving the Idea of Sension, is implanted; but as the
Shell is twofold, and that in like manner there is a double insertion of the
forked auditory Nerve, it follows, that in either Ear, there is a twofold Organ
of Hearing: but for what use this is so made, does not plainly appear.

For what Uses it is so made.
That we may give our Conjecture concerning these, perhaps there is need for the
audible Species, to be carried toward the common Sensory, that its passage may
be the more certain, and that the perception of the sensible thing, may be put
out of doubt; but we rather think, that this Sensory is made double, that when
oftentimes the Idea's of sounds ought to be heard and perceived together, some
might pass this way, and others that way, without Confusion. For it is
observed, that the Hearing, not only as the other Senses, receives many objects
together; and by and by whether united or confused, comprehends them, by the
same act of the Sense; but moreover, this faculty in the time of Hearing, so
distinguishes things, often diverse, admitted together at the Ears, that it
seems to hear one after another: It ordinarily happened, that in a confused
multitude of voices and sounds, that I have my self taken notice to have heard
the peculiar voice of a certain Man, and then a little after, I have known that
I have heard, at the same time, some other words o^ another Man, that I did not
perceive before; the reason of which is, that this sound, being received
together with that, reached not at the same instant to the Common Sensory:
wherefore, we may believe, that the sensible Species of the former sound,
passing through only one Shell, is by and by conveyed, by the first branch of
the auditory Nerve, sooner to the Sensory, but the other sensible Species,
because it could not be carried with it together by the same Nerve; therefore
it is carried by a winding about through the second Shell, and at length to the
second branch of the auditory Nerve, and so coming later to the Common Sensory,
is afterward perceived.

A rehearsal of the Parts, which serve for Hearing.
Thus much concerning the Instrument of Hearing, and its parts, both
Preparitory, and chiefly Organical; of the first sort are the Ear, the outward
Den, the Drum, and what belongs to it, the interior Den, and its two doors; to
wit, one admitting inward through the door from the palate, the other emitting
through the oval hole: Of the latter sort are, The twofold Shell, with both the
Branches of the auditory or hearing Nerves. Both the Parts, for the most part,
are of like make in all Animals; the greatest mark of difference is, as to
their Ears, which are variously figured, partly for ornament sake, and partly
for a diverse use in respect of the inward Den, placed behind the Drum: for
this is framed in a Calf, Sheep, and perhaps some other Animals, of spongy
Bones, and long Caverns, having recesses in themselves; In Man, and in Dogs,
and perhaps in many others, who are endued with a more acute Hearing, How they
differ in Man, and in some four-footed Beasts.
this Cavity is shut up with a round Bone, having a plain Superficies within,
whence the sound is reflected more strongly into the Shell; but in a Calf, and
Sheep, the sound seems to be much broken and debilitated, in these bony
Caverns; wherefore, these Animals are said to have slow Ears; for it is not
expedient, for such destinated for to be fatted for Food, to hear acutely, that
they might be affrighted and provoked by every Noise.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Sight.

IF there be any strife for Dignity among the Senses, The Sight is the most
noble Sense.
the Palm is given, almost by the consent of all, to Seeing, as the most noble
Power; because this faculty apprehends things at a great distance, under a most
subtle Figure, by a most clear perception, and with great delight; so this
Sense acts, that is next in virtue to the Eternal and Immaterial Soul: To wit,
it views and measures both Heaven and Earth in a Moment, and brings within its
embraces whatever Bodies are situated in either, and that are far remote from
our touch.

It Is needful that Seeing should be so performed at a distance, It acts at a
distance by reason of the Species of visible things diffused afar off.
that visible things might diffuse, and every where propagate themselves by
their Images far and wide; so that wherever the Eye is stopped, the Images of
some Bodies objected are met with. But after what manner this is done, and by
what means the sensible Species is received by the Organ, ought a little more
deeply to be inquired into.

As to the first, Light, Colors, and Images, are the same substance.
although Light, Colors, and Images, are wont to be moved from place to place,
and by the help of Glasses to be transferred hither and thither, and indeed
affect the Eye with their Motion, yet it is manifest, that they are not mere
Qualities, but certain Bodies, or consist of most thin little Bodies. These
three are very much of Kin among themselves, and differ little or nothing one
from another, as to their Essence; for indeed, the same Effluvia's or little
Bodies, for as much as they proceed from a lucid Body, are called Light, for
that they are reflected from an opacous or shaddowy Body, under a certain
placing and meeting together, cause the Image of the Object; and for as much as
it happens, the same rays of Light, in their reflection, are broken or turned
in, from a dark or opacous Body, after this or that manner, they cause the
Appearance of this or that Color to be represented.

As to the Rays themselves, What the Rays are, which cause the visible Species.
or the passing through of little Bodies, the irradiation or beaming forth of
which, shows the Representations either of Light, Color, or Images, it is much
disputed; whether they are only Effluvia's, darted from a lucid Body, and
repercussed in their going forth, and reflected variously here and there, as is
asserted by Gassendus, Whether they are Particles, streaming from a lucid Body.
and some others; or whether Particles being sent forth from a lucid Body, move
other the like Particles, implanted in the Air, and as it were by inkindling
them render them luminous, and these at length others, and so a diffusion on
every side of Light, or Images, is propagated as it were by a certain waving.

Against the former Opinion it is objected, that it seems impossible, that the
Effluvia's of flame or fire, should be able to be unfolded so suddenly, and
dilated or spread abroad to an immensity: for when a Candle being lighted,
immediately the whole Chamber is illuminated, it can scarce be conceived, that
the fiery little Bodies of that flame, should break forth so suddenly and so
thick, that they should fill, in the twink of an Eye, so vast a space. Or
rather, whether inkindled Particles of Nitro-sulphureous Air.
For indeed, the new Motions and Increase of an inkindled flame, are more slow
and perceivable to the Sight it self; how therefore can we imagine, the motion
or dilatation of Light, for that this is but only a thinner flame, to be so
incredibly swift? Besides, when in the same instant, in which a Light placed in
an eminent place is inkindled, it is beheld at many Miles distance, none can
think, that these Particles sent forth from it, can be able to be carried so
long a space, at least in so short a time; but truly, how should it be
supposed, that these Effluvia's streaming from a small Light, should presently
possess the whole Hemisphear? Because the light enkindled in the whole Region
round about, meets with the Eye wherever placed. Besides, when from a
Glowworm, a certain kind of Light or fire shines in the dark, and is perceived
at a distance, if this apparition should be made by reason of the fiery little
Bodies streaming from this little Creature, whence I pray is so much fiery
Tinder supplied? From these and some other Reasons, we are led to believe, that
when the Medium is so soon enlightened, besides the Effluvia darted from the
lucid Body, others also interwoven with, and implanted in the Air, being moved
by those Effluvia's, and as it were inkindled, contribute to illumination.

For the Explanation of this, Which Opinion, seems most likely.
hither ought to be referred what has formerly been said concerning the Nature
of fire and flame; to wit, we have showed, that with the Sulphurous Particles,
breaking forth from an inflameable Body, others Nitrous do come from the Air,
and are inkindled with them, and so do not constitute fire or flame, unless
both are jointly inkindled. The like reason may be given of Light, and
consequently of Images, and Colors, The differences of flame, and light.
most swiftly produced from Flame and Light: to wit, some Sulphurous Particles
being carried beyond the compass of the Flame, join together with others
Nitrous, and easily inkindled, and so produce a most thin Flame, viz. Light.
For indeed, from an inkindled fire, many sulphurous Particles presently
streaming forth thickly, lay hold on more, or at least the like Nitrous, and so
constitute a more thick and almost dark Flame; this, for that it is fat and
thick, passes not through the Pores of Glass, and tho it is apt of its own
Nature, to be carried in direct lines, yet it is wont to be bent hither and
thither, and to be made crooked by the blasts of Wind, yea to be carried within
Tubes or hollow Pipes very crooked. But Light is made of fewer and more subtle
sulphurous Particles, which passing beyond the first inkindling, fly away
round about far and wide, and so meeting every where with many Nitrous,
constitute a most thin white Flame, and without heat; this easily passes through
Glass, and all clear Bodies* Its beams, for as much as they consist of more
Nitrous than Sulphurous little Bodies, are carried only in strait lines, so
that tho they are wont ordinarily to be broken or reflected, yet they cannot be
made crooked.

Lucid Bodies, are either Celestial,
Subjects emitting fiery and luciferous Particles, among the Coelestials are the
Sun, and Stars; but among the Sublunaries, whatsoever are filled with Sulphur,
are apt to flame forth. Concerning the Sun we note, that wherever it may be
seen in the Earth, it diffuses a clear Light, so do not the fixed Stars,
because they are at too great a distance from the Globe of the Earth. Or
Sublunary; in the light of which, we observe three measures.
As to the Subluminary Lights, we shall observe, as it were three Stadia or
measures, in which they have their Beams after a diverse way; to wit, in the
first place, the Flame consists within the compass of a lucid Body, which is
both hot, and disperses heat every where round about, to what is near, not only
by the open Air, but also by all Bodies, to wit, both diaphanous and dark,
solid or rare. Secondly, In the extreme Border of the Flame succeeds the Sphere
of Light, which being more illustrious near the Flame, is by degrees
attenuated, till it ends in plain darkness. Beyond the bound of the Light, the
lucid Body propagates its Image or likeness a great way; for a Candle being
inkindled, is beheld for many Miles in the dark: The trajection of which seems
to be made, by reason of the Impression made on the Nitrous Particles, diffused
through the Air; wherefore when the accension ends, about the border of Light,
yet from thence it at a long distance transmits every way an Idea of the Flame
or Light, by a most swift undulation or waving of them being moved.

Wherefore light, either reflected, or refracted, goes forward only in strait
lines.
The trajection or the passing through of the Rays of Light, whether the same be
direct, or reflected, or broken, goes forward (as we hinted but now) only in
strait lines, and not in oblique, or turning about: the reason of which is,
because the fiery or light-carrying Particles, how subtle or active soever they
be, most easily pass through, and without any impediment, the Pores and Passages
of the Air, and follow not its Course or Torrent. Further, as the fiery
Particles (as it seems) are only of a Spherical Figure, and of a very small
bulk, their irradiation or beaming forth, is made only in direct or strait
lines: to wit, because, when the little Globes breaking forth from any fire,
stream thickly forth on every side, and that the former are joined to the
latter, it is necessary, that they should be driven forward to the side, still
without any declination: for as much as if Pricks be driven one from another,
their progress create a strait line.

Light can pass through a Chamber in the mean time, not to be perceived.
But hence it happens, that Light does not as a Sound or Odors, pass through
winding chinks, or passages of holes; yea, neither do we perceive the Sun or
Stars, nor the Beams of a Sublunary Light, unless the same meet the Eye direct,
or reflected, or refracted; for it may be made, that an handful of the Beams of
Light, may pass through a Chamber whole, that in the mean time the Eye, placed
in it, may perceive nothing of brightness. For Example, Let there be bored in
one end of the Chamber a small hole, and in the other opposite a greater, in
the space then without the less hole; if a Light or Lamp be placed, it shall
illuminate that space placed without the greater hole, in the mean time, the
Chamber between which the Beams of the same Light passes through, shall be seen
dark: The reason of which is, because the Beams, passing through, for that they
neither unfold themselves abroad, nor are reflected, meet not the Eye placed
without the line, and therefore create no appearance of Light: also, for that
reason it is, that when we look up from the bottom of a Pit, at Noon day, it is
as if it were quite night, and we behold clearly the Stars themselves, without
any appearance of Light.

Light Primary, or Secondary.
But although Light is devolved into every Part round about, not by a waving
fluctuation, but proceeds with only strait rays or strokes, yet these rays
stream forth so thickly, and being reflected from Bodies after a manifold way,
meet one another, mutually join, and are sent together, with so thick a Series,
that not rarely almost the whole Pores or Passages of the Air, are possessed by
them, either direct, or refracted, or reflected. Wherefore Light is wont to be
distinguished, either that which is Primary, which proceeds immediately from
Light; Or Secondary, which is reflected from Objects, which sort of reflection
of it, is wont to be many time reiterated.

Concerning the Primary Light we observe, The differences of these.
that its Beams, from whatever Light they proceed, either Celestial or
Sublunary, are almost the same; hence it is, when many of a diverse Original
are mixed together, they are not easily known asunder, because the lesser Light
is always obscured by the greater: But the Secondary Light, or Beams reflected
from solid Bodies, that besides, by redoubling the illumination, they render
the Medium more clear; also, according as they are variously modified from
Objects, in their being reflected, they create the appearances of Images and
Colors.

Concerning the Nature of Colors and Images, The reasons of Colors and Images
unfolded.
as the Philosophers of every Age, have disputed it, and that diverse Opinions
are delivered, by several Authors, none as I think has discoursed more
ingeniously, or more like to Truth about this, than the famous Gassendus;
wherefore, if it may be lawful to Plow with his Heifer, we will add the whole
Matter in a short summary.

Every visible thing or Body is lucid, According to Gassendus, Every Body is
either lucid, or illustrated.
or illustrated from Light; That, is beheld by its proper Light, and by direct
Rays; This by another, and by reflected Beams; but the Medium is not seen
purely perspicuous, because it emits not proper Beams, nor reflects others, by
reason of its thinness. Concerning a lucid Body we observe, that this shining
clearly and without any Impediment, appears under a bright form; wherefore
Light in a fountain, The Color of a Light Body is white.

Which is variously altered, by reason of interspersed Clouds.


is of a white shining Color, but that it alters its Color, it is nothing
else than the intermixture made in its Beams, of shaddows or darknesses; but
this is made either by reason of little Bodies, being between in the Medium,
which avert some Beams: So the Sun seems red in the Horizon, by reason of
Vapors which intercept many Beams, or the whiteness of a lucid Body
degenerates, by reason of Particles, not lucid, interspersed within its Body,
and with the Beams themselves; so when Soot and Smoke stream forth with the
inkindled Light, the Light becomes more red or darkish.

As a lucid, ^o also an illustrated Body, appears not pure, but altered, under
the form of whiteness; An illustrated Body, as it is either smooth or rough,
reflects Beams variously, and therefore produces various Colors.
for because the Rays are not all reflected, but by reason of the inequallities
of the Superficies, some are wholly immerged, and others averted, therefore not
a pure whiteness, but another Color is seen in it. Indeed, as an illustrated
Body is more smooth and polite, that it may reflect many Beams, the more bright
and shining it appears, as is manifest by a Looking-Glass; but the more rough
and rugged the Superficies is, that it hides many Beams, or averts them, the
more the form of whiteness degenerates.

Concerning the unequal Superficies of illustrated Bodies, two as it were
extreme dispositions are to be observed, by which the proper whiteness of
reflected Light is very much altered; for either the Superficies of a Body is
rendered unequal, by many Swellings up, as it were little hills or bubbles
thick set, by which, tho many Rays are turned aside, yet by the diverse faces of
the little hills or risings, Beams are reflected in a more thick heap, than
from a smoothed plane, therefore there is made a white Color, coming near to
the whiteness it self of Light. Or Secondly, The Superficies of an illustrated
Body, gapes with very many Ditches or Pits, as it were Dens, in which the Rays
entering, are wholly drowned, and are not reflected at all, from whence comes
the black Color, or a privation of white: after this manner, the two extreme
kinds of Colors, to wit, white and black, seem to be produced.

But as to the other intermediate Colors, The variety of Colors also depends,
upon the refraction of Beams.
besides the Light, being reflected with little shaddows, and variously
intermixed with darkness, we ought to suppose, the diverse manner of refraction
of its Beams, to be partly also the Cause; of which there is a certain sign,
for that in a Triangular Glass called the Prism, the Beams being refracted
diversely, falling upon this or that Angle, are wont to show Green, or Purple,
or Yellow, or a Color of some other Kind: In like manner we may believe, that
also the Rays of Light being variously broken and turned inwards, in their
reflection from an illustrated Body, and so cut and mixed together among
themselves, do produce all manner of differences of Colors. This is not a
place here to treat of the particular Splendour of every Color, and the manner
of their Production, but it may suffice, that we have mentioned in general the
reason of their appearances.

But these things concerning the Nature of a visible Object* A Burning-glass
placed before a dark Chamber, declares how Sight is made.
and the manner of its trajection, being thus premised, it behooves us next to
show, after what way Sight or Seeing performed, by reason of the sensible
Species being so sent from the Object, and received by the Organ. This
commonly, and not improperly, is wont to be declared by the example of a
Burning-Glass, which like a little Window is fixed before an hole made in the
Wall of a shut up and dark Chamber; Because, from the Bodies every where
brought before that hole, the Rays of Light being reflected, meet together in
the Glass, and in that passage cutting one another, spread themselves at last
within the Chamber, and so upon a white Wall within, represent a Landschap of
the whole visible Hemisphear. The Conformation of the Eye it self is much after
the same manner, for in it may be discovered, both the shut up Chamber, and
humors as it were Dioptric Glasses, which gather together the Beams, and break
them after a manifold way, all artificially disposed; and lastly, as it were a
whited wall, viz. the Retine Coat, or the Membrane of the Eye, on which the
Images of visible things are Impressed.

The Organs of the Sight, are the Eyes, and the Optic Nerves.
Indeed the Eyes, and Optic Nerves belonging to them, perform the whole Act of
Seeing; within the Cloisters of these, the Images of all visible things are
formally painted, and by the passage of these, to wit, the Nerves, the
perception of the Images there drawn is conveyed to the common Sensory: It now
remains, that we consider both the Fabric in either Organ, and the particular
uses of the several Parts.

How the frame of the Eye, is fitted for Seeing.
As to the Frame and offices of the Eye, for the performing of which its Fabric
seems to be made, we shall take notice chiefly of three things to be done by
it. To wit, In the first place, That the visible Species, or Rays of Light,
sent from a lucid or from an illustrated Body, are intromitted by the Pupil,
as it were through an hole. Secondly, The Rays so admitted being refracted, and
artificially collected, through a fit Medium, are disposed according to the
best Dioptrick Rules. Thirdly, That the Images of things, resulting from the
due refraction and Coalition of the Beams, may be aptly represented, the
interior Den of the Eye is formed, like a black Chamber with a white Wall,
susceptible of the Images.

The Anatomy of the Eye, necessary for the Explication of Seeing.
If it should be further demanded, what kind of Fabric it is of the Eye it
self, and after what manner its parts are disposed, by which all its offices
are performed, it will not be from the Matter, to show here a perfect
description of the Eye and its Appendix, together with the offices and uses of
its parts, truly laid down. For truly, if any part of the whole Animal Body
deserves a peculiar Anatomy, it is chiefly due to the Eye, which tho made of a
very small bulk, contains in its Structure many admirable things, and is of
most noble use.

But in delivering the Anatomy of this Member, many Authors, both Physicians
and Mathematicians have already labored so exactly, that hardly any thing can
be added in this business: but because, thorough the frequent Observations from
others, made of the same thing, and then again from others, an easier
apprehension, and more of certainty, yea, and a more accurate Knowledge is wont
to be made; therefore it may be lawful for us, to subjoyn here our description
of the Eye, not taken from the Writings of others, but by our own ocular
Inspection, and observation of the Eye and its parts.

Why the Eyes are two.
We need not here mention that the Eyes are two, that there may be an help
provided by one, against the loss of the other; also that the impression of the
Object may be made more strong, and the more certain, which notwithstanding
does not become double, being prevented by the Coalition of the Optic Nerves,
before they are carried to the Common Sensory: nor is it behoveful to play the
Rhetorician, by telling that the Eyes are placed like Watchmen, in an high
place, and well fortified, from whence they may be able to move themselves
hither and thither, with notable volubility, for the receiving from every part
the met with Species, The Parts of the Eye are either Exterior.
and to direct its Sight every where about: But that we may go about to
describe the Fabric of the Eye, without any Circumlocution; The Parts which
belong to it are either Exterior, and as an Orchyard, which serve for Ornament,
The Bone, Eyelids, Hairs of the Eyelids, Eyebrows, etc.
Defense, or Commodity of Action; of which sort, besides the round Bone, are
the Eyelids, with the hairs of the Eyelids, and the Eyebrows, also the
Glandulae or Kirnels, with the Vessels, and Excretory passages; or its parts
are Intrinsic, to wit, constituting the Globe it self of the Eye; which are
again disposed, either about its Compass, Or Interior, the Muscles, Vessels,
Coats, Humors, etc.
as are the Muscles, and Vessels, with the fat lying between; or more intimate,
which make up its Penetralia or inmost parts, to wit, the Coats, and Humors:
In each of these, we shall note what is chiefly worth noting.

Among the outward parts of the Eye, first is mentioned the Eyelids, which are
like a Membranous Vail or Covering, For what use the Eyelids serve.
and cover or expose the Eye as there is occasion: as often as any injury is
coming, these most swiftly hiding their Tenants, defend them; also when a
relaxation is required from work, and that rest indulges the Animal Spirits,
presently the Eyelids shut their Windows, like an officious Servant; but when
the Spirits are called back to watching, these Vails being again opened, the
Impressions of visible things are admitted.

They are two in Number.
The Eyelids are two, to wit, the Upper and the Lower; the motion of this is
either none, or very obscure; yea, it is as it were fixed to the mound Bone,
with which the other Upper Eyelid meeting, causes the shutting of the Eye to
be more firm. The Upper Eyelid, There are two Muscles of the Upper.
for the double Motion of opening and shutting, is furnished with two Muscles,
to wit, one strait, which arising near the Optic Nerve, with a broad and very
thin Tendon, is inserted into the Margin of the Upper Eyelid; this Muscle with
its contracted Fibers, lifts up the Eyelid: The other Muscle is Circular,
which arising about the greater corner of the Eye, and from thence encompassing
the lower Eyelid, reaches to the Upper Eyelid, nigh the other corner of the
Eye, and coming under it, returns toward its beginning, this Muscle thus
brought about, as it were into an Orb, draws down the Eyelid, and so shuts up
the Eye.

As to the Nerves which are inserted into the Muscles of the Eyelids, With
what Nerves they are furnished.
we have shown elsewhere, that they are of a twofold Kind, to wit, some arising
from the fifth Pair, others from the seventh; by virtue of these it comes to
pass, that the motion of the Eyelids accords with the Soul, and fitly answers
to all the Passions; and that not only in opening and shutting the Eyes, for
Sleeping and Waking, but in variously turning about, and composing the Eyelids
themselves, as is to be seen in Weeping, Anger, Joy, Sadness, Shame, and other
Perturbations; which Kind of Pathetick motions of the Eyelids, are for the
most part involuntary, or are performed at least unthought of.

By reason of the Nerves of the seventh Pair inserted also into the Eyelids,
it may be known, wherefore we suddenly shut, or open, or any other way role
about our Eyelids, at any unaccustomed Sound, coming suddenly to the Ears. It
is showed elsewhere, why the Eyelids being affected at the approach of Sleep,
with a kind of heaviness or weight, desire to be closed whether we will or no,
or tho we strive against it; where we treat particularly of Sleeping and Waking.

There is nothing to be observed but what is Common, The hairs of the Eyelids
and the Eyebrows.
concerning the Hairs of the Eyelids, and Eyebrows; to wit, these hairy Walls
or Mounds, like Ramparts, are constituted with a double Series or row of noted
Pallizadoes, for the defense of the Eyes, by which care is taken beforehand,
lest any troublesome things should unawares fall into the Eyes, or lest that any
thing should slide into them from the Head.

We will pass from the Eyelids to the Glandula's or Kirnels of the Eye, The
Kirnels are two.
which indeed stick to their Back, and put forth the Humor belonging to the
Eye, through proper Passages, which lie open within the interior Superficies of
the Eyelids; if that a super-abounding serous Humor is poured forth, more than
it ought into the Eye, that falling down into a Cavity like a Basin, nigh the
greater corner, enters there two little holes, from which going out into a
singular passage, is carried even to the end of the Nose, where it is sent
forth of Doors at an open passage; besides, the serous Humor in a Man, being
plentifully heaped up, nigh to the Opthalmick Kirnels, drops forth in Tears.

Indeed, Their Use.
the Eye leans on these two Kirnels, as it were soft stays laid under its round
Cushion; one of these sited nigh the greater corner of the Eye, is wont to be
called commonly the Lachrymal Kirnel, The Lachrymal Kirnel is described with
the excretory Passages.
tho the other better deserves the Name; To this belong Arteries, Veins, and
Nerves, also excretory Vessels, which are of two sorts, to wit, out of this
Kirnel, open two or three water-carriers; into the inward Superficies of the
Eyelid; out of which the watery Humor drops forth upon the Ball of the Eye;
besides, two passages also open into the Ditch of the inner Corner, which carry
not thither the Water as some think, but sends forth what is there deposited,
and superfluous, from the excretory Vessels, and received by them, and then it
is carried forth of Doors by one Channel, Its use is ^inted at.
which going through the Bone of the Nose, passes through its passage. This
Channel was first found out by Nicholas Stenon, who has ingeniously described
its make and Use.

This little Channel, stretched forth from the Kirnels of the Eye, through the
passage of the Nostril, even to its end, is like a Sink, which sends forth of
doors the serous filth, apt to be too much poured forth on the Eye, by a secret
passage: Hence is to be noted, that not only in Weeping, excited through Grief,
but as often as Tears are pressed forth from the Eyes, by any thing bitingly
pulling them, an humidity distills from the Nose. The Lachryma^ Vessels.
But as to the Vessels, which are properly Lachrymal, it is observed, that
three or four Lymphaeducts or water-carriers, reaching from this Kirnel into
the Eyelid, one of them opens into the Margent of the Upper Eyelid, another
into the Margent of the Lower Eyelid, with a little Dam raised in either, and
send forth the water in Tears or Weeping between the hairs of the Eyelids
themselves. I have sometimes seen in an Ulcerous disposition of this Kirnel, a
filthy Matter to have dropped forth, by Compression, from those two Lachrymal
Puncts.

The other Kirnel of the Eye, A nameless Kirnel rather to be called the
Lachrymal.
(commonly nameless, but deserves chiefly to be called Lachrymal) beginning at
the lesser corner of the Eye, leaning on the back of the Eye, under the Upper
Eyelid, is carried forward, almost to the inner corner. As to its Figure, it
is cleft into many Lobes, distinguished by various distances between; from
every one of which, water-pipes ascend into the Eyelids, and opening through
the Lachrymal Puncts, within its inward Superficies, pour forth water requisite
for the watering the Eye, both for its Motion, and for Weeping: The most
Learned Doctor Stenon, has clearly and sufficiently described this Kirnel also,
with the Lachrymal Vessels, and expressed them with apt Figures; whatsoever of
superfluous Serum sweats forth through the Lachrymal Vessels of this Kernel,
slides into the greater corner, for that it is seated in a sleep place, and
from thence is sent away, through the same excretory Vessels of the other
Kirnel, as it were by a common Sink.

The Vessels of the Kirnels.
Besides these Vessels, carrying the water from the Kirnels into the Eye, and
the excretory of its superfluous Humor through the Nose; there belong to the
Kirnels of the Eye some others designed for other uses, to wit, Arteries,
Veins, and Nerves. From the Carotid Artery, gotten within the Skull, and about
to ascend toward the Brain, a noted branch being sent into the Compass of the
Eye, imparts shoots to either Kirnel, carrying Blood to them plentifully: To
this Artery (which besides the Kirnels of the Eye, respects also the chief
parts of the upper Jaw) is adjoined a Vein, which reduces the Blood from them;
yea, and to both these a Nerve is added for a Companion, to wit, the
Ophthalmick Arm of the fifth Pair, which variously binds about and knits the
sanguiferous Vessels, with many shoots, sent forth in its whole Progress, and
also distributes many little shoots into the Kirnels themselves.

The Matter of Tears.
From these we may easily gather, that from the Blood carried through the
Arteries to either Glandula or Kirnel, a watery Humor, requisite both for the
perpetual watering of the Eye, and also occasionally for the matter of Tears,
is sifted forth, and there heaped up, for the aforesaid uses. As to the former,
these Kirnels, even as others implanted elsewhere, imbibe the Serum carried to
them for constant food; to wit, because the Arteries carry the Blood thither
more copiously, than the Reins are presently able to sup back; wherefore what
is watery is imbibed by the substance of the Kirnel, as it were a Sponge, the
bloody Humor being sent away by the Veins. For this reason, because the Nerves
bind these Vessels, therefore as often as the Serum abounds too much in the
Blood, destinated for the Brain, these Arteries being provoked by the Nerves,
and bound together, it is separated or bolted forth, and carried more
plentifully than it was wont, toward these Kirnels.

The Causes of Weeping, and the manner of its being made described.
But as to Tears, oftentimes poured forth in great plenty from these Kirnels of
the Eye, that it may the better appear, by what means, and for what Causes this
is done, it seems very opportune, to discourse concerning Weeping and Crying,
and of the Causes and manner of its being made, which yet shall be done briefly
and succinctly, because the more full Consideration of these, properly belong
to the Doctrine of the Passions. In the first place therefore, concerning
Weeping, we observe that it does chiefly and almost only follow upon great
Passions of the Mind, to wit, great Grief, Sadness, Pity, sudden Joy, and the
like; to wit, whenever the sensitive Soul, being struck by either a
disagreeable or unaccustomed Object, is as it were compelled inwardly to shake,
or to contract more near together its Systasis, or Constitution; so care is
taken, that a greater company of Spirits, yea and a more plentiful flux of
Blood, are compelled to the principal Parts, viz. The Heart and Brain, as it
were the stays of Life: The Animal Spirits of their own accord leap forward to
these places, as to the two fountains of Life, yea and the Blood is more fully
heaped up in either; for as much as the blood-carrying Vessels, being bound
together straightly by the Tract of the Nerves, drive forward swiftly to these
places its Latex, and take it away, more sparingly from thence; therefore,
whilst an occasion is offered of Weeping, presently the Bosoms of the Heart,
with the whole Neighborhood, swell up and are hugely inflated, by the Blood
there heaped together, and (for as much as it is suffused with abundance of
Serum) very much boiling; hence, both the Lungs are stuffed up that they can
yield but a sobbing respiration; and the Diaphragma, that it might give place
to their swelling, is depressed lower, with a stronger and more often repeated
Systole, which is the Cause of Sobbing; in the mean time, for as much as the
Air is hardly blown into the Windpipe, the Lungs and the Diaphragma being so
distended, and at last hardly returned, that mournful sound in Crying or
Lamenting is effected. The parts of the Face and Mouth, composed into a
mournful Aspect, aptly answer to this Affection of the Praecordia; the reason
of which we have showed elsewhere; because the Nerves which Contract the
Praecordia, are intimate Relations, and rejoice in a mutual Sympathy, with
those, which pathetically Compose the Face, in Laughing and Weeping. But
whilst these things are acted in the Praecordia and Countenance, Wherefore a
bewailing, is oftentimes joined, Weeping.
the business is carried no less tumultuously in the Brain; for here the
Spirits being acted in Confusion, all things are upside down, and the Brain, by
the too great influx of the Blood, is in danger to be either overturned, or
drowned; which that it might not come to pass, and that madness follow not upon
any Passion, the Nerves binding about the Truncks of the Arteries in many
places, bind them strongly, and so repress the flowing of the Blood; and its
Liquor being at first notably rarefied, is thickened suddenly, and as it were
melted, wherefore its Serosities running forth like a Flood, are disposed into
the Kirnels of the Eye, destinated for this business by Nature: Then, because
these Kirnels are pulled by the Pathetick Nerves, which are of the same stock,
with those of the Face and Praecordia, and are strictly bound together, the
serous Humors, by reason of these Passions of the Mind, being imbibed by the
Kirnels of the Eye, are as it were stroked out from thence, and so distill in
showers of Tears.

From hence a reason may be had, Wherefore Weeping comes upon sudden Joy.
why Tears are wont to break forth in some, after a sudden Joy, because in
great Joy, joined with admiration, the sensitive Soul enlarges it self very
much, and diffuses most amply its Systasis or Constitution; then as it were
fearing a Dissolution, it again Contracts it self; wherefore, in such an
Affection, the Blood flowing forth plentifully into the Brain, blows up all the
Vessels, and by reason of its fullness distends them; then after its Channel
being thus intumefied, the same Vessels being presently bound hard together,
suffers a Flux, and as it were growing liquid, plentifully deposes its
Serosities into the aforesaid Kirnels.

There remains another Consideration about Weeping, Why Mankind only or chiefly
Weep.
why Men or Man Kind only, or chiefly in bewailing, are wont to weep, or to
shed tears? even for the same reason, which is given for Man's being a visible
Creature, makes him fit for Weeping: To wit, Man is more fitly made for all
Affections, and chiefly for the conceiving of Joy and Sadness, than Brute
Animals; and as he is a sociable Creature, he ought to Communicate those
sociable things, some signs naturally implanted in him, to wit, Laughing and
Weeping: But as to the Organs, which perform these Kind of Affections, we have
elsewhere observed, that there happens in Man, otherways than in Brutes, a
wonderful consent between the Praecordia, and the parts of the Mouth and Face,
by reason of the Conformation of the intercostal Nerve; so that as soon as
sadness possesses the Breast, presently the Aspect of the Face, corresponds
with the same Perturbation.

Thus much for the Kirnels of the Eye, The Muscles of the Eyes and their uses
described.
and their Use and Action: Among the intrinsecal Parts of this Member, next
follow the Muscles, concerning which, there is scarcely any thing rare to be
met with, or that has not been already taken notice of by others. It is obvious
for any to conceive, that so many Muscles ought to be constituted, as there are
Kinds of spreading abroad, by which this Globe may be moved, as it hangs within
the Compass of the Bone; for this is made after a fourfold way or manner; to
wit, on that side and this side, upward and downward, and two ways obliquely,
viz. By bringing it about both toward the outward, and inward corner.

For these several Kinds of Motions are constituted so many distinct Muscles,
which are found almost in all perfect Animals, Four strait, two oblique.
and are easily seen in the dissection. Four strait Muscles are inserted into
the Cardinal spaces of the Eye, to wit, the Muscle lifting it up, and pressing
it down, its Zenith and Nadir, and drawing to, and putting from, as it were
possessing the opposite points of the Horizon, to wit, East and West; the
oblique Muscles compass it about like a Sphere, toward the Exterior and the
Interior corner. I pass by here, that the Muscles of the Eye, do change their
Names, according to the Passions of which they are Marks; wherefore, that
lifting up, is called Superb or Proud, because that in Pride, it holds the Eye
elate or lifted up, which however is more true of the Eyelid, and that Muscle
deserves rather the Name of Holy and Devout, because it greatly lifts up the
Eye in strong Prayer; wherefore it is the manner of Hypocrites, who affect the
Habit of Sanctity, so to role the Eyes about, that they hide the Pupil of the
Eye, and turn up the white to be seen: The depressing Muscle, by its action
shows the mark of an humble, abject, and often of a Pious Mind also; that
drawing inward, may not be improperly called Drunken, because Drunkards drawing
their Eyes toward the inward corner, are wont to look asquint; and when one
Eye is drawn in more than the other, for that by this means the Pole of the
Sight is varied, they behold things as if they were double. I knew a young Man,
obnoxious to the Palsy, when the drawing in Muscle was strongly drawn, the
other Muscles of the left Eye being loose, by reason of the Eye being thus
distorted, every object appeared double, nor could he distinguish the true one.
The Muscle drawing from or outward, may be well enough called the Indignator,
to wit, because in such an Affection, we bend our Eyes outwardly, with a
certain aversion. The oblique Muscles may be called Amatory, because Lovers
behold one another obliquely or side-ways, and as it were fearing the direct
Sight of one another, they role about their Eyes like those of Cattle; hither
and thither.

A Consent, and Sympathy, between them all.
That the Eye might rightly perform the Act of Seeing, there is required a
Consent or Harmonious acting, between all its Muscles; to wit, that all acting
together, may keep and continue its Globe, like the Tube of an Optic Glass, in
a just Position for Seeing; for if any Muscle overcoming its Antagonist, acts
more strongly than it ought, and draws the Eye too much to its part, presently
the Sight becomes distorted; and by this means it is, to wit, by reason of
overmuch strength of some one Muscle, whether it so happens by a Disease, by
Nature, or by an evil Custom, that some are goggle-eyed, or have them distorted
or squinting; Whence squinting comes.
For squinting is wont to be caused by the fault of any one of the aforesaid
Muscles; but especially the Muscle going about to the inward corner would
endanger the bringing in of this Vice, by its exorbitances, unless prevented by
Nature; for as diverse visible Species, being sent from Objects at a great
distance, are received together by the Organ, every one is apt to turn about
their Eyes, bending them forward: wherefore Infants, when many things at once
are held before their Eyes, easily are brought to squinting: But lest this
Muscle, inordinately rolled about, should cause in many this Evil, it is
prevented with a wonderful Artifice, that its Motion may be still kept within
just limits; because, near the root of the Nose is hung a certain handle, like
a Pully, which this Muscle passing through, there is a necessity for it to
perform its trajection at a certain Angle, and as it were within a determinate
compass.

Some Brutes are furnished with other two Muscles.
Besides these six Muscles which Man enjoys and no more, and which are common to
other perfect Animals, as well as him, some Brutes are furnished with two
others for their peculiar uses. It is observed, that four-footed Beasts, who
carry their Eyes prone or hanging down toward the Earth, have a peculiar
Muscle, which holds up the Globe of the Eye, and which sustains it, lest by its
weight it should be apt to slip beyond the compass of the Bone: with this
Muscle are endued Kine, Horses, Sheep, Hares, Swine, and perhaps many other
Animals, also a Dog is furnished with this, but has it made after another
manner; but to many who have the aforesaid hanging Muscle of the Eye, is
granted another Membranous Muscle, which being placed nigh the inward corner of
the Eye, when it is lifted up, hides almost the whole Globe of the Eye. The use
of this seems to be, that when Beasts thrust their heads to feed among high
Grass and Herbs, this Muscle hides the Pupil of the Eye, lest any thing should
hurt it. The former Muscle is wont to be called the Seventh of Brutes, and
this, that by which Brutes twinkle their Eyes.

The Globe of the Eye, with the Optic Nerve.
After that all the Muscles, with the Kirnels and the fat lying between, are
separated from the Eye, its Globe remains naked, with the Optic Nerve inserted
about its bottom: This Conformation, as we have formerly observed of the Brain,
is after one manner in Man, and four-footed Beasts; and after another in Birds
and Fishes: for in these the whole compass of the Eye is not round, but
depressed nigh to the more outward, and the posterior Superficies; and almost
like to a Platter or Shield rather; but in the others, being perfectly round,
it imitates the System it self of the World: The reason of the difference is
easily known, by the diverse framing of the Eye, which we shall show anon.

Its Figure in some is round, in others depressed.
We meet also with another notable difference in the Eyes of diverse Animals,
about the insertion of the Optic Nerve, for in Man, a Dog, and other more
sagacious Creatures, the end of the Optic Nerve is placed directly before the
Pupil, or is inserted to the Pole of the Eye it self: for the Beam, or the
Optic Pole, passing through the Pupil or Apple of the Eye, and its middle
Cavity, falls into the insertion of the Optic Nerve; but in a Sheep, a Calf,
and many other four-footed Beasts, and besides in all Birds and Fishes, the
insertion of the Optic Nerve being made in the Den of the most inward circular
Cave, or side of the Hemisphear, is at a distance from its Pole, even as the
Pole of the Zodiac, The Insertion of the Optic Nerve, is after a diverse manner,
in diverse Animals.
from the other of the Equator. This difference Dr. Scheinerus not perceiving,
when he had found the Optic Nerve to be inserted into the side, in the Eyes of
great Cattle, Oxen, and Swine, two soon concluded, that it was so also in Man,
and in all Creatures besides; for he says in his Third Book, Fundam. Optic. p.
11. That the Optic Pole does not fall into the Optic Nerve, with any
Proportion, the error of which Assertion, the Anatomy of a Man's, or a Dog's
Eye, easily discovers.

It is placed either in the Pole, or at the Side of the Eye.
If the reason of this diverse Kind of Conformation be demanded, we say, that
the Primary Organ of the Sight, to wit, in which the Image or visible Species
stays, and from whence it is delivered to the first Sensory, is not the Optic
Nerve, but the Retina, netty Coat, or fifth Membrane of the Eye, on every side
spread out, by the Insertion of the Optic Nerve. The reason of the diverse
Conformation inquired into.
Further, the Image projected within the bottom of the Eye, does not consist in
the small Punct, neither is it determinated to the same individual space, but
being variously drawn forth, is painted now bigger, now smaller, upon the
Retina, or fifth Coat of the Eye; yet so, as being placed nigh to the insertion
of the Optic Nerve, it may presently be carried by it to the Common Sensory;
when as therefore the Optic Nerve is placed in the Pole of the Eye, the Images
disposed round about upon the Retina, from every part of it, do fill the whole
Circle of the painted Scene. But when the insertion of this Nerve, declines
from the Pole, to the side of the Eye, the apparition of the Objects stands
only below, and not at all above that Punct, and so the whole apparition of
visible things, is concluded within a Semicircle. This is clear to any
thinking Person, that it is fit for some Animals, that they receive many
Objects at once, at one view, and that others but a few only; therefore the
Optic Nerve, for the former, ought to be inserted about the middle of the Eye,
and for these latter toward its side. Man, a Dog, an Horse, and perhaps some
other Animals, wont to be employed with various Matters, ought to behold all
things in the whole Neighborhood placed together: but a Sheep, Ox, Hog, and
many other four-footed Beasts, and universally Fowls and Fishes, to wit, such
whose chiefest task is to get their Victuals, and to defend themselves from
Enemies, have no need to behold the whole Horizon, but only things placed near
on the right and left hand; although perhaps in some of these, the paucity of the
Objects, is compensated with the sharpness of the Sight.

There is observed another no less noted difference in several Animals, The
Pupil of the Eye in some round, in other longish.
about the Pupil of the Eye; for this is round or spherical in Man, a Dog, and
in many other four-footed Beasts, in all Fowls and Fishes; but in an Ox, great
Cattle, a Goat, and some others, it is oblong, like a great cleft; the reason
of this difference seems to be, because that by a Man that is upright, and
other Animals that are wont to lift up their heads, and to look round about on
every side, many Objects, coming from both above and beneath, and from either
side, out of the whole Hemisphear, are received by the Sight; wherefore the
Pupil of the Eye ought to be round, The reason of this inquired into.
that the visible Species sent in from every side, might be admitted in a round
form: But Oxen, Cattle, and other Animals, almost always carrying their Heads
prone, and hanging down, need only to behold such things as are presented
before them, or a little of one side: wherefore, the Pupil of the Eye is
depressed, and somewhat long, for the receiving the visible Species, that are
only shown at hand. The Color of the Pupil in some black, in others gray,
reddish, or otherways Colored.
Further, another difference is noted, about the color of the Ball or Pupil it
self, which in Man, and in all Fowls and Fishes is perpetually black, but in
four-footed Beasts, it is either gray, or bluish, like the Sky, or of a
shining red, or of some other Kind, which color notwithstanding being fixed,
not in the Horney part, but in the Concave of the Crocoideos, shines through all
the Humors into the Pupil. Concerning the reason of this, we may believe, that
those endued with a black Pupil, see more clearly by daylight, The reason of
this shown.
because indeed the Image is rendered most perspicuous to the Eye, as it were in
a Chamber wholly dark, but by Night they discern little or nothing at all of
any Objects; on the contrary, we have observed, those furnished with a bluish,
or gray, reddish, or some other shining Pupil, not to see so clearly in the day
time, but much better in the night than the former; to wit, because that
shining Color of the Pupil, illuminates something the Cloister or Optic
Chamber of the Eye, that fewer Beams being there gathered together from the
darkness they might constitute the visible Image.

These things concerning the Fabric of the Eye, The Parts of the Eye, are the
Coats and Humors.
and its diverse manner of furniture, in various Animals, being thus premised,
it now remains, that we show its Anatomy, and that we unfold its several Parts,
and the uses of the Parts. We have already mentioned, what also is known to
common Observation, that the Eye consists of Coats, and Humors. The Coats or
Membranes are as the containing Bodies, and constitute the walls of the dark
Chamber, with the little Window, and the Paper for the receiving the Images;
but the Humors, are as Dioptrick Glasses, so placed within the hole of the dark
Chamber, that they aptly break, and gather together, the Beams exhibiting the
Images.

The Coats of the Eye, The Coats greater or lesser.
like the Spears of a Globe, are either Greater, which are stretched forth
through the whole Compass, or its greatest part; or Lesser, which contain, or
include the particular Humors.

The greater Coats of the Eye are three; The greater are three.
which seem in some measure to arise from a threefold Substance of the Optic
Nerve; for in the Trunk of the Optic Nerve, may be found an Exterior Coat,
arising from the Dura Matter, with which it is included as with a sheath;
Another more inward, clothing the Membrane, lies under this, arising from the
Pia Matter; and within these Coats are found very many Fibrous Nerves, gathered
together into one bundle. But this Nerve, being continued, to the Compass of
the Eye, its Exterior Coat being much enlarged, and stretched out into a round
enclosure, constitutes the outmost Wall of the Eye: The Sclerotick.
This Coat, by reason of its hardness, (because it is strong, and is in the
place of a defense against Injuries) is called the Sclerotick: The hinder part
in most Animals is thick, and spacious, except that in a Dog, and perhaps in
some others, it is thinner, and in some measure clear; but the Anterior part of
this Membrane, that it may transmit the visible Species, is transparent and
shining in all. But lest this should admit more forms than it ought, (by having
a too broad, and too large a transparent opening) and so too confused together;
another Coat, arising from the Pericranium grows to it, and covers it;
excepting a hole left for the Pupil: This, from its Color, The Albugine grows
to this.
is called the Albugina or the White, for besides that it determines the
aperture of the Cornea, or horny or third Pannicle of the Eye, it firmly ties
the Eye also to the sides of the bony Compass. The additional Coat, or the
white Tunicle, besides the proper Membrane, is made up also of Tendons of
Muscles, spread into a most thin Net; therefore, also it becomes white,
because, when many diaphanous Membranes are thrust together, like thin cakes,
they cause a shaddowing, and with it a whiteness, as may be perceived in the
Bones and Horns of living Creatures, made up of a Pellucid Glue, also in the
white of an Egg made hard by Boiling.

The Figure of the Sclerotic Coat, is proportionate to the quality and
disposition of the Humors, The Sclerotic Coat, is in some round, and in others
depressed.
which are contained in the Eye; wherefore, in some (as we hinted before) it is
round, in others pressed down, but in most its Anterior Part swells up, above
the remaining Part of the Ocular Globe, by reason of the Watery Humor
underneath, as it were a Portion of the outward Sphere, to wit, for this end,
That the Compass of the whole visible Hemisphear, may be received together, by
the Eye, as it were by a Unequal Glass.

The Vessels of this Coat.
As to the Vessels which are inserted into this Coat, besides the shoots of the
Nerves, sent from the fifth Pair, after they have bound about the Trunk of the
Optic Nerve, they are bestowed on the bottom of the Sclerotic, whose Use or
Office seems to be, variously to carry the Optic Nerve, with this outmost Chest
or closure of the Eye, and to Compose it for the receiving the Species; there
are also granted to this, noted Arteries, from the Trunks of the Carotides,
before they reach to the Brain. It is observed, that the Artery destinated for
this, falling in, ^igh to the Trunk of the Optic Nerve, imparts to the same, in
its whole progress, some small Shoots, which are certainly sufficient for Heat
and Nourishment; then this Artery, spread forth at the bottom of the Eye, is
divided into six Branches, like so many little Rivers, all which being brought
upon the Sclerotic, toward the Cornea, divide the Exterior Globe of the Eye
into so many equal and distinct Regions; from these, many little shoots, going
through the Sclerotic, are inserted into the Wea, and after a sort knit this to
the other: The Arterous branches and shoots, are every where accompanied with
Veins, by which the Blood is reduced toward the wonderful Net, and at length
into the Trunk of the hollow Vein.

The Coat Chorocoeides.
Within the Sclerotic Coat, or the outmost Coat of the Eye, follows the
Chorocoeides, and is almost through the whole, Contiguous with it, and coheres
to it, by some Fibers, and blood-carrying Vessels; this being perforated in the
forepart, leaves an opening for the Pupil of the Eye, which notwithstanding,
as occasion requires, is wont to be either contracted or dilated. Is black in
most Animals but not in all.
This Coat, being black in most Animals, is covered in the Superficies or
Unequal, or Concave, as it were with a black Paint, which is also fixed to the
other contiguous Coat; the reason of this is, that it might render the inward
Chamber of the Eye black or dark: But in some Animals, to wit, in most
four-footed Beasts, a certain Interior Portion of the Chorocoeides, A Portion
of this, in most Brutes, is of a diversified Color, otherwise than in Man. The
reason of this is shown.
which is turned over the Pupil, shines with a diversified Color, like the
Rainbow, and according to this, the Pupil of the Eye seems to be colored: but
as this is wanting to Man, his Pupil is always black, according to the whole
Picture of the Chorococides: But it appears otherways in a Dog, and otherways
in a Cat, Ox, and the rest. In those also that have the Pupil round, this
Signature is expanded round; those who have the Pupil stretched forth at
length, like a chink, this Picture being as it were double, stands on either
side of the Optic Nerve: The uses of this (as we said but now) is to illuminate
the Pupil of the Eye, as it were with an inward Beam, that it may be able to
behold things by Night, and placed in the dark; wherefore it is very shining in
a Cat, but is wholly wanting to a Man, Birds, and Fishes.

The Rainbow of the Eye is described, and its use declared.
Nigh to the opening of the Coat Chorocoeides, stands the Rainbow of the Eye,
that is, nigh to the outmost border of this Coat, where the opening is for the
Pupil, a certain Fringe, made up of Nervous Fibers, diversely colored and
disposed, covers it: These Fibers are called the Ciliare Processes, which like
brows of hairs, being carried from the Pupil of the Eye, like rays from a
luminous Body, are disposed into an Orb; These Fibers being placed in a thick
row, are noted with a variegated or diversified Color, outwardly, where they
stick to the Corneous or horney Coat; in the mean time, where they are
Contiguous to the brim of the Chrystalline Humor, and also to the border of
the Retine Coat, they always appear black: These Ciliare Processes, do not only
dilate and contract the Pupil of the Eye, but also they thrust forward, or draw
backward the Chrystalline humor, The strength and irradiation of the Eye from
the Rainbow.
and bend it hither and thither into the view of the Objects. Further, there is
in these Colored hairs, or the Rainbow of the Eye, a certain vigor, and mighty
conflux of Animal Spirits, by the Exertion of which, the Eye seems to beam
forth, and to cast forth outwardly certain darts like Lightning, according to
the Instinct of the Passions: yea, hence we suppose Light to be diffused, and
to illuminate the Medium; for which reason, Men discern in some measure Objects
in the dark. I knew a certain Man, endued with an hot Brain, who after a
plentiful Drinking of Wine, was able to read distinctly, The Animal Spirits
actuate it very much.
in a very dark Night; the reason of which seems to be, because the Animal
Spirits, being as it were inflamed, and so beaming forth from this Rainbow, did
illuminate the Medium, with an implanted Beam. Moreover, when by any stroke on
the Eye, an apparition of flame, or shining appears; surely this proceeds from
a sudden Concussion, and Explosion of the Spirits, lying within the Ciliar or
hairy Processes. If it be demanded, by what passages the Animal Spirits run
into these Fibers, we say; That from the Nerves of the sixth Pair, which bind
about the Optic Trunk, certain shoots, entering the Sclerotick, and the
Corocoeidal Coat, come also to these Parts; besides, the Retine Coat, which is
wholly Nervous, sticks to this Rainbow.

Within the Chorocoeides or the Wea, The Retine Coat.
another Coat follows, whose Compass as it is less, so it is shorter in
breadth; for its Border, subsisting about the lower brim of the Chrystalline
Humor, is Contiguous to the lower Border of the Rainbow, and in some part
sticks to it: This Coat, as it is white, so it is Medullary, and said to
proceed from the Medullous and Fibrous Substance of the Optic Nerve, so that
what is there of Nervous Fibers collected into a little bundle, is here like a
Veil stretched forth of a Net-like form. Indeed, if the whole Eye may be taken
for the Flower which grows in the Brain, through the Optic Nerve as its stalk;
The Retine Coat is the Flower it self, and the two former, Its description and
use.
but the Stalk and Cup. The Retine Coat therefore being spread forth within the
Chamber of the Eye, or its inmost Conclave, is like a white Wall, which
receives and represents the visible Species, admitted through the hole of the
dark Chamber; for doubtless this part, however Medullary and Fibrous, and so
greatly akin to the Brain, and to the Optic Nerve it self, is the proper Organ
of Seeing; to wit, on which the sensible Species is impressed, and from which
the same is communicated to the chief Sensory; which shall more plainly be
manifested anon, after we have unfolded the Humors of the Eye.

Agreeable to the three Coats of the Eye, The Humors of the Eye Three.
there are so many Humors of it, to wit, the Watery, Chrystalline, and Glassy:
The Chrystalline Humor supplies the place of the Burning-Glass, placed within
the whole of the dark Chamber, and the two other Humors, constitute and fitly
determine, the spaces only, or places between, which ought to come between the
first approaches of the beams into the Eye, and the place or Organ of Sight,
wherefore this is put behind, the other before the Chrystalline Humor.

But this Chrystalline Humor it self, Chrystalline.
within the aperture or opening of the Wea Coat, like a Glass placed before
the hole, gathers together, and breaks the Beams coming thither on every side:
The Substance of this is very shining, like glue, or the Gum of a Tree, and is
endued with a Consistence like melted wax, yet if pressed it will not willingly
flow forth. Its Figure in Man, and most four-footed Beasts, comes near to the
shape of a Lentil, whose utmost Superficies is more plain, and the innermost
more gibbous or bunching out; but in Fowls and Fishes, its Figure comes near to
a Spherical shape; Its description and uses.
In these later, where the Chrystalline Humor is round, the whole Figure of the
Eye is depressed in either; But in the other, where the Chrystalline Humor is
of a depressed Figure, the Eye is found to be plainly Spherical. A reason of
the Conformation of either, shall be shown afterward: The Chrystalline Humor,
tho not apt to flow forth, yet is included with a proper little Membrane, for
the Lightness of it, called the Cobweb.

In Man, The watery Humor, and its uses described.
and in four-footed Beasts, tho the Chrystalline Humor be of the form of a
Lentil, it does not bear out enough, so as it might receive the Beams of the
whole Hemisphear, therefore the watery Humor is laid to it, as an addition,
which thrusting forth the Cornea, or horny Coat, and rendering it more bunching
out, increases outwardly the Convexity or bending forth of the Eye, which is
indeed, that the visible Species might be from this place, and from that, and
on every side more plentifully admitted into it, as into a Window, made forth
or butting out beyond the plane of the Wall. Further, the watery Humor swelling
forth with the horny Coat, breaks a little the oblique Beams falling toward
the Perpendicular; and so compelling them nearer together, directs more
together into the Convexity of the Chrystalline swelling. There is yet another
use of this watery Humor, to wit, to temperate the Beams passing through it,
being sometimes somewhat fiery, and so to render them more proportionate to the
Sensory.

The glassy Humor.
On the other side of the Chrystalline Humor, to wit, on the back of it, the
glassy Humor stands, like to fused Glass; this, much more plentiful than both
the other, possesses the greatest part of the Optic Chamber; also, being less
Compact in it self, is apt somewhat to flow out, and is included with a most
thin little Membrane: this lies upon the Retine Coat, and contains the
Chrystalline within its Bosom. Its Primary use is to separate the Retine Coat
in a just space from the Chrystalline Humor, Its uses.
that after the Beams have past through this, as it were through the
Burning-Glass, with a due Refraction, they may have in that, placed at a just
distance, their habitation: Hence, in those who have the Chrystalline Humor in
the form of a Lentil, and so the Beams passing through, cannot come together but
at a greater distance, have great plenty of this glassy Humor, and its
plenitude causes the Spherical Figure of the Eye; But in those, who have the
Chrystalline swelling round, The plenty of the glassy Humor varies; according
to the Figure of the Chrystalline Humor.
that the Beams passing through, are more crooked, and have a dwelling or nest
at a less distance, the quantity of the glassy Humor is found less; and its
defect causes the depressed Figure of the Eye, or of the form of a Cheese.
Further, the glassy Humor, according to Scheinerus, being somewhat a more thin
Medium, than the Chrystalline Humor, breaks a little the Beams passing through,
from the Perpendicular, and therefore somewhat enlarges or draws forth the
Picture of the visible thing, otherwise more contracted, and shows the same
more conspicuous in the Retina. Thus much concerning Seeing, and of all the
Senses; in the next Chapter, we should speak of the other Power, to wit, the
Locomotive: but being we have formerly largely discoursed concerning that; we
shall handle in the following, certain Affections, belonging to the Corporeal
Soul, as to the Exercise of the Motions and the Senses, to wit, Sleep and
Waking.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Sleeping and Waking.

Sleep Necessary for all Animals.
SUch is the weak and instable Nature of all living Creatures, that they are not
able, neither to Live perpetually, nor to Act and Labor continually; but that
there is a Necessity for them (even as once, and at last to dye so) daily to
repeat frequent turns of Sleep, as it were so many previous Monitors of Death.
Though we have not experienced it, we easily know what it is to dye; to wit,
when the vital Flame, like a Lamp, is either by degrees consumed, or violently
extinguished, presently Heat and Light, and what flow from them, both all the
Vital and Animal faculties, are abolished. But what is the formal Reason,
Essence and Causes of Sleep, which we suffer, and daily experience, is almost
wholly unknown. Concerning this, there are various Opinions, both of Ancients
and Moderns, but they rather seem Dreams, than satisfactory Reason: To wit,
whilst some affirm Sleep to be mere Privation, What it is unknown, or greatly
Controverted.
others a Bond of all the Functions; these place for its Cause a retraction, or
introcession of Heat, those an assent of Vapors from the Stomach to the Head.
Some assign for the subject the Brain, others the Heart, others the Stomach,
and Spleen; and some again the Soul, others the Body by it self; and lastly,
others both together, to wit, the whole Animal Body.

The Opinion of Schneiderus.
Among the latter Writers, Conradus Schneiderus has of late been Eminent, who
rejecting the Opinions almost of all others, and asserting Sleep not to be
produced from Vapors, nor from any material Cause; nor to depend, either upon
any affection of the Brain, He affirms Sleep to be an inorganical faculty of
the Soul.
or of any other part; affirms it to be, and Waking also, mere faculties of the
Soul; to wit, innate, or born in it, and wholly inorganical. Also he says,
that the formal Reasons of either are, that the Soul, or its animadversive
Faculty, sometimes withdraws, and as it were hides it self; and sometimes puts
forth, and expunds it self. This Opinion, tho in some part it seems likely,
does not easily deserve our assent, because, notwithstanding he asserts Sleep
and Waking to be proper Faculties of the Soul, and these inorganical and
independing of the Body, he further supposes, other chief Powers of the Soul,
to wit, common Sense, Memory, and Appetite, not to be performed from the diverse
Organs within the Brain, nor to be distinguished by their Seats, but to be
diffused through the whole Body.

Therefore, that we may the more rightly Philosophize concerning Sleep, we
ought to consider, what are its Subject, formal Reason, Causes, Differences,
and Effects.

First, The Subject of Sleep, not the whole Body.
As to the first it clearly appears, that Sleep is not extended neither to the
whole Soul, nor to the whole Body: for the Praecurdia, and Organs of
respiration, are exercised with a perpetual Systole and Diastole, the Viscera,
dedicated for Concoction, perform their Offices more, and better in Sleep than
in Waking: Further, when as the aforesaid Parts are wont to alter their
actions, according to the urgencies of evident Causes, (as may be argued by the
Pulse and respiration variously changed, also from Vomiting, and sometimes a
sudden loosning of the Belly) the exercises of the sensitive Power, as well as
the Motive, ought to be granted to them in Sleep: But the Blood is circulated,
and flames forth in quiet, the nourishing and Nervous Humors are dispensed,
yea, and the superfluous, and what is excrementitious, are best separated or
put forth: Hence, as it appears, perpetual watches are kept about the midst, or
inmost part of the Animal Body. In the mean time it is observed, that Sleep
urging, all the External Senses are shut up, also that all Spontaneous Motions
whatsoever cease; so that the Bodies being wholly subjected to ease, lie as
they were dead. Further, the Internal Powers, related to these, such as are the
Common Sense, Fantasy, Memory, Appetite, conspire together with these
External Powers, and either wholly omit their Acts, or exercise them but
obscurely and confusedly.

From these it may be plainly gathered, The Animal Spirits are the immediate
Subject of Sleep.
that the Animal Spirits, which are the next or efficient Instrument of Sense
and Motion, are also the immediate Subject of Sleep; but, not all of them, but
some Bands, as it were of a Superior Order, at those times keep Holy Day; but
others, whose task is more assiduously required, for the Preservation of Life,
are wholly inhibited.

Concerning these, All the Spirits enjoy rest, but not in Sleep.
that the reason of the difference may appear, and that the bounds of Sleep may
be defined, we must note, that there is need for all the Animal Spirits (which
constituting the Hypostasis of the Corporeal Soul, perform all its Functions)
because they cannot incessantly exercise, or ever continue their Acts, to have
frequent intermission; by which, being worn out and tired, they might be
refreshed: notwithstanding there is not granted a Vacation or rest to the
Spirits of every Regiment, after the same manner, nor in the like dimension.

For the Animal Spirits, The Spirits only arising from the Brain, and who are
the Authors of voluntary Functions enjoy Sleep.
which being born within the Brain, there constitute the chief Faculties of the
Soul, and from thence flow into the Nervous stock, for the performing of the
Spontaneous Acts of Sense and Motion, and effect the more hard and laborious
tasks, are not tied to the continual performance of them, but are permitted,
after hard labors, to lay aside their work, and as it were to be idle; so that
the Privilege of Sleep properly pertains only to these. But as to the Animal
Spirits of the other Kind, which being procreated within the Cerebel, and there
receive and emit the Instincts, and forces of Sense and Motion, merely Natural;
and from thence flowing into the Praecordia and Viscera, perform the more
assiduous Offices of the Vital and Nutritive Function; I say, that the Labors
of these are more easy, Not those Procreated in the Cerebel.
and less laborious; but as they are absolutely necessary for the preserving of
Life, that they ought not almost at any time to lie still, therefore the
aforesaid Spirits, being busied about these Offices, are not suffered to keep
Holy Day long, and to indulge themselves with Sleep, but it is sufficient for
them, to intermit their tasks for a short space, and presently to resume them,
and so to have, in stead of a longer Vacation, some broken times from their
Labors: as chiefly appears from the pulse, and breathing, in which the times
of motion and of rest, are reciprocal, and almost equal. Indeed the Spirits
performing these tasks, seem as if condemned to the Stone of Sisyphus; to wit,
that they still lift up the same burden, then resting whilst it slides down
again, they presently, and so perpetually, repeat their Labor. Further,
whilst that the Animal Spirits influencing the Viscera of Concoction,
propagate the Acts of Vermiculation, from Part to Part, receive and give place
to motion, and rest mutually in themselves; which also is more amply performed
when we Sleep soundly; in so much, that sometimes the work of more difficult
Concoction, is not to be done but in Sleep. Therefore the Empire of Sleep
chiefly and almost only belongs to the Animal Spirits, inhabiting the Brain,
and the Executors of the Animal Function there, (of whose Acts we are knowing)
and in the Appendix both Medullary and Nervous. If those Spirits arising from
the Cerebel, as influencing some Pathetick Nerves, to wit, of the fifth and
sixth Pair, seem to participate of Sleep, that happens by a consent, delivered
from the Brain; to wit, by which the Commands, as of Motion, so of rest are
conveyed to them.

We affirm, The immediate Subject of Sleep, is the Knowing Part of the
sensitive Soul.
That the immediate Subject of Sleep, is the greater Portion of the sensitive
Soul, which being rooted in the Brain, and thence diffused into many Parts of
the Body, is the Author of every Spontaneous Motion: But the Mediat, the Brain
it self, and all the sensible and moving Parts, which Communicate with it.
Also, on the contrary, the other lesser part of the sensitive Soul, which being
rooted in the Cerebel, and thence stretched forth into the Praecordia, The
Mediate are the Bodies containing it.
Viscera, and some other Bodies, is the Parent of the Vital and merely Natural
Function, to wit, of whose Acts the Animal is not conscious, is freed from the
Bonds of Sleep.

The formal reason of Sleep.
From these, that we may proceed to deliver the formal Reason of Sleep, let us
conceive, that this greater portion of the sensitive Soul (the Animal Sleeping)
does lay aside its expansion like a Veil, sinks within it self, and hiding its
head, as it were within its own Bosom, sees nor cares for nothing, that is
without; so that both the Emanation of the Spirits into the globous Part of the
Brain, and also their irradiation, into the Nervous stock, ceasing; the Act of
spontaneous Sense and Motion, both outwardly and inwardly, is suppressed.

The beginning of Sleep, is in the Cortical part of the Brain, which is also
the seat of the Memory.
If it be demanded, in what Part or Region these Spirits dwell, who first of all
possess Sleep, and begin to be indulged with rest, before any others, it may be
well supposed, that the Spirits first Sleeping, are those, which flowing within
the globous part of the Brain, create the Acts of the Fantasy and Memory. To
wit, these, either of their own accord, or by reason of the incourse of
Strangers, falling down from the Pores of the Exterior Brain, in which they
were wont to expatiate, convey themselves into its more deep Matrows, or middle
Parts, where as it were lying down idely, entice the Spirits there implanted to
the like slothfulness; and from thence flowing into the Nervous stock, recall
others from their Efflux, and solicit them to idleness. Indeed, the Spirits
irradiating the outer Brain, do first of all grow stupefied, and begin Sleep in
their recess, as appears from hence, because there is a Necessity, for these
sometimes to be repressed from their expansion, and to be driven inwards, that
there may be a place left, for the instilling the Nervous juice, or matter for
new bands of Spirits, into the Brain; wherefore, those veterane, or old ones,
being not only wearied, go from their Station, but being as it were drowned by
the Humor, plentifully rushing in, are compelled from their watches.

The Causes of Sleep: First, what the final is.
From these things it will not be difficult to assign the Causes of Sleep; and
first, that we may begin with the Final; (which is always the Key to the rest)
If it should be demanded, for what end, the Animal Spirits going out of the
globous part of the Brain, into its middle or marrowy Parts, are bound up with
chains of Sleep, and so after a solemn manner, alter the vicissitudes, as of
Exercise, so of Rest; this easily occurs; that the Animal Spirits (at least
those who are wont to be more strongly exercised) lest they being wholly
loosned should perish, and break the Hypostasis of the Soul, want for the
sustaining of themselves a twofold prop, to wit, Rest and Food; by the former
care is taken, lest the Spirits, for that they are highly volatile, should be
very much drawn asunder, by too much Occupation, and acted into Confusion:
wherefore, after that they have long and much labored, they desire to rest,
and be at quiet of their own accord; then by the other, to wit Food, the
wastings both of themselves, and of the spirituous Liquor, with which they are
washed, are repaired; therefore needful for them: But both these benefits, To
wit, a refection and quieting of the Spirits.
requisite for the Spirits, to wit, their sedation and refreshment, are granted
(and almost only) to Animals in Sleep. For although in Waking, pleasant sensible
Objects do something please the Spirits, and that the nourishing Liquor,
supplied from Aliments newly received in, may something cherish them, yet a
fuller refreshment, and quieting, by which they are sufficiently fortified, for
the lively performing the Animal Functions, are not obtained but in Sleep; for
then the Spirits being at leisure for some time, from Motion, get to themselves
new stores; and in the mean time the Brain, like a dry Sponge, imbibing most
greedily the nutritious Liquor, takes it for Provision for it self; which after
a little space, it dispenses to the several Parts, both of its proper Regiment,
and also of its Appendix; yea, plenty of the Spirits, and their food, being
somewhat exhausted, the Brain, as it were another Stomach, seems to be hungry
after Sleep, greatly to desire it, and not to be satisfied, unless it daily
enjoys it, and that in its wonted measure: for in the space of every Night,
there is a certain Necessity of Sleeping for so many hours, as we have formerly
accustomed our selves to; if at other times, as after Eating, an evil Custom
indulges Sleep, we afterward more hardly want it, than our Dinner; for the
privation of due Sleep, or what often accustomed to, is as it were a fasting to
the Brain, by which, if long affected, that, and its Nervous Appendix, languish
as it were for hunger.

The formal Cause of Sleep, consists in the Rest of the Spirits, and in the
watering of the containing Parts.
Therefore, for the taking of Sleep, by which the Brain may be filled, with the
Nutricious Humor, and the Spirits, wearied or exhausted by Motion, may be
refreshed, a certain Law of Nature, or Necessity is incumbent upon us, and
calls it upon us oftentimes against our Minds: But this kind of Disposition
being innate to most Animals, and chiefly to Man, whose Spirits are most of all
employed, is the Final or Procatartick, or more remote Cause of Sleep; but its
formal or Conjunct Cause, consists in these two things, viz. in the Vacation or
Rest of the Spirits, and in the Irrigation or watering the Parts containing
them; by which (as common to either Affection) a relaxation follows, from a
Tensity or Inflation of the Brain, and Nervous Parts.

As to the evident Causes or occasions, The evident Causes.
by which Sleep is wont to be introduced, first we must distinguish concerning
Sleep; That it is either Natural or Ordinary, which every one enjoys daily, for
so many set hours, and its accession and duration depends upon either Conjunct
Cause existing together in Act, Sleep either Natural, or not Natural, or
Pre^ernatural.
viz. at the same time, the Spirits remitting their tasks, sink down, and the
nourishing Humor flows into the Brain; then this being sufficiently watered,
and they refreshed, Waking returns: Or Sleep is not Natural or Extraordinary,
which for some occasions follows in an undue measure, and inconvenient time.
Concerning preternatural Sleep, we shall speak more properly of it in another
place; when we shall treat of Soporiferous or Sleepy Diseases. But as to the
Non-natural, Sleep not Natural, sometimes begins, from the Spirits being
brought low.
we have observed; that it is of a double Kind, according to the Complication
of the Conjunct Cause; For either the Spirits first lie down, and so the Brain
imbibes more copiously the apposite Liquor; or first the Brain is too much
moistened with Humor, and so the Spirits being as it were drowned, are forced
from their watches. For when the Blood every where washes the Cortex of the
Brain, by almost innumerable Ramifications of Vessels, a certain spirituous
Water from these bloody Rivulets, always stands at the Door, and is ready to be
instilled into the Medullar Substance of the Brain; which, for as much as it is
copiously received within, presently overwhelms the Spirits, and obstructs
their passages, and so Sleep being called upon, every Animal Function ceases
for a time; Sometimes from the Cortex of the Brain being too much watered.
yet, lest this should be too frequently and untimely done, the Animal Spirits,
so long as they are lively and active, inflate the Substance of the Brain, and
keep it extended, so that the Spirituous Liquor, which is also Soporiferous, is
not admitted, but only in a small quantity, such as may suffice for the
exciting of Sleep. But if either the Spirits being weary lie down of their own
accord, or are compelled by the boiling Blood coming impetuously to the borders
of the Brain, to give place to it, the aforesaid Liquor, rushing in on heaps,
produces almost invincible Sleep. Wherefore, according to which, either the
Animal Spirits open the doors of the Brain of their own accord, or the Nervous
Liquor besieging them, impetuously breaks through; The Prophases, or evident
Causes of Sleep, are of this or that rank: there are many Kinds of both of
these, and ways of being done, the chief of which we shall briefly touch upon.

First, For what Causes the Spirits lie down of their own accord. The force of
Custom.
In the first place therefore, there are many Causes, for which the Animal
Spirits begin of their own accord to keep Holy Day, among which, the force or
power of Custom obtains the chief place. For when we have accustomed our selves
to Sleep at certain set hours, the Spirits about the same time, as it were
dismissing the force of their Motion, leaving presently all work, and External
Commerce, retire inward, and indulge themselves with Rest: The reason of which
is, because the sensitive Soul, for as much as it is void of all Science, and
proper direction, determinates this or that thing to be done, by outward
Accidents and Circumstances; wherefore, the Animal Spirits, in what path they
are once led, unless they be hindered, will repeat to an hair their former
tracts. Hence it is, that we both Sleep, and also Awake, at set and wonted
hours, also we expect and hardly can pass by, the same times of Dinner and
Supper. So solemn the manner of Nature is to do the same thing which it did
before, and till being taught new things, it is the manner of its Government,
constantly and exactly to observe the old. An Example of this Kind of Natural
assiduity is admirable, which was told me for certain, of a Fool living some
years in our Neighborhood; who, tho he were silly and foolish, A notable
Example of Natural Custom or Ass^duity.
yet did he know exactly, without any sign, the interspaces of the Hours, and
as often as the space of an whole Hour was elapsed, as if he had been a living
Clock, he would presently personate the like Number of the Hour, with so many
hoarse founds, and no business or employ about any other occupation, could make
him omit this Task. He at the beginning was wont to imitate aloud, by making a
noise, every stroke of the sounding Clock; and as often as he heard the
sounding of the Bell of the Clock, presently he cried, One, Two, Three, etc.
repeating successively the several Pulsations; hence it happened afterward, that
the Animal Spirits, by daily imitation, being accustomed to be stirred up, to
such a Motion, according to the set spaces of Time, at length they were able to
distinguish the same Periods of their own accord, nothing directing, as if the
sliding spaces of time, had been measured out by the wheels of a Clock.

Secondly, The Spirits being weary, lie down on their own accord.
The Animal Spirits being wearied by the hard labor of the Body, or too
serious intention of the Mind, indulge themselves with Sleep of their own
accord: For when after immoderate exercise, by reason of Heat and Sweat flowing
forth, the Spirits plentifully exhale, and those which are left being as it
were poured forth and distracted one from another, as soon as those have left
them, they presently lay aside all work, that they may Concentre themselves
within, and recollect their forces; for the like reason, after vehement study,
or long Contention of the Mind, by reason that the Animal Spirits become very
much tired, we grow Sleepy; yea, sometimes serious Meditation, and when
employed with Hearing (chiefly of Sacred things,) and great Attention, procures
an invincible Sleep; the reason of which is, not that the Spirits are so much
consumed or wearied, but because they are gathered together in two great heaps
in the Brain; and so with them too great plenty of the Nervous Humor is poured
in, whereby the Brain is overflowed: Hence also it is, that if presently after
Eating, Reading or Philosophical Lectures be attended to, they shall cause
Sleep sooner than an Opiat; to wit, because these more grave Exercises of the
Mind, both convey more plentifully to the Head, the Blood; and at the same time
the Spirits Concentre together on every side toward the middle Part of the
Brain; wherefore, from the Blood coming to its border, a mighty heap of Nervous
juice is admitted in; by which the Spirits are presently overturned, and their
spaces stuffed up; the contrary happens, as often as any one after a full
Banquet shall go to the Theaters, to see Plays, for the Spirits being stretched
forth by delectation, blow up and distend the Brain, so that the coming in of
the Sleepy Humor, tho heaped up at the Door, is kept out.

The pleasing of the Senses, and the Fantasy, cause Sleep.
Thirdly, We may observe, that the Animal Spirits, when delighted with a soft
Harmony, are invited inwards from the Organs of the Senses, and being there
recreated, slide into Sleep. So a certain Musical and soft modulation of the
Voice, the gentle murmur of Waters, the soft whispering of the Wind, also
pleasant Fancies, as when we Imagine our selves to be in a green Meadow, or
splendid Houses, because by this means, the Spirits gently Concentre together,
Sleep is wont to creep upon one.

The Spirits are Compelled into Sleep, by Narcoticks.
Fourthly, There remains another manner of introducing Sleep, to wit, when the
Animal Spirits are oppressed by Narcoticks or Opiats taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly, and so are inhibited the exercise of their Function. For Opiats,
because they Poison the Spirits, extinguish their forces, as Water poured upon
Fire, or Sulphur laid on the Kitchen Fire, and cause a Torpor or Numness;
wherefore, if they are more largely taken, that they cannot be overcome by the
Spirits put to flight, who by little and little being recollected, renew the
Systasis of the Soul, a deadly or perpetual Sleep follows.

Their Penury or want persuades to Sleep.
Fifthly, To this rank ought to be referred the Penury or evil Constitution of
the Animal Spirits; for when they are either deficient in Plenty, or are dull
and Torpid, that they can neither tolerate daily or hard Exercises, nor actuate
the Brain, nor defend it against the Inundations of the serous Humors, from
thence are wont to be induced a Torpor or Numness, and frequent Sleepiness of
the Animal Faculty; as is to be observed in Dropsical and Scorbutical People:
but the Consideration of this Kind of Torpor, we shall refer to another place,
where we speak of Soporiferous Diseases.

By what, and how many ways Sleep begins from the Brain, first affected.
2. Another Kind of evident Causes, by which Sleep is introduced, consists in
this, that the Brain is first affected; then by its Consent, the Animal Spirits
being half overthrown, betake themselves to rest; these Kind of Effects are
chiefly brought in when an heap of Serum is poured in upon the Brain from the
Blood too much stuffed with a watery Humor, which watering it with too much
moisture, rushes overs its Pores and Passages, When its Compass it overflowed,
by the Serum coming to it.
and as it were drowes the Animal Spirits flowing in them. Such an Inundation
of Spirits is produced, either from a too great taking in of Food, whence the
Blood swelling up above measure, with the nourishing Humor, too much puts down
upon the Brain the plentiful provision of Nervous Juice; wherefore, presently
after a more full feeding or drinking, men become Sleepy; or also, the Blood,
as to its Temper, being made more watery, To which may be added, the
i^^^cilli^y of the Brain, and looseness of the Pores.
moistens the Brain, as it were with a perpetual shower, and so renders those
affected continually Sleepy; as is wont to come to pass ordinarily in Dropical
and Scorbutical People. To these may be added, and oftentimes is partly the
Cause, the imbecility or weakness of the Brain, and the looseness of its Pores,
so that, they gaping too much, most easily admit the serous heap, whereby
Sleepiness is brought in. For it is observed, That Drunkards, especially such
as drink Wine, fall asleep with it, on the least occasion, and not only become
Drunk, but also Drowsy or Sleepy. The reason of which is, that when the
passages of the Brain, are more often and untimely unlocked, with the Particles
of the Wine, at length become so feeble, that the Blood growing hot above
measure, pours forth its Recrements upon the Brain, and so causes from thence a
torpor or stupidness therein.

Sleep not from fu^^s or vapo^^s.
These are the chief means, whereby Sleep is effected, when it is excited, by
reason of the overflowing of the Nervous juice, and as it were the over-turning
of the Animal Spirits. But as to these, it has been far otherways taught, by
the Opinion of the Vulgar, to wit, that fumes and vapors are raised up from the
Chyle, or Humors growing hot within the Viscera of Concoction, which cloud the
Brain, and so cause a Numness. But this Opinion easily falls, since the
Circulation of the Blood, and the more plentiful Suffufion of it on the Brain,
have been known; and that the rather, because a passage from the Stomach into
the Head, through so many Inwards, and bony Cloisters, like stops, The Matter of
Sleep, conveyed only by the Arteries.
seem impervious, or not passable for the sending up of fumes. Without doubt,
much the greatest part of the Humor, with which the Brain is watered, and the
Spirits inhabiting it, over-turned, during Sleep, is carried by the Arteries,
and distilled in immediately from the Mass of Blood. But although we deny vapors
elevated from the Stomach to the Head, to cause Sleep, yet by reason of some
affections of the Ventricle, it manifestly appears, that Sleepiness is induced;
for as much as Opiats being taken, they begin to operate oftentimes presently,
and before the virtue or any of their Particles can come to the Brain, Why raw
and indigested meats induce Sleepiness.
by the passage of the Blood. This also appears, because we become Sleepy from
more gross Meats, and of ill Digestion, which stay long in the Stomach, and
burden it. The reason of which seems to be, because, when as the Corporeal
Soul, or a principle portion of it, is the immediate Subject of Sleep, and she
entertains it, for as much as being restrained from Expansion, and as it were
drawing a Curtain, she enters into her self, and sinks down on every side,
toward the middle of the Brain; we say, that such a subsiding of the Soul, or
its chiefest part, tho done in the Brain, is oftentimes excited, by reason of
the Cause lying hid in the Stomach; because there is a mighty Sympathy, That
happens by reason of the Consent, which is between the Stomach and the Brain,
and which it has with the whole Soul besides.
between this and that; or rather, the Animal Spirits, inhabiting the
Ventricle, although arising from the Cerebel, conspire so intimately with the
desiring or knowing Soul (which is the Inhabitant of the Brain) that they are
able to bend, exalt, depress it every way. The Appetite of necessary or
delicate food, snatches it from any other proposition or desire. The frustrated
longing of big-belly'd Women, causes an Abortion, or a Monstrous Birth. At the
first taste of a draught of Wine, before the Liquor can be carried into the
Blood, it lifts up and wonderfully chears the drooping Soul. In like manner on
the contrary, Opiats or Sleeping Medicines, because they stupifie or mortify
the Animal Spirits, How Opiats Cause Sleep, whilst they operate in the
Ventricle.
implanted in the Stomach, bring presently a Torpor to the Knowing part of the
Soul, and sometimes an extinction to its whole Hypostasis, both flamy and
lucid: For the same reason, undigested Aliments, because they fix and burden
the Spirits inhabiting the Ventricle, render the others Presiding in the Brain,
for some time, Dull and Torpid.

But sleep seems to begin not only from the Ventricle, How Sleep seems to begin
in the Eyes.
but for the most part from the Eyes; for when about to Sleep of our own
accord, we our selves first of all shut our Eyes, and our Eyes being made
heavy, and dull, Sleep creeping upon us whether we will or no, love to be
closed; yea, if we would watch longer, we rub our forehead, and Eyelids, and
open them with a certain force, as if about to cast off Sleep chiefly there
arising. Concerning these, we may say, that rest, being about to be indulged to
Animals, may be the less disturbed, Divine Providence has so provided, that
the Windows being presently shut, the meeting with External Objects may be
hindered. The Eyes ought to perform this Office especially, as the most noble
Sensory; also that they may more certainly perform it; whilst the Knowing Soul
withdraws it self, and Contract its Compass, the Spirits being recalled toward
the middle of the Brain; the Sight, as the Organs of the other Senses, are
destitute, and left flaccid and apt to fall down; and this happens chiefly and
more certainly to the Eyes, because Sleep coming on, the Brain becoming full
and swelled with the flowing in of the Nervous juice, at that time more uberous
or plentifully abounding, very much presses upon the Optic Nerves, and those
moving the Eyes, lying under its basis with a long passage, (different from any
others) and so hinders the wonted inflowing of the Spirits into the Sensory of
Sight.

Thus much for the Nature, Of the Effects of Sleep.
Causes, and the various ways of inducing of Sleep; there yet remains for us to
consider of the chief Effects and Alterations of it, which it is wont to bring
to Soul and Body, Toward the Vital or Flamey part of the Soul.
and their Parts and Humors, and first, what it brings to the Vital or Flamey
part of the Soul, radicated in the Blood.

Concerning this, first of all we shall note, That the Blood is more inkindled,
and much more plentifully burns forth in Sleep, The Blood is more inkindled,
and inflamed in Sleep, than in Waking.
than in Waking: the Truth of this is plain, from the standing Observations of
such as have given it for Law, that Men Sleeping, exhale or breath forth a
departure of a far greater weight, than Men Waking, tho they use Exercise and
Sweat. Moreover, Reason and Experience dictate the same thing, for as a
Combustible Matter, being placed near the Center of inkindling, and heaped
about it, burns more than if the same being divided into parts, smoking and
half inkindled, should be drawn out and planted here and there in various
places; in like manner, it may be judged of the Blood, which being quiet in
Sleep, being called aside or disturbed with no Passions, nor with the impulses
of the Muscles out of the Praecordia, or detained out of doors, enters the
Lungs with a more full Flood, and there more slowly passes through the Center or
place of accension; Wherefore those that Sleep, are apt to be Cold outwardly.
whence, there is a Necessity, that it should then be more plentifully
inkindled, and burn with a greater flame, than if touched only with a more
light burning, it should hastily pass through those places. But every one does
know by Experience in himself, that in Sleeping, the Praecordia grow very hot,
and the External Parts are apt to be cold; wherefore, there is need of covering
them with Bed-Cloaths, whereby the Effluvia, detained about the Compass of the
Body, might warm it, whilst in the mean time there is a Burning in the Breast,
and from the Flame and Soot ascending from thence, the Tongue and Parts about
the Mouth, as if roasted, are white: Hence in the Daytime those Sleeping in
the open Air, or any where else, unless well defended with Clothes, take Cold:
for by reason of the Heat being drawn back, the Cold little Bodies of the Air
compassing them, enter into the Pores, and stop them up; but on the other side,
Asthmatical People, and such as have their Lungs stuffed or bound together, or
are otherways difficult to be moved, hardly Sleep within the Bed, because the
ambient Heat so greatly increases the Flame, inkindled in the Praecordia, that
for the eventilating it, and conveying it through the Arteries, the Lungs being
weak, and growing tired in the Motion, are scarce, nay, not at all sufficient.

Sleep allays the disorders of the Blood.
2. For as much as the Blood is more inkindled during Sleep, therefore then
chiefly its disorders are allayed. But these are of a twofold Kind: to wit,
either the Blood is variously agitated hither and thither by the impulses of
the Containing and Neighboring Bodies, as in violent Passions, and Commotions
both of the Body and of the Soul: Or it grows turgid, or swells up by its
proper rage, after the manner of fermenting Wine, from the Heterogene, and
heating Particles being mixed with it. As to the First, so long as we are
Waking, the Course of the Blood being very much disturbed, is continually
agitated as it were with certain winds: because the Fantasy, more strong
Meditation, the Appetite, and the several Passions, drive the Blood sometimes
more swiftly, sometimes repress it by their Influence, snatch it impetuously
sometimes into these, sometimes into those Parts, and thence again repel it.
Besides these Floods, stirred up by the Mind, Whither they are induced by the
containing Bodies.
also the Motions of the Body and Members, render its Course yet more troubled
and dangerous; because the Sanguiferous Vessels, being variously pressed, by
the Motive Parts, and by and by released; they variously transfer, and call
back the Blood, and by and by snatch it elsewhere; hence, its Humor, so long
as it rapidly runs from place to place, evaporates less, and so heaps together
a greater stock of Excrementitious Matter, which being suppressed within, stirs
up Preternatural Heat, and renders the Flame of the Blood unequal, more smoaky,
and troubled, yea sharp and biting, and so troublesome to the Heart and Brain,
and also to several Viscera, and sometimes to the whole Nervous Kind, all which
notwithstanding Sleep allays; yea whilst the Animal Spirits lie quiet, like
allayed winds, the Sea of the Blood presently becomes Calm.

The Internal boiling up of the Blood, is also allayed by Sleep.
Nor is the Blood, disturbed by reason of its proper Effervescency, less quieted
by Sleep: for when it grows hot from such a Cause, it flames not forth with a
clear and bright Flame, but fumes up with Smoke and Soot, and therefore being
less eventilated, diffuseth a very troublesome and sharp heat: which also is
more infestous, because the Recrements of the Blood, to wit, the Serum, and
adust, and otherways viscous Particles, being involved with its smoking Latex,
cannot be separated and carried away. But in Sleep, the Blood is soon quieted,
and passes more slowly through the place of inkindling, to wit, the Lungs;
wherefore being there first more inkindled, it burns with a clearer Flame, and
also more mildly, and so the smoke presently ceasing, and some Heterogenious
Particles being burnt, all the rest extricating themselves from Confusion, what
are profitable are employed in their designed Offices, and what are
unprofitable, are bolted or sifted forth, partly by Breathing, Transpiration,
or Sweat, and partly through the other Emunctories.

The Blood performs its Offices, (which are the generation of the Animal
Spirits, and the nourishing of the Parts) better in Sleep.
3. The Blood burning forth more clearly and plentifully in Sleep, at that time
also performs better, yea chiefly, or almost only its Offices, the chief of
which are, the Stilling forth of the Animal Spirits, and the Nutrition of the
solid Parts. And first, it Prepares best of all Matter for both these, to wit,
it well subdues, dresses, and ripens the Chyme, infused into its Mass: then it
instills the more pure and more subtle Part into the Shell of the Brain, from
which, the veterane Spirits, during Sleep depart, for the end that a way may be
open, for the Nervous or Spirituous Liquor to restore their Stores; and in the
mean time, the other part of the Chyme, is conveyed every way by the Arteries,
to the solid Parts, and whilst they are quiet, it is best of all put upon
them, and suffered to grow to them; otherwise, by their too great Motion and
Agitation (as in Waking) it is apt to be shaken and wiped off.

Sleep is not to be yielded to, presently after Eating.
But that Nutrition, and the Production of Animal Spirits may be rightly
performed, in Sleep, it is not to be presently indulged after Eating; for so
the aforesaid Offices are wont, not only to be hindered, but perverted into
Evil: because if any one Sleep with his Belly full, the Chyle as yet Crude, is
snatched into the Blood: then before it can be there broken small, and mixed
with the Blood exactly, it is exposed to a more full inkindling within the
Lungs; that from thence the Lungs themselves not rarely draw, as from Juyces
and Vapors there sent forth, Such Sleep burts the Lungs and Brain. Makes the
Spirits more dull and gives evil nourishments.
from the Crude inkindled Matter (as it were from green Wood) an Evil: which
thing indeed is observed of many, falling into the Phthisis or Consumption of
the Lungs. Thirdly, At length from the Chyme so evilly prepared, neither pure
Spirits are dispensed to the Brain, nor laudible nourishment to the solid
Parts; yea, that is obscured and made dull by Fumes and Vapors, and these are
disposed into a Cachexie or Atrophie.

So much concerning the Effects and Alterations of Sleep, What Sleep affords to
the lucid part of the Soul.
which indeed are wont to be more immediately impressed on the Flamey part of
the Soul, rooted in the Blood, but mediately on the Parts of the Body depending
upon it: Now let us see next, what this Passion brings to the other Part of the
Soul, viz. the Lucid; and its Subjects, to wit, the Brain and Nervous Stock;
Concerning these, we will show what Sleep contributes to the dispensation of
the Nervous Liquor, and to the generation of Spirits out of it, we shall also
further Consider, what sort of influence it has on their Exercises and
Government.

As to these, It refreshes the wearied Spirits inhabiting the Brain.
First, It is to be noted, which we beforementioned, to wit, that the Spirits
of the Regiment of the Brain, the Executors of every Spontaneous Function, are
employed only Waking; and that others arising from the Cerebel, both Waking and
in Sleep: There is need for Sleep only for the former, whilst they are well,
that their Expenses or consumed Stores might be by it repaired: yea, and that
the languishing or weariness of those remaining might be refreshed. This every
one experiences in himself, And allays them, being out of order.
and feels that there is no farther need of explaining it: But if the same
Spirits, by some Morbifick Cause, being provoked, are moved into disorder, that
they become irregular about the Acts of Motions, or of the Senses, whether
Interior or Exterior, and stir up a Delirium, Convulsions, or Pains, Sleep,
like a Charm, fully quiets these Spirits, how mad and devilish soever they be:
wherefore if it comes not of it self, in these Cases it ought to be fetched
with Opiats.

But as to the Spirits, The Spirits inhabiting the Cerebel, are disturbed, in
Waking, with the Spirits of the other Regiment.
the inhabitants of the Cerebel, because, in Waking they are disturbed by the
business and tumult of the Spontaneous Functions, and being called away from
their Labors are hindered; therefore, they perform their tasks better in the
rest and deep silence of the others: Hence the Concoction and the distribution
of the Food, and the Separation of the Excrements, yea, and the Economy of the
whole Animal Function, is best performed by reason of Sleep: Hence, if at any
time, too much Meat, or more gross than is wont, being eaten, molests the
Stomach, and inducing fullness, nauseousness, or bitter and acid belching to it,
approaching Sleep, for the most Parts takes away these Evils, and facilitating
the Concoction of the Chyle, clears it from its sharpness, foulness, Why those
being disturbed, do perform their Offices better, whilst these lie quiet in
Sleep.
and bitterness. The reason of which is, because the Animal Spirits, which
actuating the Fibers of the Stomach, serve for Digestion, whilst awake; being
forced to bear its manner or guise toward the Brain, and its Parts, are
distracted here and there, and are called away from their proper work, so that
the Meat being as it were unfermented, and undigested, stays in the Ventricle.
This every one plainly experiences in himself, if presently he sits down after
feeding to Study, or serious Reading, for then the Brain being full and
disturbed, the ponderous and heavy Chyle in the Stomach, is deprived of
Digestion: Other benefits of Sleep are noted.
But in Sleep, the Spirits inhabiting the Ventricle, being freed from the
Businesses of the Brain, do best of all perform their task, and rightly digest
and exalt by Fermentation, the Chyle in the Stomach, like an Elixir in a
Furnace, with an equal and convenient heat. Hence Chy^ification, and other
functions merely Natural, are performed best of all in Sleep.
I might here enumerate other benefits of Sleep, for as much as it refreshes
the whole Faculties of the Soul, renews the vigor of the Intellect or Wit,
sharpens the Senses, stops the tumults of Passions, recollects the forces of
the Cogitations, as often as they are either wholly enervated, or distracted by
immoderate Study, or long Waking, allays and quiets all things, and heals the
weak Brain, and the languishments of its Parts, yea, and of all other Parts and
Powers, by giving to them new forces or strength, as it were Food to such as
want.

The Nature, Causes, and Effects of Sleep, being unfolded after this manner,
before we wholly leave its Consideration, it will not be from the Matter, to
subjoyn something of Dreams, we shall here purposely pass over what manner of
Signification they have, both Natural, as they indicate the intemperance of the
Brain, and also fatidical, as if they were inspired by a Demon, Of Dreams.
and are affirmed to Prophecy things to come: we shall only inquire by what
Motion, and agitation of the Animal Spirits, Dreams are produced in the Brain.
We say therefore, that the Animal Spirits, although they affect naturally
alternate times of Motion and Rest, and whilst they indulge Rest, instilling
fresh Nervous Humor to the Brain, they suffer themselves to be bound together
with Embraces, as it were with Chains, that they may not enter into Motion; yet
it for the most part happens, that some Spirits easily cast off this Bond, and
love to wander hither and ^hither, What they are.
in the deep silence of the Rest. And indeed Dreams are only the Excursions of
some Spirits in the Brain, from their bond or tie, which, whilst the rest are
strictly bound together, wander about, without any Guide or Ruler; and repeat
the types or shaddows of Motions, as it were Dances before learnt; and are wont
to represent the Cogitations of things, They are sometimes excited by the
Spirits inhabiting the Brain.
though after a very confused manner. The Spirits which being got loose,
variously run about, whilst the rest are bound together, gain the Liberty of
Motion, by a twofold means. To wit, some Spirits, fly from the Captivity of
Sleep, for the most part, by reason of the Heat and Agitation of the Brain, as
by Drinking of Wine, the fume of Tobacco, immoderate Exercise, as also by the
Passions, and more hard study, is wont to arise: for by these means, the
Spirits are stirred up, by a certain Stimulation or Provokement, and are driven
as it were into rage, that, though Sleep creep upon them, all of them will not
be bound or restrained, but that some of them will walk about the Sepulchers of
the rest, like Specter in a Churchyard, and Cause stupendous Apparitions of
things. Sometimes by Spirits inhabiting other Parts, to wit, the Stomach,
Spleen, Genitals.
Another Exsuscitation of some Spirits in the Brain, whereby Dreams are
produced, is made by reason of some Spirits being disturbed in other Parts, as
in the Praecordia, Stomach, Spleen, Genitals, etc. By which, whilst the same
Perturbation is Communicated by the Nerves to the Brain, perhaps one or two
Handfuls or Bands of Spirits, there stirred up, causes various Fantasies to be
represented. In the Disease called the Incubus or Nightmare, when the
Praecordia are stopped in their Motion, or otherwise hindered, by reason of the
Nerves being bound together, we Dream some Animal or heavy weight lying upon
the Breast, stops our Breathing. The Genital Humor growing turgid or swelling
up in the Vessels, and irritating them, produces immodest Dreams. Undigested
and gross Meats, eaten at Supper, because they aggravate or lie heavy in the
Ventricle, and trouble it, render Sleep also troubled, and infested with
terrible and affrightful Fantasies; in like manner we might easily show, that
it is the same with many other Parts.

Whilst as it were private Troops of Spirits, being excited in the Brain,
carrying themselves hither and thither, exercise the Fantasy, their
Divergency or Excursions happen sometimes regularly, Dreams sometimes stir up
local Mocions.
sometimes inordinately: and therefore Dreams, represent either the Series of
things before acted, or only Chimera's, or Notions altogether incongruous and
disagreeing. Further, whilst the Animal Spirits, being agitated by this means,
within the Brain, produce Dreams or the Images of Cogitations, do often leap
back, into the Nervous Stock, and there stirring up other Spirits, produce
diverse sorts of local Motions: wherefore some Men also, when they Sleep
soundly, are wont to rise out of their Bed, to walk here and there, to remove
the Household Stuff from place to place, oftentimes to put on their Clothes, to
open the Doors, go up Stairs, and to pass over Rocky places, which they could
scarce go over when Awake; in the mean time if they meet with any Obstacle in
their Progress, they either advisedly pass by it, or remove it out of the way.
I knew a certain Man, who was wont after this manner to walk a-Nights like a
Spectre, and to speak to others whom he met being Awake, would take them by the
hand, and oftentimes strike them, then, unless he being roughly handled did
Awake; returning to his Bed, and after Awaking of his own accord, knew nothing
at all of what he had done. Yea, it is observed of most of these Night-walkers
like Spirits, that being awakned, they scarce remember any thing of what they
did, or acted in their Sleep; as if they suffered something that was different
from other Dreamers; for these think that they perform local Motions, when
indeed there is no such thing, but the others move from place to place, and yet
know nothing of it. In Dreamers, the Spirits being stirred up, spread or are
carried wholly inwards, toward the Callous Body, and affect only the
Imagination and Memory: but in those walking in their Sleep, some handfuls or
bands of them, being awakned, direct their tendency only outward, toward the
moving Parts, in the mean time, the Common Sense, Imagination, and Memory are
not at all affected. It is wonderful, what ordinarily happens to Witches, or
Wise-women; to wit, they, whilst they lie Buried in a profound Sleep imagine
that they are in very far and remote places, and that they have seen the
Spectacles of Seas and Lands, and things wholly unknown to them, and shall
exactly describe them; which without doubt is, because the Devil brings the
Idea's of these things before the Fantasy, and so strongly impresses them,
that they for a certain believe, that they had been in them: On the contrary,
Walkers in their Sleep, wander about the whole House, and its Precincts, and
truly perform diverse Actions, of which, when they are Awake, they are wholly
ignorant. If the reason of this Kind of Passion be inquired into, this first of
all occurs; that those so affected, freely exercise, at that time, the
Faculties, both Sensitive and Locomotive; because, they not only move their
Feet and Arms, as it were in certain Measures and Numbers, as a Machine
furnished with wheels and force is wont to do; but moreover, they hear with
their Ears, see with their Eyes, and with a certain discretion vary their local
Motions, according to the Impressions made from sensible things. Wherefore,
from hence we may lawfully conclude, that some Animal Spirits, being stirred up
inordinately, within the hinder Part of the middle of the Brain, perhaps about
the streaked Bodies, do strike upon the little heads of the Nerves, and so
raise up other Spirits, implanted by a long Series, within the nervous
Passages, and the moving Parts, and drive them into Motions before accustomed
to; hence the diverse movings of the Body and Members, are produced. But,
because the tendency of the Spirits excited is made only outward, and is not
at all reflected inwards into the streaked and Callous Bodies; therefore, for
that the Common Sensory nor the Imagination are affected, they neither perceive
nor remember the Actions they had done* If it should be demanded, (for as much
as the Common Sense at this time is stupefied or asleep) by what instinct the
Animal Spirits are determined, according to the Impressions of Sensible Things,
for the performing of local Motions of this or that Kind; It may be said, That
this reciprocation of Sense and Motion, depends chiefly upon Custom, viz. The
Spirits being before accustomed to be ordered after this or that manner, and
having gotten the Liberty of Action in Sleep, compose themselves of their own
accord, for the performing of their wonted Measures; even as when an Harper,
whilst he is thinking of some other thing, his Fingers being before taught the
N^mbers of the Tune, exactly strike the Strings, with wonderful agility and
discretion.

Therefore, the Cause of walking in Sleep, seems to consist in this, viz. That
the Animal Spirits are too fierce and unquiet, and will not all lie down
together, but that some of them, more fierce than the rest, leap forth of their
own accord, and enter into Motion, like as perhaps one or two Dogs, starting
out without government, leave the company of the rest and fall to Hunting: For
that Cause also, the Spirits so apt to wander and roam about for Excursion,
obtain their more free spaces in the Oblong Marrow, nigh the Nervous Original,
rather than in the Brain or in its middle or marrowie Part. For it seems, that
during Sleep, the Pores and Passages in the globous frame of the Brain, are
stuffed up so, that the Spirits there, like to water frozen, are thrust in hard
together; in the mean time, the Substance within the Medullar Processes of the
Brain, and the Oblong Marrow, which lead toward the Nervous Original, is more
loose, and possessed less with an adventitious Humor; that the Spirits there
being ready for Motion, easily make way for themselves to go forth, and entering
the little heads of the Nerves, produce local Motions, of which the Common
Sense, and the Superior Faculties of the Soul are utterly ignorant. For such a
Disposition of the Brain and its Appendix, which inclines to wandering by Night,
as if it depended upon a certain peculiar Conformation of the Organ, is proper
to some Men from their Birth; nor does it indifferently happen to all Men, or
is ever contracted by the reason of inordinate Living. I have known in a
certain Family, where both the Father, and all his Children were obnoxious to
this Affection, the Brothers would often run up and down in the Night, in their
Sleep, sometimes meet and lay hold upon one another, and so awake one another.
But others, who had not this Evil impressed upon them from their Birth, have
fallen into this Distemper, without any fore-warning or manifest Occasion.

Thus much concerning Sleep, and by the by of Dreams: we have largely handled
thus the Nature of it, because this Speculation very much Conduces to the
illustrating the Affections of the Brain, Of Waking. A double Consideration of
it. 1. As it follows upon Sleep. Waking is either Natural or Violent.
and the Nervous Stock. It behooves us next, that we consider of the Aurora of
Sleep, to wit, Waking; but this may be considered under a twofold respect;
either First, for as much as it succeeds Sleep, it is its bound; or Secondly,
according to its proper Essence. As to the former, we Awake, or Sleep is shaken
off, either because it ends of its own accord, or because it is interrupted.
That it may end of its own accord, two things are requisite, to wit, that the
Animal Spirits, being enough refreshed, rise up of their own accord, and return
to their wonted watches; which indeed, they for the most part do, at a
set-time, unless hindered: Secondly, That what ever is superfluous of the
serous Humor, by whose Embraces the Spirits are bound, be evaporated: for after
Banqueting, or often Drinking, by which a greater plenty of the serous and
spirituous Latex is carried to the Brain, we Sleep longer; so that there is
need that Sleep be longer protracted, that it may suffice to spew forth the
untamed Wine. But Rest is very much interrupted by a violent Sensation; to wit,
some Spirits dwelling about the Extremities of the Nerves, being awakned by the
impulse of some strong object, awake others in the Common Sensory, whereby
Sensation is performed, and then the stroke being further continued, all, being
as it were at a Sign given, called to Arms, awake suddenly, and fall to their
watches. This kind of troublesome Sensation, which awakes the Animal Spirits
from Sleep, is not only brought in from an outward sensible thing, as when a
great sound, or stroke made on the Flesh, shakes off Sleep; but sometimes the
Nervous Parts are pulled by a sharp Humor, Physic, Worms, and other Internal
Distempers, and so a Convulsion or Pain arising, the Spirits are compelled into
Motion, and for that reason, we are excited from Sleep. As often as Sleep is
broken off sooner than it ought, often yawning, and reatching, for the most
part follows: the reason of which is, because the Spirits being awakned, strive
by contracting and extending those Parts, to shake off the Dewie Humor, not
sufficiently evaporated from the Brain and Nervous Parts. Further, If we are
forced to awake, before the Spirits are refreshed with their wonted Provision,
they from thence become dull and heavy, and less ready for the exercise of the
Animal Function.

The Essence or formal Reason of Waking.
As to the Essence or formal Reason of Waking, it consists in the liberty and
expansion of the Animal Spirits, in the Brain, and the whole Nervous Stock. For
these, like standing Soldiers, desire to watch, both to meet the sensible
Object, also by reason of their obedience toward the Superior Powers of the
Soul, so long as they are fit for this work: But that the Animal Spirits may be
able to perform their watches in a just time, and with their whole strength it
is required, that they should be free without any Impediments; to wit, that
they be not irritated with any gross, or otherways Excrementitious Humor, nor
drowned with a serous heap, but that being free from all burden, they might
remain ready, and still nimble for the swiftest Motions. Then Secondly, That
the Spirits may rightly perform their watches, there is need, that they should
be only entangled in moderate Affairs. Being fitted by these Kind of defenses,
they lively accomplish their Task, and daily for so many hours, continue their
Motion, like the Wheels of a Clock, and then, the time being expired, they go
to Rest of their own accord.

The End of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART PATHOLOGICAL: OR Of the DISEASES which belong to the Corporeal
Soul and its Subjects, viz. The Brain and the Nervous Stock.
CHAP. I.
Of the Headache.

THE pain of the Head is wont to be accounted the chiefest of the Diseases of
the Head, The Pain of the Head the chiefest and most common affection among
Diseases.
and as it were to lead the troops of the other Affections of that part; for
that it is the most common and most frequent symptom, to which indeed there is
none but is sometimes obnoxious, so that it is become a Proverb, as a sign of a
more rare and admirable thing, That his Head did never ache.

The Headache, though it be a most frequent Distemper, has so various,
uncertain, and often a contrary original, that it seems most difficult to
deliver an exact Theorie of its appearance, containing the solutions of so
manifold, and often opposite things. The Causes of it manifold, and very
diverse, that they (...) be methodically recited.

Hence it is, that its Cure is often instituted E^pirically.


This Disease being constant to no temperament, constitution, or manner of
living, nor to no kind of evident or adjoining causes; ordinarily falls upon
cold and hot, sober and intemperate, the empty and the full bellied, the fat
and the lean, the young and old, yea upon Men and Women of every age, state, or
condition. Hence, because they cannot satisfy any one sick with this
Distemper, with the causes of it, most commonly they say, they all proceed from
Vapors. Further, the Cure of this Disease is more happily instituted, not so
much by certain Indications, as by trying various things, and at length, by
collecting an Extempory method of Healing, from things helping and hurting.
Wherefore, if I should go about to untye this hard knot, by drawing forth the
matter more deeply and more accurately, I must ask for pardon, if I am carried,
by a long compass, through the various Series and Complication of Causes: and if
at length, by any means, the Aeriology or the Reason of this Disease may be
fully detected, a more certain way to its Cure may be opened.

Therefore, What things belong to its Pathology.
that we may go on more fully to institute this Pathology, or showing the
Causes or symptoms of this Disease, we ought first of all to unfold the
Subject, and the formal reason of this Disease, together with the Causes and
differences; then to subjoyn the Curatory method, and to illustrate it with
some more rare Cases and Observations.

As to the former, as all pain is a hurt or violated Action, or a troublesome
sension or feeling, depending on a Convulsion, or a Corrugation of the Nerves,
the Subject of the Headache are the most nervous parts of the Head, that is, the
Nerves themselves, as also the Fibers and Membranes, and such as are more and
most sensible, seated both without and within the skull. The Subject of this
Disease.
But the parts of this kind, which are affected with pain, are first the two
Meninges, and their various processes, the Coats of the Nerves, the Pericranium
(or skin compassing the skull) and other thin skinny Membranes, the fleshy
Panicle of the Muscle, and lastly the skin it self. As to the Brain and
Cerebel, and their Medullary dependences, we affirm, That these Bodies are free
from pains, The formal Reason of it.
because they want sensible Fibers, apt to be wrinkled and distended: the same,
for the like reason, may be said of the Skull.

2. But whenever pain is excited any where about the nervous parts of the
Head, its formal reason consists in this, That the Animal Spirits being drawn
one from another, and put to flight, cause the containing Bodies to be pulled
together and wrinkled, and so stir up a troublesome sension or feeling: But
that which so distracts the Spirits, that from thence a troublesome feeling
arises, is some improportionate thing, rushing upon the Spirits themselves, or
on the Bodies containing them, which entering the Pores of, and spaces between,
the Fibers, pulls them one from another, and so drives the spirits dwelling
there into disorder.

The differences and kinds.
3. As to the differences of the Headache, the common distinction is, That the
pain of the Head is either without the Skull, or within its cavity: The former
is a more rare and a more gentle disease, Pain is either without, or within the
Skull;
because the parts above the Skull are not so sensible as the interior
Meninges; nor are they watered with so plentiful a flood of Blood, that by its
sudden and vehement incursion, they may be easily distended, or inflamed above
measure. Secondly, The other kind of Headache, to wit, within the Skull, is more
frequent, and much more cruel, because the Membranes, clothing the Brain, are
very sensible, and the Blood is poured upon them by a manifold passage, and by
many and greater Arteries. Further, because the Blood or its Serum, sometimes
passing through all the Arteries at once, both the Carotides and the Vertebrals,
and sometimes apart, through these or those, on the one side or the opposite,
bring hurt to the Meninges, hence the pain is caused that is interior; Or
universal, or particular.
which is either universal, infesting the whole Head or its greatest part; or
particular, which is limited to some private region; This either before,
behind, or on the side.
and sometimes produces a Meagrim on the side, sometimes in the forepart, and
sometimes in the hinder part of the Head.

There are many other differences of this Disease, to wit, That the Pain is
either light or vehement, Many other differences of it noted;
sharp or dull, short or of continuance, continual or intermitting; its
approaches sometimes periodical and exact, sometimes wandering and uncertain.
Also by reason of the Conjunct Cause, which (as shall be declared by and by)
sometimes is the Blood, sometimes certain excrements of it, as either the
Serum, or nourishing juice, or vapors, or wind; sometimes it is the nervous
liquor, sometimes a congression or striving of it with the bloody liquor: The
Headache may be called, either bloody, and that either simple, or else serous,
vaporous, or otherways excrementitious; or else Convulsive, from the humor
watering the nervous Fibers, and irritating them into painful Corrugations.

Of which the chiefest is, that it is either occasional, or habitual.
Concerning these, that we may proceed methodically, we shall rehearse in a
certain order, the various kinds of this Disease, with their Causes; and it
seems good, that we distinguish the Pain of the Head to be either accidental,
or occasional and habitual: The former is wont to be excited without any
foregoing cause, or previous disposition, by the solitary evident cause* as
when an Headache happens almost to all men after the drinking of Wine. The
reason of the former unfolded.
Surfeiting, lying in the Sun, or vehement exercise, also in the fitts of
Feavours; to wit, forasmuch as the Blood being incited, more than it was wont,
and boiling up immoderately, very much blows up and distends the Membranes it
passes through; The habitual Pain of the Head has always a more remote Cause,
besides the evident Cause.

The evils, or the weak Constitution of the affected part, and the easy
flowing in of the morbific matter, concur to this more remote cause.

The Parts of the Head predisposed, and their vices, viz. an evil or weak
conformation are noted.


yea the Serum and Vapors, copiously sent forth, from it, then growing hot, and
rushing on the Membranes, pull and provoke the nervous Fibers.

Secondly, The habitual pain of the Head, has some procatartick or more remote
Cause fixed somewhere, by reason of which it is troubled, either constantly or
often; so that though it sometimes intermits, yet it often returns of its own
accord, and is excited also upon every light occasion: but this, whether it be
continual or intermitting, has neither always, nor only, the Suffusions or too
great Evaporations of the Blood or Serum, for the Conjunct Cause, (although
these are often present, where notwithstanding they are rather instead of the
Evident Cause, than the Conjunct) but beside, an evil procatarxis, or a certain
predisposition, is always affixed to the part affected, or wont to be
distempered; by reason of which, the aforesaid Causes, also the inordinations
of the Nervous Liquor, and the meeting and growing hot of it with the bloody
Serum, or the Nutritious Juice, raise up the fits of pains.

Although the more remote Cause of the Headache be manifold and diverse, so that
its several kinds can scarcely be numbered, yet for the constituting it, these
two, to wit, either one or both of them, do chiefly or for the most part lead
the way, viz. First, The evil or weak Constitution of the affected part.
Secondly, Then, because of the more easy and ready heaping up of the Morbi^ic
matter in it.

As to the former, the parts of the Head obnoxious to pains, are the Nervous
Fibers, belonging to the Membranes, Tendons, the Musculous flesh, and other
sensible Bodies; the Morbid provision of which consists in their evil
conformation or debility.

Of these, The former often times is innate and hereditary;
that the former is sometimes innate and hereditary, appears from hence,
because the Disease is often delivered from the Parents to the Children: and
seems to be done chiefly by this means: because the covering of the Head being
made more thick, or more close than it ought, neither the humors, nor the
vapors do easily pass through; wherefore being by these restrained, and hindered
in their Motion, and so heaped up, the Meninges, Pericranium, and other
sensible parts, being too much stuffed, or inflated, or hauled, receive pains:
to which happens, that sometimes, by reason of the original intemperance of the
Brain, the Humors or Vapors about the parts, hanging like an arch over it, are
variously heaped up together.

2. But it more often comes to pass, But more often is contracted anew:
that the Vices of an evil Conformation, by which these or those parts of the
Head are disposed to the Headache, are contracted anew, and that by a various
kind of production: for sometimes by Cold taken, by reason of the Northern
winds, Snow, or Rain, the Pores of the skin in some region of the Head, yea and
the nervous Fibers themselves, are so closed up, or otherwise perverted or
weakened, And chiefly from Cold,
that they are not able to bear the outward air, nor the agitations of the
Blood or Humors, but presently the Headache arises.

Nor is the predisposition of the Headache less rarely produced, Also by reason
of the inordinations in the six non naturals.
in the disorderly useing the six not natural things. For the Blood being
stirred up above measure, upon any cause whatsoever, impresses by its boiling
up, or by the insinuation of the Serum or Vapors, a breaking of the unity in
some nervous parts, or some other sort of hurt; for which reason, as there is a
present Headache, by and by stirred up, so afterward there is a disposition to
the same, By accident.
upon every light occasion. But oftentimes a disposition to the Headache not
easily blotted out, is induced by a vehement Passion, Surfeit, Drunkenness,
also by a blow, wound, or contusion of the Head: so that either the proper or
excrementitious humors being heaped up, and standing in those parts, From
internal Corrections.
being afterward moved of themselves, or growing hot with other inflowing
juices, stir up inflations, or painful haulings or pullings. Yea, I have known
Inflammations, Imposthumes, Whelks, Scirrhous tumors growing to the Meninges
with the Skull, and other Diseases of an evil conformation, excited in the
Membranes of the Brain; by which, at first for a long time, frequent Headaches,
and most cruel, and then afterward a sleepy and deadly distemper has been
induced; the cause of the Disease not detected, but after death by Anatomy; and
indeed it is to be suspected, that inveterate and pertinacious pains in the
Head, which return, and daily become more tormentive, in spite of all
Remedies, depend upon some such invincible cause.

2. Not only an evil conformation, The debility of the distempered part is also
a more remote cause of the Headache; which outward accidents and errors in
feeding and other Distempers, are wont to produce. The other part of the more
remote Cause, secondary and moveable, consi^ting in the flowing i^ of the
morcific matter.

This matter is either the Blood, or its (...), or the nutritio^s, or nervous
(...). Which sometimes alone, sometimes ^^^ing together, (...) the (...).


or the breach of unity, but also sometimes a mere weakness or enervation,
renders some parts of the Head obnoxious to the Headache; for when as the Fibers
are somewhere so infirm, that they are neither able of themselves to rule the
proper humor, nor to resist the incursions of a strange humor; the part so
disposed, by reason of any light occasion, is moved into painful wrinklings:
These kind of debilities of the Fibers, sometimes external accidents, as the
excess of cold or heat; sometimes also errors in Diet or living, as Surfeit,
Drunkenness, and especially sleeping at noon; moreover great Catarrhs, and a
long lodging of a sharp Serum are wont to bring in.

So much for the primary more remote cause of the Headache, which is also fixed
and rooted: The other cause of it, secondary and moveable, consists in a ready
and easy heaping up of the Morbific matter about the predisposed parts, from
which come the fits of pains, and their approaches: But as the matter is
manifold, it is wont to be heaped up after a diverse manner, and to excite
pains which affect after a diverse sort: This, as we have said, is either the
Blood, or its Serum, or the nourishing Juice, or the nervous Liquor. Every of
these being variously disposed, or imbued with feculences or dregs, are by
degrees heaped up about the predisposed parts of the Head, sometimes before the
fit; and sometimes, that coming, they are plentifully cast down. But sometimes
one only humor with its plenitude and acrimony, distends or provokes the
sensible Fibers; sometimes more meeting together, by their mutual growing hot,
pull or haule the Fibers, and so stir up painful Convulsions. We shall briefly
take notice of the several kinds of these, with their signs, and the manner of
their being made. When therefore a part of the Head, as chiefly the Meninges,
or some region of the Pericranium, is predisposed, by reason of an evil
conformation or debility, to the Headache; the approaches or fits of the Disease
are wont to be excited, by reason of the various incursions or coming together
of the following humors, sometimes of this, sometimes of that humor, and
sometimes of many together.

How the Blood excites the Headache.
1. Sometimes the Blood it self being incited into a more rapid motion, and
boiling up into the Head, is straightened or stopped in its passage about the
predisposed places, and from thence, being by and by heaped up there, distends
the Vessels, greatly blows up the Membranes, and pulls the nervous Fibers one
from another, and so brings to them painful corrugations or wrinklings. For
this reason those obnoxious to the Headache, are forced to shun all occasions by
which the Blood should grow hot above measure, as drinking of Wine, Exercise,
Baths, etc.

How the Serum.
2. The Serum being more copiously heaped up in the bloody Mass, oftentimes
conceives a sudden Flux, either of its own accord through mere fullness, or
stirred up by an evident cause, and so presently running forth from the Blood
does not only rush into the Lungs, but very often into the Head, and being
poured upon its Membranes or Muscles, is copiously heaped up about the parts
predisposed to the Headache, and there induces painful Corrugations and
Inflations. Further, the Serum carries with it infestous Recrements, as
sulphurous, saline, sharp, acid, bilous, or melancholic, or of some other
kind, and fixes them to the nervous Fibers, which cause an acute or dull, a
shorter or a longer pain. The Headaches arising by reason of this kind of
remote cause, infest more grievously in the Winter time, in a moist Air, and in
a Southern Wind: Moreover, Catarrhs of the Face, Mouth, Larynx, and of other
parts, oftentimes accompany this Disease.

How the nutritious Juice.
3. The nourishing Juice, or fresh Chyme, being carried from the Blood to the
solid parts, and laid upon them, by reason it becomes improportionate to some
parts of the Head evilly disposed, is wont to excite periodical fits of the
Headache. For this provision being laid up near some nervous Fibers, because it
cannot be assimilated, begins to trouble them or burden them, after some stay,
and at length provokes them into wrinklings to expulse that which troubles
them. An Headache proceeding from such a cause, as I have observed in many, does
daily come at so many hours after eating, and continues a like space of time;
yea the times alter according to the manner of taking their repast, both as to
the quality and quantity, and so also the fits of the pains are wont to vary.

How the nervous Liquor is a cause of this Disease.
4. The nervous Liquor, is a cause of pains, by its inordination, as oftentimes
in other parts, so also not seldom in the Head; for this either degenerating
from its temper, or being imbued with dregs or filthiness, does not pass through
so freely the nervous Fibers, but is apt to stagnate, and to be heaped up in
them to an irritative fullness: and that chiefly within the Fibers made weak
beforehand, or of an evil conformation (such as are sometimes the Membranes of
the Head) because in these predisposed, the watering Liquor being hindered in
Motion, easily arises to an aggravating or provoking fullness; The Headache
arising from the fault of the nervous Liquor infests chiefly in the Morning.
so that the Fibers being so filled, like the stomach too much crammed, enter
into Convulsions and painful wrinklings, for the putting away their contents,
nor do they cease from them, till they are freed of their burden; which
notwithstanding, afterward being heaped up again, sometimes sooner and
sometimes later, cause from thence others, and so again other fits of pains.
The Headache arising from such a cause, springs oftentimes without any notable
turgescency of the Blood, and gently and as it were of its own accord, without
any errors in diet or living; yet sometimes it may sooner arise by reason of
disorders in the non-naturals, and other accidents: This is wont to come more
often in the Morning, and after long sleeping, when the nervous Fibers have
drunk in this humor more largely.

How many humors meeting together, and mutually growing hot, stir up Headaches.
In the aforesaid Headaches, the Morbifick matter is made up for the most part
of one singular humor, and so the fits of the pains are something more gentle,
and oftentimes sooner pass over. But there is another Cause of this Disease,
when two humors (like diverse kinds of Salts) meet together, and grow mutually
hot, and so from the strife of dissimilar particles, the Fibers are very much
pulled, and moved into very acute and cutting pains, and are most commonly
longer infested with them. In this case one of the champions is always the
nervous liquor, but the other, either the serous water or the nourishing juice.
We exempt the Blood, because it only washes the passages of the Nerves, and
does not enter them deeply; but the nervous humor, by reason of the vices but
now recited, sometimes of it self, pulls the containing Fibers, and provokes
them into painful Convulsions. If that another humor, either the Nutritious or
Serous, (for both of them are wont to be guilty) being little of kin, be
plentifully poured upon this so predisposed, and copiously heaped up within the
Fibers; presently all the particles being raised up, strive among themselves,
and so by a mutual effervency, notably distend and haule the Fibers, that from
hence from their being long and greatly wrinkled, most sharp and long remaining
pains are induced. Whether it be this or that humor, meeting with the nervous
juice, that causes the Headache, may be easily known from the proper
irregularities, above described, of either peccant humor by it self.

By what means, The habitual Headache depends chiefly upon the fault of the
nervous hamor.
and for what more remote causes, the humors, either Nutritious or Serous,
offend, as often as meeting with the Nervous humor, contained within the
Fibers, move the fits of pains, shall be declared anon: in the mean time, I
think it sufficiently appears, that the more frequent and habitual Headaches
are produced chiefly by the fault of the nervous liquor, because this is most
intimate both with the Fibers themselves, which are wrinkled, and the Spirits
which are moved into painful distractions; also because the pains of the Head
sometimes arise without any disorder or tumult of the Blood, Serum, or
nourishing Juice, and these being emptied or allayed, after what manner soever,
oftentimes the Headache most pertinaciously continues.

But concerning the nervous Liquor, The fault of the nervous liquor is either
universal, or particular, proper to the place distempered.
when it is the cause of the Headache, we observe that its fault is sometimes
universal, and sometimes private: for sometimes it does acquire its evil from
the distempered part: to wit, forasmuch as being constrained to subsist or
stagnate within the Fibers, hurt by their conformation, it is so perverted that
at length being infested, fermenting either by it self, or with some other
humor, it irritates them into painful Corrugations: Yet sometimes, and
especially in the more grievous Headaches, we may suppose that the whole Mass
of the nervous Liquor is in fault, but the nervous parts of the Head partake of
its evil, before any others in the whole Body; because these are the chief and
nearest springs of the nervous Liquor, and are also highly sensible: wherefore,
the nervous Liquor, when ever it is vicious, either swelling up of its own
accord, or growing hot by another humor being poured unto it, within the
Meninges and other Membranes of the Head, more than in the other parts of the
Body, becomes painful. The thing appears to be so, because a long and grievous
Headache is wont to be Cured, not so much by Remedies applied or proper for the
Head, as by those which restore the Crasis or Constitution of the nervous
Juice, and the bloody Mass; and such are Chalybeats, or Steel Medicines, and
Antiscorbuticks, or Medicines against the Scurvy. Which certainly argues that
the nervous Liquor, wherever it is in fault through the whole Body, chiefly
punishes the parts of the Head.

Thus much for the causes of the Headache, The more remote or evident Causes of
the Headache are noted.
both the procatartick or foregoing, and the Conjunct: there yet remain others
more remote, called Evident, which raise up the former, and provoke them into
act, or the painful means of affecting. But they are of a various kind, and of
a diverse operation: to wit, Whatever things are apt, first, Of which sort are,
first, those which move the morbific matter flowing from another place, to wit,
either the Blood, or Serum, or nourishing juice, and stir it up within the
places affected of the Head.
to transfer the Morbific matter from another place into the part affected; or
secondly, to move it before lodging in it; or thirdly, and lastly, which
impress on the Fibers themselves, predisposed to painful Convulsions, this
Distemper, by the consent of the other parts afar off, they belong to this rank.

As to the former, the Blood and its inmate humors, to wit, the Serous and
nutritious; also the bilous, acid, and otherwise vicious recrements, are apt to
be moved from various Causes, and to be transferred into the Membranes of the
Head, viz. many accidents from without ordinarily effect this, as great and
sudden mutations of the Air, or the season of the year, excess of heat or cold,
or of moisture, plentiful feeding, drinking of Wine, Bathing, immoderate Venus,
violent passions; yea many other occasions sufficiently known, and to be
avoided by all subject to Headaches. Further, these humors sometimes swell up
of their own accord, The Blood and its contents, in Headaches are sometimes the
means of the Conjunct, sometimes of the Evident Cause.
and without any external Cause, or other ways evident, being moved, drive
themselves forward into the Head: in which place, when they come, and settle
upon the Fibers before indisposed, though they constitute a part of the
Conjunct Cause, yet they, when they are first in motion or flux, become the
means of the Evident Cause. Wherefore, when we have first unfolded, by what
means the Blood, with its contents, being carried to the distempered Membranes,
stir up Headaches; we shall then show by what means, and upon what occasions,
the same humors are wont to be moved, and to be snatched into the Membranes.

And first the Blood growing hot of its own accord, For what Causes the Blood
is wont to be moved, and to bring (...) to the distempered Head.
and by reason of the strife, and intestine motions of its particles, imparts
its trouble to the Head: Its frequent and wandering turgency or boiling up,
happens not only in the fits of Feavours, but also without any cause or
suspicion of disease, which in others scarce perceiveable, those obnoxious to
the Headache sufficiently take notice of and feel; neither does the blood only
bestow the hurt to the Head, from its own proper provision, but receiving it
elsewhere, sends it thither. Oftentimes the Blood receives the incongruous
matter from the Stomach, Spleen, Mesentery, Liver, and other parts, or Inwards,
infestous to it self or nervous Stock; which growing hot a little time after,
that it might extrude or thrust it forth; The Blood delivers to the head the
morbific matter received from any other part.

A Flux of the Serum sometimes from mere fullness.


it pours it upon the Membranes of the Head, and so produces the Headache,
commonly called Sympathetick, viz. by a consent excited in other parts; which
kind of Distemper being transmitted from other parts to the Head, sometimes
also it happens after another manner, as shall be by and by declared.

When the Mass of Blood abounds with Serum, it is sometimes excited to the
putting it off by mere fullness, wherefore it conceives a flux, or as it were a
certain melting, to wit, by which the thin and watery part may be separated
from the thick and bloody. Then, because the Blood becomes more diluted in its
swelling up, and passes more swiftly and more copiously through the Arteries,
than can be carried back by the Veins, almost all that is serous is sent away
by the spaces between the Vessels, being poured sometimes on these parts, and
sometimes on those, as falling down in many places, it causes tumors or
Catharrs, so lying on the Membranes of the Head, it stirs up fits of pains.

Sometimes from other Causes.
But the serous heap, from many other causes sweating forth from the Blood
suffering a flux, rushes on the Meninges and the Pericranium, and causes in
them most troublesome Headaches. A sudden Constipation or closing of the Pores
by Cold or Wet, almost constantly produces such a Distemper in most, obnoxious
to this Disease. Sharp and thin Wines, Cider, yea and Beer, that by reason of
its soureness is apt to ferment, because they fuse the Blood, and precipitate
its serosities, are forbid to those troubled with Headaches, as so much poison:
And lastly, whatever is wont to cause a Flux in those troubled with the Gout,
the same also for the like reason causes it in these, for the rising Serum, in
either, flows to the distempered part, where it oftentimes grows hot with the
nervous humor.

Sometimes the watery humor suffering a flux offends the Head.
Further, not only the mere and simple Serum of the Blood, dropping forth upon
the Membranes of the Head, stirs up pains, but sometimes other humors joining
together, and by this passage being admitted to the distempered part, increase
the tragedy of the Disease; it often happens, that a thin and watery humor does
suddenly flow forth from the Lymphic Vessels, the Glandula's, and perhaps from
the Passages and Pores of the solid parts (in which it is gathered together)
and is poured forth into the Blood in the Veins; from whence presently passing
through the bosom of the Heart, and being confused with the Arterious Blood, and
by that soon separated, is cast back by any way it can find; therefore, being
partly sent away by the Reins, it causes a flowing down of a clear and copious
Urine, also sometimes partly redounding on the Brain or Nervous Originals,
Hence in those that have the Headache, as in Convulsive Diseases, there is often
a clear and copious Urine. The recrements of other parts, often carried
violently to the head with the Serum.
produces Sleepy or Convulsive Distempers, as we have elsewhere shown. Yea
sometimes, a certain part of the same limpid humor, being snatched with the
Serum into the Membranes of the Head, raises up fits of a most cruel Headache:
For indeed, I have observed in many, a watery and very plentiful Urine, either
to precede or accompany the fits of this Disease.

But we may believe other manner of recrements, of the other parts, viz. bile
from the Liver, black bilary feculencies from the Spleen, and perhaps
incongruous humors from the Stomach, Reins, Pancrace, etc. are supped up by the
Serum of the Blood, and deeply boiled with it, by which, whilst it is infected,
it more readily conceives Effervescencies, and so rushing impetuously into the
Cephalic Vessels, and there fermenting with the nervous Liquor, brings forth
Convulsions, and painful and very troublesome pullings or haulings.

The evacuation of the Serum through its right ways, being suppressed, brings
its flux to the Head.
The serous heap, whether it be simple, or as we have shown, complicated, is
sufficiently infestous to the Head, whenever its usual evacuation, through its
due and accustomed ways, is hindered: viz. whether if the Pores being bound up,
transpiration be inhibited, or by reason of the evil distemper of the Reins, an
Evacuation by Urine is not copiously performed; either defect greatly punishes
those subject to Headaches. Further, the Membranes of the Head are oppressed,
by reason of the passages of the Blood being obstructed in other places: for if
the lower or middle parts of the Belly, and especially the Liver and Lungs, are
troubled with an obstruction, so that the Blood can scarce pass through in those
places, its more full torrent is directed into other parts, and especially
toward the Head; so that for this Cause, I have known to have followed, not
only Headaches, but also soporiferors or sleepy, and sometimes deadly
distempers.

The nutritious juice sometimes the cause of the Headache, either,
3. As the Serum in the bosom of the Blood, so the nourishing Juice, that is the
fresh Chyme made out of the Aliments, lodges there too, and is circulated with
it, and forced to follow its inexorbitances, being as it were in the current of
the same River. Wherefore, when the Blood, presently after eating, is carried
impetuously or inordinately to the Head, Because it is carried with the Blood
into the Head.
and the nourishing Juice being half Concocted or depraved, is fixed there to
the Membranaceous Fibers, it causes painful pullings or haulings to follow; for
hence it is, that exercise, bathing, violent passions, reading, or any serious
intention of the Mind, upon a full stomach, hurt those troubled with Headaches.

Sometimes the nutritious Juice is not presently or easily mixed with the
Blood, Because not being agreeable to the blood, it stirs up its effervescency.
but being carried fresh to it, by and by stirs up a turgency, so that many,
constantly after eating, are troubled with an high Color, and oftentimes also
with an Headache. This commonly, but amiss, is imputed to the obstruction of the
Liver, when indeed it proceeds from an evil disposition of the Blood, hardly
bearing the mixture of the fresh Chyme. Wherefore, such a distemper, follows
for the most part dangerous Feavours, and especially the Small Pox, and
sometimes great Surfeits.

4. There yet remains another sort of Evident Causes, Sometimes the evident
causes of the Headache are Convulsions somewhere begun and continued by the
passage of the nerves, into the Head.
(to wit, by which the leading Causes, or predispositions to the Headache are
actuated) plainly different from the former irregularities of the Blood, Serum,
and nourishing juice; to wit, when Headaches very often most terrible, follow,
by reason of Convulsions, begun in other parts, and from them continued to the
Head. It Is an usual thing for a certain sense, or feeling, of a Formication, or
little pricking, to creep forward from the Hypochondria, as also from the
region of the Stomach, Mesentery, Womb, yea sometimes from the Members or
outward parts, to the Head, and by and by sometime after to excite a pain that
will last for a good while. This kind of Distemper, which is wont oftentimes to
be the forerunner of the Vertigo, also of the Epilepsie, or the Apoplexy, is
commonly believed to be the ascent of Vapors; when indeed it is only a
Convulsion, begun in the extremity of some Nerve, which creeping upward toward
its original, and then coming to the Skull, for as much as it either is
communicated to the parts within the Head, or to the Meninges, either one or
both of them, it stirs up Convulsions or pains. Which passions notwithstanding,
Convulsions beginning after off, are sometimes signs of an Headache shortly to
follow.
follow this Formication or tingling, brought from elsewhere, sometimes as a
sign, and sometimes as the cause. We have in another place largely enough
unfolded the reason of the former, to wit, it being shown, that when the
Morbifick matter possesses the beginnings of the Nerves, or the nearest parts
to them in the Head, a Convulsion oftentimes beginning from the ends of the
same Nerves, being carried thence upwards toward the places first distempered,
ascends as it were by a creeping forward: wherefore not only upon the Vertigo,
but upon the Headache, a Vomiting comes very frequently.

But further, Sometimes also the cause of it.
an Irritation in some distant Member or Viscera, is sometimes the occasion,
and in a sort the cause of the Headache; to wit, when the Morbifick matter is
heaped up, even to a fullness of Turgency in the part of the Head already
disaffected, there is need only of a light Vellication or pulling of the
Containing Fibers, that this matter being stirred, should cause a fit of the
Disease; to which movement, it often suffices, that by intimate concent of some
distant Inward, as the Ventricle, Spleen, or Womb, with the Head, the nervous
Fibers should be pulled or hauled; for presently from thence, the trouble being
communicated by the Nerves, some Membranaceous Fibers of the Head, being evilly
disposed, and burdened with the Morbific Matter, begin to be strained and
wrinkled, and so when the Mine of the Disease is moved from its moved
Particles, the Fibers are urged into grievous and continual Corrugations.

Headaches that seem to begin after this manner from the Viscera, Co^vni^^^e
Headaches seem to arise so from the Vi^^era, not from Vapors.
and commonly called Sympathetic, are wont to be ascribed to Vapors, viz. by
supposing a Mine of the noxious humor to lie hid in some Inward, from which
being moved, whilst the Effluvia ascend into the Head, and there sharply pierce
through and p^ll the nervous Fibers, pains are excited. We have already so
plainly refuted this doctrine, that there is no need here to bring any other
reasons to oppose it. But in the mean time, let us inquire whether pains of the
Head do not arise also by other means, besides a Convulsive communication
through the Nerves, by reason of the Morbific Cause lodging in the Stomach,
Spleen, and other places.

Concerning this, we may suppose, that Matter oftentimes degenerate, is heaped
up in remote parts, which carries its hurt to the Head, by the passage or
Circulation of the Blood. But this sympathetick Distemper per^^ps proceeds
el^ewhere, by reason of an evil ferment, communicated to the blood.
It Is a usual thing for Corrupt humors, viz. sometimes sharp, sometimes acid or
austere, to be heaped up in the Ventricle; Bile in the Liver, atrabilary or
melancholic dregs about the Spleen, yea and other sort of degenerate Matter
about the Mesentery, Womb, or other parts: from which being heaped up to a
fullness of swelling up, a Fermentative Miasm or Infection is fixed to the
Blood; from which, that, being as it were imbued with rage, impetuously grows
hot, and partly by its swelling up, and partly by transferring what is
incongruous into the Membranes of the Head, stirs up fierce and cruel fits of
pains.

As to the Ventricle, So sometimes it seems to be caused from the Ventricle.
that it is so, some obnoxious to this Disease have plain experience. Because
some of them, after the Bile or Choler flowing in the Stomach, and others after
a noted soureness, and ravenous hunger, most certainly expectia fit of the
Headache. The reason of which seems partly to be, that those contents of the
Ventricle being supped up by the Blood, make it hot, and stir up in the same a
Cephalic Turgency or swelling up; moreover, from this kind of sharp Vitriolick,
or otherways infestous matter, being heaped up and moved within the Stomach, a
Convulsion, or Corrugation very troublesome, is impressed on the Fibers and the
extremities of the Nerves there inserted, which immediately being continued
into the Head, by the passages of the same Nerves of the eighth pair, and of
the Intercostal, is communicated to the Membranes, and the nervous Fibers,
predisposed to painful wrinklings.

The Head and the Stomach intimately conspire, and mutually affect one another.
By reason of the same Reciprocal Communication, between the Stomach and the
Head, a nauseousness and Vomiting, as we said but now, follows upon the
Headache, viz. the Membranes being stirred up into painful wrinklings, by the
Morbifick matter (even as is wont by a blow or wound) and transferring the evil
by the passage of the Nerves to the Ventricle, guiltless of it self, a vain
endeavor of Vomiting sometimes arises, nothing remaining within the Ventricle,
that should be cast forth: yet sometimes, from a cruel shaking of the Inwards,
in striving to Vomit, the Gallish or Pancreatick humor, either one or both of
them, being thrust forth into the Duodenum, and cast forth by Vomit, is
ignorantly taken for the Cephalic matter.

How the Headache seems to arise from the Spleen.
2. The pains of the Head are wont to be imputed no less to the Spleen, than the
Ventricle; and indeed it is ordinarily observed in Hypochondriacks, obnoxious
also to this Disease, when a Pain, Inflation, a Rumbling, or some other
Perturbation of the distempered Spleen, happens in the left-side, that the
Headache, as if raised up by it, by and by frequently suceeds; hence, presently
it is the voice of the people, that these Vapors being sent forth from the
disturbed Spleen, stir up the pain of the Head: But indeed, we may grant that
the Headache arises sometimes from the default of the Spleen, yet reject this
opinion, that it ought for this cause to be imputed to Vapors, but indeed
either to an evil Ferment, transmitted into the Blood from the Spleen, or from
a Convulsion, from thence communicated to the Head, by the Nerves: because in
the Spleen evilly affected, the Melancholic humor being degenerate, sometimes
into a Vitriolic Nature, sometimes a biting, sometimes a sharp, or otherways
infestous, is oftentimes heaped up, which of its own accord being shaken forth,
by reason of plenitude, or occasionally by reason of some perturbation, and
being confused with the Blood, impresses a Fermentation upon it, by which its
Liquor rushing by it self on the Membranes of the Head, or growing hot with the
nervous Liquor, causes painful pullings or haulings. Further, it is no less
probable, that sometimes a Convulsion being excited in the nervous Fibers,
which are very much disposed about the Spleen, brought thence by the passages
of the Nerves of the wandering and Intercostal pair, and continued to the Head,
impresses the like Distemper to the Membranes predisposed to it.

The like reason is for this Disease, arising from the Liver, Mesentery, or
Womb.
3. A reason may be also rendered, according to the same Pathology, to wit,
either from an evil Transmission of the Ferment, or a continuation of the
Convulsion, for Headaches which are said to be raised up by consent, from the
Liver, Mesentery, the Womb, and other parts.

The habitual Headache, the Aetiology, or the Reason of which, we have already
sufficiently handled, The kinds of habitual Headache are noted. It is either,
is yet divided into certain kinds, to wit, it is either Continual, or
Intermitting; but the periods of this are sometimes determined to a certain
time, and are sometimes wandering and uncertain: we shall speak briefly of each
of these.

Continual,
1. Sometimes therefore it happens, that some are afflicted with a Continual
pain of the Head, to wit, for many days or months, little intermitting, unless
when sleep helps; in which case we suppose, that there is not only present a
Procatartick or leading cause, but also a Conjunct, somewhere fixed and
constant. For besides that the parts affected, or that are wont to be affected,
are weak, and their watering liquor much depraved, is apt to stagnate, or to
grow hot with other humors; there is moreover oftentimes excited in them, a
breaking of the unity, to wit, an Inflammation, a red and painful swelling, a
Scirrhous tumor, or Imposthum, or of some such kind; about which, whilst the
humors of diverse kinds do meet together, and are heaped up, there arise almost
perpetual pains, by reason of the nervous Fibers being continually pulled or
hauled. These kinds of Headaches, do not rarely end in sleepy distempers, and
at length deadly; for when I have opened the Heads of many dead of these
Diseases, the signs or footsteps, declaring the aforesaid kinds of Morbific
causes, have appeared; some examples of these shall be added hereafter.

^ Intermitting.
2. The habitual Headache, is for the most part Intermitting, whose sits, as they
are certain and Periodical, or coming at a set period of time, are wont often
to return in the space of half a day and night, or once in twelve hours. Some
more rare cases I have known, which exactly repeating the Fits, came every
other day, yea once in a week, or a month. It is an usual thing, for Headaches,
that seem to be driven away, to return again about the Equinoxes or Solstices;
to wit, because at these times, the Blood and Humors conceive greater Turgences
or risings up, than are wont, and therefore are more apt to grow hot with the
watering Liquor of the nervous parts of the Head, The Fits of the intermitting,
either periodical, or certain;
and to renew the wonted fits of pains. But when about these times of the year,
Headaches return, they are not prorogued by a longer accession for a great
while, but for the most part, having gotten subordinate periods, they are wont
to infest at some certain standing hours, for the space of twelve hours.

When therefore a Periodical Headache has its daily fits, for the most part the
reason of these, as of Intermitting Feavors, ought to be sought from the fault
of the Morbifick Matter, arising to a plenitude at a set time, and then growing
hot. For it may be supposed, that the proper Liquor is perverted somewhere
about the Membranes of the Head, and the nervous Fibers evilly disposed, or
does not well pass through them; wherefore, when the nourishing Juice, placed
also on the same parts from the Blood, is not presently assimilated, nor does
well agree with the other humor; at length, from both of them heaped up
together and disagreeing, a mutual growing hot arises, and from thence a
painful pulling of the Fibers: but for that the fits of the pains, are not
always at the same distance after Eating, but arise in some sooner, and in
others later, and sometimes before sleep, and sometimes after; the cause is,
that partly the offices of Concoction, and distribution of the Aliments, are
performed sometimes sooner, sometimes later; and partly, because in these the
nervous Liquor, and in those the nutritious Juice, is most in fault: wherefore,
as the fullness of this happens sooner, and of that later, so the times of the
fit vary: we shall illustrate these afterward, with observations made
concerning the cases of sick persons.

3. When the fits of the intermitting Headache are wandering and uncertain, ^^
i^certain, and wandering.
the Procatarxis, or foregoing cause of the Disease, is neither great nor
constant, nor is the Evident Cause continual: Wherefore, when that either cause
is oftentimes absent, and one of them often wanting, the fits of the Disease
are not tied to certain times, but in some, they are as it were by chance and
accidental, in others, in whom a predisposition to this Distemper is a little
more firmly rooted: the pains of the Head more frequently molest, and are
ordinarily excited, by reason of various occasions, yea and for some, they are
wont to be most certainly expected. The reasons of the fits so variously
happening appear clearly above, from the Aetiology delivered of this Disease;
besides, the whole business shall be illustrated anon, by examples.

CHAP. II.
The Prognostic and Cure of the Headache.

SO much for the Causes of the Headache, The prognostic of the (...) is ^asie
or diffi^^lt to secured; also,
which being so various and diverse, and their Series so perplexed and
intricate, it will not seem easy to keep one Method concerning all cases of
the Sick, whereby we may be led presently to the true knowledge and Cure of
this Disease; nor is there less difficulty concerning its Prognostic: But
common experience affords some observations, from which it may be gathered, the
(...) of the Disease safe or dangerous.
that the Cure of this Sickness is sometimes easy, sometimes difficult, or
scarce possible; so that from thence it may be lawful to declare the event of
the Disease, either safe, or very dangerous, or wholely uncertain.

Truly, By what signs we may pronounce it safe, and easy to be cured.
if any one enjoying formerly a perfect Health, should fall into something a
cruel Headache, and of some long standing, by reason of a more strong Evident
Cause, as drinking of Wine, Surfeit, Venus, immoderate Exercise, or such like;
forasmuch as the fore leading Morbid Cause is not as yet firmly laid, we may
pronounce such a Distemper to be safe enough, and not pertinacious

But if the Morbific disposition should be inveterate, so that for many years
the fits repeat often of their own accord, and upon every light occasion, this,
though not dangerously sick, By what difficult.
yet we predict it not easy to be Cured. Further, the Cure will be yet more
difficult, if Hypochondriack or Hysterical Distempers, oftentimes troublesome,
are often wont to excite the Headache at every turn, or if the taint of an
inveterate Venereal Disease be rooted in any distempered part.

If that the pain of the Head shall be not only inveterate, By what scarce
possi^le.
but almost continual, that we might suspect it to arise from an Inflammation,
or a Scirrhous Tumor, an hot Swelling, an Imposthum, or Worms, there is none
or very little hope of Cure; especially because the sick will refuse great
remedies, as Salivation, or opening the Skull; which if they be made use of
perhaps at any time with any fruit or success, yet the former and this two for
the most part are wont to be tedious to the sick, before they can effect any
thing worth the trouble and expectation.

By what, dangerous.
The pain of the Head either Continual or Periodical, if it be great, and has
joined with it a Vertigo, Vomitting, or other Convulsive or Soporiferous
Distempers, shows a suspicion of great danger: even which often passes into a
deadly Apoplexy, and not seldom into an Epilepsie, Palsy, Blindness,
Deafness, and other funestous and incurable Diseases.

The Curatory method of the Headache comprehends many Indications, and those of
a various kind, according to the manifold Species, Causes, and differences of
this Disease, which will not be an easy thing here to set down, and rehearse
in order.

Accidental Headache easily cured.
The accidental Pain of the Head, with the remote Evident Cause, and its
consequences, ceases for the most part of its own accord, or at least is taken
away by letting of Blood, Rest, and Sweat.

The habitual affords more indications.
The habitual Pain, by reason of the diversity of Causes, viz. both the
Procatartick and also the Conjunct, suggests also different intentions of
Healing; we shall here briefly touch upon the chief of these, and to which all
the rest may be placed.

Two chief scopes of Cure.
In every habitual Headache, whether Continual or Intermitting, there are two
chief scopes or intentions of Cure to be met with; to which all the other
Curatory intentions ought to be aimed, and by which we should provide against
either Cause of the Morbid Procatarxis.

To cut in two the Bed ^^ Root of the Disease.
1. To wit, in the first place, that all the Tinder or inkindling of the Disease
be cut off, you must endeavor, that both the matter flowing to the distempered
places of the Head, or those evilly disposed, or apt from thence to flow to
them, be suppressed, or called from thence to another place; then moreover, that
Convulsions in other places excited, and that are wont to be propagated from
thence into the Head, be prevented.

To root out the Conjunct Cause.
2. Then secondly, it must be endeavored (if it may be done) that the Disease
it self, or its Conjunct Cause may be rooted out, that the places of the Head
predisposed to Headaches, (whether they be only enfeebled or hurt in their
Conformation) whilst they are defended from the frequent Excursions of the
infestous matter, may recover their former state and vigor. Which kind of
Indication, though it be very seldom suddenly or wholely performed, yet
sometimes the Cure is by degrees labored out, by diligence and care, however
fixed and rooted the Morbid matter be.

The ^^st or Tinder of the Disease, the blood, serum, nourishing juice, nervous
Liquor, and the Recrements carried through the Blood.
As to what appertains to the first scope of healing, which is first and
especially to be regarded; we said, that the Matter or Humors, which are wont
to be gathered together about the parts of the Head predisposed to the Headache,
and to excite the fits of the Disease, are either the Blood or the Serum, or
the nourishing or nervous Juice, or Liquor. Moreover, with every one of these
Vapors and Effluvia's, as also Recrements, sometimes Bilous, sometimes
Melancholic, sometimes Acid, Salt, Sulphurous, and of some others of a various
kind, taken into the Blood, from the Viscera, sometimes from those, and
sometimes from these, we have showed to be transferred by its passages into the
Head^ against the force and incursion of all these, Medicinal fortifications
are to be instituted.

How the inordinations of the Blood may be taken away and prevented.
1. And in the first place, if the leading cause to pains, or a disposition
thereto, lie about the Membranes of the Head, for that the Blood being hot, and
apt to rise up, rushes by heaps into the Membranes of the Head, and when it
cannot easily pass through them, distending the Vessels above measure, and
pulling the nervous Fibers, excites the fits of this Disease (whose signs are a
Sanguine temperament, heat, and a flushing or redness about the head and face,
also an high pulse, and shaking, with veins distended with Blood) presently it
must be endeavored, both that the Blood be made more sedate, that it may not
be so readily moved into rage or swelling up; as also that it be not incited,
and boiling up may not be carried with a greater tendency or inclination into
the Head, than into other parts, nor in like manner be compelled to stagnate,
by reason of the bosoms of the Meninges being too full. Wherefore, if the fit
infests long, let blood in the Arm, or the Jugular Vein: out of the fit,
sometimes it is expedient to take Blood from the Sedal Veins, with Leeches; to
wit, by this means, that the Blood by chance boiling up, may be brought down
toward that place, to which it often tends of its own accord. Let there be
Medicines of Vinegar, Rosecakes, and Nutmeg, or some other Epithems or
Medicines of the same nature applied to the Head: Also give to drink Iuleps,
Emulsions, or Decoctions, which allay the fervor or madness of the Blood. Let
the Belly be cooled and kept soluble by the use of Clysters. Moreover, for
prevention, use at times Whey, or Spaw-waters; also drinking of Water, a thin
and a cooling diet help; the shunning of Wine, spiced Meats, Baths, Venus,
violent motions of the mind or body, yea and of all hot things is to be
ordered. Then for the fixing of the Blood, its Effervescencies or growing hot
must be prevented, for which, Distilled Waters, Juices of Herbs, or Decoctions,
Electuaries, Powders, and especially Crystal Mineral, are in frequent use.
There is no need here to add a method or particular forms of Medicines, when in
this case, almost every body laboring, is wont to be his own Physician, being
taught by frequent experience, from things hurting or helping.

2. It is rarely, The pain of the Head from the serous heap, ^ow to be cured.
that the Blood alone or only by it self is in the fault; more often other
humors, being carried by its passage to the Head, and there disposed, cause the
hurt: Therefore, when ever the Serous Colluvies, or heap, goes out from the
Blood (as was shown but now) it causes Headaches frequently, (the signs of
which are Catarrhs about other parts, viz. the Nose, Mouth, or Throat, being
infested with them) then abstinency and rest is to be ordered, and that the
belly be emptied by a Clyster, for the allaying the flux of the Serum, and that
the matter be suffered to evaporate from the Membranes of the Head; if these do
not succeed, and that the Headache ceases not quickly, Phlebotomy.
and of its own accord, oftentimes in a more hot Constitution, Phlebotomy is
convenient; to wit, because the Vessels being emptied of Blood, sup up the
extravasated Serum: But in frigid tempers, Vesicatories or Blisters are of
notable use, applied to the hinder-part of the Head, or nigh the Ears. Then
after the Belly is emptied by a Clyster, the Flux may be allayed, by the use of
Anodynes, or more gentle opiats: that being allayed it may be convenient to
exhibit a gentle Purge, then Medicines, which either move by Urine or Sweat,
Purges.
or by both together, that so they may gently evacuate the superfluous
Serosities.

Medicines fit for this purpose may be every where found in Books: which
notwithstanding are not to be made use of by Empericks rashly, and without
distinction; but ought to be designed according to the judgment and skill of a
prudent Physician, always having a respect to the Constitution, the
temperament, and proper disposition of the Patient, and to other accidents and
circumstances, and to be compounded or altered according as the matter
requires; yea sometimes to be prescribed extempore. Wherefore, since it will be
altogether needless, here to heap up many Receipts, and a great pile of
Medicines, it shall be sufficient to propose in this place, one or two forms
only, of every sort of Medicines, respecting the chief intentions.

Take Pills of Amber half a dram, Pills.
Resine of Ialap four grains, of Peruvian Balsam what will suffice to make four
Pills, let three be taken when the Patient goes to sleep, and the other in the
morning, if they work not enough.

Or Take of sulphurated Scammony half a scruple, Purging Powders.
of the Ceruse of Antimony fifteen grains, of the Cream of Tartar eight grains;
make a Powder, to be taken in a spoonful of Grewel, early in the morning.

Take of the Sulphur of Antimony four grains, An emetick Powder.
of the Refine of Ialap five grains, of the Cream of Tartar six grains, bruise
them together, and with what will suffice of the Conserve of Violets, make a
Bolus, to be taken early in the morning with care, or by government.

Take of the Roots of Butchers-Broom, An Apozem.
Burdocks, Cherefoil, Avens, each one ounce; of preserved Eryngo an ounce and
an half, of the Florentine Iris three drams, of the lesser Galangal a dram and
an half, of the Seeds of Burdock three drams, of the dried leaves of Betony,
Sage, Vervine, female Betony, each half an handful; of Raisins of the Sun
stoned two ounces; boil these in four pints of fair water, till a third part be
consumed, then add to it of white Wine half a pound, strain it, and sweeten it
(if need be) with syrup of the Five Roots two ounces; take of this six ounces
warm, twice or thrice in a day, a good while after meals.

For such as are endued with a more Cold and Phlegmatic Constitution, A
decoction of woods.
the like Decoction of the Wood of Guaicum, Sasafrass, Sarsaparilla, with the
addition of the aforesaid Ingredients, A Cephalic Decoction impreg^ated with
the Tincture of Coffee.

The Headache from other barious mixed with the serum, how to be cured.


make an Apozem, of which take six or eight Ounces, twice or thrice in a day
warm.

For the poor, and oftentimes with good success for the rich, I was wont to
prescribe a Decoction of the dried leaves sometimes of Sage or Betony, Vervine,
or Rosemary, made of Spring Water, and impregnated with the tincture of the
Powder of the Berries of Coffee, taken warm twice a day, about six or eight
Ounces.

3. If that with the running out Serum, Saline, Acid, Bilous, or otherways
Infestous particles, received either wholely from the Mass of Blood, or by its
means from the Viscera, are carried into the Membranes of the Head, and being
there fixed, bring forth great, acute, and continual pains, then it will be
convenient to iterate spareingly, the taking away of Blood, yea and sometime a
gentle Purge, to apply cooling Medicines, Anodynes, and sweetners to the
distempered places; so oftentimes also to exhibit more gentle Hypnoticks, or
Medicines causing sleep, at every turn; also Apozems, and the Juices of Herbs
pressed forth, which allay the fervor of Choler, carry it forth gently by
Stool or Urine, and are of known use: but in the mean time more sharp
Medicines, or the more strong, whether they be purgative, working by Sweat or
Urine, helping it, for that they too much fuse and shake the Blood and Humors,
are carefully to be shunned. I have frequently observed in those laboring with
an acute and pertinacious pain in the Head, the Serum swimming in the Blood
being let forth, to be dyed with a yellowness, or Bilous Recrements being
boiled in it; also in this case, let Phlebotomy be sparingly but often
celebrated, and the drinking Whey, or Spaw-waters plentifully, have helped
before any thing else.

The Headache arising from any Inward, how to be cured.
4. Further, by the fault of any Inward, as the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, or Womb,
or of any other (by reason of the transmission of an evil Ferment) the parts of
the Head suffer, then in the Cure of the Disease, Remedies for the Spleen are
to be given, with Cephalicks, or such as are proper to the Head: Hence the
Stomach being also in the fault, these often times are helpful to such as are
troubled with Headaches, Elixir Proprietatis, the Elixir of Vitriol of Mynsich,
the sacred Tincture, Vitriol of Steel, the Powder of Aron Compound, and others
ordinarily had for the Stomach; for others whose heads partake of the evils of
the Spleen, Chalybeats, or Medicines made of Steel often yield help. Some Women
troubled with Headaches have felt ease from Hysterical Remedies. In like
manner, when the vices of other parts contribute to the Headache, let there be
joined with the former shown you, things to be taken for those parts.

Raised up from the fault of the nourishing Juice, how to he handled.
5. Sometimes the nourishing Juice (as we showed already) is the cause of the
periodical Headache, viz. forasmuch as this being poured on the Blood, and not
rightly assimilated, by reason of disagreeing particles, causes a swelling up
in it, so that the Blood boiling up into the Head, carries its leavings or
superfluities into the Meninges, or into some of their predisposed parts, and
by this means stir up the Fibers into painful Convulsions. I have known many
for this cause, to have been obnoxious to daily Headaches, whose Mass of Blood
has been vitiated after the Small Pox, Measels, and other Feavours, Frequently
follows the Small Pox and Measles.
and sicknesses: viz. so many hours after eating, sometimes sooner and
sometimes later, first a flushing of redness in the Face, then a fullness in
the Head, and a pain would infest them, and especially after drinking of Wine,
or eating of Meats apt to swell up, they would be more vexed. The coming of the
Disease is wont to keep its distance, according as Meats are taken more or
less, as the Chyme begins to swell up, either a little after its first entering
into the Blood, or after a little stay in it.

Easily cured.
This Distemper is free from danger, and for the most part is easily enough
Cured. After a provision of the whole, a gentle Purge, and sometimes
Blood-letting being ordered, Remedies profit most which restore the Complexion
of the Blood, such chiefly are Antiscorbuticks and Chalybeates.

An Electuary.
Take of the Conserve of Fumitory, of Tansie, and Wood Sorrel, each two ounces;
of the Powder of Aron Compound three drams, of Ivory, Crab's-eyes, Coral
prepared, each one dram; Powder of yellow Saunders, and Lignum Aloes, each half
a dram; of the Vitriol of Steel one dram, of the Salt of Wormwood a dram and a
half, of the Syrup of the Five Roots what will suffice to make an Electuary.
Take of it in the morning, and at five a clock in the afternoon the quantity of
a Chestnut, drinking after it three ounces of the following liquor.

A Iulep.
Ta^e of the water of the leaves of Aron, of Vervine, of Elderflowers, each six
ounces; of the Water of Snails, and the Magisterial of Earthworms, each two
ounces; of Sugar one ounce: Mingle them.

Antiscorbutick Remedies good for it.
Hither may be brought various Remedies, that are wont to be made use of against
the Scorbutic Dyscrasie, or evil disposition of the Blood, and may be given
with good success: For Headaches, which are so familiar in the Scurvy,
oftentimes proceed from the vice of the Blood perverting the nutritious Humor,
and carrying its Recrements to the Membranes of the Head: Wherefore Remedies
against that Distemper, in another place noted by me, may be used here.

The Headache raised up from the vice of the nervous humor, how to be cured.
6. There yet remains another humor, to wit, the nervous Liquor, which being
heaped up within the Fibers of the Meninges, and of other parts of the Head,
sometimes becomes improportionate, by its proper incongruity, to the Fibers,
because sharp or otherways degenerate, sometimes pulls the containing parts,
and provokes them into painful Convulsions, or Distentions, because it grows
hot with some other Humor flowing thither, to wit, the Nutritious or the Serous.

The Nervous Humor, Its fault either private or particular,
when it is so Morbific or faulty in its whole Mass, carries its evil to the
predisposed Head, or if of it self innocent, is perverted within the
distempered Fibers, and so secondarily becomes Morbific or Diseased; then the
Cure of it depends upon the restitution of the containing parts; to wit, if the
Debilities, or the hurt Conformation of the Fibers may be mended, presently the
Humor watering them will be free from fault. We shall tell you by and by, by
what Remedies the vices of the parts predisposed to Headaches may be taken away.

In the mean time, Or universal; and then letting of blood, or stronger Purges,
are not convenient.
if the nervous humor, being degenerate in the whole Mass, imparts its evil to
the Head prepared for pain, those kind of Medicines, and method are to be made
use of, by which it being reduced to its due Constitution, passing through those
Fibers, it little or nothing provokes them. For which end, neither letting of
Blood, nor yet strong Purges are at all convenient, because those things which
shake the Blood and Humors, and lessen strength, impress by that means a
greater sharpness and rage to the faulty Nerve. But gentle Solutives, and a
sparing taking of Blood, sometimes may be useful, whereby the Inwards may be
cleansed, and the bloody Mass somewhat purged, and a way made for other
Medicines, that may better succeed.

But Medicines, Remedies called Cephalicks proper here.
which render the nervous Liquor more friendly and benign to the Membranes of
the Head, that are wont to be troubled by it, are of that sort commonly called
Cephalicks, whose particles being active, thin, and subtle, pass through the
Blood without trouble or tumult; then insinuating themselves with the nervous
Liquor, gently move it, and so cause the nervous passages to be unfolded, so
that the Animal Spirits, Of which sort are these,
more freely beam forth through all the Bodies, both sensible and motive, and
inspire them without any lessening, Convulsions, or irregular distentions.

These kind of Remedies, which are convenient in Dis^ases of the Brain, and in
these kind of Headaches.
although they are not always effectual, yet they oftentimes take away some
Headaches not much inveterate, and in some, help sometimes how pertinacious
soever they be. Further, the same which are prescribed with good success for
the pains of the Head, are also for the distempers of the Brain and Nervous
Stock; and so on the contrary, what are used for these, also for those; to wit,
the virtues of those being unfolded within the Head, against the Apoplexy,
Palsy, Lethargy, and other Diseases akin to them, help also within the moving
Fibers, against Convulsions and Convulsive Motions; besides, putting forth
their virtues within the sensible Fibers, they often give help to pains.

A very large field of these Medicines are opened in physical Books, A great
many of these every where to be found in Physical Books.
yet so, that the poorness of them, and their abundance, bring confusion to the
Method of healing; for oftentimes among so many various and different Remedies,
heaped up together, lie hid or obscured, what may be of great use, but even as
Wheat among Chaff, harder to be separated than that to be thoroughly sifted out
from the husks.

Therefore in this case, a provision of the whole being made, and applied, and
things given which by Diet or Medicine, restrain the Inordinations of the
Blood, and immediately allay them; Medicines called Cephalicks, or such as take
away the disorders of the nervous Juice, are prescribed to be carefully taken.
I shall add some few forms of these.

Take of the Conserve of the Flowers of Betony, An Electuary.
of Clove-gilliflowers, each three ounces; of the Powder of the Root of the
male Poeony half an ounce, of Cretick Dittanny one dram; of the wood Aloes, and
yellow Sanders, each one dram; of red Coral prepared, of Pearl, of Ivory, each
one dram and a half; of the Salt of Vervine one dram and a half, of the Syrup
of the Flowers of Poeony, what will suffice: make an Opiat, take of it to the
quantity of a Chestnut, drinking after it of the following Iulep three ounces.

Take of simple black Cherry water, and of Walnuts, and of Vervine, each four
ounces; Iulep.
of Cowslip Flowers three ounces, of Poeony Compound two ounces, of Sugar Candy
six drams.

Take of the Flowers of Vervine, A distilled Water.
Misleto Berries, each ten handfuls; of the male Poeony Roots two pound, of
Mace and Nutmegs, each half an ounce; of Coriander Seeds one ounce, cut and
bruise them and put to them eight pints of new-milk (or else seven pints of
Milk and one pint of Malago) Distill them in a common Still, and mix all the
liquor together: Take of it three ounces at a time.

Tablets.
Take of the Powder of the Root of the male Poeony half an ounce, of red Coral
prepared two drams, of Ivory and Pearls prepared, each one dram; make of them
all a very fine Powder, add to it of Sugar what will suffice; boil them to the
consistence of Tablets with six ounces of black Cherry-water, of the Tincture
of Coral one dram; make of them Tablets according to Art, to the weight of half
a dram: Eat three or four in the Morning, and at five of the Clock in the
Afternoon, drinking after them a draught of Tea.

Tinctures.
Or Take of the Tincture of Coral one ounce; take of it from fifteen to twenty
drops twice in a day, in a little draught of Iulep, or of the distilled water.

Spirits.
They who are of a Phlegmatic or more Cold temper may take a Dose twice a day,
either of the Tincture of Antimony, or of the Spirits of Ammoniac, impregnated
with Amber of Coral, or of Spirits of Hearts horn, or of Sut, in a proper
Vehicle.

The use of millepedes notably helps.

The other part of the conjunct Cause, consisting in the weakness or evil
conformation of the distempered part, how to be handled.

We are not to despair of the Cure.


We ought not to omit, or postpone the use of Millepedes or Woodlice, for that
the Juice of them, wrung forth, with the distilled Water, also a Powder of them
prepared, oftentimes bring notable help, for the Curing of old and pertinacious
Headaches. I might here propose diverse other kinds of Medicines; yea all those
which I have formerly heaped up, against Convulsive Distempers, may be brought
hither. But yet the most difficult knot of the Cure of the Headache, remains to
be untied, to wit, how the conjunct Cause of this Disease, and fixed,
consisting in the weakness, or hurt Conformation of the Fibers, may be healed
or taken away

Although this is sometimes incurable, to wit, when as a Scirrhous, or Callous
Tumor, or some other old and fixed swelling, has possessed the Meninges; yet, for
that the knowledge of this is uncertain, and that the leading Cause, how cruel
soever it seems, is sometimes overcome by a long course of Physic; therefore
in every Headache, so long as the Patient will admit of Remedies, let it not
seem troublesome to the Physician, to prescribe those things which seem most
convenient.

Here those Medicines are only profitable, that cut off the inkindling or root
of the Disease.

Chyrurgical Remedies chiefly help here; of which are, 1. Plasters.


Therefore, first of all, which we hinted before, you must carefully endeavor
that the nest, or feeding of the Disease be cut off or intercepted, and that
the frequent coming of the fits be hindered; for so the indisposed Fibers, so
long as they are no more affected only by the means of Nature, will recover
health.

In this case the helps of the Medical Art, are rather to be sought from the
Chirurgical part, than from Physic: for whatsoever is taken at the mouth,
going about by long turnings and windings, spends all the virtue before it
comes to the Membranes of the Head.

Among Chirurgical Remedies, first Topics are met with, and among these,
Plasters are of most profitable use, and oftentimes give the greatest benefit:
Let not these be very hot, which may rather draw the humors to the distempered
place, but moderately discussing and strengthening. I was wont to prescribe
Plasters of Red-Lead, and of Soap, with double of the proportion of the Plaster
of Paracelsus, to be applied to the part, it being first shaven, and to be let
remain there for some time The Ancients frequently administered Plasters made of
Mustard, and such as raised wheals or whelks over the parts, Medicines raising
Whelks and Blisters.
and it is a daily practice to apply sometimes to all the hinder part of the
Head, and sometimes to the former, Vesicatories or blistering Plasters, against
most cruel Headaches: when ease is got from these more hot Topics, it is
because by these administrations, plenty of the more sharp Serum is drawn away
from the disaffected part.

Liniments, Fomentations and Bathings, help not.
Liniments of Oils and Ointments, though often made use of, effect little;
because (as I think) if they should penetrate deeply into the tones of the
Fibers, they would loosen them more; so that they would more easily lie open to
the Incursions of the Morbifick matter: Further, they stop up the Pores of the
skin, whereby the Effluvia's do less evaporate. Almost for the same reason, as
hot stupes or Fomentations made of boiled Spices, or other Cephalicks, oftener
hurt than profit; forasmuch as they draw the humors toward the distempered
parts, and also open the Pores and passages, whereby they are more readily
admitted; An Embrocation, or a dipping of the head in cold water, oftentimes
helps.
it is that a Bathing of the Head, or an Embrocation or washing of the Head, at
the pumps in hot Baths, is used with no better success for Headaches: When on
the contrary, it has been beneficial to many, to pour cold water every Morning
and Evening on the temples, forehead, and forepart of the Head: yea to wash or
pump the whole Head, every Morning with cold water, or at least to dip it into
a Bucket or Pit of water.

Issues.
Another Chirurgical help, especially for an inveterate and cruel Headache, and
much cried up, is wont to be the burning or cutting of Issues, in several parts
of the Body. It is without doubt, that these being made in the Arms or Legs,
are both less troublesome, and do bring something of help: because they draw
away the feeding of the Disease in part, and call it away far from the
distempered part. Besides, Issues in the nape of the Neck, and a Seaton in the
hinder part of the Neck, behind the Ear, or near it; also a piece of the root
of wild Hellebore, being put into an hole made in the Ear, because they
evacuate much serosity, and draw it to other Emunctuaries, to wit, Issues made
upon or near the distempered place, help little.
the Glandulas, are oftentimes administered with benefit. But indeed, there has
been a talk, and much expectation from Cauteries, made on the grieved place, or
near it, and so large Issues have been made on the top of the Head, or nigh to
the joining of the Sutures. If we should measure this practice by the fruit or
success, it will appear to be rarely beneficial, but more often unlucky. For I
never knew any healed, but many troubled with Headaches, to be much the worse
for it. And truly, reason plainly tells us, that where a Fontinel is made,
thither the Serous Humor flows, from the whole bloody Mass, and by consequence
from the whole body, and oftentimes is there heaped up more copiously than can
constantly be put forth by that Emissary: wherefore, there ordinarily arise
about Issues, a red swelling, pustles, and various humors. Why should I not
then believe, that a Cautery made nigh to the grieved part of the Head, should
rather cause the Morbific matter to be there heaped up?

There is yet another Chirurgical operation cried up by many for a pertinacious
Headache, The opening of the Skull cried up by many, but rarely or never
attempted.
but by none (that I know of) yet attempted, to wit, an opening of the Skull,
near the grieved place, with a Trypaning Iron. This our most ingenious Harvey
endeavored to persuade a Noble Lady, laboring with a most grievous and
inveterate Headache, promising a Cure from thence; but neither she, nor any
other would admit that administration. Indeed, it did not appear to me, that
there could be any thing of certainly expected from the opening of the Skull
where it was pained; if an Imposthum lay hid there, this had been the only way
of Cure; but that would rather have caused sleepy distempers, or deadly
Convulsions than the Headache. If that a red swelling, or pustles, or a burning
boil, should be in the enfoldings of the Head, I know not if those Tumors,
exposed to the open Air, would more easily evaporate, or whether Remedies
applied to those naked places, would effect any thing or not; because, if the
pains arise by reason of the Meninges being beset with little whelks, a
Scirrhous or a Callous Tumor, I think the opening of the Skull will profit
little or nothing.

But letting this alone till it is practiced, we shall pass over to other
things; and now in the next place, we shall consider, whether Salivation for
the Curing old and confirmed Headaches is to be administered. Whether salivation
in inveterate Headaches, without any suspicion of the Venereal Disease, ought
to be administered.
Indeed, if the pains of the Head arise from the Venereal Disease, no doubt but
that evil Remedy ought to be applied to that evil Distemper: But having tried
that kind of remedy in Headaches arising from other Causes, I found not the
harvest worth the pains, and I confess some examples in those kind of cases,
have terrified me from that method. A certain noble Lady (whose sickness is
below described) for the Curing of a cruel and continual Headache, underwent a
plentiful Salivation three times, viz. the first by a Mercurial Ointment, by
the counsel of Sir Theodore Mayern, and afterward twice by taking the lately
famous Powder of Charles Huis, without any help, I wish not with some
detriment: for afterward for many years, even to this day, the disease being
by degrees increased, she suffered under its heavy tyranny. It happened
somewhat worse, so that noted man Doctor G. D. to whom a Mercurial Ointment was
applied for his akeing Head, for the Cure of an old Headache, by which a
Salivation being excited, and the Disease not Cured, he fell into blindness.
Indeed these kind of effects from Quicksilver, rashly given, every one, rightly
weighing its operation on an humane body, ought to fear. For the Mercury, I
shall not say is malignant or wholely venomous, because it brings little or no
hurt, its particles being united, so that oftentimes a great quantity may be
taken safely enough; yet the Mercurial little bodies, being divided and
separated one from another, (whether it be done by Chemical Salts, as in the
Mercury sublimate, and precipitate, or by straining through the Pores of the
Skin when they are anointed) immediately become fierce and untameable, and stir
up, before any other Medicines, The means and manner of salivation by Mercury,
unfolded.
great perturbations in the humane body: They sometimes bring trouble, first to
the nervous parts, whereby oftentimes happen, (by reason of the Fibers of the
Ventricle, Intestines, and other Viscera's, being pulled or hauled) Torments,
horrid Vomitings, sharp and frequently Bloody-stools, Heart-burnings,
Swoonings, and other most terrible Distempers, a little after the Medicine is
given. Yet sometimes the particles of the Mercury, when they are not presently
dissolved, go forth without any great hurt to the Bowels, and before their
strength be deduced into the bloody Mass. Therefore they easily enter into
this, being highly active, and unfolding themselves on every side, and
immediately infecting the whole, shake it, and frequently (when fully
dissolved) stir it up into a great burning. Then the Blood, that it might put
away from it self, the incongruous little bodies, Fermenting, delivers the same
which way it can, and boils it with the humors, contained within its bosom, to
wit, the Serum and the nourishing Juice, and so endeavors, with those imbued
with that preternatural mixture, to put it off. But this succeeds not
plentifully enough by Urine and Sweat, because the meltings of the Blood, by
the particles of the Mercury boiled in it, like the ladder of a Wash-Ball,
become more clammy and thick, so that they cannot pass through the fine
strainers of the Reins and the Skin, but oftentimes breaking forth (unless
hindered) into the Caeliac Arteries, go forth, by exciting a Diarrhoea or
Dysentery; but by that the intent of Salivation is hindered or frustrated: but
more often, the Liquor imbued with the Mercury, remaining within the Blood, in
a manner also infected, is carried about with it, hither and thither,
impetuously through the Arteries and Veins, and is separated into various parts,
and either breaks forth what way it can, or is forced upon the Bowels,
Membranes, and other parts, oftentimes with great hurt. Also it is seen that
some Mercurial particles do penetrate the Brain, and insinuating themselves
into the nervous Juice, are diffused, not only into the whole Head, but into
all the nervous parts, and so in some measure ferment the nervous Liquor.

But in the mean time the Mercurial Serosities, residing in the Blood, are laid
up for the greatest part into the Glandula's, which are the nearest
Emunctuaries of the Arteries: wherefore, when the Glandula's about the parts of
the Mouth (by which great plenty of Serum is destinated for spittle) being both
many and great, are there placed, and that from these passages lie open, by the
Excretory Vessels, into the cavity of the Mouth; surely by this most certain
way, the envenomed liquor of the Blood, finds a passage forth, when it cannot
easily elsewhere. Wherefore, a spitting at the Mouth being excited, the Blood
long Fermenting, casts forth whatsoever is extraneous, and not agreeable,
either that lies in its bosom, or that it licks up elsewhere from the Bowels,
or receives from the solid parts, or from other humors, like working Ale or
Wine, through the Salival passages, and innumerable pipes opening every where
into the Mouth. Further, it is most likely, as the purgings of the Blood, so
also of the liquor watering the Head, and the nervous Appendix, being excited
by the Mercury entering therein, are also put forth by this way, to wit, by the
Salival passages.

Therefore, a Salivation induced by Mercury, if by chance it succeeds rightly,
it sometimes takes away difficult and untameable Diseases, not to be dealt with
by any other Remedies; because this operation thoroughly purges the Blood and
nervous Juice, and other humors, by a long purgation, destroys all exotic
Ferments, overcomes the enormities of the Salts and Sulphures; yea, and shakes,
and oftentimes carries forth the Morbific matter, wherever remaining or
impacted.

Salivation not always safe, wherefore to be suspected in Headaches.
But this Medicine is not without danger, forasmuch as the Mercury becoming
enormous, and carrying with it abundance of most sharp, and as it were
poisonous Serum, rushing on the noble parts, and especially the Head, with the
Medullary and nervous appendixes, or on the Lungs, and parts about the Heart,
brings to them an incurable and sometimes a deadly evil. Wherefore in a more
grievous and old Headache, there is danger lest the indisposed Fibers should be
more irritated, by the Mercury going through them, with much, and corrosive
Serum, and should move them into more painful Convulsions and wrinklings;
further, lest it should invade the Brain, by a great falling of the Humors upon
the Head, by which means, as it often happens to the Brain, sleepy and
Convulsive distempers are caused. I should have said many things more
concerning this, but that we expect shortly to be made public, by the Learned
Physician Doctor Needham, an exact method of Salivation, and a full account of
it, as to its measures and effects, and its benefits and hurt.

What the cutting of the Artery may profit in this Disease.
There is yet a celebrated Remedy remaining among Chirurgical helps, viz. a
cutting or opening an Artery. This was of great esteem among the Ancients, and
some of the Moderns make use of it, and very much cry it up. But it appears to
our observation, that this so cried up success most often fails. Nor no wonder,
because reason holds not at all, on which the Ancients depended, that the
Arterious Blood was different from the Venous, or that of the Veins, and was in
greater fault and more rageing, and therefore to be let forth. Nor indeed is
there any reason wherefore the Blood being drawn from the Artery, rather than
from the Vein, near the pained place, should bring ease; but rather on the
contrary, more help ought to be expected from opening of the Vein; because, the
Artery being emptied, receives and draws nothing from the distempered part; but
the Vein being opened, draws from the place of the effused Blood, and from its
whole neighborhood, and oftentimes sups back, and renders to a Circulation the
Blood, and other Humors, heaped up and stagnating near the nest of the Disease.
But however, that we may not recede too much from the practice of the Ancients,
we shall grant, that sometimes it may be helpful, though attributing nothing to
the section of the Artery, and not immediately, yet causally, Nevertheless in
this Distemper it is often helpful, and by what means, is shown.
and only by consequence and by accident: to wit, forasmuch as the ends of the
Artery being cut, grow fast together, so that the passage of the Blood by that
way is shut up for the future; from hence when as a lesser provision of Blood
is carried by the Artery toward the place: and the like still carried away
from it by the Veins, it therefore sometimes happens, that the nest of the
Morbific Matter sometimes lessened, and its mine is by degrees consumed. For
this reason, this administration oftentimes succeeds happily in diseases of the
Eyes. Farriers use the like practice.
Further, Farriers make use of the like practice for the Curing of evil tumors
in the Legs of Horses; to wit, they take and bind the Artery, by which the
Matter flows to the distempered part, and in the mean time, that which was
impacted, partly evaporates, and is partly supped up by the Vein. And I have
heard, that the same has been tried by our Harvey, and not without success, And
perhaps it may be convenient for the curing of strumous or running humors,
such as the Kings Evil.
for the Curing also of Strumous and Scirrhous Tumors in the humane body. I
might here subjoyn many other kinds of Remedies, yea also the prescriptions and
forms of Medicines, which are wont to be administered for the Curing of
Headaches, both by Physicians and by Empericks: but enough of these are to be
had in Physical Books. It will be to our purpose, that after the delivering the
Aetiology, or the reason of this Disease so confusedly shown, and its
Therapeutic or Curatory part sufficiently shadowed, for the more clear
illustrating of these things, that we add some more rare cases of sick persons,
and examples of a continual and most grievous Headache, which also for an
invincible cause was oftentimes deadly.

A Woman of about fifty years of age, The History of a continual and a deadly
Headache.
after she had labored for about six months with a most grievous pain in the
Head, troubling her almost perpetually, under the Sagittal Suture (or the seam
that goes through the length of the Skull, dividing it into two parts) yielding
to no Medicines, or method, at length fell into a Lethargy, with a partial
resolution of her members; from which notwithstanding, being shortly recovered
by timely Remedies, she awaked with the Headache, as cruel as before; moreover,
A continual and inveterate Headache passing into a Lethargy.
within two or three weeks after, relapsing into the sleepy distemper, she
departed this life. Her skull being opened, there grew from the side of the
third bosom, to the Membranes, a Scirrhous Tumor three fingers broad, by the
coming between of which, both the Dura matter for a little space was grown to
the Pia matter, and the sanguiferous Vessels, which should open there into the
cavity of the bosom, were stopped up. Further, the cranklings or turnings in of
the Brain, both the exterior and the inward cavity, was filled with a clear
water. From these things being observed, the invincible and at length deadly
cause most clearly appeared: to wit, the most sensible Fibers of the Meninges
being continually pulled and torn, partly by reason of the breaking of the
unity, and partly from the humor belonging to the Nerves, being there heaped up
and stagnating, together with others flowing thither, and growing hot with it,
were provoked into Convulsions perpetually, or painful Distentions: Afterward,
when the Blood being for a long time hindered in its circulation, by reason of
that Tumor, or that at least it could not pass through it, by any means, sent
copiously away from it self the Serous Water (as its manner is wherever it
finds an hindrance) and at length a Dropsy in the Brain was raised, which was
the cause of the deadly Lethargy. I remember I have seen the like case in
another, whom I have opened. Further, as I think, the disease in many troubled
with Headaches, does depend on the like invincible cause; I will however
describe one example yet living, of this kind of Distemper.

Some years since, A second History of an incurable Headache, in a most noble
Lady laboring with it for twenty years.
I was sent for to visit a most noble Lady, for above twenty years sick with
almost a continual Headache, at first intermitting: She was of a most beautiful
form, and a great wit, so that she was skilled in the Liberal Arts, and in all
sorts of Literature, beyond the condition of her sex; and as if it were thought
too much by Nature, for her to enjoy so great endowments, without some
detriment, she was extremely punished with this Disease. Growing well of a
Feavour before she was twelve years old, she became obnoxious to pains in the
Head, which were wont to arise, sometimes of their own accord, and more often
upon every light occasion. This sickness being limited to no one place of the
Head, troubled her sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, and often
through the whole compass of the Head. During the fit (which rarely ended under
a day and a nights space, and often held for two, three, or four days) she was
impatient of light, speaking, noise, or of any motion, sitting upright in her
Bed, the Chamber made dark, she would talk to no body, nor take any sleep, or
sustenance. At length about the declination of the fit, she was wont to lie
down with an heavy and disturbed sleep, from which awaking, she found her self
better, and so by degrees grew well, and continued indifferently well till the
time of the intermission. Formerly, the fits came not but occasionally, and
seldom under twenty days or a month, but afterward they came more often: and
lately, she was seldom free. Moreover, upon sundry occasions, or evident causes
(such as the change of the Air, or the year, the great Aspects of the Sun and
Moon, violent passions, and errors in diet) she was more cruelly tormented with
them. But although this Distemper most grievously afflicting this noble Lady,
above twenty years (when I saw her) having pitched its tents near the confines
of the Brain, had so long besieged its regal tower, yet it had not taken it:
for the sick Lady, being free from a Vertigo, swimming in the Head, Convulsive
Distempers, and any Soporiferous symptom, found the chief faculties of her soul
sound enough.

Remedies of every kind for the curing this Headache, tried in vain.
For the obtaining a Cure, or rather for a trial, very many Remedies were
administered, through the whole progress of the Disease, by the most skilful
Physicians, both of our own Nation, and the prescriptions of others beyond
Seas, without any success or ease; also great Remedies of every kind and form
she tried, but still in vain. Some years before, she had endured from an
ointment of Quicksilver, a long and troublesome Salivation, so that she ran the
hazard of her life. Afterward twice a Cure was attempted (though in vain) by a
Flux at the Mouth, from a Mercurial Powder, which the noted Emperick Charles
Hues ordinarily gave: with the like success with the rest she tried the Baths,
and the Spaw-waters, almost of every kind and nature: she admitted of frequent
Blood-letting, and also once the opening of an Artery; she had also made about
her several Issues, sometimes in the hinder part of her Head, and sometimes in
the forepart, and in other parts. She also took the Air of several Countries
besides her own native Air, she went into Ireland and into France: There was no
kind of Medicines both Cephalicks, Antiscorbuticks, Hysterical, all famous
Specificks, which she took not, both from the Learned and the unlearned, from
Quacks, and old Women; and yet notwithstanding she professed, that she had
received from no Remedy, or method of Curing, any thing of Cure or Ease, but
that the contumacious and rebellious Disease, refused to be tamed, being deaf
to the charms of every Medicine. Further, this so long possessing the out-parts
of the Head, though it could not invade the cloisters of the Brain; yet, when I
visited her, unfolding its ends in some other parts of the nervous kind, it had
begun to stir up most cruel pains in her members, and also in her Loins, and
bottom of her Belly, as is wont to be in the Rheumatism, and in the Scorbutic
Colic.

Conjectures concerning the reason of this cruel Disease.
If we should inquire into the Aetiology or the Causes of this inveterate
Disease, we can suspect nothing less than that the Meninges of the Brain, being
from the beginning more lightly touched, had afterward contracted an habitual
and indelible vice. It appears by the History, that the distemper at first
arose from a Morbific matter, which was translated into the Head, after an ill
cured Feavour. Then perchance, by reason of some hurt brought to the Membranes,
the tone of the Fibers was so much endamaged, that afterward, the Humors
flowing in them, both the nervous and others, being heaped up to a fullness, or
growing hot by mere aggravation, raised up the fits of the Headache. But at
length the diseased cause growing worse, by reason of the frequent fits, it
seems that the unity of those Fibers, were so much broken, that from thence
little Tumors, or Scirrhous knots or swellings, being riased up in all the
exterior Meninge, or in a great part of it, produced pains almost continual,
and those apt to be made worse or embittered upon every light occassion:
Certainly it seems most likely, that the invincible and permanent cause of so
long, and yet not deadly Headache, proceeds from some such thing, viz. a
Scirrhous Distemper of the Dura matter, the Pia matter being in the mean time
safe. For from any other cause, if there had beee a conflict of Nature and
Medicine with the Disease, either a quick death or a joyful victory had far
sooner been obtained.

A third History of a deadly continual Headache.
A noted Gentleman of about forty years of Age, strong and healthy, going a
journey for a whole day in a continual rain, the wet beating on the hinder part
of his Head, caught cold, and the next day he began to feel a pain in that
part; which in a short time after becoming very bitter, afflicted him night and
day, and kept him almost continually without sleep. For the Cure of this
Distemper, Phlebotomy, Purging, Glisters, Blisterings, and Remedies to cause
rest; yea and many others of every kind, though diligently applied, by the
Counsel also of many Physicians, helped little or nothing. When the Disease
notwithstanding these, grew every day worse, after a fortnights time,
preternatural swelled kernels and painful arose all about his Neck, the pain in
his Head nothing remitting: Further, the Tendons of his Neck being very much
distended and stiff, became very troublesome to him; to which, in a short time,
succeeded Convulsive motions, and a sudden leaping of the Tendons, in several
parts, with a delirium, and at length, the sick person worn out with pains and
watching, yielded to death.

Though we had not leave for the dissecting the dead body, A conjecture
concerning the reason of the Disease.
yet it may be suspected, that both the Pericranium, and the Meninges in the
hinder part of the Head, clothing the Cerebel, where they are more thick and
very nappy, were first affected; and then from thence the evil was afterward
communicated to the whole Head, and wandered into all the nervous stock: when
as in those Membranes, transpiration was hindered, from the cold and the wet,
and also the tone of the Fibers very much hurt, it is probable, that the
nervous Liquor watering them, being then hindered in its motion, and stagnating,
did burden the containing bodies; then that being depraved in its Complexion,
grew hot with other humors flowing thither, and being at length coagulated with
them, grew together into Scirrhous and Strumous Tumors, and so laid the copious
seed-plot of a most grievous Headache: Then afterward, when through watching
and perpetual pains, a great inordination of the Spirits, and a great Discrasie
of the Juice watering the Head, were produced; for that reason, the knotty
Concretions in the Neck, the stifness of the Tendons, and at length Convulsions
and Convulsive Motions followed in the Brain, and in the whole nervous Stock:
and so, when as the animal economy or regiment was much decayed, and that the
motion of the Praecordia could not be continued, the vital flame expired.

Sometimes deadly and incurable Headaches are no less raised up from a fiery
swelling and Imposthum, A fourth History of an Headache, excited from a fiery
Swelling, or an Inflammation of the Meninges.
than from these kind of knots, and little pimples of the Meninges. Sometime
since, a young man of the University, whenas he had complained for a fortnight
of a most grievous pain in the Head, incessantly afflicting him, it was at
length increased by a Feavour, and afterwads, waking, Convulsive motions, and
talking idly followed; at which time a Physician being sent for, letting blood,
Clysters, Plasters, Revulsives, Blistrings, also internal Remedies which call
away the Flux of the Blood and Humors from the Head, being carefully
administered, profited nothing; so that death soon followed. His Skull being
opened, the Vessels leading to the Meninges were full of Blood, and very much
distended, as if the whole Mass of Blood had flowed thither, so that the bosoms
being dissected and opened, the Blood presently rushing forth, flowed to the
weight of several ounces above half a pint: Further, the Membranes themselves
being distempered through the whole, with a fiery Tumor, appeared discolored:
These coverings being taken away, all the infoldings of the Brain, and of its
Ventricle, were full of a clear water, and its substance being too much watered,
was wet, and not firm. Without doubt in this case, the incursion of the heated
blood into the Meninges, and the heaping of it up there, exciting the Phlgemon
or fiery swelling, was the cause of the Headache, and of the following Delirium:
Then the Blood being accumulated there, when it could not circulate, flung from
it self plenty of Serum, by which the whole inward part of the Head was
over-flowed; so that the Disease, at first perhaps curable by Phlebotomy, from
thence afterward became mortal.

I remember another Academick, An History of an Headache raised up from an
Impost^ume in the Meninges.
who after a long Headache, under the temporal Suture, tormenting him
perpetually for three weeks together, immediately fell into a deadly Apoplexy.
His Head being opened, a fiery swelling had grown in the Meninges, near the
place where the pain was, from which, being ripened and broke, the filthy
bloody matter falling on the Brain, had distempered its substance with a
rottenness and blackness. Besides, these invincible causes, detected by
Anatomy, I observed more chances after the same manner, as of other sick
people; by which we may conclude its Aetiology, to be the same, or very near of
kin, with the signs and symptoms of the like nature, and but now described.

But although a continual Headache (especially if it be without intermissions
for many weeks) is not without danger: A continual Headache, we always to be
accounted incurable.
yet we ought not therefore to despair of its Cure, because the cause of this,
how fixed and immovable soever it seem, oftentimes by the long use of
Medicines, and sometimes without them, is helped by Nature and time: however,
in a case almost desperate, there is need of some Medicines, lest the present
Distemper should pass into a worse, to wit, a Soporiferous or Convulsive. Thus
much for a Continual Headache: it now remains, that we should propose some more
rare examples and instances of the Intermitting. An intermitting Headache, whose
Fits are uncertain, are so frequent that we need show no instances of it.


Therefore, that we may let alone here, the Headaches, whose fits being
wandering and uncertain, proceed from the Blood or Serum rushing on the
distempered places, as cases very well known, and commonly seen; we shall now
show you now some select Observations of this Disease, either periodical, or
caused by the consent of some Inward: As to the first, we have shown the
periodical fits of the pains of the Head, to be produced by the nutritious
Humor, or by the nervous Juice: we shall now show you Examples of either.

The sixth History of a periodical intermitting Headache.
A venerable Matron of about forty five years of Age, of a lean habit of Body,
and endued with a Choleric Temper, after she had lived for a long time
obnoxious to Headaches, wont to be caused occasionally, she began about the
beginning of Autumn, to be troubled with a periodical pain of the Head: This
Distemper invading her about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, was wont to
continue till midnight, when being wearied with pain and watching, she was
compelled to sleep; then afterward awaking out of a profound sleep, she found
her self well again. She being sick after this manner for three weeks, suffered
the daily fits of this Disease, and forbore to take any Medicine, which she
greatly abhorred; but at length her Appetite being lost, and her strength worn
out, being forced to seek for Cure; after letting blood and a gentle Purge, she
took twice a day for a week or two, the quantity of a Chestnut of the following
Electuary, and grew perfectly well.

The Cure of the same.
Take of the Conserve of the Flowers of Succory and Fumitory, each three
ounces; of the Powder of the Root of Aron Compound two drams and a half, of
Ivory one dram and a half, of yellow Sanders, and of Lignum Aloes, each half a
dram; of the Salt of Wormwood one dram and a half, of Vitrial of Steel one
dram, of the Syrup of the Five Roots what will suffice to make an Electuary.
The reason of this Case unfolded.
In this Case, that after a disposition to the Headache, the fits of the Disease
became at length periodical, after the manner of intermitting Feavours, the
cause without doubt was, the assimilation of the Chyme, or nourishing Humor,
into Blood, being hindered: because, when its provision being received into the
Mass of Blood, could not be overcome, it was wont after a little stay to
disagree, and with its particles, to grow hot; therefore presently the Blood
swelling up, that it might shake off the incongruous mixture, laid aside its
recrements, as in other parts, so especially and with a greater sense of
trouble into the before weak Fibers of the Meninges, or hurt in their
conformation: This Matter being poured on the Head, or rushing of it self
through the sensible Fibers, or growing hot with the Juice watering them, raised
up the fit of the pain but now described; which continued until the
heterogeneous particles growing hot, with their mutual coming together, were
either subdued or exhaled.

The seventh History of the same Distemper, excited by the default of the
nervous Liquor.
A very comely Woman, tall and slender, being for a long time grievously
obnoxious to distempers of the Head, was wont sometimes to be troubled for many
days, yea weeks, every day as soon as she awaked in the Morning, with a most
Cruel Headache, afflicting her for three or four hours: and in the mean time,
she was vexed with a weight of her whole Head, a numness of her senses, and a
dullness of mind: which kind of Distemper, together with the pain, like
discussed Clouds, vanished before noon, and left her quiet and calm: Then again
the next morning, it possessed her Head like a dark Cloud. The Cure of it.
For the Curing of it I prescribed the use of Purging Pills, Phlebotomy
sparingly, besides a Blistering, and Spirits of Hartshorn, or of Sut, with
Cephalic Juleps or Waters.

The reason of the Case unfolded.
That in this Lady, otherways than in the other sick Lady, the pains of the Head
rather followed after sleep, than were healed by it, the reason seems to be,
because in this morning Headache, the Morbific Matter resided in the nervous
Juice, whose more notable crudity, and fuller aggestion about the Head, happen
immediately after sleep, as we have elsewhere shown at large: But the other
Evening fits of this Disease, depended upon the fullness and swelling up of the
nourishing Liquor within the bloody Mass, and therefore happening so many hours
after dinner, was not allayed but by sleep, which quiets the disorders of the
Blood.

An Instance of an intermitting Headache, which seemed to be excited from the
womb.
It does no less clearly appear, that the fits of the Headache do arise,
sometimes by consent from other parts, viz. the Womb, Spleen, Stomach, etc. and
though the complaints, and the experience of the sick, declare it to arise from
Vapors, yet from the Histories of them, and their appearances rightly weighed,
it is most clear, that this proceeds from another reason, than from Vapors
carried to the Head from the distempered inward. And in the first place, as to
the pains of the Head, that seem to arise from the Womb, there is nothing more
frequent than that upon the suppression of the Monthly Flowers, or the Lochia
after being brought to bed, or (as they call it) the flooding, for cruel
Headaches to succeed. Further, although the Terms do rightly flow, yet some at
the instant of its flowing, others at the stopping of the same, are wont to be
troubled with a cruel pain of the Head. But indeed, though at the same time, as
the Head, the Womb also is distempered: however it does not follow, that the
evil is transferred from hence, thither immediately: but the Blood it self,
which fixes the Morbific Matter to the Head, carries it, sometimes begotten in
its proper bosom, and destinated to the Womb, wrongfully into the Meminges of
the Brain; and sometimes snatching it from the parts of the Womb, delivers it
with greater malice to the Head. This same reason may also serve for the
Headache, commonly attributed to the Stomach, Spleen, and other parts.

A beautiful and young Woman, The eighth History of an intermitting Headache,
seeming to a^ise from the Stomach.
endued with a slender habit of body, and an hot Blood, being obnoxious to an
hereditary Headache, was wont to be afflicted with frequent and wandering fits of
it, to wit, some upon every light occasion, and some of their own accord; that
is, arising without any evident cause. On the day before the coming of the
spontaneous fit of this Disease, growing very hungry in the Evening, she eat a
most plentiful Supper, with an hungry, I may say greedy appetite; presaging by
this sign, that the pain of the Head would most certainly follow the next
Morning; and the event never failed this Augury. For as soon as she awaked,
being afflicted by a most sharp torment, through the whole forepart of her Head,
she was troubled also with Vomiting, sometimes of an Acid, and as it were a
Vitriolick, Humor, and sometimes of a Choleric and highly bitterish: hence
according to this sign, this Headache is thought to arise from the vice of the
Stomach.

That I may render a reason of this, first it appears, that a Vomiting will
succeed a hurt upon the Head, to wit, after a blow, or wound, or a fall; yet a
pain of the Head rarely or never follows, upon Vomiting, the pain of the Heart,
or the Stomach, any otherways laboring, A reason of this Case delivered.
unless the Blood comes between. Wherefore in the aforesaid case of the sick
person, as it appears plainly that the Meninges of the Brain were before
disposed to Headaches, its fits were stirred up by every agitation of the
Blood; hence it is obvious to be conceived, when the heterogeneous particles
are heaped up together to a fullness, in the bloody Mass, by reason of the vice
of the Chyle, presently a flux of it arising, for the expulsion of the trouble,
those being but evilly matched, being separated by the Blood, and partly poured
forth out of the Arteries into the Ventricle, The like reason is for other
Headaches, seeming to arise from the Spleen, Liver, Mesentery, etc.
do raise up its Ferment, and so produce hunger; and partly rushing into the
predisposed Meninges of the Head do there dispose the tinder, or rather
incentive of the Headache about to follow. This sick Gentlewoman, averse to all
Physic, when she would undergo no method of Medicine, at length became
obnoxious also to Paralytick, and Convulsive distempers. Out of these it will
be easy to design the reason of every other Headache, viz. of the
Hypochondriac, Hepatic, or otherways Sympathetical, so that there need not here
to be added any more Histories or Observations.

CHAP. III.
Of the Lethargy.

THUS far we have described, by what Disease chiefly, and after what sort, the
out-skirts of the Head, or the coverings of that enclosed within the Skull, are
wont to be affected; The Seat of the Lethargy is the same with that of Sleep
and Memory; to wit, about the Shell of the Brain.
and now descending to its more internal part, and which lies next to the
Cortical or shelly substance, we shall see to what distempers this part is
found to be chiefly obnoxious. We have showed at large in another place, that
the Cortex or shelly part of the Brain is the seat of the Memory, and the porch
of sleep: wherefore, we rightly referr the Disease, which is wont to cause an
excess of sleep, and an eclipse or defect of memory, to wit, the Lethargy, to
that Cortical part of the Brain.

The word Lethargy is wont to signify two sorts of Distempers, By this name
both the Fits of the Lethargy are called,
which are as it were the act and the disposition of this Disease; for those
who are said to labor with this Disease, or are sick of its great assaults,
are overwhelmed with so great sleepiness, that they can scarce be excited by
any impression of a sensible object, yea if by chance being pricked or pinch't,
they open their Eyes, or move their members, presently they let them fall
again, and become insensible; and oftentimes when left to themselves indulging
a perpetual sleep, by an easy transition, they pass into death it self, whose
type this Disease is; which kind of fits, have often a Feavour joined with
them, which when the sick awake, and return perfectly to themselves, for the
most part ceases of its own accord. And also the soporiferous disposition, or
Sleepiness;
Or secondly, they are accounted Lethargical, who being oppressed with an
immoderate torpor or numness of the senses, are found to be almost ever prone
to sleep; so that in the midst of a journey, yea at dinner, or though busied
about any thing, they presently fall into a drousieness. But as there are
diverse degrees, Of which there are various kinds:

The continual Sleepiness, the Coma, etc.

In every Lethargick Distemper there is an excess of Sleep, and a defect of
Memory.


and various manners of this sleepy distemper, so also they constitute the
various kinds of this Lethargick disposition. We shall for the present speak
first of the former Lethargy, and properly so called, and afterward of
continual Sleepiness also of the Coma, Caro, and other soporiferous Diseases
akin to it, and likewise of Continual Waking.

In the mean time, it is to be noted, that almost in every kind of Lethargy,
there is always as its Pathognomick sign, a Torpor or Sleepiness, and oblivion
or forgetfulness. Those who suffer the more grievous fits of this Disease, if
they are awakened by any force in their declination, forget all things, nor are
they able to remember their own, nor the names of their Friends: also, those
who have drunk more sparingly of this forgetful cup, as much as they are
proclive to Sleep, so much are they deficient in Memory; so that they forget
late actions, and oftentimes repeat things done, and very often ask the same
questions: As to the other faculties, as Reason, Fantasy, the sensitive and
loco-motive powers, the failings or defects of them, are proportionate
according to the enormities of Sleep and Memory. Wherefore, that the formal
reason, and the causes of the Lethargy, may be the beter known, we should here
first of all discourse concerning sleep and oblivion, and for what causes they
are excited.

The essence and causes of natural and non-natural Sleep, rehearsed.
But having already discoursed concerning the former of these, we showed that
the essence of Sleep did consist in the corporeal souls withdrawing it self by
little and little, and contracting the sphere of its irradiation, left
destitute and as it were shut forth of doors, the outmost compass of the Brain,
or its shelly part, and so the exterior, and all the organs of sense and
motion, from the emanation of the spirits; so that they for refreshment sake,
being called inward, lie down and give themselves to rest; in the mean time,
the Pores and passages of the outward part of the Brain, being free and empty
from the excursions of the spirits, are prepared for the coming of the nervous
Liquor, stilled forth from the Blood, for a new provision of Spirits. In
accustomed and natural Sleep, these two causes, conspire and happen together,
as it were out of a certain mutual compact of Nature; viz. at the same time,
the Spirits give place, the nervous Humor enters: but in unnatural sleep, or
that which is extraordinary, sometimes this cause, and sometimes that is the
former; for the Spirits being wearied or called away, first withdraw
themselves, and so offer an entrance to the nervous humor heaped up before the
doors; or else the nervous humor driving to those places more plentifully, and
as it were making its way by force, repels the Spirits, and entering into their
passages, does as it were drown them: we have particularly assigned the various
occasions of either of these, and after what manner they come to pass.
Concerning the eclipse or desect of the Memory, we need not speak much here,
because it is wholely from the same cause, as immoderate Sleep, to wit, the
exclusion, and an interdiction for a time, of the passing up and down of the
Animal Spirits, from the exterior passages of the Brain, full of some humor.

The causes of preternatural Sleep are,
Preternatural Sleep, or an insatiable sleepiness (which is the chief symptom in
the Lethargy, and sleepy Diseases) seems to arise wholely from the same causes
as non-natural Sleep, carried forth only with greater force or energy; to wit,
either the Animal Spirits, being first distempered, leave the outward compass
of the Brain, and give an entrance, An infartion or obstruction of the outward
part of the Brain, and a recess of the Spirits from thence:

Sometimes this, sometimes that, is the cause.

The Lethargy oftentimes from the serous heap overflowing the outward part of
the Brain:

And sometimes from a Dropsi^ of the whole Brain.


not only to the nervous, but to the serous, and some other vicious Humor; or
else, the superfluous and excrementitious humors, together with the nervous,
break through the cortical doors of the Brain, and as it were overflowing its
Pores and passages, drive thence and repel the Spirits; sometimes this is
chiefly the cause, sometimes the former, and sometimes both together. We shall
first speak of that which is the more frequent cause of the Lethargy, to wit,
the eruption of either too much, or too incongruous humor, upon the confines of
the Brain, and then afterward of the departure of the Spirits from the
affected part.

I have often found by Anatomical observation, that the Lethargy does arise
from the Serous heap rushing into the outward infoldings of the Brain, and
entering into its Pores and Cortical passages; for in many dead of this
Disease, I found the spaces between the foldings of the Brain, full of clear
water, yea and its outmost substance soft and infirm, from too much wet;
moreover in some I found the interior cavities swelled with water, and the
whole frame of the Brain overflowed with a Dropsy, or rather a flood. When
therefore in a great and mortal Lethargy, it has appeared that it has been
after this manner, we may well suspect in a lesser and cureable sleepiness,
that the out-borders of the Brain, are at least too much watered with humor,
and the tracts of the Spirits overflowed; especially if there appear any signs
of water or of Serum, abounding about other parts of the Head.

A grievous sleepiness is wont to be excited, Not only a plenty of humor, but
the malignity, often causes this Disease.
not only from the Serum being too much, or from the over plenty of any other
Morbific humor, but sometimes from its malignity: for it often happens, that a
certain infestous and virulent matter is instilled from the Flood into the
Brain, which entering the Pores of the Cortical substance, profligates the
Spirits, and either extinguishing them, or driving them away inwards, so that
this region being left destitute of them, a sleepiness and forgetfulness
succeeds. There is none almost who has not taken notice, that this often
happens in malignant and ill handled Feavours: also in the Scorbutic Cachexie,
the Yellow Iaundice, and certain other Chronical Diseases, oftentimes a
sluggish and vapid or tastless water is sent in, instead of the subtle and
spirituous nervous Juice, that is the parent of forgetfulness, and of
sleepiness.

This Conjunct Cause of the Lethargy, The pro^atarctick causes of the Lethargy.

In what respect they are in fault;


to wit, the heaping up of too much Humor, or too incongruous, within the
shelly part of the Brain, depends upon other Causes, to wit, more remote
leading causes, and also evident causes. As to the former, they are wont to be
in fault, both when the Blood supplies the distempered part with Morbific
matter, and also because that the Brain it self too easily admits it.

For indeed, Both the Blood begetting evil humors, and sending them to the
Brain;
the Blood transfers to the Head in some, a great quantity of a watery humor,
and in others of a salt or scorbutical humor, also again in others
excrementitious humors, and deadly to the animal government, sometimes taken
from these bowels, and sometimes from those; and as occasion serves, instills
them together with the nervous Juice, out of the Arteries on the outer borders
of the Brain, and there by little and little insinuating this kind of Morbific
Matter, by a long congestion, causes a dark cloud, or else by a sudden
transportation of it, overflows at once all the outward part of the Brain, and
drives away the inhabiting Spirits, like a Sea breaking in, and compels them to
run more inwardly.

But indeed the Morbific Matter, and the Brain too easily receiving them.
how copiously or infestous soever it be, and poured on the Head, does not
induce the Lethargic Distemper, unless the very weak or vicious, constitution
of the Brain be also in fault: for if this be strong and of good temper, it
easily resists the assaults of all those; yea it bears, without hurt, the
errors and enormities in the six non-naturals. Upon what occasions the Brain is
prone to the Lethargy.
Those who have this part too humid, or too cold, as Children and old Men;
also, those distempered with Cacochymical Humors, the Dropsy, Scurvy, or
Humors gathered about the mouth of the Stomach, are very prone to sleep, and
sometimes, fall from a stronger Evident Cause, into a continual drowsiness.
Besides, those who have a weak Brain, and their Pores too lax or open, that by
that means the feculencies obtruded from the Blood find a more easy passage,
often become obnoxious to sleepiness, yea and to the Lethargy: for such as are
given to Surfeiting and Drunkenness, are wont presently after to fall asleep,
which weakens the tone of the Brain, and fill, and too much open its Pores,
with a crude and filthy Juice; so that when it has been for a long time
accustomed, by reason of these occasions, to admit into them the Serous
superfluities, it afterward refuses nothing brought to it, but that its
passages, like a course or wide strainer, suffers all the grosser particles,
both Saline, watery, and earthy, easily to pass through them.

Besides these more remote leading causes (which become the act of the stirred
up Morbific) there are more strong Evident Causes, The evident causes of this
Disease.
for so great danger does not hang over the Brain, as that its whole compass
should be invaded, from every morbid provision, nor upon every light occasion,
But there are many and diverse occasions, by which the sleepy assaults are seen
to be incited: the chief of these are great Surfeits, Drunkenness, especially
of Wine, or the Drinking immoderately of Strong Water, then after such excess
to lie all night, or sleep in the open Air: further, an evacuation of the
Serum, by otherways, after having been long suppressed; also if Spaw-waters
being drunk in a larger quantity, and not again rendered presently by Urine,
threaten a Lethargy. And so also do recrements of other Diseases, either not
well or not at all Cured, being translated to the Head; so as a continual
sleepiness often happens after acute Feavours, or such as continue long, and
other Chronical Diseases, and especially the Headache, Frenzy, Empyema, or
collection of gross Humors upon the Lungs and the Colic.

Thus much of the Lethargy, Another conjunct cause of the Lethargy consists in
the afflicting the Spirits with some narcotick.
whose assault proceeds from the Cortex or shelly part of the Brain, being
affected; to which succeed either an eclipse or an exclusion of the Spirits
there inhabiting, with a sleepiness and oblivion. But as non-natural sleep, so
sometimes what is preternatural, begins from the Spirits being first dejected;
and which is usual to succeed another Cause. It is obvious to any one, that
this ordinarily happens from more strong Opiates, without any previous flood or
stopping of the cortical part of the Brain: for it is not probable that
Narcoticks stir up the Humors, and send them to the Brain, when it plainly
appears, that all the effervescences and flowings of these, are allayed by
them. But if it should be asked after what manner, and by what means, Opiates
cause sleep, and sometimes a deadly Torpor or sleepiness, we say; That this
Medicine is a certain kind of poison, beating down or extinguishing the Animal
Spirits, by its blasting; the Blood and solid parts in the mean time being
almost untouched: How opiates causes Sleep.
Wherefore, when the Animal Spirits become raging, and as it were struck with
madness, running hither and thither, and will not be quieted and allayed,
Opiates being administered, like water flung upon a flame, destory some of the
outmost bands of them, so that the rest being lessened, and flying inwards,
quietly lie down. We have at large discoursed of these things in a particular
Tract, Of the Operations of Medicines on the Humane Body: For the present we
shall note (which is to the purpose) that Narcoticks (or Medicines causing
rest) being taken at the mouth, do put forth their powers partly in the
Ventricle, and indeed immediately, and partly in the Brain, both that and the
Mass of Blood mediating. By what means Narcoticks do operate, whilst in the
Ventricle, and provoke sleep, we have shown, Chap. XV. When they are moderate,
in either province, they gently intoxicate some unquiet Spirits, and so
immediately quiet the rest; but if any one takes Opiates in too large a Dose,
he shall presently feel hurt both in the Ventricle and in the Brain, and a
little after being insensible, shall suffer a greater evil in either: to wit,
How they operate in the Ventricle, (...) what mea^^ in the Brain.
a mighty heaviness, and as it were an immovable weight in the Stomach, which
seems to opress both it and the neighboring parts; indeed by this sign, the
Fibers of this place (the Spirits which before actuated them being broken)
become without life, and as it were dead; then by reason of the Opiate,
particles being carried about with the Blood, to the frame or compass of the
Brain, and instilled into its Cortical or shelly part, the Spirits being driven
away from thence or extinguished, an irresistible, and oftentimes a deadly
sleep follows: yea, I have sometimes known, from a more grievous hurt inflicted
on the Ventricle, only by the use of a more strong Narcotic, Death it self to
have followed before sleep could creep upon them, The History of one presently
killed by taking too large a Dose of Opium.
coming by a long way about. A strong man vexed with a most cruel Colic, for
ease sake (whilst a Physician was sent for) took rashly a great quantity of
Opium; a little after he had taken it, he complained of a great burden
oppressing, and mightily weighing down the Ventricle: His Friends and the
bystanders gave him Cordial waters, Wine, and Strong Water, but without any
ease: This oppression creeping wider ahout the Precordia, raised up pains and
swoonings; but still being awake, and constant in mind, he cried out, that his
spirits more and more failed him; till about three hours after, complaining
that his sight was gone, he presently dyed.

Sometimes a Lethargy arises from Narcotick Particles begotten in the Body;
But that we may return to the Lethargy, as it is a Disease and not the effects
of Opium, whence we digressed; concerning which we are yet to enquire, whether
it may arise from a Narcotick Humor begotten in us, as some Chemists assert? We
shall tell you our conjecture, that we think this it is sufficiently plain, that
there are other sorts of Morbific particles produced in our Bodies, than those
commonly called Elementary and Humoral, and that they do affect after a various
manner, viz. besides the Watery, Earthly, Bilous, Phlegmatic, or Melancholic,
we may find others Vitriolick, Nitro-sulphureous, and others participating of
enormous Sulphurs and Salts, and active to our evil. The Convulsive Pathology
can by no other means be delivered and explained, unless by supposing that some
extraneous little bodies, and as it were Nitro-sulphureous, which sticking to
the Spirits, and at last cast off by them, stir up the Explosive, Even as
Convulsions from a nitro-sulphureous, or explosive matter.
that is Convulsive force: In like manner we may think, that others of another
nature may perhaps be begotten, such as are of a Sulphurous, Vitriolick, or
Narcotick nature, which when they creep into the Brain and nervous Stock, fall
upon some Animal Spirits, which they by chance do meet, with extinguishing and
fixing them, ordinarily induce their losses and eclipses, such as happen in the
Vertigo, Apoplexy, or Palsy, as we shall more fully show hereafter. In like
manner, in a great fit of the Lethargy, though it be improbable, that these
kind of Narcotick particles should be in heaps derived from the Blood into the
Brain, in so great a quantity, that they should at once overturn the spirits
dwelling in its whole precincts, and fix them; yet we may believe, that this
may be some part of the Cause. Wherefore, in every long sleepiness, or
Lethargick disposition, we do suspect the Animal Spirits, to be burdened with
such a Lethaean Copula, and that we should direct the darts of every Medicine
against it.

Thus much concerning the formal reason, What things belong to the Theory of
the Lethargy.
subject, and causes of the Lethargy, properly so called, the sum of all which
is, That the Animal Spirits, the inhabitants of the exterior Brain, being
hindered from their wonted motion and emanation, lie down in a profound and
inextricable sleep: but they are hindered either by the proper vice of
themselves, because having taken or being distempered by some Narcotick, they
are as it were coagulated and become immovable; or because their exterior
tracts or paths in the Brain, are obstructed and possessed by some strange
guest, so that there is no fit space granted them for their expansion.

The symptoms of this Disease, Its symptoms.
which now come in order to be explained, the chief are Sleep, and
forgetfulness, or a cessation of every other knowing or spontaneous function,
unequal and slow breathing, a Feavour, and oftentimes, the distemper growing
worse, Convulsions, a leaping of the Tendons, and at length universal and
deadly Cramps or Convulsions.

As to the too former of these, The chief of which are, a sleepiness, and
oblivion.
we mentioned before, that Memory is deficient altogether for the same reason,
as Sleep exceeds; to wit, forasmuch as the Spirits inhabiting the outward part
of the Brain, being either bound up or expulsed from their tracts, do not
irradiate or beam forth from the Callous Body, into the Cortex or shelly part
of the Brain, by which imagination or waking is made; nor do they, being
carried inwards, and repeating their former footsteps, represent the Ideas or
Images of things before acted. Indeed, Sleep, Watching, and Memory, are
affections of the same parts and places: of which it is no light sign, and
which vulgarly appears by experience, that Opiate Medicines, by which Sleep is
provoked, being often given, hurt the Memory. Yea I my self knew one, having
taken a strong Hypnotick, or Medicine to cause sleep, after being sick with a
Feavour, lived many nights and days without sleep, and almost wholely lost his
Memory, especially as to any thing long past.

As to what respects the other faculties of the Corporeal Soul, By what means
the other faculties of the Soul, to wit, the knowing, desiring and locomotive,
are affected.
to wit, the Imagination, Appetite or desire, Sense, and Motion, although no
Narcortick or sleepy chains are cast upon the Spirits destinated to these
offices, and that the Pores and passages of the interior Brain, within which
they are wont to expatiate, are seen to be open enough, yet these Spirits,
because during the fit, they are denied their commerce with the others bound
up, of themselves lie down, and are overcome by Sleep. For as a continual
sleepiness beginning about the root of the sensitive Soul, to wit, the Cortex
or shelly part of the Brain, immediately its whole province is obscured, as it
were with a veil, to wit, the knowing, desiring, and self-moving part of the
Soul, and also the intellect it self, its windows being every where shut up,
hardly speculates, or beholds any thing.

Further, The evil of the Disease reaches also to the Cerebel.
the power or force of this Disease, is seen to be extended to the other part
of the sensitive Soul, presiding over the Cerebel and its Regiment; wherefore,
during the fit of the Lethargy, the respiration and Pulse are altered: for that
becomes unequal and slow, sometimes drawing the breath deep and long, sometimes
short, repeated, and as it were double: and this being great and swift,
diffuseth a feavourish heat through the whole body.

The reason of the former, Hence breathing is often hurt, or altered.
if I am not deceived, is this, to wit, that the same Morbific Cause, which
infects the outward part of the Brain, and its inhabitants, infects also in
part the Cerebel, and the Spirits there serving for the motions of the
Precordia; which being by that means disturbed and hindered, though they omit
not their tasks, yet they perform them difficultly, and with interruption; hence
the Diaphragma and Muscles of the Thorax, do not so easily and swiftly as
before, perform their Systoles, but laboriously and with a longer straining or
endeavor, and sometimes with repeated trials or forces. This kind of unequal,
long, and difficult breathing, frequently happens also in a Frenzy;
wherefore, some judge the cause both of this and that, This proceeds not from
the Inflammation of the Midriff. From whence the Lethargick Fever.
to be from the inflammation of the Midriff or Diaphragma, but amiss, because
the symptom in both these Cephalic Diseases depends on the Cerebel,
participating the hurt of the Brain, grievously distempered.

As to the Feavour of one troubled with a Lethargy, to be known by the great
and quick Pulse, hot breathing, with a burning of the Tongue and Mouth, without
any heat in the extreme parts, some deduce this from the same cause as the
Lethargy, to wit, either from Phlegm putrefying in the Brain, or from a cold
inflammation of the Brain Others on the contrary, affirm the Feavour to be the
primary effect, and thence the Morbific Matter to be carried into the Head,
from the burning Blood.

Concerning these, Not from Phlegm putrefying in the Brain.
we grant, that a Lethargy comes often after a Feavour, but we can say nothing
of the Phlegm putrefying in the Brain, or of its frigid Inflammation, which is
as much as to say, icy fire; for if this be malignant, or of evil custom,
happening also to Children, old Men, and other Phlegmatic, Scorbutic, or very
Caecochymical persons, or such as are full of ill humors, about the height of a
Disease, not well Cured, oftentimes in the place of a Crisis, the feavourish
matter being snatched into the Head, Nor is the former always the cause of it
in the Lethargy. Lib. de Morb. Convuls. Cap. viij. p. 96.
induces a cruel and oftentimes a deadly Torpor or sleepiness; which
notwithstanding ought not to be esteemed the symptom of the Disease, but of
that Feavour. After this manner I have often observed, and elsewhere have
particularly described, that Soporiferous Feavours, and as it were marked with
a certain sleepiness, have raged and become Epidemical, at sometimes, by reason
of the evil constitution of the year.

But it is no less usual when a Lethargy is the principal distemper, for a
Feavour to follow, and to owe to it as much its original, as its Cure; for a
Feavour beginning after a continual sleepiness, that being shaken off or
discussed, ceases soon of it self; such a Feavour we think to arise, More often
the effect of this Disease
not from the Blood growing hot by reason of the strife of intestine particles,
but because of the impulse of the containing and neighboring bodies, variously
altering and disturbing its course. For indeed the right temper of the Blood
very much depends, not only on its particles being truly mixed and overcome, but
also upon the motion impressed on the Heart and the Vessels, or the Organical
Circulation; proceeds from the Organical Circulation of the Blood, being
hindered or altered.
to wit, that its Liquor may every where flow with an equal and alike flowing
and ebbing; which, if finding any where a stop or Remora, it be retarded, its
motion is made more impetuous, and with a Feavourish tumult in the whole
channel besides. This manifestly appears in violent passions, acute pains, a
breaking of the unity, in all, which the Blood being obstructed in one place,
or straightened, it is snatched more vehemently in others, and conceives a
Feavourish heat; for this cause, to wit, lest the thread of its circulation
should be broken, on which life necessarily depends; How none dies without a
Fever.
wherefore as the Proverb says, None dies without a Feavour: For how poor or
deficient soever the Blood is, and that the strength of all the moveing parts
are weak, yet in the instant agony of Death, by the mere impulse of Nature,
they either pursue their functions, or the nervous Fibers every where erect
themselves, and put forth their utmost endeavors, that they might drive
forward the Blood flowing in them, and Circulate it with a rapid motion. I once
visited an illustrious Lady, who for some time had been miserably afflicted
with Colic and Convulsive distempers, and quite worn out, and at length fell
suddenly into a deadly Lethargy. When I perceived her Pulse to beat strongly, I
prescribed that four ounces of Blood should be taken out of the jugular Vein,
which immediately leaped from the opened Vessel, with such force that, I
believe, if it had been suffered, the whole Mass of Blood would have flowed
thence: for the next day after, her dead body being opened, I found scarce four
ounces more of Blood in her whole Body, and yet she dyed thus in a Feavour. The
reason of the Lethargick Feavour is wholely the same, which is seen to arise
only from the Vital Organs, being very much incited by laboring Nature, and
therefore vehemently driving about the Blood.

The Prognostic of the Lethargy.
The prognostic of the Lethargy is shut within a strait limit; for the fit of
the Disease being for the most part acute, is soon terminated either in Death
or health, and for the most part it is wont to give more of fear, than of hope.
If it comes upon a malignant Feavour or hard to be cured, When the Disease is
desperate.
or if it comes upon other Cephalic or Convulsive Diseases, as the Headache,
Frenzy, Madness, Epilepsie, or also upon a long and grievous Colic, or Gout,
the Physician can predict nothing but evil: nor is it less to be feared if it
happen in a Body full of evil Humors, or one long sick, or in an old Man.

When it is only so.
In like manner it is an evil omen, if the sick, being presently overwhelmed
with a great Torpor or stupidness, and almost Apoplectick, cannot be awakened,
and if he breaths unequally, and slowly, or with a great snorting, then the
Disease increasing, and the sick troubled with tremblings, Cramps, leapings of
the Tendons, and at length with Convulsive Motions, it is to be esteemed
desperate or without hope.

When some hope may be conceived.
But if the Distemper be excited, without any great foregoing Cause, with an
only Evident Cause, as a Surfeit, Drunkenness, or by the use of Narcoticks, a
blow on the Head, or some not deadly stroke, we may expect the event to be less
deadly or mortal.

From whence more hope may be had.
Then if the Distemper, arising from such occasions, happens to a Body before
whole and strong; if it does not wholly take away the Sense and Memory at the
first assault, and after a short time the symptoms begin to remit a little, of
such a sick person you ought not to despair.

Whence more of hope than of fear.
In every Lethargy, if any Cause of the Disease is seen to be cut off and
removed, so that if by the help of Medicines, or the instinct of Nature,
copious and helpful evacuations by Sweat, Urine, or by Stool do follow, with
ease or help, or if by applying of Blistering Plasters a great deal of water
flows forth, if a swelling or great whelks or pustles break out behind the
Ears, or in the Neck, if frequent sneezing happens, or water flow from the Eyes
or Nose, thence a certain hope of health may be expected.

Hippocrates l. Coac. c. 145. mentions a Cure of the Lethargy, A red Swelling
coming upon a Lethargy sometimes cures it.
to be often made by the distemper of the Thorax; saying, That many Lethargicks
that are stuffed with Phlegm have recovered: Which words are wonderfully
wrested by Interpreters. Mercurialis understands by suppuration, the putrified
matter of the Disease, to be evacuated by the Ears and Nostrils. Prosper
Martianus will have Hippocrates to be understood in the word Lethargy, not the
disease of the Head, but of the Breast. But wherefore are all these
subterfuges? when it often happens that the Morbific matter, at first fixed in
the Head, and stirring up a continual sleepiness, or Lethargy; the same being
thence supped up by the Blood, and deposited in the breast, does produce an
Empyema, Lib. 9. of Convulsive Diseases.
or a spitting like those whose Lungs are wasted. In the description of a
Soporiferous Epidemical Feavour, which raged in the year 1661. we noted the
same to have happened to many.

Concerning the Cure of this Disease, The Cure of the Lethargy.
for that it has no respite or truces, it is not to be deliberated on: after a
sharp Clyster being given, let a Vein be opened presently, for the Vessels
being emptied of Blood, they are more apt to sup up the Serum, or other Humors
deposited in the Brain. Phlebotomy almost always necessary.
Further, in this case, I advise rather to open the Vein in the Neck, than that
in the Arm. Because by this means, the Blood being very much heaped up, within
the bosoms of the Head, and perhaps standing still, is more easily reduced to
an equal Circulation.

Letting blood being performed, Outward Administrations.
immediately other remedies of every kind are to be made use of: Let
Vesicatories or blistering Plasters be applied largely to the Neck and Legs;
anoint the Temples and Face with Oil of Amber, or Cephalic Balsoms; lay over
all the Feet a Cataplasm or Poultis, made of Rue, Crowfoot, and Pepperwort,
with black Soap and Bay Salt; use hard frictions or rubbings to the Members,
frequently apply to the Nostrils Salt of Urine, or Spirits of Sal Ammoniac.

Then let there be administered Cephalic Remedies. Internal Rememedies.


Take of the Water of Poeony Flowers, Iulep.
of black Cherries, Rue, and of Walnuts, simple, each three ounces; of the
Water of Poeony Compound two ounces, of Castor tied up in a rag and hung in the
glass two drams, of Sugar three drams; mix them and make a Iulep, Spirits.
let it be given about four or five sponfuls every three or four hours; also
with every Dose of this, give twelve or fifteen drops of the Spirits of Amber,
or of Sal Ammoniac, or a paper of the following Powder.

Take of the Powder of the Root of Poeony the male, A Powder.
of a Man's Skull, of the Root of Virginian Serpentworth or Snakeweed, of
Contrayerva, each one dram; Bezoar, and of Pearl, each half a dram; of Coral
prepared one dram, make a Powder, and divide it into twelve parts.

Further, A Vomit or Purge.
here it is to be considered, whether an evacuation, either by Vomit or Stool,
should not be made. I know that this is variously controverted among Authors,
and I have also known it performed with various success: which being weighed
and laid together, I shall briefly propose my opinion.

If the Lethargy should arise upon a Surfeit, How they are indicated.
or a late Drinking, or if from taking some disagreeable things, or Narcoticks;
presently let a Vomit be given; wherefore, you may give Salt of Vitriol, with
Wine and Oxymel of Squills; or in strong bodies an Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, or of Mercurius Vitae, with black Cherry water. Let it be given,
and if it does not work of it self, provoke Vomiting with a Feather thrust down
the Throat.

But if the fit of the Disease comes upon a Feavour, When to be avoided.
or any other Cephalic Distempers, or if it be raised up primarily, or of it
self, by reason of some foregoing cause before lying in the Blood or Brain,
then a Vomit or Purge being given at the beginning, when the matter is flowing,
does oftentimes more hurt than good; because the Humors whilst in motion, are
more shaken and agitated, and when they cannot be subdued and brought away,
they drive them into the distempered part.

On the second day, Starification.
if the numness does not remit, let Phlebotomy be repeated, if the Pulse show
it fitting; or else instead thereof, take forth blood from the Shoulders, after
Scarification by Cupping Glasses; then a little after (if nothing hinders) let
a Vomit or Purge be administered.

Catharticks.
Take of the Sulphur of Antimony five grains, of Scammony sulphurated eight
grains, of the Cream of Tartar six grains; mingle them, make a Powder; let it
be given in a spoonful of the before prescribed Iulep.

Or Take of Scammony sulphurated twelve grains, of the Cream of Tartar fifteen
grains, of Castor three grains; make a Powder, and let it be given after the
same manner. In the mean time, let altering Medicines, or such as derive the
matter from the place, the same or such like, be still continued.

Erthines, Sneezing Powders, and Apophlegmatisms, etc.
On the third day, and afterward ought to be applied such things, which are
forbid at the beginning of the Disease, for fear of a new Fluxion, viz.
Errhines, or things that Purge the Head at the Nose, Sneezing Medicines or
Powders, Apophlegmatisms, or Medicines which draw the Humors from the head by
the mouth. Further, it is then sometimes expedient to apply the warm intrails
of some animal new killed, to the forepart of the Head, after the hair is
clipped or shaven off, and often changed: also sometimes to foment those places
with a Discussing and Cephalic Decoction, or Fomentation: but before all other
Topics, A Blistering applied to the Forepart of the Head very much helps.
I have known great help brought from a large Vesicatory or Blistering, with
many running sores made all over the compass of the Head. I saw two sick with
the Lethargy, after the Disease held long, and that not only the Memory, but
almost all knowledge was lost, Cured chiefly by this Remedy: for in both of
them, the ^^eyed places, when they could not be easily covered, poured forth
great plenty of thin matter, about half a pint every day. It will not be
needful to set down any more Medicines of this nature, being commonly and every
where to be had; it now remains, that we illustrate what we have said, with
some Histories of sick people, which I shall here add.

The first History.
A Countryman about thirty years old, of a Phlegmatic Complexion, something
inclining to Sanguine, being a long time obnoxious to frequent Headaches, about
the beginning of Winter, became sleepy and very stupid; and one day, whilst he
was following the Plow in the Fields, lying down on the ground, he fell into a
profound sleep, and when he could not be awakened by his servant and others
calling him, he was carried home and put to bed; his Friends in the mean time
expecting that after he had finished his sleep, he would awake of himself.
After the space of twelve hours being past, when he could not be awakened by
pulling, thumping, noise, and other means, they sent for me; as soon as I came,
I applied Blistering Plasters, large ones, all about the hinder part of the
Neck, then taking from him about sixteen ounces of Blood, I caused him to take
a strong Clyster, and his Face and Temples to be anointed with Oil of Amber,
and Frictions and painful Ligatures to be applied to his Legs. Also I
prescribed him to take oftentimes in a day, Spirit of Sut, with a Cephalic
Julep. Notwithstanding he lay all that day stupid, without any sense; and if
being provoked by some strong or hard pulling, he lifted up himself a little,
and opened his Eyes, presently falling down again, and shutting them, he fell
into his continual sleep again. About Evening I took care to have Cupping
Glasses, with a great flame to be applied to his shoulders, which done, he
began a little to awake; and about that time he had a great stool, and very
much Serum flowed forth from the Blisters, the Plasters being taken off, then
we had great hopes of his health. And therefore at every turn, remedies being
applied that night; awaking in the morning following he knew his Friends, and
answered aptly to those who interrogated him: But as yet the whole cloud was
not vanished, but that being sleepy, he remained several days oblivious, till
at length, being purged twice, he perfectly grew well.

The reason of this.
This case has the exact type of the Lethargy, properly so called, where for the
conjunct Cause, it had an heaping up of abundance of Serum about the compass of
the Brain, and then a breaking in of it into its infoldings: and when by a
timely use of Remedies, the flowing in of new matter was hindered, and that
which lay upon the part was partly supped up into the Blood, and partly being
rarefied into Vapors and Effluvia's, was shaken off, the Cure of the Disease
quickly and wholely followed.

A second History.
An Oxford Gardener being sick of a Feavour, about the height of the Disease,
instead of a Crisis he fell into a continual Sleep, and lay drowned in it for
three or four days, so that he could not be awakened by the use of any
Remedies: But at length, his Head being shaven, Blistering Plasters were
applied all over his Head, and many running sores left open, and awakening he
recovered the use of his senses a little: But his Memory being almost wholely
lost, he became so stupid, that he remembered the name of no Man, nor their
words, and remained like a Bruit. When he had thus remained foolish for the
space of almost two months, and still very sleepy, the cloud began a little to
be dispelled: and at length, he returning to his wonted labor, was in
indifferent good health; but he never had afterward the same vigor of mind and
wit, as he had before this Disease. In this case you have an example of a
Lethargy coming upon an ill Cured Feavour, in which the Morbific Matter, by a
sudden translation of it into the outward part of the Brain, had for a little
while filled, not only all the Pores and passages, but also had so hurt their
Conformation, that the Spirits being for some time excluded, and at length
freed, they could not recover their former paths, or wonted tracts, till of a
long time after.

I remember very well, The third History.
the example of a Lethargy, arising from the use of Opiates, in a Country
Village where I lodged by chance one night, by reason of the foulness of the
weather. For being about to go to bed, mine Host asked me if I would visit two
poor people his Neighbors, distempered after a wonderful and miserable manner.
When I showed my self ready to do the office, not only out of Charity, but led
also by curiosity, I was carried willingly into a small and poor Cottage, where
I found the Father an old Man, and his Son, both of them in two Beds in one and
the same Chamber, overwhelmed with a most profound Sleep, which had oppressed
them the day before, after they had eaten some roots, which they had dug up in
the Garden, being it seems Henbane, which they took for Parsnips.

After they had both Oil and Oxymel poured down their throats, The Cure
described.
and a Feather thrust down a great way, that made them vomit, I prescribed for
them tincture of Castor, with a spoonful of Treacle-water (which Remedies I had
then about me) to be given them at every turn all night: besides, that they
should anoint their Nostrils and Temples with the same Tincture; and if it
might be done, that a strong Clyster should be given them: the following day
the old Man first, and afterward the Son awaking, returned to themselves, the
sleepiness being almost wholely shaken off. In these distempered, after the
relics of the Narcotick were cast out by Vomit, left they should do further
hurt, there was only need, that by fit Medicines (among which Castor deservedly
is esteemed to be contrary to the venom of Opiates) the Spirits being excited,
should be set free from the sleepy poison afflicting them.

CHAP. IV.
Of some other sleepy Distempers, viz. a continual Somnolency, the Coma, or
heavy Sleeping; and the Caros, or a deprivation of the Senses.

IN the former Chapter, we have fully shown what does belong to the knowledge,
prognostic, and Cure of the Lethargy, properly so called. But we did not only
therefore affirm, that the seat of this Disease was in the unequal compass, the
cranklings, or infoldings of the outward part of the Brain, because we had
there assigned the repository of the Memory, and the porch of Sleep, (although
we might from hence conclude it;) but besides, because it has appeared so to
me from Anatomical observations very often, Sleepy Diseases do not arise by
reason of the Ventricles of the Brain being filled with water.
that the Lethargy does not arise (as is commonly thought) from the interior
Ventricles of the Brain being distempered: for we have known, these to be
frequently overflown with water, and sometimes distended with extravasated
Blood, and yet the sick whilst they lived, were free from the Coma, or any
great stupidity. I must confess, that sometimes the Dropsy of the whole Brain
causes the continual sleepiness: but in this case not only the internal Cavity,
but also the Intersitia, or the spaces between the outward Infoldings, are
filled with a flood of waters.

The Lethargy therefore being confined to the outmost borders of the Brain, The
ends or limits of the Lithargy, as to the places distempered, are constituted.

Some sleepy Distempers lesser than that, viz. Sleepiness, and the Coma: The
Caros is greater than it.


we so constitute its limits, that those circlings about, being almost wholely
possessed, together with the interspersed Marrow, perpetual and inexplicable
Sleep, or hard to be rid of, with oblivion or forgetfulness, is induced; in the
mean time, the middle part of the Brain, or the Callous body, from whence the
Animal Spirits irradiate, or beam forth, into all parts both sensible and
motional, being almost unhurt; for the total eclipse of this causes the
Apoplexy, as shall be showed hereafter. But indeed on either sides of these
ends or limits, other soporiferous distempers are ordinarily found, which
though of kin to the Lethargy, yet some of them are lesser than it, as
Somnolency or continual sleeping, and the Coma; only one is greater, as the
Caros. Therefore we shall now, and in order, speak briefly of every one of
these, as also of some opposite passions, viz. through waking, and the waking
Coma: and first of Continual Sleepiness.

Continual Sleepiness described.
Most Authors call this not a Disease, but an evil habit, or a sleepy
disposition, for the distempered, as to other things, are well enough; they eat
and drink well, go abroad, take care well enough of their domestic affairs;
yet whilst talking, or walking, or eating, yea their mouths being full of meat,
they shall nod, and unless rouzed up by others, fall fast asleep: and thus they
sleep continually almost, not only some days or months, but (as it is said of
Epemenides) many years; wherefore we ought to believe this a Disease, and
worthy of Cure, which defrauds one of more than half his life.

Its Seat assigned.
The seat of sleepiness, as that of the Lethargy, is to be placed in the outward
part of the Brain; but with this difference; that the material or conjunct
Cause of this Distemper, though it vexes, or troubles always without doors, yet
it penetrates less deeply than the Lethargy; yea it disturbs or affects almost
the whole superficies of the Brain, or the mere Cortical substances of the
infoldings, the included marrow being almost untouched: In what respect it
differs both from the Lethargy and the Coma.
in which respect, it differs not only from the Lethargy, but the Coma also;
for in the Distempers which we described, though continual sleep presses on
them, yet it is easily broken off; then besides, being fully awakened they
remember many things, and converse with their Friends, though immediately prone
again to sleep: whence it appears, that the cause of this Disease sticks only
in the outer border of the Brain, nor does it enter deep into its compass, as
other sleepy distempers do.

The conjunct cause of Sleepiness.
But indeed it may be suspected, that while the Blood every where washing the
border of the Brain, with thick rivulets, and instills every where into it a
subtle water, for the matter of Spirits, oftentimes a great plenty of water
flowing thither with it, and entering together the Cortex, and remaining there,
mightily fills it, and (like an Anasarca in the Body) swells it up: But this
Cortical or shelly part being swelled up after this manner, and as it were
dropical, so presses the Medullary infoldings, every where lying under it, that
the expansion of the Spirits being hindered, by reason of the Pores of the
exterior part of the Brain being something bound up, What the deluge or
Anasarca of the Cortical part of the Brain is.
sleepiness is induced; to which it happens, that the Blood, that by reason of
the Cortex of the Brain being intumefied with water, as it were between the
Skin, Circulates less expeditiously, through all the neighboring parts, and so
is apt to fill the Vessels and bosoms, and to stagnate in them; by which means
it comes to pass, that the exterior border is yet more compressed, To which
happen an heaping up, or as it were a stagnation of the Blood, about the
compass of the Brain.
and so the spaces requisite for the emanation of the Spirits, are also more
straightened. Indeed this appears to be part of the cause, from hence, because
this kind of sleepiness, by reason of the Blood not freely circulating in the
Head, and therefore apt to stagnate, is wont to make red the Face, with a
certain blueness and blackness: Further, whilst the subtle Liquor, which is for
the matter of Spirits, passing through this pond or deluge heaped together in
the Cortex of the Brain, goes forward into the Marrow lying under, it is
probable, that with it do creep through some extraneous, and as it were very
small Narcotick particles, Also a Torpor or Sleepiness of the Spirits.
which growing to the Spirits immediately render them torpid or stupid, and
prone to sloth of their own accord.

This Distemper, as I have observed in many, is not very dangerous, for as it
often happens, it is wholely Cured, or at least remaining for many years,
without the Carus or Apoplexy (which is wont to be feared) it does not become
mortal or terrible. The Cure of this Disease often happens, the seat of it
being changed, to wit, when clearing the Brain, the Morbific Matter is
transferred to the Cerebel, which coming thither, produces tremblings of the
Heart, the Asthma, loss of Spirits, and other troublesome Symptoms, commonly
taken for Hypochondriacal,

The Cure of Somnolency.
The Curatory Method suggests chiefly these intentions, to wit, that after a
provision or foresight of the whole, that (where it is convenient) Phlebotomy
be performed, and a Purge given; then those Remedies to be diligently
administered, by which the Blood and the Brain may be freed from the watery
deluge, and this latter may be strengthened, whereby it may for the future
receive and retain the Serous superfluities. For those ends, once or twice a
week, may be given Pills of Amber, or of Cochiae, with the Refine of Ialap; at
other times, let there be taken daily Morning and Evening, a Dose of a
Cephalic Electuary, or Spirits of Tincture of Sal Armoniack, Amber, Sut, with
a Cephalic Julep: the forms of which may be picked out of those above
described. At eight of the Clock in the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon,
let them drink a draught of Coffee, or the Liquor prepared of that Berry, first
boiling in it, the leaves of Sage or Rosemary, till it has got a greenish
Tincture. Let them drink for their ordinary drink, a Decoction of Lignum
Sanctum, adding toward the end, the leaves of Sage or Betony, or other
Cephalicks. Further, it is expedient that two large Issues be made between the
Shoulders, and also frequent Blistering Plasters be applied about the Neck. The
hair being cut off, let a quilted thing of Cephalicks and Spices be worn under
the Cap. Let them also hold their noise often over a Vessel filled with Salt of
Urine, or the Spirit of Sal Armoniack; let care be taken that they keep to an
exact order of diet, and that those attending the sick, do not only rouse them
from sleep, but daily at some set hours keep them waking.

A certain Gentleman of a Sanguine Complexion, and when he was young, of a
sharp and cunning wit, An History.
but afterward growing aged, being given to idleness and drunkenness, became
dull and stupid, and also Dropsical, with a great paunch, and his thighs and
legs swelled. Yet from these Diseases (which he frequently fell into) when he
abstained at any time from drinking, and took Physic, he oftentimes quickly
grew well. But at length, though he was freed from the Dropsy, he was
oppressed with so heavy a sleepiness, and that almost perpetually, that in what
place soever he was, or what ever he was doing he would sleep; then being
awakened by his Servants or Friends, his mind appeared well enough, and for a
few minutes he would discourse of any thing well enough, then immediately fall
again to sleep. To this man I prescribed, after he had taken in vain several
Medicines, The (...) Sick (...)
that every Morning and Evening he should take of the Powder of the Leaves of
Betony dried in the Sun, and kept in a Glass, a spoonful in a draught of the
distilled water of Lavender Flowers. By which Remedy finding ease, after a few
days, he was perfectly Cured within a month, and enjoyed perfect health for
four years after: Afterward by reason of his evil manner of living, the same
returned again, but the same Remedy found not the same success; yea there was
need of other Medicines besides; sometimes he took the Spirits of Hartshorn,
or of Sut, with an appropriate Julep; sometimes Cephalic Conserves and
Powders, to which sometimes Steel was added. When he would indulge himself by
Drinking, instead of Wine or Beer, he drunk Coffee; but for his ordinary drink,
he had sometimes Ale, with the leaves of Scurvigrass, Sage, and Spices infused
in it; and sometimes with Woods, Spices, and Cephalic Herbs boiled with it: He
lived thus for many years after, almost always intemperate, and full of gross
humors, yet free from the Lethargy; at length a Cachexy or evil state of Body
invading him, and wasting with a Cough and Asthma, by degrees, he dyed.

The next sleeepy Distemper before spoken of, The sleepy Coma.
greater than this last, and yet lesser than the Lethargy, is that which is
commonly called the sleepy Coma. Those troubled with this, are for the most
part oppressed with an heavy sleep, which they almost still indulge, and lie
with their mouth gaping, and their lower Jaw fallen down, more like dead than
living persons; being rouzed up by some strong pulling or pinching, they look
about, speak to those standing by, answer their questions, but immediately
sleeping again; they are much troubled to be hinderd or disturbed from sleep so
pleasingly creeping on them. And thus indisposed after this manner, they
continue for many days, yea sometimes months, sleeping without any Feavour
accompanying, or following it, nor have their breathing hurt, and not very
forgetful, in which it differs from the Lethargy: Again, they differ from those
sick of the Distemper but now described no less; because, those sick of this
Coma, are for the most part fixed to their Bed or Chair, and walk not abroad as
the others, nor take any care of their household affairs. They answer to any
short questions properly, but they cannot discourse, or deliberate about doing
any business.

Without doubt, The reason of it.
the Cause of this is of the same nature as the former, but of a middle degree
between those two but now described; for indeed, it may be well suspected in
this Distemper, that the Morbific Matter does penetrate the Brain a little
larger than in a Continual Sleepiness: to wit, the turning cranklings, or
Cortical infoldings, together with the small Rivulets of the included Marrow
are invaded: But yet they reach not to the greater bosoms of the Marrow, within
the Callous Body, that are wont to be possessed in the Lethargy.

The Coma sometimes beginning first and of it self, The Coma is either a
primary Disease, or it comes after other Distempers.
like the Lethargy, proceeds either from a Serous deluge poured forth from the
Blood into the Cortex of the Brain; or else from a Narcosis, or a sleepy
stupidness inflicted on the spirits dwelling there; and then, by how much this
Distemper is lesser than the Lethargy, by so much it is esteemed less
dangerous. But this Disease more frequently comes upon other Chronical or acute
Diseases, to wit, the Headache, Convulsions, and frequently ill-judged Feavours,
especially in Children, old Men and Women, and Phlegmatic people. Some time
since, I observed in the Epidemical Feavour of the Nerves, (which I have
elsewhere described) as some were Lethargical, so many were troubled with this
Sleepy Coma; of whom many grew well, the Morbific matter being translated from
the Head into the Breast. Further, in other cases, this Distemper of a doubtful
event, between hope and fear, requires the careful pains of a prudent Physician.

The Cure of it when it is a Disease of it self.
In the primary Coma, the Curatory Method suggests almost the same intentions of
healing as in the Lethargy: as to the Morbific Matter, endeavor must be had,
both that a new flowing into the Brain may be prevented; and also that what is
already impacted, may be discussed or taken away. Further, the Animal Spirits
ought to be rouzed up, or excited, and all sleepiness or stupidity shaken from
them. For this end, ought to be applied Purging, Blood-letting,
Cupping-glasses, Blistering Plasters, repelling and discussing Topics, and
Cephalic Medicines to be given, and chiefly such as are impregnated with a
Volatile Salt, and many other means of administrations already recited.

The Cure of the Coma as it is the symptom of another Disease.
But if this Disease coming upon other Distempers, happens to a person, whose
Body is already much worn out, the Blood vitiated, or greatly depauperated, you
must seriously deliberate before taking away of Blood, or Purging: yea, also
abstain very much from them. Yet sometimes that the Conjunct Cause, or matter
of the Disease impacted in the Brain, may be put into motion, it may be
expedient, to take away Blood moderately, either from the Forehead or Temples,
by Leeches, or from between the Shoulders by Cupping-glasses and Scarification.
Here Blistering Plasters are in chief esteem, to be applied not only to the
hinder part of the Neck, or Head, but to the Legs and Arms, and other parts of
the body, by turns. Further, let there be given frequently the Spirits of
Hartshorn, of Sut, of Sal Armoniack, Amber, or a Man's Scull, Coral, and
others, impregnated with other Cephalicks, with a Iulep, or any other proper
Liquor. The forms or Receipts of these, and of other Remedies, In Lib. Of
Convulsive Diseases Chap. viij.
used in these cases, together with the Histories of the sick, and examples of
Cures, are extant in the description of the aforesaid soporiferous Feavor; so
that there is no need to inculcate here again, the same, or such like.

Of the Caros.
There yet remains an other sleepy Distemper, or kind of Lethargy or continual
sleeping, commonly called Carus, which is greater than the Lethargy, and
somewhat lesser than the Apoplexy, and is so near akin to this, that it often
passes into it; but yet it is wont to be differenced from either: For those
sick with the Carus, breath well for the most part, and when they are strongly
pulled, they move their Members, sometimes lift themselves up, How it differs
from the Lethargy and the Apoplexy.
open their Eyes, and often speak, which Apoplectical persons do not; yet the
same, though excited or moved, do scarcely understand any thing, or plainly
discern, in which respect they are distinguished from such as have the Lethargy.

The Seat of the Caros is a little deeper in the Brain than that of the
Lethargy.
From these it appears, that the Conjunct Cause of the Carus, does penetrate
deeper toward the middle part of the Brain, and has its seat in the outmost
border at least of the Callous Body; wherefore the Animal Spirits, being
restrained from their wonted expansion, within this Emporium, the acts of the
Imagination and Memory cease, and although the Species being impressed from a
more strong sensible, is directed inwards, and oftentimes the local motion is
retorted to it, yet because this impression reaches not to the Callous Body, by
reason the Spirits are there amazed or stupefied, the sick know nothing what
they feel or do.

Its Conjunct Cause.
The Conjunct Cause of this Disease therefore, is very often the same, but
somewhat more strong, than that of the Somnolency, Coma, and Lethargy: The
Morbific Matter is seen to possess both the Cortex of the Brain, and the Marrow
lying under, and being carried forward, some greater bosoms of the middle part,
and the upper borders of the Callous body; yea sometimes, as this matter is
partly carried forward by degrees, these Diseases arise, and every next is but
the augmentation of the former.

The Caros is either a primary Disease, or it comes upon other Distempers.
But sometimes the Morbific Cause; without any gradual progress through these
parts, affects the middle part of the Brain at the first assault, and there (as
it is more lightly or more deeply placed) causes the Carus or the Apoplexy. In
which case, it is not to be thought, that the whole compass of the Callous
Body, like the Cortical part of the Brain, should be possessed by the
soporiferous matter: because it is sufficient, this matter rushing into any one
place, and invading some part of the middle Marrow, that presently for that
reason, an Eclipse, or at least a beating down of the Spirits follows, in all
that region. After this manner it is wont to be, when the Carus comes upon a
malignant or ill handled Feavour, or upon the Headache, or some Convulsive
Distempers, or when it is excited by a blow on the Head, or by a fall, or by
reason of an Imposthum broken in the Meninges: for by reason of these
accidents, the interior Marrow of the Brain is wont to be so pressed together,
shaken, or otherways altered, that presently the tracts or paths of the Spirits
are obliterated or blotted out.

The prognostic of the Carus for the most part is but evil, The Prognostic of
the Carus.
especially if this Disease comes upon a malignant, or a long continued, a
gentle and not Cured Feavour, or on a Woman in Childbed, no less danger is also
threatened, if it follows after other Cephalic Diseases, or is excited by
reason of a Wound in the Head: but yet in these cases, all hope of Cure is not
presently to be cast off; for I my self have observed, some sick after this
manner, and esteemed desperate or past all hope, to have recovered.

The event of this Disease is wont to be various, The event of this Disease is
various, sometimes it passes into an Apoplexy:
either in Death or in health. The Carus passes not rarely into a soon killing
Apoplexy, that after first the animadvertive faculty being lost, with a short
breathing, and without motion, then by reason of the evil being transmitted to
the Cerebel, there follow alterations of breathing and the Pulse, and quickly
death it self.

But sometimes the Morbific Matter settling more deeply, Sometimes into the
Palsy.
and falling from the Callous Body, into the streaked Body, one or both
together, the Brain clears up a little, so that the sick look about them, talk,
and know things, yet in the whole body besides, a Palsy, or Dead-Palsie on one
side follows: but so, that life is not out of danger: for oftentimes, when the
Brain begins to be restored, the Cerebel grows worse, that for that cause the
Spirits there being evilly disposed or affected, which perform the offices of
the vital function, and merely natural, either Convulsions are stirred up in
the Bowels, and Precordia, or deadly impediments of the Pulse and respiration;
yet sometimes when the Morbific matter is not so plentiful, nor very malignant,
it is partly supped up into the Blood, and partly shook off, so that the sick
grow perfectly well again.

The Curatory Method suggests the same intentions of Healing, Its Care is the
same with the Lethargy and the Apoplexy.
and requires wholly the same Remedies, as those which are wont to be
administered in the Lethargy and the Apoplexy. Wherefore, there will be no need
to add here a company of Indications, nor to heap together a great pile of
Medicines. But what seems more to the purpose, that I give you one or two
Histories of sick people, of which I have many by me.

A known person of about forty years of Age, The first History.
who having through Intempernace lost his health, took I know not what
Medicines, prescribed by an Emperick, and fell into the Carus; perchance it was
because the Morbific Matter being moved and agitated by the Medicine, it rushed
into the Head. Visiting this Man on the second day, I found him buried in a
profound sleep, and almost insensible; for although he opened his Eyes, moved
his Members, when pricked or strongly pulled, yet presently sleeping again, he
perceived nothing of what he did or suffered. Though in this case, I could
prognosticate nothing but what was sad, however I did not desist from giving
him my Medicinal help: abstaining from letting of blood, his strength being
worn out, and his Blood depauperated, I took care for a large Blistering
Plaster to be applied to the hinder part of the Neck, and a strong Clyster as
soon as I could, to be given him, made of a Decoction of Briony Roots, with
Carminative Flowers and Seeds, adding thereto of the Species of Hiera two
drams: his Nose and Temples were anointed with Balsoms. Cataplasms of Rue, and
the Roots of Bryony were laid all over his Feet. Besides, every other, or every
third hour, I ordered him to drink a Dose of the Spirits of Hartshorn, with a
Cephalic Iulep; yea, and I took care to have administered several other
administrations, used in this case. By which, when the Disease did not wholly
give place on the following day, I prescribed a Purge of prepared Scammony to
be taken in a spoonful of Broth; by which, when he had gone often and
plentifully to Stool, he began to open his Eyes, speak to, and to know those
standing about him, and a little after returning to himself, he fully awaked.
This Disease therefore (as I think) was easily and quickly Cured beyond hope,
because that cloud, being by chance sent into the Brain by Physic, might the
better be deduced thence by the help of other Physic.

A noble person about fifty, Another History.
fat in body, and in time past obnoxious to the Vertigo, and to Asthmatical
Distempers, using for two years Physic every spring and fall, having also a
large Issue between his shoulders, lived in indifferent health: The Summer
coming on, and he living in the Country, neglected his Issue for several weeks,
so that the recrements there, flowed much less than they were wont; yet he was
still well, till about the Solstice (or middle of June) when one morning
cheerfully talking with his Friends, sitting in the Porch of his House, rising
suddenly he complained, that he was not well; and going into the House, sitting
down in a Chair, immediately leaning backward, fell into a profound sleep, and
lay so buried in it, that all that day he could not be awakened. Coming to him
in the Evening, I took care to have Phlebotomy administered, and also a Clyster,
a Vesicatory, and many other Remedies, proper in such a Case. On the next day,
his Brain began a little to grow clear, so that he looked about him, and spoke
a few words; he seemed to know his Friends, but could not utter the name of
any; but by reason of this matter sinking down more deeply into the Brain, a
Palsy seized his whole right side. Further, when as yet his great sleepiness
continued, that day Blood was taken out of the other Arm, and also other
Remedies as the former, were continued: On the third day, being less stupid, he
knew many, and could tell the names of some of them, he perceived then his own
sickness, and began to be careful for the taking of Remedis. But indeed, whilst
his Brain grew better, the evil spread it self on the Cerebel, and the nervous
Stock; for on the fourth day, his breathing became unequal, and more laborious,
his Pulse weaker, and his whole body troubled with a stifness, and Convulsive
shakings: On the fifty day, more cruel Convulsions and Cramps did more often
infest him; then his Pulse by degrees lessening; on the sixth day, though more
freed from his sleeping, he dyed. In this case, and in others like it, it is
probable that the Morbific matter did at once invade the Brain and the Cerebel,
but whilst it stuck in the Cortex of this latter (contrary to what happens in
the Brain) it caused no sensible hurt, because this part, which was hurt, was
neither the seat of Sleep nor of the Memory; but afterward, perhaps on the
fourth or fifth day, the matter sinking down from thence, to the middle parts
of the Cerebel, whilst as to the other Distemper the sick grew better, the
vital function, by reason of the spirits destinated to it being oppressed in
their fountain, began to faint, and afterward suddenly declining, took away
unexpectedly all hope of recovery, which before seemed favorable.

CHAP. V.
Of through or long Waking, and of the Waking Coma.

EVEN as Light and Darkness, so Sleep and Waking, being placed nigh together,
best illustrate the natures of one another; so that it will be to the purpose,
after the Sleepy Distempers, to discourse here of preternatural Watching, or
Waking; to wit, forasmuch as it exceeding its limits, and hurting some
functions, is both a Disease, and requires Cure. In this rank there are
commonly two Distempers, to wit, through or long Waking, and the Waking Coma; of
both which we will now speak in order.

Long Waking is either the symptom of other Diseases, or else is a Disease of
it self.
Concerning through Waking, we must here first distinguish, to wit, that it is a
symptom coming upon some other Disease, as a Feavour, Frenzy, Madness, the
Colic, Gout, or such like; then the Cure and consideration of it belongs to
that distemper, whose issue it is: or else immoderate Waking, arising of it
self, without any notable sickness, is seen to be a Disease almost solitary or
alone of it self. So I have known some, free from any Feavour or pain, well in
their Stomach, and fit enough for their business, being in Bed, could take no
more Sleep than the Dragon of the Hespcrides. Some troubled with this kind of
Waking, though destitute of Sleep, scarce seem to want it it; for their Spirits
appear neither sluggish, or weary, or exhausted: but others hardly bearing
watching, become from thence languishing, and without Appetite, and are forced
to fly to Opiates, which sometimes they use daily, and in a large Dose unhurt.

The cause of natural Waking consists in the restlessness of the Spirits, and
the openness of the Cortical part of the Brain.
We have before hinted, that the Cause of Natural Waking, which is interlaced
with Sleep, consists in these two things, either in one of them, or both
together; to wit, first that the Animal Spirits being sufficiently refreshed,
and freed from the stocks of the nervous Liquor, do come forth lively, and are
on every side streamed forth, and chiefly from the middle part of the Brain
into its circumference; then secondly, although they obtain every where an open
sp^ce, and especially in the exterior compass of the Brain, then freed from the
incursions of the nervous Juice, yet lest this expansion of Spirits (which is
waking) should be protracted to their loss, longer than is fit, the Spirits by
it being wearied, become faint, and as it were lie down of their own accord,
and at the same time, the nervous Liquor being poured into the Cortex of the
Brain, stops or shuts up their passages. Hence it follows, that preternatural
Waking, In like manner also preternatural Watching depends upon one or both.
or that which is immoderate depends upon these two, either on one or both
together; for either they being grown too outrageous, and as it were struck
with a fury, will not lie down of themselves, or the nervous Liquor does not so
fill and stop up the Pores of the outward part of the Brain, that from thence
the Spirits may be compelled inward to rest: Examples of both of these are
ordinarily to be met withal.

And first of all we shall take notice, The former means described, by showing
how many ways the unquiet or elastick Spirits stir up long waking.
that the Animal Spirits, sometimes becoming outrageous and so Elastick or
shooting forth, or otherways enormous, that they will not only not lie down and
be quieted, but scarce be contained within the proper sphere of their
emanation; wherefore, being spread abroad in continual waking, so fill the
Brain, and keep it extended, that the nervous Juice though it lies heaped up at
their doors, cannot be admitted; but if it enters of it self, and the Spirits
are called back inwards, from the Cortex of the Brain, presently they being
forced thither, or tumultuating within the middle part of the Brain, raise up
many, and often most horrid fantasies, whereby sleep is driven away; or
directing thence their declination further, into the nervous Stock, there stir
up great disorders, which continually drive away, and break off Sleep, though
it seems ready to creep upon them.

As to the former of these, First, Because being recalled for Sleep into the
middle part of the Brain, they grow tumultuous.

Secondly, Because being called back into the nervous Stock, they impetuously
leap forth.


I have often observed, that some being disturbed with waking, were afraid to
sleep, though desiredly coming upon them; for as soon as they shut their eyes
to sleep, presently leaping up, they would cry out they should grow mad, with a
multitude of confused phantasms, so that they were necessitated to abstain from
sleep.

Secondly, whilst the Spirits become more outrageous, and are for sleep sake
recalled toward the interior compass of the Brain, sometimes they convert
their rage into the nervous Stock, and then tumultuarily rushing in upon the
Nerves, destinated for the Precordia, or the Inwards, raise up inordinations in
the respective parts: hence in those thus distempered, as often as they shut
their eyes to invite sleep, either tremblings, leapings, and binding up of the
heart, with loss of Spirits, and breathing stopped, or inflations, and rising
up of the Bowels, with a sense of choking, and other symptoms commonly called
or taken to be Hysterical, And so, either into the interior Nerves, serving the
Praecordia and Viscera;

Or, into the Spinal Marrow, and the exterior Nerves.


follow: or else secondly, the Spirits being recalled from their watches, and
turning on the nervous Stock, transfer their rage sometimes on the spinal
Marrow, and the Nerves reaching from thence into all the exterior Members:
Wherefore, in some, whilst they would indulge sleep, in their beds, immediately
follow leapings up of the Tendons, in their Arms and Legs, with Cramps, and
such unquietness and flying about of their members, that the sick can no more
sleep, than those on the Rack. Once I was consulted with for a noble Woman, who
was in the daytime cruelly tormented with the pain about the heart, and
Vomiting, but in the night she was hindered from sleep, though it seemed to
approach, by reason of these kind of Convulsive Distempers invading her, with
it; nor indeed could she sleep all the night, unless she had before taken a
large Dose of Laudanum; wherefore, this Medicine at first being permitted her,
only twice a week, afterward she took it daily for three whole months,
contracting by it no hurt, either in her Brain, or about any other function;
and when in the mean time, by the use of other Remedies, the Dyscrasies of the
Blood and the nervous Juice were amended, and the Animal Spirits were made more
benign and gentle, she having after that wholly left off her Opium, The causes
of the aforesaid Distempers assigned.
could sleep indifferently well. These kind of sleep-destroying Distempers,
stirred up either within the middle part of the Brain, or within the nervous
Stock, either more inward or more outward, do depend wholly on the evil
constitution of the Animal Spirits: for those who ought to be gentle, clear,
and bright, and to actuate gently the containing bodies, and to influence them
with a benign influence, become sharp and fierce, and like Effluvia's sent from
Stygian Waters, unable to be restrained, do distend them too much, and refuse
to be governed by the command of the will, and to be quieted by sleep; yea
being restrained in one place, they immediately grow tumultuous in another.
Such a constitution of the Animal Spirits proceeds from the acid, and
oftentimes as it were Vitriolick Dyscrasies of the Blood begetting it, and of
the nervous Juice cherishing and increasing it: as shall be more fully showed
hereafter, when we speak of madness.

In the mean time, The Cure of them declared.
as to what belongs to the Cure of through or long waking, (which we but now
described) because it cannot be long tolerated, therefore those things, which
may bring present ease, ought first to be administered; for this end, those
things which sooth the Spirits, and gently moderate their disorders, are
convenient, as those commonly called Anodynes, viz. Distilled Waters,
Decoctions, Syrups, and Conserves of the Flowers of Water-Lilies, Cowslips,
Mallows, Violets, Hearts-ease, of the leaves of Willow, Lettice, Purslain, also
Emulsions, or Juicy expressions. If that the unquiet Spirits will not be
allayed by gentle flatteries, you must compel them into quietness, as it were
with bonds and strokes: plenty of them ought to be diminished, and the places
also to be enlarged, in which they may expand themselves in freedom, and
without tumult, and quitted from the intanglements of other Humors, to wit, of
the Blood and Serum: For which ends, sometimes the opening of a Vein is
convenient, and Blisterings are always to be made use of; also Diacodium, and
Laudanum, if it be convenient, are frequently given; and in the mean time,
whilst that Opiates give some truce to the Disease, the cause of it ought
carefully to be rooted out by the use of other Remedies, as much as may be;
wherefore, such as take away the sharpness of the Blood and nervous Juice, and
render a sweetness to them, are to be administered, day after day, in Physical
hours: In which rank are shelly Powders, Apozems, and Distilled Waters;
Alterers, made out of temperate Antiscorbuticks; the more gentle prepared
Chalybeats, Spirits of Hartshorn, and of Sut, and almost before all other
things, the Tincture of Antimony is much esteemed.

The second sort of through or long waking, arising both from the too much
openness of the Brain, and from the unquietness of the Spirits;
There remains another sort of through or long Waking, the cause of which in
some, if not in the greatest part, consists in almost a continual openness, or
too much gaping of the Pores, or passages in the Cortex of the Brain: For
besides, that the Animal Spirits becoming sharp, and somewhat outrageous,
refuse to lie down of their own accord, and to indulge rest; moreover, no stop
or yoke is imposed upon them from the nervous Liquor, entering into the Pores of
the Brain, but being free and quitted of all burdens, they are also expanded
within the exterior spaces of the Brain, every where open: wherefore, for this
cause, those troubled with long Waking, feel no sleepiness or heaviness in the
fore part of their head, no desire or approach of Sleep. I have known some
distempered after this manner, who, when they had lived for many nights
continually without Sleep, seemed still cheerful, active, strong in their
stomach, its foreleading Cause.
and ready for business, and not to want Sleep. The cause of this without doubt
is, because the burnt and melancholy Blood, supplies the exterior part of the
Brain with a nervous Juice, that is not soft and favorable, but too much
parched, and stuffed with adust particles, which, for that reason, is apt
neither to stay long within the Pores of the Brain, nor gently to embrace and
hold the Animal Spirits. Further, the Spirits themselves, procreated out of it,
become of their own nature too Elastick, and unquiet, so that they are not
easily settled, or are prone of their own accord to Sleep: But these more fixed,
do not readily fly away, nor being wearied, do suddenly grow faint, but endure
for a long time, without any great refection, and yet remain lively. Which also
causes waking in Melancholic People.
Concerning this waking disposition of the Animal Spirits, as it is the same in
Melancholicks, we shall have an opportunity of speaking of it more largely
hereafter. We may also here take notice, that for the same reason (to wit, that
the adust Particles of the Melancholic and torrid Blood, being poured into the
Brain, For the same reason Coffee causes waking.
together with the nervous Juice, causes waking) the drinking of Coffee also,
(in use formerly among the Arabians and Turks) which is drunk by our Country
Men, either Physically or out of wantonness, all sleepiness being driven away,
does produce unwonted waking, and an unwearied exercise of the Animal faculty;
that some having a necessity to study late in the night, or presently after
drinking, or a full meal, by drinking a due quantity of this Liquor become
still waking, and perform any hard task of the mind, without sleepiness. Surely
the cause of this is, because this drink insinuates adust particles (of which
it is full, as may be perceived both by the smell and taste) immediately into
the Blood, and then into the nervous Juice; which still detain the pores of the
Brain open, by their agility and inquietude, and add to the Spirits, all
sleepiness being shaken off, certain provocatives, and madness, by which they
are excited to a longer performance of their offices. Further, we shall deliver
afterward, where we speak of Melancholy, those things which belong to the
preventive Cure of this long waking, or the removing of the Morbific cause: In
the mean time, for the taking away immediately this symptom, as often as it is
grievously troublesome, we noted that Opiates were little profitable; for a
bare Dose being given, does rarely cause sleep, and render the sick more weak
and languishing: It often better succeeds, if they go to bed, and take some
soft and pleasing Liquor, as our own Ale, clear and mild, or Posset Drink with
Cowslip Flowers boiled in it, or an Emulsion of Melon Seeds, and Almonds in a
great quantity, to wit, two or three pints.

An History showing an example of this Disease.
I was some times past consulted with about an old Hypochondriacal person, who
besides other Symptoms usual in that case, was for many years obnoxious to
frequent, very troublesome, and noisie belchings: he was wont every day, two or
three times, for about two hours, continually to belch, with such a noise, that
he might be heard far and near, at a great distance: But sometimes for a week
or two, and sometimes for a month, this belching would be changed into a long
waking, for having that Distemper much remitted, this Gentleman was kept
without sleep almost whole nights; and when he had thus been for three days,
and sometimes more, perfectly waking, he seemed not to want sleep, and
complained not of sleepiness, dullness, or languor of spirits. And when
Narcoticks rarely brought to him any help, he took sometimes in the evening a
Posset made of Ale and Canary Wine; and night coming on, he sometimes drunk
Distilled Waters, by the use of which, oftentimes he got some sleep; then
afterward, his waking perfectly vanishing by degrees; his belching returned:
Hence it appears, there was but one cause for either, to wit, the adust
particles, and irritative, being poured forth from the bloody Mass, sometimes
into the coats of the Ventricle, and sometimes into the Cortical part of the
Brain.

Secondly, besides these distinct Distempers of Sleep and Waking, or their
inordinations, there remain other conjunct, or complicated irregularities of
them, in which, the acts of either function are prevaricated together. Which
indeed is observable in that Distemper or affection called the Waking Coma; of
which we shall now speak briefly.

Those sick with the Waking Coma, A description of the waking Coma.
although they are continually prone to Sleep, yet they can scarce sleep at
all, but after the manner of Tantalus, up to the chin in the Lethaean River, to
taste which as soon as he stoops down, the water slides away from him and sinks
lower. For they feel a cruel heaviness in their Heads, with a sleepiness or
numness of all their senses, and faculties, that they hardly endure to turn
themselves in their Bed, or to be disturbed by the bystanders with talking,
and expect they shall presently fall into a sweet sleep; but when they would
indulge it, and endeavor strongly to embrace it, various phantasms rolling
about in their mind, keep them still waking; neither are they suffered to take
any sleep at all, which seems to them to be still at hand. Upon this, not
seldom follows a Delirium, that whilst the sick lie with their eyes shut, they
perpetually talk absurd and senseless things, and fling about hither and
thither their Arms and Legs excessively, and being raised up, they look about
them doggedly. It is an usual thing for those sick of Feavours, to remain a
whole night as it were drowned in sleep; and in the mean time are scarce silent
a minute of an hour, but murmur various things to themselves; also sometimes
cry out, The cause of this Distemper shown.
houl, and leap out of Bed. If the reason of these be inquired after, we may
say, that the Pores and passages in the Brain, which are the walking places of
the Spirits, are very much possessed with a thick and so periferous matter,
poured forth from the Mass of the Blood, that the Spirits being very much
hindered from their wonted expansion, and mutual commerce, an heavy and
invincible sleep seems to hang over them; but because some sharp and highly
active particles, like so many goads, cleave to these Spirits, they are
perpetually incited into motion; and so some of them break through the ways,
howsoever fast shut and stopped with mounds, and run forth either directly or
obliquely as they can; and thus such motions of theirs, however confused and
diverted, by reason of impediments, and not able to exercise completely the
Animal function, yet they easily drive away or hinder its cessation and rest;
for this reason indeed, such who are distempered with this Disease, are like
those living under the Pole, who only see (when the Sun is in the Equinox) the
light on the Horizon, and have neither perfect night, nor perfect day; so these
only enjoy a kind of twilight betwixt sleep and waking.

The Waking Coma is rarely a Disease of it self, It is more often a symptom of
other Distempers than a Disease of it self.
but for the most part it is a symptom coming upon other Diseases, as the
Feavour, Frenzy, Lethargy, and the like; wherefore it requires not a Curatory
Method peculiarly, but there is only need, that to the Remedies prescribed for
the first or primary Disease, there should be added other Cephalicks, which may
dispel these clouds and meteors of the Brain; or if both will not be expelled
together, the same Medicine which cherishes the parts of the one, getting the
better, will immediately overcome the other: so in the Waking Somnolency, it is
convenient to procure either perfect sleep, or perfect waking, and in this case
I have often given Narcoticks with good success.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Incubus, or Nightmare.

THUS much concerning the morbid exorbitancies of irregular sleep and waking;
which are almost proper, and as it were of the region of the Brain, and affect
not the Cerebel but rarely, The Seat of the Incubus is in the Cerebel.
and that secondarily and collaterally, as has been shown. But there remains a
distemper, commonly called the Nightmare, in Latin the Incubus, which is both
peculiar to this Region, and also seems in some measure analogical to the
sleepy diseases; forasmuch as its fits arise, for the most part from sleep, by
reason of the Animal Spirits being bound in the Cerebel or suppressed; their
eclipse or interruption (though short) about the exercise of the vital
function, is induced.

A Description of it.
That the subject, nature, and causes of this Disease may be the better known,
we shall first consider its Phenomenon, or the appearance of it. The fits of
the Incubus, or Nightmare, for the most part, and indeed only falling on one
in sleep, are used to be excited mostly after the stomach is loaded with
undigested meats, and lying on the back in Bed. They who labor with it, seem
to feel the hurt chiefly in the Breast, and about the Praecordia, for
respiration being suppressed, and very much hindered, they think that a certain
weight lying heavily upon their Breast, does oppress them, which weight mocks
their imaginations with the Image of some spectre or other; and this, whilst
they think to shake off, or put away, by the moving of their Body or members,
they are not able to stir themselves any way: But after a long space, and
sometimes till they are almost dead, they at last awake with a struggling about
their heart, and being more fully rouzed from sleep, the imaginary weight
suddenly vanishes, and the motive force of the body is restored, but for the
most part a trembling of the heart remains, and frequently a swift and violent
beating of the Diaphragma. Then the fit being over, the deception of the
fantasy, conceiving the horrid image of the Incubus or spectre, is perceived.

It most often proceeds from natural causes.
The common people superstitiously believe, that this passion is indeed caused
by the Devil, and that the evil spirits lying on them, procures that weight and
oppression upon their heart. Though indeed we do grant, such a thing may be,
but we suppose that this symptom proceeds oftenest from mere natural causes;
though what they are, and in what place the Morbific matter does subsist, is
not agreed on among Authors, nor indeed is it easily to be assigned.

The Seat of this is falsely placed in the Brain.
Because the imagination is deceived, and the error being propagated further
into the senses themselves, so imposes on the sight and feeling, that they
believe they plainly see and feel a monster of this or that shape or figure
lying upon them; and for that the loco-motive faculty of the whole body is
hindered, in the mean time; some have placed the seat of this Disease wholly in
the Brain, and would have the oppression of the breast to be merely
fantastical: But although we grant the monstrous shape of the Incubus (which
is conceived) to be a mere dream; the Precordia to be truly affected, is
apparent, and the motion of the Pulse and breathing is suppressed or hindered;
for that the heavy weight of the breast is plainly felt by most, in their
waking; yea, and when thoroughly fresh awaked, The Praecordia truly labor.
and when that is removed, the tremblings of the Heart and Diaphragma, and
inordinate motions follow: whence it follows that these parts labor and suffer
a real hurt.

The cause does not stick partly in the Brain, and partly in the Breast.
Wherefore others, that they might the more easily unloose this knot, dividing
the Morbific Cause, assign a portion of it to the Brain, and another to the
Breast; for they say, that the motion of the Lungs are hindered, by a viscous
and very gross humor impacted about them, and that does excite as it were the
oppression of a bulk lying on them, with want of breathing; then Vapors being
raised to the Head, do fill the principal Nerves, and so hinder the loco-motive
force: which opinion (no more likely than the conceptions of those troubled
with the Nightmare) deserves not to be assented to; because there are not any
signs of this humor heaped up about the Praecordia, which appear before or
after the fit, yea when this region is very much burdened, as in the Phthisis,
Asthma, or Dropsy of the Breast, the Incubus does not therefore infest more
frequently or more grievously: Further it appears not, how the matter heaped up
in the Praecordia, should be only troublesome in sleep, or by what passage or
way, the Vapors from thence so suddenly inducing want of motion, should be
elevated to the Head* Wherefore, the Reason or Aetiology of this Distemper, I
think to be taken or judged of far otherwise.

Therefore this heavy weight or load lying on the breast, The next cause of
this is, the hindrance of the inflowing of the Spirits to the Praecordia.
seems indeed to be left, because the motion of the Heart, and the organs
serving for breathing, is hindered; for from the motion of the heart ceasing, or
being hardly performed, the Blood in its bosoms, and in the breathing or
Pneumonick Vessels statgnating, and being there very much straightened, a sense
of as it were a weight opresses the region of the breast: which also seems
therefore the more grievous, because the Lungs, Diaphragma, and Muscles of the
Thorax, being hindered in their motions, and as it were bound together, at the
same time with the heart, do labor with a great endeavor, to exercise or to
put forth themselves. But the most hard question yet is, concerning the Cause,
by reason of which the motion or action of the Praecordia is suppressed, or
hindered. This seems impossible to be done by matter impacted in the organs
themselves, This not in the Parts affected;
of which indeed, there must be a very great deal, to suffice for the hindrance
of so many parts, and some signs of it at least would appear somewhat out of
the fit; wherefore, it seems that we may rather say, that the action of those
parts are hindered, because the influx of the animal spirits are hindered or
suppressed. This is frequently done in Convulsive Distempers, as we have
elsewhere declared, and have clearly showed by Anatomical Experiment, Nor in
the Nerves themselves:
to wit, by tying the trunk of the Nerves of the eighth pair, in a living Dog:
But in those distempered by the Incubus or Nightmare, the obstruction of the
Spirits, seems to be excited neither in the organs themselves, nor in their
Nerves; for such a cause happening to those awake as well as to those sleeping,
does not become presently moveable, but is fixed and permanent.

Wherefore, But happens in the Cerebel, where the first Spring of the Spirits
is.
we think the fit of the Nightmare to be induced, for that in sleeping, a
certain incongruous matter is instilled into the Cerebel, together with the
nervous Juice, which causing a certain torpor or benummedness in the first
spring of the spirits, compells them immediately, by little and little, to
cease from the offices of their functions; so that as it were another Lethargy
being excited within the Cerebel, the vital actions suffer a short eclipse;
during which, partly from a strife of the obstructed or bound together
Praecordia, From whence the sense of the Weight proceeds.
and partly from the blood very much heaped up and stagnating in them, that
weight, or a sense as it were of a great bulk lying on them, is caused; then,
because all the rest of the faculties depend upon the motion of the heart,
Whence loss of motion proceeds.
therefore this being suppressed and hindered, presently those eclipses or
disorders of them follow; but especially because the flowing of the Blood into
the Brain, for the making of Animal Spirits, is interrupted, therefore
immediately the flowing forth of these into the nervous System is suppressed,
so that the sick, whilst they endeavor to shake off the imaginary load of the
breast, are not able to move their Body, or any member; to wit, because the
irradiation of the Spirits, (whilst they are destitute of the flowing in of the
Blood) is kept from the moving parts: In the mean time, those which reside in
the Brain, being spread abroad here and there, conceive confused phantasms, and
from the trouble impressed from the Praecordia, horrid dreams of specter.

The fit of the Incubus is soon ended, Wherefore the fit being so grievous, is
so soon ended, without leaving any evil.
because the matter, rarely or never entering deeply into the Cerebel, is easily
shaken off, or is supt back again into the Blood: for after the spirits became
free from its embrace, and having got the liberty of motion within their wonted
spaces, they repeat the exercises of their functions: wherefore, the afflux of
the Blood then presently returning to the Brain, immediately the afflux or
flowing forth, and emanation of the Spirits, are restored, like a light new
kindled, both in its middle or marrowy part, and also in the nervous Stock:
whence they being awakened, the motive force returns, and the error of the
imagination is perceived. But that there follow in the Heart and Diaphragma
tremblings and most swift beatings, Whence after the Fit, the tremblings of the
Heart and the Praecordia.
the reason is, because these Bodies, so long as they were hindered from their
motions laboring with an endeavor of exercising, or putting forth themselves,
are not able to contain themselves within their just limits, as soon as they
are restored, but putting forth at once all their strength, and being too
active, exceed due performance of their duty: even as a wand, being held a
while bent, being afterward let go, recovering it self with a certain force,
enters into a motion of trembling or shaking.

After this manner, the fit of the Nightmare, because it immediately stops the
vital function, The Incubus of it self rarely dangerous.
as it were the first moving wheel in the animal Machine, compels forthwi^h all
the other faculties to cease, yea the whole corporeal soul (more than the more
grievous fits of the Apoplexy or the Lethargy) to shake, and as it were to
suffer an eclipse. Notwithstanding, little danger is threatened from this
Distemper, because the Morbific matter being poured forth from the Blood, into
the compass of the Cerebel, is not suffered to penetrate deeply; because the
Spirits of that province, being always in a readiness and watchful, most
swiftly run to meet the enemy, and oppose his entrance strongly, though the
offices of the vital function be omitted in the mean time; further, the Animal
Spirits which are in the region of the Brain, being awakened, fly presently to
assist those of the laboring Cerebel: For those sick of the Incubus, if by
chance they be awakened by any one lying with them, they sooner come out of the
fit.

The Prognostic of the Incubus.
But although it is rare, that any one dies of this Disease only; yet those
often obnoxious to it, if they are taken with other Cephalic Distempers, as
the Lethargy, Carus, Apoplexy, or the Epilepsie, are in far greater danger:
because the Morbific matter, being poured forth from the Blood into the Brain,
easily invades the Cerebel so predisposed; so that the sick therefore suffering
at once an eclipse of the vital and the animal function, are brought into
greater danger of their Life. Hence it is a vulgar observation, that those who
frequently are troubled with the Nightmare, fall into the Apoplexy.

The Event of it is shown.
There is wont to be another event of the Incubus, less dangerous, that leads
often into the Cardiack passion, and other affections, commonly taken to be
Hypochondriack. I knew several while young, grievously afflicted with the
Nightmare, who being freed from it in their riper Age, were troubled with the
trembling and palpitation of the Heart, and other pains about the Praecordia,
and Hypochondria; and also with Convulsions in those parts. We think the cause
of this morbid commutation to be, because the Morbific matter, after it was
wont so often to besiege the region of the Cerebel, at length an impression
being made, it did penetrate more deeply into some private place, and passing
through its frame, became impacted on the Nerves destinated to the Praecordia.

Its Cure.
As to the Cure of this Disease, there needs no help for the fits, because they
pass away quickly of themselves. The method of Cure after a considering the
whole, suggests Blood-letting, (where it is convenient) and a gentle Purge, and
chiefly the use of Remedies, which are commonly called Cephalicks. Therefore,
here Powders of Amber, Coral, and Pearls, with the Roots of the Male Poeony,
Cretick, Dittany, Contrayerva; also Electuaries, Tablets, and Distilled Waters,
Tinctures, Elixirs, and other things that are wont to be prescribed in the
Lethargy and Apoplexy, have the chief place; but especially a right course of
diet being ordered, let gross and ill digested meats be shunned, Pulse and
Summer-fruits; nor let sleep, study, or reading be presently yielded to after
eating: late and large Suppers, and lying on the back, are to be forbidden.

Infants and Boys obnoxious to this Disease, how they ought to be handled.
Because Children and Youths, are often sick of this Disease (the sign of which
is, that they are shaken in their sleeping, and waking cruelly cry out) and
more often suffer its fits, which oftentimes bring them to Convulsive passions,
therefore a method of healing them ought to be administered, as soon as they
are seen to be distempered: you ought to inquire into the milk they suck,
whether it be of it self pure and landable, and truly convenient for the
Stomach: let them not sleep presently after they have sucked their fill: The
Nurse using a good diet, let her take also Morning and Evening a Dose of
Cephalic Powder, or Electuary, drinking after it a draught of Posset drink,
with the leaves of Sage or Betony, or the Roots or Seeds of Poeony boiled in
it: Let the Infant take twice a day, a spoonful of proper Distilled Water. Let
him have an Issue made in the nape of the Neck, and let it lie sometimes on one
side, and sometimes on the other, and rarely or never on its back. If a
Neck-lace of Coral, or little balls of the Seeds or Roots of the male Poeony be
worn about the Neck, or at the pit of the Stomach, it is not altogether
useless; if that in sleep being often and grievously shaken, they are seen to
be more dangerously troubled with this Distemper, let Blisters be raised in the
hinder part of the Neck, or behind the Ears; also Evening and Morning let there
be daily given a Dose of the Powder of Ammoniacum, or other proper Dose, in a
spoonful of Distilled Water or Iulep.

CHAP. VII. Of the Vertigo, or a turning round in the Head.
HAving viewed the exterior compass of either part of the Head, The Stat of the
Vertigo.
and detected, the Diseases which beset the sensitive soul, about the first
beginnings, and last springs of the Animal Spirits; we shall next descend to
the middle part of the Brain, where the fantasy and common sense reside, and
behold what kind of passions these parts are obnoxious to. Concerning this in
the first place we shall note, that sometimes troops or rather mighty armies of
Spirits, inhabiting these places, are affected, and sometimes also small
handfuls or bands: then again many of them are affected together, or else only
a few at a time; or they become Elastick from an heterogeneous Copula, and so
are compelled into inordinate motions, or as it were explosive or shooting off,
as in the Epileptick fit; or suffering an eclipse, as in the Apoplexy, are
deprived of all motion. Concerning the former disposition of the Spirits, we
have formerly treated largely enough, and the astonishing Disease we shall
handle afterward. But in this place, we shall speak of a certain Passion or
distemper belonging to these parts, viz. the Vertigo, in which a certain band
or handful of the Spirits are affected, and their motions are seen to be partly
perverted, and partly suppressed.

Being but little solicitous about the names by which the Vertigo is wont to be
known, A Description of it.
we shall describe the nature, or formal reason of it after this manner, viz.
The Vertigo is an Affection or Distemper, in which the visible objects seem to
turn round, and the sick feel a perturbation, or confusion of the Animal
Spirits in the Brain that they do not rightly flow into the Nerves: Wherefore
the visive, and the loco-motive faculties, do often in some measure fail, that
those laboring with it fall, and oftentimes are covered with darkness.

In this fit it is observed, that the imagination and the common sense are in a
manner deceived, whilst they believe, the quiet objects to be moved, but the
rational judgment remains; for we understand our error, and we presently
ascribe this fallacy to the inordination of the Animal Spirits; for that we
plainly know that the spirits flowing within the Brain do decline from their
wonted irradiation or beaming forth, and do not rightly perform the offices of
motion and sensation, during the fit.

That we may find out the Morbific Cause, The Causes and the Manner of the
non-natural Vertigo.
and the preternatural manner of the Vertigo, we shall inquire after what
manner this same affection or Distemper, how extempory or sudden soever it be,
is wont to be excited from non-natural things; for men ordinarily become
Vertiginous (or have a turning in their head) with a long turning round of the
body, looking down from an high place, passing over Bridges, Sailing, and by
Drunkenness, and many other ways. It will be worth our while to consider a
little further, the means of affecting, by which these exterior actions stir up
this turning or rolling about, from whence it will the better appear, what kind
of intrinsic causes ^ay be able to excite this passion. In the first place
therefore, when men are for ^ome time turned about, both in that motion all
things seem to be turned about, and also they ceasing from turning about, that
still continues in the fantasy; so that the affected oftentimes fall to the
ground; further, though they shut their eyes, they still perceive as it were a
turning round, like the turning about of a Mill, in the Brain.

The reason of these is not, The Reasons of them shown.
that the deception of the sight is first brought to the eyes, and afterward
continued for some time; because this affection is caused by the turning round
of the body, whether they look with, or shut their eyes: But indeed the cause
of this apparition wholly depends upon the fluid substance of the animal
spirits. For that the spirits flowing within the Brain, are even like to water,
or a thick heap of Vapors, included in a Phial, which being shaken round about,
together with the Vessel, and made so to turn about, continues for a time that
motion, though the Vessel stands still; in like manner also, when the body of a
man is turned round about, the spirits inhabiting the Brain, from that turning
about of the Head, like the containing Vessel, are agitated into spiral or
round motions; and when therefore they cannot irradiate the Nerves with their
wonted influx and direct beams, from hence oftentimes a Scotomy or dizzness,
and a failing of the feet, together with a rotation or whirling about of
visible objects, are induced. The visible Hemisphere seems to turn round,
because as the sensible impression is received by the means of the recipient,
so the objects, as the spirits, seem to be moved round about.

Why looking down from on high, and passing over Bridges, cause a turning round
in the Head.
Secondly, looking from on high, and passing over Bridges, stir up a Vertigo or
giddiness in the Head, for that there is a terror cast on the imagination from
unaccustomed objects, as also from the site of the body, or going in danger,
whence that being very solicitous, how it should rightly order and more firmly
direct the spirits into the bodies of the Nerves, calls them back into the
middle part of the Brain, and so perverts them from their wonted afflux and
irradiation; and whilst it endeavors to set their battle in better array, and
to direct them more surely, by too great a care, drives them into a certain
confusion and irregular motion. Wherefore it is observed, that drunken men, and
very bold, because they are not careful or solicitous concerning the guiding of
the animal spirits, suffer no such thing. Sailing, or riding in a Coach, causes
a turning in the Head by the like reason, as the turning round of the Body;
because, the very fluid spirits being too much agitated, like water shaken in a
Glass, leap hither and thither disorderly. Further, it is wholly for the same
reason, why many going by Ship, or by Coach, are subject also to cruel
Vomiting; to wit, because the spirits being snatched into disorder, by too
great a motion, and confused fluctuation, run inordinately into the heads of
the Nerves of the wandering pair, and for that reason stir up Convulsions and
Convulsive motions in the Bowels.

How Drunkenness.
Thirdly, It Is observed, that the Vertigo comes upon Drunkenness, as a known
symptom; and that to those unaccustomed, the drinking, though moderately, of
Wine or strong Ale, also the taking of Tabaco, easily induces the same
affection; the reason of which is, because from the Liquor, or vapor so taken,
certain fierce particles, and untameable, are carried into the Brain, by the
passages of the Blood and nervous Juice; which being improportionate, and
incongruous to the Animal Spirits, drive them hither and thither from their
wonted tracks of flowing and reflowing or ebbing, and so move them into
whirlings, and turnings about.

These are the chief occasions, or solitary evident causes, which do use to
bring the Vertigo, or turning round in the Head to some men, how sound of
constitution soever they be: which kind of effect, these occasions produce,
forasmuch as the Animal Spirits, being disturbed beyond their set courses, and
orders, are moved inordinately, fluctuating here and there, both within the
passages of the Brain, and also some of them, like a thread broken off, from
their wonted irradiation, into the nervous Stock. A perturbation of the Spirits
in the Brain, and a revocation of them from their flowing into the Nerves,
depend mutually on one another.
For these being always reciprocal, depend mutually one of another, to wit, a
perturbation of the Spirits within the middle part of the Brain, and their
flowing forth into the nervous Stock being hindered; for from what ever cause
either effect is induced, the other immediately follows. A turning round of the
body, going in a Coach, or in a Boat or Ship, also Drunkenness, and the
unaccustomed fume of Tabaco, compel the spirits in the Brain to fluctuate and
shake disorderly, which, for that cause, are presently inhibited from their
wonted flowing into the Nerves, that those so affected, can hardly go or stand;
in like manner, on the contrary, looking from on high, passing over Bridges, a
languishment or syncope falling on them, recall the spirits from their wonted
emanation, who, for that cause tumultuating within the Brain, or being moved
inordinately, cause a Scotomy or dizziness, or a turning round of the objects.

From what causes the preternatural Vertigo is wont to be excited.
These things being thus premised, concerning the Vertigo, raised up by reason
of an outward accident, or from a solitary evident and non-natural cause; we
shall next inquire, how and by what means, it is wont to be induced, from an
intrinsic and preternatural cause.

Concerning these take notice, that the Vertigo is sometimes a symptom
depending upon some other Distemper, placed sometimes within the Brain, and
sometimes without it: but sometimes this is a Disease of it self, which being
raised up within the middle part of the Brain, becomes very troublesome, and
often terrible, and very hard to be Cured.

Sometimes the Vertigo is a symptom of other Cephalic Diseases.
As to the former, many Cephalic Diseases (or such as belong to the Head) viz.
Acute pain, the Lethargy, Epilepsie, Carus, Apoplexy, with many others, do
often accompany the Vertigo; to wit, because the equal expansion of the Spirits
in the Brain, and therefore their irradiation into the nervous Stock, from such
like various Morbific causes, are easily hindered or disturbed; as shall
hereafter appear, when we deliver the Aetiology or reason of the Vertigo, as it
is a Disease of the Brain.

Sometimes it is excited by reason of the Distemper of other distant parts,
viz. from the stomach, spleen, etc. and so by two means:

1. Either by reason of the Flood of the Blood being kept back.


But sometimes this symptom is wont to be produced, by reason of other
Distempers, placed a long way from the Brain, and that chiefly by two ways or
means. For first it is usual for a dizziness to arise, by reason of the flowing
of the Blood being suddenly called away from the Brain, as in a Syncope or
Swooning, great want coming near it, wicked hard labor great Haemorrhagies or
expense of blood, long fasting, in passions of violent sadness and fear; yea by
reason of other occasions, when the motion of the blood is deficient or fails
in the heart; so that the affected are proclive to faintings and swooning away;
presently, because the tribute of the vital liquor is withdrawn, the animal
Spirits growing deficient in the Brain, withdraw their radiation from the
nervous Stock; for when their spring is cut off, those that remain, leaping
back from their emanation, wander about confusedly in the Brain, and very often
stir up the Vertiginous Distemper.

Secondly, Or by reason of an inordinate recourse, or flowing back of the
Spirits toward the Brain.
an inordinate recourse or flowing back of the Animal Spirits, from some
inward, or from some outward member, often causes the Vertigo: forasmuch as the
Spirits being disturbed from the affected part, by a long series, through the
passages of the Nerves, at length disturb others inhabiting the middle part of
the Brain, and drive them into the like disorders; for this cause it is, that
sharp humors gnawing or pulling the Fibers of the Ventricle, because the
infestous and irritative matter being moved in the Spleen, Pancreas, or
Intestines, causes light dizzinesses in the Brain. I have known from an accute
pain, an Ulcer, or a mortified Inflammation in the Foot or Arm, frequent
tremblings and failings, though short, in the Brain, to have been induced.
Whilst that the conceived inordination of the spirits, is transferred from the
distempered part, through the Nerves into the Brain, a certain Formication or
tingling, or as it were the ascent of a cold air, is seen and perceived;
wherefore the cause of this Distemper is commonly ascribed to Vapors, arising
up to the Head: which error we have elsewhere sufficiently confuted. Further,
many are wont, when they have fasted, or stayed long beyond their hour of
dineing, to have a dimness before their eyes, and their heads to have a
turning, and then afterward those clouds vanish, having eaten a little; this
does not so happen (according to the vogue of the people) for that wind or
vapors ascend to the Head, from the empty Stomach, which the aliments being
taken in, Not by reason of vapors, elevated from these parts is it excited.
do immediately suppress; but because the Fibers of the Ventricle, and the
nervous Filaments or little strings, being destitute of the nervous Juice, with
which they desire to be watered, are wont to enter into corrugations or
wrinklings, and light Convulsions, which kind of Convulsions and disorders of
Spirits, for that they are continued through the passages of the Nerves, into
the Brain, produce the Vertiginous Distemper; which, as soon as the Fibers of
the Stomach remit their wrinklings, ceases of its own accord. For this reason I
have known some, by a Vomit being given, tearing the coats of the Ventricle, to
have been taken with a cruel Vertigo: yea I do suspect, that this Distemper
does sometimes arise from meats of ill digestion, and ungrateful to the stomach.

But the Vertigo is not only a symptom, but sometimes a primary Disease of it
self; whose nature, that we may the better search into, we ought to inquire
into its subject, the formal reasons, and causes of it; and then these being
found out, and truly unfolded, we will proceed to its prognostic and Cure.

Without doubt the immediate subject of the Vertigo are the Animal Spirits, The
immediate Subject of the Vertigo is the Animal Spirits.
which every one laboring with this Disease finds to be greatly disturbed, and
wandering up and down; but the mediate subject are those parts of the Brain, in
which the Imagination and common sense reside, and whence the next way lies
into the nervous Stock. These are the Callous and streaked bodies.

For indeed, The mediate the Callous Body.
the Animal Spirits love to expatiate themselves, and to he expanded or
stretched forth on every side, within these medullary places, as in a most
ample Field, and pleasant Garden; wherefore like beams of light, with a full
and straight ray, they pass through all the Pores and most thick passages of the
marrow: hence it is, that whilst they gently flow in one line, from the outmost
border of the Callous body (to wit, from the streaked bodies, and turnings and
windings of the Brain) toward its middle part, they represent pleasant
imaginations and fantasies; and whilst in another line they flow forth,
perhaps through other passages from the middle of the Callous body, into the
infoldings or windings about of the Brain, they transferr thither signets or
marks of notions for the Memory; and then, whilst they tend into the streaked
bodies, and the beginnings of the Nerves, they actuate all the moving parts,
and carry to them, as often as there is occasion, the instincts of the motions
they are to perform.

But in the Vertigo, Its formal reason.
these equal emanations of the Spirits, as it were rays of light, seem to be
intercepted, and diversely perverted in various places; because some bands or
handfuls of the Spirits are obscured, others are bended another way, and moved
hither and thither into turnings round and whirling about, and oftentimes
snatched transverse, or cross one another. Wherefore, confused phantasms,
wandering and inconstant images, or actions of sensible things are represented,
in the Brain, by reason of the Spirits so disturbed: Then forasmuch as the
irradiation into the nervous stock is lessened or hindered, a dizziness and
failing of the motive function follows.

If that we should yet further inquire into what hinders or obstructs the ways,
whereby the Spirits are compelled thus to go aside, or tumultuate within the
Brain; it seems probable, that these inordinations of theirs do depend upon a
two sold cause, viz. first, Its Conjunct Cause.
that certain fierce and extraneous Particles, being entered deeply into the
Brain, together with the nervous Juice, stick close to the spirits, and move
them into enormous motions; but this, as appears from common experience,
happens to every one, on the immoderate drinking of Wine or Strong Water, or
the unaccustomed taking of Tobacco, by the eating of some Vegetables, or being
anointed with Mercury; for that some Heterogeneous bodies and infestous to the
Spirits, From the perturbation of the Spirits.
follow them, and are snatched with them, even to the middle part of the Brain:
why may not such kind of Morbific particles and Vertiginous be supplied from
the Blood, and other humors very much vitiated, and insinuated into the inmost
conclave of the Brain? Then secondly, From their ways or passages being
obstructed.
we may suspect, that when the serous foulness does by degrees creep forward
with the nervous Juice, and at length penetrated deeply, that it does
contaminate these pure marrows, and greatly stuff up its Pores, so that the
Animal Spirits do not shine or beam forth with a clear and full light, but with
a weak, broken, and as it were with many shadows mingled or interspersed with
it.

This is seen by things helpful and hurtful.
In an habitual Vertigo, and inveterate, it seems to be plain, that the Conjunct
Cause does contain both these, from the proof, and that not light, taken from
things that are hurtful and helpful: For I have observed in many, that this
affection or Distemper has been altered, much for the worse or for the better,
upon two occasions; for whatsoever things being inwardly taken, that beget
turgid particles, and apt to grow too hot and rageing, as Wine, Strong Water,
spiced, peppered, and flatulous or windy food, always hurt those troubled with
the Vertigo: and for the same occasions, no less hurtful are those things, by
which the brain is filled, and more stuffed, as Surfeits, sleeping at Noon, or
overlong in the Morning, the Southern wind, a cloudy, thick, and moist air, a
low and watery habitation; on the contrary, the same persons are much helped, as
they easily perceive, by a slender and light diet, also by a clear air, and an
open soil, where the wind has a through passage.

The more remote foregoing cause of the Vertigo consists both in the vice of
the Blood, and of the Brain.
Thus much concerning the subject, the formal reason, and the conjunct cause of
the Vertigo; now in the next place, let us inquire into its Procatartick, or
more remote leading cause; by reason of whose morbid provision or
predisposition, these two evils are wont to be induced on the spirits
inhabiting the middle part of the Brain: But here we apprehend both the Brain
it self, with the watering Liquor, and also the Blood with its infected humors
to be in fault.

The Reason of the former explained.
The vice of this is most often, that it turns from its right temper, into a
sour, acid, and otherways vicious disposition, and being degenerate, perverts
the nourishing Juice; and also gathers in its bosom a Serum, and filthiness of
diverse kinds, which it is ready to pour forth into the Head. But there are
many evident causes, to wit, an evil diet, and errors in the non-naturals, also
the Scurvy, a long or malignant Feavour, and other Diseases going before, by
reason of which the Blood becomes so full of ill humors, and so hurtful to the
Head.

The vices of the Brain noted.
In the mean time, the crime of the Brain is, for that its temper is humid and
weak, its frame loose and infirm, with its Pores too much open and gapeing,
more than they ought, so that all the heterogeneous, strange, and elastick
Particles, together with the serous, or otherways diseased recrements, being
poured forth from the Blood into the Head, are easily admitted into the Brain,
together with the nervous Juice; and because of its more open Pores, fall down
without any let or stop into the middle part, viz. the Callous and streaked
Bodies. This kind of too dissolute or loose habit of the brain, is in some
innate and originally; further, those who are of a tender constitution, to wit,
delicate, soft, and luxurious Men and Women, whose spirits are not able to
suffer any thing strongly, easily contract a Vertiginons Distemper, or rather
increase it; to wit, because when the spirits of the Brain cannot resist the
incursions of strangers, they give way to every matter that is drove to them:
but in others, though strong, inordinate feeding, a sedentary life, frequent
surfeiting, also intemperate sleep, and study, an inveterate Scurvey, evil
gross humors, a long ^eavour, and other diseases of the Head, do very often
cause this kind of evil disposition of the Brain.

The differences of this Disease.
From what has been said, the differences of this Disease are easily gathered;
for that I may pass by what we but now mentioned, that it was either a primary
Distemper of it self, or secondary arising or depending upon others: further we
noted, that the primary Vertigo, so it were light and not deeply rooted, was
only troublesome with fits excited from an evident cause; so that oftentimes
the distempered are well enough, but by reason of their evil manner of living,
or other accidents they become Vertiginous; but sometimes this Distemper
becoming habitual, they are found to be obnoxious to it almost at all times.
Secondly, As to the feat of this Disease there is a notable difference; for
this is sometimes more outward as is seen happening in the Callous body, and
has almost only the tumults and failings of the Spirits, and the wandering,
inconstant, and often confused acts of notions and sense, in the forepart of
the Head; but sometimes the Morbific matter falling down more backward, about
the streaked bodies, stirs up the Scotomy, or turning of the Head, and a loss
or failing of the motive function, that oftentimes the Eyes are darkened, and
they reel or stumble, and their Legs fail them.

As to the prognostic of this Disease, Its Prognostic
the symptomatick or accidental Vertigo, yea almost all the others, while
fresh, are free from much danger, and are easily to be Cured.

But the habitual, and almost continual, although great danger and suddenly to
fall is rarely threatened; yet because it admits of only a difficult and long
Cure, it so tires out both the Patient and the Physician, that before the
Disease can be Cured, they both become weary of one another.

The primary Vertigo being placed before, or more outward, which has scarce a
darkness or falling accompanying it, is more safe, and healable, but is often
changed into an inveterate Headache, and sometimes also it is cured of it self,
by an Haemorrhage, or bleeding at the nose, or by a flowing down of the
Haemorrhoids; it is also oftentimes taken away by Medicine.

The Vertiginous Distemper, arising behind, and intercepting the beamings forth
of the Spirits into the Nerves, is far more dangerous, and oftentimes passes
into an Apoplexy, or a Palsy, or into Convulsive Diseases.

There does not properly belong to the symptomatick Vertigo any Curatory
Method. The Cure of the Vertigo.
There it is only needful to join some Cephalic Remedies, discussing the
clouds of the Brain, and quieting the disorders of the Spirits, to those other
primary indications; or rather that we may speak to the capacity of the vulgar
(which ought to be done sometimes, though feignedly) let some Medicines
contrary to Vapors be added.

The accidental Vertigo, or any other fresh or newly taken, may be healed with
Phlebotomy, and a gentle Purge, and sometimes iterated: but that the Disease
may be more certainly extirpated, let there be besides administered carefully
Cephalic Remedies, such as are anon described.

For the Cure of an habitual Vertigo, There are three chief intentions of
healing;
and become inveterate, there ought to be instituted almost the like method, as
is against most other Cephalic Diseases, which suggests these three chief
intentions of healing, viz. in the first place must be endeavored that the
root or nest of the Disease may be cut off, and that the brain may remain free
from any new flowings in of the Morbific matter; for which end a right order of
diet being commanded, sometimes letting of blood, and most often a gentle Purge
in the intervals are convenient. To take away the root or feeding of the
Disease.
Let a dry and open air be chosen, let immoderate and untimely sleep and study
be shunned, let morning and evening draughts be wholly abstained from; in the
place of the former, let a draught of Tea or Coffee, with Sage leaves boiled in
it, be given. Let an Issue be made in the Leg or Arm, and sometimes let the
Hemorrhoidal Vessels be kept open with Leeches; let the distempered rise early
in the morning, and wash every day the forepart of his Head with water, and
also his Temples, and rub them with a course cloth.

Secondly, To remove the procatartick causes.
The second curatory intention is, to take away the Procatartick or more remote
foregoing causes; wherefore, endeavor that both the Dyscrasie or evil
disposition of the Blood may be removed, and also that the weak and too loose
constitution of the Brain may be mended: For the former, altering remedies
chiefly are convenient, as temperate Antiscorbuticks, and sometimes Spaw
Waters, or Whey. To which always may be added for the latter indication,
Cephalic Medicines, to wit, such as are prepared of Coral, Amber, humane
Skull, the root of the male Poeony, Misleto, the dung of a Peacock, and the
like, the forms of which we shall show you by and by.

The third Intention, To take away the Conjunct Cause.
which is properly curatory, endeavors to take away the Conjunct Cause of this
Disease; which however the Procatartick Causes being removed, for the most part
ceases of it self: for if the coming of every extraneous Matter into the Brain
be cut off, there will remain nothing but pure and clear Spirits, and they
having gotten open and free spaces, within the Callous Body, will from thence
flow forth on every side: However, for the scope of healing this, you must
prosecute it with the former; with Medicines endued with a volatile salt, whose
particles being very subtle and active, do refresh the Animal Spirits, of which
sort are chiefly Spirits of Hartshorn, Sut, of Sal Armoniack etc. impregnated
with Amber, and humane Skull, Tinctures of Coral, Amber, Antimony, Elixir of
Poeony, etc.

The Curatory Method as shown.
These things being premised, concerning the Vertigo in general, it will seem to
the purpose, to draw or shadow forth the Curatory Method particularly, and as
it were to direct you by a thread: and in the first place is shown what is to be
done for the Cure in the fit, and what out of it, for prevention.

1. As to the first, although the invasion of the Vertigo seem cruel, it is for
the most part without danger, and easily passes over of its own accord; In such
a case, if the Pulse shows it, let Phlebotomy be made use of, after having
given a Glyster; but because the sick think themselves dying, and expect
medicinal help, in that case let there be Blisters made in the Neck, and
stinking things held to the Nose, as Castor, the Spirits or Salt of Hartshorn,
or Urine, or of Sal Armoniack. Further, let these Spirits be given twice or
thrice a day with a convenient Dose of Cephalic Iulep: going to sleep, let
them take a Bolus of Mithridate, with the Powder of Castor: let them take the
next day, if the Distemper does not yet vanish, a light Purge, or if the sick
be prone or easy to Vomit, an Emetick, than which a better Remedy can scarce
be taken.

Take Pills of Amber twenty five grains, of the Resine of Ialap six grains, of
Tartar Vitriolated seven grains, of the Balsom of Peru what will suffice to
make four Pills, to be taken going to bed, or early in the morning.

Or Take of the Sulphur of Antimony five grains, of the Cream of Tartar half a
scruple, of Castor seven grains; make a Powder: Let it be taken with care,
expecting to Vomit.

Why vomiting Medicines are so much noted in this, and other Diseases of the
Head.
That Vomiting Medicines do oftenest help in the Vertigo, besides the testimony
of Authors, appears plain enough also from common observation; and besides,
since those troubled with the Vertigo do often Vomit of their own accord, many
have been of the opinion, that the cause of this Disease most commonly lies hid
in the stomach; but it is much otherways, and as we have elsewhere showed;
Vomiting frequently follows upon the Spirits being disturbed in the Brain: But
that Vomits help much in this Disease, the reason is, because this kind of
Physic causes a great revulsion of the humors from the Brain, and very much
restrains the Spirits tumultuating in it. When the Membranes and Fibers of the
Ventricle, and Viscera planted nigh them, are pulled; various humors, viz. the
nervous, serous, watery, pancratick, and choleric are drawn into those parts,
and so squeesed forth, so that the Head being freed from their flowing to it,
does easily shake off from it many impacted there before: then as to the Animal
Spirits, we have showed somewhere, that there is a most intimate commerce, and
agreement between those inhabiting the stomach, and those dwelling in the
Brain; to wit, that therefore the grateful or ungrateful affection of the
Ventricle, from things taken into it, might bring rejoicing or dejection to the
Spirits dwelling in the Brain. Opiates whilst they lie in the stomach cause
sleep; in like manner, it does not a little help in the Vertigo, and other
Cephalic Diseases, whereby the Spirits of the Brain wandering up and down, and
agitated enormously may be repressed, and returned into order; if their
Companions or Kindred be stricken down, by the working of the Medicine; because
whilst many are called forth from the Brain, to their assistance; the others
remaining, remitting their disorders, resume their wonted offices or functions:
without doubt it is for this reason chiefly, Emeticks bring so often help in
the Distemper of madness; so that Empericks do almost only use them.

What is to be done out of the Fit, for prevention sake.
2. But to return from our digression, let us consider what is to be done for
the Curing of an inveterate and almost continual Vertigo, out of the fit.
Therefore, first a method being instituted concerning bleeding, and purging,
according to the constitution and strength of the Patient, and after rest, to
be repeated; let a Vomit also, by my advice, be taken once a month (if nothing
to the contrary hinders it) for which end let there be given to the weaker,
after the stomach is filled with slippery Meats, Wine, and Oxymel of Squils, to
about two or three ounces, and after it let a great quantity of Posset Drink be
drunk, with Carduus boiled in it, that the Patient may vomit of himself, or by
provocation. To others may be given an Emetick of the Salt of Vitriol, or the
Sulphur of Antimony, or of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum: as concerning
Issues, Blisterings, the bleeding at the Hemorrhoidal Veins, Plasters, or
quilted Caps to be worn upon the Head, or other Topics to be applied to the
soals of the Feet, or to the wrists, for revulsion or derivation sake, let the
Physician deliberate.

Take of the Conserve of the Flowers ^f the male Poeony fix ounces, Electuary.
of the Powder of its Root one ounce, of the Seeds of Poeony powdered two
drams, of Amber, Coral, Pearls powdered, of each two drams and a half; of the
Salt of Coral one dram, of the Syrup of Coral, what will suffice to make an
Electuary: the Dose is one dram and an half, or two drams, Evening and Morning;
drinking after it of the following distilled water three ounces.

Take of the fresh leaves of Misleto six handfuls, A distilled Water.
of the root of the male Poeony, and of Angellico, each one pound and an half;
of the whitest dung of the Peacock two pound, of Cardamoms bruised two ounces,
of Cast^r three drams: all being cut small and mixed together, pour to them
eight pints either of White Wine, or Whey, made of it: Let them be distilled in
fit Stills, and the whole liquor mixed together.

Take of the Powder of the Root of the male Poeony half an ounce, Tablets.
of red Coral prepared, of Species Diambrae, each one dram and a half; of the
Powder of the Flowers of the male Poeony fresh bruised and dried in the Sun,
one dram: make a Powder, to which add of the whitest Sugar, dissolved in the
water of Poeony, and boiled to the consistence of Tablets ten ounces: of this
make Lozenges according to art, each weighing half a dram; eat one or two of
them often in a day.

Because all things are not convenient to all Men, and that the Physician ought
to try diverse Medicines, and institute various methods, and to try now this,
now that, therefore we shall here add some other forms of another kind.

Take of our Syrup of Steel six ounces, Chalybeats or Steel-Medicines
and drink a spoonful of it in the Morning, and at five in the Evening, with
the distilled water, but now described, or any other Cephalic, to the quantity
of three ounces; or take of our Tincture of Steel, from fifteen to twenty
drops, in a draught of the same distilled water, twice in a day. I have known
this to have given notable help to many.

Let there be given daily after the same manner, Spirits.
Doses, sometimes of the Spirit of Sut, Harts-born, or of Sal Armoniack,
impregnated with Coral, Amber, or the Skull of a Man: or of the Tincture of
Antimony, Amber or Coral.

Take of the Powder of the Root of the male Poeony one ounce and an half,
Powders.
of the Seeds of Poeony, Coral prepared, and of the whitest Amber, each three
drams; of Pearls prepared, of the Powder of the Flowers of the male Poeony,
fresh bruised and dried in the Sun, of each two drams; of Sugar Candy one
ounce: make a Powder, and take one dram twice in a day with a draught of Tea or
Coffee, or a Decoction of Sage or Rosemary.

For poor people may be prescribed, Powder of the leaves of the Apple Tree,
Misleto, dried in the Sun, and powdered, to the quantity of a dram, to be taken
twice in a day. Or take of the whitest Peacocks dung six ounces, of the Powder
of the Flowers of the male Poeony one ounce, of Sugar two ounces: make a
Powder, of which let them take a spoonful twice in a day, in some convenient
liquor.

Let those troubled with the Vertigo drink for their ordinary drink, small Ale,
with leaves of the Orchard Misleto boiled in it instead of Hops, and in the
Vessel holding about four gallons, let a little bag be hanged, in which put
half a pint of Peacocks dung, and three drams of Cloves bruised.

Examples of those laboring with the Vertigo are so frequently met withal and
almost daily, Cases and Examples of the Sick.
that there seems no need to add here any; but however, that the image or type
of this Disease may be known, I shall only mention some few and more rare cases.

A Divine about sixty years of age, after he had been troubled for about three
months with a light Vertigo, The first History.
or as it were a frequent coruscation or brandishing of the Spirits, in the
fore part of the Head, at length the Disease growing worse, he became ready to
fall, and with a darkness before his eyes; in so much, that in walking he
sometimes would fall flat on the ground. Being sent for to Cure him, I
prescribed Phlebotomy, with a gentle Purge, and after a little respite, to be
repeated again; further, I took care to have the Electuary, and mixtures given
him, such as we noted above, with Blistering Plasters, and other
administrations not to be neglected: A fortnight after, no ease following from
these, I gave him a Vomit of the Salt of Vitriol, and the infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, by which when he had easily vomited ten times, he began to find
himself better, and by using further altering Cephalicks, for about a fortnight
more, he became perfectly well, and from that time, for six years, he took
yearly spring and fall a Vomit, with some other Medicines; though he continued
in perfect health.

The second History.
A certain Gentleman about sixty six years of Age, when he had lived for a long
time obnoxious to a light Vertigo, and that was wont to be excited only
occasionally, about the end of the last Autumn, laboring more grievously with
this Distemper, he also became forgetful. Being sent for to visit this Man,
after he had been sick about three weeks, I found him very much changed in his
looks and countenance, the vigor of both being diminished. Seeing that he was
daily distempered toward evening with a small Feavour, his Pulse beating high
and vehemently: I first caused blood to be taken out of his Arm, and after six
or seven days, out of the Hemorrhoidal Veins; and then I took care for Blisters
to be made behind the Ears and hind part of the Neck, and two large Issues
between the shoulders: Inwardly, at physical hours, he took daily Cephalic
Medicines, almost of every kind. Within a months space he seemed to recover,
and began to walk abroad, and to take care of his household affairs, and other
businesses: but in the beginning of the Winter, taking cold by going daily
abroad, he fell into a little Feavour, with a greater perturbation of the
spirits within his Head: for becoming every evening delirous, he hardly knew
what he said or did. But within seven or eight days, blood being taken away,
and a slender diet used, the Feavour vanished, but the distemper of the Brain
was changed from its former state. For the Vertigo wholly ceasing, he became
very forgetful, and Paralytick, in all his right side. As to his Head, being
asked, whether it was clear, and free from the dizziness and confused
Phantasms; he answered, that as to those things, he never was better in his
life: For he well understood his infirmity, knew his Friends and Relations, and
others who came to visit him, but could hardly remember the names of any of
them; and when he began to talk of any thing, he wanted words to express his
mind: Then as to his Distemper in his side, in his right Arm and Leg; there was
not only a ^oosning wholly, and a want of motion, but in either there grew a
great white waterish Tumor, in so much that not only the Cure, but his life was
despaired of, to be long prolonged; yea, the Magistracy and Offices which he
held, were sought for by others.

However I did not desist from my curatory work, the most skilful Physician
Doctor Wharton being called to my assistance. Carefully administering to the
sick by our joint counsels, we prescribed solutive Pills to be taken at times,
and in Medicinal hours on other days Cephalic, Antiscorbutick and
Antiparalytick Remedies: His head being shaven, we ordered a Plaster of Gumms
and Balsoms to be laid upon it, and the loosened parts to be anointed with Oils
and Balsoms, and to be strongly rubbed. Whilst these things were doing, with
some success as to the greater clearness of his intellect, I know not from what
cause, he fell into a Feavour, in the midst of the Winter, so that for several
days and nights, he grew extremely hot, with burning, great thirst, and
interrupted sleep; his tongue being scorched, and having a white scurf, his
Pulse was high, his Urine red, and full of contents. We abstained from
Phlebotomy, by reason of his Age and Palsy, and especially because of the
Dropsy begun in the distempered side: but with a slender diet prepared of
Barley Broths, and Grewel, we ordered him day by day Iuleps, Apozems, and other
Remedies moving Sweat and Urine; and when about this time the Issues between
his shoulders flowed very much, the sick man began to grow better as to his
Memory, and Palsy, and from thence profiting daily, and by degrees growing
well, of both his distempers, together with his Feavour, he was restored to
perfect health within a fortnight, and is still living in health.

The Reason of the Case described.
In this sick man there was a notable motion, and a various change or
translation of the Morbifick matter; for what was at first in the middle part
of the Brain, viz. sitting on the Callous Body, stirred up the cruel Vertigo;
the same afterward increased, and (as it is probable) being further diffused
into the infoldings of the Brain, brought forgetfulness or oblivion to the
former Distemper: Then forasmuch as the same matter being moved by the Feavour,
and a little discussed, falling partly on one of the streaked bodies, brought
the Palsy of one side, and being partly expulsed into the compass of the
Brain, almost took away the Memory, the Callous Body in the mean time obtaining
a clearness; and lastly, it was not without the help of the other Feavour, that
the Morbifick matter being discussed from these two last nests, was wholly
carried away, the sick being restored to health.

The third History.
Lately being tired out with the continual complaints of a certain man, troubled
with the Vertigo, after many other Remedies tried in vain, I prescribed at
length, that for the space of a month, he should take daily, twice a day, about
a spoonful of the following Powder, drinking after it a draught of the
Decoction of Sage or Rosemary, impregnated with the Tincture of Coffee.

Take of the Powder of the Roots of the male Poeony two ounces, of the Flowers
of the same bruised and dried in the Sun one ounce, of the whitest dung of the
Peacock half a pound, of white Sugar two ounces; make a Powder. It is scarce
credible how much help he received from this Remedy; visiting me after a month,
he seemed a new and another man; being freed of the Vertigo, he not only
confidently walked about, but was able to take care of his household affairs,
and to meddle with any hard business, which he was not able to do before.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Apoplexy.

As the seat of the Vertigo, The Seat of the Apoplexy.
so also of the Apoplexy, seems to be within the same more inward cloister of
the Brain, viz. the Callous Body; to wit, because in either Distemper, although
in a far different degree, the imagination and the common sense are affected,
viz. in the first, the irradiation of the Spirits is wont to be obscured in
some places, and as it were broken with interspersed shades; but in the latter,
the same is wholly darkened, and suffers a full eclipse.

The word Apoplexy denotes percussion, A Description of the Disease.
and by reason of the stupendous nature of the Disease, containing as it were
something divine, it is called a Sideration or Blasting; for those taken with
it, being as it were Planet struck, or with an invisible Numen, fall suddenly
to the ground, and being deprived of sense and motion, and the whole animal
function ceasing (unless that they breath) they lie a long time as if dead, and
sometimes yield to death; But if they revive, oftentimes they are taken with an
universal Palsy, or else of one side.

The immediate subject of the Apoplexy, Its Subject.
and the nearest, are the Animal Spirits inhabiting that region of the Brain
where the principle faculties of the knowing or understanding soul reside; to
wit, the Callous Body: but we conclude the mediate subject, to be the middle
part of the Brain; because from hence, the instincts of all spontaneous motions
proceed, and in this, the perceptions of all sensible things are terminated: by
what means the Cerebel and Praecordia, and all the other parts both Animal and
Vital, are secundarily affected, we shall show anon, when the symptoms of this
Disease and their reasons are delivered. Upon the coming of the Apoplectick
fit, all the acts of every spontaneous and knowing function (to wit, which
depend upon the brain it self) are forthwith hindered and cease; the reason of
which is, because the Animal Spirits being suppressed in their chief place of
meeting, to wit, the Callous Body, both their next motion of expansion in that
place, as also their flowing forth into the nervous appendix, The spontaneous
Functions only deficient in the Apoplexy.
is wholly defective: For therefore, by reason of such an eclipse of them in
that place, an immediate and an universal darkness is caused in the whole
animal region, which is under this government: yet in the mean time, the Pulse
and respiration, as also the motion of the Ventricle and Intestines, are after
a sort performed, either perfectly and freely, or at least interruptedly and
with pain; forasmuch as their actions proceed wholly from the Cerebel, which is
not at all, or but little hurt by the Morbifick matter.

But it will seem difficult to be explained, after what manner, and from what
causes, the Animal Spirits are so suddenly, and all at once suppressed, and as
it were extinguished, about their first spring of emanation; so that all sense
and motion depending thereon ceases every where. The opinions of others
concerning this Disease.
Concerning this, there are many and diverse opinions of Authors; whilst some
place the cause of the Apoplexy in the Heart, and others in the Brain; then
some lay the fault on the intemperance of that, and others on the evil
conformation of this. Further, the obstruction of the Brain is said by some to
cause the Apoplexy in the greater Ventricles, by others in its Pores or lesser
passages: then the obstruction being taken for the cause of the Disease, and
wholly binding up the lesser Pores of the Brain, is said to excite the fit,
either because the afflux of the blood, for the begetting of Spirits is hindered
from those parts; or because, the flowing forth or emanation from thence, of
the Animal spirits is kept back. It would be a tedious thing to examine the
opinions of every one, and to consider the weight of their reasons.

The Theory of this Disease seems to be very exactly delivered by the famous
Webferus; for in the first place, for the finding out of its so abstruse and
hidden causes, he brings Histories or Anatomical observations, The Theory of
this Disease is best shown by the famous Dr. Webfer.
in which the Phenomenon are declared in many dead Carcases of those dying of
this Disease; to wit, in three struck or blasted, he had found the blood
extravasated or out of the Vessels here and there in great clodders, and had
largely marked the substance of the Brain; in another the Serous Colluvies had
overflowed the whole head, both without and within the Skull. From these
footsteps of this most hidden* Disease thus detected, the Author concludes,
That the principal places affected are not the greater Ventricles, but the
middle marrowy substance of the Brain and Cerebel, which is every where porous,
and endued with very small passages, both that the vital spirits may flow in
thither from the blood, and that the animal may flow forth: But indeed he
affirms, That the whole cause of every Apoplexy does consist in these two, viz.
either in one of them, or both of them together: to wit, either because the
flowing of the blood through the Arteries to the Brain is denied, or else by
reason that the flowing forth of the Animal Spirit from the Brain and Cerebel,
through the Nerves and Spinal Marrow, is prohibited; or for both these causes
together. As to the former, he proposes a threefold means, whereby the blood
may be hindered; viz. First, Either by reason of the obstruction of the inner
Carotid Arteries, and of the Vertebrals, to wit, which happens in the greater
Vessels, and chiefly about the ascent of the Brain, from the blood concreted
into cloddery pieces; or in the lesser Vessels, which pass through the brain
from a Viscous Matter planted in them: Or, Secondly, the flowing in of the
blood is detained from the brain, by reason of the compression of those
Vessels, which sometimes happens, because the Paristhmia, or Kirnels of the
hinder part of the Neck, do so swell up, from a Serous heap of watery Humors,
that by pressing together the Arteries passing through, shuts forth the passage
of blood to the Head. Or, Thirdly, The bloody flood may be hindered, because a
Vessel being preternaturally opened within the Skull, great quantity of blood
is poured forth, which should otherways go to the benefit of the brain. As to
the other cause of the astonishing Disease, viz. from the flowing forth of the
Spirits being hindered, he affirms that may be caused by two ways; to wit,
either by reason of the obstruction of the beginning of all the Nerves, caused
by a serous inundation, or by a sudden compression of the same; which is caused
either by an heaping up of too much blood in the Meninges, or in some parts of
the brain it self, or in its Ventricles; or else by a disposition of the
Phlegmonodes.

Another Reason given by the Author.
These most ingenious reasons indeed seem to challenge our assent, for that more
probable or more likely are not easily to be brought; but because we think some
of these are to be altered, and others to be added, therefore we shall here
institute, though not a different, yet somewhat another reason of this Disease.

The Exclusion of the Blood from the Brain does not easily happen;
And in the first place, though we grant that the flowing in of the blood, may
be sometimes denied to the Brain; yet we do not believe, that it only happens
after the aforesaid ways, nor that, for that reason, the Apoplexy does arise.
We have elsewhere showed, that the Cephalic Arteries, viz. the Carotides, and
the Vertebrals, do so communicate one with another, and all of them in several
places, are so ingraffed one in another mutually, that if it happen, that many
of them should be stopped or pressed together at once, yet the blood being
admitted to the Head, by the passage of one Artery only, either the Carotid or
the Vertebral, it would presently pass through all those parts both exterior and
interior: which indeed we have sufficiently proved by an experiment, for that
Ink being squirted in the trunk of one Vessel, quickly filled all the
sanguiferous passages, Because all the Arteries communicate one with another,
and some of them supply the defects of the others.
and every where stained the Brain it self. I once opened the dead carcass of
one wasted away, in which the right Arteries, both the Carotid and the
Vertebral, within the Skull, were become bony and impervious, and did shut
forth the blood from that side, notwithstanding the sick person was not
troubled with the astonishing Disease; wherefore, it may be doubted, whether
the blood excluded from the Brain, by reason of some Arteries being obstructed
or compressed, does bring forth this Disease. Certainly there is more of
danger, that the cause of the Apoplexy, should be from its too great incursion
and extravasation within the Brain, as it was in the three Apoplectick people,
cited by the Author; and that not only, because the marrowie substance of the
Brain was deprived of the Blood coming to its use, (for such a defect might
have been supplied by the other Vessels, extending their branches every where)
but rather, because by the extravasated Blood, and not seldom being concreted
into an hard and mighty bulk, the marrow of the Brain is pressed together, the
passages of the Spirits being by that means shut up.

But indeed, A total Exclusion of the blood from the Brain sometimes happening,
causes a terrible Syncopy.
though we deny this to the afflux of the blood into the Brain, being hindered
in any part only, yet it may be granted to its total exclusion, for therefore
we have often noted, a want of all motion to be caused: which Distemper however
has been rarely taken for the astonishing disease, but rather is wont to be
called a Syncopy, or Swooning away, or the Hysterical Passion: If at any time
the motion of the Heart be wholly suppressed, presently, the Blood being
retained without the Brain, the Animal Spirits fall down, even as the light
vanishes when the flame is put out.

The action of the Heart is stopped or hindered, This depends oftenest on the
motion of the heart, being hindered, and so either because of the Cardiack
Nerves being bound together;
either by reason of the improportionate flowing in of the Blood, as in the
violent passions of fear or sadness, or by reason of the Animal Spirits, which
serve for its motion, being denied by the Cerebel. This we think to happen
sometimes, because of the Cardiack Nerves being Distempered with a Convulsion,
or otherways bound together, after which manner it is usual in Convulsive and
Hysterical Passions; sometimes for the outward parts, as the Arms and Legs, and
sometimes the Inward, to wit, the Praecordia and Viscera, one after another to
be affected: but a want of motion follows the inordinations of these, in which
the sick lie for some time without motion or sense, with a small or seldom
beating Pulse as if dead. Which indeed so seems to come to pass, by reason of
the Cardiack Nerves being contracted at that time, and so the Spirits which
were about to flow being suspended; though we believe such a want of motion
sometimes to be produced by the mere confusion of the Spirits within the Brain,
but in this case, the heart it self is lively enough moved, and the Pulse is
also strong and landable.

But besides, Or, By reason of the Spirits in the Cerebel, being hindered from
their flowing into the Nerves.
it seems most likely, that the motion of the Heart is ofen suppressed or
inhibited, by reason of the Animal Spirits, destinated to the vital function,
being suppressed in the fountain it self; to wit, within the Cerebel. We have
mentioned this to be done in the Distemper of the Incubus: but without doubt it
ought to be attributed to this cause, for that I have observed in some, a
failing of the Spirits, with a sudden privation of all the Animal functions to
follow, upon a great weight in the hinder-part of the Head, in which the sick
become senseless and immovable, with the Pulse and breathing very much
lessened, and scarce perceivable, and lie quite cold for many hours; yea
oftentimes, a day or two, more like dead than living persons. I have known
sometimes those distempered, to be stiff and cold, Pulse and breathing to be
thought quite gone; and to be indeed esteemed quite dead, and put into their
Coffin, yet after two or three days to have revived again: but whoever awakes
out of this fit, whether it be of short or long continuance, does not for that
reason fall into a Palsy, or half Palsy of one side, as those for the most
part do, who are distempered with the Apoplexy. Further, no doubt but that many
die from such a Morbific cause, whose death wrongfully has been ascribed,
either to the mortal Syncopy, or to the Apoplexy properly so called. Truly the
case afterward described, can only have the like reason given for it. Hence
there is a twofold Apoplexy, one in the Brain, the other proper to the Cerebel.
Wherefore, though it may seem a Paradox, yet it is not incongruous to reason,
that we affirm, that there is a twofold Apoplexy, one in the Cerebel, which we
but now described; the other seated in the middle of the Brain, into the causes
of which, and the manner of it, we shall now inquire.

But here in the first place we must distinguish concerning the various assault
or fit of this Disease, The Theory of the former delivered.

This Disease either accidental, or habitual.


to wit, forasmuch as sometimes being excited, without any previous
disposition, or Procatarxis, from a sudden and solitary cause, it is often
invincible, and for the most part mortal; against this there can be no
preventive method of healing, or preservatories instituted; and the Curatory
method which is wont to be taken, proves very often ineffectual. Or, Secondly,
the Apoplectick fit having an antecedent cause, or previous Procatarxis, is
brought into act by reason of various occasions, or evident causes.

As to what belongs to the blasting, The cause of the former is, either a great
breach of the unity in or near the middle of the Brain;
or being stricken, of the former kind, to wit, suddenly and unthought of, its
conjunct or next cause is, either a great solution or breach of the unity,
happening some where within or near the middle of the Brain, by reason of which
its Pores and passages being obstructed or pressed together, the whole
emanation of the Spirits is suppressed: or else it is an huge and sudden
profligation of the Spirits, or an extinction of those dwelling in the Brain.
We shall show the formal reasons of both of them particularly, Or a sudden
stupefaction or extinction of the Spirits.
and the several ways of their being affected.

Extravasated Blood, the breaking of an Imposthum, and a great flood of Serous
humor plentifully flowing forth, are wont to effect the greater breach of the
unity within the Brain.

A Solution of the unity, either from blood let forth of the Vessels; Or,
From Blood effused or extravasated within the Brain, and there either growing
together in clodders, or striking on the affected places, does often times
cause mortal Apoplectick fits, as I my self have proved by Anatomical
inspection in some others, besides the instances brought by the famous Webfer;
but such Morbific extravasations of the Blood within the Brain, proceed either
from an external cause, as a fall from on high, or by a blow on the Head, or by
hitting it against some hard thing, and the like; or from an inward cause, to
wit, for that the Blood being sharp and thin, and the little mouths of the
Vessels, and the places between being too loose, it growing more than
ordinarily hot, either of its own accord or occasionally, and flowing forth
through these, easily breaks into the soft and yielding substance of the Brain.
Further, although we have assigned the seat of this Disease in the Callous
Body, yet the blood, because effused somewhere nigh or above it; because it
compresses the underlying Marrow, by intumifying the distempered places, causes
the Apoplectick fit.

From an Imposthume, or the breaking of an Ulcer; Or,
Secondly, An Imposthum or Ulcer is rarely wont to be excited within the Brain,
but often in the Meninges, and almost for the same occasions, by which the
extravasation of the blood happens: while it is ripening, it causes only an
Headache or heaviness, but when it is broke, the filthy stuff flowing from it,
into the shelly part of the Brain, gnaws and putr^^ies it, and then by degrees
instilling its putrid particles, and very infe^tous to the Spirits, into the
middle or marrowie part of the Brain, raises up at las^ the fit of the
astonishing disease.

From a Deluge of the Serum.
Thirdly, The Serous heap or deluge being poured forth from the blood, into the
Head, though rarely or never of it self, yet sometimes by reason of more strong
evident causes, runs so suddenly into the Brain, that filling and stuffing soon
all its Marrowie Pores, causes astonishment or deprivation of sense and motion:
And this I have known to happen to some, from drinking of sharp thin Wine, or
Spaw-waters, and sleeping upon it; and I have observed the like effect, from a
long and total suppression of Urine, also in Haemorrhages (or fluxes of blood)
being suddenly stopped: And lastly, the Serous Recrements in malignant
Feavours, being translated to the Head, by a critical transposition, often
causes a mortal senselessness, or becoming speechless.

An extinction of the Spirits from Opiates, or from immoderate Drinking of hot
Waters.
Another kind of evident causes, from which sudden blasting or being smitten is
wont to be caused, consists in the sudden profligation or extinction of the
Spirits, which indeed does not seldom or rarely happen, from strong Narcoticks,
or Medicines causing sleep, and also from the immoderate drinking of hot waters.

Though we have already discoursed concerning the use and effects of Opiates, I
cannot however pass over their way of affecting, assigned by that most famous
Doctor Webfer. The operation of Opiates, as it is assigned by the famous Webfer.
This Learned Man affirms, That Narcoticks only do too much open and dilate the
Pores and passages of the Brain, and as it were open the doors of it, before
fast shut, whereby every extraneous and incongruous thing is admitted into the
Chamber or sleeping place of the Spirits, together with the subtle liquor
poured forth from the blood; and so by a violent incursion, dissipates their
ranks and orders. But indeed it appears from what has been above said, that
Narcoticks do not only or always operate so; for we have shown that whilst they
are yet within the Ventricle, they often cause sleep, and sometimes death it
self: Besides, it should follow from thence, that Opiates being often given
should bring still a greater evil, because by dilating more and more the Pores
of the Brain, they cause a much more easy entrance to all manner of
impurities; but truly it is clear enough, that Narcoticks are most hurtful at
the first time being taken, and afterward being often taken do little hurt, so
that some accustomed to Opium, will devour a great quantity of it without hurt;
which is certainly a sign, that this does not so much alter the conformation of
the Brain as that it does immediately agitate or work upon the Animal Spirits;
whom at first (because so very improportionate to them) it slays with a mere
blast; then afterward there being a certain familiarity between them, and this
Medicine, it disturbs them not.

The formal reason of the habitual Apoplexy.
Thus much concerning the causes of the accidental and sudden Apoplexy, which
falls indifferently upon all men, though not at all predisposed: for which also
there can be no preventive Medicines instituted, and it is rarely that it is
cured. But besides, we observe, that this Disease is sometimes habitual, and
that it remains as a constant disposition in some men, by reason of which, at
first they are exercised only with light skirmishes, but after some time they
become more grievous, and of which at last for the most part they dye.
Concerning this therefore, we shall inquire, 1. what the Conjunct Cause of this
Disease may be, and the formal reason of it. 2. In what the Apoplectick
Disposition or Procatarxis of the Disease consists: Then 3. What Evident Causes
it has.

1. As to the first, What its Conjunct Cause is.
we may suppose, upon the coming of the Apoplectick fit, that a certain matter
before heaped up, and dispersed in the compass of the Brain, at length does
descend into its middle or marrowie part, and there does assault all the
Spirits, and suppress and beat them down in the very fountain of their
emanation: Although it does not plainly appear, whether they effect it either
by stuffing only the Pores of the Marrow, or by driving away the Spirits
themselves, or by inflicting on them a numness; notwithstanding it is likely,
that it may be done by either of the ways. And indeed we say the medullary
Pores of the Brain, may be somewhat stopped or obstructed, because the same
matter, which at first settling on the Callous Body, caused senselesness, being
sliden down from thence lower into the Callous Body, and then stuffing its
Pores, is wont to excite the Palsy of one side. But yet we may not conclude,
that the sideration or being struck, does arise only from the Pores of the
Brain being stopped, because then the fit would oftentimes creep on them
gently, and by little and little; forasmuch as all the Pores cannot be
possessed by the inflowing matter at once, It consists in the Pores of the
callous Body, being suddenly stopped, and the Spirits being driven away, by the
contact of malignant matter.
but successively, and some after others: But when as this Distemper leaps upon
one suddenly, and like lightning, what can we conceive less, than that the
Spirits are struck down as it were by a blast, from the malignant contact of
the matter rushing upon them? For it seems, that its particles descending on
every side from the compass of the Brain, into its middle part or the Callous
Body, and entering it from every part, do presently fill the passages how strait
so ever they be, and drive to flight hither and thither the Spirits, and compel
them into a close place, who being then beset and reduced to a strait corner,
when they can neither resist long, or are able to penetrate into other Pores
possessed by the Morbifick matter, at length are struck flat down, letting go
every function of the knowing soul; but then they do not easily nor quickly
rise up again, because they are not able to quit themselves from the embraces,
or bonds of the malignant matter, nor pass any where into empty or open places;
wherefore, they lie long suppressed, till at length sometimes perhaps that
matter, though leasurely, is dss^pated, or supped up into the Blood, or issuing
forth from the little Pores of the Marrow, slides forward into the Ventricles
of the Brain; or at length, that matter sliding a little lower, and being
impacted on the Streaked Bodies, either one or both of them, causes the
Hemiplegia, or half Palsy, or the Palsy: In the mean time, as the Spirits,
within the Callous Body grow free, and getting wider spaces, they resume their
wonted offices; which they indeed execute, until new matter springing again in
the compass of the Brain, and being by degrees increased, descending into the
Callous Body, brings on another fit; out of which, if the Spirits get not, by
either of the aforesaid ways, being wholly discomfited, they perish by degrees.

If you should ask after the nature or disposition of this Morbific matter;
What the nature or disposition of the morbifick matter is.
it may be suspected, that the Animal Spirits in the Apoplexy are plainly
affected after another manner, than in Convulsive passions; to wit, those
obnoxious to this blasting obtain a Copula contrary to the explosive, that is,
Vitriolick, rather than Nitro-sulphureous; and so by it their spiritous-saline
particles are wholly fixed, and are hindered from entering into any motions or
explosions, even as when the Vitriolick particles being beaten and combined
with the fulminating gold, they quite take away its explosive or letting off
virtue, and congeal and render immovable all other active particles, like the
blowing of a freezing air. The Animal Spirits seem to be not unlike the same,
and their Copula's have diverse sorts of adjuncts, some of which induce an
Elastick and very explosive virtue, as in the Convulsive Distempers, and others
a stupor, numness, or immobility, as in the sleepy Diseases, and also in the
Apoplexy and Palsy.

Thus much concerning the Conjunct Cause, The procatarctic Cause of the
habitual Apoplexy.
and formal reason of the Apoplexy; as to its Procatartick or fore-leading
Causes, they are much after the same manner as in most other Cephalic
Distempers; to wit, both the Blood is in fault, for that it affords to the Head
extraneous particles, and very contrary, or as it were destructive to the
Texture or constitution of the Animal Spirits, either begotten in it self, or
taken from some other place: and then the Brain is in fault, for that being
weak in its disposition, and so its Pores and passages too dissolute and lax,
so that it always and easily admits without impediment, the Morbific matter
poured forth from the Blood. There is no need that we should here rehearse or
unfold particularly the peculiar reasons of either, and the various ways by
which it is done; but we shall rather referr you to what we have already said
very largely, concerning the foreleading causes of the inveterate Headache, and
also of the Lethargy. Further, the like or the same evident causes, which were
noted in those Distempers, and in other sleepy Diseases, ought here to be taken
notice of, to be shunned carefully by Apoplectick people.

The differences of this Disease.
From what has been said, the differences of this Disease may be easily known:
1. What we mentioned but now; The Apoplexy is either accidental, which is
suddenly, and at once excited, without any foregoing cause, and almost
indifferently in all, from some strong evident cause; or it is wont to be
esteemed habitual, which depending upon a previous disposition, has frequent
fits, by reason of several occasions: 2. From the reason of the subject, this
Disease is said to be proper, either to the Brain or Cerebel, or common to
both: previous and frequent Scotomies or dizziness with mists before the eyes,
and the Distemper of the Vertigo, denote the Brain more obnoxious to this
Disease: A frequent Nightmare, intermitting Pulse, often Swooning and failing
of the Spirits, argue the Cerebel to be evilly disposed.

3. In respect of magnitude, it is either universal, every function, both
merely natural and the spontaneous ceasing; or it is partial, this or that part
being affected by it self, then for that the faculties of either, now all, now
many only, yet none excepted suffer an eclipse; for in either regiment, the
morbific matter descending to the middle or marrowie part, possesses sometimes
all its whole substance, sometimes part of it, to wit, the fore part, hinder,
or middle part. 4. In respect of the antecedent cause, the Apoplectical
disposition is either hereditary or innate; or acquired by means of an evil
diet, or other accidents.

Its Prognostics
The prognostic or fore-judging of this Disease is always denounced deadly or
dubious; for the Apoplexy is never without present or future danger. But it is
worst of all, in which, besides the abolition of all the spontaneous functions,
the Pulse and breathing also are either deficient, or are performed
laboriously; and then for the most part it happens, with a foam at the mouth,
and snorting; upon which comes a sweat, which is often like melted grease, and
indicates a very sudden death to be at hand.

Those who are blasted or stricken, and are presently deprived of Pulse and
breathing, and a little after growing cold, and seem dead or without any life,
are not presently to be had from bed, or left destitute of Medicinal helps:
further, though there be no hopes of life, they ought not to be buried under
three or four days; because such do sometimes revive again, either of their own
accord, or by the use of Rememedies: which certainly comes to pass, not because
a vital heat is at last stirred up in the heart (for it is not there
extinguished altogether;) but because the Morbific matter being discussed, or
evaporated from the Cerebel, the motion of the heart is restored, like a Clock
when the weights are put on.

In the Apoplectical fit, if any help follows upon letting of Blood, there is
hope of health. But if after this and other Remedies, the Distemper continues
without intermission, above the space of a night or a day, or grows worse, the
case is desparate.

If after the first speechless fit being over, the sick person becomes more
nummed and duller, and distempered with a Scotomy, and frequent Vertigo, it is
a sign that he will be obnoxious to more fits of this astonishing Disease: for
the aforesaid distempers proceed from the Morbific matter, already laid up in
the compass of the Brain, and there flowing sprinklingly, and thence descending
through the very small Pores only, into the middle part: which matter whether
Vitriolick or Narcotick, growing to a greater fullness, calls on this blasting
or being suddenly smitten.

The Curatory Method.
The Therapeutick Method, is either Curatory, for the taking away the fit, when
it is upon one; or preservatory to prevent it, that it may not return: the
former belongs to every Apoplexy, the other only to the habitual.

The assault or fit of this Disease being come, (if it proceeds not from some
outward or vehement hurt of the head) although it is not known, whether it be
excited or no from an invincible cause, What is to be done in the Fit.
such as the Blood being let forth of the Vessels, or the breaking of an
Imposthum in the Brain, yet we ought carefully to endeavor the Cure of it. And
because the blood being too hot or swelling up, is wont sometimes to bring in
the Morbific cause, or at least to increase it, and the same sinking down, and
becoming more settled, sometimes carries it away; therefore in the first place,
you ought to deliberate, concerning the moderating its course. And h^re a
question arises, concerning the placing of the Patient, to wit, whether he
ought presently to be put to bed, or to be detained out of it for some time:
some religiously observe the latter, In what position the Sick ought to be kept.
and that not without reason; to wit, because in Bed there is a greater
propensity to sleep, and the blood growing hot, and flaming forth more
plentifully, by reason of the heat of the Bed-cloaths, pours forth still more
recrementitious matter into the distempered Brain: on the contrary, whilst the
sick is thinly clothed, and placed in a Chair, the blood flows more slowly,
and the sinking Vessels seem more apt rather to sup back the humors out of the
Head, than to send them thither. Wherefore, if the Patient be strong enough, it
will be expedient perhaps to let him stay out of bed for six or eight hours,
till the f^ux of the Morbific Matter passes over, and the course of the Blood
be made more quiet by Phlebotomy, and other Remedies carefully administered: but
the weak, and who are of a tender constitution, let them be put to bed as soon
as they are smitten. But let not the sick, whether in bed or up, lie upon his
back, but with his head somewhat upright, and inclining either to one side or
the other.

Phlebotomy, Phlebotomy.
necessary almost in all Apoplectical persons, is not to be deferred: but the
Blood is copiously drawn back by a strong Clyster. In the Clyster may be
dissolved the Species of Hierae Diacolycinthia, and a troubled Infusion of
Crocus Metallorum. Let a large Blistering Plaster be applied to the hinder part
of the Head, Other ways of Administration noted.
and other drawing Cataplasms to the Legs and Feet: Let the Temples and
Nostrils be anointed with proper Oils and Bal^oms, and let painful rubbings be
used almost to the whole Body: In the mean time, let things that stir up the
Animal Spirits, and help them out of their bonds be given them; viz. Spirits of
Hartshorn, Sut, and the like, with a Cephalic Iulep.

After this the sick being placed in the bed (if he be able and does easily
Vomit) let an Emetick be given him, Vomiting Medicines.
of the Salt of Vitriol, Oxymel of Squills, or an Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, and then with a Feather put down the throat, provoke vomiting four
or five times, drinking between whiles Posset Drink.

Vomiting being over, Comforters.
let there be given Comforters, as the Elixir Vitae of Quercitan, Spirits of
Lavender, or Camphorated Treacle, Tincture of Poeony, or of Amber, or of Coral,
with Apoplectical Water, or other appropriate Waters in a convenient Dose, and
repeated as the business requires.

On the second day, Cupping-glasses.
the same Remedies being still continued, let dry Cupping-Glasses, or with
Scarification, be applied between the shoulders, or to the hinder part of the
Neck; or if more blood ought to be taken away, let the jugular Vein be opened;
the Clyster repeated; apply to the Nose Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or a fume of
Galbanum boiled in strong Vinegar. Besides, let Errhines or Sneezing Powders,
and things to chew in the mouth to draw away Rheum be used. Then in the Evening
let a Purge be ordered of Pil. Rudii, or a Solutive Electuary of Roses,
dissolved in some liquor.

None of these things helping, Hot or glowing Iron.
though there be small or no hope, the top of the Head being shaven, let
glowing Iron be held over it, or a large Blister made upon it; and let the
other part, especially the Forehead, and forepart of the Head, be bathed with
Bez^ardick Vinegar; let Leeches be set to the Temples, or behind the Ears; let
also a large Dose of Spirits of Hartshorn, or of Sut, be often poured down the
throat; these and other the like administrations, are to be used till you see
death at hand; which (as Celsus faith) these sort of Remedies only defer, but
some times hasten life.

The Prophylactick or preventive Method, The preservatory Method.
respects both those who have been troubled with one or more fits, and also
those who are seen to be prone to it, as those who are born of Apoplectick
Parents, or are frequently obnoxious to the Vertigo, the Incubus, or Swooning
away; also such who have short and brawny Necks.

Let Purging and Bleeding be ordered Spring and Fall, Purging and Bleeding
Spring and Fall.
where it is convenient; as to the former, those who are easy to vomit, let
them first take an Emetick, of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum, with the Salt
of Vitriol, or of the Sulphur of Antimony; and then after three or four days,
let there be given a Dose of Pil. Rudii, or of Amber; and after a due distance
between, let it be repeated three or four times: Let two large Issues be made
between the shoulders; or if that place does not please some, let them be made,
in one of the Arms, and in the opposite Leg.

On other days, Cephalic Remedies.
free from purging, let altering and Cephalic Medicines be taken twice a day.

Take of the Conserves of the Flowers of the Lilies of the valley (or of the
male Poeony) six ounces, An Electuary.
of the Powder of the Root of the male Poeony half an ounce, of humane Skull
prepared three drams, of the Seeds and the Flowers of the male Poeony powdered,
each two drams; of red Coral prepared, of Pearls, and of the whitest Amber,
each one dram; of the Salt of Coral four scruples, of the Syrup of the Flowers
of the male Poeony, what will suffice to make an Electuary: The Dose two drams
morning and evening, drinking after it two or three ounces of the following
Water.

Take of the Roots of the male Poeony, A distilled Water.
of Imperatorian Angelica, each half a pound; of the Root of Zedoary, of the
lesser Galangal, each one ounce; of the leaves of the Orchard Mifleto, of Rue,
Sage, and Betony, each four handfuls; of the outer rind of ten Orenges, and
eight Lemons, of Cardomums, Cloves, Nutmegs, each half an ounce; all being cut
and bruised, pour to them of white Wine (in which two pints of the dung of the
Peacok has been infused for a day) ten pints: let them infuse, close shut for
three days; then distill it according to art, and let the whole liquor be mixed
together.

Lozenges.
Take of the Species of Diambrae two drams, of the Powder of the Root of the
male Poeony, of Zedoary picked, each one dram and a half; of Pearl one dram, of
the Oil of the purest Amber half a dram, of the whitest Sugar half a dram,
being dissolved in six ounces of the water of Poeony, and boiled up to a
consistence: make Lozenges according to art, each weighing half a dram: Let the
Patient eat one or two often in a day, at his pleasure.

Spirits and Tinctures.
Within the fifteenth or twentieth day, that the Remedies may not be irksome,
and may profit the better, let them be changed: therefore, instead of the
Electuary let there be substituted for two or three weeks, sometimes the Spirit
of Sal Armoniack, with Amber or Coral, or else impregnated with humane Skull or
Castor; sometimes Elixir of Poeony, or Tincture of Amber or Coral, or Elixir
Vitae of Quercitan, or the simple mixture: also instead of it, may be drunk
compounded Waters, or Water of black Cherries, or Walnuts; or the simple Waters
of Rosemary, or Lavender; sometimes a draught of Posset Drink, with Flowers of
the male Poeony or the Lilies of the valley boiled in it; Tea, Coffee, and
Chocolate prepared, how
or a draught of Tea or Coffee in the morning, (let the water of which it is
prepared have such ingredients first boiled in it) or let Chocolate be prepared
after this same manner.

to be made and taken.
Take of the Powder of the Root of the male Poeony, of humane Skull prepared,
each half an ounce; of the Species of Diambrae two drams, make a Powder; to
every paper add of the Kirnels of the Cocoe Nuts one pound, of Sugar what will
suffice; of this make Chocolate: take of it half an ounce or six drams every
Morning in a draught of the Decoction of Sage, or of the Flowers of Poeony, or
such like.

A Powder.
Take of the Powder of the Root of the male Poeony, of humane Skull prepared,
each one ounce and a half; of the picked Root of Zedoary, Cretick Dittany,
Angelica, Contrayerva, each two drams; make a fine Powder of them all, add to
it of the yellow of Orenges and Lemons Candied, each two ounces; let all be
beaten to a Powder: take about half a dram, or a dram an hour before and after
meals.

For ordinary drink, let a Vessel of four gallons be filled with ordinary Ale,
in which six handfuls of white Horehound dried had been boiled, of Anacardine
and Cardomums cut and beaten, each one ounce and a half; of it make a bag to
hang in it.

Medical A^.
First of all, a very strict diet ought to be ordered; let a temperate, dry and
open air be chosen; let good and wholesome meats be eaten, and slender meals.
Let suppers be sparingly taken, or none at all: Let noon-sleeps, drinking
bouts, and other customary things about the non-naturals be shunned.

Examples.
I could here propose many Histories of Apoplectical persons, to wit, of some
who were once or twice touched, and yet living; and of others who have dyed at
the first assault, or in the second or third fit. The most Reverend Father in
God the Lord Gilbert Archbishop of Canterbury, recovered of a grievous
Apoplectical Fit, six years ago, (God prospering our medicinal help, to whom we
render eternal thanks) and from that time, though he sometimes suffered some
light skirmishes of the Disease, yet he never fell, or became speechless or
senseless. But we shall not stay upon this or other examples to unfold them
largely, because there is nothing in them very rare, that may illustrate the
Aetiology of this Disease. Some of their dead Carcases I have dissected, but
only of such as the cause of death was from some former great hurt of the head,
as some blow, or by means of some blast; in all which the extravasated Blood,
or an Imposthum was the cause of their death: We have been prohibited often by
their Friends, from opening those dying of an habitual Apoplexy, who expecting
to have them revive again, held it as a deadly thing, and so wholly forbid
Anatomy: But I shall here relate a notable Anatomical observation taken about
five years since at Oxford.

A very rare History.
An ancient Divine, an honest and a godly Man, endued with a fat body, a short
and brawny Neck, being long unhealthy, and living a sedentary life, contracted
a very Scorbutic evil disposition: being troubled with a difficult and
laborious breathing, with an heaviness of the Head, and unwonted numness, was
scarce able to endure any thing of labor or exercise, more than that he daily
went and came from his Chamber to the Chapel and Hall: one Morning he came to
the Chapel a little before Prayers begun, and while he was on his knees, he was
suddenly struck, and immediately became speechless and senseless, and fell on
the ground; but being carried thence, and his clothes taken off, he was put
into a warm Bed. I and other Physicians being presently sent for, and coming as
soon as we could possibly, we found him not only without. Pulse, sense, and
breathing, but all his Body cold and quite stiff; nor could he be recalled to
life or heat, by any Remedies or ways of administrations, though used for some
time: by which we suspected, that the Pulse of his heart was wholly hindered at
the first stroke, and that its flame being put out, presently all motion of the
Blood was suppressed.

The next day, An Anatomical Observation.
seeing the Carcass dead enough, and stiff, we opened it, nothing doubting but
that the Distemper so suddenly mortal, would show clear marks of it within the
Head. But there, or in any other part, was not the least shadow of this most
cruel Disease: The Vessels watering the Meninges were moderately filled with
Blood, without any Inflammation or Extravasation: The Brain, the Cerebel, and
the oblong Marrow, with all their processes and prominences, appeared every
where thoroughout firm, and well colored, both without and within: nor was
there any Serum or Blood poured forth any where, within the Pores or passages,
nor yet within the greater Ventricles, nor heaped up; yea the Choroeidal
Infoldings placed both within the cavity of the Brain, and behind the Cerebel,
seemed free from all fault; so that the Morbific matter, equally thin and
subtle like the Animal Spirits, whom it affected, remained wholly invisible,
and we could only argue its presence by the effect.

But lest this should lie hid some where without the Head, after the contents
of the head were diligently inspected, we came to the Breast: where the
discolored Lungs being through the whole stuffed with a frothy matter,
manifestly showed the cause of the short and difficult breathing. But the Heart
was sound and firm enough, free from any obstruction or fleshy Concretions.
Further, neither in the neighboring parts, or in others about the Viscera, was
found any Imposthum or Ulcer, by whose contact or stink, the Heart could be
suddenly oppressed, or the Vital Spirits (if this be possible) might be choked.

Wherefore in this case, nothing could be suspected else, but that the Animal
Spirits implanted within the middle of the Cerebel, were put to flight, and as
it were extinguished suddenly, by some malignant, or narcotick, or otherways
deadly Particles, so that the motion of the Heart presently failing, like the
first moving wheel in a Clock or Watch, immediately all the other functions,
their impulses being taken away, wholly ceased.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Palsy.

THE middle of the Brain, The middle of the Brain, which is the Seat of the
Apoplexy is also the Seat of the Epilepsy.
or the Callous Body, to which we have assigned the seat of the Vertigo and
Apoplexy, seems also to be the primary distempered place in the Epilepsie:
Concerning which, as also concerning Convulsie Diseases, since we have
elsewhere largely treated, we shall therefore here pass over purposely in this
part of the Diseases belonging to the Head, and according to our wonted method,
descend yet lower, to the other regions of the Brain, and its dependences; and
now we shall endeavor next to describe the Distempers which belong to the
Streaked Bodies, Oblong Marrow, and also to the Nerves, and nervous Fibers.

We have formerly showed, The streaked Bodies, the Medullar Trunks, and the
Nerves, are the Seat of the Palsy.
that these parts do perform all the functions belonging to motion and sense;
wherefore, the failing or the enormities of these, are the affections of those
Bodies, or of the Spirits inhabiting them. But indeed sense and motion are hurt
chiefly after two manner of ways: to wit, either is wont to be perverted or
hindered; when Motion is perverted, Cramps and Convulsions; when Sense, pain
arises; when either function or both together is hindered or abolished, the
Distemper is thence stirred up called the Palsy; which we are at present about
to handle. Concerning Convulsion and Pain we have already treated.

The Palsy is described after this manner, to wit, That it is a resolution,
loosening, or relaxation of the nervous parts, what the Palsy is.
from their due tensity or stiffness; by which means Motion and Sense, to wit,
either one only, or both together, in the whole Body, or in some parts, cannot
be exercised after their due manner.

Its Conjunct Causes are, Obstruction of the passages, and the Impotency of the
Spirits.
The nervous pats are loosened, because the Animal Spirits do not sufficiently
irradiate them, nor blow them up, nor actuate them with vigor. The cause of
which defect is, either an obstruction of the ways, by which their trajection
or passage is hindered; or the impotency of the Animal Spirits, for that they
are distempered with a numness, or that being but few in number they do not
lively enough unfold themselves. By reason of these various means of being
affected, there arise diverse kinds of Palsies. For in the first place, as to
motion by it self, this spontaneous faculty (which is chiefly and almost only
liable to the Palsy) is sometimes taken away in the whole, or altogether in
some parts; but sometimes this, being only hindered, is lessened or depraved. In
the Palsy either motion, or sense only, or both together, is hurt.
Secondly, In like manner also one sense only by it self, or more together, is
sometimes wholly taken away, and sometimes only much diminished or vitiated.
Thirdly, Sometimes it happens that both powers are hurt at once. We shall speak
of each of these in their order; and first of the Palsy, in which spontaneous
motion is abolished; which we say is excited from two causes chiefly; to wit,
the ways being obstructed, and the Animal Spirits being touched with a numness,
or as it were with a certain malignant blast.

Spontaneous motion is abolished by reason of the ways being obstructed, either
in their beginnings, or the middle passages, or about the ends.
As to the former, an interception of the Spirits from the loosned parts, by
reason of their passages being obstructed, that always existing above them, is
wont to be caused in various places, and for diverse causes; but chiefly it
happens in the first sensory, viz. in the Streaked Bodies, or some where about
the Medullar Trunks, or lastly in the Nerves themselves; and so, either in
their beginnings, or middle processes, or in their extreme ends, ( i. e.) the
nervous Fibers. When the evil or hurt is brought to the Streaked Bodies, or the
oblong, or spinal Marrow, it either obstructs the whole Medullar thread or
rope, from whence arises an universal Palsy below the distempered part; or one
moiety of it, whence comes the Hemiplegia or Palsy of one side; or it affects
in one side, or in both at once, the little heads of some Nerves, whence
loosnings or resolutions are caused in this or that member apart from the
others.

The ways are obstructed by Impletion, or Compression, or by a breaking of the
Unity.
There are many means whereby the ways or passages of the Animal Spirits are
obstructed in the aforesaid bodies. First, Either their passages are filled by
an extraneous matter impacted in them: Or, Secondly, They are pressed together
by Blood flowing out of the Vessels, a Serous deluge, or some Tumor lying upon
them: Or, Thirdly and lastly, the unity or continuity is broken, as by a
stroke, or wound, or bruise, also by excess of cold or heat. According as these
several places are distempered, and the several means of their being affected,
we shall run through the chief cases of the Palsy, together with the Aetiology,
or reason thereof, with the manifold appearances of Symptoms in them; and in
the first place we will speak of the Palsy arising from an hurt brought to the
common Sensory, to wit, the Streaked Bodies.

An obstruction in the streaked Bodies causes the Universal Palsy, or the
Palsy of one side.
And indeed, that it so comes to pass, I have proved by ocular inspection, and
shall be plainly demonstrated anon by Anatomical observation. Further, as often
as an universal or an half Palsy follows, (as it is often wont to do) upon a
Lethargy the Carus, or Apoplexy, any one may conceive, that such a change of
the Disease, happens from a translation of the Morbific matter; for that this
at length going out of the Pores and passages of the Callous Body, which it at
first possessed, and sinking down a little lower, runs into the Medullary tracks
of one: of the Streaked Bodies or perhaps both of them. And so, when the Animal
Spirits are hindered from their wonted out-flowing, or irradiation into the
nervous Stock, the motive faculty only, or (if the obstruction be very great)
both this, together with the sensitive, is hindered.

I have sometimes observed in a Palsy, coming after a grievous fit of some
other Disease, that all the moving parts, of either side, have been loosened
after a more light manner: For though they were not able to perform the more
strong motive endeavors, yet for the most part they could extend, bend, yea
and move their members hither and thither, to wit, because the Morbific matter
being diffused abroad, through both the Streaked Bodies, had not so closely
filled every where all the passages: Moreover, on the contrary, I have known in
a Palsy of one side, so suddenly excited, that there has been a far greater
resolution, so that they so struck, were not able to move any way hand or foot,
nor any other member on the distempered side. Further, sometimes it happens,
from the Morbific matter being copiously fallen down, and obstructing closely
all the Medullary tracts of one of the Streaked Bodies, that all the respective
parts, have not only been destitute of motion, but some of them also of sense;
so that some members felt not any painful impression, how vehement so ever it
was. Such a Distemper happening in a lesser degree, is wont to excite a sense
of numness, or pricking or tingling, such as in members leaned or lain upon.

If it be demanded, Why sense is not hindered as well as motion in every Palsy.
why sense is not always hindered as well as motion in every Palsy, since as it
seems either is performed by the same Nerves and Fibers, within the same
Medullary tracts, so that one faculty is only the inversion of the other? as to
this we may say, that as light beams through glass, when wind is excluded, so
also sense being safe, oftentimes motion is lost. Besides, sense is only a
passion, and a sensible impression, which is propagated from the organ, by a
continuity of the nervous process, to the common sensory, without any endeavor
or labor of the Spirits; which may be done, though the common sensory be in
some measure obstructed, and the Spirits inhabiting it benumbed: But motion is
a difficult and laborious action, to which is required, that the Spirits expand
or stretch out themselves lively, and not only put forth as it were explosive
endeavors in the moving organs, but chiefly about the parts, where the
beginning of the motion and its first force is, and from thence, in the whole
passage through the nervous parts. Wherefore, as but a few Spirits and bound,
suffice for sense; many, free, and expeditious as to their expansions, are
required for motion.

But that the Morbific matter being slid down into the Streaked Body, In an
universal Palsy why all the Muscles of the Eyes and Face are not loos^ed.
the Muscles of the Eyes, Mouth, and Face, do still retain their motions; it is
because that some of them, about the beginning of the Spinal Marrow, below all
the Nerves, arising from the oblong Marrow, have their place of obstruction; I
say, that it is so, because the Nerves destinated to the aforesaid Muscles,
(the motions of which are stirred up by natural instincts) and brought from the
fifth and sixth pair, even as the Nerves serving the Praecordia and Viscera,
derive chiefly the influences of the Animal Spirits from the Cerebel; whose
regiment, though the Streaked Body be distempered, remains often unhurt.

Not only an obstruction of the Streaked Body, A Compression of the streaked
Body sometimes stirs up the Palsy.
but also a compression sometimes causes the Palsy, as shall be showed by and
by from Anatomical observation; to wit, when the blood is extravasated, and
growing cloddery within the inferior cavity of the Brain (and perhaps a Serous
deluge is there heaped up) and does lie heavily upon the Streaked Body, and
press it together, so that for that reason, the Medullary tracts being bound
together, are hindered from the Spirits flowing into them.

Next after the Streaked Bodies, A Paralytick obstruction does sometimes happen
in the Oblong and Spinal Marrow.
the seat of the Morbific Cause is in the oblong and spinal Marrow; also
sometimes in these, though rarely an obstruction, but more often a compression,
or a solution of the unity, excite the Palsy.

As to the former, it is not probable, that great plenty of Morbific matter
should be sent from the Brain, into this or that part together and in heaps;
for such a great and sudden flux hardly happens beyond the streaked Bodies. But
it may be suspected, that Narcotick or otherways deadly Particles, being
forthwith poured forth into the Brain, and from thence thrust forth into its
appendix, does at first stick within the more narrow spaces of the Medullary
Trunk, and then by degrees being heaped up, causes the Paralytick obstruction,
whilst these Particles are carried in the Brain here and there, in the Callous
or Streaked Bodies they stir up frequent Vertigoes, and mists before the eyes,
and sometimes in the motive parts short numnesses; but these being by degrees
heaped up together within the Trunk of the oblong Marrow, or the spinal,
forasmuch as they possess all or part of its passage, and by that means either
obstruct all the Pores of the Spirits at once, or some ranks or orders of them,
they bring forth either an half Palsy, or a loosening of some members,
sometimes the superior, sometimes the inferior.

I have observed in many, A Palsy often succeeds stupidity, or becoming
foolish.
that when, the Brain being first indisposed, they have been distempered with a
dullness of mind, and forgetfulness, and afterward with a stupidity and
foolishness, after that, have fallen into a Palsy, which I often did predict;
to wit, the Morbific matter being by degrees fallen down, and at length being
heaped up some where within the Medullar Trunk, (where the Marrowy Tracts are
more straightened than in the Streaked Body) to a stopping fullness. For according
as the places obstructed are more or less large, so either an universal Palsy,
or an half Palsy of one side, or else some partial resolutions of members
happen.

But in either Marrow, A Palsy sometimes from the pressing together of the
Marrowy Cord.
and especially the Spinal, an interception or inhibition of the Spirits,
creating a Palsy, most often happens from a compression, or a breaking of the
unity: The extravasated Blood, or the Corruption flowing from the broken
Imposthum, and perhaps a Serous deluge being deposited within the hollowness of
the Backbone; yea also an hard Tumor, being risen somewhere in it, by pressing
together the marrowy rope, shuts up the ways of the Spirits. Further, either a
stroke, wound, or bruise of the Head, or spine; yea and a distortion of this
latter, do often pervert or break off the Marrowy Tracts; Sometimes from the
unity being broke.
yea an excess of cold taken in Frost and Snow, straitens and stops up the
passages of the Spirits. Those kind of cases, and instances, being obvious
enough to common observation, there will not be any need here to speak of them
particularly, or to unfold them more largely.

The Seat of the Palsy sometimes in the Nerves themselves, which are either
obstructed, or compressed, or the unity broken.
Thirdly, The Morbific cause being sometimes planted lower, possesses either the
greater Trunks, or the lesser shoots of the Nerves themselves; and that
likewise is either an obstruction or a compression, or a breaking of the unity,
by reason of any of these ways, and according to the like means of affecting,
within the nervous passages, as in the marrowy, it is wont to be excited.

The oppilative or stopping Particles being fallen down, from the Brain, and
carried forward into the oblong Marrow, enter into the Nerves, destinated to
the Muscles of some parts of the Face, and by obstructing the ways of the
Spirits in them, bring forth the Palsy in the Tongue, An Obstruction.

Sometimes in the beginning of the Nerves.


and sometimes a loosening in these or those Muscles of the Eyes, Eyelids,
Lips, and of other parts; and then by reason of the contrary Muscles being
contracted beyond measure, they stir up a Cramp or Convulsion in the opposite
part.

Nor is it less usual, for the same Particles, for that they are fewer, to be
carried yet further, without any great hurt into the Spinal Marrow; and lastly
going forth from it, to run sometimes into the several Trunks of the Nerves,
and sometimes into some handfuls of them; and for that reason, to induce the
Palsy to the several Muscles or members, or in some of them only. As often as
for this cause, the Muscles of one side of the Neck are resolved, or loosened,
the other opposite being too much contracted, render the Neck twisted or awry.
It ordinarily happens, by reason of some private Nerves being so obstructed,
for some Fingers of the Hand, or Toes of the Feet to be loosened. But if many
handfuls of Nerves together happen to be stopped, a Palsy follows, oftentimes
in the whole Arm or Thigh. It would be too tedious to mention every case here,
by which the Nerves are wont to be stopped, about their beginnings, middle
processes, or utmost ends, to wit, the Membranaceous or Musculous Fibers,
Sometimes in the middle.
by reason of compression, or breaking of the continuity, and so deny the
exercise of the moving faculty to the respective parts: The reasons of these
kind of Distempers are so clear and manifest, Or in their utmost processes. The
other conjunct cause of the Palsy, to wit, the impotency of the Spirits;
and so commonly known, that it would be superfluous to insist on the opening
them any longer. But we shall rather pass to the other conjunct cause of the
Palsy, which more immediately affecting the Animal Spirits, and sometimes
striking down, and as it were extinguishing them, by mere contact, or as it
were by a malignant blast, brings in a resolution or loosening in the
respective parts.

Often arises from narcotick or vitriolick Particles, by which the Spirits are
put to flight.
What we before affirmed in the Apoplexy, we now again do the same in the
Palsy, that there are deadly Particles, not only oppilative or stopping, but
sometimes Narcotick or Stupefactive, and as it were extinguishers of the
Spirits; which kind of affection, if it be strong, causes sometime Paralytick
Symptoms, without any great obstruction of the ways. The breath or steams of
Antimony, Mercury, or Auripigment, often causes weaknesses, tremblings, and
loosening of the Members, in such as are long conversant among the Furnaces of
Chemists, and of Metals. We may in like manner believe, that in some Scorbutic
and very Cacochymical people, heterogeneous Particles, and as it seems of a
Vitriolick nature (passing through the Brain, and its marrowy appendix) do enter
into the nervous passages, together with their watering Juice, and cast down
some handfuls of the Spirits in them, or suppress their motion. Hence suddenly
arise stupors, numness, or looseness in the Members, or Muscles, sometimes in
these, sometimes in those, and soon after vanishing in one place, presently
spring up again in another: But at length, when these sort of Particles being
abundantly poured forth into the Nerves, and laid up in heaps, they become
variously fixed here and there; and moreover, shut up the ways of the Spirits,
and so cause a fixed and permanant Palsy. In every Palsy the matter is not so
thick or cold, as it is vitriolick or other ways infestous to the Spirits.
And indeed, in every Palsy, made by obstruction, the Morbific matter is not
thick and cold Phlegm, (as Galen and many other Physicians have asserted) for
such does not pass through the Brain, much less the nervous passages; but it
seems to consist of most subtle and very active Particles, though infestous or
deadly to the animal regiment: But indeed the Palsy happens in Men, no
otherwise than the blasting, or burning, or withering in Trees; because some
winds being endued with very frigid or cold blasts, to wit, with a Nitrous or a
Vitriolick Spiri^^ when they blow upon the green and tender sprigs of trees,
The blasting or withering in Trees like the Palsy.
cause them suddenly to wither, for that the tender stalks like Nerves every
where inter-woven with the sprigs and leaves, are bound together by the blast
of the malignant air so fully, that they receive not any more the Juice sent
from the Trunk or Root, by reason of which defect they wither. Much after the
same manner, extraneous Particles, and as it were Vitriolick, being admitted
within the organs of sense and motion, for that they at once bind up the Pores,
or cast down or suppress from motion the Animal Spirits, cause in the
respective parts, as it were a withering or drying up. But this is not so
caused by mere Phlegm, or a Serous ^^ood, as plainly appears, because those
endued with a moist and cold Brain, have always their Nose and Eyes moist, with
the distillation of a snotty or watery humor; yea those who are troubled with a
Dropsical Brain, in which the Brain, and the tops of either Marrow do as it
were swim in water, are not for that reason disposed to the Palsy, unless by
the pressing together of the Marrow.

We have hitherto described the various cases of the Palsy, The more remote
foregoing causes of the Palsy, which are two:
and the means by which it is caused, together with their ^everal formal
reasons, and conjunct causes. As to what belongs to the other causes of this
Disease we must first distinguish, that it is either accidental or habitual:
The former happens to some, from a solitary evident cause, such as a stroke,
wound, bruise, and excess of either heat or cold, without any previous
disposition; and besides this, and the conjunct cause, which for the most part
is a compression, or breach of the unity, it has none: The habitual Palsy
depends upon a Procatartick cause, which is always an extraneous, and as it
were a Vitriolick matter begotten somewhere before, and heaped up, which being
from thence suffused into the organs of sense and motion, for that it stops up
the marrowy or nervous Tracts or sometimes profligates the Spirits by mere
contact, or effects both together, brings forth loosenings in the respective
parts, by reason of the influence of the Spirits being denied them.

This kind of Procatarxis or foregoing Cause, More remote, to wit, a vicious
Blood, and for that reason pouring forth a deadly matter upon the head.
depends upon a twofold antecedent or secret leading cause, to wit, one remote,
which is a vicious Blood, carrying to the Head a Morbific matter, either
begotten in it self, or taken from the Bowels, or some other place; and the
other more near, which is an indisposed Brain, to wit, weak, and too lax or
loose, or otherways evilly made, and so easily admitting heterogeneous, or
strange and deadly Particles.

The Morbific matter being brought to the Brain, Nearer, to wit, a weak and
loose Brain, admiting the evil Particles. The Palsy is either a primary
Distemper, and a Disease of it self;
sometimes induces the Palsy primarily, but more often secondarily, and not
but after other Diseases first excited.

The reason of the former, (to wit, that the habitual Palsy be a primary
Disease, and by it self) requires these two things, viz. That the heterogeneous
Particles be disposed chiefly for the causing or stirring up the Palsy; then
that they be admitted by degrees, and but in small quantity, for if they enter
in great heaps, they would first cause the Carus or Apoplexy: and if they be
not of a plain Vitriolick nature or quality, when having passed through the
Brain, they come to enter into the organs of Sense and Motion, they would first
occasion in them Convulsive and painful Distempers, yea sometimes the Colic,
Gout, or Scurvy first, and then at length, the Palsy.

2. The secondary Palsy often succeeds Distempers for the most part Chronical,
Or secondarily, viz. Coming upon or succeeding other Diseases*
after the natural and vital faculties being by them very much hurt: a slow and
long Feavour, strength being at length worn out, causes oftentimes enervations
or resolutions of the whole Body, or of some Members. Long and immoderate
sadness, a Consumption, a Scorbutic Atrophy or wasting, being long fixed in
Bed, unhealthy old Age; yea and many other passions, after a notable evil first
brought to the Brain, and nervous Stock, at length brings on the Palsy. But
indeed this Disease more frequently comes upon some other Distempers, either of
the Brain, as chiefly the Carus and Apoplexy, or of the nervous stock, and such
chiefly are the Scurvy, Convulsions, Colic, and Gout. By what means it
succeeds Cephalic Diseases, we have already showed in this; and how the
Scurvy, in another tract: we shall now inquire how it is often the offspring
of the other three.

1. We have shown already, Wherefore the Palsy often succeeds Convulsive
Diseases.
that the Spasme or Cramp or Convulsion, does sometimes bring in the Palsy, to
wit, when from contrary or opposite Muscles, being one of them loosened and the
other pulled together: Further, it is an usual thing, for those who are long
obnoxious to Convulsive Distempers, to suffer at length debilities in some
members, and at length resolutions or want of motion. I have known many
Epileptical persons, and others troubled with Convulsions, by reason of the
motive function being abolished or inhibited, in this or that part, to become
at first lame, and then Bedridden; the reason of which seems to be, because the
Morbific matter, being continually admitted within the tracts of the Brain and
its appendix, both medullar and nervous, and often thrust forth, does at length
so debilitate and dilate them, so that it gives an open passage besides to
other kind of Particles, either Narcotick or Vitriolick; by reason of which,
the Palsy comes after the Convulsion. Further, I have often observed, by
reason of the diverse mingling of the Morbific matter, (like as when Rain and
Snow happen together) that the sick have at once been infested both with
Convulsive motions, and the Palsy. A notable example of this, with the reason
of it, we have fully described in our Tract of Convulsive Diseases, Chap. IX.
p. 115.

Wherefore the Distemper of the Colic.
2. They who are frequently and grievously obnoxious to the Colic, at length
become also Paralytick. The case is so frequent here, that the succession of
this Disease is accounted among its prognostics; for those who are wont to
suffer cruel fits of torments in the Belly, returning by intervals, or are
troubled with pains about the Viscera of the Abdomen, cruel and almost
continual, at length have wandering pains in their Body and Members, and then
afterward stupors or numness, and lastly resolutions or want of motion. The
cause of these effects proceeds, both from the seat of the Disease, and the
Morbific matter being changed, to wit, this, which being very small but sharp
and irritative, runs only into the Sphlanchnick Nerves, and so by reason of the
Fibers of the Viscera being pulled, did stir up in them Cramps and pains;
afterward becoming more copious, and also duller and Narcotick, pours down
through the Spinal Marrow, and entering into the Nerves destinated to these or
those Members or Muscles, brings forth resolutions in the respective parts. We
shall more largely show the reason of this, when we treat of the Colic*

Wherefore the Gout.
It is a very ordinary observation, that the Palsy comes upon the Gout
frequently, in the Members obnoxious to it; the reason of it is easily known,
forasmuch as in this sickness the Morbific matter is twofold, and does depose
salt and as it were lixivial Particles through the Arteries, and as we suppose
others sourish or acetosous to come to them by the Nerves; (as shall be more
largely shown hereafter) it is no wonder, if that at length, other sorts of
Particles become companions to them, by other beaten ways, and at length either
by filling or by compressing, obstruct the very small passages of the Spirits.

The evident Causes of the habitual Palsy.
As to what belongs to the evident causes of the Palsy, to wit, for what
fore-causes or occasions those disposed to this Disease contract it the sooner,
or that having been taken with it already, are yet wont to be more grievously
tormented; I say, whatsoever does more vitiate the Blood, also those things
that stop up the Brain and its nervous appendix, or stir up suffusions of the
Morbific matter in it, also what do inflict a Narcosis or stupefaction to the
Spirits, or lessen their numbers, may be brought hither. In this rank first
occur the disorders in the six non-naturals, an evil manner of living, drinking
thin clear Wine, or strong hot liquors, too much sleep, or too untimely, an
idle and sedentary life, immoderate Venus, too much loss of blood, a moist Air
or Marshie dwelling, an House new Plastered, Metalick fumes and vapors,
frequent use of Narcoticks, or stupefying Medicines, or too much taking
Tobacco, excess of cold, heat, or moisture, vehement and long passions of
sadness or fear, with many others, all which we have not here leisure to recite.

Want or pa^city of Spirits oftentimes the Cause of the Spurious or Bastard
Palsy.
Thus much concerning the Palsy, in which the loco-motive faculty is abolished
or lost, or very much hindered; by reason of the ways of the Spirits being
obstructed, and themselves affected with a certain stupefaction, in the whole,
or in the respective parts. There follows another kind of this Disease,
depending upon the want and fewness of Spirits, in which, although motion be
not deficient in any part or member wholly, yet it is not performed by any but
weakly and depravedly only. For though the distempered are free from want of
motion, they are not able however to move their members strongly, or to bear
any weight; moreover, in every motive endeavor, they labor with a trembling
of their limbs, which is only a defect of debility, and of a broken strength in
the motive power. For when strength is wanting for the lifting up of any member
firmly, and at one essay or endeavor, Nature flagging, acts with a more often
repeated trial or endeavor, and so the part being in motion, is compelled as
it were to shake and tremble. To which happens, that when the nervous Fibers
flagging or growing weak, they are not able to sustain the Tonick endeavor, or
the stiffness in the Animal regiment, and these endeavoring or striving to
exert or put forth their utmost power, enter into motions as it were
Convulsive, and reiterate them perpetually. Wherefore, in some Paralyticks,
there is always a trembling and shaking in all the limbs.

Those who thus become Paralytick, by the paucity or want of Spirits, and so
from their small or diminished dispensation into the nervous System, are made
obnoxious to such a Distemper, by reason of various causes and occasions.

First, For this Reason Old Men are obnoxious to this Disease.
Extreme or unhealthy old age, or immoderate loss of blood, or the genital
humor, induce this kind of Paralytick disposition in many men; to wit, because
from the wasted blood and almost liveless, there is stilled forth into the
Brain but a very small stock or provision of Animal Spirits.

Secondly, Also Scorbutical Persons, and such as are full of ill humors.
Almost for the same reason, the loco-motive faculty grows weak or fails in
persons greatly Scorbutic, and such as are full of indigested juice; for such
not being fit for any strong exercise, go infirmly and weakly, and are very
much tired by any long or swift walking; further, by any more heavy endeavor,
they suffer often times a numness in their limbs, with an impotency of moving
them. For indeed, the bloody Mass is in these very watery, and stuffed with
impurities, and for that the Brain being weak and loose, as to its Pores,
admits easily all sorts of filthinesses into it self; wherefore, fewer Animal
Spirits being only created, and those not clear and subtle, but dull and
hindered, by the adhesion of a more thick matter (although there is not always
an obstruction of the ways, or a Narcotick disposition) they are not able to
unfold themselves into motive endeavors.

Thirdly, Also others long sick.
Not only Scorbutical persons, but also many others, hardly and long growing
well from some Chronical Disease, are distempered with Members very much
loosened from their due vigor and strength, and with a languishing of their
Limbs; that though they are well in their stomach, and have a good and laudable
Pulse and Urine, yet they are as if they were enervated, and cannot stand
upright, and dare scarce enter upon local motions, or if they do, cannot
perform them long: yea, some without any notable sickness, are for a long time
fixed in their Bed, as if they were every day about to dye; whilst they lie
undisturbed, talk with their Friends, and are cheerful, but they will not, nor
dare not move or walk; yea they shun all motion, as a most horrid thing.
Without doubt in these, although the Animal Spirits do after a manner actuate
and irradiate the whole nervous Stock, yet their numbers are so small, and in
so few heaps, that when as many spirits ought to be heaped together somewhere
in it for motion, there is great danger lest presently in the neighboring
parts, Hence some dare not venture on local motion.
their continuity should be broken. Wherefore, when the spirits inhabiting the
Brain, are conscious of the debility of others disposed in the Members, they
themselves refuse local motions, for that it would be too difficult a task to
impose on their companions; wherefore, the sick are scarce brought by any
persuasion, to try whether they can go or not; Nevertheless, those laboring
with a want of Spirits, who will exercise local motions, as well as they can,
in the morning are able to walk firmly, to fling about their Arms hither and
thither, or to take up any heavy thing; before noon the stock of the Spirits
being spent, Others endeavoring, cannot bear them long.
which had flowed into the Muscles, they are scarce able to move Hand or Foot.
At this time I have under my charge a prudent and an honest Woman, who for many
years has been obnoxious to this sort of spurious Palsy, not only in her
Members, but also in her tongue; she for some time can speak freely and readily
enough, but after she has spoke long, or hastily, or eagerly, she is not able
to speak a word, but becomes as mute as a Fish, nor can she recover the use of
her voice under an hour or two.

In this kind of spurious Palsy, The Impotency of the Spirits proceeds in some
measure from the default of the explosive Copula.
arising from the defect, or rather the weakness of the Animal Spirits, than
from their obstruction, it may be suspected, that not only the Spirits
themselves, as to their first numbers of them, and particular originals, are in
fault; but besides, that sometimes the imbecility and impotency of local
motion, does in some measure also depend upon the fault of the explosive
Copula, suffused every where from the blood, into the moving Fibers. For
indeed, from a very Cacochymical blood, or full of juice, and for that cause
vappid, and liveless; as the Animal Spirits are but few, that are instilled
into the Brain, so it is probable, that those themselves derived from the
Brain, into the Nerves, being disposed at length within the muscular Fibers, do
meet with other Nitro-sulphureous Particles (which we have somewhere shown to
be necessarily required to the Musculary motion) from the so vicious blood that
are but dull, and degenerate, from the Elastick power; wherefore indeed the
Spirits being concreted so evilly within the Muscles, even as Gunpowder being
full of more thick feculences, rarely and weakly perform the acts of explosions.

As to what belongs to the other species of the Palsy, The kind of Palsy, in
which Motion and Sense are hurt at ones.
in which the sensitive faculty is also affected, we say, that this is hurt
either by it self, or together with the motive; and such an hurt of both
together, does almost only happen, forasmuch as the passages and ways of the
Spirits are more firmly shut up, so that whether they tend forward or backward
all their irradiation is intercepted: That sometimes happens, though rarely
from the Morbific matter fallen down from the Brain into the oblong Marrow, but
more often by reason of a grievous hurt of the Spine or Backbone, as from a
fall from on high, stroke, or wound inflicted on them: For from such occasions,
by compressing the marrowy cord, or by too much distending or writhing it, all
the tracts of the Spirits are blotted out.

Kind, in which sense only is affected.
Sometimes the sensitive faculty is hurt by it self, the motive being still
safe; this is sufficiently obvious, and the reason very clear, of the organs,
whose Nerves are only sensible, to wit, as of the sight, hearing, taste, and
smell. But indeed, that in the extreme habit of the body or members, the touch
or feeling sometimes perishes, the loco-motive power being unhurt; as is
ordinarily discerned in Lepers, those distempered with the Elephantiasis, and
some Madmen, who are wont to go naked, and lie on the ground, whose skin and
musculous flesh are so benumned, that they feel not the gashes made in their
flesh with a Penknife, nor Needles any where thrust into them; Wherefore
feeling is sometimes lost, and motion safe.
this I say seems very hard to be unfolded. But as to this it may be said, that
perhaps the same Nerves, carry the instincts of motions, and the impressions of
sensible things forward and backward, or to and fro, but that the same Fibers,
which are loco-motive, are not altogether or chiefly sensible. We have
elsewhere showed, that its power is performed by the tendinous and musculous
Fibers; but the sensible Species, is almost only received by the membranaceous
Fibers; wherefore, the outer skin is the primary organ of feeling; after this,
the Membranes covering the Muscles, and lastly those constituting the Viscera,
are somewhat affected by the Tangible object. What is the proper Organ of
feeling.
Wherefore, the loss or hurt of feeling arises, by reason of an hurt, brought
to the exterior Membranes; to wit, when the Fibers of these are obstructed by a
Vitriolick matter, or are benumbed very much by excess of cold; so that the
Animal Spirits, which ought to receive their impressions, are excluded from
their organs. And indeed, from hence it appears, that these inhabiting the
exterior Membranes, are only affected, because sense being lost, the members
wither not, as when deprived of motion, but remain full and round; which is a
sign that the Animal Spirits entering still the Nerves, and fleshy Fibers, do
contribute their virtue to the office of nourishment; after what manner we have
already shown; but when motion is lost, the Spirits are almost wholly banished
from those parts, and the flesh consumes, because the nourishing matter, though
carried through the Arteries, is not assimulated. We have largely discoursed of
this in our Treatise of the Nerves.

The Prognostic of the Palsy.
The Theory of this many-form'd Disease being now at length finished, its kinds
and differences, all, or at least the most and chiefest of it, together with
the reasons of each of them, being rehearsed in order, we shall show next those
things which belong to its prognostics and Cure.

1 Every Palsy, whether accidental or habitual, and either of them, whether
universal or partial, or whether suddenly excited or by degrees, if it happens
that the knowing and vital faculty be unhurt, it ought not to be accounted an
acute Disease; but being free from sudden danger, admits a long Cure, or at
least an endeavor of it.

2. This Disease coming from a solitary evident cause, as from a stroke, a
fall, wound, etc. or coming upon the Apoplexy, Carus, Convulsion, the Colic,
or other Distempers of the Brain, or nervous System, if it be not in a short
time altered for the better, or gives not place to Medicines, it remains for
the most part incureable.

3. If that a total resolution follows, from a total obstruction in the
beginning of the oblong Marrow, or from the Backbone being vehemently hurt,
and that sense and motion are both taken away, the Distemper is hardly, or
scarce at all to be Cured.

4. Those who are once cured of a Palsy, arising from an evident solitary
cause, do not so easily relapse into the same, as when the Disease depends upon
a procatartick cause.

5. A Palsy, happening to men of years, to Cacochymical, very Scorbutical, and
intemperate persons, although the Distemper be not very great, is difficultly
Cured.

Its Cure.
As the Palsies are manifold, and are from diverse causes, so the Cure is not to
be instituted always after one manner, but after a various method, to wit,
appropriate to every kind of this Disease. Three means of healing, according to
which this Disease is, 1. Either accidental; 2. The offspring of another
Disease; 3. Habitual.
For the most part there are these three kinds of it, or rather there are three
means of healing; of which there ought to be had concerning the Cure of this
Disease, now this, now that, or now another; to wit, because resolution
(whatever, or in what place soever it be) is either caused, 1. from an external
accident, as a stroke, a fall, a wound, excess of cold, or the like, suddenly:
Or 2. It succeeds to some other Distemper, as the Apoplexy, Carus, Colic, or a
long Feavour: Or, 3. It is primary and a Disease by it self, by degrees
excited, and depending upon a procatartick cause, or a previous provision.
Concerning each of these, we shall speak particularly.

1. Therefore, The Cure of the former.
when the Palsy is caused, by reason of some accident, with a vehement hurt,
there are not many intentions of healing; but only that the part hurt may
recover its pristine conformation. And first of all, that the Blood and other
humors flowing to it, being weak and distempered, and staying there, might not
increase the hurt, Phlebotomy is most requisite in this case, and presently to
be celebrated; then the belly being made slippery by the use of Clysters, and a
slender diet, if the matter requires it, let there be instituted either easily
digested meats, or moderate Hydroticks, or water meats; to wit, that whilst the
sick is kept in bed, he may continue in a gentle sweat, that all the
superfluities may copiously exhale from the hurt part, and that the Spirits
being gently agitated, may repeat their former ways and tracts, within those
Pores and passages, so unlocked by the warm Effluvia's.

For this end, A Powder for a Fall.
the Powder ad Casum, described in the Augustan Pharmacopoea, or as it is in
ours, is of common use; let there be given of Irish Slate, to the quantity of
about a dram, in a draught of white Wine warmed, or of Posset Drink made of it;
and repeated every six or eight hours. Besides, if there be at hand the
Decoctum Traumaticum, let it be taken ever now and then, frequently in
Posset Drink, or a Decoction of the Roots of Madder, or of Butter-bur, or of
St. Iohns-wort Flowers.

Further, Topics to be, applied to the Distempered part.
in the mean time, let the distempered part be carefully looked to, which may be
easily known, partly from the hurt inflicted, and partly from the loosened
members. If there be any thing dislocated in it, you must take care that as
soon as it can, it may be put again in its place; if a Tumor, Contusion, or a
wound be excited, they are to be succored by Balsams, Liniments, Stuphes or
Fomentations, or Pultesses: But if nothing preternatural appears outwardly, let
a Plaster of Oxycrocium and of Red-lead, each alike, what will suffice, be laid
upon it, and let the sick be kept quiet, and in a moderate heat, for three or
four days. If the resolution remains confirmed, and the afflux of new matter be
not feared, let more resolving and discussing Remedies be applied to the
distempered places; wherefore, make use of Fomentations, and hotter Ointments,
yea natural Baths, if they are at hand, or at least artificial. Sometimes it
may be expedient for the distempered Members to be wrapped in Horse-dung, or in
warm grains, and to be kept so for some time; and lastly, between whiles,
besides the use of these, to add Clysters and gentle Purges. But if no help
follows these administrations, the sick ought then to be handled with the like
long method, and with the same Remedies, as those that have an habitual Palsy,
or any other coming upon other Diseases and confirmed; which means of Cure, for
every common Palsy more deeply rooted, shall be showed anon.

2. When the Palsy coming upon a Feavour, How the Palsy coming upon another
Disease is to be cured.
Apoplexy, Carus, or other Cephalic or Convulsive Diseases, is greatly and
suddenly excited, first the Physician ought to endeavor the taking away of the
conjunct cause, which has almost ever its seat in the oblong or spinal Marrow.
Wherefore, at the beginning of the Disease, Bloodletting, and Purging (if
nothing shows the contrary) Clysters, Vesicatories, Cupping-glasses, Sneezing
Powders, Ointments, and other administrations used in Cephalic Diseases, to
wit, which by any means may shake off, or pull away the deadly matter, fixed to
the Medullary Trunk, or to the little heads of the Nerves coming from it, are
to be made use of. If that at first, the force of Medicine effects nothing
within fifteen or twenty days, for that the Distemper is radicated, and become
habitual, it must be expunged by a long method, and equally by preservatory as
well as curatory Indications; of which we shall speak anon.

3. The habitual Palsy, The Cure of the habitual Palsy.
depending upon a procatartick cause, whether it be in fieri or in disposition,
or whether it be made, or in the nest or bird, either requires a peculiar means
of healing

There are two chief causes of the former, Whilst it is In fieri, or doing.
in both which the Curatory Method, respecting only the fore-leading Causes, is
designed after the like manner, to wit, whether any falling dangerously ill of
the Palsy, or growing well of it, relapses into danger, the same Remedies
almost are to be insisted on.

The intentions therefore of healing are, The Intentions of healing respect the
Blood and the Brain.
First, That the offices of Chilification, and of making of Blood, be rightly
performed, and matter for the procreating the Animal Spirits be supplied, both
laudable and sufficient to the Head; then, Secondly, That the Brain being still
firm and well made, the heterogeneous Particles being excluded, it may admit
all that are fitting, and rightly exalt then into Animal Spirits. For these
ends, I think convenient to propose the following method, which ought to be
varied, according to the various constitutions of the sick,

In Spring and Fall, that they enter into the ordinary course of Physic, yea
the whole year besides, some Remedis are in constant use. Blood-letting is not
always convenient to all men: But though we forbid this, it is not for the same
reason with the Ancients, supposing the Palsy to be a cold Disease, but
because the Animal Spirits, are both procreated out of the Blood, and become
also Elastick in the motional Fibers, by reason of the bloody Copula;
therefore, if plenty of this be taken away, they grow weak and deficient. Which
thing indeed I have observed in many, and for the most part languishings and
tremblings to have been begun in the Arm, out of which the blood had been
taken. Bloodletting.
However in some, endued with a sharp and hot blood, and apt to flame forth too
much, though disposed to the Palsy, it is sometimes convenient to let blood a
little and sparingly.

A Purge.
About the Aequinox, a Purge ought to be instituted, and after due times
between, to be iterated three or four times. But first, if nothing oppose, let
a Vomit be given, of the Salt of Vitriol, Sulphur of Antimony, or an Infusion
of Crocus Metallorum, or of Mercurius Vitae; then let there be taken Pills of
Amber, or of Aloephanginae, by it self, or with the Resine of Ialap, every
seventh or eighth day. At other times we prescribe Cephalic Remedies,
Cephalic Remedies.
such as in the sleepy Diseases: viz. Electuaries, Powders, Spirits, and
Volatile Salts, Tinctures, Elixirs, with distilled Waters and Apozems,
sometimes these, sometimes those, or others. Let Issues be made in the Arm or
Leg, yea in fat people, and such as are full of ill humors, in both together,
or between the shoulders. Let them drink all the year medicated Beer of Sage,
Betony, Stechades, Sassafrass Wood, and Winterines Bark. Wine and Women ought
to be forbidden, or but moderately to be used.

How the Disease in habit is to be cured.
If that the Palsy be excited, after a previous disposition, either of one
side, or in some members, and that it still continues, notwithstanding the
first attempt of Medicine, a long and complicated method is always requisite,
and oftentimes does not suffice; for not only the Disease, or its conjunct
cause, or its foregoing severally, but all together ought to be opposed: for
which ends Phlebotomy being for the most part interdicted, Bloodletting and
Purging cautiously and rarely to be admitted.
only a gentle Purge and rarely is convenient. Besides, some chief Cephalic
Medicines, and Antiscorbuticks are wont to help against the foregoing cause of
this Disease. But all of this sort, are not convenient to all; yea as we have
observed in the Scurvey, according to the various Constitutions of the Sick,
there are also Remedies of a diverse kind and virtue. For to Choleric
Paralyticks, to wit, in whose sharp and hot Blood there is much of Salt and
Sulphur, Altering Medicines ought to be given with choice.
and very little of Serum, the more hot Medicines and endued with very active
Particles, are not agreeable, yea are often hurtful; which things
notwithstanding are very profitable to Phlegmatic persons, whose Blood is
colder, and contains much of Serum, and but few active Elements. Wherefore, for
this twofold state or condition of sick persons, it seems convenenient that we
institute here a double Method of Cure, and two classes of Medicines, of which
these may be given to cold Parlyticks, and those to the hot.

How the Palsy is to be healed in a cold temperament.
In the former case, for the taking away the Procatartick cause, after Vomiting
and Purging being rightly instituted, I was wont to prescribe according to
these following forms.

Electuary.
Take of the Conserves of the leaves of the Garden Scurvy Grass, of Rocket,
made with an equal part of Sugar, each three ounces; of Ginger Candied in India
half an ounce, of the rinds of Oranges and Lemons Candied, each six drams; of
the Powder of the Claws and Eyes of Crabs, each four scruples; of the Species
of Diambre two drams, of Winterens Bark one dram and a half, of the Roots of
Zedoary, the lesser Galingal, of Cubebs, the Seeds of Watercresses, Rocket,
each one dram; of the Spirits of Scurvy Grass, Laevender, each two drams; of
the Syrup of Candied Ginger, what will suffice to make an Electuary. Take of it
about the quantity of a Walnut, at eight of the Clock in the Morning, and at
five in the Afternoon, drinking after it a pint of the following Decoction,
Coffee.
warm, or Coffee, with the leaves of Sage boiled in it six ounces, of or ^per
Wine three ounces.

A Decoction.
Take of the shavings of Lignum Sanctum six ounces, of Sarsaparilla, and of
Sassaphras, each four ounces; of white and yellow Sanders, of the shavings of
Ivory, of Hartshorn, each half an ounce; infuse them according to art, and
boil them in sixteen pints of Spring water, till half be consumed, adding of
Crude Antimony in Powder, and tied in a rag four ounces, of the Root of the
Aromatic Reed, of the lesser Galingal, each half an ounce; of the Florentine
Iris one ounce, of Cardamums six drams, of Coriander Seeds half an ounce, six
Dates; make a Decoction to be used for ordinary drink.

Spirits.
Going to sleep, and first in the morning, let a Dose of the Spirits of Sut, or
Hartshorn, or of Armoniacal Amber, or of Blood, etc. be taken, with three
ounces of the following distilled water.

A Distilled Water.
Take of the leaves or roots of Aron one pound, of the leaves of Garden
Scurvey-grass, of the greater Rocket, of Rosemary, Sage, Savory, Thyme, four
handfuls; of the Flowers of Lavender three handfuls, the outer rinds of ten
Oranges, and six Lemons, of Winterans Bark three ounces, of the roots of the
lesser Galingal, of Calamus Aromaticus, the Florentine Iris, each two ounces;
of Cubebs, Cloves, Nutmegs, each two ounces; all being cut and bruised, pour to
them of white Wine, and of Brunswick Beer or Mum, each four pints: distill it in
common Stills, and let all the liquor be mixed together.

Sometimes in the place of the Electuary may be taken for fifteen or twenty
days a Dose of the Tincture of Sulphur Turpentined, Tinctures and Elixirs.
of the Tincture of Antimony, or of Amber: Also sometimes Elixir Proprietatis,
or of Poeony; let them be taken in a spoonful of distilled Water, drinking
after it three ounces of the same: Also sometimes the following Powders or
Lozenges may be taken by turns, in the medical course.

Take of the Powder of Vipers flesh of Monpillier prepared one ounce, of the
hearts and livers of the same half an ounce, of Species Diambre two ounces;
make a Powder, take one dram once or twice a day with the distilled Water three
ounces, or with Viper Wine, with a Decoction of the leaves of Sage, of the root
and seeds of the Burdock, and the Candied roots of Eringo, made of
Spring Water, what will suffice, and boiled to one moiety; six or eight ounces
in the Morning warm, expecting to sweat after it.

Take of Bezoartick Mineral Solar half an ounce, Powders.
of Cloves powdered two drams; mingle them, make a Powder and divide it into
twelve parts, let one be taken after the same manner, twice in a day; between
these kind of Remedies, gentle purging may be often used.

Take of the Powder of the picked roots of Zedoary, Lozenges.
the lesser Galingal, each half a dram; of Species Diambre one dram, of the
Powder of the seeds of Mustard, Rocket, Scurvygrass, Watercresses, each half a
dram; make of them all a fine Powder, add to it of the Oil of the purest Amber
half a dram, and with white Sugar dissolved in the compounded Poeony water, and
boiled up to the consistency of Lozenges six ounces: make Lozenges according to
art, weighing each half a dram: Eat of them three or four twice in a day,
drinking after every Dose, of the liquors before mentioned.

Take of the Powder of Virginian Snakeweed two drams, Pills.
of the lesse^ Galingal one dram, of the gummed extracts of the remains of the
distillation of the Elixir Vitae of Quercitan two drams, of the Flowers of Sal
Armoniack, (or the most pure Volatile Salt of Sut or Hartshorn) one dram, of
the Balsom of Peru one scruple, of the Balsom of Capivus what will suffice to
make a mass; let it be made into small Pills involved in the Species Diambre.
The Dose is half a dram evening or morning.

Take of the Resine or Gum of Guaicum three drams, of the Species Diambre one
dram, of the Chemical Oil of Guaicum rightly rectified one dram and a half, of
liquid Amber what will suffice to make a mass: let it be formed into Pills, to
be taken after the same manner.

If that the Palsy happens in a Choleric temper, How the Choleric or hot
Palsy is to be cured.
or to a young Man, it admits only of milder Medicines, and all the more hot
things, and Elastick, do but imbitter the Disease: The following forms are in
use, for the taking away of its foregoing cause.

Take of the Conserves of the Flowers of Betony, An Electuary.
of Fumitory, of Primroses, each two ounces;; of the Species Diambre one dram,
of Ivory, Crabs Eyes, and Claws, each four scruples; of the Powder of the
Flowers of Poeony two drams, of Lignum Aloes, of yellow Sanders, each one dram;
of the Salt of Wormwood one dram and a half, and with the Syrup of the Flowers
of Poeony what will suffice, make an Electuary. The Dose is two drams twice in
a day, drinking after it, either the simple water of the Flowers of Aron, or of
the following Compounded Water three ounces, or of the Decoction of Sage, with
the leaves of Tea infused in it four or six ounces.

Take of the Roots of Aron or Cuckopint, A Distilled Water.
of the male Poeony, Angelica, Imperatoria, each half a pound; of the Flowers
of Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Brooklime, Watercresses, each four handfuls; of
the rinds of six Oranges, and four Lemons, of Primroses, Cowslips, Marigold
flowers, each three handfuls; let them be all bruised and cut, and pour to them
of new Milk six pints, of Malaga Wine one quart; distill them in common Stils,
and let the whole liquor be mixed together.

Sometimes instead of the Electuary may be taken between whiles, Chalybeats or
Steeled Medicines.
for fourteen or fifteen days, of the Syrup of Steel, of which let one spoonful
be taken in three ounces of the distilled Water: It may be made after this
manner.

Take of the whitest Sugar dissolved in black Cherry Water, and boiled up to a
consistency, eight ounces, adding to it of our Steel in Powder three drams; let
them be stirred together over the fire, and then by degrees pour to it of the
Water of Rosemary warm twelve ounces; let it boil gently for a quarter of an
hour, scumming it, and pouring it forth warm through an hair sieve or strainer.
There may be also made steeled Lozenges after this manner, to wit, with Sugar
sufficiently boiled with Steel, adding of the Chemical Oil of Amber or of
Rosemary half a dram, and presently let it be poured forth that it may flow
into a consistency of Lozenges: The Dose is two drams twice in a day, drinking
after it of distilled Water, or of the following Apozem six ounces.

A Decoction.
Take of China Root one ounce, of the shavings of Ivory, Harts-born, each half
an ounce; of white and yellow Sanders, of the Wood of the Mastick-tree, each
half an ounce; let them be infused in warm water and close stopped for a whole
night, six pints; in the morning add to them of the Roots of Chervil, of sweet
smelling Avens, of Broom, and Parsley, each one ounce and a half; of the dried
leaves of ground Ivy, Sage, Germander, Betony, each one handful, of Coriander
seeds three drams; let them be boiled till half is consumed, then add to it of
white Wine half a pint, and strain it into a jugg, upon the leaves of
Watercresses bruised two handful: Let it infuse warm and close shut, for two
hours, strain it again, and keep it in a close Vessel well stopped. In the
Scorbutic Palsy, the Juices and expressions of Herbs, do often bring notable
help.

The juice and expressions of Herbs.
Take of the leaves of Brooklime, Watercresses, and Plantan fresh gathered,
each four handfuls, bruise them together, and pour to them of the distilled
Water but now described eight ounces, squeese the juice strongly forth, and
keep it in a glass, and take of it twice or thrice in a day three or four
ounces. At the extreme Physical hours, viz. Morning and Evening, may be taken
these following Pills.

Pills.
Take of Millipedes prepared three drams and a half, of Pearls one dram and a
half, of the Root of the Cretick Dittany one dram, Venice Turpentine what will
suffice to make a mass: let it be formed into small Pills, the Dose is half a
dram, drinking after it a draught of the distilled Water. For ordinary drink,
let there be prescribed, either a Bochet of Sarse, China, yellow Sanders, etc.
or small Ale, with the dried leaves of ground Ivy, boiled in it; and of Sage,
with the Wood of Sassafras, infused therein.

2. Whilst these things are doing, for the taking away the foregoing cause of
the Disease, there is no less a curatory care required, for its conjunct cause;
to wit, that all obstructed places being opened, they might admit the Animal
Spirits, free from stupefaction, and that they may pass freely through.

There are two chief kinds of Remedies, which conduce to those ends, viz. one
particular and private, to be applied to the distempered places: to wit, that
by Fomentations, Ointments, Topic and particular Remedies.
Plasters, and such like outward applications, the sleepy Spirits might be
awakned, and their passages opened: the other universal, to wit, that the Blood
and Spirits, and the other humors (and the active Particles flowing in the
whole Body) being very much agitated, and put into a rapit motion, like a
torrent, they might cast down and remove all impacted heaps or stays, by which
the Spirits are obstructed.

The administrations used to the distempered parts are so ordinarily and
commonly known, that it were superfluous to insist here on the describing them
more largely. First Liniments, made out of Oils, Ointments, and Balsoms, are to
be applied according to the temper of the Patient, more or less hot, and with
frictions or strong rubbing twice a day. Sometimes, before these are made use
of, Fomentations made of Cephalic Herbs, or spices boiled in Spring Water,
adding to it sometimes Strong Waters, Wine, or Bear or their Lees. Further,
oftentimes it is convenient to make about the distempered places Blisters, and
to use Cupping-glasses, and Medicines to take away the hairs, and to raise
pimples. Little Bags and Plasters often help. Moreover, if the business will
admit it, let the Paralytick members be covered over with hot grains, or with
the refuse of the Grapes when flung out of the Wine Press; or let them be
thrust into the belly of a Beast new slain, or bathed in an artificial Bath, or
in the natural Baths, and be kept for a long while in any of these.

But if these help not, Universal Remedies.
you must then come to universal Remedies, or great Remedies; of which sort, in
the first place, are Diaphoreticks or sweating Medicines, Mercurial Medicines
stirring up Salivation; and strong Vomiting Medicines: of each of which we
shall speak briefly.

In the Cure of the Palsy, Diaphoreticks.
sometimes Diaphoreticks, or Medicines causing sweats, do very much help; and
that they sometimes are hurtful, the common people do ordinarily observe.
Wherefore it is very requisite, that we should unfold the reasons of this so
different effect; and that so indications may be taken as to the use or
rejection of them.

Therefore, They are not to be administered indifferently to all.
, a plentiful sweating is wont to be helpful sometimes to Paralyticks, chiefly
for two reasons; to wit, for that it does thrust forth or exterminate in a
great measure the impurities of the Blood, and the nervous juice, being apt to
breath forth; so that the Morbific matter does not flow any more to the Brain,
and the distempered parts; and that whatever has already flowed forth from
them, is partly conveyed forth of doors. Then, Secondly, Because the Effluvia's
of heat falling away from the boiling blood, do very much open the nervous
Passages before obstructed, whilst in evaporating they pass through them, and
make an open way for the Spirits. Wherefore this administration is chiefly and
almost only convenient for those, whose Blood is not stuffed with fixed Salt
and Sulphur, but is diluted with a limpid and saltless Serum. For on the
contrary, Paralyticks whose blood and humors are full of fierce, Exotic, and
fixed Particles of enormous Salts and Sulphur, and unfit to be exhaled, They
often hurt the Choleric.
do often receive great harm by a violent and forced sweating. Of this kind of
effect we have assigned these two causes, to wit, because that the Morbific
Particles, by reason of agitation being too much exalted, become more
outrageous; then secondly, because these being more plentifully brought to the
Brain and nervous Stock, they oftentimes increase the old obstructions, and not
rarely produce new.

That a plentiful sweating or Diaphoresis may be easily provoked, both internal
Medicines, and outward administrations are wont to be made use of. The former
stir up either the Blood or Serum into an heat, or provoke the heart into more
swift motions; and for that cause (whether one or both be done) when the bloody
liquor is rapidly circulated through the Heart and Vessels, and is wrought into
a frothy swelling up, there is a necessity, that very many Effluvia's, which
are the matter of sweat, should go away from it. Sweating Medicines.
For this end, Medicines of a various kind are commended to Paralyticks, of
which the most noted are, a Decoction of Guaicum, Sarsaparilla, etc. Spirits
and Oil of Guaicum, the simple mixture, Flowers and Spirits of Sal Armoniack,
Aurum Diaphoreticum, the Salt of Vipers, as also the Powder and Wine of the
same: the solar Rezoartick minerale, Tincture of Antimony, etc.

External administrations move sweat, because they hold in, and stir up the
moderate heat in the whole body; and so the blood being made hot, is compelled
to move more swiftly, and to evaporate more, and at the same time, the Pores of
the skin, being unlocked, readily let forth all the Particles that are apt to
exhale. For this use, besides the Bed-cloaths (which only hold in the
Effluvia's of heat sent from the body, about it still) there are little
sweating Chairs, or Stoves, made hot with Coals or with the Spirits of Wine:
Stoves, Baths, Natural Baths.
also Hot-houses and Baths of various kinds and forms, and our natural Baths,
are wont to be made use of: But of all of them, our natural Baths of the Bath
(if they agree with the temper of the sick) are thought to be the best Remedy;
which the many Crutches, hung up as so many trophies of this Disease being
overcome, belonging to many Cured of the Palsy, do sufficiently show.

But as the best Medicines, When the use of Baths is hurtful in the Palsy.
if they prove not a Remedy to the Disease, often pass into poisons; so the use
of Baths, when it cures not some Paralyticks, renders them much worse; so that
when as the sick had before many members distempered and resolved or loosened,
there was no other occasion for them of leaving behind them there their
Crutches, unless it were because they could use them no longer. We have above
showed the cause of this; to wit, because bathing, shaking, or moving the
blood, and all the humors, more exalts all the Morbific and extraneous
particles, and they becoming more outrageous, drives them from the Viscera into
the bloody mass; from whence (when they cannot easily evaporate) entering into
the Brain and nervous Stock, increase the Paralytick Distemper, and very often
adds to it the Convulsive. For this reason Bathing sometimes actuates or stirs
up the Nephritick, and the Gouty disposition; and further, in many where there
was not a disposition, it causes a spitting of blood, the Asthma, or
Consumption. Wherefore Baths ought not to be tried without the advice of a
Physician, and then having tried them, if they seem not agreeable, they are to
be soon left.

Salivation.
I have by my own experience sufficiently tried, and known also by that of
several other Physicians, that some Paralyticks have been cured by Salivation
excited by Mercury. But I think this kind of Remedy, is only to be used to the
habitual Palsy, to wit, which has its foregoing cause in the Blood and Brain,
easily moveable, and its conjunct cause, in the nervous appendix, not very
fixed. But when this Distemper is caused from an outward and great hurt, or
follows upon the Carus, Apoplexy, or Convulsions, a Salivation or spitting is
attempted in vain, and sometimes not without great hurt. But whoever are endued
with a weak and too loose a Brain, and are obnoxious to frequent Convulsive
motions, are not rashly to make use of Mercury. Yet sometimes a Salivation in
an habitual Palsy, are not very fixed, has highly profited, forasmuch as by
taking away the impurities of the blood, it cuts off all the nourishment of the
Disease; also, because some Mercurial Particles, whilst passing through the
Brain, and entering the nervous passages, divide the Morbific matter impacted in
them, and drawing its parts one from another, variously disperse some forward,
and others backwards; when oftentimes it is the fault of other Medicines, that
they only urge forward the heap obstructing the ways of the Spirits, so that if
they pull in not to pieces, they drive it more firmly into the obstructed
places.

Vomitories.
In some measure it is for this reason also, that Vomits do frequently yield
notable help in the Cure of the Palsy, to wit, because they draw away the
nourishment of the conjunct cause, yea and do not always drive forward, but
pull back the matter impacted in the Nerves, do greatly shake, and often break
it in bits; so that when the continuity of the heap is broken, the Animal
Spirits themselves easily dissipate the Particles of the Morbific matter,
loosened one from another. We have before mentioned another reason of the help
of Emeticks in the Sleepy Disease, which also may have a place in the Palsy.

Histories and Examples of Paralyticks.
Instances and examples of Paralyticks are so ordinarily and almost daily met
with, that their various Types and Histories would fill a Volume, if they
should be described. Wherefore I shall only add here some few and more rare
ones, to wit, one or two, by which the chief kinds of this Disease may be
illustrated. For as it will be little to the purpose, to describe the
resolutions of members, excited by outward accident, as from a fall, wound, or
stroke; I shall insist only on those cases, where the Palsy either arises by
its self, after a previous disposition, or comes upon some other Disease.

The Example of the Palsy habitual* excited of it self. The first History.
Some time since, a certain Gentleman, strong, and well fleshed, and beyond the
tenth luster of his age, almost ever healthful; at length being given to a
sedentary and idle life, and from thence becoming more dull and heavy than
usual, refused any exercise, and more hard motion of the body: moreover he was
wont to be melancholic and sad, upon any light occasion, yea sometimes to
break forth into weeping and tears, without any manifest occasion. This man a
little after (which I also observed in many others) was distempered with an
imbecility and trembling of all his members, and then with a resolution of the
lower parts; to which Disease (for that he was melancholic, and soon weary of
Medicines) he gave himself up as overcome, and by degrees being made more weak
and languishing, he dyed within six months.

I remember many others, but especially two committed to our Cure, who were
highly ingenious and very learned, in the former part of their life; but
afterward in their declining age, partly through the evil disposition of the
body, and partly through the perturbation of the mind, became dull and
forgetful, and after that (notwithstanding the use of the Remedies in the
beginning of the Disease) Paralytick.

The Reason of it.
In these kind of cases, first the Brain it self, as to its temper and make,
seems to be so weakened, that the Spirits inhabiting it, becoming torpid, and
wandering out of their tracts, did not rightly perform the acts of Memory and
Imagination; then by reason of their failure and disorders in their first
spring or fount, (which are not enough taken notice of till they become
uncureable) there is a necessity, that an impotency or an eclipse of the motive
faculty, should succeed in the nervous appendix. But the Cure of these
Distempers, as often as they are excited from such an occasion, is ever very
difficult, because the antecedent cause is hardly or scarce ever taken away.

The second History more rare and notable.
A young man, of a Sanguine temper, ingenious, and for the most part healthy,
sitting in a Chair after a large supper, and immoderate drinking of Wine, was
so distempered with a numness or stupidity in his right hand, that his Gloves
which he held in it, fell of themselves out of his hand; then getting up, and
endeavoring to walk, he felt a resolution or loosening in his Thigh and Leg of
the same side, and a little afterward falling into a certain hebetude or
dullness of mind, and stupefaction, yet without an Apoplexy; for he was still
himself, answering aptly to questions asked him, though but slowly and with
difficulty, and doing those things that were bid him. Presently a skilful
Physician being sent for, Phlebotomy, Vomiting, and Purging, were celebrated in
order, Cupping-Glasses, Scarification, Ointments, Frictions, and other fit
administrations were carefully applied: Nevertheless the Palsy increased, that
besides the motion of his members on the right side being taken away, he also
lost the sight of that eye; yet still being stupefied and sleepy, he was compos
mentis, and knew his Friends, and being conscious of his infirmity, and
solicitous for the recovering his health, he took all remedies were given him;
but notwithstanding all this, the animal functions daily more and more
languished, and at length by their consent the vital; so that about the seventh
or the eighth day, from thence, falling sometimes into a Delirium, and
sometimes into Convulsions, or other distractions of the Animal Spirits, his
strength being at length quite lost, he yielded to Death.

His Head being opened, An Anatomic^ Observation, ^ which the Ca^ is explained.^
the anterior cavity of the Brain was filled, partly with Ichorous Blood,
partly concreted and in clodders or gobbets, with plenty of Serum: Hence, as it
is easy to conceive, from this deluge, pressing upon one of the Streaked
bodies, and binding up its Pores and Passages, the flowing of the Spirits into
the nervous appendix of that side was hindered, and for that reason, the
resolution in the respective members was excited; and because of the optic
chamber, where it is inserted into the Streaked Body, being also pressed
together, the Eye of that side lost its sight; further, because the Callous
Body, chambring that den, was somewhat pressed by the heaped matter, from
thence the hebetude and stupefaction of the chief functions of the soul were
excited, yet without their subversion or inordination. By reason of the evil
being fixed on the substance of the Brain, and the Spirits inhabiting it, these
sorts of Distempers do proceed, and not from the impletion of the Ventricle, as
appears clear enough by this instance, and by what we have elsewhere mentioned.

A Servant to a certain Nobleman, The third History.
being about forty years of Age, endued with a sharp Blood, and Choleric
temperament, and for some time obnoxious to the Vertigo, whilst he was riding
in the Country to a certain Village, being taken suddenly with a dizziness in
the Head, he fell upon the ground headlong, and being instantly taken up by the
inhabitants, and put to bed, he lay for many hours insensible, and as if dead.
But afterward being awakened, he felt an universal Palsy, and all his members
loosened on both sides. Visiting this Man the day after, I took from him
presently about twelve ounces of Blood, and prescribed forthwith some other
Remedies, both outward administrations and also inward Medicines to be
carefully given him, and indeed with good success; for after five or six days,
he began to bend and stretch forth his hands, and feet, yea, though slowly, to
move them about hither and thither; then by the constant use of Remedies,
within two months, he was able to rise up, to stand on his feet, and to walk a
little with the help of Crutches; then using at home for some time daily a
temperate artificial Bath, he got strength and motion by degrees in his
members; at length as soon as the season of the year served, going to the Bath,
within a fortnights time, by the use of the Baths, he grew perfectly well, and
leaving his Crutches behind him returned whole.

In this case, The Reason of this.
the Apoplectick matter falling down out of the middle of the Brain, being
divided and largely poured forth, entered both the Streaked Bodies, and so
caused the universal Palsy; but forasmuch as being more stretched abroad, the
same was the less thickly impacted in the Marrowy Pores, therefore being more
moveable, and apt to be shaken off, it did admit so easy and quick a Cure. To
this man the more hot Remedies were not agreeable, so that I was compelled
sometimes to iterate Phlebotomy, and to give him only temperate Medicines. That
the Palsy does sometimes succeed, not only Cephalic Distempers, but also the
Colic, and Scurvey, (as we have already hinted) the following History, (of
which we have somewhere made mention as to its Scorbutic reason,) will
manifestly declare.

A young and handsome Woman, The fourth History.
after being brought to bed, fell into a Tertian Feavour, this coming at length
daily upon her, and protracted, brought in a most cruel and continual Colic.
The pains at first tormented her only in her Belly, with vomiting and most
sharp torments. Being a long while vexed with these, and almost worn out; at
length she began to be molested with a stupefaction, and a sense of tingling,
such as comes upon a member laid upon. Nor was it long after that but a Palsy
(which this other Distemper very often foreruns) followed in her whole Body. In
this condition being brought to Oxford, she was committed to our Cure (the
noted Physician Dr. Lydell being also called to our assistance.) In this sick
Gentlewoman, not only all her greater Members, as her Arms and Legs, but almost
every lesser joint or limb, was almost wholly loosened, that she could not move
hand nor foot, or the fingers or toes of either. Further, she was so
distempered with a wasting away, that she was nothing but skin and bones,
however (and from which only we had any hopes) she had a good Pulse, and a
lively aspect.

The C^rt expoposed.
After we had administered to her for many weeks, most choice Medicines, both
Antiparalytick and Antiscorbutick, almost of every kind, and according to the
various methods, without any success; at length we proposed to her, and to her
Friends, Salivation, as the most powerful, though also most dangerous of all
other Remedies; they not long deliberating upon it, resolve to try a Medicine
rather doubtful than none, and though the same should be wholly inefficacious.
Therefore by God's help, we gave her in a small Dose, precipitate of Mercury
cum sole, and the next day repeated it. On the third day, a moderate and easy
Salivation beginning, gently succeeded for a week, without any malignant
symptom; but then the sick complaining of a grievous Headache, and Vertigo,
began to be afflicted with Convulsive motions; so that there was a necessity to
let her lie down, and depress the Salivation, and as soon as we could, to break
off this course, by the Serous Flux of water being called away from the Head,
to the other parts; which indeed Clysters, frequently given, Epispatick or
drawing and revulsive Plasters, applied to several places, together with
Cordials and Opiates inwardly given her, did quickly effect; and then presently
this Gentlewoman finding her self a little better, began to strech forth and
bend her fingers and toes, and sometimes to move her members from one place to
another. Her spitting ceasing, being gently purged, she took for many days a
Decoction of China, Sarsa, Saunders, Ivory, etc. with the addition of the dried
leaves of Betony, Sage, female Betony, etc. and between whiles with that,
Spirits of Hartshorn, or of Sut, Cephalic and Cardiack Confections, also
Powders and proper Iuleps. Within a months space, being held up by her
Servants, she could stand on her feet, and walk a little in her Chamber;
moreover, sleeping and eating moderately, she every day got flesh and strength,
and at length by the use of the temperate Bathes at the Bath, she grew well.

The Reason of it.
The reason of the aforesaid case seems to be after this manner: First, the
vicious blood had contracted an intermitting Feavour, then by reason of the
long stay of that Feavour, the same being made more vicious, did also impart
its evil to the Brain and nervous Stock; the matter being poured forth from the
blood on them, together with the nervous juice, being only at first Spasmodick
or Convulsive, and entering much into the Intercostal Nerves, excited the
Colic; but then, that being more largely poured forth into the Nerves of the
spinal Marrow, brought on painful contractions in the nervous Fibers, in almost
the whole habit of the Body; and when from the assiduous and plentiful incourse
of the Convulsive matter, the passages of the Brain and Nerves being very much
unlocked, became very open; at length the more thick and vitriolick Particles
entering with them, disseminated the Paralytick Distemper through the whole
Body. Concerning its Cure, the Remedies used before Salivation did not profit,
because they urging this Morbific matter still forward, drove it more deeply
and closely into the nervous passages; but the mercurial Particles, because
they dissolved the matter so compacted, first opened the way of Cure, which
afterward being much helped daily by Cephalic Medicines, it was at length
consummated by the use of the Baths.

The fifth History, sh^wing when the Baths are hurtful.
But that Baths are not profitable to all Paralyticks, yea (as we said above)
very hurtful to some, this following History (whose mournful catastrophe
happened whilst we were writing these) will manifestly declare. A Merchant of
London having put his foot out of joint, became upon it lame in that part, but
as to all things else he was sound and strong enough; when he had tried for
some time several kinds of Topic Remedies, and they effecting nothing; at
length, by the counsel of a Physician, going to the Bath, he began to try the
temperate Baths, by the use of which growing presently worse, and beginning
immediately to have a Palsy in his other Members, he had abstained from them,
but that the Physician, then present, promising him that he should afterward
be better, exhorted him to persist; wherefore he again entered into the Bath,
for about thirty days, until at length all his lower members, to wit, from the
Os sacrum to his Feet, being wholly loosened, withered away; besides in his
Breast was excited a very great difficulty of breathing, and as it were
Asthmatical: For that his breast was not able to be dilated sufficiently, by
introducing the breath deeply, the Muscles dedicated to respiration being as it
seems also affected with the Palsy; wherefore growing short-winded, he
labored with a continual endeavor of those parts, and with an agitation of
the whole Thorax. In this condition leaving the Bath, he was bid by his
Physician, to abstain for a whole month from any Remedies taken from Medicine;
which when he had strictly observed, out of hope to grow well again, that time
being elapsed, it was then too late to deliberate on the use of any Medicines;
for besides his Paralytick and withered members, his belly swelled, his
breathing was yet more hard and troublesome, that he could now scarely draw
breath: His Pulse was very weak, and upon any motion of his Body, he had
frequent swoonings away, and loss of Spirits: Hence, as there (...)rce any
place left for purging, Cordials and Antiparalytick Remedies were only to be
insisted on, but notwithstanding the use of which, this sick man, within a
fortnights time, laboring for many hours under a Dyspnoe or want of breath, at
length expired. The immediate cause of whose Death I suspect to have been the
manifold concretions of the blood in the Heart; for when the motion of the
Praecordia for a long time was very much hindered, there seems nothing more
probable, than that these kind of gobbets as it were fleshy, should increase
within the Ventricles of the Heart.

For the illustrating of the Theory of the Palsy, a little more, and also of
the Lethargy and Carus, I shall add this other example, with Anatomical
observations; which happened whilst the former were in the Press.

A little one a little above three years old, An example of the Palsy from a
Lethargy.
of a moist or humid Brain, as appeared by most grievous sore Eyes, and the
watery whelks or pustles of the face, to which it was sometimes obnoxious;
falling ill about the beginning of Autumn, with a slow Feavour, and lost
Appetite, it became very torpid and sleepy, so that it would sleep almost
continually day and night; but being awake, he knew those standing about him,
and answered very aptly to their Questions. To this Child, fit Remedies being
presently and diligently given, viz. Clysters, Blistering Plasters, Purges,
also Juleps, Spirits of Hartshorn, Powders, with many others used in these
cases, they prevailed so much, that within six or seven days the sick Child
being free from its Feavour, waking enough, and desiring Food, seemed to grow
well, and to have scarce any more need of a Physician: But in a short time
after (by what occasion uncertain) falling into a relapse, and again sleepy,
was presently seized with a most grievous stupefaction, so that it was hardly
to be awakened, and scarce knew any one, or what it did it self; the next day
being plainly stupid, though being strongly pulled, it did open its Eyes, it
would roll them about hither and thither, and saw nothing; but within a day or
two, a Palsy followed in its whole right side. The former Remedies were
repeated, and besides sneezing Medicines, chawing Medicines to draw down Rheum
by the mouth, a taking away of Blood, with Poultisses applied to the Feet, and
all its Head being shaven, drawing Plasters were put all over its Head, with
other Medicines, and ways of administrations prescribed in order, nothing
profited, but that this sick Child, after its lying so insensible for four or
five days, at length its breath and Pulse failing, dyed.

Its dead Body being opened, we found almost all things sound enough in the
lower and middle bellies, ( i. e. in the Belly and Breast) unless that in the
right Kidney, a whitish mattery Humor, or as it were a thin Corruption, had
begun to be heaped together, which plentifully flowed forth out of some parts
of the Kidney being disfected and squeezed together: This did seem to have been
the beginning, or a certain rudiment of a future Imposthum, and perhaps by
reason of the Serum not sufficiently separated here, its greater plenty had
slowed to the Brain.

For the top of the Skull being taken away, the anterior region of the Head,
almost to the insertion of the fourth bosom, swelled up, being covered with
clear water, shining through the Membranes, which presently flowed forth, when
the Meninges were dissected: Further, in this place, portions of the Brain
being by pieces cut off, appeared too wet, and without any red or bloody
pricks: but in the hinder border of the Brain the Vessels were red with blood,
and the Cortical substance appeared without tumor, or deluge of water, more
close and firm: From these (as we have affirmed before) it manifestly appeared,
that the cause of the Lethargy did depend upon the watery flood, or as it were
Anasarca or Dropsy of the outward part of the Brain.

The Brain being cut piecemeal, and an hole made in the anterior cavity,
distended by the water, the clear water being before as it were penned up,
within a more narrow space, leaped forth, a great plenty of which had filled
all the Ventricles to the top, and (as it seems) by compressing the Optic
chambers, (as in the other case above described) brought in blindness, and by
entering or pressing together one of the Streaked Bodies, or its Pores, caused
the Palsy.

The Choroeidal Infoldings appeared as it were half boiled, whitish, and almost
without blood. It is probable, that the water did flow forth of these Vessels,
by which the Ventricles of the Brain were overflown, all, or at least the
greatest part of it; although in this case, if (as some think) the watery Latex
or Humor sliding down lower from the shelly part of the Brain, the Brain being
at length thoroughly passed through, did rain down into these bosoms, we may from
thence aptly fetch a reason, wherefore the Lethargy at first thought to be
cured, returned afterward more cruel, accompanied with blindness and the
Palsy; to wit, because at first the stock of the sleepy matter falling down,
from the shelly part of the Brain, into its cavity, the animal function was a
little cleared; but afterward, when new matter sprung up in the Cortex of the
Brain, and this sliding forward into its bosom, was heaped up to a fullness, for
that reason happened the relapse of the former Disease, with those companions
of blindness and the Palsy.

But although the Dropsy of the interior Brain, or the inundation of its
Ventricles, by compressing either the Streaked Bodies, or the optic chambers,
raised up the Palsy or blindness, or by pulling the beginnings of the Nerves,
the Convulsive Distempers; yet it appears most evidently by our late Anatomical
observation, that the Lethargy did not arise from any such cause, but only from
the exterior part of the Brain being overflowed, or pressed together.

A certain Gentleman a long time unhealthy, after he had labored almost for
five months with the Colic, or rather with a wandering Scorbutical Gout, in
which not only the Viscera and Loins were troubled with great torments; but
moreover the Membranes and Muscles of the whole Body, were almost continually
tormented; and at length he suffered sometimes most horrid Convulsions in his
Members, sometimes resolutions, and sometimes a Frenzy in his Head, and
sometimes as it were Apoplectical fits, or a darkness in his Eyes, so that
being worn out, his strength and spirits wholly exhausted, he dyed. Almost
seven days (except the last but one) before he dyed, being more strong as to
his Sense and Intellect, he lived almost perpetually without sleep; though
gentle or the more strong Opiates were given him, yet he could not sleep at
all. A little before this waking, from a Vesicatory applied to the hinder part
of his Neck, an immense quantity of water flowed; and from that time even till
he dyed, it still flowed forth; hence, as I suspect, he became so waking by
reason of the watery humor being so greatly drawn away from the Brain.

The head of this dead Man being opened, the interior cavities of the Brain, or
all the Ventricles being filled to the top with clear water, appeared as if
they were distended; yea the medullary cord it self, about the top of the
Backbone, seemed to be drowned and compassed about with water laid up there.
Without doubt, for this reason, the Pains and Convulsions so cruelly tormented
him in his Loins, Members, and all over his Body; and by reason of the deluge
in the Ventricles, he became obnoxious to blindness of his sight, and to
frequent loosenings of his limbs: Nevertheless, hence no Lethargy, but a waking
was induced, by reason of the waters being so much derived from the compass of
the Brain by the Blistering Plasters. He had also a Dropsy in his Breast, by
reason of his Lungs being much vitiated. His Liver appeared of a mighty bulk,
besprinkled every where with white spots, and almost without blood: so that to
these faults of the Viscera, the vices of the Blood and nervous juice ought in
some measure to be ascribed.

CHAP. X.
Of the Delirium and Frenzy.

THUS much concerning Cephalic Diseases, The Distempers of the Brain follow,
in which Reason is hurt as well as the other Animal Functions.
by which the Animal Functions by themselves, and as they are Corporeal,
without any respect to the Animal Soul, are wont to be hindered or perverted: In
some of which, viz. the Vertigo and Palsy, the Intellect for the most part
remains clear and lively, and in the rest, like the eye placed in an obscure
place, it beholds the species, either not at all, or a few objects only of a
more rude appearance, but is not easily snatched into any great error or fury;
which kind of symptoms are ordinarily induced by reason of other Distempers of
the Head, and of the Spirits inhabiting it, of which we are now about to treat.
For if at any time the Imagination is so disturbed, or perverted, that it
falsely conceives, or evilly composes or divides, the species and notions
brought from the Sense or Memory; Who are said to be Foolish, or to talk idly.
presently for that reason the intellect beholds or forms conceptions and
thoughts only deformed, distracted one from another, and very confused: Which
indeed are represented to it from the Brain evilly affected, and as it were
monsters from a multiplying or distorted Glass. This is either shorter, as the
Delirium; or longer, and with a Feavour, and called Frenzy; or without a
Feavour, as melancholy, madness, stupidity.
As there are many ways, by which the Imagination, and by consequence the mind
and will, and the other powers of the superior soul, are wont to be perverted
or depraved, all of them are noted by the common word Foolishness, or talking
idly. But this Distemper is distinguished into shorter, which is called a
Delirium; and into a longer or continual; which is either conjoined with a
Feavour, and termed Frenzy; or it happens without a Feavour, and then their
is joined with it, either raving, sadness, or stupidity, and so it is divided
into madness, melancholy, and morosity or foolishness: we shall speak of each
of these in order; and first of the Delirium and Frenzy.

Although the Delirium is not a Disease of it self, but only a symptom
proceeding from other Distempers, yet because it happens in some of them, that
for the most part it is cured by Remedies appropriate to it, therefore it will
not be amiss for us to inquire a little more strictly into the causes and
nature of it. This word taken after an especial manner, What the Delirium is.
is the same with (...), or a going crooked, or out of the right or straight
way, and denotes an hurt of the same Animal Function such as arises in fits of
the Feavour, Drunkenness, and sometimes in the passions called Hysterical, and
induces men for a short time to think, speak, or do absurd things, either some
of these, or all of them together.

The Delirium is excited, Its formal Reason.
forasmuch as the Animal Spirits being either too much irritated, or acted into
confusion, are carried tumultuously into disorders hither and thither, within
the globous compass of the Brain, where the Fantasy and Memory have their
seats; and so whilst the various images of the imagination and the memory being
excited at once, are confounded together, they object only incongruous and
absurd fantasies to the rational Soul, and so both the acts of the intellect
and the will, are only inordinately chosen or drawn forth. In like manner it
happens, by reason that the Animal Spirits being moved, within the middle of
the Brain or the Callous Body, that incongruous conceptions, and confused
thoughts, are objected to the rational Soul; as in a long circumgyration or
turning about of the body, the images of visible things are carried to the
common sense, whence all things seem to be turned about, and sometimes to be
lifted up, and sometimes to be depressed to the ground; that nothing is beheld
stable or standing in its due place, and position. In a Brain rightly disposed,
the motion of the Animal Spirits are performed, as it were in certain numbers,
ways and measures; whilst some Spirits are raised up in these tracts, others
lie still in those, and so they succeed one another in their motions; and the
several acts of every faculty are made distinct, like so many wavings of water
in a River; but in the Delirium, all the Spirits leap forth at once, and
meeting one another tumultuously, or variously laying hold on one another, are
agitated like mad Bacchanals. Further, even as these being struck with such a
fury within the compass of the Brain, do stir up manifold and very much
disturbed cogitations; so whilst they are carried without its confines into the
nervous original, they produce incongruous speeches, absurd gestures of the
body, and members, and not rarely Convulsive motions. But for that such a rage
of the spirits, (otherways than in the Frenzy or Madness) presently grows
cool, and their tumult being over, none of their wandering tracts are imprinted
in the Brain, the Delirium soon passes over, and the distempered come
immediately to themselves again, without any marks left of their foolishness or
idle raving.

If it be demanded, from whence this short fury is impressed on the spirits,
inhabiting the Brain, that the Reins of the mind being shaken off, they turn
thus all things upside down in their government; The Causes of the Delirium.
we say, that they conceive this kind of inordination, from a twofold reason;
to wit, this rage or madness is brought immediately to them, Either from the
Blood: Or
from the blood washing the frame of the Brain; or some Animal Spirits,
outwardly dwelling in the nervous Stock, enter first of all into some disorder;
then the same being communicated by the nervous passages, affecting in like
manner the spirits there inhabiting, From exterior Spirits planted in the
nervous Stock.
stirs them into a Delirium. There are various causes and kinds of either of
these: the chief of which we shall here touch upon; and first shall be showed,
how, and for what occasions, the Blood, being either swelled up with too much
heat, or being pregnant with an invenomed matter, is the parent of the
Delirium; forasmuch as it insinuates into the Pores and passages of the Brain,
either fierce and untameable particles, or such as are malignant and deadly to
the Animal regiment.

By what, and how many ways the Delirium is caused by the Blood:
First, As to the first, in the fits of intermitting and in the height of
continual Feavours, the blood growing hot, by an immoderate burning, sometimes
stirs up the Delirium, by the mere force of its Ebullition or boiling up; to
wit, for that it swelling up very much, whilst it passes through the small
shoots of the Arteries, every where diffused through the outward compass of the
Brain, By reason of its too great heat.
it very much blows them up and distends them; and so pressing together the
substance of the Brain, variously drives in the Spirits, and as it were
compells them into very confused troops: Moreover, from the blood so swelling
up, with a frothy rarefaction, the Effluvia's of heat, and with them
heterogeneous particles, entering into the Pores and passages of the Brain,
agitate the Spirits, and tumultuously snatch them hither and thither.

By reason of untameable Particles carried from it into the Brain.
Secondly, Almost for the like reason Drunkenness, a deep Sleep, or a Delirium,
is brought in; to wit, forasmuch as the bloody mass does insinuate the
spirituous particles of the Wine, (by which it grows hot) into the Pores and
passages of the Brain, by which the Spirits dwelling in them, are either
plainly overturned, or are moved into inordinate and confused motions. For that
the untameable little Bodies of Wine or Beer plentifully drunk, open the shut
places of any Brain, how sound and firm soever it be, and penetrating deeply
into the Marrowy passages, disturb and plainly overturn the Acts both of reason
and of the imagination.

By reason of malignant Particles suffused from it.
Thirdly, The blood suggesting not only feavourish and turgid, or vinous and
untameable particles, but sometimes malignant, and as it were venomous to the
Animal regiment, stirs up a Delirium, either with or without a Feavour. As to
the former, in the Plague, Small Pox, malignant Feavours (although the heat be
but moderate) the malignant matter being translated to the Brain, because it
dissipates a great company of Spirits (rather than that it drives them into
tumults) brings forth abrupt, incoherent, and at length distracted notions.

By reason of Effluvias, or venomous Particles, obtruded also on the Brain.
For the like reason also, some intoxicating and venomous things taken inwardly,
and (as some affirm) outwardly applied, quickly cause a Delirium. This is
commonly reported of the furious nightshade, Mandrakes, and some other plants;
as for the roots of wild Parsnips, the thing is very well known. A certain
intimate friend of mine told me, and he was a Man that might be credited, and
also very learned, That he entering into the House of a certain Gentleman, found
the Mistress of the Family, her Daughters, and all her Maids (excepting one)
become all at once Delirious, and speaking absurd and incongruous speeches, run
up and down and leaped about the House; and for that he plainly thought them
all mad; he learnt of the sober Maid, who had her reason, and was her self,
that all that had happened from their eating of Parsnips, which she had not
tasted: Which indeed the event showed to be true; for after they had tired
themselves, and fallen to sleep, they all at length awakned sober. We have not
here leisure to examine, whether this or other kinds of intoxicating things,
infestous rather to the animal government, than the vital, do communicate to
the Brain their evil, by the passage only of the Blood, or also in some
measure, by a contact of the spirits residing in the Ventricle.

By reason of its afflux being denied to the Brain.
But moreover, we advertise you, that sometimes a Delirium is excited from a
want, and great dissipation of the Animal Spirits; because their series or
orders being kroken off, and drawn one from another, like as if they were
tumultuarily heaped together, cause confused and incongruous notions. Hence it
is observed, that some have become Delirious by great Haemorrhagies, or long
watchings, and excessive want of Food; for this reason, many are wont to die
delirious, and talking idly.

There remains the other kind of Delirium, How a Delirium proceeds from the
irregularities of the exterior Spirits.
in which the Blood being faultless, the Animal Spirits flowing some where in
the nervous flock, first enter into disorder; then the same affection creeping
through the nervous passages to the Brain, stirs up the Spirits inhabiting its
middle part into a Delirium. This is sufficiently obvious in the passions that
are called Hysterical; to wit, after a swelling up of the Belly, and an
oppression of the Heart, does succeed sometimes a lying speechless, sometimes a
talking idly, with weeping and laughing. In like manner I have observed in a
most cruel Colic, that sometimes after great torments about the Bowels and the
Loins, they have fallen into a Delirium, then a little after this ceasing, the
torments have returned. I knew a young Maid (as we have somewhere else
mentioned) from the taking of an Emerick Potion, whilst it worked, was wont
constantly to fall into a Delirium. I have also often noted, that a Gangrene
beginning in some external member, has caused a Delirium. And this in a Wound
or Ulcer, is ordinarily noted for a mortal sign; because it denotes the Animal
Spirits in the distempered part to be slain.

Nor does this symptom coming upon those who are long sick and almost worn out,
The Prognostic of a Delirium.
give any better prognostic; in the fits of intermitting Feavours, it is
almost ever safe; but in continual Feavours dubious, and of something a
suspected event; in malignant it more often fore-speaks evil; in Convulsive
Diseases, the first assaults of a Delirium for the most part are free from
danger, but yet its frequent coming, frequently turns that disposition into a
Carus, Apoplexy, or Palsy.

This Distemper, Its Cure*
as often as it is seen to be safe enough, requires not a Cure; for the fit
quickly and easily passes over: yet, because some, who have a loose and weak
Brain, and the Animal Spirits too easily dissipable, and apt to flight and
confusion; being disturbed by any light occasion, are wont presently to grow
Delirious and to talk idly; therefore there is need of Medicine for these, not
only of Hellebore, but also Cephalic Remedies, which may strengthen the Brain,
and fortify it against the incursions of the Morbific matter; also which may
fortify the Animal Spirits, and render them more fixed and strong for
resisting. We have above described the forms of these kind of Medicines, and
their manner of administration, which are profitable for the taking away the
foregoing cause of any other Cephalic Disease.

A Delirium coming upon continual and malignant Feavours, requires a peculiar
was of healing: for in the first place, it shows the morbific matter
dangerously translated toward the Head, and therefore ought to he called back
from thence, by any means; for which end may be laid Plasters that draw
blisters to the hinder part of the Neck, other Plasters or Pultisses, or the
flesh of living Creatures, or their warm bowels to the feet; inwardly may be
taken temperate Cephalicks, as Powder of Coral and Pearl, black Cherry Water,
or Water of Cowslip Flowers, or Poppy Water, and others sweetning and
cherishing the spirits.

These being thus premised, concerning the first and most light manner of
foolishness or talking idly, we will proceed to its higher degree, viz. the
Frenzy, which is far longer, and more durable, than the former Distemper. In
the Delirium, a perturbation of the Spirits, inhabiting of the Brain, being
excited, is like a waving of waters, from a stone flung into a River; but in a
Frenzy, their commotion seems as it were the storm of waters, raging in a
tempest.

The Frenzy is defined, Of the Frenzy, what it is.
to be a continual dotage, or deprivation of the principal faculties of the
Brain, arising from an Inflammation of the Meninges, with a continual Feavour.
The Paraphrenesis.
To this Disease there is another of kin, viz. the Paraphrensie, commonly
called, or additional Frenzy, whose cause is not an inflammation of the
Membranes which cover the Head, but as they affirm of the Diaphragma. Further,
in either Distemper (as also in the Pleurisy but falsely) it is affirmed, that
the Feavour does arise as it were only symptomatical, from the same conjunct
cause, viz. from the Inflammation of some part. But indeed, that the Frenzy
does rather succeed the Feavour, and is produced, because the boiling blood
does transfer its adust or burnt recrements to the Head; Hippocrates long
since, and now every common body, observes: to wit, for that the Urine of one
sick of a Feavour, being changed from a troubled and thick, into a thin and
waterish Urine, shows a Frenzy at hand: Wherefore, from hence, the cause of
this Distemper is concluded to be a translation of the Feavourish matter into
the Brain.

But as to the conjunct causes of the Frenzy, Their Conjunct Causes.
and Paraphrenesis, we may easily show, that the former does not always proceed
from the Inflammation of the Meninges, nor this latter from the Inflammation of
the Midriff. I have often seen in Anatomical Dissections, the Meninges, yea
sometimes also the exterior compass of the Brain, beset with an inflamed tumor,
and the sick not distempered with a Frenzy, but on the contrary with a
stupidity, and have dyed with a Carus, or some other sleepy Diseases. The
Frenzy not from the Inflammation of the Meninges.
And truly, that it is so, reason plainly declares; for the Meninges being
inflamed, and by that made more tumid, press together the Brain very much, and
about its compass shut up the ways and passages of the Spirits; so that the
functions of waking and memory being hindered, the Lethargy (as it appears de
facto) necessarily follows: Nothwithstanding, far otherways in the Frenzy,
all the passages and Pores of the Brain, for the excursions of the Spirits,
seem to be too largely open, because the Images hidden or laid up, are raised
all at once, out of the utmost, and all the places of the memory, which
together with others, suggested from the Fantasy to the common sensory,
tumultuously, bring forth such manifold and highly confused notions. There is
only wanting to the sensitive soul, for its expansion to be straightened or
loosened, within the Head (which certainly the inflammation of the Meninges
would effect) rather than that it should be dilated above measure, and that all
the Pores of the Brain should be unlocked and carried beyond its wonted
compass. Perhaps it may happen, from a long continuance of this Disease, that
the Blood being greatly heaped up within the Vessels of the Meninges, and there
stagnating, that it may at length bring forth an Inflammation in them; and then
for that reason, we may suspect, (because it often so falls out) that the
Frenzy does pass into the Carus, or Lethargy, of which phrensical persons
often dye.

The Paraphrenesis not from the Inflammation of the Diaphragma.
No less do we reject the Inflammation of the Diaphragma, which cause of the
Paraphrenesis, Galen in times past, and moved by this authority, most
Physicians in every age since, asserted: Anatomical observations plainly prove
the contrary. Some time since, dissecting the dead Carcass of a Maid, dying of
a sudden Leipothymy or swooning away, we found in the fleshy part of the
Diaphragma a great Imposthume, with a bag full of filthy matter, and watery
little bladders; yet she was not troubled ever with a Delirium or Frenzy.
Some time since also when we had made an Anatomical Inspection of a Gentleman
of the University, (of whom we have made mention in a late Tract) who dyed of a
long spurious Pleurisy, it manifestly appeared, that a great Imposthume being
ripened in the Pleura, and the intercostal Muscles, and broke inwardly, that a
vast plenty of matter had flowed forth into the cavity of the Thorax, which
gnawing the Diaphragma lying under, had made a great hole in it; nor was this
man however in all his sickness Delirious, or Frantic. Wherefore, I think this
Distemper scarce ever to be produced from such a cause: but that opinion seems
to arise from hence, because oftentimes in a true Frenzy, together with a
continual raving, the motion of the Diaphragma is wont to be hindered or
perverted; as is gathered from the unequal and difficult breathing, to wit,
sometimes anhelous or breathing short, and as it were suspended, sometimes
short and swiftly repeated, with sometimes a double breathing; Wherefore
breathing is hurt in this Disease.
which kind of symptoms, and also at the same time the alienation of the mind,
are said to proceed from the Midriff being inflamed, and for that reason
convulsed; wherefore the Ancients called the Diphragma Phrenes: But there was
no need for this, if they had considered, that the whole action of the
Diaphragma, does depend upon the flowing forth of the Animal Spirits from the
Cerebel, and therefore there is a necessity, if the Phrenetick matter invading
the Brain, some part of it should with it rush into the Cerebel, that besides
the raving, the motion also of the Midriff, though of it self innocent, should
be altered; as we have showed elsewhere more largely.

The formal Reason of the Frenzy.
Therefore the formal reason of the Frenzy seems to consist in this, that the
Animal Spirits being at first very much irritated in the whole Brain, are
driven into inordinate, very confused, and also impetuous motions; so that the
acts of every Animal Function are depraved, and variously perverted; and at the
same time, very many Ideas of things being raised up out of the memory, the old
are confounded with the new, and some evilly joined, or wonderfully divided,
are confounded with others, the imagination suggests manifold Phantasms, and
almost innumerable, and all of them only incongruous; and the common sensory
represents the images of sensible things distorted, double, or incoherent; that
hence the mind and the will, choose or pick out nothing but ridiculous and
impertinent conceptions and passions; and cause the actions of the body to
become almost only irregular. Moreover, the spirits being struck as it were
with madness, tumultuate not only in the Brain, but also in the Cerebel, and
every where in the nervous Stock; wherefore, Frantic people not only talk
idly, but breath unequally, speak aloud, strike with their fists, fling about
their hands and feet, yea and stretch forth all their members with a mighty
strength, and a most strong force, that indeed the whole Soul seems to grow hot
and furious in the whole body, to be mad, or rather as it were to be inflamed
with a sudden burning. And truly a Frenzy cannot be more aptly defined, than
that it is a burning or inflammation of the whole sensitive soul, or animal
spirits, as to their whole Hypostasis or Constitution. This burning always
beginning from the spirits inhabiting the Brain, and wandering from thence into
the other parts of the sensitive soul, This Disease proceeds from the burning
of the Animal Spirits.

The Inflammation of the Meninges stirs up rather the inveterate Headache, or
the Lethargy, than the Frenzy.

Prosper Martianus also asserts this.


seems to receive from the Blood, first growing hot and raging with a
Feavourish fire, both the first incentive matter, and then the constant food of
the burning. For indeed it is probable, that the blood burning Feavourishly,
does pour forth on the Brain sometimes sulphurous Particles, together with the
spirituous, which being half inflamed, and after a sort burning forth,
penetrate together with the others, and from thence immediately entering into
all the marrowy and nervous passages, adhere every where to the spirits, and so
render them being inflamed, highly rageing and implacable. Certainly it is more
likely, that the Frenzy is rather excited after this manner, by an
inflammation of the Spirits, than from that of the Meninges or of the Brain,
which more surely causes an Headache or Lethargy, than a Fury, as we have
frequently found by Anatomy.

And indeed, that it is so, is not only ours, or any new opinion, but that
great follower and best interpreter of Hippocrates, Prosper Martianus, who has
affirmed the same thing, almost in express words, viz. Comment on his Book De
Morbis 3. verse. 99. page 151. he says, That Hippocrates does call the Frenzy
a Delirium with a Feavour, which is continual, and depends upon a firm and
stable Distemper: to wit, from an inflammation of those parts, which serve to
institute Nature, Reason, and the Mind; For so the Animal Spirits, whose
viciousness cause the Delirium, do not grow hot as it were by a simple quality,
but are altered as to their substance. This Man manifestly distinguishes
between heat and flame, and affirming that to be in respect of quality, and
this an alteration in respect of substance, plainly ascribes the cause of the
Frenzy to the inflammation of the spirits. He has in the same place more
things apposite to our matter, to wit, that the containing cause of the
Frenzy was not the inflammation of the Meninges, but of the Spirits, whose
substance is indeed altered, that is, forasmuch as it is become fiery, such a
continual Delirium is excited.

I have oftentimes compared the production of the Spirits from the Blood into
the Brain, Chemical Spirits in their distilling are sometimes inflamed.
to a Chemical Distillation; of which it is observed, if the spirituous
sulphurous liquor be provoked with too strong fire, that in Distilling it
sometimes takes fire, and ascends in the Alembick with a very great flame. This
is known of Oil of Turpentine, of it self, or with the Flowers of Sulphur, to
the great loss of some. In like manner we may believe, So the Animal Spirits.
that the blood growing more strongly hot, does often communicate also a
burning to the Spirits distilled out of it, viz. that some half burnt
Particles, do insinuate themselves into the Pores of the Brain, which rushing
into all the passages of the Spirits, both there and in its appendix, every
where inkindle the Spirits, and compel them into most swift motions, almost
like Lightning.

But because the Frenzy does not come upon all Feavours, What the
Indisposition of the Brain is to the Phrensy.
but only on those highly burning, the reason is plain by what follows; to wit,
the closure of the Brain ought to be so shut up, that not only any extraneous
thing might not be poured into them, but that the more intense flame of the
Blood, however burning it be, and though planted round about, might not be able
to break through; wherefore, some distempered with a burning Feavour, although
the Blood grows hot through the whole, the Bowels burn, the Marrow rages, the
Tongue and Jaws roasted like a coal, yet the Brain being still firmly shut up,
all the Animal Functions remain whole and sound. But on the contrary, others
who have a weak and too loose a Brain, and their Blood more sulphurous than it
ought, become Phrensical not only from a burning Feavour, but sometimes from a
more gentle visit. By reason of what foregoing cause, and for what occasions,
or evident causes, this is wont to happen, is the next thing we shall inquire
into

Hitherto has been shown that the immediate subject of the Frenzy is the
sensitive Soul, or the Hypostasis of the Animal Spirits, and that the formal
reason of the Disease does consist in their Inflammation, The Procatartick
Causes of the Phrensy,
and that the conjunct cause is the sulphurous particles poured forth from the
Blood into the enclosures of the Brain, and there continually inkindling the
Spirits; and now it is no difficult matter to assign its procatartick or
foregoing causes, which we find partly in the Blood, and partly in the Brain
and its inhabitants.

The previous disposition of the Blood, which are partly in the Blood, and
disposing to the Frenzy, is sometimes simple, sometimes twofold; the former
is an hot, sharp, or bilous constitution of it, to wit, that contains very many
sulphurous Particles in it self, which are apt to inflame the Blood in a
Feavour more than ought to be, and to insinuate its burning into the Brain.
This disposition, when it is very potent and active, often produces this
Disease of it self; but for the most part, there is another disposition of the
Blood, which helps that former, and renders it more efficacious, to wit, that,
besides the sulphurous and inflameable Particles, there are others sharp and
penetrative, which enter into the Pores, and open them, so that the former more
easily enter in, or are introduced: This the saline little Bodies, conjoined
with the sulphurous, do in a manner effect; hence Choleric and Melancholic
persons growing Feavourish, are more prone to become furious; but much more do
the Heterogeneous Particles, implanted in the Blood, and moved by a Feavour,
open the doors of the Brain, and intromit all that are inflameable: wherefore a
Frenzy frequently comes upon the Smallpox, and malignant, and Pestilential
Feavours.

Partly in the Brain.
The other provision to a Frenzy, which is of the Brain, consists partly in
its temper and conformation, and partly in the disposition of the Spirits
inhabiting it: As to the former, those endued with an hot and dry Brain, are
found to be most prone to a Frenzy; not because that constitution is more
obnoxious to an inflammation or burning, (for to this it is less apt) but
because in such a Brain, otherwise than in an hot and moist, or cold and dry,
the Pores and passages are more open, and too much gaping, and so give an
entrance to the incentive matter, suggested from the Feavour: which besides,
they much more easily admit, if the Spirits being very fugacious or apt to
flight, or pathetick, or passionate, are upon every light occasion ready to
fall into passions of sadness, fear, anger, or hatred; so that they resist not
the incursions of the extraneous matter, and more readily conceive a burning
themselves.

The evident causes of the Frenzy.
The evident causes of the Frenzy are either more remote, viz. whatever things
are wont to excite a Feavourish intemperance; as Surfeits. Drunkenness, a very
vehement disturbance of either body or mind, usual evacuations being
suppressed, with many others; or more near, as a Feavour, and its dependences
and adjuncts; to wit, if it be pestilential, malignant, or after an evil
manner; if it arises by reason of a Surfeit taken from very incongruous Meats
or Drink, or if it succeeds violent passions, as of Love, hatred, envy,
indignation, or sadness; or immoderate studies: for these kind of occasions
render the Blood and Animal Spirits, growing Feavourishly hot, very propense to
the frantic Distemper.

The differences of it.
Since that this Disease depends rather and more immediately upon the Soul than
upon the Humors or solid parts being distempered, its kinds and differences are
neither various nor manifold: In respect of magnitude, the Frenzy is either
great or moderate, also continual or intermitting; to wit, according as the
Animal Spirits are more or less inflamed, and as they receive the food of their
burning continually from the Blood, or by turns. Secondly, As the burning
begins only in the Brain, or together with it in the Cerebel, it is commonly
distinguished into the Frenzy, or the Paraphrenesis; which is as much as to
say, that either the spontaneous Animal Functions are only or chiefly hurt, or
else together with them the vital also. But this Disease as to the Feavour, on
which it depends, has its nature and manner malignant, or free from malignity;
also according to the temper of the sick, the Frenzy is distinguished into
Sanguineous, Choleric, Phlegmatic, or Melancholic; and this not improperly,
for the Animal Spirits are wont to grow hot and burning, after a diverse
manner, in this Disease, according to their various dispositions.

The Prognostic.
The Prognostic in this Disease is always doubtful, and the event is to be
instituted with an evil suspicion: For the Frenzy of it self (as Trallianus
says) is a most acute and most dangerous Disease; then, if it comes upon a
Pestilential, or malignant Feavour, or of some other evil kind, we cannot but
expect the end of it to be mortal.

If a Frenzy happens in a sound body, well habited, of a Sanguine
temperament, and young, there is greater hopes of health, than if it were
sickly, aged, lean, or Choleric, and obnoxious to violent Passions.

If the Frenzy remitting by frequent turns, have lucid intervals, it is
better than if the fury should be undiscontinued: But if the sick sometimes
seem to be better, yet after moderate sleep to awake always furious, it is a
sign that the Disease is pertinacious, and for that reason dangerous; for that
a new stock of incentive matter is from thence carried to the Brain; which
indeed we have elsewhere shown to be made far more plentifully in sleep than
waking.

A Frenzy is in a short time terminated with the Feavour, either in health or
death; or else it is protracted, and remains after the Feavour; or at length it
is healed, or passes into other Diseases, to wit, the Lethargy, or Madness, or
Melancholy.

If the Feavour having a laudable Crisis, either by Sweat or great quantity of
Urine, is fully cured, for the most part the Frenzy also ceases; but if the
Feavour be not cured and carries still the Morbific matter to the Head, so that
besides the Animal Functions being depraved, the vital begin to fail (which
appears by the Pulse and breathing being altered for the worse) if the Urine be
pale, if that frequent bleeding at the Nose, if Vomiting, and Convulsion
happen, the Physician concludes death to be at hand.

Sometimes a Feavour, though it be not at once or fully Cured, yet passing away
afterward slowly and by degrees, leaves a Frenzy, or a talking idly behind
it; which, if it does not by its stay obliterate the former tracts of the
Spirits in the Brain, either will end by little and little of its own accord,
or is to be healed by the help of Remedies.

If that by reason of the Frenzy being long protracted, the Meninges, or the
Cortex of the Brain, be possessed from the Blood, or Serum, there heaped up,
and stagnating; with an inflamed tumor, or a serous deluge, the Lethargy, or
sleepy Diseases follow; the Cure of which is often very difficult, or not at
all. But if from a long Frenzy, either the Animal Spirits (though their
burning should cease) contract a vicious nature, or that the passages and Pores
of the Brain are perverted, a perpetual raving oftentimes succeeds, the former
Disease passing into Madness, or Melancholy, or foolishness or stupidity.
Wherefore it is vulgarly said of those that are Frantic, and not soon Cured,
that their Brains are cracked or broken, so that after that, they are always
Mad or raving.

In the Cure of the Frenzy, The Cure of the Frenzy.
we ought to respect at once the Feavour and the Fury. The Feavourish burning
of the Blood, or its immoderate growing hot (which for the most part is the
antecedent cause of the other effect) ought in the first place to be appeased
and allayed, and the Animal Spirits to be cherished, and freed from any great
burning. If the Frenzy happens about the beginning of the Feavour, or the
middle of it, the same Remedies in a manner, and the same method or curing
conduce to either end: But if this Distemper comes upon this, whilst it is at a
stand, or at its height, the means of Curing are oftentimes repugnant to
either, and there is need of great caution, lest whilst we endeavor to help
one Disease, we do not increase the other; in this case, the vital indication
concerning the preserving of strength, obtains the first place; and the taking
away of blood, or purging, is not to be rashly and copiously celebrated.

In the former case, Phlebotomy.
when the Feavour and the Frenzy are almost both of an age, Phlebotomy rarely
or never is to be omitted, but is presently to be performed, and if strength
will bear it, let it be afterward repeated. For nothing depresses and
diminishes the immoderate flame of the blood, like to this Remedy, and nothing
more averts or recals its burning from the Animal regiment: Wherefore* if the
matter requires it, let a vein be opened, sometimes in the Arm or Hand,
sometimes in the Leg or Foot, and sometimes in the Neck or forehead: perhaps
sometimes it may be expedient to open the temporal Artery: yea also to take
away blood in other places by Leeches, and sometimes by Cupping-Glasses. For
this gives the chiefest help, and according to Galen, is the most powerful and
principal Remedy, and is wont to fulfill very many indications in a Frenzy.

But for the prevention of the Feavourish matter being carried from the Bowels
into the Head, Clyster^.
Clyters are of chief use; with which, if need be, let the Belly be continually
kept slippery. Vomiting Medicines, and Purging, unless very gentle, have very
rarely any place here. Cataplasms of Rue, Chamomel, Vervine, Bryony Roots, red
Poppies, with Soap, may be laid all over the Feet; or instead of them, may be
applied Pigeons or Chickens, cut up and laid warm: In the mean time, as you see
occasion, there ought to be prescribed Iuleps, Apozems, Powders, and
Confections, by which the rage of the Blood, and the burning of the Animal
Spirits may be allayed.

Take of Pipin Water, Black Cherry Water, and Cowslip Water, A Iulep.
each four ounces; Water of the whole Citrons two ounces, of Pearl powdered one
dram, of Syrup of the juice of Citron one ounce; mingle them and make a Iulep:
let three ounces be taken three or four times in a day.

Take of Grass Roots, An Apozem.
of the Leaves of Wood Sorrel, and Pimpernel, each one handful; of Barley half
an ounce, of Apples cut, of Currants, or Strawberries, or Rasberries, one
handful; let them be boiled in four pints of spring water, till a third part be
consumed; clarify it, and strain it; then add to it of the Syrup of Violets
one ounce, and of Sal Prunella a dram and a half.

A Drink.
Take of the Leaves of Borage fresh gathered and young, four handfuls, of
Wood Sorrel two handfuls, two Apples sliced, of Sal Prunella two drams, the
pulp of one Orange, of white Sugar one ounce; let them be bruised together, and
pour to them of spring water two or three pints* let them be strongly squeezed
forth, and kept in a Glass, and cleared from its settling; let six or seven
ounces be taken of this often in a day, when they will. For the quenching of
thirst, let the excellent drink of Palmerus, viz. Spring Water with Sugar, and
the juice of Lemons, or Water, or Possetdrink with Elm leaves, or Pimpernel
infused or boiled in it, be drunk: Emulsions of the Decoction of the roots and
flowers of Water-Lilies, with Melon-seeds; or else Spring Water distilled with
the pulp of boiled Apples dissolved in it.

Hypnoticks.
Hypnoticks or Medicines causing rest, are often very necessary in this
Disease; but yet the stronger are not convenient in the beginning, nor let them
be frequently used; because sleep caused by Opiates, carries more morbific
matter to the Brain, and fixes it more deeply there.

Take of the Water of Cowslip flowers four ounces, of the Syrup of Poppies half
an ounce, of Pearl one scruple; make a drink to be taken at night late.

Take of the Seeds of white Poppy two drams, of Sugar Candy a dram and a half;
bruise them together, and pour to them of white Poppy Water six ounces; make an
expression, to be taken after the same manner.

Narcoticks or Stupefying Medicines, which are made of things merely cold, are
cautiously to be exhibited; because they agree not with some, who have the
Fibers of their Stomach very tender and sensible. I have often observed these
kind of Hypnoticks, to have stirred up a great oppression in the Ventricle, and
then presently an Inflation or blowing of it up; and a little after
distractions and inordinations of Spirits use to follow in the Brain, yea in
the whole Body; so that there was not only a frustration of sleep, but great
disquietness was stirred up.

Take of liquid Luadanum, prepared with the Salt of Tartar, or the juice of
Quinces, Let a Dose of it be taken in a convenient liquor. External Medicines
causing Sleep.
Things inviting Sleep, as Epithems or moist Medicines applied to the Temples
and Forehead, are often used with success; of which sort are Rose-cakes dipped in
Vinegar, Rose Water, and grated Nutmeg, and Embrocation or washing with Water
or Milk, Ointments of Oil of Nutmeg by expression, Ointment of Poplar, to which
sometimes may be added of Opium five or six grains; or a Cake of Poppy flowers,
with Vinegar and Nutmeg, etc. Further, for this end, rather than for the taking
away the inflammation of the Meninges, the hot Lungs of a Lamb or Weather, as
also Pigeons or Chickins slit in two, Epithems.
do often give notable help. Also for this use Housleek bruised, and mixed with
a Woman's Milk, and applied to the hinder part of the Head being shaved, is
wonderfully praised; Also the Epithem of Penotus, of twelve grains of Nutmeg,
of Camphir half a scruple, and the Tincture of Rose Water impregnated with red
Sanders twenty ounces, is commended by some.

Further, they are wont to apply Epithens not only to the Head, but also to the
Heart, Liver, and other parts: A little bag of silk may be applied to the
Praecordia, with Cardiac Species being sewed or quilted in it, with silk, and
sprinkled with Rose Water, or Vinegar of Roses; also rags wet in Rose Vinegar,
may be laid to the Testicles: The Feet way be hathed with a Decoction of Willow
leaves; Lettice, or the heads of white Poppy. But these kind of cooling Topics
only, and cherishers are to be used in the beginning of the Disease; but in its
height, resolves and softners, are to be added, as the Flowers of Chamomel,
Melilot, Elder, etc. also the leaves of Mallows, Orage, Marjoram, Hysop, and
such like: In the declining of the Disease, resolvers only, and those sparingly
are to be administered.

The means for the preserving of strength.
In the mean time, there ought to be great means used, for keeping up of
strenght, for that too much failing, all hopes of Cure is lost. For strength is
quickly worn out, by reason of great watchings, the perpetual agitations both
of the body and mind, a thin Diet, and Phlebotomy sometimes often requisite.
Wherefore, great care must be had, lest whilst we endeavor to root out the
Disease, by Purging or frequent letting of Blood, we should suddenly debilitate
the Vital Function: If this begins to fail, the Frenzy being let alone, a
better diet may be granted, and especially Cordialls are to be used.

Take of the Tincture of Coral half an ounce, Cordials.
take of it twenty drops, twice or thrice in a day, with a Dose of a Cephalic
or a Cordial Iulep; or let it be given with Coral dissolved in Milk, made with
the juice of Oranges, one spoonful often in a day.

Take of the Rob or Conserves of Rasberries, and Barberies one ounce, of
prepared Pearl, of Magistery of Coral, each one dram; of Confection of
Hyacinthae two drams, Syrup of the juice of Alchermes, what will suffice; make
a Confection, and let the quantity of a Nutmeg be taken three or four times a
day, drinking after it of the following Iulep three ounces.

Take of the Water of the Flowers of Water-Lilies, red Roses, and of Elm
leaves, each three ounces; of the Syrup of Coral two ounces, of the Cordial
Water of Saxony one dram* mingle them.

Take of the Conserves of the Flowers of Water-Lilies, and of Violets, each one
ounce; the Stalks of Lettice candied or preserved half an ounce, of the Powder
of red Coral, bruised in a mortar with the juice of Orange and dried, two
drams; of the Species of Diamarg. frigid. one dram, of white Poppy seeds one
dram and a half, with what will suffice of the Syrup of the juice of
Wood Sorrel; make an Electuary; let the quantity of a Nutmeg be taken often in
a day.

In the Frenzy, not only the Belly, but also the Bladder, and their offices,
ought to be thought on, and often solicited or provoked.

Wherefore, the sick are to be warmed, and the Urinal given them, and asked to
make water; but if they will not, or cannot, let the region of the yard below
the belly be bathed with a Decoction of Pellitory of the wall, Elder Flowers,
and of the Seeds of Parsley, and wild Carrot Seeds, or daucus; with a Sponge;
and after the Fomentation, anoint it with Oil of Scorpions, and Ointment of
Dialthaea: In a long suppression of Urine, you may put up to the bladder a
piece of Wax Candle.

The Histories and cases of Frantic people are so many, The Histories of sick
persons in Hippocrates Lib. Epidem.
and so diversely described, and so accurately by Hippocrates in his Books De
Epidem. that there seems little need here to add others; especially, because it
would be an immense work and tedious, to relate the various manner and cases of
Madmen: In the mean time, as to the event of the Disease, there is great
diversity; for that for the most part the Feavour being cured, the Frenzy
ceases by little and little; or else, that having no, or an evil, Crisis;
either death, or a long raving follows. But that our Hypothesis, of the
Inflammation of the Spirits, may be illustrated, I shall propose here one more
rare instance.

I was one time sent for to Cure a Maid, A notable History.
that was strong, and having a Feavour, was highly raging, being continually
bound in her Bed. I took from her a great quantity of Blood, and caused it to
be again iterated; I often took down her Belly with Clysters; yea I ordered all
the other administrations in order, usual in this case; in the mean time she
took Iuleps, Emulsions and Hypnoticks: But these little or nothing availing,
she continued still for seven or eight days without sleep, and furious,
perpetually calling and bauling for cold drink; wherefore an Hydropick being
granted her at her pleasure, yea to satiety; she was nevertheless not any thing
less quiet, or thirsty: I therefore bid them (for that it was Summer time) that
in the middle of the Night she should be carried by Women forth of doors, and
put into a Boat, and her Cloths being pulled off, and she tied fast with a
Cord, should be drenched into the depth of a River, the Rope being tied only
about her middle, that she might not be stifled in the Water; but there was no
need of that, for the Maid of her own accord, fell to swimming, that scarce any
Man could do it better, who had learned the art: After about a quarter of an
hour, she came forth of the Water sound, and sober, and then being had to Bed,
she slept, and sweat very much, and afterward, without any other Remedy she
grew well. This Cure succeeded so happily and so suddenly, forasmuch as the
excess both of the Vital and the Animal flame, being together immensly
increased, was taken away by a proper Remedy for the more intense Fire; to wit,
by the moistning, and cooling of the Water.

CHAP. XI.
Of Melancholy.

The Distemper of the Animal Spirits, being after a (...) manner, as it is the
cause of the Frenzy, so it is of Melancholy, Madness, and Stupidity.

The definition of Melancholy. That it is a Distemper of the Brain and Heart.

Its Examples or Types various, and almost infinite.


AS the Frenzy arises from the burning of the Animal Spirits, (as we have
elsewhere shown) or as Prosper Mart. seems to affirm, from their substance
being inflamed: so indeed other Distempers of raving arise from their substance
being altered by other ways, and from their genuine nature being changed, from
a spirituous-saline, into an acetous or sharp disposition, like to Stygian
Water, or else into a liveless; which therefore are either Melancholy, or
Madness, or Foolishness or Stupidity: of which we shall now speak in order, and
first of all of Melancholy.

Melancholy is commonly defined to be, a raving without a Feavour or fury,
joined with fear and sadness. From whence follows that it is a complicated
^istemper of the Brain and Heart: For as Melancholic people talk idly, it
proceeds from the vice or fault of the Brain, and the inordination of the
Animal Spirits dwelling in it; but as they become very sad and fearful, this is
deservedly attributed to the Passion (...) the Heart.

It would be a prodigious work, and almost an endless task to rehearse the
diverse manner of ravings of Melancholy persons; and there are great Volumes
already of Histories and examples of this sort; and more new and admirable
observations and examples daily happen. Fabulous antiquity scarce ever thought
of so many metamorphoses of men, which some have not believed really of
themselves; whilst some have believed themselves to be Dogs or Wolves, and have
imitated their ways and kind by barking or howling; others have thought
themselves dead, desiring presently to be buried; others imagining that their
bodies were made of glass, were afraid to be touched lest they should be broke
to pieces. Melancholy is ^ither, 1. Universal, or
There are extant manifold and various kinds of the Imagination so depraved,
concerning which may be commonly observed; That the distempered are Delirious
as to all things, or at least as to most; so that they judge truly almost of no
subject; or else they imagine amiss in one or two particular cases, Particular.
but for the most part in other things, they have their notions not very
incongruous. We shall first inquire into this more universal Distemper, for
that the Imagination is prevaricated concerning very many things; to wit, by
what causes, and with what difference of Symptoms, this is wont to come to
pass; afterward we shall speak of the special raving or idle talking.

The primary Phenomenon of a Melancholic D^^^rium.
Although the universal Distemper of Melancholy contains manifold Delirious
Symptoms, yet they chiefly consist in these three; 1. That the distempered are
almost continually busied in thinking, that their Fantasy is scarce ever idle
or at quiet. 2. In their thinking they comprehend in their mind fewer things
than before they were wont, that oftentimes they roll about in their mind day
and night the same thing, never thinking of other things that are sometimes of
far greater moment. 3. The Ideas of objects or conceptions appear often
deformed, and like hobgoblins, but are still represented in a larger kind or
form; so that all small things seem to them great and difficult.

After this manner the Phantasms in the Brain evilly affected, are objected to
the Intellect, almost after the same manner as the visible images are showed to
the Eye, by the interposition of some Optic Glass; to wit, where every object
appears an horrid and huge monster, and for that reason a small portion only of
the visible matter or thing, being increased to that immensity, is received by
the aspect; then by reason of its horrid and unusual appearance, the image
being once conceived, is not easily or suddenly let go: we will now consider by
what affection of the Brain and Spirits, these appearances happen.

From what disposition of the Spirits they proceed.
Here we shall first of all inquire into the disposition or preternatural
Constitution of the Animal Spirits: For inasmuch as they are after an irregular
manner, they always or for a long time continue in their irregularities; and
when the Palsy, Apoplexy, Vertigo, or Convulsion, are not joined to this
Distemper of theirs, which argue obstructions of the Brain, it may be inferred,
that the Animal Spirits, not fetching their force elsewhere, are driven into
such inordinations; nor do chiefly conceive their disorders, by reason of the
Pores and passages of the Brain being obstructed; but rather, in this case,
they cause these aforesaid Symptoms in the sick from the default of their own
Nature.

Such an indisposition of the Animal Spirits is wont to be described after this
manner; As they are compared to Light, they are called opacous, or full of
darkness.
to wit, that they, when as they ought to be transparent, subtle, and lucid,
become in Melancholy obscure, thick, and dark, so that they represent the
Images of things, as it were in a shadow, or covered with darkness: The
explication of which does not seem incongruous; forasmuch as we have already
showed, that the Animal Spirits flowing forth from the inkindled Blood, go
forth after a manner, as the rays of light from a flame. And it sufficiently
appears, that the light shows and illustrates it self diversely, according as it
proceeds from the burning of bodies, flaming forth after a various manner; as
of Spirits of Wine, Oil, Fat, Mineral Sulphur, Nitre, and others: in like
manner the Animal Spirits, forasmuch as stilled forth from the Blood, having
got this or that, or some other disposition, they are either subtle, clear, or
dull, thick, and as it were sooty, they variously pass through and irradiate the
organs of the Animal Functions, and so for that reason, diversely pervert their
actions.

But further, These kind of Spirits in Melancholy compared to those in Chemical
Liquors.
when as the Animal Spirits are not wholly loose and free as the little bodies
of light, but mutually cohere or stick together, and left the continuity of the
soul should be broken off, they ought to be contained in a certain Latex;
therefore these, with the Vehicle to which they cleave, may be very aptly
compared to some Chemical Liquors, drawn forth by distillation from natural
mixtures. Which Analogy indeed seems fittest for the unfolding the mad
distempers.

1. Liquors Chymically Distilled, They are not like the Spirit of Blood, as
they should be.
are, according to the active Elements after a various manner combined in them,
of a diverse kind: the chiefest of these, by the consent of all, are said to be
such, as in which the Spirit being united with the Salt, does volatise it, and
on the other side is sharpened by it, and after a sort fixed or kept. Of this
sort they conceive the great Elixir and the Liquor Alcahest to be; and indeed
in a manner are the Spirits of Blood, of Hartshorn, of Soot, and such like,
very subtle, volatile, and penetrating, yet not apt to be inflamed, or suddenly
to be dissipated. And indeed, the Animal Spirits seem to be after a manner,
having obtained a sound and legitimate disposition, like a spirituous liquor
stuffed with a volatile Salt, which is distilled from Blood; besides, to this
there is given from the fire an high Acrimony and Empyreuma, or smatch of
burning, which are wholly absent from the liquor watering the Brain and Nerves.

2. Other Chemical Liquors are sulphurous and burning, Nor like the Spirit of
Wine: Such rather in the Frenzy.
as the Spirits of Wine and Turpentine, which consisting of Spirit and Sulphur
combined together, are easily inflamed, and depart one from another of their
own accord, and fly hither and thither what way they can find; the Animal
Spirits of this nature, as we showed in the former Chapter, seem to be in the
Frenzy.

3. Some Liquors or Spirits are produced by Chemical operation, But these are
like acid Spirits, distilled out of Salt, Vinegar, Box, and such like.
in which the fixed Salt being carried forth to a Flux, has obtained the
dominion; of which sort are such as are distilled from Vinegar, ponderous
Woods, and some Minerals, with a gentle fire; whose particles are very
moveable, and unquiet, but of a short activity; so that Effluvia's do not long
flow from them, that if they should be distilled in Balneo, nothing but an
insipid Phlegm would be carried into the Alembick. And indeed, the Animal
Spirits in Melancholic Distempers, are to be suspected to be of this kind of
acetous nature, with the dominion of a fluid salt, as shall hereafter be more
largely showed.

4. Some Stagmas drawn forth by Spagyrick art, Stygian Waters are like the
Nature of the Animal Spirits in Madness.
are sometimes most sharp, to wit, in which the untamed Particles of a fluid
Salt, and also Sulphurous, and Arsenical, being combined together, are
exalted; as are the Stygian Waters distilled out of Nitre, Vitriol, Antimony,
Arsnick, Verdigriece, and the like, all which are of a fierce nature, very
penetrating and not to be broken, so that their Effluvia's are agitated with a
perpetual motion, penetrate every thing, and are also diffused far and wide.
And these kind of Liquors, may be aptly likened to the disposition of the
Animal Spirits, acquired in Madness, as shall be anon declared.

But for the present, The formal Reason of Melancholy aptly represented by
acetous Chemical Liquors.
that we may deliver the formal reason and causes of Melancholy, let us
suppose, that the liquor instilled into the Brain from the Blood (which filling
all the Pores and passages of the Head, and its nervous Appendix, and watring
them, is the Vehicle and bond of the Animal Spirits) has degenerated from its
mild, benign, and subtle nature, into an Acetous, and Corrosive, like to those
liquors drawn out of Vinegar, Box, and Vitriol; and that the Animal Spirits,
which from the middle part of the Brain, irradiating both its globous
substance, as also the nervous System, and do produce all the Functions of the
Senses and Motions, both interior and exterior, have such like Effluvia's, as
fall away from those Acetous Chemical Liquors. Concerning which there may be
observed these three things, 1. Their being in perpetual motion: There are
three chief affections of these, which agree with the Animal Spirits in
Melancholy.
2. Not long able to flow forth: 3. not only to be carried in open ways, but to
cut new Porosities in the neighboring bodies, and to insinuate themselves into
them. From the Analogy of these conditions, concerning the Animal Spirits, it
comes to pass, that Melancholic persons are ever thoughtful, that they only
comprehend a few things, and that they falsely raise, or institute their notions
of them. We shall consider of each of these a little more largely.

Effluvias falling away from these Liquors are perpetually in motion.
1. Therefore we shall take notice, that the Effluvia's falling away from these
distiled Acetous Liquors, are perpetually in motion: for the Spirits of
Vitriol, or of Vinegar, or Sea Salt continually evaporate: the reason of which
is, because those Particles of the fluid Salt do scarcely agree with any
others, but where ever they are stopped, being apt immediately to leave their
subjects, seem to endeavor to get new consorts. And hence some have thought
nothing more like to perpetual motion, than the Acid Spirits of Minerals, shut
up and Hermetically sealed in a Phial; for so the Vapors or Effluvia's will
creep about the sides of the Glass, with a continual Circulation. In like
manner also the Spirits in the Fantasy of a Melancholic person.
In like manner we may suppose, That the nervous Acetous Liquor is instilled
from the Blood, sometimes stuffed with a fixed Salt, or with Vitriolick
Particles, or other heterogeneous, into the Brain, for the matter and Vehicle
of the Animal Spirits; and so these being admitted within the middle part of
the Brain, for the acts of the Animal Functions, do not quickly pass through and
irradiate all the Pores and Passages, but like little acid Atoms, creep about
here and there, slowly, but incessantly, and as it were with a certain unquiet
motion of tingling or creeping, diffuse themselves by little and little through
the whole neighborhood: Hence a storm of thoughts is perpetually stirred up,
by which the Brain is wont to be busied without intermission; so that
Melancholic persons have continually, day and night, disturbed Fantasies; for
that their Animal Spirits consist of a continually moveable matter; Hence also
they look with eyes turned inwards, or fixed, or obliquely, and sullen or
dogged, and exercise the other faculties both sensitive and loco-motive
inadvertently; because the Spirits being worn out and distracted by continual
motion, do not well actuate or beam into the nervous System.

Effluvias from acetous Chemical Liquors do not proceed far.
2. Though the Effluvia's continually fall away from an Acetous Spirit, prepared
by Chemical Art, yet they do not go far, but gather together on an heap
thickly, near the superficies of the liquor, and penetrate only the
neighboring bodies, not touching those that are at a distance: Hence the
Spirits of Vitriol, Salt, or Vinegar, will not ascend out of the Cucurbit into
the Alembick unless urged with a very strong heat; but being included in a low
Phial, they shall corrode and pierce through the stopple.

In like manner the imagination of a Melancholic Person, though always
employed, comprehends only a few things.
It is after the same manner, concerning the Fantasy of Melancholic persons;
for inasmuch as the Animal Spirits being degenerate into an acid nature, do not
irradiate or quickly pass through the whole compass of the Brain, as before, but
flowing in the middle part, are carried with its force only into the nearest
Pores and Passages; therefore cogitations raised up from thence, though they be
continual, yet they comprehend but a few things: and so, as when many bands of
Spirits are thrust together in strait bounds, every small object, and of very
little moment, seems to them very great and of notable weight; And therefore
every thing is conceived with a greater Image than it should be.
certainly after the same manner, and for the same reason, as when the visible
images passing through a Microscoptick Glass are carried to the Eye; for,
because many beams of the same thing are concentered, its magnitude seems to be
increased into an immense greatness; so when as every intentional Species or
Image, by the conflux of very many spirits together, is formed in the Brain, it
appears to the soul greater and of more weight than usual. Every one may
experiment this truth in himself: For when as we become thoughtful, from eating
gross or melancholic meats, or by reason of the passion of sorrow (the reason
of which affection is, because the Animal Spirits are unfit for a more free
expansion) then we are very solicitous and fearful, concerning every little
thing, as if then our health or fortune were for ever in danger. Hence also,
because the Animal Spirits, though almost ever in motion, are notwithstanding
still limited within the same short bounds, Melancholic persons persist a long
while in thinking and revolving in their mind often the same thing.

Effluvias from acetous Liquors do not evaporate so much from open Pores, as
they make new.
3. But there yet remains another similitude of the Animal Spirits, with those
distilled from Vitriol, and other saline bodies, to wit, that as the Effluvia's
sent away from these kind of Acetous Spirits, do not evaporate so much from
open spaces and tracts, before made, as they cut out Pores and Passages that
are new, for themselves, in an objected body; so that they easily pass through,
and render friable or crumbling, the Cork or stopple to the Vessel where they
are; which happens not from the Spirit of Wine, to any thing that stops up the
Phial; so indeed in Melancholic persons, it is usually wont to be. For because
the Animal Spirits, being as it were pointed with saline Particles, whilst they
flow from the middle of the Brain, they observe not their former tracts and
ways of their expansion, but they thickly make for themselves new and unwonted
little spaces, And in like manner the Animal Spirits, whilst they form in the
Brain new Tracts, produce unwonted and incongruous Notions.
within the globous substance of the Brain: Hence cogitations are brought
before the Soul, not such as they were wont to be, but new and incongruous, and
for the most part absurd. But indeed, because the Fantasy is prevaricated,
about the Conceptions of things, and by reason that the acts of judgment and
reason are falsely framed, the only cause is, for that the Animal Spirits
leaving their former walks, and going backward and forward in their ways in the
Brain, being carried hither and thither obliquely and transverse, affect
altogether unaccustomed and bye ways, which indeed is proper for them to do,
out of the Acetous disposition, with which they labor; to wit, forasmuch as
the Effluvia of those kind of Liquors expand themselves not in a direct or free
emanation, as the rays of light; but by a bending motion, and as it were
creeping, they craul on every side into the neighboring part.

Thus much for the primary Melancholic Distemper, In Melancholy, after the
Animal Spirits being for some time vitiated, the Conformation of the Brain is
also hurt.
to wit, a Delirium or Raving, being excited by reason of the vices of the
Spirits inhabiting the Brain: The beginnings of which, although they proceed
chiefly, and oftentimes, almost only from the Acetous disposition of the
Spirits, yet afterward, the conformation of the Brain it self is often brought
to be a part of the cause; to wit, forasmuch as the Recrements of the
Melancholic Blood, being perpetually poured forth, renders its substance more
thick and dark, and the primary tracts or paths of the Animal Function being
near blotted out, new, oblique, and bypath are made; insomuch, that the
Spirits, though better should be begotten, could not easily irradiate the
Brain, or presently recover their former passages.

Melancholy is not only a Distemper of the Brain and Spirits dwelling in it,
The Affection of the Praecordia in this Disease, as to fear and sadness, is
delivered.
but also of the Praecordia, and of the Blood therein inkindled, from thence
sent into the whole Body: and as it produces there a Delirium or idle talking,
so here fear and sadness; but by what means we shall now see.

First, After what manner the Corporeal Soul is affected in these two passions.
in Sadness, the flamy or vital part of the Soul is straightened, as to its
compass; and driven into a more narrow compass; then consequently, the animal
or lucid part contracts its sphere, and is less vigorous; but in Fear both are
suddenly repressed and compelled as it were to shake, and contain themselves
within a very small spaces; in either passion, the Blood is not circulated, and
burns not forth lively, and with a full burning, but being apt to be heaped up
and to stagnate about the Praecordia, stirs up there a weight or a fainting;
and in the mean time, the Head and Members being destitute of its more
plentiful flux, languishes. The formal reasons of these Distempers, and their
causes, we have before exposed.

But because these are habitual in Melancholic persons, The cause of either
depends partly on the blood;
the cause is partly in the Blood, and partly in the Animal Action of the
heart. For the Blood, because of the saline particles being exalted, becomes
less inflamable; from whence it is neither sufficiently inkindled in the Lungs,
or does it burn with a plentiful and enough clear flame within the passages of
the Heart and its vessels; but is apt to be repressed, and almost blown out
with every blast of wind: Hence, when that the vital flame is so small and
languishing, that it shakes and trembles at every motion, it is no wonder if
that the Melancholic person is as it were with a sinking and half overthrown
mind always sad and fearful. By reason of this kind of saltish Dyscrasie of the
Blood, Melancholicks rarely have a Feavour; yet being taken with it, by reason
of the irregular burning of the Blood, they are more in danger.

No less does it come to pass, and partly on the Animal Action of the Heart.
by the fault of the Heart, that Melancholic persons become sad and fearful,
by reason of the course of the Blood being retarded, and called back from
thence: for, because that Muscle is actuated but with an inflowing of weak and
enormous Spirits, it cannot perform its contractions strongly enough, and
constantly, whereby the Blood may be driven forward into the whole body,
without stop or leaping back: So the Blood and the Animal Spirits affect one
another mutually, with a reciprocal evil, and bring hurt one to the other. That
is, the Melancholic Blood consisting of Saline Particles, carried forth
together with Sulphurous, begets Animal Spirits, endued with an Acetous
nature, as has been shown; and these Spirits wrongly performing the offices of
the Vital Function, cause such an evil disposition of the Blood to be increased.

Thus much of Melancholy in general, The procatartick Causes of Melancholy are,
viz. of its Essence, Conjunct Causes, and chief Symptoms, together with the
reasons of them. Before we proceed to the kinds and differences of this
Disease, we ought to explain, from what kind of causes, both Procatartick and
Evident, it is wont to arise, and to be cherished; and first, from whence
either part of the Soul, viz. both Animal and Vital, does acquire their morbid
dispositions.

Partly the acetous Nature of the Spirits, and partly the Melancholy Dyscrasie
of the Blood: The Distemper begins sometimes from this, sometimes from that.

How it begins from the Spirits and the Animal Government.


First we say, the former of these to be Acetous, like to the Spirit of Vitriol
or Vinegar, and this to be Salino sulphurous, or Atrabilary or Melancholic;
further, as the one does cherish the other, so they at first beget one another.
For sometimes Melancholy beginning, and for a long time persisting, from the
Animal Spirits being disturbed, and driven into a certain confusion, causes the
Melancholic disposition of the Blood; and sometimes also the Blood, at first
contracting this evil disposition, perverts the nature of the Spirits.

That Melancholy does very often arise from the Animal Government, every common
body does sufficiently note; to wit, forasmuch as the Animal Spirits conceive
inordinations from violent passions of the mind, in which, when they remain
long, they bend the whole Soul, yea and the Body, from their due temper and
constitution: So especially destroying Love, vehement sadness, panick fears,
envy, shame, care, and immoderate study, are wont oftentimes to excite this
Distemper. For by reason of these kinds of occasions, the Animal Spirits being
thrust down, beyond their wonted paths of expansion, and remaining in their
error, by reason of the assiduity of Passion, at last they go into these
deviating tracts, which afterward observing, they are hardly reduced into
their former due ways. Then, forasmuch as for that reason, the motion and
vigoration of the Heart (as has been showed) is lessened; therefore the Blood
is defective in its due temper, and sanguification, and is from thence made
more fixed and Salino-sulphureous, and the Animal Spirits coming from it, are
but degenerate into a sourness; and so the Blood being depraved by the latter,
increases to the Melancholic disposition, begun from the Spirits.

By what means this Disease arises from the Blood.
No less often does it come to pass, that the seeds of Melancholy, being at
first laid in the Blood, do at length impart their evil to the Spirits: For
this reason, some are made obnoxious to this Disease from their Parents. But an
inordinate living, long intermission of wonted exercise, usual evacuations, as
of the Menstrual Blood, or the Piles, or bleeding at the Haemorrhoidal Veins,
also the Seed, or the Serous Matter, being suddenly suppressed, and many other
occasions, easily infect, and foul the Blood, and render it Melancholic; whose
depraved disposition is of necessity communicated to the Spirits.

Melancholy does not arise from an atrabilary humor heaped up in some place or
mine.
But we cannot here yield to what some Physicians affirm, that Melancholy does
arise from a Melancholic humor, somewhere primarily and of it self begotten,
and they assign for its birth, several places, to wit, the Brain, Spleen, Womb,
and the whole habit of the Body; for besides, for that no such mines of such an
humor appear, unless perhaps some be planted in the Spleen; moreover the Blood
it self is it, which conceives at first the Melancholic intemperance, or any
other by it self, and then deposes the Recrements of the same nature, in proper
emunctories or receptacles. For neither is the yellow Bile or Choler laid up in
the Gallbladder, or the black Bile so called, or Melancholic humor in the
Spleen, unless the bloody Mass begets those humors before hand: If at any time
these, or other Recrements, being any where laid up, are received of the Blood,
they produce its effervescency or growing hot, but not presently or easily its
intemperature.

By what means according to the Ancients, it is said to arise from the Head.
Therefore, because sometimes the original of Melancholy is ascribed to the
Head, and the intemperature of the Brain from these, to wit, too hot, and
accused to be from those, too cold, I rather think it ought to be affirmed,
that this Distemper does sometimes at first begin from the Brain, and the Soul
dwelling in it: because Hippocrates also plainly asserts it, 6 Epidem. Sect. 8.
T. 58. For distinguishing Epileptical and Melancholic persons, beings made so
together, or else successively, as to the formal reasons of the Diseases, he
says, The defluxion which flows from the Brain, from the ill affection,
state, or temperament thereof, if it flows into the Body causes the
Falling Sickness; if into the cogitation or the mind, Melancholy. So in
Melancholy he grants, the Soul distinctly, and as it were apart from the Body,
or Brain, to be affected.

How from the Womb.
Secondly, Because sometimes the original of this Disease is deduced from the
Womb, it is not to be thought, that the Melancholic humor is there at first
generated, but the occasion of Melancholy does proceed from thence; either
bacause the whole Blood being infected, and made degenerate by reason of a
stoppage of the Menstrua, strives to go into a Melancholy Dyscrasie or
intemperature; or because, by reason of the provocations of Venus or Lust,
being restrained, not without great reluctance of the Corporeal Soul, the
Animal Spirits being for a long time forced, and restrained, become at length
more fixed and Melancholic.

How from the Spleen.
Thirdly, It is a common opinion, and also ours, that sometimes Melancholy is
either primarily excited, or very much cherished from the Spleen, being evilly
affected, and so from thence is called by a peculiar word, Hypochondriack; as
we have showed at large in another Tract of Convulsive Diseases. But the Blood
is first in fault, begetting in it self fom the beginning Melancholic
foulnesses, deposes them in the Spleen, which receiving again, after their
being exalted into the nature of an evil Ferment, is more vitiated in its
disposition, by their foulness.

Fourthly, How from the whole Body.
But besides, it is said, there is another kind of Melancholy, distinct from
the Hypochondriack, and the former, that is begotten in the whole Body
together; this is nothing else, than the Mass of Blood being degenerated from
its true nature, by reason of errors in the six non-naturals, and for many
other occasions, does acquire at Atrabilary or Melancholic disposition; that
is, where the Spirit being depressed, the Sulphurous Particles, together with
the Saline, and also with some Earthy, are carried forth; for the Melancholic
disposition of the Blood is very much akin to this Sulphureous-saline, which
we have showed oftentimes to excel in some kind of Scurvy. For what causes, and
upon what occasions, this is wont to be produced, may be sufficiently known
from the Aetiology of that Disease, being at large explained.

The differences of this Disease may be easily gathered from what has been
said: The Differences of the Disease.
for in respect of its first subject, which is sometimes the Soul, sometimes
the Body, or rather the Blood, In respect of its first Subject.
it is called either Animal or humeral Melancholy. Again, it is impressed
according to that, with various powers, to wit, it is first impressed either on
the Rational Will, or the sensitive, concupiscible, or irascible Appetite; also
it is divided into very many kinds, as it is employed about diverse things, to
wit, either Sacred, or Magical, or Humane, the huge cense or bead-roll of which
is almost infinite; the chief of which, that are wont to come within the Cure
of Medicne, are Religious, Amorous, and Jealous Melancholy.

2. By reason of the temperament of the sick, By reason of Temperament of the
Sick.
according to which, the Particles of the Melancholic blood, being made
sometimes Sulphurous, sometimes Saline or Earthy, the Spirituous being
depressed, are exalted more or less, a Delirium, or sadness, fury, or
stupidity, are more or less variously joined to Melancholy.

3. The Disease is either continual or intermitting, In respect of the next
Cause, as it is singular, or conjunct.
according to the conjuct cause, either stronger, both the Hypostasis of the
Spirits, and also the bloody Mass, being both together vitiated; or else
lighter, and less deeply fixed; so that the Distempered sometimes are well
enough for many days or months, yet apt to relapse upon any great occasion.

4. In respect of the hurt Imagination, In respect of the Imagination diversely
hurt.
there are very many types of Melancholicks to be met with, yea almost
innumerable; yet the chief difference of which is, that some are dilirious in
all things, and others in one thing only.

The Prognostic of this Disease, The Prognostic of this Disease.
though as to health or death, it is for the most part safe; yet by reason of
the event, it is very uncertain: For some quickly grow well, others not of a
long time, and others are never cured.

This Distemper suddenly excited, from a solitary evident cause, as a vehement
Passion, is far safer than by leisure invading, after a long Procatarxis or
foregoing cause. For the former, if the evident cause be presently removed,
often ceases of its own accord, or with a little help; but in this latter, for
that the Mass of Blood, and the whole heap of Animal Spirits, are departed from
their due disposition, and not rarely the conformation of the Brain, as to the
tracts of the Spirits, is altered; The Cure very difficultly, and not under a
long time succeeds.

Melancholy being a long time protracted, passes oftentimes into Stupidity, or
Foolishness, and sometimes also into Madness; further, sometimes it brings on
Consulsive Distempers, or the Palsy, or Apoplexy, yea sometimes a violent
Death.

As to the Cure, there is little or no hopes, if the Distempered being very
contumacious and refractory, reject all Medicines, and every method of Physic.
Further, there is scarce any better thing to be expected from them, who lying
sick with only imaginary Diseases, take all Remedies, and require still more,
and of diverse kinds, to be given them.

As the Cure of Melancholy, The Cure of the Disease.
as it is always difficult and long, so it is wont to be mighty intricate and
perplexed; for that it ought to be diversely and variously instituted, in
respect of the evident, Procatartick, and Conjunct causes of its kind, also by
reason of the Symptoms daily arising. Neither is it only behoveful oftentimes
to change the Remedies, and Method of healing, but also variously to make use
of between whiles, warnings, deceits, flatteries, entreaties, and punishments.

But first of all, The evident Cause first to be removed.
the Evident Cause of this Disease, if any noted thing went before should be
inquired into; and if it may be, either presently removed, or else its removal
to be in some sort feigned. Further, the affections of the mind being vehement,
and stirred up from thence, are either to be appeased, or subdued by others
opposite. Wherefore, to desperate Love ought to be applied or showed
indignation and hatred; Sadness is to be opposed with the flatteries of
Pleasure, Music, a desire or vain glory, or also a pannick terror. In like
manner, as to the rest of the Passions, you must proceed to quiet, or elude
them.

Three primary Indications.
The Curatory Method, accommodated for the healing of Melancholy, suggests many
other indications, the chief of which, and to which the rest may be the better
placed, are these three, commonly noted, viz. Curatory, which respects
immediately the Disease, and its Conjunct Cause; Preservatory, which cuts off
the Procatartick, and Evident Causes; and Vital, which is employed about
conserving of strength.

Curatory.
As to the first Indication, the intention of the Physician is so much to lift
up, make volatile, and corroborate the more fixed or dejected Animal Spirits,
that being also apt to go backwards, or out of the way, that afterward they
may irradiate more freely, being stretched forth, the whole Brain, with a full
and not broken beam, for the Acts of the Imagination, Judgment, and other
principal faculties; and so lively actuate the Praecordia, and make them to
vibrate or beat strongly, that the Blood being more plentifully inkindled, it
may be projected from thence, without stop or stagnating, into the whole Body.

Therefore, The healing of the Spirits, is best performed by admonitions and
artificial inventions, concerning the business of Life.
for the healing of the Spirits, first of all it is to be procured, that the
Soul should be withdrawn from all troublesome and restraining passion, viz.
from mad Love, Jealousy, Sorrow, Pity, Hatred, Fear, and the like, and
composed to cheerfulness or joy: pleasant talk, or jesting, Singing, Music,
Pictures, Dancing, Hunting, Fishing, and other pleasant Exercises are to be
used. They who care not for Sports or Pleasures (for to some Melancholicks they
are always ungrateful) are to be roused up by employing them in more light
businesses; sometimes Mathematical or Chemical Studies, also Traveling, do
very much help; moreover, it is often expedient to change the places of
habitation, in their native soil. Those who will still stay at home, are to be
warned, that they take care of their Household affairs, and that they should
govern their Family; that they should build Houses, plant and order Gardens,
Orchards, or Till the Ground. For the mind being busied with necessary cares or
duties puts aside, and at last deserts more easily, vain and mad cogitations.
Melancholy persons are seldom to be lest alone, for that then they indulge
their airy fantasies and speculations, and suffer them to continue longer. The
Soul sinks down inwardly, and leaving the body, enters into a certain
Metamorphosis, and puts on a new shape, and oftentimes different from humane
manners. Wherefore, the Distempered ought to be disturbed almost always with
the discourses of their familiar Friends; to wit, that the Animal Spirits,
being called outward, may be solicited from their diversions, into their
former and accustomed tracts. But if the sick be seduced with fantastical
illusions, and imagine some prodigious things of themselves, and firmly believe
them; their mind is to be drawn from them, by artificial inventions; very many
causes and examples of this sort of Cure are to be found in Books, and a
discreet Physician may institute the like as occasion serves.

Yet oftentimes there is need of Medicine besides.
Although a fresh Melancholy may be cured sometimes by the mere discipline and
institution of the mind and Animal Spirits, yet in a long or inveterate, where
the Spirits have contracted an acetous nature, and the Blood an Atrabilary or
Melancholic disposition, and that the Brain is hurt, as to its Pores and
passages: other Indications called Preservatory are required, The Preservatory
indication, concerning the Procatartick Causes of the Disease.
for the taking away of the Procatartick causes. Concerning this thing, the
Medical intentions are first, that the Blood be reduced to a better temper, and
genuine, to wit, a spirituous saline; then to enliven the Brain, and to render
it bright and clear, its Pores being unlocked; and also to corroborate the
Animal Spirits, and to excite them into a lively flowing forth. For which ends,
the following method I think good to propose, which notwithstanding ought to be
varied, according to the various constitutions of the sick.

Phlebotomy.
The taking away of Blood has place almost in all Melancholicks, and sometimes
it is often to be iterated. For the adust and liveless Blood, being at times
drawn away, a new and more spirituous comes in its place. Concerning the
quantity, place, and manner of celebrating this Remedy, Authors have various
opinions; but the motion and the affections of the Blood, being truly weighed,
it will at first suffice to take a moderate quantity out of the Arm, and
afterward if need be, a lesser, or to draw it from the Sedal Veins by Leeches.
How the Salvatella Veins being opened (as is said) should bring such notable
help to Melancholicks, I confess I cannot understand: perhaps it may help them,
if the Melancholic persons be firmly persuaded, that this Phlebotomy will cure
them before any others: the frequent opening the Hemorrhoidal Veins, invites
Nature to an endeavoring afterward for that evacuation, which succeeding of
its own accord (as Hippocrates says) does not seldom Cure this Disease.

Purging.
Purging, for that it draws back the nourishment of the Disease, from the firsts
ways, and removes the impediments of other Remedies, ought to be celebrated at
the beginning, and repeated at intervals. But that some think, for the sooner
rooting out of this Disease, Hellebore or Elateriums are chiefly to be used,
and cite Hippocrates for their Author; we apprehend, if the success be minded,
those things do not ordinarily agree with, yea more often do hurt to the sick:
For indeed, more strong Purgers do not take away the cause of the Disease, to
wit, the Dyscrasie of the Blood, but rather increase it; besides, they more
debilitate and strike down the Animal Spirits, before dejected. But Hellebore
was so often prescribed by Hippocrates, because in his Age other Catharticks
were scarcely known, or at least they were not in frequent use: But now it is
thought much better, gently to draw forth the receptacles of the humors, by
more gentle and easy Purgers, and to cleanse only the Viscera and the first
ways, without any great commotions of the Blood and Spirits.

Vomiting Medicines (as in most Cephalic Diseases free from a Feavour) are
wont to help after a peculiar manner in all mad Distempers. Vomiting.
The reason of this partly consists in this, because the viscous load of the
Ventricle, which (as we have elsewhere shown) does very much burden the Soul,
being purged forth, the Spirits by that means being more free, expand
themselves more lively and cheerfully. Further, forasmuch as Vomiting presses
together and evacuates the neighboring receptacles of the humors, to wit, the
Gall Bag, the passage of the Pancreas, and the Glandulas of the Mesentery,
procures that their contents be not transferred into the Head.

Take Oxymel of Squills one ounce and a half, Vomitories.
of Wine of Squills one ounce, of the Syrup de Peto two drams; mix them, and
make a Vomit: if it does not work, or but slowly provoke Vomiting with a great
deal of Carduus Posset Drink.

Take of the Decoction of the middle bark of Elder four ounces, of the Salt of
Vitriol one scruple to two scruples, of Oxymel simple three drams; mix them,
and take it after the same manner.

To robust and well-set persons may be given of the Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, or of Mercurius Vitae, also the Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht, or the
Sulphur of Antimony.

Take of the Root of Polypodium of the Oak half an ounce, Purgers.
of Epithimum three drams, of Sena half an ounce, of Tamarinds six drams, of
the seeds of Coriander three drams, of yellow Saunders two drams; let them be
boiled in fourteen ounces of Spring Water, till it comes to ten ounces; adding
to the Colature, or when it is strained, of Agarick two drams, of Rhubarb one
dram and a half, being clarified, add of the Syrup of purging Apples two
ounces; let six ounces be taken, and repeated within three or four days.

Take of the best Sena three drams, Epithym, Rhubarb, each one dram and a half;
of Yellow Saunders half a dram, of Coriander seed two scruples, of the Salt of
Wormwood half a dram, of Celtick Spike a scruple; put these into white Wine,
and the Water of Pipins, of each four ounces, kept close all night; to the
liquor being strained five ounces, add of the Syrup of Epithimum six drams, of
Aqua Mirabilis two drams; mix them and make a Potion. In strong bodies or hard
to work on, may be added to these, of the strings of black Hellebore macerated
in Vinegar one dram or two.

For those who had rather make use of Pills, Boluses, Powders, or Syrups, take
the following.

Take of the Pil. Tartar of Quercitan, Pills.
or of Amber of Crato half a dram, of the Resine of Ialap or of Scammony six or
eight grains, or Tartar vitriolated half a scruple, of Ammoniacum dissolved in
Aqua Mirabilis, what will suffice to make a Pill: let four be taken going to
sleep, and unless they work first one in the morning following.

Take of Calamelanos, of the extract of black Hellebore, each one scruple; of
the Resine of Ialap six grains, of Ammoniacum solut. what will suffice; make
four Pills, let them be taken with Government.

The Powder of Haly, Powders.
the Powder of Valesco de Tarenta, of Peveda, and others, are very much
commended. And indeed in Country bodies, or robust, this Cathartick may seem
convenient. Take of Epithimum half an ounce, of Agarick, Lapis Lazuli, each
three drams, Scammony one dram, Cloves thirty; make a Powder: the Dose is from
half a dram to a dram.

Take of the Powder Diasenna, of Diaturbith with Rhubarb, each half a dram;
make a Powder: let it be taken in a draught of Posset Drink, in a Decoction of
Epithimum simple four or five scruples.

Take of the best Senna two ounces, Syrups.
of the Roots of Polypodia of the Oak two ounces, of Epithimum one ounce and a
half, of yellow Citrons half an ounce, of Tamarinds one ounce, of Coriander
seeds six drams, boil them in Barnet water four pints, till half be consumed,
strain it, and let it be evaporated in a warm Bath, to the consistence of a
Syrup, adding toward the end, of pure Manna, and of white Sugar, each four
ounces; make a Syrup: the Dose is two spoonfuls or three, in three ounces of
some convenient distilled water, or in any other liquor. Or,

Take of the same liquor evaporated to the consistence of Honey six ounces, of
fresh Cassie four ounces, of the jelly of Currants two ounces, of Cream of
Tartar, of the Salt of Wormwood, each one dram and a half; of the Powder of
Diasen. two drams, of yellow Sanders powdered two drams; mix them and make an
Electuary: Dose three drams to half an ounce.

Altering Medicines are of the greatest moment;
Purging is not to be used continually, nor too frequently, yea it suffices that
it be administered within six or seven days space, and at other times, let the
belly be taken down by Clysters, if it be bound. As to other Medicines, which
are not evacuators, though the Ancients relied not much upon them, we put our
greatest confidence of Cure in them. For they (to whom also many moderns
consent) thought there was nothing more to be done for the curing of
Melancholy, than to Purge forth the Melancholic humor; wherefore, making
Purges their chiefest business, they instituted the other Medicines called
Preparatory, only for the sake of this, to wit, making it their scope, that as
soon as the humor being reduced to a fit consistency, by altering Medicines,
and that the ways for its excretion were open enough, then that it should be
carried forth of doors by Purgers. and not pargi^g Medicines, as the Ancients
thought.
Which kind of Hypothesis seems not agreeable, neither to reason, nor to
Medical experience; because Melancholic people rather receive hurt than help
by often Purging, how methodically soever it be instituted. Therefore, we,
placing the cause of this Disease in the Dyscrasie of the Blood and Spirits,
and in the weakness or evil conformation of the Viscera and the Brain, esteem
altering and corroborating Medicines to be in the first rank for Remedies, and
for the sake of these, that Purgers may be used sometimes between whiles.
Therefore Purging being rightly prescribed at due intervals, for the removing
impediments, as to the rest you may proceed according to these forms.

An Electuary.
Take of the Conserves of the flowers of Gilliflowers, and of Brage, each two
ounces and a half; of the rinds of Myrobalans preserved six drams, of Coral
prepared, and of Pearl, each one dram and a half; of Ivory, and Crabs Eyes,
each one dram; of Confection de Hyacintho two drams, of the Syrup of Coral and
red Poppy what will suffice; make an Electuary: take two drams Morning and
Evening, drinking after it three ounces of the following Iulep, or the
distilled Water.

A Iulep.
Take of the water of the Flowers of Cowslips, and of black Cherries, each six
ounces; of Balm four ounces, of Dr. Stephens his Water two ounces, of Sugar six
drams; mingle it and make a Iulep.

A Distilled Water.
Take of the leaves of Balm, Borrage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Watercresses, and
Brooklime, each four handfuls; of the flowers of Pinks, Marigolds, Borrage, and
Cowslips, each three handfuls; the outer rinds of six Oranges and six Lemons,
being all cut and bruised, pour to them Whey made of Cider eight pints; distill
it in a common Still, and mix all the liquor together.

Lozeng^s.
Take of the Powder of Pearl, of Ivory, of Coral prepared, each two drams; of
the Species Laetificant (or making merry) of Diarrhod. Abbatis, each one dram;
of the Oil of the rind of Citrons half a scruple, of white Sugar, dissolved and
boiled to the consistence of Lozenges, in what will suffice of Balm Water, six
ounces; make Lozenges according to art, weighing a dram: take two or three at
nine of the Clock in the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon, drinking after
it a draught of the distilled Water or of Tea. Or,

An Apozem*
Take of the Roots of Chervil, of Polypodium of the Oak, each one ounce and a
half; of the leaves of Hearts Tongue, Ceterach, Scolopendria, Germander, each
one handul; of Tamarisk half a handful, of the bark of the same half an ounce,
of Raisins of the Sun stoned two ounces, one Apple cut; let them be cut and
bruised, and boiled in four pints of Spring Water, to the consumption of a
third part; about the end add of the leaves of Water Cresses one handful, let
it be strained and clarified: take of it six ounces twice or thrice in a day;
sweteen it with Syrup of Fu^itory.

Spaw-Waters.
Spaw-Waters coming from Iron, are wont oftentimes to give great benefit for
the Curing of Melancholicks, to wit, because they being plentifully drunk, wash
out salinosulphureous Tincture of the Blood, and destroy its evil ferment.
Moreover, they wipe clean the silthiness of the Viscera, unlock obstructions,
and what is of great benefit, they corroborate, by their astriction, both the
weak and too loose Viscera, and also shut up the little mouths of the gaping
Vessels of the Brain, by which a passage lay open into it for the extraneous
matter, together with the nervous juice. And for this reason, to wit, by
corroborating the Viscera, and by locking up the passages of the Head,
Vitriolick^ prepared of Iron are wont to be given profitably in Melancholy, and
also in the Vertigo.

Take of our Steel prepared three drams, Chalyb^ates.
put it into a quart of the Water above described, take of it three or four
ounces twice in a day, by it self, or with any other solid Medicine.

Take of the filings of Iron one ounce, Steeled Medicines.
put it into a glass with the juice of Oranges two ounces; let it stand for a
day, shaking it sometimes, then pour to it of the Water of Pipins, and of White
Wine, each one pint; or of the more thin and sweet Cider one quart: take of it
three ounces, twice in a day, after the same manner.

Take of the Vitriol of Steel, of the Cream of Tartar, of Crabs Eyes, each one
dram; mix them; make a Powder, and let it be divided into nine parts: Take one
part every Morning in a draught of the distilled Water, or the Decoction, or in
a proper Broth.

Take of the Syrup of Steel four ounces: take of it one spoonful twice in a
day, in a proper Vehicle.

Take of the Extract of Steel, of our Steel prepared with a proper Decoction
three drams, of the Powder of Ivory, of yellow Saunders, of Lignum Aloes, each
half a dram; of the Salt of Tartar two scruples, of Ammoniacum dissolved in the
Water of Worms what will suffice to make a mass; let it be made into small
Pills; let three or four be taken every Evening, drinking after it three ounces
of the water of Apples, or of Cowslip flowers.

Whey, Whey.
if it agrees with the stomach, being drunk very plentifully, for many days,
for the same reason as Spaw-waters, viz. by washing out the Salt, and
Sulphurous particles of the Melancholic blood, is often given with success.
Whey with Epithimum infused in it, or boiled in it, is highly praised by some.

Let Broths be made of a boiled Pullet, Broths.
with the roots of Polypodium, Chervil, Fenil, Butchers Broom, and the leaves
of Ceterach, Hearts Tongue, Scolopendria, etc. take a draught of it in the
Morning, and at five of the Clock in the Afternoon, in which dissolve of the
Vitriol of Steel six grains, to ten of the Salt of Wormwood, and of the Cream
of Tartar, each a scruple.

The Juices of Herbs and their expressions bring sometimes notable Juices of
Herbs.
help to the taking away the Discras^e of the Blood. Take of the leaves of
Borage, of Watercresses, each six handfuls; two Apples pared, the Pulp of two
Oranges, and of white Sugar one ounce; let them be all bruised together, and
pour to them of the best Cider a pint and an half; make an expression very
strongly, and let it be kept in a glass. The Dose is four ounces twice or
thrice in a day.

In the summer time, A Bath.
a Bath of sweet water, for that it wipes away the filth impacted in the Pores
of the skin, and moves transpiration insensibly, is very profitable to some.

Because Melancholic persons sleep but badly, Hypnoticks.
and from long and frequent waking become worse, therefore Anodynes, and
sometimes the more gentle Hypnoticks (when there is need) may be prescribed to
be taken late at night, for this end are convenient, a Decoction of Cowslip
flowers, or of the leaves of Lettice, or the water of red Poppies, or the Syrup
of the same: Further, Emulsions of the Seeds of the white Poppy, of the Syrup
de Meconio, and others that are only agreeable and cherishing of the Spirits.

As there is an infinite Company of Melancholicks, as well as of Fools,
therefore we shall illustrate our Hypothesis with two Examples only, in one of
which the Disease begins from the sensitive part of the Soul, or the Animal
Spirits; and the other from its Vital part, to wit, from the Blood.

Sometime since, The first History.
a noted person about forty years of Age, of a florid countenance, cheerful,
and nimble about any business, being afflicted in his mind, by reason of a
certain affair, and very much dejected, he became thereupon very sad,
Melancholic, and with a dark and cast down countenance. When I went first to
visit him, he complained of a manifold hurry and distraction of thoughts, which
were so many, that he was bus^ed in his Fantasy almost night and day
continually, he lived without any sleep: Nor were these cares concerning the
commonweal, An Example of Melancholy beginning from the Spirits.
or the proper business of his Family; nor about the health of his Soul, or of
his Body, was he at all solicitous; but was rather troubled perpetually about
small matters, and of no moment. He was so fearful of all things, that he
presaged loss or death immediately to happen to him, upon every small accident.
And lastly, he was so sad, as if he would contend in wee^^^^ with Heraclitus.
Further, he labored with such a straitness of Heart, and so g^^^^ a
constriction, that he seemed to feel all his Praecordia to be drawn together
like a Purse, and he thought that there still lay there an immense burden, and
mighty weight, under which he imagined he could not go, unless stopping toward
the Earth. Whilst he talked, and discoursed with his Friends, this constriction
of the Praecordia, and the weight did somewhat remit; but then again, they were
wont to be repeated more vehemently, shaking for fear at any unaccustomed
object: Nor did he labor only in his Praecordia, but with a certain
constriction in his whole Body besides, and as if a certain burden lay on the
region of his Loins, and also on his shoulders and arms.

The Cure.
The reasons of these Symptoms are clear enough from our Hyphothesis. As to the
Cure, after various Medicines being given, without any success, I at last
persuaded, because it was then Summer time, that she should drink of our
Artificial Spaw Waters, for a fortnight: Therefore, first two quarts of
Spring Water being poured upon half a dram of our prepared Steel, for a night,
and afterward as much in four quarts of water; the sick man every morning
drunk the clear liquor, and within four or five hours he rendered the greatest
part of it by Urine: He took besides, going to sleep and early in the morning,
a Dose of an appropriate Electuary, (such as is above described) with a
Cephalic Iulep; within two months he became much better, and afterward by
degrees returned to himself.

The second History.

An Example of Melancholy arising from the Blood.


Whilst I was writing these, a young Noble man, being lately returned from his
Travels beyond Sea, and becoming unhealthy, put himself upon our care. This
person being formerly endued with a Sanguine and cheerful temperament, splendid
in his appearance, as also with an acute wit, and of a ready ingenuity, whilst
he traveled in the Countries abroad; but one Summer living in Spain, he felt a
great alteration in himself, from the great heats in that place: for first of
all, from the frequent heatings of his Blood, he became obnoxious to an heat
arising in the palms of his hands, and in the bottoms of his feet, with
prickings over all his body, which in a short time vanished. Then he found him
self very bad as to his Appetite and Sleep; moreover being dull and sad, he
began not to mind, yea sometimes to avoid any pleasant business, or the
converse of his Friends. At length his indisposition daily increasing, without
any evident cause, or real trouble of mind, he became Melancholic, so that
being ever thoughtful, fearful, and sad, nothing could delight him; for his
studies, exercises, traveling, conversation with learned men, or any other
thing which he before delighted in, now became to him a trouble and a terror.
After this manner being distempered for two years, he was so changed from
himself, as if he were another Man. For his Cure he had consulted the most
skilful Physicians in Spain, France, and Holland, and lastly in England, and
had tried several methods of healing almost without any benefit. The
Melancholic distemper of his blood, at first contracted by the intemperature
of the Air, still remaining, and afforded to the Animal regiment, Spirits as it
were acetous, that is such as we but now described. To this Noble man, at the
beginning, we thought good to recommend these following Remedies.

The Curatory Method proposed.
Take of the Decoction of Senna Gerionis (with Tamarinds half an ounce) four
ounces, of the Syrup of purging Apples one ounce, of Aqua Mirabilis two drams;
mix them, and take it with government, repeating it within nine days. After
Purging let Blood be taken away with Leeches, about four ounces.

Take of our Syrup of Steel six drams, take a spoonful in the morning, and at
five of the Clock in the Afternoon, in the following liquor three ounces,
walking after it for an hour or two.

Take of the leaves of Balm, Borrage, Bugloss, Pimpernel, Elm-tree, Hearts
Tongue, Watercresses, each four handfuls; of the Roots of Borrage half a
pound, of Pinks and Marigold flowers, each three handfuls; the outer peels of
eight Oranges and four Lemons, of Mace half an ounce; these being cut and
bruised, pour to them of Whey made of Cider eight pints; let them be distilled
in common Stills.

Take of the Conserves of Gilliflowers, Betony, Borrage, each one ounce and a
half; of Pearl powdered two drams, of red Coral prepared one dram and a half,
of the Species Confect. de Hyacintho two drams, of the Syrup of Coral, and red
Poppies, each, what will suffice: make an Opiate to be taken going to sleep
every night, the quantity of a Chestnut, drinking after it of Cowslip flower
water two or three ounces.

After sixteen or twenty days, changing the method of altering Medicines, the
following things were used in their places.

Take of the Powder of Ivory, Pearls, red Coral prepared, each two drams; of
male Poeony roots one dram and a half, of the Wood-Aloes half a dram, Lozenges
made out of Oranges four ounces, of the solution of Tragacanth made of Balm
Water, what will suffice: make Troches weighing half a dram: let him eat four
in the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon, drinking after them a draught of
Tea.

Take of the same Powder without the Lozenges half an ounce, of the flowers of
Sal Armoniack, and of Salt of Coral, each one dram; with Turpentine of Chio six
drams, make a Mass: take half a dram Evening and Morning, drinking after it of
the distilled water three ounces.

His food was only good and easily digested meats: he drank small Ale, with the
leaves of Hart's-tongue infused in it. He tasted sometimes a little Water and
Wine, or Cider, and he was almost continually employed, sometimes in some easy
affairs, sometimes in moderate exercises, or in several sorts of recreations.

Thus much concerning universal Melancholy, Universal Melancholy.
by which the sick are affected almost indifferently by any object, so that
they are entangled in every place, and by any accidents and circumstances, with
a multitude of thoughts continually, with raving, fear, and sadness. De Morbis
Convulsivis, Cap. 2. Particular Melancholy,
We have largely enough handled the symptoms of this Disease being manifold,
and the reasons of them, partly in this Chapter, and partly in another Tract.

It is called special Melancholy, when the sick respect a certain particular
thing, or some kinds of things, of which they think almost without ceasing; and
by reason all the powers and affections of the soul being continually employed
about this one thing, they live still careful and sad; moreover, they have
absurd and incongruous notions, not only about that object, but also concerning
many other accidents and subjects. In this Distemper, the Corporeal Soul,
bending from its proper kind, assumes a certain new one, but not being
conformable, either to the Rational Soul, or to the Body, or to it self, it
enters into a certain Metamorphosis.

This kind of Distemper, is excited by reason of two sorts of Affections
concerning Good or Evil.
is produced by many ways, and on various occasions; for vehement passions,
desire, fear, anger, pleasure, yea all other passions both of the concupiscible
and irascible Appetite, being long continued, and carried forth to the height,
are wont to excite the same. But there are two general occasions, from which
special Melancholy chiefly and most frequently does arise; to wit, first, when
there lies a most heavy pressure on the mind of some present evil, or an evil
just at hand, whether it be true or imaginary: or secondly, if the loss or
privation of some good before obtained, or desparing of something wished for or
desired, happen. In these opposite cases, the Corporeal Soul being either drawn
forth outwardly, omits all domestic care, either of it self, or of the Body,
or of the Rational Soul: or being pressed inwardly, it relinquishes or perverts
the offices of Reason, and of both the Vital and Animal Functions. It would be
an huge work to enumerate the various cases in either kind, and their ways of
affecting; out of the great plenty, which being of the greatest moment, seem to
require the care of a Physician, are chiefly furious Love, Jealousy,
Superstition, despair of Eternal Salvation, and lastly the imaginary
Metamorphosis of the Body or its parts; and the good and evil phantasticks of
fortune; of these, severally, we shall speak briefly.

Concerning the power of Love, Love-Madness.
saying nothing here of some most noble Lord, or Heroic actions, (which appear
chiefly on the stage of the Theater, and on that of humane life) it is a most
common observation, that if any one being taken with the aspect and
conversation of any Woman, begins to desire her and to grow mad for her
inwardly, and for his most devoted affection has nothing but loss and contempt
allotted him, unless he be very much supported by a firm reason, or is averted
as it were by other cross affections, there is great danger lest he falls into
Melancholy, Stupidity, or Love-Madness; with which passion, if by chance he be
distempered, he forth with seems transformed from himself, as it were into an
animated statue, he thinks on, nor speaks of any thing but his Love; he
endeavors to get into her favor, with the danger of both the loss of his Life
and Fortune; in the mean time, he not only neglects the care of his household
affairs, or of the public, yea his own health, but becoming desperate of his
desires, he oftentimes lays violent hands of himself: But if he be content to
live, yet growing lean, or withering away both in Soul and Body, he almost puts
off man; for the right use of reason being lost, omitting food and sleep, and
the necessary offices of Nature, he sets himself wholly to sighing and
groaning, and gets a mournful habit and carriage of body.

If we should inquire into the reason of this Distemper, The Reasons of
Symptoms in mad Love.
it easily appears, that the Corporeal Soul of Man being obnoxious to violent
affections, when it is wholly carried into the object most dear unto it self,
viz. the beloved Woman, and cannot obtain and embrace her, there is nothing
besides that can quiet or delight it; yea being refractory, it grows wholly
deaf to the Rational Soul, and hears not its dictates, but carrying only
tragical notions to the Imagination, darkens the sight of the intellect.
Further, forasmuch as the Praecordia (the more plentiful afflux of the Spirits
being denied to them) do slacken of their motions, the blood heaped up in the
bosoms of the heart, and apt to stand still, stirs up a great weight and
oppression, and for that reason, sighs and groans; in the mean time the face,
and the outward members grow pale and languish, for that the affluence of the
Blood and Spirits is withdrawn: Hence in our Idiom or Speech, the Heart of
despairing Lovers is said to be broken, to wit, because this Muscle is not
lively enough actuated by the Animal Spirit, and so is shaken weakly and
slowly, and does not amply enough cast forward the blood with vigor, into all
parts. Indeed in Love, the Corporeal Soul intimately embracing the Idea of its
most grateful object, endeavors all it can to be joined, and fully united to
the same; emitting toward her, the roots of the affections, with which it is
most strictly enfolded, seems from thence to draw its chiefest life and growth;
so that the body being neglected, when as it inclines it self wholly toward
the thing beloved, if by chance being broken off from this union, it suffer a
divorce, like a plant taken out of its natural soil, for that it does not
receive any more, or assimilate food convenient for it self, it soon withers:
Hence the Animal Spirits leaving their accustomed offices, and wonted tracts of
expansion, do not actuate or irradiate either the Brain or the Praecordia, nor
the nervous Appendix, after their due manner: wherefore, not only for the
present an untrimmed, and a delirous disposition of mind, with a mournful habit
of body, are excited; but from thence the vitiated Blood, and the Spirits,
having gotten an acetous nature, an habitual Melancholy is introduced.

Jealousy.
Such an inordination of the Animal Function as Mad-Love has, about the
acquisition of its object, the same or very like has Jealousy, about the
retention of the same, being gotten; so always (as well in the fruition as in
the desire) Res est solliciti plena timoris Amor: Love is ever full of careful
fear. This Soul, if it be not secure of its most dear prey, it presently grows
hot, and pours forth darkness and clouds upon its own serenity: Then afterward
being infected by a Choleric tincture, it receives every object, as if it were
imbued with a yellow color: for indeed, as the ferment of the stomach being
too much endued with a sourness, perverts all things that is put into it, into
its nature; so Jealousy being once arisen, changes all accidents and
circumstances, into the food of its poison; and when the sensitive Soul, being
as it were bowed inward in this passion, becomes not conform to its Body, for
that reason the Economy of the Functions both Animal, Vital, and vegetative
being depraved, Jealousy makes one rave, and to wither away.

Superstition and Desperation.
Superstition, and a despair of Eternal Salvation, are wont to impress on the
sensitive Soul, the Blood, and the Body, almost the like Distempers of
Melancholy, as Love and Jealousy; but their way of affecting is somewhat
different: for in those the object, whose acquisition or loss is endangered, is
wholly immaterial, and its affection being at first conceived by the Rational
Soul, is impressed on the other Corporeal: In the prosecution of which, if ^he
easily obtains her desires, then no perturbation of the humane mind arises; but
if (as it often is wont to happen) the Corporeal Soul being oppugned or
refused, it will not stand to the monitions of the Rational, but presently
growing hot, moves inordinately the Blood and Spirits, opposes the Corporeal
goods and blandishments to the spiritual objects, from the intellect, and
endeavors to draw the man to its side; and so whenas there is a continual
skirmish between the two Souls, and that sometimes the superior Will, and
sometimes the sensitive Appetite prevails; at length the judgment seat of the
Conscience is erected by the mind, where every several action is scrupulously
examined. The reason of the Symptoms.
By reason of this more frequent strife of the Souls, the Animal Spirits being
too much and almost perpetually exercised, and often commanded, and as it were
drawn hither and thither into contraries, at length they depart something from
their vigor and their nature, and at length being made more fixed and
Melancholic, for that they are detained from their wonted expansion, cut
unaccustomed and by-tracts in the Brain, and so induce a Delirium or idle
raving, with mighty fear and sadness. In this sort of Distempers, the Corporeal
soul being snatched as it were violently, departs both from it self, and from
the Body, and according to the characters of the impressed Idea being modified,
it is wont to assume a new image, either Angelical or Diabolical; in the mean
time, the Intellect, because the Imagination furnishes it only with undecent
and monstrous notions, is wholly perverted from the use of right reason.

The imaginary Metamorphosis of Melancholic Persons.
By the like means of affecting, it happens that some Melancholic persons
undergo imaginary Metamorphoses, as to their fortunes, or as to their bodies,
viz. whilst one imagines himself, and plays the part of a Prince, and another a
Beggar; another believes that he has a Body of Glass, and another that he is a
Dog, or a Wolf, or some other Monster; for after the Corporeal Soul's being
distempered with a long Melancholy and the mind blinded, it wholly departs both
from it self, and also from the Body, and affects, and as much as in it lies,
truly assumes a new image or condition.

CHAP. XII.
Of Madness.

AFter Melancho^y, Madness and Melancholy are akin.
Madness is next to be treated of, both which are so much akin, that these
Distempers often change, and pass from one into the other; for the Melancholic
disposition growing worse, brings on Fury; and Fury or Madness growing less
hot. oftentimes ends in a Melancholic disposition. These two, like smoke and
flame, mutually receive and give place one to another. And indeed, if in
Melancholy the Brain and Animal Spirits are said to be darkened with fume, and a
thick obscurity; In Madness, they seem to be all as it were of an open burning
or flame. But indeed, for that as we have already shown, that the Animal
Spirits being inkindled or inflamed do excite a Frenzy with a Feavour, which
is wanting in Madness, their affection will be better illustrated in this
Disease, as well as in Melancholy, by the Analogy of Chemical Liquors.

Whenever therefore Madness without a Feavour being excited, The Subject of
Madness are the Animal Spirits.
with a remarkable hurt of the animal Function, is wont to be permanent, and
continue long, its next and immediate subject are the Animal Spirits; which
acting not by consent, nor from any force from another, but of themselves, are
habitually distempered, and depart from their proper and genuine nature, The
disposition^ of which are like to Stygian Water.
to wit, a Spiritual saline, into a Sulphureous-saline disposition, like to
Stygian-Water, as we have showed above; therefore they perform only inordinate
acts, and so persist a long while to act amiss or evilly. To this vice of
theirs, perhaps the Brain, or the Blood, or other parts may contribute
somewhat, but the Spirits themselves are first and chiefly in fault.

It is observed in Mad men, Three chief Accidents in Madness.
that these three things are almost common to all: viz. First, That their
Fantasies or Imaginations are perpetually busied with a storm of impetuous
thoughts, so that night and day they are muttering to themselves various
things, or declare them by crying out, or by bauling out aloud. Secondly, That
their notions or conceptions are either incongruous, or represented to them
under a false or erroneous image. Thirdly, To their Delirium is most often
joined Audaciousness and Fury, contrary to Melancholicks, Which are also to be
found in Stygian Water.
who are always infected with Fear and Sadness. These primary symptoms of
Madness in the Animal Spirits, endued with the nature of Stygian-Water, may be
thence most aptly deduced as appears clearly by what follows.

For first, The Particles of this are always in motion.
the Particles of Stygian-Water are highly active and unquiet, and in perpetual
motion; hence the Effluvia's falling from them continually strike the Nostrils,
and the Liquor being poured forth from the Vessel, meeting with some other
bodies grows very hot, and penetrates their Pores and Passages; the reason of
which is, because the Saline Particles being conjoined with the Sulphurous,
shake one another, and will not cohere with any of another kind. In like manner
we may suppose that the Animal Spirits being stilled forth from the Blood;
filled as it were with a Nitrous sulphur, are endued with a notable mobility or
unquietness; And in like manner the Animal Spirits in Madmen.
which, for that reason, being stretched forth from the middle of the Brain on
every side, both in its compass and in the nervous System, and being from
thence perpetually reflected, produce unbridled Fantasies, and almost never
interrupted, and also great and perpetual inordinations, both of the sensitive
and loco-motive function.

Secondly, The Effluvia's of Stygian Water, every where make new Pores and
Passages. In like manner also the Animal Spirits in Mad men.
the Effluvia's exhaling from Nitrous or Stygian Spirits, do not so much
evaporate from open spaces, but being very penetrating, cut every where new
ones, almost in every subject, where they are able to break through; yea most
bodies containing these kind of Spirits, or the things laid upon the mouths of
the Vessels, are so bored through by them, that they are presently rendered
friable or brittle, and fall into small bits. In like manner we believe, that
the Animal Spirits in the Distemper of Madness, becoming very moveable, and
very much sharpened, out of their morbid nature, do so likewise leave their
former tracts of going and returning to and fro, and do cut for themselves,
every where in the Brain, new little spaces or walks, and plain^y ^^vious; in
which, whilst they slow, they produce unaccustomed notions, and very absurd,
whence there is a necessity, that the distempered do speak, and imagine for the
most part incongruous and discomposed things; at once confounding things past
with things present, or to come; and contrary or opposite things.

The Effluvia's of Stygian Water are diffused far.
Thirdly, it is observed, that the vaporous little bodies falling away from the
Nitrosu^phureous Spirits of Minerals, do not only subsist in the neighborhood,
(as the breath exhaling from acetous Liquors) but are diffused very far, and on
every side into remote places. I have often seen, when the Spirit of Nitre has
been mixed with the Butter of Antimony, that the whole Chamber has been filled
with a black smoke ascending from those Stygian Liquors: When Aqua fortis or
the Spirit of Nitre being poured from the Alembick, or drawn forth by a gentle
heat, a most sharp vapor has pierced the Nostrils and Lungs of those standing
afar off; which certainly happens by reason of joining together of the fluid
Salt, and the rag^ng Sulphur; the little bodies of either of which mutually
incite one another, and so being combined together, are carried farther.
Indeed, In like manner as the Animal Spirits in Madmen.
after the same manner it seems to be concerning the Animal Spirits in Madmen,
which, for that they are of the same nature as Stygian Water, quickly passing
through both the frame of the Brain and its Appendix, cause the distempered not
only to be furious, but as it were Demoniacks or possessed with the Devil; so
that being free from any fear or languishing, they enter upon any thing boldly,
and expose themselves fearless to sword or fire; also by reason of the
prodigious putting forth of their Spirits, with a mighty strength, they often
break asunder bonds and chains, and overthrow at once many strong men,
resisting and going about to restrain them.

What the Conjunct Cause of Madness is.
The comparing of the Animal Spirits with Stygian Water, or the Nitro
sulphurous Spirit, clearly shows what is the conjunct or immediate cause of
Madness; to wit, which seems to consist, not so much in an adult bile or humor,
or black and sharp vapor, being suddenly suffused into the Brain, and inciting
the Spirits inhabiting it into rage and fury; (for such a vapor or humor
either exhales of its own accord, or may be soon removed by the help of
Remedies; and so the madness thence excited, would pass away as quickly and as
easily as the Fury or Delirium produced by the eating of wild Parsnips) but
rather raging Madmen are habitually so made, because their Animal Spirits
degenerate from a gentle and benign nature, as also a subtle and very active
disposition, to wit, a Spirituous-saline, into another more sharp, to wit,
partaking of a fluid Salt, an Arsenical Sulphur.

How the Animal Spirits acquire a disposition like to Stygian Water.
As to what belongs to the more remote or antecedent causes of Madness, viz. by
reason of which the Animal Spirits acquire a most sharp disposition; before we
come to these, we ought to show how, and by what reason or means, a certain
Corrosive Latex or water (such as we suppose the Animal Spirits with its
Vehicle to be) is begotten, and is able to subsist in the humane body.

It is showed in the first place that corrosive and as it were Stygian
Particles, are begot in the humane Body.
Truly, that most sharp humors are sometimes begotten in our bodies, plainly
appears by many observations. We have elsewhere made mention of a Noble Man,
grievously obnoxious to distempers of the Brain and Nerves, whose sweat (when
he was in a fit) presently eat through his shirt, or made it so crumbling or
friable, as if it had been dipped in Aqua fortis. It is an usual thing for some
to render by Vomit oftentimes as it were a Vitriolick water, corroding the
coats of the Oesophagus and the Palate. Further, Cancrous, Scrophulous, and
Pestilential Ulcers, show a most sharp humor, by which the flesh and Membranes
are eaten, as it were with Aqua fortis, with a blackness poured on them.
Further it is observed, that Corrosive Stagmas, not chiefly brought forth in
the Blood, are affixed to the musculous flesh, or to the Parenchyma of the
Viscera; but more frequently being procreated in the nervous liquor, being laid
up with its Latex in the nervous parts, or their Emunctories, do produce
Aposthums, and Pockey, Septick, and other foul and filthy Ulcers. For these are
most often excited in the Glandulas, or near the Tendons, or Membranes; and
when as the humor falling away from them is first thin and watery, and
afterward becomes black very stinking, and corrosive; it is a sign indeed,
that the nervous Liquor it self is changed into that sort of putrefaction.

Wherefore the Nervous Liquor oftentimes becomes corrosive. Because the
volatile Salt most easily degenerates into an acid and most sharp, with the
acquired Sulphur.
It easily occurs, if the reason of these be inquired into, that the Latex
watering the Brain and nervous Appendix, does contain in it self, together with
a subtle Spirit, great plenty of volatile Salt. Therefore, when this is so
depraved, that the Spirit being depressed, the Saline Particles degenerate into
a flux, and acquire to themselves little Sulphurous bodies, it becomes plainly
Corrosive and Stygian. Wherefore, malignant humors and Ulcers chiefly happen in
the nervous parts, and their Emunctories, and there are excited upon any light
occasion (as when a small hurt happens to the Breast of a Woman, a Cancer
follows) because, indeed, the nervous humor being hindered somewhere in its
passage, does there stagnate, presently the Spirit being depressed, or flying
away, the Saline Particles degenerating from a volatile to a four nature, get
to themselves soon after strange companions, and snatching either Eart^y or
Sulphurous little bodies, or of some other kind, begin to congeal into
S^^^hous, Strumous, Hence the Reasons of Tumors and Ulcers in the Kings Evil
and the Cancer, are given.
or Cancrous Tumors. And when after this manner, by the stagnating of the
nervous Liquor, and by its getting an heterogeneous concretion, the Mine of a
Tumor is blown up in some part, and the supplements of the same liquor are
continually perverted into the like nature of viciousness; to which also
happen, the Melanchol^ck impurities, poured forth from the Blood, and other
humors, which with their joined forces increase the rage (even as when diverse
Salts and Sulphurs are destilled together) and constitute in the distempered
part, a Septick matter, and like to the Escharotick or crusting up of Stygian
Water. According to this reasoning or Aetiology, the irregularities of these
kind of Tumors, as also the appearance of the King's Evil, are most aptly
unfolded. If that the nervous Liquor so corrosive, and made degenerate, does
not grow into Tumors, flowing into the nervous Fibers, it is wont to cause here
and there most cruel Pains and Cramps.

But as this Liquor of the Nerves, Hence also the Madness of the distempered
Spirits.
being depraved after this manner, stirs up the aforefaid* Distempers in the
nervous parts; so it is not difficult to conceive, that the same water, for
that it is for a Vehicle of the Animal Spirits, flowing in the Brain, does
acquire, together with those Spirits, a Corrosive and as it were a Stygian
nature, and for that reason excites Madness. The Original of Madness either
from the Spirits themselves, or from the Blood.
The depravation of the Animal Spirits, together with the juice watering the
Brain, or the disposition of Madness, is wont to arise after various ways and
for diverse causes; but truly, for the most part this Distemper (as we have
observed of Melancholy) begins either from the Spirits themselves, or else from
the Blood.

First, It begins for two occasions from the Spirits.
Madness beginning from the Spirits, arises sometimes from an evident solitary
cause, as a violent Passion; sometimes also it proceeds from a foregoing cause
lying in the Brain, as when it comes upon Melancholy or a Frenzy. We shall a
little weigh the reasons of either case, and the various manner of their being
made.

1. As to the former, By Reason of a violent Passion, by which
when a vehement affection puts any one besides himself, that happens to be
made thus; either because the Animal Spirits are too much overthrown, and
hurried into confusion; or because they are elevated above measure, and
endeavor to stretch themselves forth beyond their sphere.

First, They are either too much cast down,
The Spirits are wont to be cast down by a violent and terrible Passion; so it
often happens, that some being struck with a panick fear, by seeing a true or
an imaginary Spectre or Ghost, afterward fall into a perpetual Madness.
Further, some by reason of some notable disgrace or repulse, others by reason
of their hopes of obtaining their Love being suddenly and unthought of
frustrated, and others by reason of a rash breaking their oaths or vows, and
violated Conscience, being first highly troubled in mind, anon become Mad. The
reason of which is, because the Animal Spirits being driven beyond their orders
and wonted passages, and put into confusion, do make for themselves new and
devious ways, which entering into, immediately they bring forth delirious
Phantasms; in the mean time, the Saline Particles of the nervous juice, the
spirituous being depressed, depart from their volatileness; and suffering a
flux, assume to themselves the Sulphurous little bodies poured forth from the
Blood, into the then weak and open Brain; From whence this Liquor, being most
sharp like Stygian Water, and the Animal Spirits becoming fierce and very much
incited, become furious.

Secondly, Or elevated above measure.
Sometimes the Animal Spirits, whilst they are too much elevated, almost after
the same manner induce both to themselves, and the nervous juice, the mad
disposition. Hence Ambition, Pride, and Emulation, have made some mad; the
reason of which is, because whilst the Corporeal Soul swelling up with an
opinion and pride of its own excellency, lifts up it self, and endeavors on
every side to expand or stretch it self forth most amply, beyond the border or
sphere of its body, the Animal Spirits being tumultuarily called into the Head,
will not be contained within their wonted bounds, but being there broken and
diversely reflected, by reason of their too much excretion, are compelled into
new and plainly devious tracts; wherefore, both they being thrust forth from
the course of their proper emanation* and also the nervous Liquor, do quickly
acquire a sharp and incitative Disposition, as was said but now, for that
reason Madness follows.

Thus much concerning Madness, Madness beginning from the Spirits succeeds
Melancholy, or the Frenzy.
excited by reason of a solitary evident cause; but this Disease does also
arise from a Procatartick cause, preexisting in the Brain, and chiefly from
Melancholy or the Frenzy going before; in that the Animal Spirits with the
nervous juice being a little more exalted, and in this a little more depressed,
acquire the disposition of Madness. As to the former, it is a vulgar
observation, that sudden and great Melancholy is for the most part next to
Madness: the reason of which is, because, when the Animal Spirits, together
with the nervous liquor, degenerate into a sourness, are perverted, there only
wants the accession of Sulphur, by which they afterward getting a Stygian
nature; By what means it comes upon Melancholy.
may induce Madness; (as when an acid Liquor distilled out of Vitriol or Salt,
by the addition of Sal Nitrosus, becomes Aqua fortis) but indeed, in a great
passion of Melancholy, because the Spirits being disturbed, the passages of the
Brain are too open, the Sulphurous Particles carried from the Bilous and
Rancid Blood, find an easy entrance, and so the former sour or acid
disposition, turns into a Stygian or Maddish. Hence it is observed, if any one
of a more hot temperament, falls into a Melancholic Delirium, with fear and
sadness, forasmuch as the Sulphurous Particles in its humors, are joined to
the Salts being depressed into a flux, that sadness and thinking at the
beginning, How upon a Frenzy.
very readily a short time after becomes madness. Secondly, for that also a
Frenzy often ends in Madness, the reason is almost the same with the former,
but inverted; to wit, because in a Frenzy the Spirits and the nervous Liquor
becoming Sulphurous, and too much inflamed, afterward burning forth, get to
themselves Saline Particles, and so in like matter get a most sharp and as it
were a Stygian nature; wherefore the Feavour then ceasing, the Fury becomes
fixed and continual.

The Original of Madness sometimes from the Blood.
2. The disposition of Madness, has no less frequently its roots in the bloody
Mass, and is at length produced into act, to wit, when as the Blood being
depraved, and becomes Nitro-sulphureous, it either perverts the nervous Liquor,
as also the Animal Spirits, or supplies them but evilly. Which kind of taint of
the Blood is either hereditary or acquired.

It is either Hereditary.
First, It is a common observation, that men born of Parents that use sometimes
to be mad, are obnoxious to the same disease, and though they have lived above
thirty or forty years prudent and sober; yet afterward without any occasion or
evident cause, they have fallen into Madness. The reason of which is, for that
the Blood at that time bending from its due temper, by degrees into a Nitro
sulphurous, affords to the Head Animal Spirits, The Reason of which is shown.
and also the nervous juice, participating (as has been said) of a most sharp
nature. We have formerly shown, that in our Complexion, Elementary Particles do
persist during life, apart from the secondary, afforded by nutrition, and have
their times of crudity, maturity, and defection; wherefore we suppose, the
morbid seeds do ripen into fruit, according to the periods of Ages. Further, we
take notice, that oftentimes the fruits of Diseases of this kind, do remain
ripening for a long time, or perpetually as long as life; yet sometimes falling
off as it were of their own accord, do wither away; then sometimes in another
tract of time, from the infection being left, new fruits do spring up, and by
little and little rise up to their height. Wherefore, Hereditary Madness is
sometimes continual, and sometimes intermitting; Its fits are wont sometimes to
come again after a shorter time, and sometimes after a longer interval.

Or acquired, and so either,
Secondly, As the foregoing Cause of Madness sticking in the Blood, is
oftentimes innate or original, so sometimes the same is by degrees begotten,
either by an evil manner of diet, or by the suppression of usual evacuations,
or by reason of a Feavour going before, or for some other causes, and at length
being brought to maturity, breaks forth into Madness. By reason of errors in
the six Non-naturals;
It is an usual thing in great want of sustenance, that some poor people, being
constrained to feed only on very disagreeing meats, and of ill digestion,
become at first sad, with an horrid aspect, louring and dark, and a little
after Mad. The Haemorrhoids, and the after flowings of Women in Childbed,
being restrained in their flux, or some evil and foul running Ulcers being
suppressed, dispose some toward this Disease. Further, those who originally,
or by acquisition, are endued with a more sharp temper, and with fierce
manners, and threatening countenance, by reason of the dispositition of their
Blood, being nigh to a Nitro-sulphur, are in danger to fall into Madness, from
some strong evident cause.

Or by reason of Poisons.
Thirdly, Venomous Ferments being insinuated to the Blood and nervous juice, as
first of all from the biting of mad Animals, or by the taking of some poisons,
are wont to stir up Madness. Concerning the reasons of the former, we have
proposed our conjectures in another place. An History of a Mortal Madness, from
eating the leaves of Wolfs Bane.
Of late a very Noble Lady, and to be credited, told me from her own knowledge,
that a certain Gentleman, having eaten at dinner time the tender leaves of
Wolfs-bane, in a Sallad with other herbs, in the Evening found himself ill, and
complaining of a great unquietness and agitation of his Blood and Spirits, he
desired his Friends to send for a Surgeon to let him blood, or that
otherwise he should grow Mad; which indeed, as he said, came to pass; for
before he could be let blood, he fell into Madness, and dyed in a nights space:
This kind of deadly Distemper so suddenly happened, for that this poison had
not only perverted the Blood and Animal Spirits, as to their temper, but had
slain or beat them down immediately, with its malignant Ferment.

Thus much for the formal Reason, and Causes of Madness. The Reasons of the
symptoms of Madness explained.
The primary Symptoms of it, we have mentioned to be a Delirium and a Fi^ry;
the reasons of which appear clear enough from what has been already said. To
these we may moreover add Boldness, Strength, and that they are still unwearied
with any labors, and suffer pains unhurt, of which we will speak briefly.

Madmen are not as Melancholicks, Wherefore Madmen are audacious.
sad and fearful, but audacious and very confident, so that they shun almost no
dangers, and attempt all the most difficult things that are. The reason of
which is, because the Animal Spirits being very fierce and provoked, both
fortify the Imagination, that no object may seem greater or bigger than it is
wont to be, and actuate also the Praecordia with vigor, so that they cast forth
the Blood strongly and swiftly, and drive it forwards lively to the utmost
borders of the Body. In this Distemper the Soul endeavors to be carried forth,
and to l^ap beyond the compass or sphere of the Body, and so striving on every
side, against the incursions of any exterior things, bears it self without fear.

Secondly, From whence their immense strength.
Madmen are still strong and robust to a prodigy, so that they can break cords
and chains, break down doors or walls, one easily overthrows many endeavoring
to hold him. The certain cause of which is, because in the Blood and nervous
juice of Mad people, are contained Particles as it were Nitro sulphurous, or
otherways most sharp, and as it were Stygian; from whence the Animal Spirits
are endued, or are strong with an Elastick or Explosive force, stupendous,
great, and far beyond what is natural.

Thirdly it is observed, Wherefore they are never tired.
that Mad men are almost never tired; for although by playing mad pranks, and
striving many days and nights they strongly exercise their members, and live in
the mean time without sleep or eating, yet they scarce languish at all, nor
desist from their agonies for want of strength. Which without doubt comes to
pass, for that the Animal Spirits, though very moveable and Elastick, are not
however volatile and easily dissipable, but by reason of the Saline Particles
being depressed from their volatileness into a flux, being joined with the
Sulphurous, become firm and more fixed; and therefore continue longer in their
activity. In like manner as we have observed in Aqua fortis, which though it be
contained in a vessel that is open, perpetually sends forth very many
Effluvia's, and yet still retains its substance unwasted, and its corrosive
force, otherwise than the spirit of Wine or Blood, the virtue of which soon
evaporates.

In the fourth place, almost for the same reason, Wherefore they are not easily
hurt.
Madmen, what ever they bear or suffer are not hurt; but they bear cold, heat,
watching, fasting, strokes, and wounds, without any sensible hurt; to wit,
because the spirits being strong and fixed, are neither daunted nor fly away.
Further, the blood having gotten a Nitro sulphurous Dyscrasie, is incapable of
any other sudden mutation; wherefore, although insensible transpiration be
hindered, and other usual evacuations suppressed, or the supplies of the
nourishing juice degenerated, yet neither a Catarrh, nor Feavour, nor Atrophy,
or evil digestion easily comes upon Madness. For in this Distemper, although
the Particles of the Blood do greatly swell up, yet by reason of the abundance
of Salt they do not conceive a Feavourish burning. Even as also Aqua fortis,
though it grows very hot and burns other subjects, yet it self is not at all
inflamed, but rather resists burning.

The differences of this Disease are easily gathered from what has been before
said; The Differences,
for first as to its beginning, In respect of the Original.
it is either occasional, which sometimes quickly ceases, the evident cause
being taken away presently; or habitual, depending upon a foregoing cause lying
in the Blood, and that either hereditary, or acquired.

Secondly, By reason of the Magnitude.
by reason of the magnitude, Madness is either highly furious, that the
distempered ought to be bound or locked up, lest they should attempt any
mischief to themselves or others; or else it is more gentle, in which the sick,
being conversant with others, In respect of Time.
abstain from any malice or hurt. Thirdly, In respect of time, Madness is wont
to be long or short, continual or intermitting. Fourthly, As to the various
kinds of Deliriums, the shapes or types of this Disease are almost innumerable;
all which to run through, is neither possible, nor worth the while; but most
commonly, the distempered are mad alike in all things, or else chiefly as to
one particular thing, having their judgment concerning other matters for the
most part right.

As to the Prognostic of Madness, The Prognostic.
if the distempered be not obnoxious to a Feavour, nor any other Diseases
besides, nor easily hurt by external accidents the Disease is not mortal of it
self; yet the Cure is very difficult, because there is made a great alteration
in the Blood and Spirits, and the sick resist every method of healing, and are
enemies to Physicians and to themselves.

If Madness be inveterate or hereditary, or is caused by the biting of a
Mad-Dog, it is hardly or not at all to be cured. What is excited upon some
occasion, or from a solitary evident cause, or succeeds a Feavour, also upon
which comes a Manginess, Whelks, the Haemorrhoids, or spots in the skin, is
easily cured.

Those who are obnoxious to this Disease at intervals, about Midsummer, or when
the Dog Star arises, are in greatest danger; also those who are altered
according to the changes of the Air, or when long cold and foul weather are
opposite in the constitution of the Heaven.

The Cure.
As there are two kinds of Madness, to wit, Continual, and Intermitting; so the
means of healing ought to be twofold.

What the indications are of continual Madness.
1. The Curatory method to be administered, as to continual Madness, suggests
the commonly noted three primary Indications, viz. The first Curatory, which
respecting the Disease it self, endeavors to correct or allay the furies and
exorbitances of the Animal Spirits. Secondly, Preservatory, which being
levelled against the causes of the Disease, endeavors to take away or amend
the sharp and Nitro-sulphureous Dyscrasies of the nervous Juice and the Blood,
as also the Stygian disposition of the Spirits. Thirdly, Vital, which directs
such a means of diet and restraint, which is only fit in this Disease, for the
nutritive and vital function to have and be sustained with.

The Curatory Indication.
The first Indication, viz. Curatory, requires threatenings, bonds, or strokes,
as well as Physic For the Madman being placed in a House convenient for the
business, must be so handled both by the Physician, As to Discipline.
and also by the Servants that are prudent, that he may be in some manner kept
in, either by warnings, chiding, or punishments inflicted on him, to his duty,
or his behavior, or manners. And indeed for the curing of Mad people, there is
nothing more effectual or necessary than their reverence or standing in awe of
such as they think their Tormentors. For by this means, the Corporeal Soul
being in some measure depressed and restrained, is compelled to remit its pride
and fierceness; and so afterward by degrees grows more mild, and returns in
order: Wherefore, Furious Madmen are sooner, and more certainly cured by
punishments, and hard usage, in a strait room, than by Physic or Medicines.

As to Medicine.
But yet a course of Physic ought to be instituted besides, which may suppress
or cast down the Elation of the Corporeal Soul. Wherefore in this Disease,
Blood-letting, Vomits, or very strong Purges, and boldly and rashly given, are
most often convenient; which indeed appears manifest, because Empericks only
with this kind of Physic, together with a more severe government and
discipline do not seldom most happily cure Mad folks. But indeed, this more
sharp handling is not convenient for all Mad people, but to the most furious.
Others more remissly Mad, are healed often with Flatteries, and with more
gentle Physic.

Phlebotomy.
In most Mad folks the taking away of Blood copiously ought to be in the
beginning of the Disease, as it is the common practice and vogue of the people.
And indeed, while there is strength, the opening a vein ought to be repeated,
sometimes in the Arm, sometimes in the Neck Vein, Forehead, or Foot; and
sometimes it is expedient for the Hemorrhoidal Vessels to be opened by Leeches;
for these evacuations being timely made, both the raging of the Spirits and the
lifting up of the Soul, are best of all suppressed; then besides the Dyscrasies
or evil habits of the Blood (for that what was sharp and Corrosive in it being
drawn forth, a new and gentler comes in its place) are amended.

Vomiting Medicines.
That Vomiting Medicines are highly profitable for the curing of Mad people, it
is almost a Proverb, so that the most part of Hellebore, yea almost all
Anticyra is allotted to them. By what means Emeticks do often help in Cephalic
Diseases, we have shown already. Quack-salvers in this case, give with success
many times, though rashly and with danger, a large Dose of Stibium: But
Chemical things are here more convenient, both because they move more strongly,
and because also the sick may be more easily deceived by them.

Take of the Sulphur of Antimony eight grains to ten, of the Cream of Tartar
half a scruples; mix them together by pounding them; make a Powder: let it be
given in a spoonful of grewel; or if it be to be given deceitfully, to one not
knowing of it, let it be put into a bit of white Bread, and so let it be taken
in Milk or Broth. Let this Vomiting Medicine be often repeated, to wit, once in
four days.

Take six or seven grains of Mercurius Vitae; let a Powder be made, and given
after the same manner. The Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht, and of Hercules Bovius,
and other various preparations of Mercury may be given after the same manner.
Aurum vitae or the Solar Precipitate, also the Lunar Precipitate, are esteemed
by Chemists for specific Remedies against madness; and indeed, Mercurial
Medicines, for that they operate not only by Vomit and Stool, but oftentimes by
Sweat, Urine, or Salivation, do notably help. A long and plentiful spitting or
flux at the mouth has perfectly cured some Mad people.

3. The more strong Purging Medicines, Purging Medicines.
(where strength and the constitution may bear them) because they depress the
raging of the Spirits, and of the Blood, and very much evacuate the
Emunctories, that are for the receiving the recrements of the Blood, and
nervous Juice, do often bring help in this Disease. For this use preparations
of black Hellebore, as chiefly its extract, and Wine of the Infusion of its
strings, or the pulp of an Apple with the roots of it boiled together are much
praised.

Take of the Extract of black Hellebore, of Calamelanos of each one scruple:
make a Bolus.

Take Calamelanos one scruple, of Diagridium from twelve to fifteen grains;
make a Powder.

Take of Confectio Hamech, or of the Electuary of the juice of Roses half an
ounce to six drams: let it be given in broth.

Take of the Decoction of Senna Gereonis, or of Epithimum (with the roots of
black Hellebore two drams) six ounces; make a draught.

Take of the Powder of Diasennae two drams: let it be taken in Posset Drink.

In the mean time, The preservatory Indication. Altering Medicines.
whilst these things are doing, let the Preservatory Indication respect the
cause of this Disease. Wherefore, with these frequent purgings and letting of
Blood, between whiles let altering Medicines or Remedies be used, which may
attemper the Blood and nervous juice, and reduce them to their due temper; if
that the sick be tractable and orderly enough, they will not refuse to take
such things methodically.

Take of Crystal Mineral, or of the best purified Nitre two ounces, of Pearls
powdered two drams, of Sugar Candy two drams and a half, of Camphor half a
scruple; let them be all beaten together to a moist fine Powder: let two drams
of this be put into a glass vessel that will hold two quarts of Spring Water,
or of clear small Ale, or Beer and ^^ld; let it be given for ordinary drink at
pleasure. Put to Whey being made hot the flowers of Violets or Water-Lilies,
Whey.
and after they have infused for two hours, let them drink it plentifully; also
the Spaw Waters are convenient for Mad people to drink orderly, and plentifully.

Take of the tops of green and the tenderest Borrage, and Bugloss, An
Expressions.
each four handfuls; three Apples pared, of Sal Prunella two drams, of Sugar
half an ounce; let them be bruised together, and pour to them of Spring Water
three pints; make a strong Expression: take half a pint thrice in a day or
oftener.

Take of the Conserves of Borrage flowers, An Electuary.
and of Violets, each three drams; Confectio de Hyacintho, of Alchermis, each
two drams; of Coral prepared a dram and an half, of the Powder of Pearls one
dram, of the Salt of Coral one dram, of the Syrup of red Poppies what will
suffice; make an Electuary, of which take two drams twice or thrice in a day,
drinking after it of the following liquor four ounces.

Take of the waters of the flowers of the Water-Lilie, A Iulep.
Borrage, Bugloss, and of black Cherries, each four ounces; of red Poppies six
ounces, of red Rose Water two ounces, of Camphor tied in a rag and hanged in
the glass half a dram, of the Syrup of Coral one ounce and a half; mix them and
make a Iulep.

Take of the yellow flowers of the Willow-tree what will suffice, Distilled
Waters.
let them be distilled in a common Still, and let the Distillation be repeated,
by putting to it fresh flowers for three times: Give of it four ounces twice or
thrice in a day, sweetning it with the Syrup of Water-Lilies.

Take of the leaves of the Willow, Meadowsweet, Pimpernel, Borrage, Balm, each
six handfuls; of the flowers of the Water-Lilie, of the tops of St. Iohns-wort,
each four handfuls; of Camphor powdered three drams, all being bruised
together, pour to them eight pints of new Milk; let them be distilled in common
Stills.

Let the brains of Weathers be distilled with Milk, and give of the water three
or four ounces thrice in a day.

Further there are to be used Specific Remedies, Specificks.
so called, of which is famous, a Decoction of Pimpernel with the purple
flower, also the tops of Hypericon or St. Iohnswort, and other Decoctions,
Opiates, and Powders of Antilyss^ are frequently noted among all the famous
Empericks.

Concerning the cure of Madness, A Decoction and Infusion of Apples.
excited from the biting of venomous or mad Animals, for that it is almost only
Emperical, and commonly known, we shall not discourse of it in this place, and
since we have elsewhere proposed our conjectures concerning it. But a Decoction
or an Infusion of Apples, either raw or boiled in Spring Water, the liquor of
Tea, Emulsions, with many other things, whose forms we have shown in the Cure
of Melancholy, are convenient in this case.

Other Chirurgical Remedies.
Moreover, from Chirurgical Remedies, besides opening of a Vein, many other
helps are wont to be had for the curing of this Disease. Cupping-glasses with
Scarification, often help. Blisterings, Cauteries both actual and potential are
praised of many. Others commend cutting an Artery, others Trepaning, or opening
the Skull, others Salivation. But these kind of administrations, besides that
their effects are uncertain, can hardly be performed, or not at all safely, by
reason of the intractability of the sick; wherefore, it were here superfluous
to inquire into the reasons of help or cure to be expected from them. The hair
being shaven off, sometimes it is expedient to apply to the forepart of the
Head the hot Lungs of a Lamb or Weather, and other Fomentations, and so to
change them. But these sorts of Remedies also are hardly to be applied and
repeated methodically, because of the reluctance of the sick, and so often
afford more hurt than help.

The vital Indication.
3. The vital Indication institutes how mad people ought to be handled,
concerning their government, diet, and sleep. In this Disease there is no need
of keeping up the flesh, as in most other Diseases: For the spirits ought not
to be refreshed with Cordials, nor strength to be restored with Medicines; but
on the contrary, both being too raging of themselves, things are to be
administered as it were for the suppression or extinction of a flame raging
above measure. Therefore let the diet be slender and not delicate, their
clothing course, their beds hard, and their handling severe and rigid. But
sleep, for that it is very necessary, ought to be caused sometimes by Anodynes;
for which end, Hypnotick Remedies or Medicines above prescribed for Melancholy,
are also convenient in this Disease. In inveterate and habitual Madness, the
sick seldom submit to any Medical Cure; but such being placed in Bedlam, or an
Hospital for Mad people, by the ordinary discipline of the place, either at
length return to themselves, or else they are there kept from doing hurt,
either to themselves or to others.

Histories and Examples of mad people are to be sought in Bedlam, or Hospitals
for mad people.
There is no need to illustrate the nature of this Disease with Histories and
Examples, or to describe the manifold Types of it; but rather let them go to
the Hospitals of Mad people, where they may behold, not without a wonderful
spectacle, as it were a new and monstrous nation of men, contrary to rational
people, and as it were our Antipodes; all which, if they were gathered together
in one place, and that all, Madmen and Fools were joined to them; I know not
whether this world would not be equally divided between them and the sober and
prudent.

The Cure of Intermitting Madness.
Thus much concerning the cure of continual Madness. The intermitting, either
has perfect lucid intervals, in which the sick return to themselves, or the
fury only ceases, the Delirium being still lest, insomuch that the distempered
become gentle and tractable, yet still they continue amiss, as to their
imagination and judgment, and speak and do many absurd or incongruous things,
and afterward sometimes again become furious.

The Curatory Indication.
The Cure of either of these Distempers, as to the Curatory Indication, is the
same, as in continual Madness, so that there is no need to show here any other
Medicines, or method. But as to what respects the Prophylaxis or Preservatory
Indication, by which the means of healing is instituted out of the fits,
cautions and threatenings are to be given them; in whom only the Fury intermits,
the Delirium remaining, the very same Remedies of Medicine, which we have
prescribed for the taking away the foregoing cause of Melancholy are convenient.

Preservatory.
In Madness which perfectly intermits, as to all its Symptoms, at the chiefest
convenient times, to wit, Spring and Fall, they ought to enter into a solemn
course of Physic; and besides, there is a continual need of looking to, or
governing the sick, both as to diet and to their manner of living, that they
may be always preserved in an equal and a moderate temper; and also, that as
soon as the signs of the approaching fit appear, its coming may be hindered by
Blood-letting, and by administering of Medicines.

Therefore, in the times of the Aequinoxes, let Blood be taken out of the Arm,
and seven or eight days after out of the Hemorrhoidal Veins by Leeches. Let
Purges and Vomits be given twice or thrice at due intervals. Moreover, between
whiles, let them take in order altering Remedies, at Physical hours. The
Formulas or Recipes of these are set down both in this Chapter and in the
former for the cure of Melancholy. Let the diet be slender and of good
digestion; as concerning exercise or motion, sleep, and other non-naturals, let
them be all moderate. When the approach of Madness is seen to be at hand, and
constantly before the Summer Solstice, let Phlebotomy be celebrated, with
Vomiting, and a more slender or sparing diet.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Stupidity, or Foolishness.

STupidity, or Morosis, or Foolishness, although it most chiefly belongs to the
Rational Soul, and signifies a defect of the Intellect and Judgment, yet it is
not improperly reckoned among the Diseases of the Head or Brain; forasmuch as
this Eclipse of the superior soul, proceeds from the Imagination and the Memory
being hurt, and the failing of these depends upon the faults of the Animal
Spirits, and the Brain it self.

We have before clearly showed, Stupidity arises chiefly from the failing of
the Imagination and Memory.
that the Rational Soul does subsist in a sensitive or corporeal Soul, and that
its principal seat is the Imagination: Further from this, and the Memory,
either the notions themselves, or their occasions of all things are supplied,
which the Mind beholds; wherefore, when it happens that these Corporeal
Functions are defective or hindered, forthwith the eye of the Intellect, as if
covered with a vail, is wont to be very much dulled, or wholly darkened.
Therefore, that the reason of Foolishness and Stupidity may be rightly
delivered, first we ought to inquire by what means, and from what causes, the
Imagination and the Memory are often defective or fore-hindred.

That we may proceed methodically, Wherefore the Organs of these Faculties
labor in this Disease.
concerning these, hither ought to be referred, what we have discoursed before
concerning the Functions of the Corporeal Soul, and their subjects and
instruments. we have at large declared that the Callous Bodies, or the middle
of the Brain is the seat of the Imagination; and the Cortical Marrows of the
Brain, the seat of the Memory; and further, that the Animal Spirits are the
immediate organs of either. Wherefore, because their powers being hindered
(which are the first or chief movers of any other Function, both rational and
sensitive) the Imbecility and dullness of the mind, the slowness of the
ingenuity, stupidity and madness at length do often arise; the fault is either
in the Brain it self, or the Animal Spirits, or both together, and at first now
these, now that.

1. As to the Animal Spirits, we have largely enough declared, of what sort
they ought to be, of their proper and genuine nature, and what they are by
reason of their preternatural disposition, in the Frenzy, Melancholy, and
Madness. But besides (which we before mentioned) it may be suspected, that
these Spirits being sometimes almost destitute of active Particles, become as
it were liveless or vapid; to wit, when the spirituous Particles ought to
excel, and to get to themselves volatile Salts; in Stupidity, both these,
together with the Sulphurous, being too much depressed, they are almost
drowned and overwhelmed with the watery and terrestrial. For indeed, Fools are
not so dull or of such thick understanding, as their soul seems to be endued
with, and their Animal Spirits are rather formed of clay than their Heart.
There are many occasions or evident causes, by which the Animal Spirits acquire
so deadish a texture, the chief of which we shall touch on by and by.

2. But it does not frequently come to pass, that Stupidity is excited by the
mere solitary fault of the Spirits, or of the Corporeal Soul it self, but more
or rather the Brain it self is found to be first in fault: For as there are
many things requisite, by which this exact subject or machine of the Animal
Function is constituted, if by chance any thing of them be deficient or
depraved, it easily follows, that such so distempered have little wit.

First, As to Magnitude.
It is a vulgar observation, That the wit and ingenuity does depend somewhat on
the magnitude and figure of the Head, and consequently of its Brain; for as to
its bulk, it is a Proverb, that it argues little of Brain or too much
Foolishness. And although this does not always happen, yet it does for the most
part. The reason of which is, because in a little Brain but a few Spirits are
begotten and exercised; but in a greater, consisting for the most part of a
vile or base texture or frame, it is less fitted for the quickness or sharpness
of the mind.

Secondly, By Reason of the Figure.
The genuine and best figure of the Brain ought to be globous; to wit, for the
end that the Spirits may be poured forth with an equal efflux on every side,
from its middle part to the whole compass, and may be from thence retorted
every where by equal angles of reflections. But those who have a flat head, or
too sharp, or otherways improportionate, are affected for the most part with
some noted fault of the Animal Function; for these kind of Brains, like
distorted Looking-Glasses, do not rightly collect the Images of things, nor
truly object them to the Rational Soul.

As to its Substance or Texture.
Thirdly, The substance of the Brain should be well tempered, and of a laudable
frame; not only as to the qualities of heat and cold, of dryness and moisture,
but its Systasis or Constitution consisting of plenty of a volatile Salt and
Spirit, with a moderate proportion of the rest should be thin and airy, that
the Spirits may pass through the whole, and cut out to themselves paths; also it
should be moderately firm and compacted, that the tracts and passages being
made, may remain, and not be presently blotted out again, by the sinking of the
too so^t parts. But in Stupidity, it is to be suspected, that there is in the
Brain an excess of some manifest quality, as of moisture or coldness, for which
reason, Children and old people are wont to be affected with a dullness of their
senses; or sometimes, the Texture is too thick, and Earthy; so that the spirits
do not easily irradiate it, or cut tracts for themselves; to wit, they cannot
penetrate an opacous or thick body, no more than rays of light. To this kind of
deadish Texture of the Brain, those that are born of Plowmen and Rusticks, as
if they were formed of a worser clay, are obnoxious; hence in some Families,
reckoning many descents backward, there is scarce one witty or wise man found.
In some places, the influences of the Heaven and Air incline, as it is thought,
the Inhabitants to Stupidity; so, to be born in Batavia, is proverbially, as
much as to say, a Fool.

The evil conformation of the Brain, as to its pores and passages.
Fourthly, Besides these vices of the Brain, which are for the most part
original and born with it, sometimes its evil conformation, as to its Pores and
Passages, by reason of some acquired inordinations, is a cause that the Animal
Function is not rightly performed. For first of all, as to what appertains to
the smaller Passages and Pores of the Brain (which the spirits themselves frame
every where through its whole substance, and perpetual flow into them for the
exercise of the Animal Functions) it sometimes happens that these are either
defective or perverted, and so bring on a dullness of mind, or Foolishness.
These little spaces are defective, because the consistency of the Brain being
either too obdurate or too fluid, it will not endure to be cut through after a
due manner, or to remain or continue so bored through. But we suspect those
Passages to be perverted, either because they are too loose or too strait, or
else, for that their making is unequal. Too strait Pores do not sufficiently
admit store of matter for a good plenty of Spirits: Those loose above measure,
receive together with that matter, Heterogeneous Particles, and infesting the
Animal Regiment. They seem to be unequally formed, where they are more open in
one part of the Brain, and more strait in another. For this cause we think it
to be, that some understand, or know things well enough, but still judge
evilly; for that their notions and conceptions, like the visible Images,
passing through a diverse Medium, become distorted. Further, perhaps for this
reason it comes to pass, that some excel, or are strong in Imagination and
Fantasy, yet are very deficient in Memory, and others on the contrary.

Stupidity sometimes proceeds from both of them being in fault together.
3. It sometimes happens, that both these conjunct causes do concur together to
Foolishness, to wit, because both the Animal Spirits are dull and to^pid, and
also the Brain evilly conformed. And in truth, which part soever is first in
fault, it quickly will make the other in like manner guilty. Because when the
Spirits being blunt and sluggish do not freely pass through the Brain, the Pores
and Passages in it are not either sufficiently cut through, or else they close
again; and the Spirits if they cannot expand themselves, by reason of the evil
texture of the Brain as they should do, they at length becoming slothful and
idle, grow heavy, and acquir^ a vicious disposition.

What the Antecedent Causes of Foolishness, are,
Thus much concerning the Conjunct Causes of Foolishness, as to its Procatartick
and Evident, there belong more occasions, by reason of which the aforesaid
evils are wont to be brought to the Brain, or the Spirits, or to both together.

An Hereditary Disposition.
For in the first place, Stupidity (as we but now observed) is sometimes
original or born with one, and so it is either hereditary, as when Fools beget
Fools, the reason of which is clear enough, to wit, the same weak Particles
flowing for the constituting the Animal Organs in the Son, which were in the
Father^ or Stupidity being born with one, is as it were accidental, to wit, it
frequently happens, that wise men and highly ingenious, Why strong or wise men
are not always begotten of strong and wise Man.
do beget Fools and Changelings, or heavy witted: which we suppose so to come
to pass sometimes for this cause, for that the Parents being too much given to
study, reading, and meditation, the Animal Spirits that inhabit the Brain, are
so much wasted, that for the supply of them, the most generous Particles of the
Blood are still carried to the Head, and but few only, and small, are permitted
to descend to the Spermatick Bodies. The first Reason.
When the rational Soul becomes greatly solicitous in bringing forth its child
(which are the works of the Intellect) then the Corporeal Soul (the Spirits
being called away to wait on the other) becomes not at all, or very weakly
prolifick.

A Second Reason.
Besides this reason, there is another frequently to be met with, wherefore the
first implanted sagacity of men, as well as of Brutes, is not often propagated
from the Parents to the Children: For when as we presume certainly, the Colt of
a generous Horse, or of a delicate strain, or the Chickens of a Game-Cock, that
they will patrissare, or be like their Sires, so that they are sold at a great
rate, and the virtues of these, if not broken by inordinate and preternatural
feeding or bringing up, descend by a long series to their young from age to
age: This often happens otherwise to men, to wit, because the Parents do so
enervate and weaken their bodies by intemperance, luxury, and evil manners,
that they beget only languishing and unhealthy Children. Hence it is, that for
the most part, those who are born of Parents broken with old age, or of such as
are not yet ripe or too young, or of drunkards, soft, and effeminate men, want
a great and liberal ingenuity or wit. Nor does there happen a less detriment to
them of the Animal Faculty, whose sires are obnoxious to evil affections of the
Brain, as the Palsy, Epilepsie, Carus, Convulsions, and the like; so that to
be born of Parents who have a sound mind in a sound body, is far beyond a large
patrimony.

Secondly, Ripeness and the Declination of Age dispose some to Foolishness.
There are more evident causes, by which Stupidity is wont to be induced, to
some originally whole. Some at first crafty and ingenious, become by degrees
dull, and at length foolish, by the mere declining of age, without any great
errors in living; to wit, because the nervous liquor, and the blood, (whose
evil dispositions the Animal Spirits partake of) like some Wines, and other
fermented liquors, depart from their vigor after a perfect Fermentation; and by
little and little degenerate into a dead and pallid substance. For it is
observed, the wits of some people do receive a various increase and decrease,
according to the periods of their Ages. I have known many in their childhood
very sagacious, and extremely docil or apt to learn, that by their literature
and discourse have caused admiration, who afterward becoming young men, were
dull and heavy: and those who at first were very beautiful, were afterward not
at all handsome, or beautiful in their aspect. In like manner, it often happens
on the contrary, that many at first indocil or unapt to learn, and wholly unfit
for literature, and seeming of an ill favored countenance, when they have
become young men, or have put off their childhood, have had both an excellent
wit, and become beautiful. The reason of the former is, that some ripe wit, or
ingenuity, like garden fruit, does not remain long in the same condition, but
soon declining, quickly withers. For in every mixture or concretion rightly
made, there is required, that a progression from crudity to maturity be made
gently and by little and little, that is, the active elements do not at first
arise above the rest, and show themselves above measure, but being involved
with the others, rise up and put forth themselves by little and little; for
otherwise, being too free in the beginning, and made loose, they easily fly
away, leaving their subject almost dead or taste less. Wherefore, Boys who are
seen to be dull in their first Age, may be hoped afterward, when the temper of
the Brain (the superfluous moisture being evaporated) is come to maturity, to
become ingenious enough.

Thirdly, Great hurts of the Head sometimes cause Doting, or want of Ingenuity.
Sometimes great strokes or bruising of the Head, especially such as happen
from a fall from some high place, do bring hurt or debility to the Animal
faculties. I have known some very learned, and men of great wit and judgment,
who outliving some of these falls by chance, afterward were of a heavy and
dull ingenuity. It is commonly said of such so distempered, that their Brain is
turned; and indeed a vehement Convulsion or shaking of the Brain, greatly
perverts, and not seldom presses together, or shuts up the accustomed tracts
and paths of the Spirits, so that they perform the acts of the Memory and the
Imagination for ever after, hardly, and amiss; so as some by some great wound
inflicted on the Head, have become sottish, and afterward mad.

Fourthly, Frequent Drunkenness.
Frequent Drunkenness and Surfeiting, especially if they sleep in their Cups,
and lie as it were buried in Wine and Sleep, do very much decay the wits of
some, and make infirm the use of their Reason; to wit, because by them,
Heterogeneous little Bodies, and infesting very much the Animal Regiment, are
introduced. Almost for the same reason, the frequent use of Opiates very much
troubles the sharpness of the mind.

Fifthly, Vehement Affections.
Violent and sudden passions, as in the first place, an unexpected and very
great affright, or terror or vehement sadness, have caused Sottishness or
Foolishness in some, so that they have been scarce able to express the sense of
their mind in words, or to perform the familiar actions of life. Which
certainly comes to pass, forasmuch as the spirits inhabiting the Brain upon
such an occasion, are very much dissipated and drawn asunder one from another,
and afterward, are not able to repeat the the former footsteps of their
motions; in like manner as Soldiers, being put to flight by a sudden and
violent attack of the enemy, The more grievous Diseases of the Head, oftentimes
excite Foolishness.
recover not easily their orders and stations.

Sixthly, It is observed, that some men have contracted also Foolishness, by
reason of cruel Diseases of the Head. This frequently happens in a great and
long Epilepsie, for that this Distemper, possessing the middle part of the
Brain, perverts, and so fills and stuffs up with feculencies, all the Pores and
passages, the Spirits being thereby frequently and vehemently thrust forth,
that the tracts of the Spirits being shut up; the acts of the internal Senses
and Motions are hindered. I knew a young maid, at first of an acute wit, and
lively ingenuity, who after she had long labored with the Falling Sickness,
became sottish and foolish, like a changeling. Further, I have taken notice in
many, that Stupidity has accompanied the Palsy, or has gone before it (as we
mentioned in the Chapter of the Palsy) to wit, the same matter which brings a
resolution or loosning, being in the Streaked Body, being heaped up in the
Callous, causes often, if not an Appoplexy, or Carus, a Foolishness.

The Differences of this Disease.
Many differences of this Disease are to be met with; and first, there is
commonly wont to be a distinction between Stupidity and Foolishness, for those
affected with this latter, apprehend simple things well enough, dexterously and
swiftly, and retain them firm in their memory, but by reason of a defect of
judgment, they compose or divide their notions evilly, and very badly infer
one thing from another; moreover, by their folly, and acting sinistrously and
ridiculously, they move laughter in the bystanders. On the contary, How
foolishness and stupidity differ.
those who are Stupid, by reason of the defect of the Imagination and Memory,
as well as of the Judgment, do neither apprehend well, or quickly, nor argue
well; besides they behave themselves not as the others by toying and
gesticulation, but sottishly, foolishly, or like a dull Ass; so that the
simplicity of these is the more miserable, who show so the Disease in their
countenance and behavior. In Foolishness, it seems, that the Animal Spirits
being somewhat active, though less firm, do pass through only more short and
oblique tracts, and do not beam through the Brain, with an equal and constant
irradiation, but leaping forth, or running out desultorily or after a leaping
manner, sometimes here sometimes there perform the acts of the Animal
Functions, perfunctorily only, or ridiculously. But in Stupidity, the Spirits
being obtuse and dull of their own proper nature, and flowing, very little
pervious in the more thick Brain, cannot exercise themselves rightly, for the
performing the offices of the Animal Regiment.

Degrees of stupidity.
Stupidity (whose Pathology we here chiefly deliver) has many degrees; for some
are accounted unfit or incapable, as to all things, and others as to some
things only. Some being wholly fools in the learning of letters, or the liberal
Sciences, are yet able enough for Mechanical Arts. Others of either of these
incapable, yet easily comprehend Agriculture, or Husbandry and Country
business. Others unfit almost for all affairs, are only able to learn what
belongs to eating or the common means of living: Others merely Dolts or
drivling Fools, scarce understand any thing at all, or do any thing knowingly.

The Prognostic of the Disease.
As to what belongs to the Prognostic, Stupidity being contracted from the
birth or hereditary, or happening from unknown causes, if it still persists to
ripe age, it is almost never healed: but when it happens that Children being at
first dull and almost insensible, by reason of the complexions of both their
Brain and Spirits being ripened, they are made ingenious and docil enough.

Evil if from an hurt of the Head.
This Disease excited from an evident solitary cause, as from an hurt of the
Head, or a violent passion, also coming upon an inveterate Epilepsie, if it
continues for some time, it is afterward incurable.

What is excited from a Lethargy admits a Curt.
What succeeds a Lethargy, and any other sleepy Diseases, depends chiefly on the
hurt of the Memory, and sometimes vanishes of its own accord, those Distempers
being cured. Therefore, when in these cases the cure of Stupidity is
instituted, here are convenient almost the same method of healing and Remedies,
which we have prescribed in the Preservatory Indication of the Lethargy; the
chief intentions of which are, that the Animal Spirits being freed from any
torpor or benummedness, cut forth or frame Pores and passages within the
translucid Brain, and may be expanded truly in them.

Sometimes it is cured by a Feavour.
Sometimes a Feavour has cured some Fools, and stupid, and rendered them more
acute. Huartus tells of a certain man that was a Fool in the Court of Corduba,
that being distempered with a malignant Feavour, came so much to himself in the
midst of the Disease, and with that judgment and discretion, that the whole
Court stood in admiration; and so remained his whole life afterward, one of
the most prudent men of his time. We our selves have known a certain man of a
very blunt, Boeotick or dull wit, who talking idly in a Feavour, most suddenly
brought forth most acute speeches, and seasoned with a great deal of salt or
ingenious wit. Further, we before spoke of a generous old Gentleman, who having
lost his memory, and so the use of discourse, received great help by the
distemper of a Feavour happening afterward; the reason of which seems to be,
because the feavourish burning sometimes rarefies and dispels the darkness
covering the Brain.

As to what respects the cure of this Disease, The Cure requires both a Master
and a Physician.
Stupidity, whether innate or acquired (if it be not plainly Madness or
Stolidity, incapable of all learning) though it may not be cured, yet is often
wont to be amended. Wherefore it must be the work both of a Physician and a
Teacher, that the wit of such that are so affected, may be somewhat trimmed,
and they being at least brought to the use of reason in a little measure, may
be accounted out of the number of Brutes.

For this end, What the labor of the former ought to be.
because dull or senseless Beetles, or the more dull Loggerheads or Blockheads,
do not readily learn the common notions of things, no more than Children the
first elements of letters, therefore they are to be instituted in all things,
by the frequent care of a Master, and the same things are again and again to be
inculcated to them. For by this means, the Spirits, though slow and torpid, are
a little sharpened by perpetual exercise, and they being continually excited in
the Brain, how rude and crasse soever they be, do cut forth at length for their
expansion, some tracts or passages, though more imperfect. What the Medical
intentions art.
But that this may the more happily and easily succeed, medical Remedies ought
to be administered, which may purify and volatize the Blood and nervous Liquor,
together with the Animal Spirits; and also, that may clarify the Brain, and
render it as it were Diaphanous.

For the purifying the Blood, What kind of Remedies are shown.
let there be sometimes administered a gentle Purge, and Phlebotomy in a small
quantity, if there be strength, several times; for that end also Issues are
convenient, in the Arm or Leg, or both, for the driving the filthiness from the
Brain: Evacuating Remedies.
In fat folks, and such as are endowed with a moist Head, let them sometimes be
made between the shoulders. Further, some in this case cry up with wonderful
praises a Trepaning, by which the Brain may more freely breath forth, and
evaporate. Let their diet be light and attenuating; their dwelling in a free
air, and dry; their sleep moderate.

After these have for some time been administered, Altering Medicines.
in the ordinary and usual manner, if that in the left part of the breast there
is no beating of the heart in the Arcadian youth, or if there be no sign of
hopes, it will be in vain to spend labor and pains, and Medicines any further
on them: but if by the use of these, any signs of help, or any hopes appear,
sometimes it will be to the purpose to add to these, altering Remedies, to be
daily taken at medical hours, for a long time. The Recipes or Formula's of
these are already delivered in our Pharmaceutice for the taking away the
foregoing causes of most Cephalic Diseases; and thence may be taken: moreover
what do besides respect this particular case, we think here good to add, being
some magisterial Receipts.

Take of the Spirits of Armoniacum, Spirits.
succinated, or with Amber six drams; let it be given from fifteen to twenty
drops Evening and Morning, in three spoonfuls of the following distilled water;
drinking after it seven spoonfuls of the same.

Take of the fresh leaves of Misletoe of the Apple tree six handfuls; A
Distilled Water.
of the lesser Sage, Rosemary, Savory, the greater Rocket, Mother of Thyme,
Calaminths, Penyroyal, Marjoram, each four handfuls; of the roots of Angelica,
of Imperatoria, each six ounces; of Zedoary, the lesser Galingal, of the
Aromatic Reed, of Winterans Bark, each two ounces; of Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace,
Cinnamon, Ginger, each one ounce; of Cubebs, Cardamums, Grains of Paradise,
each six drams; all of these being cut and bruised small together, pour to them
twelve pints of the best Canary; let them be digested cold, and close shut in a
vessel for three days, then distilled according to art: let the whole liquor be
mixed together, and sweetened with Sugar when it is taken: The Dose is two or
three ounces.

After the use of the Spirits of Armoniack for fifteen or twenty days,
Tinctures, Elixirs.
other Medicines about that time may have their turns, such as Spirits of
Hartshorn, of Sut, Humane Skull; Tinctures of Coral, Antimony, Castor, Amber;
the Elixir Vitae Quercitani, Elixir Proprietatis, Spirits of Lavender. etc.

Or Take of the Conserves of the flowers of the Lilie of the valley six ounces,
An Electuary.
of the roots of Acori very preserved six drams, of Ginger preserved in India,
of preserved Nutmeg, each half an ounce; of Species Diambrae two drams, of
Lignum Aloes, yellow Saunders, the picked roots of Zedoary, of Cubebs, of
Iamaica Pepper, each one dram and a half; of Coral prepared two drams, of the
Syrup of Candied Ginger what will suffice; make an Electuary. The Dose two
drams Morning and Evening, drinking after it of the distilled Water three
ounces. For those whose Brain is too abounding with moisture, Coffee.
let them drink every Morning a draught of Coffee, with Sage leaves boiled in
it: For those who have their Animal Spirits too poor and liveless; Chocalate.
let them take Chocolate, as we have described it above, which seems most
profitable. For ordinary drink let small Ale or Beer be prepared in a vessel
containing three or four Gallons, and after it has worked, put into it in a
little bag, Physical Beer.
these following things. Take of the leaves of Sage, the sharp leaved and
dried, four handfuls; of Cubebs one ounce, of Cloves and of Nutmegs bruised,
etc. Mix them according to art.

Outward Applications.
Outward Applications have also a place here; such are a quilted Cap, Plasters,
and Liniments: and sometimes let these, sometimes those or others be
administered.

A Cap or quilted thing for the Head.
Take of the flowers of the Lily of the valley, Rosemary flowers, Stoechadoes,
each one handful; of Celtick Spike two drams, of the roots of Cypress, the
lesser Galingal, the Florentine Iris, each three drams; of Labdanum, Benzoin,
of Toluvian Balsam, of Amber, each two drams; of Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace,
Cinnamon, each one dram and a half: make of them all a fine powder, quilting it
in a Cap with silk between.

A Plaster.
Take of the Plaster of Floris unguent* so called, two ounces, of Tachamahac,
of Carranae, of the Balsom of Tolu, each three drams; of the Powder of Amber,
Myrrh, each two drams; of Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, each one dram; being all
liquefied or melted together, let them be made into a mass, of which make a
Plaster, spread it on leather, and the head being shaved, put it to it.

A Liniment.
Take of the Oil of Palms half an ounce, of Capive Balsom three drams, of the
Balsom of Peru one dram, of the Oil of Nutmeg, by expression two drams, Oil of
Amber half a dram; make an Ointment for the Head.

I might here add many other Medicines, and ways of Administrations, but in
this almost desperate case, where oftentimes no Remedies are wont to help, and
the Cure never perfected, these may suffice.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Gout.

AMong the Diseases of the Head and the nervous stock, we may refer hither some
Distempers that are chiefly wont to infest the Feet and the Belly, The
Distempers of the Gout and Colic are Distempers of the nervous Stock.
to wit, the Gout and the Colic. That the seat of either is in the nervous
parts, we may very well conclude from the primary Symptom, to wit, pain. The
cause of this latter, Charles Piso has affirmed to exist within the Head, and
Fernelius affims the same of the other. Wherefore we shall endeavor to deliver
the Pathologie of either, together with the apposite means of healing them; and
first we shall speak of the Gout.

The Subject of the Gout.
The name of the Gout denotes plainly its subject; because that it is almost
only Articulate, or is in the space where the heads of two or more Bones meet
together. This Disease is wont to be excited more frequently about the
Internodia or knittings of the Bones of the Feet; because this part being
greatly declining, and remote from the Praecordia, and the fountain of Heat,
receives readily the Morbisick matter, and does not easily overcome it, or
quickly put it off. Yet the Gout often happens in the jointings of the Hip or
huckle bone, the knee, the bending of the arm, the shoulder, the wrist, the
ancle, and of other parts.

Its appearances rehearsed.
The fits of this Disease (which are almost ever intermitting) invade either
wandringly, or periodically; which being finished, sometimes sooner, sometime
more slowly, the intervals happen lucid or quiet enough; presently after the
first assault of it, for the most part pains arise without any tumor; though
afterward, about the height of the Disease, the distempered part often swells
up; the pains in the beginning yield to no Remedies, but are made more cruel by
Catharticks, and are not presently put to flight by Topics, or wont to be
allayed. The Fit most often falls upon one without any previous distemper, but
suddenly; yet sometimes there will be an heat of the blood, or a little
feavourish distemper going before. The disposition to this Disease is sometimes
hereditary, and sometimes acquired, by reason of an evil manner of living. The
occasions or causes, which being wont to move this disposition, stir up the
Gouty pains, are all violent alterations or passions, inflicted on the humors
or spirits. Hence Surfeiting immoderate drinking, especially of sharp and thin
Wines, transpiration being hindered, wrath or indignation, immoderate Venus or
Lust, sadness, also the changes of the air, and of the year, and any great
mutations ordinarily induce fits of this Disease. Those obnoxious to this
disease, are sometimes in danger to be distempered also with the Stone, or
Gravel in the Reins; and so on the contrary, those obnoxious to the Stone, are
wont to be troubled with the Gout. Yea the Gout growing grievous, it every
where heaps up about its nests, to wit, in the joints, a calculous or stony
matter, and there excites a stony or hard bulk.

The distempered parts, The parts affected.
whose pains are stirred up in the hauled Fibers, for the most part are the
Periostea, or the heads clothing the Membrane of the Bones, and perhaps the
Tendons and Ligaments there planted about. But sometimes the pain in these
parts, wholly depends upon a breach of the unity, and this proceeds from a
certain matter being impacted in those Bodies, or lying upon them; first of all
we shall inquire, what sort of morbific matter this is; secondly, from whence
it comes; and thirdly, by what means it so stirs up periodical Gouty Fits, by
breaking the unity in them.

As to the Morbifick Matter it seems, The Morbifick Matter.
first that it is not the Blood or nervous juice of it self; nor is it one only
simple humor laid up a part from the others. We deservedly excuse the Blood
from this censure, because these pains only infest Bodies for the most part
without Blood; yea, and almost them only. For although in the neighboring
parts, by reason of the course of the Blood being hindered, sometimes a tumor
happens with an inflammation; yet this is not the Disease, but a Symptom, and
for the most part comes upon the Gout. Further it appears, that the nervous
juice (how ever sharp, or biteing, or pricking, or pulling it is supposed to
be) does not excite of it self the pains of the Gout; because then the
Distemper would cause pains also, or as much in some other passages of the
nervous parts, and also in the Internodia or knittings of the Bones.

It is improbable, It is not any simple or singular Humor suggested from any
of them.
for the same reason, that any singular, excrementitious, or superfluous Humor
or Matter deposited from the Blood or nervous juice, to cause the pains of the
Gout. For if such were only carried through the Nerves, it would excite pains by
order, and a continual tract, not first in the feet or extreme joints, but by
irritating the nervous Stock in its whole journey. If that according to the
opinions of Hollerius, Sennertus, and other Moderns, it be affirmed, that some
impurities falling off from the heated Blood, and received by the joints, is
the material cause of the Goutish pain; then it should follow, that all who are
greatly obnoxious to the Goutish Distempers, are also most prone to Feavourish
burnings or heats; and that a Feavourish heat should precede every assault of
this Disease; neither of which to be true, common observation does witness. For
those troubled with the Gout, as it were with a privilege (to wit, by reason of
the Saline dispositions of the Humors) are free from a Feavourish Distemper.
Further, the Fits of the Gout most often arise of a sudden, without any great
swelling up or ebullition of the Blood, and presently at the beginning become
very cruel; which also argues, that the Morbific Matter is not by degrees laid
up in the distempered part, as in a Mine, and then to excite pains by its
fullness. For if it were so, the beginnings and the increase of the Disease,
being always made gradatim, they would be longer and more durable; not does the
distemper (as it often is wont) being presently vehement, by and by change its
seat, and quickly vanishing in one place, anon arise up in another.

When therefore any singular humor (of which sort soever it be supposed) seems
not efficacious enough, In the Mine of this Disease two humors concur, and
mutually grow hot.
for the provision of the Fits of the Gout; we may affirm, That in the nest or
mine of this Disease, (whether it be one or many), that many fermentative
juices, and those not easily to be mixed, do meet together; then from the
strife and growing hot of these, the painful Vel^ications or pullings of the
nervous Fibers do arise.

Formerly discoursing of the wandering Scorbutic Gout, In like manner, as when
the Spirits of Vitriol are poured upon Oil of Tartar.
and the Rheumatism, we plainly showed what was also the cause of this Gout, of
which we now treat; viz. forasmuch as it appears by a very vulgar experiment,
that salts being put in a diverse state, to wit, some of them being fixed or
Alchalizate, and others having gotten a flux, or sharp, or acetosous things,
being put together, do very much boil up and grow hot, and their humidity
causing a white and hardish Coagulum or curdling; as for instance well known,
when the spirit of Vitrial is poured to oil of Tartar, it manifestly appears;
and why may we not think, that in the fits of the Gout, there is something like
it? to wit, that from the fighting and mutual conflict of the Liquors, which
are of a diverse Saline nature, the nervous Fibers are pricked and provoked,
and at length, from the various Coagulations of either juice, that there is
sometimes heaped together in the distempered places, a Calculous or stony
matter.

That we may show the genuine matter of the Gout, A Vitriolick Matter partly
supplied from the Nervous Liquor.
we ought to referr hither, what we have elsewhere said, concerning the
nourishment of the solid parts. For indeed, we have showed, that to that office
both the Blood, and the nervous Liquor do bring their tributes; to wit, when
the nourishing juice is carried from the Blood, through the Arteries, to all the
parts of the whole body, another liquor being deposited from the Brain, through
the Nerves, and their dependences, does actuate that former, as it were with an
inspired spirit, so that it is made full and fertile, and so more easily
insinuates into the Pores and passages of the part that is to be nourished, and
is assimilated into its susbtance. There will be no need to repeat here what we
have formerly discoursed at large; as to what respects the present matter, we
shall take notice, that the nutritious humor, distributed from the blood,
consists of a little Spirit, but of more plenty of Water, Earth, and Sulphur,
and moderately of Salt, somewhat volatile; further, whilst the nutritious humor
is distributed, for that its Particles, which are for the cherishing or
nourishment of any part, ought to be proportionate, and to remain like it self;
therefore, whilst the spirituous are destinated to the Brain, and the
sulphurous to the flesh, the inwards and the fat, it is behoveful, that the
most Saline and more fixed, should be laid up about the jointings of the Bones,
and then growing full with the nervous liquor, to be assimilated with them.

Either Matter, growing degenerate or depraved, turns to the Gout.
But if by reason of the vicious Dyscrasie of the Blood, it happens that
Particles saltish above measure, and fixed, should be laid up in the joints,
and by reason of their incongruity are not presently assimilated; they soon
after grow together into an heap, or a certain Morbific mine. But the Fit of
the Gout is not wont for that reason to be excited, but an heaviness only and
languishing of the distempered member, From the Blood, for that it becomes full
of a fixed Salt.
which is oftentimes taken away by abstinence, or exercise, or Physic; the
strange Particles being discussed, or supped back again into the Blood.

But if the Particles of the nervous liquor degenerate from a volatileness into
an acetous Flux, From the nervous Liquor, for that it is acetosous or sharp.
a flowing arising from thence, they ^all down in too great plenty into the
little joints, and because they there grow hot, with the Saline or Lixivial
Mine, there before laid up, they stir up the Fits of the Gout.

The Saline or Tartarous Matter therefore being laid up from the Arterous
Blood, about the jointings together of the Bones, The former is, as it were,
the feminine Seed of the Gout;
is as it were the feminine seed of this Disease; which notwithstanding, though
there be heaped together a great plenty of it, is of it self wholly unfruitful,
like an Egg without a Cock; until the nervous liquor growing turgent, sends its
acetosous Recrements falling from it, into the nest of the former; which
immediately, The other masculine.
as it were the masculine seed, renders the other prolifick. For inasmuch as
those two Particles which are of a different state and original, do meet
together, and mutually concur, they pull or haul the Fibers of the Membranes
and Tendons, and so stir up the fit of the Gout; the allaying of which, wholly
depends upon the mutual subaction or bringing under, and the difflation or
blowing away of the most sharp Particles of either kind.

These things concerning the formal reason, and the conjunct cause of the Gout,
being thus laid down, The Procatartick, or foregoing Causes of the Gout.
we will proceed to the further unfolding its Procatartick or foregoing causes:
And we say, that these are a Saline matter, laid up from the Blood in the
joints, and acetous or sharp Recrements, sent into the same nest, from the
swelling up of the nervous liquor.

First therefore, that this sort of Saline Mine is laid up about the jointings
or knitting of the Bones together, A Mine of fixed Salt laid up about the
Internodia, or Knitting togegether of the Bones.
is plainly argued by the sudden and unlooked for assault of this Disease, and
from its difficult cure; for the matter does not flow into the distempered part
altogether, and at once, in such abundance, that it should excite a fit so
grievous and tedious; besides, for that the pains are repeated still within the
accustomed nest, it seems that their fetation or hatching does most certainly
depend upon the Egg somewhere laid up before hand. But that this matter is not
merely Excrementitious, but a portion of the nourishing juice, This Matter is
not merely Excrementitious,
degenerate toward a fixed Salt, being destinated to the same bony parts, we
may lawfully conjecture, because an humor merely Excrementitious, would cause
in the distempered place, a continual trouble and tumor; moreover, this plainly
convinces, from the cure of the Gout, by torture or cutting of the part: For
Authors worthy to be believed, have told us in their writings, that the Member
being cut off, in which the sickness uses to be, or greatly wounded, that the
Disease has ceased without any relapse; in like manner as a most grievous
Tooth-ack, and continual, is most often cured by pulling out the distempered
Tooth.

If that the Goutish humor were (as it is commonly said) a Choleric, or a
Phlegmatic humor, nor a Bilous or Phlegmatic Humor.
or any other merely Excrementitious, it flowing afterward to some other
member, after the former distempered were cut off, would there excite a new
Morbific Mine; but this happens only in some accustomed joints, for that this
or that part is become more weak, and so admits into it self the more easily,
all other filthy portions; and neither assimilating nor sending them away,
suffers them to increase into a Morbific Mine. Further, the Recrements also of
the nervous juice, that are sharp and acetous, fall down more readily into the
same part by reason of its debility.

But to the Saline Procatarxis, To this previous procatarxis, to wit, a fixed
Salt, the Discrasie of the blood, and the debility of the Distempered Member
does help.

What the Saline Particles of the blood ought to be, to wit, in a middle state,
between fixation and volatilisation.


or foregoing cause of this Disease, lying in the Joints; not only the weakness
of the distempered member, but much more and first of all, the evil disposition
of the Blood does help. We shall weigh a little the reasons, and the manner how
it is done, of either.

1. And in the first place, the fault of the Blood is, that its elementary
Particles, and chiefly the Saline, are not in a fit state or condition. For
they ought to be within the mass of the Blood, in the middle betwixt a fixed
and a volatile constitution: they are called fixed, so long as the Sulphur and
Earth being combined, do pertinaciously adhere to them; as it is observed in
fresh and raw Urine, from which you shall not easily draw by distillation,
either Salt or Spirit: But the saline Particles are votatilised, when leaving
the Sulphur and Earth, they adhere to the spirituous, and with them fly away;
as it is seen in the spirit of Urine, being distilled after a long digestion.
Then there is a middle constitution between these, when the Saline Particles
are so loosned and dislocated from the Sulphurous and Earthy Particles, that
upon occasion they may be easily laid hold on by the Spirituous, and ascend
together with them; as it is in Urine putrefied by digestion, from which with a
very little heat, you may force out Spirit and Salt. In like manner the Saline
Particles in a living body, seem first of all to be in a degree of fixity,
within the Chyle; from which, notwithstanding, through Concoction in the
Bowels, being rightly made, they begin to come forth a little. Secondly, these
are made volatile in the nervous juice: And, Thirdly, they are of a middle
constitution in the bloody mass; to wit, which are exalted by a continual
circulation or digestion, so that they are in some manner volatile, that being
associated, partly with spirituous particles, and distilled forth with them
into the Brain, they go into Animal Spirits; and partly going into the
nutritious juice, together with the sulphurous and others, they increase in
their nourishing the solid parts.

But sometimes it happens, When, being too fixed, they become Morbifick.
that the saline Particles (at least not all) are not rightly exalted within
the bloody mass, but remaining in a state of fixity, give a beginning or
cherishing to many Diseases. That we may say nothing of the Scurvy, Dropsy,
and many others, we only say for the present, it may be suspected, that the
first seeds of the Goutish distemper depend upon this cause; And so they bring
forth the Scurvy, Dropsy, and other Diseases, and especially the Gout.
for when the nervous juice, being destinated to the heads of the bones (where
it is chiefly received) ought to consist of very much Salt, there is a
necessity, that its Particles, because they are too fixed and thick, cannot be
admitted presently into the Pores and passages, should increase into a Morbific
Mine. Besides, that more easily and more often happens, if the weak or broken
Fibers of the bodies, planted near, cannot by wrinkling themselves, shake off
what is troublesome or superfluous.

As to the secret leading or evident causes, The Saline fixed, or Arthritical
Disposition of the Blood, proceeds from various Causes.
from which the nutritious liquor being brought from the blood to the joints,
is imbued too much with a fixed Salt, and by reason of which, these parts
become too prompt and easy for the receiving what is improportionate to them,
the chief of these, for that they are various and manifold, we will briefly
touch upon.

1. And first of all, Sometimes it is Hereditary.
an hereditary disposition is wont to produce either evil. For those troubled
with the Gout, for the most part beget Gouty Children, and this Disease
descending from the Parents to the Children, is wont not only to have the like
fruits in both, and also to ripen about the periods of the same age; but for
the most part, it has its first roots in the same members, and observes every
where the like progresses: concerning the reason of which, I think, we have
already said enough, being the same as other Diseases propagated ex traduce, or
from the Parent.

2. But indeed, Oftentimes acquired, by reason of an evil manner of living.
the Gouty disposition is brought in oftentimes without any original fault, by
reason of an evil manner of living, and errors in the six non-naturals. For
those who are given to Surfeiting and drinking much, and indulge their
appetites by an inordinate eating and drinking, and especially if they feed on
salt and spiced meats, and guzle down great plenty of Wine, easily contract
this Disease. For by this means, the Chyle is indigested, and endued with very
unfit and untameable Particles, and so ill prepared in the Bowels; and then
from a more liberal drinking of Wine, saltish settlements and heterogeneous
feculences or dregs, which subsist somewhere in the first passages, being too
much exalted, are carried into the Blood: to which enormities of living* if a
sedentary life, idleness, or sleeping at noon be added, so that the
superfluities neither exhale, nor the Saline impurities are dissipated by
exercise, but left to settle about the jonts, certainly too much of this
Alchalisate seed is sowed for a plentiful harvest of this Disease of the Gout.

3. The debility of the little Joints, From what Causes the debility of the
Joints is excited.
and Goutish disposition is not only hereditary, but excited frequently by
reason of various occasions. The falling down of the Morbific matter often
induces this: for if by chance it happens, that at first, the fit of the Gout
comes in this or that part, afterward the peccant humor more easily falls down
into the same member; and quickly constitutes, as it were, a nest, where the
Eggs may be continually laid up. Besides, a solution or breach of continuity
also, or some hurt inflicted on any joint, by wet, or cold, by a blow, or
putting out of joint, oftentimes stirrs up the Goutish disposition.

The other foregoing Cause of the Gout, from the acetous part of the nervous
humor.
Secondly, But indeed, as the Blood brings a Saline Mine for the Morbid seed,
and the Joints receive and hide it readily; yet this provision, without the
coming of the other seeds, is like an addle Egg, wholly barren and unfruitful;
because, for the constituting of this Disease into act, it is required, that
the nervous liquor, by chance swelling up or growing turgid, pours forth Saline
impurities of another condition, to wit, acetous, falling away with a certain
effervescency, or heat, and as it were a firing of the other Mine. Wherefore,
we think good to set down this other foreleading cause of the Gouty Disease in
the nervous humor, and its acetous or sharp affluxions, or flowing to the parts.

Such an acetous disposition does not come upon the whole Mass of the nervous
humor, but only some portions or recrements of it.
And indeed, that the Saline Particles of this Liquor degenerating from a
volatilization to a flux, do become acid, we have showed by very many instances
and reasons; both formerly, and also in this Tract. But for the provision of
this Disease, it is not requisite that the whole Mass of the nervous juice
should be acetous; but it is sufficient, that some portions of it in the Brain,
or elsewhere in the nervous stock, being depraved, or that its Recrements laid
up here and there, had contracted this kind of Nature, from which afterward
growing turgid, when as the acid Particles run together to the Saline Mine laid
up in the Joints, they stir up the Gouty fit after the manner aforesaid.

It is shown that acetous fluxions do proceed from the nervous humor.
But truly, it manifestly appears, that acetous fluxions being brought from the
nervous humor, do frequently happen; by a notable instance or experiment, often
cited by me; viz. I have often observed, That those obnoxious to the passions
or pains of the Nerves, have suffered or felt a light rigor or stiffness in
their whole Body (which is a corrugation or wrinkling of almost all the nervous
parts) and then presently, the Convulsive Distemper would follow; at which time
the Urine was rendered very copiously and clear, which being without any
lixivial or nitrous savor (which otherwise it always has) was very sharp, like
mere Vinegar: indeed by this most clear sign it appears, that the humor being
risen up to a fullness in the nervous parts, and moved by its swelling up, does
bring in the Convulsive Distempers; and when a portion of the same sweating or
dropping forth, is laid up in the Glandulas, immediately being reduced thence
into the Blood, by the passage of the Veins and Lymphaeducts, it did excite the
flood of the sharp Urine: Indeed in like manner, from the same humor swelling
up in a lesser measure, and still remaining within the nervous passages, and
settling in the Joints, we think the Gouty fits do arise.

And so part of the Gouty Mixed is sent from the Brain and Nerves.
Indeed it is an argument, that part of the Goutish matter does proceed from the
Brain and Nerves, because for the most part, those obnoxious to this Disease,
do complain a little before the fit, of an heaviness of the head, and of a
dullness, with a Vertigo, and sleepiness; but as soon as they begin to suffer
the pains of the Gout, as if the Clouds were blown away from the Brain, they
enjoy a more free understanding, with a great and unwonted sharpness of wit.
Besides, when as there are sometimes many Saline Mines of this inveterate
Disease, deposited in diverse Members, it is observed, that the pains do very
much invade, first the superior places, and then by degrees descend to the
rest; wherefore, when perhaps at first the Vertebrae of the neck were troubled,
a little while after the shoulders, or other members of the Arm were possessed,
then the Disease reached to the Loins, or the Hips, and lastly the joints of
the Legs, and so to the lowest joints, sometimes these, and sometimes those.

The evident Causes of the Goutish Fit.
The Evident Causes, which in respect of the nervous liquor stir up the Gouty
Fits, do either pervert the Particles and portions into an Acetousness, or else
stir them up before degenerated into Fluxions.

The drinking of sharp Liquors.
1. Acid liquors, as thin Wines, Cider, stale Beer (experience being mistress)
are to be shunned by Gouty persons, more than a Mad-Dog, or a Snake. For these
kind of Drinks do not only bring into act the cause of this Disease, but
contribute more Acetous Particles, (by carrying them to the Brain, and nervous
Fibers) to its nest, and increase the Morbific matter.

Immoderate Exercise.
2. Immoderate or unseasonable exercises of the Body, violent passions,
immoderate Venus, and a disorderly feeding, and whatsoever besides greatly
disturbs the spirits and humors or shakes them, and by that means stir up the
fluxions of the nervous juice or its recrements, induce the pains of the Gout.

Evacuations being suppressed.
3. Usual evacuations being suppressed, also taking of cold and wet, for that by
this means the blood, and by consequence the nervous liquor, conceive
effervescencies and fluxions, do bring on the fits of this Disease.

4. For the same reason, The Circulations of the Heaven, Air and Year.
the changes of the Heaven and of the Air, as also the Tropicks of the year,
are wont to bring on the pains of the Gout; so that it is become a Proverb,
That Gouty persons carry their Almanac in their joints; and deduce most
certain Prognostics of the weather, from their pains: For as often as the
humid constitution of the year, or the blowing of the Southern, or the Northern
Winds, or Snow, are at hand, they are wont to predict these from the coming of
their pains. Further, every Quarter of the Year, especially Spring and Fall,
they are more grievously tormented. Wherefore the Aequinoxes are always
religiously observed by them. The reason of these consists partly in this,
forasmuch as insensible perspiration is variously altered, by reason of the
mutations of the Air and Year; therefore the Effluvia's which are wont to
transpire, being restrained, do ferment the Blood and the nervous Humor, and
easily stir them up into Goutish Fluxions. Besides, the humors of our Bodies,
even as the Sap of Vegetables, and other natural and artificial Liquors do
diversely grow hot, about the changing of times, and enter various states or
conditions of either fixation, or sometimes of volatileness, or of a flux.

The chief differences of this Disease, The differences of the Gout.
are taken from the distempered places, and so there are ordained as it were
distinct species of the same, to wit, the Chiragra or Hand Gout, As to the
places affected.
the Ischia or Hip Gout, the Gonagra or Knee Gout, and the Podagra the Foot or
Toe Gout; in the mean time, pains are wont to be excited in some other members,
and are noted by the common name of the Gout. Whether the pains of the Teeth,
or of the Loins, and pains of other parts ought to be referred hither, we have
not now leisure to inquire.

This Distemper, As to its Original.
as to its original, is said to be hereditary, or acquired; as to the
temperament of the sick, it is Hot or Cold, or Sanguine, Choleric, or
Phlegmatic, to wit, because the Blood being hindered in its circuit, about the
distempered places, sometimes an Inflammation, or a watery swelling come upon
the pains.

As to the relation of other Diseases, In respect of other Diseases.
the Distemper of the Gout is either singular, or else complicated with other
Diseases, and chiefly with the Scurvey, or the Stone. Of which kind of
combinations, because they are intimate and frequent (as if they were of kin to
this Disease) it will seem to the purpose, for us to inquire into the reasons.

A long Gout oftentimes gets to it the Scurvey, It is wont to be complicated
with the Scurvy.
and some Scorbutic Distempers are so like the Gout, that they are not easily
distinguished. The reason of the former is, both the like Dyscrasie of the
Blood in either Distemper, depending upon a fixed Salt, as also for that Gouty
people, being for a long time fixed either to their Bed or Chair, the
Scorbutic disposition easily comes upon them. Secondly, The Scorbutic
Distempers which imitate the Gout are the Rheumatism, and the wandering
Scorbutic Gout; the reasons and causes of which, and how they may be discerned
from the Gout, we need not repeat here, having already delivered them in our
tract of the Scurvey.

The Gout has so near a relation to the Stone, With the Stone.
or Gravel in the Reins, that either distemper, as if they had the same
original, most often meet together; for scarce any is sick of the Gout, but is
found to be also obnoxious to the other Disease. Further, an inveterate Gout,
is wont to excite stony Concretions in the Joints, such as the Stone does in
the Reins. The Reason of this is showed.
Hence I think it is most likely, that the Stone or Gravel in the Reins, does
arise from a like, if not wholly the same cause, that we assigned for the Gout,
to wit, the Saline fixed matter, being deposited from the Blood, in the Reins,
does grow hot with the acid humor, being there poured forth through the nervous
passages, and by that means does frequently induce Nephritick pains, or of the
Reins; then, from either matter being coagulated, after growing hot, does form
the Stone. For the illustrating this Pathology farther, (here being no place
for it) it shall be deferred to another time.

Every Body is wont to give a Prognostic of the Gout, The Prognostic of this
Disease.
to wit, that it is safe enough, but most hard to be Cured. 1. As to the
former, this Distemper is not only free of it self from danger, but on the
contrary, preventeth most other Diseases. For Gouty people, by reason of the
Saline fixed Dyscrasie of the Blood, are little obnoxious to Feavours; but for
the most part live free from a Consumption, and other more grievous Distempers
of the Bowels or Head; because the Recrements of the Blood and nervous Juice
are continually laid up in the Joints. 2. But as to the latter, the so great
difficulty of Cure, the reason is, that for the taking away the foregoing cause
of this Disease, there is required a most perfect amendment, of a double Humor,
viz. of the Blood and nervous Juice; to wit, that they may beget no Saline
fixed or plainly acid Particles; and moreover, a restitution of the weakened
Joints; neither of which can ever be easily obtained. And besides this, it
happens, that the Conjunct Cause of this Disease subsists in places greatly at
a distance, so that the virtues of no Medicine are able to reach them.

The Gouty Matter being restrained, or any other way translated, oftentimes
excites dangerous Distempers.
Sometimes it happens, by reason of the Fluxions of the Gouty Matter, being
suppressed or beat back, that sometimes torments of the Ventricle, of the
Bowels, and of the Belly, sometimes a straitness of breathing, an Asthma, or
other Distempers of the Breast, and sometimes also an Ap^plexy, and other
sleepy, or Convulsive Diseases are excited; which being observed, it may be
objected, that the Mine of the Gout is not the same as we but now described:
because its Saline part, if it were the same which is destinated for the
nourishing of the Joints, would not be from thence expelled or deferred, or
laid up elsewhere; then as to the other part, to wit, the laying up of the acid
seeds in the accustomed place, it seems that it should not be easily
repercussed, or of it self suppressed in its way, or any where else translated,
to be very hurtful to any part. But indeed, it is easy to reply to this, that
an acetous portion of the Gouty Matter, may be repelled or suppressed, flowing
through the nervous passages, and so it being poured in to other parts, The
acetous recrements of the nervous Liquor do chiefly effect this.
does oftentimes excite most grievous evils. Indeed the nervous Liquor and its
Recrements, for that they consist of very subtle and active Particles, upon
every light stop or repulse, are driven into diverse deflections and flowings;
moreover, when these grow turgid, or meet with the Particles of humors of
another kind, and grow hot with them, they stir up various Distempers, or such
as are painful and Convulsive; and not rarely, because the dissimilar Particles
are mutually coagulated, sometimes Strumons, sometimes Cancrous, or otherways
malignant Tumors arise. Instances very remarkable of these kind of effects, we
have shown in our Treatise of Convulsive Diseases; But especially concerning a
Maid, who by reason of the Inguinal Glandulas, or the Kirnels about the Groin,
The first Instance of such a^ Effect.
being hardly pressed and hurt with a Truss for a Rupture, fell into a Vertigo,
and Convulsive Distempers, and shortly after had great Scropul^'s or running
Sores, growing on the same side, in the Neck. After the same manner, by reason
of the Goutish Mine being restrained from its wonted place, and suppressed
within the nervous Passages, or otherways translated sometimes most wicked
Distempers arise.

A second Instance.
Whilst I was writing these, I was sent for to a Noble Matron, who sometimes
past being obnoxious to the Gout, and that very much, after about three months
last past, she had labored almost continually with a languishing of the
Ventricle, with a queasiness, ^auscousness, and vomiting; at length, I know not
upon what occasion, falling into frequent swoonings or loss of spirits, a
little after she was troubled with a Vertigo, with a loss of memory, and
sometimes with a light Delirium; and when she had continued thus for some days,
and free in the mean time from the Gout, and growing well in her stomach, she
eat with an appetite broth twice or thrice in a day, and once a day flesh meat,
and digested it without any trouble: by this manifest sign indeed it appears,
that the Recrements of the nervous humor, which were wont before to fall down
by the Spinal Nerves into the Feet, to the Mine of the Gout, afterward being
deposited in the Ventricle, through the Nerves of the wandering pair, and the
Intercostals, did stir up the continual troubles in it; which at last partly
restagnating in the Brain, and being partly translated into the Cardiack
Nerves, (or those going to the Heart) those last Distempers of Swooning, of the
Vertigo, and the Delirium succeeded.

The Cure.
The Curatory method suggests three primary Indications, the first of them
Curatory, to be administered only in the Fits, for the allaying the pains, and
for the sooner ending of them. Secondly, Preservatory, being destinated for the
intervals of the fits, endeavors the taking away of the foregoing cause of the
Disease, Three primary Indications.
that the fits of the pains may more rarely, or less, or not at all be
repeated. Thirdly, Vital, which institutes, by what kind of food, and by what
Remedies, strength may be sustained in the cruel Torments, and life be
prolonged, and also refreshed or cherished, notwithstanding the frequent and
almost continual troubles of the Disease.

Curatory, for the allaying the pains in the Fits.
1. The first Indication, to wit, the allaying of the pains, contains these two
chief intentions, to wit, that the breach of the unity be taken away; and in
the mean time, that the irritation, or the growing hot of the Fibers, or of the
Spirits flowing in them, may be quieted or appeased.

For the taking away of the Breach of the Continuity.
1. For the taking away of the breach of the unity in the distempered places,
both the flowings of the humors, which are apt to tend thither, ought to be
hindered, and the Mine already impacted to be dissipated, and shaken off, and
its Particles suppressed, from their mutual effervescencies or growing hot. For
these ends are destinated, evacuating and altering Remedies, and of either both
internal and external. We shall here add some forms of these, and the more
select ways of administration, in their order.

Phlebotomy.
Phlebotomy or letting of Blood, in a fresh Gout, or not very inveterate, and
especially in a more hot constitution, being used about the beginning of the
Disease, does often bring help; but in an habitual Disease, and in a frigid
temperament, and old age, it is wont to be more hurtful than profitable;
because it depresses the vigor of the Blood, and of the Spirits, not too much
raging, without a lessening of the Morbific matter.

The business is very much controverted concerning Purging about the beginning
of the Disease, Purging.
whilst some Physicians most strictly abstain from all Purging, before the
declination or end of the fit; others on the contrary, constantly give strong
Purges about the beginning of the Disease, and oftentimes with good success.
The reason of the difference seems to be placed chiefly in this, to wit,
because some Gouty persons are yet firm in the constitution and tone of the
humors, and the Vessels containing them, and being not yet weakened in their
joints, as often as the Blood and nervous Liquor are disturbed by Medicines,
their superfluities and recrements are not presently precipitated into the Mine
of this Disease, yea these being provoked by the Medicine, and also obeying the
incitement, are drawn forth by the mo^ths of the Arteries, into the cavities of
the Intestines; and in the mean time, the Vessels being emptied, they draw or
sup back a certain part of the Morbific Matter. But it is otherwise in tender
and weak Constitutions, for from the least commotion of the Medicine, the
purgings of either humor fall down into the Gouty place. Therefore to whom
Purging is convenient, it ought to be instituted with the more strong
Medicines, Forms of Purges.
and Elaterium. For this matter, these are of known use. The Electuary
Caryacostinum. The Purging Syrup de Ramno. Pills of Hermod^ctyls. The
Compounded Pill ex Duobus. The Pill of Rhasis; which if we may believe the
Author, will quickly make the sick to walk. Take of the best Aloes half an
ounce, of red Roses two scruples, of Hermod^ctils barkt one dram and a half, of
Diagridium one dram, of Honey of Roses what will suffice; make a Pill. Roderick
of Fonseca, wonderfully cries up the root of black Hellebore, and among other
things, an Apple with its small strings put into it, to about half a dram,
roasted under the ashes, and so eaten.

Take of Calowel^nos one scruple, of the Resine of Ialap three grains, or of
Scammony three grains, of the Oil of Cloves one grain, of the Ba^som of Peru
what will suffice; make th^re or four Pills, for one Dose. In the time of
Purging, it will be of some moment, perhaps, as Solenander advises, to restrain
the falling down of the humors into those places, by a Plaster, or other
defensive Medicine, laid upon the distempered places.

Vomiting, Vomiting.
to whom it is wont to be safe and easy, may be also convenient in this
Disease; for which end, the Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht, the Sulphur of
Antimony, or its Flowers, Mercurious Vitae, Vinum Emeticum, Gambogia, may be
administered.

But in the Goutish fit, Altering Medicines, or such as preserve from the Gout.
the Powders of Stones, Bones, and Shells, as also of sharp Vegetables, do
help; which being called the Alexiteria of this Disease, subjugate all the
Particles, and by growing hot with them, do as it were mortify them, and at
last they being overcome, they carry them forth either by Urine or Sweat.

Take of the Powder of Crabs claws compounded two drams, Pills.
of Ivory, of the Root of Cretick Dittany, of the Root of male Poeony, each one
dram; of the Wood of Aloes, of yellow Saunders, each half a dram; make a
Powder, let it be taken half a dram or a dram, either by it self, in a spoonful
of red Poppy Water, drinking after it six spoonfuls of the same, or let it be
reduced into a Bolus, or Pills, with Andromach Treacle, or Venice Turpentine
what will suffice: the Dose one dram twice a day, drinking after it of the
distalled Water afterward described two or three ounces.

Or Take of the same Powder six drams, An Electuary.
of the Conserves of Gilliflowers, and of Betony, each one ounce and a half; of
Diascordium one dram, of the Syrup of Poppies what will suffice; make an
Electuary: the Dose one dram to two, Evening and Morning.

In the mean time, while these things are doing, besides, altering Medicines,
and allaying, have their turns, for the calling away to some other place, the
flowing of the Morbific matter into the places distempered, or for the carrying
it forth; such as may allay the swelling up of the Blood, and the nervous
Juice, and stop the Fluxions of the Recrements falling from them; for this end
a slender diet, and spoon meat (if it be convenien^) being ordered; let
Emulsions, Iulep^, and Apozems made of gentle things, and Anodynes, be
prescribed.

As to what belongs to the other intentions of healing, The Spirits ought to be
allayed, or quiet^d.
viz. the Discussion of the impacted Mine, and for the ^llaying the burning or
growing hot of the Fibers and the Spirits; this latter must be endeavored,
without which, being performed, the other intention will not satisfy: for this
end therefore it is expedient, to give both external Medicines, viz. Topics of
a various kind; as also internal, viz. Hypnoticks.

For that there are an immense company of Topics, By Topic Remedies.
these are only Anodynes, which respect only the pain by it self, or are such
as aim at this together, and the tumor; or they are repelling, or resolving,
and discussing: There are various Formula's of every one of these, and ways of
administrations: But the chief in use are Fomentations, Pultesses, and
Plasters; of these we shall show the most celebrious; and first of all, Anodyne
Applications, which please the Fibers with a certain delight. For this use the
most common practice with the vulgar are, Pultesses.
(...) or Pultesses of Milk and (...) of Bread, or of those with a Muccage, or
jelly of the leaves and of the roots of Mallows, and Marshmallowes, and such
like.

Others praise a Pultesse of the fresh dung of a Cow applied warm.

A Fomentation.
Take of the Water of Nightshade, and of the Sperm of Frogs, each six ounces;
mingle them: Lint being dipped in this, let it be applied warm.

Take of red Lead three ounces, of distilled Vinegar one quart; let them digest
for several days; and use this liquor by it self, or else the water drawn of by
distillation.

Also a Water distilled, made of a Tincture of Verdigriese, distilled in
Vinegar, often times allays the pains.

I had from a Gentleman, oftentimes heavily obnoxious to the Gout, that he in
the most cruel torments of this Disease, had always present ease, from a
Fomentation, of the water distilled from the contents in the stomach of an Ox
fresh killed.

Outward Narcoticks.
For the extreme torments of the Gout, outward Narcoticks ought sometimes to be
applied. Take of the leaves of Henbane, and of Hemlock, each three handfuls;
let them be put into boiling water, and as soon as they grow tender let them be
taken out: These being bruised, add to them, of the Powder of Chamomel flowers
about two drams, and the yoalk of one Egg; make a Poultesse.

Or take of the Tincture of Saffron, made in the Spirit of Wine four ounces, of
Camphor, of Opium, each one dram; let them digest close shut and warm, till
they are dissolved; anoint the pained part with this liquor. There are to be
found other innumerable Medicines of this sort in Medical Books, and are every
where ordinary, and wont to be prescribed almost by every vulgar person; which
also suffices for the fulfilling of the other Intention, to wit, the
repercussion of the Humors, when it is seen necessary.

Resolving Topics consisting chiefly of Saline Particles, even analogic, or
correspondent to the Morbific Mine.
As to what respects Resolving and Discussing Topics, they are not required to
be of the same kind, which open only the Pores, and evaporate the Serum, and
make the Blood circulate, as in an Inflammation, or a white hard swelling; but
whose Saline Particles, being destinated for the opposing those Salts of the
Goutish Mine, may either by embracing them carry them sorth of doors, or by
precipitating them may suppress them from their painful heats. Wherefore in
this Disease, when Fomentations or Pultesses of Cha^^mel, Mallows,
Marshmallows, Line and Fenegreek seeds, bring little or no help; yea by
loosning the nervous parts, do oftentimes much hurt; the Salt of Armoniack or
Sea Salt, or Nitre, or of Vitriol, quick Lime, and dissolutions of the like, or
distilled Liquors, always troublesome to other humors or pains, are wont to
give the greatest help.

Forms of these.
These kind of Liquors in the Goutish Fits, to be applied to the grieved part,
are variously prescribed, by Quercitan, Crollius, Hartman, and other Chemists;
and as other famous Physicians have often ^ound them by experience good, and
approved of them, we may conclude that they are helpful for the aforesaid
reason.

There will be no need here to repeat the forms of these, though I could easily
set down many other preparations of this sort; yet I shall here give you one or
two of them only.

Take of Sal Tartari, and Ammoniac powdered, each two ounces; put them into
rain or spring water two quarts, and with a linen cloth dipped in it warm, apply
it.

Take of the Spirits of Vitriol not rectified one pint, of Sea Salt calcined
and powdered one pound; distill them in a Glass retort in sand; a very pure
Spirit of Salt will come forth, which being expulsed from its lodging by a
Vitriolick Stagma, leaving the possession* easly ascends: To the dead head pour
two pints of the Spirit of Wine, digest it close and warm, adding of Camphor
two drams; let it be applied warm to the grieved part with linen rags.

Take of the Filings of Iron, of the Flowers of Sal Armoniack, each six ounces;
mingle them well by pounding them together; let it be distilled in a Glass
retort till the Flowers are sublimated; to the Caput Mortuum being pounded,
pour the Spirits of Wine, digest it, and keep it for use.

I have heard of some that for the allaying of the pains of the Gout, have
enclosed the distempered foot in a little Bay, filled with Sea Salt calcined
and powdered; from which they have still expected a certain and sudden help.

In the declination of the Fit, Plasters in the declination of the Fit.
for the strengthening the part, and for the shaking off the relignes of the
Morbific matter, Plasters are profitably applied; which however are not all
convenient to all, but for some more, for others less hot; But the most
efficacious to most people are those in which are Red Lead, Ceruse, and Soap,
boiled with Oil. Or Take of the Plaster of Red Lead two parts, of Paracelsus
one part, wax them, and spread them upon Leather.

2. Internal Remedies for the pains of the Gout, Opiates.
that are made use of, are only Narcoticks, or such as stupefie, which ought to
be administered in cruel and long torments. Of these we shall chiefly commend
Preparations of Opium, with Salt of Tartar or its Tincture. Further, for this
use, the Laudanum of Paracelsus, or that of London, Pills of Styrax, and
Cynogloss, or Dogs Tongue, Syrup de Maeconie, or of Poppies, Treacle Andromach,
and Diascordium, are wont to be helpful or give ease.

The Indication Preservatory, The preservatory Indication, out of the Fit.
or so called, respects the taking away of the foregoing causes of the Gout;
wherefore, that the fits of pains may more rarely, or less or not at all infest
them: For this end, Evacuating, Altering, and Corroborating Remedies, together
with an exact diet, are prescribed to be given out of the Fits.

1. Gouty people therefore ought constantly to be purged Spring and Fall; Usual
Purging and Vomiting.
and then also it will be expedient to Vomit, if nothing gainsays it; and
sometimes afterward at intervals, to repeat them. Let those who are endued
with a more strong stomach and Praecordia, take Emetick Minerals prepared out
of Antimony or Mercury. Those who are of a more tender constitution, may take
after the eating of slippery meats, Wine of Squills, or the Salt of Vitriol
with Posset drink; and then the stomach being filled with warm water, or simple
Posset Drink, or with the leaves of Carduus boiled in it, let Vomiting be twice
or thrice or oftener provoked. For Purging to be often celebrated also at
convenient times, between, the forms of purging Medicines already prescribed
are convenient enough. Or Take of the strings of black Hellebore cleansed one
ounce, of Lignum Aloes and of Cloves, each two drams, bruise them, and pour to
them of the Spirits of Wine, not rectified, one quart; let them digest warm and
close shut, for several days. The Dose two or three spoonfuls in the morning,
twice or thrice in a week; and let Vomiting and Purging be always begun before
the Aequinoxes, lest perhaps the Fit being first begun should pervert the
course of the Medicine.

Letting of Blood, Phlebotomy.
or the opening of the Hemorrhoidal Vessels, are sometimes convenient Spring or
Fall, in an hot temperament, and for such as are endued with a more sharp
Blood. Cauteries, made in the Arms, and between the shoulders, are profitable
to every one almost obnoxious to this Disease.

But besides, Altering Medicines called Antidotes of the Gout.
altering Medicines, Antidotes so called by the Ancients, against the Gout, are
of known use; and in a long time, together with an exact method or Government
concerning the fix non-naturals, often bring great help; in this rank the chief
are Medidicines endued with a Volatile Salt, and Balsamic Sulphur, forasmuch
as these exalt the fixed Salt, and reduce what is Acetous; besides, bitter and
astringent things, as these Herbs, Chamaepitys, Centaury, Germander, the Roots
of Gentian, and Aristolochia, or Birthwort, etc. (as by experience has been
approved of in this Disease) for this reason seem to be profitable; because
they help the offices of Concoction, and Chylification, or making of Chyle; and
restrain the Saline fixed feculencies or dregs, that they may not be carried
into the Blood. We shall here set down some forms of each of them.

Take of the Powder of Chamaepitys six drams, Pills.
of Crabs Eyes two drams, of Venice Turpentine what will suffice, make small
Pills, take three or four Morning and Evening, for thirty or forty days,
drinking after them of the following distilled water two or three ounces.

Take of the leaves of Cypress Tree, A Distilled Water.
of the Ash, and of Misleto of the Apple tree, each six handfuls; of the roots
of sweet smelling Avens, Burdock, each one pound, the outer rinds of ten
Oranges, and of six Lemons, of Nutmegs, and Mace, each one ounce; let them be
all cut and bruised, and pour to them seven pints of new Milk and of Malaga one
pint; let them be distilled according to art, and the whole liquor mixed
together.

Or let there be a simple Water prepared of the leaves of Burdock by pouring it
twice or thrice upon fresh leaves.

Take of the Powder of the Seeds of Burdock six drams, of Crabs Eyes two drams,
of Nutmeg half a dram, of Capive Balsom what will suffice to make a Mass, which
form into small Pills: let four be taken Evening and Morning for many days.

Take of the Tincture of Antimony one ounce; Tinctures.
the Dose twenty drops to twenty five, Evening and Morning, with three ounces
of the water but now described.

Powders.
For poor people I was wont to prescribe after this manner. Take of the Powder
of the leaves of Sage half a pound, of Crabs Eyes, and of the Sugar of Crystal,
each two ounces; mix them; let it be kept in a Glass, and take one spoonful
twice in a day, with a draught of a Decoction of the leaves of Sage, or of the
roots of the Burdock.

Or of the Powder of Dorncrellius prescribed to be taken after the same manner.

Take of the Powder of the leaves of Germander, of Gout Ivy, of the lesser
Centaury, of Marjoram, of Sage, of Betony, of the roots of Gentian, and of
round Birthwort, each one ounce; of Sugar one pound; mix them and make a Powder.

Or of the Powder of John Anglicus, called by himself Saracenick.

Take of the Powder of the leaves of Chamaepitys, one ounce, the bones of a
Man's foot burnt two drams, of Liquorish three drams, mix them.

Medicated Beer.
For ordinary drink, let there be prepared a Bochet of Sarsaparilla, of
Saunders, wood of Rhodium, shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, etc. or let there be
prepared small Ale, in a Vessel holding about four gallons, instead of Hops let
their be boiled the leaves of Germander and Chamaepitys, and after it has
worked, put into it of the leaves of dry Sage four handfuls, of Sassaphras two
ounces, of the roots of sweet smelling Avens eight ounces.

A Milk Diet.
Among Altering Medicines a Milk diet has not the last place, that the Patient
should use for three or four Months, no other food: let him drink Morning and
Evening new Milk from the Cow; about noon, and at other times, let him eat
white Bread boiled in Barley, or Water Gruel of Oatmeal: I have known some by
this kind of diet to have received notable help; but others, to have received
much hurt or to grow worse, by the use of Milk, and the Gout being nothing
cured, to have contracted great obstructions of the Viscera, and a
Cachochimical disposition or fullness of evil humors. Therefore this method is
not rashly to be entered upon, without the counsel of a prudent Physician, and
by a sedulous observation, whether it be convenient or not.

Drinking of ones own Urine.
Of late it has been a common custom, for people having the Gout, to drink every
Morning their own Urine; which I know has been beneficial to some. The reason
of which help seems to be, because the Saline Latex of the Urine, passing
through the Blood, does carry with it to the Reins, the Saline fixed Particles
that were before wont to be carried into the joints. Wherefore, this method,
when it is helpful to the distemper of the Gout, for the most part increases
the Stone: which I think sufficiently appears from the following History.

A notable History of the Stone converted into the Gout, and on the contrary of
the Gout into the Stone.
A very Learned and Pious Man of this Nation, and also the glory of Learned Men
Dr. H. H. after he had lived for many years, grievously obnoxious to freqent
fits of pains, of Vomiting, and a making of bloody Urine, at length by the
constant use of the following Remedies, he lived above seven years almost free
from the Stone, and without any grievous Fit. The method of Cure which had been
taught him by a certain Gentleman, was after this manner, without any Physic
or medicine, abstaining from Wine and Cider, he drank for his ordinary drink
small Ale, made of Oaten Malt; further, once in a week in the Morning, he took
a draught of the same Ale, to about a pint, with the Powder of small old rotten
Bones three spoonfuls dissolved in it: By the use of these, within a few months
he seemed to be in health, and freed from the Stone, but shortly after he began
to be sick of the Gout, and was infested with most grievous Fits of it, all the
time he was free from the Stone; and at length upon every light occasion, was
become so obnoxious to them, that presently after feeding, if he exercised
either his body or mind, by walking or study, he most certainly expected the
Fits of his pains. The reason of which was, because the Blood being filled to a
plenitude with Saline fixed Particles, and the nervous Liquor still with
Acetous, when being incited, and also poured forth on the fresh nutritious
juice, they grew turgid, presently they deposed their superfluities, viz. the
Morbific matter of either kind, into the very weak Joints.

This venerable person therefore, being tired out with so frequent and almost
continual torture, by the counsel of a certain Friend, drank every morning of
his own Urine, by the use of which, within a month or two, he was less
tormented with the goutish Fits, but with an evil turn, the Distemper of the
Stone began to grow again upon him, for he was from thence troubled with a pain
about his Loins, with Vomiting, and a pain in making water, and a little after
a total suppression of Urine followed, which being not to be helped by any
Remedies, in about a fortnights time this Reverend Gentleman dyed.

The reason of this showed by Anatomical Observation.
The Carcass being opened, all the Viscera, except the Reins appeared most sound
and firm, but the right Kidney was almost consumed, a small heap of the
Gland^la's being only left, all the Vessels and the Vreter being joined
together, and wholly shut up, so that no Urine at all had passed there of a
long time: The left Kidney being large enough, contained within the cavity and
its passages, a great heap of Sand or Gravel, and little Stones; besides there
was a round hard and whitish stone fallen into the Vreter, three inches deep,
and there fixed, and had wholly shut out the passage of the water; the Membrane
of the Vreter, where the Stone stuck, was become so thick and callous, and so
free from pain, that here it could by no means be moved either upwards or
downwards.

It seems in this case, that when the coagulated Particles of the Blood and
nervous juice, to wit, the Saline fixed and the Acetous, meeting together at
first in the Reins, did stir up for a while the Distemper of the Stone;
afterward, by the use of the abovesaid Powder, the saline Particles being
still thrust forward into the habit of the Body, and not easily rendered, heaped
together the Goutish seed plot in the Joints, the Reins being in the mean time
free. But at length, when by the drinking of his own Urine, the saline Mine was
brought back into the Reins, the Disease of the Gout was changed into the
mortal Disease of the Stone.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Colic Passion.

IT has been mentioned in the former Chapter, Why the Colic is counted among
the Distempers of the Brain, and the nervous Stock.
by what right we have referred this Disease among the Distempers of the Brain
and nervous Stock, to wit, both in respect of the Symptoms urging, which are
pain, and Convulsive motions, as also from the reason of the cause, by Charles
Piso placed in the head, and truly not improbably.

Concerning the word Colic, from the Intestine called the Colon, we shall not
strive, for that it is supposed, From whence the denomination.
though wrongfully, to be chiefly affected in this Disease. The Distemper may
be described, That it is an hauling or notable pulling of some parts of the
Abdomen or the Belly; A description of the Disease.
from whence a very acute pain arises, and with it for the most part, a
Vomiting, as also Convulsions, and Contractions almost of the whole Viscera of
the Belly, are wont to be joined. And for that the Navil, and its neighboring
parts, are sometimes as it were with a Perforation, or boring through, drawn
inwards, and sometimes swell out, with an inflation or blowing up, and as it
were with a great leaping forth; the Intestines, by an inverse motion of the
Fibers, are oftentimes pulled together upwards: wherefore the Belly being
extremely bound together, renders little or nothing; yea although it be often
provoked by Clysters, it does not easily part with its contents: It appears
clearly, that the Ventricle, with the Duodenum, and the bladder of Gall, are in
like manner pulled, by Vomiting, and by the casting forth of great plenty of
yellow or green Choler: Sometimes the Vreters, and the bladder of the Urine,
are so contracted, that in all the fit, the Urine is wholly suppressed, or but
very sparingly rendered: Besides, a Vertiginous Distemper of the Head,
frequently preceeds, or follows the fits of this Disease: yea, the Colic
growing worse, and inveterate, oftentimes causes pains in the outward members,
and at length ends in the Palsy: Therefore, forasmuch as very many parts are
wont to labor in this Disease, we shall inquire, which is primarily affected,
and by what means the other suffer; then what is the conjunct cause of the
Disease, in what place it subsists, and from whence it draws its original.

As to the part primarily or first of all distempered, The seat of the Disease
is not always, or often in the Intestine, or Gut Colon.
though the Disease being urgent, the whole region of the Belly is wont to be
disturbed, yet its primary seat ought to be placed, where the pain chiefly
infests, and pertinaciously sticks: But this, by the consent of very many
Physicians, is said to be some where in the Gut Colon. Wherefore Celsus says,
That the Colic is a Distemper of the greater Intestine; which also reason
seems to persuade, something; for whether the Morbific Matter is supposed to be
heaped up in the Cavities of the Intestines, or to be wholly fixed in their
Membranes, certainly there are extant deep little Cells in the folds of the
Colon, for its receptacles, and thick coats of this Intestine, viz. neither in
its Cavity or Coats.
in which the peccant humor may be deeply fastened. But indeed this opinion (to
which we cannot easily assent) as also the denomination of the Distemper, seems
to have grown in credit in the Schools of the Physicians, from this only,
because we ordinarily observe, that the Intestines enter into pains and
torments, being irritated by wind, medicines, Choler, and perhaps other humors,
contained within their cavities; hence, as it is obvious, may be inferred, that
the Colic pains do arise from the sharp and provocative contents of the
Intestines, and especially of the Colon. But if it were so, without doubt,
those things which loosen the Belly, and draw forth plentifully the wind, and
the dregs or Faces, should give certain ease; the contrary of which often
happens, to wit, by some more violent, or often Purging, the Disease has grown
worse.

Pains commonly taken for Colicks.
Wherefore, that the seat of this Disease, and the nature of it may be truly
known, we ought first of all to distinguish here, concerning the torments of
the Belly, or pains commonly esteemed for Colicks: to wit, these are either
merely occasional, arising from a solitary evident cause, and ordinarily happen
without any previous disposition to some men, and especially to those who being
of a tender constitution, have very sensible Fibers, and Spirits quickly
dissipated; These are merely accidental or habitual.
after this manner, disagreeable or unwonted eating or drinking, also
medicines, taking of cold, and many other alterations about the six
non-naturals, oftentimes excite great perturbations, with pains in the Viscera
of the lower part of the Belly: which kind of Distemper, ought to be esteemed,
not the Disease, but only Symptoms excited from a manifest cause.

These latter are properly the Disease.
But besides, the Colic properly so called, happens to some, not only produced
by an accidental cause, but falling upon some men predisposed by a peculiar
right, depends wholly upon a foregoing cause ripened by degrees. The more
grievous fits of this Disease, for the most part, have their periods, and
observe the changes of the Air and Year; further, being excited, they do not
easily give place to any Remedies, nor quickly pass over; but notwithstanding
the use of Fomentations, and though the Belly be taken down very much by
Clysters, or Purging, they oftentimes continue with great fierceness for many
days, and sometimes weeks. The pains in every fit still repeat the same part,
and are followed with a concourse, for the most part, of other the like
Symptoms: But the pains of the Colic, though they have not the same se^^ in
all, but sometimes exercise their cruelties under the Ventricle, sometimes
about the Navel, or the Hypochondria, and sometimes in the lower part of the
Belly, or about the Loins; yet as often as they are repeated in the same sick
person, they mostly observe the same nest.

The conjunct cause of the Disease are not the Contents of the Intestines.
For the unfolding the Aetiology of this Disease, it is not enough to affirm,
that the Intestines are pulled, either by their sharp contents, or irritated by
the Blood, and other humors poured into them, and breaking the continuity. For
as to the former, it is extremely improbable, that the Bile, or Choler, or
Phlegm, or the Pancreatick Juice, or any other simple humor, or growing hot or
fermenting with others, should be able to excite such fixed, cruel, and long
continuing pains: Besides, because the Intestines being besmeared with their
own dung, cannot be easily pricked by the Contents, though sharp; nor are they
wont to be exasperated by them; insomuch that the sharpest stools, which
oftentimes fetch off the skin at the Fundament, very little trouble, or not at
all, the passages of the Guts; further, these being grievously provoked,
whatever is troublesome, contained in their cavity, is easily shaken forth, and
either by driving it forward, upwards, or downwards, is quickly thrust forth;
as is plainly perceived in the Disease of the Choler, and other Dysentrick
Distempers; nor indeed is there almost any loading of these provoking the
Membranes, and stirring up pains, which may not be exterminated or carried
forth of doors by one purge or other. Not the humors impacted in the Membranes.
Then, secondly, as to what respects the suffusions of the Blood, or Serum,
within the coats of the Intestines, by which an Inflammation or painful Tumors
are excited; Indeed we grant, that sometimes it may so come to pass, yea I have
known it by ocular inspection; but from thence we have observed, not the Colic
but the Iliack passion to have been excited. For when I have opened several
dying of the Iliack passion, I found almost in all, that the cause of the
Disease, and of their Death, was an Inflammation or Ulcer of some Intestine;
neither is this any wonder, because a Solution of the continuity, in a very
tender and highly sensible Membrance, does stir up Convulsions, and painful
Corrugations or wrinklings together, and so continual and cruel; that therefore
the Peristaltick motion of the distempered Intestine, whereby the dung or dregs
of the Belly are carried forward toward the Anum or Arse-Gut, should be hindered
and wholly inverted.

The nervous Liquor seems most of all to contribute to the cause of this
Disease.
Therefore, that we may thoroughly inquire out both the Matter and Mine, as also
the seats, and the ways of flowing to them, of this Disease of the Colic, by
some other means; it may deservedly be suspected, that it is the nervous Juice,
and its Recrements; and that the rather, because this passion has so intimate
an agreement or consent with the other Distempers of the Brain and the nervous
Stock, as we have already showed. Charles Piso has affirmed, That as most
distempers of the whole Body, so also the pains of the Colic, are excited by a
Serous heap or deluge gathered together in the head; and he contends, that the
seat of this Disease, is neither in the coats nor cavities of the Intestines,
but in the Peritonaum or inner rim of the Belly, and that the cause sticks
wholly in the Brain, near the original of the Nerves. To wit, he supposes,
Charles Piso 's Opinion cited,
(which he says he has found by Anatomical observation) The serosities laid
up in the hinder region of the Brain, to beset the little heads of the Nerves
of the wandering pair, and so some of the utmost branches and shoots of them
inserted into the Peritonaeum or inner rim of the Belly by the Caul, to move
into Convulsions; and from the contraction or drawing together of this, most
cruel pains, both in it, and in the underlying Viscera, as it were breaking
them to pieces, to be excited. For the proof of this opinion, he brings an
example of a certain man dissected, being dead of a most grievous fit of the
Colic, in whom the hinder region of the head near the Cerebel, was so much
drowned with a clear water, as also the nervous original of the wandering pair,
that the marrowy substance appeared very much moistened, like wet Paper, Sect.
4. Chap. 2.

But indeed, and examined.
though we should grant, that the Colic should arise from the humor of the
Brain, and from the default of that watering the nervous parts; yet we think
that this painful passion is excited, not after that manner as this Author has
laid down. Because we think neither the seat of this Disease to subsist in the
Peritonaeum, nor its primary cause to be within the head. For as to this,
although the Morbifick matter being heaped up in the head, near the origin of
the Nerves, does sometimes produce in the parts at a great distance, Numnesses,
Cramps, and Convulsive motions, as we have elsewhere shown, by many instances,
with the reasons of the Distemper; yet it is much otherwise in a very cruel
pain, such as the Colic is wont to be: For as to this being excited, which
always proceeds from a breach of the continuity, it is required, that the
dolorifick cause or improportionate object, should be fixed in the distempered
member itself, or at least a certain part or portion of it: Neither is it
sufficient to say, that the Convulsion proceeds from a remote cause, The seat
of the Morbi^ick Matter not in the Brain.
and so the pain from the Convulsions: For although pain oftentimes does
produce Convulsive motions, yet these do not produce pain of themselves, at
least great and continuing long. Wherefore in the pain of the Colic, the
matter drawing asunder the sensitive Fibers, and pulling them one from another,
and so provoking them into painful Corrugations or wrinklings, does not still
stay in the Brain; but descending from thence, through the nervous passages,
toward the Intestines, seems to be heaped up somewhere in their neighborhood,
nigh to the pained parts, and there either growing turgid or swelling up, by
reason of their fullness, or growing hot with some other humor, do bring in the
fits of this Disease.

We indeed reject the Mine of the Colic, The part primarily affected in the
Abdomen, not in the Peritonaeum. But more rightly it seems to be the Mesentery.
from the Peritonaeum; because this Membrane being very thin, and gifted but
with very few and only small Vessels, is neither capable of any great
affluxions of Humors, neither can it self, though pulled together, be able to
urge the Viscera lying under it, into pains, by compressing or drawing them
together. But the Morbific matter being slid down from the Head, by the Nerves,
into the Belly, finds very convenient nests in the Mesentery; in which very
many and great Nerves have there their noted infoldings and distributions:
Wherefore, as this part is very sensible, and very much obnoxious to the
flowings in of the humors of the nervous Stock, it may be deservedly affirmed
to be the seat of this Disease of the Colic.

We have shown formerly, Where the seat of the Distempers called Hysterical,
often lies hid.
the causes of some Convulsive motions in the Abdomen, which are commonly
called Hysterical, to lie hid in the Mesenterick Infoldings; moreover, in the
same places, we did then assert, That the Colic pains had sometimes their
nests, and confirmed it sufficiently by Anatomical observation. But the matter
is something diverse, and not the same, that is wont to excite the so different
Distempers of either, under the same roof. In the Passions called Hysterical,
we have largely declared in a former Treatise, That the Animal Spirits being
burdened with an Elastick Copula, are let off, or as it were exploded one from
another, and so the containing bodies are unwillingly forced into irregular or
preternatural Motions. But in the pains of the Colic, the same Spirits, by
reason of the matter troublesome to them, and improportionate, being provoked,
and so pulled and distracted one from another, do put the sensible Fibers into
very troublesome Corrugations, or wrinkling themselves together: By what means
this comes to pass in the pains of the Colic, also what are the conjunct, and
the foregoing causes of this Disease, and the reasons of the Symptoms, we shall
a little further explain.

Therefore we shall suppose, The Colick-mine is affirmed to be within the
nervous, and other mesenterick infoldings of the Abdomen.
that for a Seed-plot or Mine of the Colic Distemper, some Recrements of the
nervous humor being fallen from the Brain, through the Nerves, and slid down
into the Mesentery, and other infoldings of the Abdomen, are there heaped up;
which if they be thick, and very viscous, so that they cannot be received by
the Lymphaeducts or water-carriers, and so sent away, or that they cannot sweat
forth by the small shoots of the Vessels into the cavities of the Intestines,
stagnating in those parts, and being by degrees heaped together, do arise at
length to a provocative fullness; then this matter growing more degenerate by
standing, and becoming more infestous, grows turgid occasionally, or of its own
accord, or perhaps grows hot or ferments with a Saline fixed humor, poured
forth thither, from the Blood, torments the shoots of the Nerves, and the
nervous Fibers (of which the Mesentery has an infinite number) with very
troublesome and painful Corrugations; which kind of Distemper of these, does
not plainly cease, till the hot or Fermentative matter being shaken off, or
pressed forth into the cavities of the Intestines, is at length overcome.

From which, planted thereabouts, the Colic Symptoms are excited.
Further, forasmuch as from the Mesentery and its Infoldings, nervous shoots and
Fibers are most thickly put forth into the bottom of the Ventricle, the bladder
of the Gall, the Choledoch passages, all the Intestines, and on every side
almost into all the Viscera of the whole Abdomen; therefore whilst the Colic
matter grows hot or ferments in its Mines, it there stirs up torments, and
oftentimes most cruel pains; and together with them in many other Membranous
parts Cramps, and Convulsive or painful Contractions, are every where excited.
Hence, by reason of the Mesentery being primarily distempered, a most sharp
pain under the Navil shows it self, like as if a stake were driven through it,
or a wimble a boring it; then round about almost in the whole Abdomen or lower
region of the Belly, by reason of the Intestines being variously drawn down, or
backwards, in diverse places together, wandering pains run about hither and
thither; and by reason of the motions of the Fibers being disturbed or
inverted, both in these, and also in the urinary Vessels, the Belly is almost
always bound up, and sometimes a suppression of the Urine, or a rendering but a
very little succeeds: yea also the Duodenum, the Gallbladder, with its
passages, and the bottom of the Ventricle, being distempered with a Spasm or
Cramp, and their Fibers drawn upwards, from thence frequent Vomiting, with a
copious casting forth of yellow or green Choler, does infest during the fit.

The yellow or green Bile or Choler, that is cast forth by vomiting, in the
Colick-Fits, is not the material cause of this Disease.
But some do contend that this Bile or Choler (which is sometimes cast forth as
green as a Leek) is the material Cause of the Disease; and that abundance of it
dropping or distilling forth into the Viscera, does excite the Colic pains in
the Intestines. I say, that this humor about the beginning of the fit, is
contained without any offense in the Bladder or bag of the Gall; but afterward
by reason of the Convulsions of the Viscera, being from thence pressed forth,
and as it were drawn or stroked out into the Stomach, it is carried from the
distempered Ventricle by Vomit; but there perhaps meeting with some other acid
humor, it acquires a greenish color, yea sometimes a blackish (as we have
sometimes found by Anatomical observation.) And indeed, it appears clear from
this, because those who are of a more cold temperament, and beget little
Choler, when they are sick of the Colic, cast forth by Vomit little or nothing
of the yellow or green Bile; and yet they are wont to be vexed with as cruel
and sharp pains as others.

Wherefore pains of the Loins often come upon the Colic pains.
In the fit of the Colic, to the pains of the Belly, most cruel pains, raging
about the Loins, in the bottom of the back, are very often joined; which
certainly cannot arise from the irritation of any Intestine. But it may be
easily conceived, that these are excited from the Morbific cause implanted in
the Mesentery; forasmuch as some most noted Nerves, belonging to the Loins,
enter into the greatest nervous enfolding of the Mesentery; hence not only
painful Convulsions are delivered by consent from one part to another; but
besides, it is probable, that some Recrements of the Back and Loins, are
derived by this passage into the Mesentery; and in some measure, for this
reason Scorbutical people are so very obnoxious to pains of the Belly, and to a
Flux.

In what the foregoing cause of this Disease consists.
Thus much concerning the nature and seat of the Colic, as also of its conjunct
cause, and of the Symptoms of the same coming into act: As to what belongs to
the foregoing cause, it consists chiefly in these two things, to wit, first of
all for that many Recrements are heaped together in the nervous Liquor; and
secondly, because they being chiefly received from the Nerves, destinated to
the Viscera of the lower Belly, and brought into the Mesentery, The nervous
Liquor is in fault, because the Morbifick Matter is gathered together in it.
constitute the Morbid Mines there: 1. The former of these happens for the most
part, from the fault and vice of the Brain; to wit, because this admits
together with the nervous liquor, Heterogeneous Particles, and infestous to the
Animal Regiment within its borders; besides also, for that it does not send
away presently these and other ordinary Recrements by convenient sinks:
Wherefore, the incongruous matter, when it cannot be otherways carried from the
Brain, it most easily rushes into the most open Nerves of the wandering pair.
And for this Reason it is, that Women from every inordination of the Brain, The
nerves of the wandering pair, and their mesenterick Infoldings, because they
receive into themselves this matter.
frequently contract the disposition called Hysterical; to wit, because the
Recrements of the nervous Liquor, whether they are Spasmodick or Convulsive,
and Elastick or letting off, or painful, or provocative only, being more apt to
be deposed into the wandering pair, so ordinarily excite Convulsive Symptoms,
like to the Colic. 2. Because this matter running into the pair of the
wandering Nerves, is laid up in the Mesentery, or in other Infoldings within the
Abdomen; the reason is, that in these nervous Infoldings, many and large Nerves
of the same conjugation are at last terminated: wherefore, if the Recrements of
the nervous humor, subsiding here as it were upon its bottom, neither can be
drawn back by any of the Vessels, nor pass into the cavities of the Intestines,
there is a necessity that it must erect in this part its morbid nests.

The evident causes are of a double kind, The evident causes of this Disease.
to wit, first, those that do injury to the Brain and nervous stock, by causing
a greater provision of the Morbific matter: or, secondly, those which by
agitating or shaking the Blood and humors, stir up the Mines gathered together,
and before quiet, and provoke them into painful heats or fermentings. It would
be tedious here to examine the manifold, and diverse occasions, by which the
Colic pains are brought upon those predisposed; for these often are caused by
great inordinations in the six non naturals, and the mutations of the Air, and
the Year; and moreover (by what help should be expected) by the untimely
administering Medicines themselves.

From what has been said, The differences of this Disease.
the differences of this Disease may be easily known. For, first, by means of
the causes, we have shown the Colic to be either accidental, which is caused
by reason of the Intestines being provoked by sharp contents, such as we but
now described it. Secondly, By reason of the place affected, the Colic is
sometimes superior, sometimes inferior, sometimes lateral or of the side, as
the Morbific matter is fixed, either sometimes in this part, sometimes in that
part of the Mesentery, or in other infoldings of the Abdomen. Thirdly, By
reason of the sickly condition and temperament of the sick, it is called a
Bilous, or Choleric, a Phlegmatic, or a Melancholic Colic; also either
simple, or Scorbutic; not that these imaginary humors excite of themselves the
Colic, but according to the dispositions of the Body distempered, various
Symptoms are made, or caused to vary.

As to its Prognostic, Its Prognostic.
it is commonly known, that the accidental Colic, to wit, excited from a
solitary evident cause, is most often safe, and with an easy matter cured; but
the habitual, as to its disposition, it is very difficult to be rooted out, so
that the fits may no more return; and its fits sometimes are pertinacious,
notwithstanding Remedies, and sometimes continue many days, yea weeks, and
months.

2. The Colic disposition frequently succeeds long intermitting Feavours, and
continual, being evilly handled; for that the nervous Liquor being highly
vitiated, gathers together many Recrements, which are deeply deposed into the
Infoldings of the Abdomen, as it were the more open receptacles. Further, for
this reason, an Epidemical Feavour rages some years, to which the Colic is
joined, as its Pathognomonick or peculiar Symptom: hence in like manner, a long
and grievous Scurvy causes also the Colic, because it perverts the nervous
liquor.

3. After the Colic pains have raged for sometime in the Belly, they fall
oftentimes into the Loins, and then the Disease increasing or growng worse,
they enter upon the members, and the muscles almost all in the whole Body, and
at length oftentimes end in the Palsy; which certainly is a manifest sign,
that the Morbific matter is not carried by the Arteries, but by the Nerves; and
that its subject or seat, is not the cavities or the coats of the Intestines,
but the nervous Infoldings of the Mesentery: For because the Lumbary pains, or
those of the side, do come upon the torments of the Belly, besides that the
Nerves of either place communicate, the cause is further, for that the Morbific
matter being much increased in the Head, slides down, not only into the
wandering pair, but also into the spinal Marrow; and entering into it, and
settling in its bottom, causes pains to arise in the Loins, and afterward in
many other Nerves, which proceed from the Spine or Backbone, and in other
Members and Muscles distempered; lastly, it brings in the Palsy by the
passages of the Nerves being stuffed by the Morbific Matter heaped up to a
plentitude in them.

4. The more cruel Colic, and very much raging, whose cause is an
Inflammation, or an Imposthum of some Intestine, for the most part induces the
mortal Iliack Passion.

The Curatory method in the Colic, The Cure.
as in most intermitting Diseases, suggests three primary Indications: The
first of which Curatory, to be administered in the fit, respects the allaying
of the pains, and for the sooner and more easy taking away the coming of the
Disease. Secondly, Preservatory, which shows the taking away the cause of the
Disease without the fit, that the fits may not be often repeated, or more
grievously infest. Thirdly, Vital, which supplies Remedies for the preserving
of strength in the torments, and most cruel Cruciations, and for the cherishing
of the Spirits. Concerning these we shall speak a little more sully in order.

1. We almost only respect the Curatory Indication in the accidental Colic;
The first Indication Curatory.
for the evident cause, which is an irritation of the Intestines by sharp
contents, being removed, the pains for the most part cease of their own accord,
nor do they return without the like occasion. Wherefore, for the quick curing
of this Disease, the practice is well enough known to every common person,
among the vulgar, to wit, presently to administer softning Clysters, Topic
Anodynes, and Narcoticks; to which, if a Feavour be joined or feared, letting
of blood is often used with success. We shall set down forms of these, and the
order of using them in the Cure of the habitual Colic.

What the chief Medical intentions are in the Fit.
Therefore, for the healing of this Distemper, in the fit, there are two chief
Intentions; to wit, both to take away the painful breach or solution of the
unity, and to allay the burning or growing hot of the Fibers, and the Spirits
in them. For the former, you must endeavor, both that the matter impacted in
one or more Mines, may be shaken off or subdued; and also, that a flowing in of
new matter may be hindered. The second Intention, which ought chiefly and
continually to be insisted upon, is performed by Anodynes chiefly, and
Narcoticks: After what manner, and by what Remedies, every one of these are
methodically to be done, we shall now show you.

For the most part Clysters are to be begun with,
Most often, the Cure of the pain of the Colic, and that rightly, is begun with
a Clyster. Let this at first be gentle, and only emollient, by which the
Corrugations or the wrinklings of the Fibers may be allayed, and the burning
Spirits flattered or pleased. For this end, warm Milk with Sugar, or Molossus,
or Syrup of Violets, is convenient; as also Emollient Decoctions of Mallows,
Marshmallows, Mercury, with the Flowers of Melilot, Which are at first to be
gentle; afterward more sharp Clysters.
and Elder, with the Oil of Almonds, or of Olives; also a Decoction of a
Sheeps-head, or Calves-feet: sometimes a Clyster of mere Oil of Olives, or of
Linseed Oil, is wont to help before any others.

But if the more gentle Clysters do not loosen the Belly, nor are easily
ejected, there must be given such as will more provoke, and press, or as it
were stroke forth the humors, by the little mouths of the Arteries: For which
end, let there be prepared Carminative Decoctions, or such as expel wind, or
bitter Decoctions; in which are dissolved Electuary Diacatholicon,
Diaphoenicon, or of Laurel berries, or Species Hierae: Also to these Liquors it
is usual to add the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum three or four ounces, or of
the Emollient Decoction one pint: add of Venice Treacle dissolved with the yolk
of an Egg one ounce or an ounce and a half; or Take of sound Urine one pint, of
Venice Turpentine dissolved one ounce and a half, of Molossus one ounce, mix
them, and make a Clyster. I have known this oftentimes to bring great help; the
reason of which seems to be, for that the Balsamic Particles of the Turpentine
comfort the Intestines; and besides, being received by the Blood in the Veins,
and with it circulated through the whole Body, moves the Urine, so that by such
a Clyster, plenty of water follows, and always is rendered with a smell like
Violets. Perhaps also, the Particles of the Turpentine being every where
diffused, either move the stagnating Morbific matter, or incline the acetous,
or otherways degenerate, to a better disposition.

Fomentations.
Whilst the Intestines are thus washed with Clysters, and are cherished within,
Fomentations are likewise to be applied to the outer parts of the Belly. Take
of the leaves of both the Mallows, of Mercury, of Pellitory, each four
handfuls; of the Flowers of Elder, Chamomil, and Melilot, each two handfuls:
the head of a Sheep cut in pieces. Let them be boiled in as much Spring Water
as will suffice; strain it, and use it for a Fomentation, with hot linen
stuphes dipped in it, and wrung forth, and shifting them apply them by turns.
Repeating them as often as the more strong pains do come upon them: In the
intervals, Pultesses or Ointments may be administered.

Pultesses.
Make a Pultess of bruised Herbs, adding to it of oaten meal what will suffice;
which may be laid to the belly, covering it with little square bags made for
that purpose. Let one of these at a time be made hot in a pan set over hot
coals, with the Oil of Earthworms, or of Frogs; lay them on warm, shifting
them as soon as one grows cold.

An Ointment.
Or Take of the Oil of Earthworms or of Frogs what will suffice; and anoint
the pained part, after the Fomentation, and lay upon it a thin sheet of fine
brown paper dipped in it.

The Caul of a Lamb, or the Lungs, or the Inwards of any other Beast, being
laid warm to the Belly, and so shifted, sometimes wonderfully eases the pain.

Cold Fomentations.
I have observed in some Constitutions and temperaments, that Fomentations or
Bathings made of hot things, and applied hot, have rather made the pains worse
than eased them: wherefore in these cases, it will seem good to prescribe
Fomentations of the solutions of Nitre, or of Sal Armoniack, or other Chemical
Liquors, as in the pains of the Gout, and sometimes (as Septalius says) of pure
cold water.

But if the torments of the Belly do not remit by the use of these, Hypnoticks
must be used; which being given in a just Dose, oftentimes give great truces:
In the mean time, that the tired Spirits may be refreshed, and strength
preserved, there must be yet instituted a farther provision against the Disease.

Take of liquid Landanum Tartarisated, Opiates.
from sixteen drops to twenty, let it be given going to sleep, in a spoonful of
the water of Chamomil flowers, drinking after it six spoonfuls of the same
water: Let it be repeated every other, or every third night, if the pains be
very great.

In a more hot Constitution, Take of the water of Chamomil flowers three
ounces, of the Syrup of Poppies half an ounce, of Aqua mirabilis two drams;
make a draught, to be taken at the hour of Sleep.

In the mean time, Evacuating Medicines.
whilst these things are doing, for the allaying the pains, evacuating Remedies
have their turns, for the discussing, or at least for the loosning the matter
impacted in the morbid nests; to wit, that both the Colic Mine may be wholly
extirpated; and also that the supplements or its cherishment be cut off, that
they may not more increase. Vomiting Medicines.
For these ends a Vomit (where it is convenient) and a gentle purging, ought to
be ordered; and also in an hot temperament, where there is a Feavour, or where
it is feared. letting of Blood.

Take of the Sulphur of Antimony, from five grains to seven or eight, of the
Conserves of Borrage one Dram; let it be given in the Morning with government.
In this case may be given, according to the judgment of the Physician present,
either an Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or of Mercurius Vitae: The Emerick
Tartar of Mynsicht, the expression of the leaves of Asarum: and in more tender
Constitutions, Salt of Vitriol, and Wine and Oxymel of Squills.

Purges must be given only in a small Dose, Purges.
and such as are choice, lest they move a nauseousness in the stomach of the
sick.

Take of the Resine of Ialap, of Scammony, each five grains, of the Cream of
Tartar one scruple, of Cinnamon powdered four grains; make a Powder, or let it
be reduced into Pills, or into a Bolus, with the Conserves of the Flowers of
Borrage, or Damask Roses.

Take of Scammony sulphurated half a scruple, of the Cream of Tartar fifteen
grains, of Diaphoretick Antimony one scruple; make a Powder, and let it be
given after the same manner.

If there be not a Feavour, a Dose of Stomach Pills cum Gummi may be given, or
of Amber by it self, or with the Resine of Ialap.

Take of Pill. Rudii twenty five Grains, or half a dram, of Laudamon one grain;
make four Pills, let them be taken at the hour of rest: These at first cause
sleep, and Purge in the morning. Salivation.
Or, Take of Calomelanos one scruple, of the Resine of Ialap six grains, of
Scammony four grains, of Ammoniacum what will suffice; make four Pills to be
taken going to rest. In a long and tedious Colic, when all other Remedies help
little or nothing, I have often known this Medicine, being once or twice given,
to have moved Salivation, with the greatest ease to the sick. For when the
morbific matter, being heaped together, and thoroughly impacted in the nervous
Infoldings, and other places about the Abdomen, could not be moved by any other
Medicines; the Mercurial Particles every way unfolding themselves, easily
dissolve it, and divide it into small bits, and drive it up and down hither and
thither, and at length wholly dissipate it. Wherefore in a long and
pertinacious Colic a gentle Salivation sometimes may be very happily
administered.

Baths, Baths.
and Sweating Medicines, are ordinarily wont to be prescribed in the pains of
the Colic; but as to our observation, very rarely with success: For that
these, by shaking the Blood and nervous humor, cause them to lay up still more
matter into the Colic Mine, yea and that matter there deposited, to grow more
hot and raging, and very rarely wholly shake it off.

Diuretics are wont much more profitably to be given, Diuretics.
by which when the Blood is poured forth, and its serosities plentifully
precipitated, the nourishment of the Disease is cut off, and the bloody Mass
being emptied, receives part of the Morbific matter, so that its relics are
more easily shaken off. For this end,

Take of the best Spirit of Tartar rectified half an ounce; let half a dram be
given twice or thrice in a day, in a spoonful or two of the following Iulep,
drinking after it five spoonfuls of the same.

Take of the Water of the leaves of Burdock, or of Aron, or of Arsmart, one
pint; of the Water of the flowers of Elder and of Chamomil, each four ounces;
of the compound water of Gentian, of the compound Water of Raddishes, each two
ounces, of Sugar six drams; mix them together.

After the same manner as the Spirit of Tartar, may be given in a just Dose,
sometimes the Tincture of the Salt of Tartar, sometimes the simple mixture, or
the Spirit of Sal Armoniack succinated, or impregnated with Amber.

Take of Millepedes prepared two drams, of the flowers of Sal Armoniack
Tartarized one dram, of the Oil of Nutmegs half a scruple, of Turpentine what
will suffice; make a Mass, and let it be made into Pil^s; take three or four
once or twice in a day, drinking after it a Dose of the Iulep, or of the
following distilled water five or six spoonfuls.

Take of fresh Millepedes or Hog-Lice cleansed one pint and a half, the outer
rind of six Oranges, and of four Lemons, six Nutmegs; let them be cut small,
and add to them one pound of the crumbs of stale white Bread: all being bruised
together and well mixed, pour to them four pints of new Milk, and of Sack one
quart; let them be distilled according to art, and the whole liquor mixed
together; you may sweeten it with Sugar, or the Syrup of Violets as you please.

Mineral Purging Waters.
In a long and pertinacious Colic, to those who are of a more cold temperament
and Viscera, Purging Spaw Waters, or Whey with the Syrup of Violets, are wont
to be given oftentimes with great help; for both liquors, where they are
agreeable, being plentifully drunk, refrigerate the stomach and the hot
Intestines, and presently loosen and help them in their painful Cramps and
wrinklings, or from the Convulsive winds or blasts that extend them; besides,
they chiefly help (as I suppose) for that they tame and subdue the Saline
Particles of another nature, insinuating themselves into the Morbific Mine, and
other Saline and irritative Particles inhabiting it, and oftentimes carry them
forth by Purging.

In this Disease, as all things are not convenient for all men, yea neither the
same thing always for the same person, there is daily need of the careful
observation of a prudent Physician, that by the co-indications from things
taken, that hurt or help, a right method of healing may be instituted, and
varied as occasion serves.

The Vital Indication suggests Remedies.
2. The Vital Indication ought to be joined to the Curatory, and that between
whiles. For when the sick, being afflicted with torture, watching, Vomiting,
and abstinence almost continual, often fall into languishment, and sometimes in
danger of their lives; Remedies which sustain strength, refresh the Spirits,
and procure some truces against the fierceness of the Disease, to wit,
Cardiacks or Cordials, and Hypnoticks or such as cause rest, have here their
turns.

Cardiack.
Take of the Water of the flowers of Chamomil, and of Elder, each four ounces;
of Barlyed Cinnamon, and of the whole Citron, each two ounces; of Pearl
powdered one dram, of Sugar three drams; make a Iulep, take of it five or six
spoonfuls.

Take of the Powder of Pearl, and of Crabs Eyes, each one dram; let it be
divided into four parts; let one part be given twice or thrice in a day, with
the Iulep, or with a Decoction of the roots of Contrayerva.

Take of the Conserve of Clove-Gilliflowers one ounce, of the Confection de
Hyacintho, of Alchermes, each two drams; of Pearl powdered half a dram, of the
Syrup of the juice of Citrons what will suffice; make a Confection, give of it
the quantity of a Nutmeg, three or four times in a day with the Iulep.

In less hot Constitutions, Spirits of Hartshorn, of Sut, of Sal Armoniack
impregnated with Amber, also the Tincture of Antimony, or of Coral, do
oftentimes give notable help.

Hypnoticks.
Opiates are of necessary use in the Disease of the Colic, without which, the
sick cannot live, nor the Physicians, nor those who attend them be at quiet, or
have any leisure time. Take of the water of Cowslip flowers three ounces, of
the Syrup of Poppies half an ounce, of Aqua Mirabilis two drams; mix them and
make a draught to be given going to sleep.

If the pains be very strong, and yield to no such Remedy, prepared Opium and
its compositions ought to be given. The Laudanum of Paracelsus, or the London
Laudanum, Pills of Styrax, or of Hounds-tongue are convenient; a Solution of
Tartarisated Opium from sixteen to twenty grains is much used by me. Which
Medicine indeed I have given with very good success, to some, that for a long
time have been miserably vexed with this Disease, sometimes a great while every
night or every other night.

The Preservatory Indication, by which are indicated,
3. The Preservatory Indication has only place in the intervals of the fits,
and endeavors the taking away the present foregoing cause of the Disease, and
hindering it for the future, so that the fits of the pains may seldom or never
afterward return: For which end, the Blood and the nervous liquor ought to be
purified, le^t they should beget the morbific matter; and conserved in its due
temper, and the Brain and the nervous Infoldings of the Abdomen corroborated,
le^t they should too readily receive it. For these ends, a strict diet being
ordered, let them enter into a course of Physic Spring and Fall; such as we
prescribed for the prevention of the Gout.

Vomiting in this case is never to be omitted, Vomiting.
if it be agreeable, to wit, by which the Emunctories of the Viscera being
emptied, the Recrements of the Blood, and the nervous Liquor, which otherwise
would augment the morbific matter, may be received more plentifully; besides
the nervous Infoldings, and all the parts are so shaken, that nothing of that
which is about to go into the Mine of the Disease, is suffered to stagnate or
to be heaped up there.

Let Purging for three or four times, Purging.
with due intervals, and also in a hot Constitution, Phlebotomy be celebrated;
moreover, let altering Remedies, and especially Chalybeats, or such as are made
out of Steel, when they do not Purge, be daily taken at medical hours.

But before all other Remedies whatsoever, Altering Remedies.
the drinking of Mineral Waters, such as come from Iron, for a month, in the
Summer time, is wont to give the greatest help: But when these are drunk, you
must take heed, that they be rendered well and quickly by Urine or Stool, lest
if they should chance to stay long in the body, by running into the Head or
Feet, (as they often do) they should cause a Vertigo or the Gout.

Take of our Tincture of Steel one ounce, and let fifteen to twenty drops be
taken twice in a day in seven spoonfuls of the following Iulep.

Take of the Waters of the leaves of Aron, and of Burdock, each half a pound;
of the Magisterial of Earth Worms, of Gentian compound, of Poeony compound,
each two ounces; of Sugar half an ounce; mix them.

After the same manner, here deservedly have place the Tincture of Antimony,
and of Amber, yea and many other altering Remedies above prescribed for the
Distempers of the Head, may also be used for the preservation from the Colic,
whose foregoing cause proceeds from the Brain.

As to Charles Piso's Observation, The Objection of Charles Piso solved.
by which he endeavors to prove, that the cause of the pain of the Colic
remains wholly in the Brain, because he had found a Serous deluge in the Head
of a certain person dead of that Disease: I say, that this Serum being heaped
up in the head, was the remote and antecedent cause of this Disease, and not
the conjunct cause. But indeed it is probable, that from this first spring a
certain portion of this superfluous and sharp Serum did descend, by the nervous
passage, into the nervous Infoldings of the Abdomen, and there constitute the
Mines of the Colic Distemper. Further, although the Morbific matter there
sliden down, because of the tenuity of the parts, and the smallness of the
nests, can rarely be seen with the eyes, yet I have plainly seen and handled
such a Mine of this Disease become inveterate and very cruel, not long since,
in the Mesentery, opening the dead body of a certain Gentlewoman, of whom I
have elsewhere made mention.

Being sometimes since consulted with, The first History.
concerning the curing of a Reverend old Man, grievously obnoxious for many
years to the Disease of the Colic; I administered to him the same method of
healing, and the Remedies I but now described; by the use of which, he found
himself much better after a month or two, and within half a year he seemed to
be perfectly well, so that he lived afterward wholly freed from any fits of
the pains: But the Colic disposition had not long ceased, and he had omitted
the usual course of Medicine, but he suffered about his throat a resolution or
loosning in the Muscles serving for swallowing, which troubled him oftentimes,
so that he was in danger to be choked by Food, and chiefly by liquid things
sticking in that place. Against this evil receiving help by Antiparalytick
Remedies, he continued from thence six or seven years in moderate health; at
last, being taken, the first time in the midst of a journey with an Apoplexy,
The Reason of it.
he dyed. It is obvious enough in this case, that the Recrements of the nervous
liquor, that were wont to be deposed about the nervous Infoldings of the
Abdomen, did at first stir up the Distemper of the Colic; then the same being
shut forth from that part, getting another nest for themselves about the
Ganglioform nervous Infoldings of the Throat, brought in the resolution or
short Palsy of the Oesophagus; and lastly, by reason of the same matter
restagnating in too great a plenty in the middle part of the Brain, that deadly
senslesness followed.

A certain cunning and crafty little Lawyer, The second History.
about fifty years of Age, was wont to be troubled for many years with a
periodical Headache, and with a stupor or numness of his Senses, and a great
weight of his head; about the middle of Summer laboring very much with the
aforesaid Distempers, he perceived a sudden ease from the applying of Topical
Remedies; but a little after, he was taken with a very cruel Colic, then being
the first time; whose fit fell upon him with so much cruelty, that his strength
suddenly failing, he fell into frequent swooning fits, with a cold sweat, which
fit notwithstanding by leisure vanished within twenty four hours, without any
breaking of wind, or going to Stool. But after that, he suffered frequent fits,
and became obnoxious to the Disease; all which (as I was carefully informed)
for the most part were ushered in with a pain of the Head, with a Vertigo, and
amazedness, or stupidity, and from hence he was wont to presage the pains of
the Colic would very suddenly follow. In a certain fit, which lasted for
twelve days with great cruelty, the sick person himself observed, and told me,
that whilst the distemper troubled him in his Belly, he felt no trouble in his
head, but the Colic pains remitting, presently the Vertigo returned, with the
Headache: The Reason of it.
from which reciprocal translation of these Symptoms, from the Head into the
Belly, and so on the contrary from the Belly to the Head, we may lawfully
argue, that the same Morbific matter, flowing in the nervous Passages, falling
down sometimes below, brought in the Colic Passion, and sometimes above; and
restagnating, caused those distempers of the Head. Hither may be referred, what
Charles Piso has accurately observed concerning himself, being wont to be
affected with Cepha^ick distempers, and the Colic pains by turns, and with a
mutual dependency, Sect. 4. C. 2. p. 355.

The third History.
Not long since, a certain studious young Gentleman, and living a sedentary
life, began to complain of a great stupidity of his senses, and a dullness, as
also of a great weight of his Head, and almost continual sleepiness; further,
his Ventricle or Stomach was become so slothful and stupid, that he wanted all
manner of Appetite, whilst a Cure was instituted against this evil disposition,
by Remedies which roused up the Spirits, and shook off their burdens, this
Gentleman fell into a most cruel Colic Passion (which he was never obnoxious
to before) from which a most cruel pain, like the boreing of an Auger,
possessed the middle of the Abdomen, his Navil being drawn inwards, and
notwithstanding the daily use of all kind of Remedies, it continued for three
weeks, with great cruelty; that in the time he could take no rest, but what he
received from Narcoticks, nor could he receive any ease from his pains, The
Reason of it showed.
unless by an hot fomentation. Certainly in this case it is plain enough to
every one, that the impurities of the nervous liquor being gathered to a
certain fullness, was the immediate or conjunct cause of the whole sickness;
which matter subsisting first in the Head, brought in the notable stupidity of
the Brain and the oppression of the Animal Function; then being fallen down, by
the passage of the Nerves, into the nervous Infoldings of the Abdomen, caused
that cruel and daily Colic.

FINIS.
A TABLE.
A.
AFfections, how wont to be iterated, and how allayed or obliterated, 49. they
are more than eleven, 54. the two primary affections or gestures of the Soul,
are pleasure and grief 48 Altering Medicines are of the greatest moment, in the
cure of melancholy Diseases, and not purging Medicines as the Ancients thought
196 Anatomy of an Oyster, 9. of a Lobster 11 Anger, its character, 54. it is of
kin to boldness ibid. Animals reduced into classes, 7. as Fire and Light are
chiefly energetical in mechanical things, so in Animals. In perfect ones there
ought to be many senses 56 Animal spirits, what they are, 23. to what compared,
ibid. they abound in an objective, and an active virtue, 24. they are the
efficient cause of sense and motion, 56. a most swift communication of them
implanted within all the parts, ibid. an opposite tendency of them effect both
sense and motion, ibid. they pass through the sensible species; and not the
effluvia of the object, penetrate even to the head, 59. they actuate the
Rainbow of the Eye very much, 85. they are the immediate subject of sleep, 87.
and the immediate subject of the Vertigo, 147. their distemper being after a
diverse manner, as it is the cause of the phrensy, so it is of Melancholy,
Madness and Stupidity, 188. from what disposition of them the primary
Phenomenon of a melancholic Delirium proceed, ibid. as they are compared to
light, they are called opacous or full of darkness, 189. these kind of spirits
in melancholy compared to those in Chemical Liquors, ibid. they are not like
the spirit of Blood as they should be, nor like the spirit of Wine, for such is
rather in the Phrensy, ibid. they are like acid spirits distilled out of Salt,
Vinegar, Box, and such like, ibid. Stygian Waters are like the nature of the
Animal Spirits in madness, ibid. three chief affections of acetous Chemical
Liquors, which agree with them in Melancholy; first the effluvias falling away
from these Liquors are perpetually in motion; in like manner also the Spirits
in the Phantasy of a Melancholic Person; thence the effluvias from acetous
Chemical Liquors do not proceed far; in like manner the imagination of a
Melancholic Person, though always employed, comprehends only a few things, and
therefore every thing is conceived with a greater Image than it should be:
Lastly, effluvias from acetous Liquors do not evaporate so much from open Pores
as they make new; and in like manner, whilst the Animal Spirits form new tracts
in the Brain, produce unwonted and incongruous notions, 190, 191. after they
have for some time been vitiated in melancholy, the conformation of the Brain
is also hurt, 191. how they acquire a disposition like to Stygian Water, 202.
they are the subject of Madness 201 Antiscorbutick Medicines good for pains in
the head 116 Apoplexy, its seat, 153. a description of the disease, ibid. its
subject, ibid. the spontaneous functions only deficient in it, ibid. the
opinions of others concerning this disease, ibid. the theory of this disease is
best shown by Webser, 154. a reason added by the Author, ibid. a twofold
Apoplexy, 155. The Theory of the former delivered, ibid. this disease either
accidental or habitual, ibid. the cause of the former, 156. an extinction of
the Spirits comes from opiates or immoderate drinking of hot Waters, ibid. the
formal reason of the habitual Apoplexy, ibid. what its conjunct cause is, 157.
it consists in the Pores of the Callous Body, being suddenly stopped, and the
spirits being driven away by the contact of malignant matter, ibid. what the
nature, or disposition of the morbifick matter, ibid. the procatartick cause of
the habitual Apoplexy, ibid. the differences of this disease, 158. its
prognostics, ibid. the curatory method, ibid. what is to be done in the fit,
and in what position the sick ought to be kept, ibid. Phlebotomy and other
administrations noted, as Vomiting-medicines, Comforters, Cupping-glasses, hot
or glowing Iron, 159. the preservatory method, ibid. purging and bleeding
Spring and Fall, ibid. Cephalic remedies, ibid. Spirits and Tinctures,
Lozenges, Tea, Coffee, and Chocalet prepared, how to be made and taken, 160 a
medical Ale, ibid. Examples and Histories of Apoplectical Persons, ibid. an
Anatomical observation 161 Appetite, it stirs up local motion, 36. the
Appetite, Imagination and Phantasy in the callous Body of the Brain 25 Approach
of the sensible object is made either by contact or effluvias sent forth, or by
reflected or repercussed particles of the Air, Breath or Light 56 Arguments and
Reasons of very many Authors, persuade that the Soul of Brutes is not only
Corporeal but Fiery 5 Artery cutting, what it may profit in the headache 120,
121 Authors for two distinct Souls in man 40
B.
BAths, when their use is hurtful to the Palsy 173 Bewailing, wherefore
oftentimes joined with weeping 80 Blasting, or withering of Trees like the
Palsy 164 Blood animated, but hardly sensible, 55. its disorders allayed by
sleep, 92. it performs its offices (which are the generation of the Animal
Spirits, and nourishing the parts) better in sleep, ibid. how it excites the
headache, 108. the Blood and its contents are sometimes the means of the
conjunct, sometimes of the evident cause in head-achs, 109. for what causes it
is wont to be moved and bring hurt to the distempered head, ibid. it delivers
to the head the morbifick matter received from any other part, 110. its
inordinations, how they may be taken away and prevented, 114. its exclusion
from the Brain does not easily happen, because all the Arteries communicate one
with another, and some of them supply the defects of others, 154. its total
exclusion from the Brain sometimes happening, causes a terrible Syncope, 155.
which depends oftnest on the motion of the heart being hindered, and so either
by reason of the Cardiak Nerves being bound together, or by reason of the
Spirits in the Cerebel being hindered from their flowing into the Nerves, ibid.
the original of madness either from the Blood, or the Spirits themselves 203
Bloody Brutes, why some more hot, some more cold 13 Bloodless Creatures,
whether they have Fiery Souls ibid. Brain and Cerebel, 2. Roots of the
sensitive Soul, 23. a twofold action in the Brain and its Appendix, of
begetting and dispensation, and of Exercise and Government, 24. the reason and
manner of the former, ibid. an exact anatomy of the Brain through its
corticated or shelly part, 25. the Brain and Praecordia the two Roots of the
Soul, 48. vices of the Brain noted, 148. its distempers, wherein the reason is
hurt, as well as the other Animal functions, 179. what its indisposition is to
the Phrensy, 183. the Procatartick cause of the Phrensy partly in the Brain,
184. Melancholy a distemper of it and the Heart, 188. its conformation is hurt
after the Animal Spirits being for some time vitiated in melancholy Diseases,
191. the Brain labors in stupidity as to its magnitude and figure, 209. as to
its substance or texture, 210. and in its evil conformation as to its pores and
passages. ibid. Bridges passing over them, looking down from on high places,
and drunkenness, how they cause a turning round of the head 146 Brutes, their
various kinds with their Souls described, 7. all their Souls after the manner
of Fire want a twofold Food, viz. a Sulphurous and Nitrous, 6. the more perfect
Brutes are endued with knowledge, either inbred or acquired, 34. what natural
instinct brings to them, ibid. some examples and instances of it, ibid. Brutes
in some things are taught by the impressions of sensible things, 35. the direct
sensible Species creates in them the Phantasy and memory, ibid. the reflected
the Appetite, 36. by example, imitation and institution also, 37. how far it is
they are able to know, ibid. their Syllogisms, 38. their raciocination what,
and how vile 39 A Burning-Glass placed before a dark Chamber declares how light
is made 77
C.
CAros, how it differs from the Lethargy and Apoplexy, 136. its seat a little
deeper in the Brain than that of the Lethargy, ibid. its conjunct cause, ibid.
it is either a primary Disease, or comes upon other distempers, ibid. its
prognostics, 137. its cure the same with the Lethargy and Apoplexy, ibid. its
Histories ibid. Cartesius and others, their opinions concerning the Souls of
Brutes 3 Coma waking its description, 141. its causes shown, ibid. more often a
Symptom than a Disease, ibid. V. Caros Colic, whence its denomination, 225.
why counted among the Diseases of the Nervous stock, ibid. its description,
ibid. its seat not always or often in the Gut Colon, neither in its Cavity or
Coats, ibid. its conjunct cause are not the contents of the intestines, nor the
humor impacted in the Membranes, 226* the Nervous Liquor seems most of all to
contribute to its cause* ibid. its seat and part affected, 227, 228. why pains
of the Loins often come upon Colic pains, ibid. in what the foregoing cause
consists, ibid. the evident cause, 229. the differences of this disease, ibid.
its prognostics, ibid. its c^re, ibid. to 233. its Histories 233* 234
Corporeal Soul the subject of the rational, 41. after what manner it is affected
in melancholy and madness. 191 Custom, its force, 89. a notable example
thereof ibid.
D.
DEafness sometimes proceeds from the looseness of the Drum 73 Declination of
age disposes some to foolishness 211 Delirium, what it is, 179, its formal
reason, ibid. its causes either from the blood, or ex teriour Spirits planted
in the Nervous Stock, 180. by what and how many ways it is caused by the blood,
ibid. how it proceeds from the irregularities of the exterior spirits, 181.
its prognostics, ibid. its cure, ibid. the primary Phenomenon of a
melancholic Delirium, and from what dispositions of the Spirits they proceed
188 Desire and aversion chiefly employ the Soul, 51. how excited, etc. ibid. to
53 Digby and others their opinion of the Souls of Brutes 3 Dreams, what they
are, 93. sometimes excited by the Spirits inhabiting the Brain, sometimes
inhabiting other parts, viz. the Stomach, etc. 94. they sometimes stir up local
motions ibid. Drunkenness and looking down from high places, etc. how they
cause a Vertigo 146
E.
EAR, and its uses 71, 72 Eating is a certain solution 62 Epicurus and his late
followers opinion that the Soul is made of Atoms 2, 3 Epilepsy, its seat the
middle of the Brain, which is the seat of the Apoplexy also 161. Eye, its
description and reason of its diverse conformation inquired into a p. 78 to 86
F.
FEar, its character, etc. 53, 54 Feeling, more thick, but most ample of all
the senses, 60. its kinds, etc. from 60 to 62. what its proper organ 168 Fire,
its definition agrees, by its causes and essences, with the Soul of Brutes 5
Fishes, why they rejoice rather in the Water than Air, ibid. they breath by the
Gills ibid. Flame V* Fire, part of the Soul, 22, 31, 33. its difference from
light 76 Foolishness, V. Stupidity.
G.
GAssendus his assertion of the Soul, 4* according to him every body is either
l^cid or illustrated 77 Gometius and Pereira deny the Souls of Brutes to have
sense and perception 2 Gout, a distemper of the Nervous Stock, 214. its
subject, its appearances rehearsed, ibid. parts affected, 215. morbi^ick
matter, not any simple humor, ibid. in its mine two humors concur and
mutually grow hot, exemplifyed how, ibid. the Blood full of a fixed Salt, as it
were its feminine, the Nervous Liquor being sharp, the masculine seed, 216. its
foregoing causes, ibid. and 217, 218. the evident causes of the goutish fit,
218. whence the debility of the Ioints, 217. differences of the Gout, 219 wont
to be complicated with the Scurvy and Stone, and the reason of that showed,
ibid. its prognostic, ibid. cure, ib. a notable history of the Stone converted
into the Go^t, and of the Gout into the Stone 224
H.
Headache the most common, and chiefest affection among diseases, 105. its
causes so manifold that they can hardly be methodically recited, ibid. hence
its cure often instituted empirically, ibid. what things belong to its
pathology, ibid. its subject, ibid. its formal reason, differences and kinds,
106. either within or without the Soul, universal or particular, ibid. many
(...) differences noted, ibid. an habitual one has always a more remote cause
besides the evident, ibid. its causes, a p. 107 ad 110. arising from the
Nervous Liquor it chiefly infests in the morning, 108. how stirred up by many
humors meeting together and growing hot, ibid. the habitual one chiefly
depends on the fault of the Nervous humor, 109. its kinds noted at large, 112,
113. how it seems to arise from the Spleen, mesentery or womb, ibid. its
prognostics, 113. cure, from 114 to 125. Histories, ibid. a continual head^ach
not to be accounted incurable 123 Hearing, its excellency as to use and
activity, performed at a distance, etc. 69. its organ described 71 Heart
hardened, what it is 47 Histories of head-achs, from 121 to 125. of one killed
presently by taking too large a d^se of Opium, 128. of Lethargick, 232, etc. of
continual sleepiness, 135, 137. of long waking, 140. of the Vertigo* 151, 152.
of the Apoplexy, 160. of the Palsy. 174, 175, 176, 177. of the del^rium or
Phrensy, 187. of Melancholy, 197, 198. Histories of mad people are to be sought
in Hospitals for mad people, 208. A notable History of the Stone converted into
the Gout, and the Gout into the Stone, 224. of the Colic, 233, 234. of a
mortal madness from eating the leaves of Wolfs-bane 204 Hope, 53, 54
I.
IMages, light, and color are of the same substance 75 Imaginary Metamorphosis
of melancholic persons 200 Imagination, V. Phantasy. Incubus, or Nightmare
its seat in the cerebel, 142. its description, ibid. it most often proceeds
from natural causes, ibid. its seat falsely placed in the Brain, ibid. the
Praecordia truly labor in this Disease, ibid. its cause does not stick partly
in the Brain, and partly in the Breast, ibid. its next cause is the hindrance
of the inflowing of the Spirits to the Praecordia, 143. this not in the parts
affected, nor Nerves themselves, but in the cerebel, where the first spring of
the spirits is, ibid. from whence the sense of the weight and loss of motion
proceeds, ibid. why the fit being so grievous is so often ended without leaving
any evil, ibid. whence the trembling of the Heart and Praecordia after the fit,
ibid. the Incubus of it self rarely dangerous, ibid. its prognostics, 144. its
Cure, ibid. how infants and boys obnoxious to this Disease ought to be handled,
ibid. Insects appear to have fiery Souls, because they want sulphurous and
nitrous food 8 Instances of passion merely Physical 46 Instinct natural, what
it is, 34. what it brings to Brutes, ibid. examples of it, ibid. it dictates to
them what is wholesome, what not, 35. leads not only to simple actions, but to
very complicate ones, ibid. yet those always, and in all, of one kind only,
ibid. how it is wont to be compared with acquired notions, 37. and with the
impressions of sensible things, ibid. with habits learned from example or
institution, ibid. with notions learned from experience and imitation ibid.
Intellect in man presides over the imagination, etc. 38. and discerns its
errors, sublimates its notions, and divests them from matter, and contemplates
immaterial substances, judges and directs its propositions, deduces from these
others more sublime thoughts, beholds it self by a reflected action, and
contemplates other things remote from sense, as God, etc. 39. it depends upon
the Phantasy, 41. by reason of the various constitution of this and the Brain,
Souls seems unequal 42 Issues made upon or near the distempered place help
little 119
K.
ALL Knowledge from sense 57
L.
LEthargy, its seat the same with that of Sleep and Memory, 125. its Fits are
called by this name, ibid. and the soporiferous disposition also, 126. of which
are various kinds, ibid. its causes, ibid. to 128. what things belong to its
theory, 129. the chiefest of its symptoms, ibid. by what means the other
faculties of the Soul, as the knowing, desiring and locomotive are affected
ibid. its evil reaches also to the cerebel, ibid. hence breathing often hurt or
altered, ibid. which proceeds ^ot from the inflammation of the midriff, ibid.
its Fever from whence, ibid. and 130. none dies without one, ibid. its
prognostics, ibid. its cure, 131 to 133. Histories, ibid. its ends or limits
as to the places distempered are constituted, ibid. some sleepy distempers
lesser than it, the Caros greater ibid. Light, Colors and Images the same
substance, 75. Light and Flame their differences, 76. wherefore Light either
reflected or refracted goes forward only in straight lines, ib. it can pass
through a Chamber, in the mean time not to be perceived, ibid. it is primary or
secundary, ibid. the differences of these, 77 Lobster, its Anatomy 11, 12 Local
motion stirred up by the appetite 36 Love, how excited, 50. it and hatred
transitory passions, 51. its object set up like an Idol in the Phantasy and
worshipped 50 Love-madness, 199. reasons of its symptoms ibid. Lucid part of
the Soul, 22. shines diversely, 31. alteration of the flamy part impressed by it
32 Lungs, how differ in Birds and four footed Beasts, 17. for what end
perforated in Birds ibid.
M.
MAdness and Melancholy are akin, 201. the subject of Madness are the Animal
Spirits, the disposition of which are like to Stygian Water, ibid. three chief
accidents in Madness, which are also to be found in Stygian Water, 201, 202.
the conjunct cause of Madness what it is, ibid. the original of Madness, either
from the Spirits themselves, or from the Blood, 203. it begins from the Spirits
from two occasions, ibid. by what means it comes upon Melancholy, 204. how upon
a Phrensy, ibid, the original of Madness sometimes from the Blood, ibid. it is
either hereditary, the reason of which is shown, 204. or acquired, and so
either by reason of errors in the six non-naturals, or by reason of Poisons,
ibid. History of a mortal Madness from eating the leaves of Wolfs-bane, ibid.
the reasons of the symptoms of Madness explained, 205. wherefore madmen are
audacious, ibid. from whence their immense strength, ibid. wherefore they are
never tired, ibid. wherefore they are not easily hurt, ibid. the differences in
respect of the original magnitude and time, ibid. the prognostics, ibid. the
cure from the indications of continual Madness, 206. the curatory indication as
to discipline, ibid. as to Medicines, ibid. the preservatory indication
consists in altering Medicines, as whey, etc. specificks, etc. ibid. the vital
and curatory indications 208 Melancholy, its definition, 188. it is a distemper
of the Brain and Heart, ibid. its Examples or Types various and almost in
finite, ibid. it is either universal or particular, ibid. the primary Phenomenon
of a melancholic Delirium, and from what disposition of the Spirits they
proceed, ibid. as they are compared to light they are called opacous or full of
darkness, 189. these kind of Spirits in Melancholy compared to those in
Chemical Liquors, ibid. they are not like the Spirit of Blood as they should
be, nor like the Spirit of Wine, for such is rather in the Phrensy, ibid. but
these are like acid Spirits distilled out of Salt, Vinegar, Box, and such like,
ibid. the formal reason of Melancholy aptly represented by acetous Chemical
Liquors, ibid. there are three chief affections of these which agree with the
Animal Spirits in Melancholy, 190, 191. in Melancholy after the Spirits being
for some time vitiated, the conformation of the Brain becomes also hurt, 191.
in this Disease the affection of the Praecordia, as to fear and sadness is
delivered, ibid. after what manner the corporeal Soul is affected in Melancholy
and Madness, ibid. the cause of either depends partly on the Blood, and partly
on the Animal action of the Heart, ibid. the Procatartick causes of Melancholy
are partly the acetous nature of the Spirits, and partly the Melancholy
discrasie of the Blood; and the distemper begins sometimes from this, sometimes
from that, 191, 192. how it begins from the Spirits and the Animal Government,
192. by what means it arises from the Blood, ibid. Melancholy does not arise
from any atrabiliary humor heaped up in some p^ace or mine, ibid. by what
means, according to the Ancients it is said to arise from the Head, ibid. how
from the Womb, ibid, how from the Spleen, ibid. how from the whole Body, 193.
the differences of this Disease, in respect of its first subject, and by reason
of the temperament of the Sick, and in respect of its next cause, as it is
singular or conjunct, and in respect of the imagination being diversely hurt,
ibid. its prognostics, ibid. in the Cure the evident cause is first to be
removed, ibid. and herein are three primary indications, first Curatory, etc.
193, 194. secondly Preservatory, etc. 149, altering Medicines are here of
greatest moment, and not purging as the Ancients thought, 196. Histories of
this Disease, 197. particular Melancholy is excited by reason of two sorts of
affections concerning good or evil 199 Melancholic persons their imaginary
Metamorphosis 200 Metamorphosis imaginary of melancholic Persons 200
Millepedes notably help in the cure of the head ach 118
N.
NEmesius attributes sense and perception to corporeal Souls, and farther the
use of an inferior reason 3 Nervous Liquor how a cause of the headache, 108.
the habitual headache depends chiefly upon its fault, etc. 109, wherefore it
ofttimes becomes corrosive, etc. 202 Nutritious juice, how it excites the
headache, 108.110, 111
O.
OP^ats, how they cause sleep, 128. how they operate in the Ventricle or Brain,
how as assigned by Webfer 156
P.
PAlace or seat of the humane mind in the Phantasy 41 Palsy, what it is, 161.
its seat, ibid. its conjunct causes, 162. in the Palsy either motion or sense
only, or both together is hurt, ibid. spontaneous motion is abolished by reason
of the ways being obstructed, either in the beginnings or middle passages, or
about the ends, ibid. the ways are obstructed by impletion or compression, or
by a breaking of the unity, ibid. an obstruction in the streaked Bodies causes
the universal Palsy, or the Palsy of one side, ibid. why sense is not
hindered as well as motion in every Palsy, 163. why all Muscles of the Eyes
and Face are not loosened in an universal Palsy, ibid. a compression of the
streaked Body sometimes stirs up the Palsy, ibid. a paralytick obstruction
does sometimes happen in the oblong and spinal Marrow, ibid. a Palsy often
succeeds Stupidity, ibid. a Palsy sometimes from the pressing together of the
Marrowy chord, ibid. sometimes from the unity being broke, 164. the seat of the
Palsy sometimes in the Nerves themselves, which are either obstructed, or
compressed, or the unity broken, ibid. an obstruction sometime in the beginning
of the Nerves, sometimes in the middle, or in their utmost processes, ibid. the
other conjunct cause of the Palsy, ibid. in every Palsy the matter is not so
thick or cold, as it is vitriolick and other ways infestous to the Spirits,
ibid. the blasting or withering of Trees like the Palsy, ibid. the more remote
foregoing causes of the Palsy, ibid. the Palsy is either a primary Distemper,
and a Disease of it self, or secondary, coming upon or succeeding other
Diseases, ibid. why the Palsy often succeeds convulsive Diseases, ibid. why
the distemper of the Colic, 166. why the Gout, ibid. the evident causes of the
habitual Palsy, ibid. want or paucity of Spirits oftentimes the cause of the
spurious Palsy, ibid. for which reason old men are obnoxious to this Disease,
167. also scorbutical Persons, and such as are full of ill humors, ibid. also
others long sick, ibid. hence some dare not venture on local motion, others
endeavoring cannot bear it long, ibid. the second kind of Palsy in which
motion and sense are hurt at once, ibid. the third kind in which sense only is
affected, 168. why feeling is sometimes lost and motion safe, ibid. the
Prognostic, ibid. the Cure, 171. Histories and Examples of Paralyticks 174
Paraphrenesis, what it is, 181. its conjunct causes, 181, 182. wherefore
breathing is hurt in this Disease, ibid. its Prognostics, 184. Cure 185 Parts
of the corporeal Soul, 22. parts serving for hearing, how they differ in man
and some four-footed Beasts 74 Passions, their History, from 45 to 55 Phantasy,
or imagination the power thereof in Brutes, 38. it is often deceived, ibid. in
man it is the intellect presiding over the imagination, V. Intellect, the seat
or palace of the humane mind in it, 41. the pleasing of it and the senses cause
sleep 90 Fantastic desires are immense 52 Phrensy, V. Delirium. Platonists
and Pythagoreans affirmed the Soul of Brutes to be an incorporeal substance 2
Pleasure and Grief the two primary affections of the Soul, 48. they affect the
two roots of the Soul, viz. the Brain and Praecordia ibid. and 49 Praecordia,
wherefore and how esteemed the seat of holy affections, 47. why called the seat
of Prudence and Wisdom, ibid. they and the Brain the two roots of the Soul, 48.
they truly labor in the Incubus 142 Prototype of a sound by and by stirs up
innumerable Ectypes 70 Pupil of the Eye in some round, in others longish, the
reason inquired into, 83. its color in some black, in others, gray, reddish or
otherwise colored, the reason shown ibid.
R.
REasons of very many Authors persuade that the Soul of Brutes is not only
corporeal but fiery, 5. the reason of good and evil either concerns the
corporeal Soul by it self, or united to the Body, or subjected to the rational,
45. reasons of Colors and Images unfolded, 77. reasons of the symptoms in
Love-madness explained, 199. of Tumors and Ulcers in the Kings, Evil, etc. 202,
203. of symptoms in Madness, 205. why wise and strong men are not always begot
of strong and wise men 210
S.
SAlivation in inveterate head-achs, without suspicion of the Venereal Disease,
whether it ought to be administered, 119. the means and manner of salivating by
Mercury unfolded 119, 120 Sense, what it is 56, 57 to 60 Serum, how it excites
the headache, 108. its evacuation through its right way being suppressed,
brings its Flux to the head 110 Sight, the most noble Sense 75, 77, 78 Sleep
unknown, or greatly controverted, what it is, 86. Schneiderus's opinion that it
is an inorganical faculty of the Soul, ibid. its subject not the whole Body,
87. the Animal Spirits its immediate subject, ibid. all the Spirits enjoy rest
but not in sleep, etc. ibid. its immediate subject is the knowing part of the
sensitive Soul, ibid. the mediate are the Bodies contemning it, 88. its formal
reason and beginning, ibid. and causes, 89. it is either natural, not natural or
preternatural, ibid. by what and how many ways it begins from the Brain first
affected, 90. not from fumes, ibid. its matter conveyed only by the Arteries,
91. why raw and indigested meats induce sleepiness, ibid. how it seems to begin
in the Eyes, ibid. the effects thereof, 92. why those that sleep are apt to be
cold outwardly, ibid. the Blood performs its offices better in sleep, ibid.
what it affords to the lucid part of the Soul, ibid. benefits of sleep noted
ibid. Soul, the contemplation thereof whereto it conduces, 1. diverse opinions
of the Soul, 2, 3. three things to be considered in the Soul of Brutes, 6.
various kinds of Brutes Souls described, etc. 7. Insects have fiery Souls, etc.
8. whether fiery Souls in Bloodless Creatures, 13. the corporeal Soul in man
subject to the rational, 18. a double subject of the Brutal Soul, 22. whence
two parts thereof, etc. ibid. the sensible part divisible, 23. the Animal
Spirits constitute its Hypostasis, ibid. its beginning, 29. frames it self
before the Body, and increases with it, ibid. the Bodies duration depends upon
it, ibid. like flame it has its trepidations, etc. 31. as strong in sense and
motion as a machine, 32. if immaterial, also rational, ibid. the common sensory
not the whole Soul, 33. it is like a self-moving musical Organ, 34. the rational
far exceeds the Brutal, how both joined in man, and how they frequently
disagree, 38. the rational Souls priority, ibid. the first act of either is
simple apprehension, ibid. the second enunciation, 39. how little the Brutes
Soul can do in respect of man, 40. Authors for two distinct Souls in man, ibid.
which reason also dictates, 41. the rational does not exercise the Animal
faculties, nor obliterate the sensitive by its coming, nor transmute it into a
mere power, ibid. by what bond united to the Body, ibid. the corporeal its
subject, ibid. created and poured into the formed Body, not propagated
extraduce, 42. plurality of Souls in man manifested by their differences, ibid.
the rational of it self without affections, and how it governs and orders them
and the Phantasy, 43. in things to be known the corporeal obeys it, but not in
things to be done, and inclining it self to the flesh fights against it, ibid.
how it is reduced to obedience, ibid. it often seduces the mind, ibid. its twofold
state, 45. its lucid part feels or perceives the impulse of all objects, and is
moved by them, 56. after what manner the corporeal Soul is affected in
Melancholy and Madness 191 Spirits, their distinct offices in various
provinces, etc. 24, 25. how they receive sensible species so very diverse, 57.
the Animal the immediate subject of Sleep, 87. for what causes they lie down of
their own accord, 89. compelled into sleep by Narcoticks, 90. their penury
persuades to sleep, ibid. the distemper of the Animal Spirits being after a
diverse manner, as it is the cause of the Phrensy, so it is of Melancholy,
Madness and Stupidity, 188, compared to light they are opacous or full of
darkness, 189. these kind of Spirits in Melancholy compared to those in
Chemical Liquors, for they are not like the Spirits of Blood as they should be,
nor the Spirits of Wine, for such are rather in the Phrensy, but like acid
Spirits dist^^^^d out of Salt, Vinegar, etc. ibid. Stygian Waters like the
Animal Spirits in Madness, ibid. three chief affections of acetous Chemical
Liquors which agree with the Animal Spirits in Melancholy, 191. after the
Animal Spirits in Melancholy being for some time vitiated, the conformation of
the Brain is also hurt, ibid. how the Animal Spirits acquire a disposition like
to Stygian Water, 202. the original of Madness either from the Spirits
themselves, or from the Blood, 203. it begins from the Spirits for two
occasions ibid. Squinting, whence it comes 82 Stupidity arises chiefly from the
failing of the imagination and memory, 209. wherefore the Organs of these
faculties labor in this Disease, ibid. chiefly the Brain, first as to
magnitude, and by reason of figure, ibid. as to substance or texture, 210. its
evil conformati^^ as to its pores and passages, whence Stupidity sometimes
proceeds from both of them being in fault together, ibid. what the antecedent
causes of foolishness are, ibid. ripeness and the declination of Age dispose
some to foolishness, 211, great hurts of the head sometimes cause d^ting or
want of ingenuity, ibid. and frequent Drunkenness, ibid. and vehement
affections, ibid. and the more grievous Diseases of the head, ibid. the
differences of this Disease, 212. how Foolishness and Stupidity differ, ibid.
Stupidity its degrees, ibid. the prognostic, ibid. if from an hurt of the head
evil, ibid. if excited from a Lethargy it admits of Cure, ibid. sometimes it is
cured by a Fever, ibid. the Cure requires both a Master and a Physician, 213.
what the Labor of the former ought to be, ibid. what the Medical intentions
are ibid. what kinds of remedies are shown ibid.
T.
TAngible species immediately carried either to the cerebel, or to the stroaked
Bodies, 61. and from thence go forward sometimes to the other faculties ibid.
Taste of kin to feeling, etc. 62, 63 Tears, their matter 80 Touch, the same
Nerves are observed to serve for its sense and motion 63
V.
VEnus an enemy to the Brain and Nerves, 55. necessary to the preserving of the
individual 62 Vertigo, its seat, 145. a description of it, ibid. the causes and
manner of an unnatural one, ibid. why looking down from on high, and passing
over Bridges cause it, 146. how Drunkenness causes it, ibid. from what causes
the preternatural one is wont to be excited, ibid. sometimes it is a symptom of
other cephalic Diseases; sometimes it is excited by reason of the distemper of
other distant parts, viz. from the Stomach, Spleen, etc. 146, 147. not by
reason of Vapors elevated from these parts, 147. its immediate subject is the
Animal Spirits, ibid. its formal reason, ibid. its conjunct cause, 148. is seen
by things helpful and hurtful, ibid. the more remote foregoing cause, ibid. the
differences of this Disease, ibid. its prognostics, 149. the Cure, ibid. the
curatory method shown, 150. why vomiting Medicines are so much noted in this
and other Diseases of the head, ibid. what is to be done out of the Fit for
prevention sake, ibid. cases and examples of the sick in three Histories, and
the reason of the case of the second History described, 151, 152 Vices of the
Brain noted 148
W.
IN Waking the Spirits inhabiting the cerebel are disturbed with the Spirits of
the other Regiment, 93. why those being disturbed perform their offices better
whilst these lie quiet in sleep, ibid. a double consideration of waking 95 Long
Waking, of two sorts, it is either the symptom of other Diseases, or a Disease
it self, 138. how many ways the unquiet or elastick Spirits stir it up, 139.
its causes assigned, ibid. its Cure and History ibid. Natural Waking its cause
consists in the restlesness of the Spirits and the openness of the cortical
part of the Brain 138 Want or paucity of the Spirits oftentimes the cause of
the spurious Palsy 166 Watching preternatural depends either upon the
restlesness of the Spirits, or the openness of the cortical part of the Brain
139 Weeping, its causes, and the manner of its being made, described, 80.
wherefore a bewailing is oftentimes joined with weeping, ibid. wherefore it
comes from sudden joy, 81. why mankind only or chiefly weep ibid. Wise and
strong men, why not always begotten of wise and strong men 210 Withering or
blasting of Trees like the Palsy 164
FINIS.
Advertisement.
DOctor Willis's Practice of Physic, being all the Medical Works of that
Renowned and Famous Physician, Containing these Ten Treatises following, viz.
I. Of Fermentation. II. Of Fevers. III. Of Urines. IV. Of the Accension of the
Blood. V. Of Musculary Motion. VI. Of the Anatomy of the Brain. VII. Of the
Description and Use of the Nerves. VIII. Of Convulsive Diseases. IX.
Pharmaceutice Rationalis, the first and second Part. X. Of the Scurvey. Wherein
most of the Diseases belonging to the Body of Man are treated of, with
excellent Methods and Receipts for the Cure of the same. Fitted to the meanest
Capacity, by an Index for the explaining of all the hard and unusual Words and
Terms of Art, derived from the Greek, Latin, or other Languages, for the
benefit of the English Reader. With a large Alphabetical Table to the whole.
With Thirty Copper Plates. Done into English by S. Por^^age Student in Physic.
Printed for T. Dring, and C. Harper in Fleetstreet, and I. L^igh at Stationers
Hall. Price Thirty Shillings.

There is now Published the second Volume of Dr. Nalson's Impartial Collections
of the Great Affairs of State, from the beginning of the Scotch Rebellion, in
the Year 1639. to the Murder of King Charles the First; wherein the first
occasions, and the whole series of the late Troubles in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, are faithfully represented, taken from Authentic Records, and
methodically digested, with a Table. Published by his Majesty's special
Command. Sold by Thomas Dring at the Harrow, at the Corner of Chancery Lane in
Fleetstreet.


