Im^^^^atur,

Guil(...)nrico Episcopo (...)is Dom.
December(...)
THE SCRIPTURES Genuine Interpreter Asserted: OR, A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The
Right Interpretation of Scripture. Wherein a late Exercitation, Entitled,
Philosophia S. Scripturae Interpres, Is Examined, and the Protestant Doctrine
in that point Vindicated.

With some Reflections on another Discourse of L. W. Written in Answer to the
said Exercitation.

To which is added, An APPENDIX concerning Internal Illumination, and other
Operations of the Holy Spirit upon the Soul of Man. Justifying the Doctrine of
Protestants, and the Practice of Serious Christians, against the Charge of
Enthusiasm, and other unjust Criminations.

By JOHN WILSON, M. A. Sometime of Kath. Hall in CAMBRIDGE

In the Savoy: Printed by T. N. for R. Boulter, at the Turks Head in Cornhil,
over against the Royal Exchange. 1678.

Dignissimo Clarissimoque Viro Jonathani Keat, Genuini Scripturarum Interpretis
Assertorias,

D. D. D. Joannes Wilson.

A Prefatory Address to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is not any pleasure in Polemick Discourses that has engaged me in this
Contest. A Work of this kind is so far from affording me any true delight, in
these declining years of my life, that if so concerning a Truth as I have here
endeavored to defend, had not called for a seasonable Vindication against the
assaults of a Daring Adversary, I could, with much more ease, and better
satisfaction to my self, have sat down with silence. I cannot but think, that
by all, who take the Holy Scripgreatest part whereof do better understand their
own Language than another; I accounted the Objection less valuable, and so
resolved to proceed. But whereas I have here and there reflected upon some
passages in the Discourses of Ludovicus Wolzogen, as they came in my way, I
give my Reader to understand, that this arises not from any prejudice against
the Person of that Noble Author, to whose Honorable Parentage and excellent
Learning I shall ever render all due respects. But finding him to have so
plainly injured the cause he undertook, and so unhandsomely treated our most
eminent Protestant Authors that have with much Judgment and Solidity defended
it; I am hopefully persuaded that those few Animadversions which I have made
upon his Writings, will not be unacceptable to the Friends of Truth. The
intricacy and perplexedness of his Discourse, has put me to some pains to
understand his meaning: for I have not satisfied my self with a slight or
transient view: but have perused his Book over and over with intenseness of
mind, that I might be sure not to mistake or misrepresent him. And I hope it
will appear to the Unprejudiced, upon consulting his Book, and comparing mine
with it, that I have done him right. One Advertisement more I must add: viz.
That my Citations out of the said Authors Book, De Scripturarum Interpret,
relate to a second Edition of it, as it stands before his Censura Censurae: and
threfore the numbers of the Pages cited, are not those on the top of the Leaf,
but those in the Margin, relating to the first Edition, which I suppose (for I
have not seen it) was Printed in a lesser Volume.

A Brief Summary of the Contents of the Discourse about the Scriptures
Interpreter.
The Introduction,
WHerein the Question about the Interpretation of Scripture is propounded, the
Terms explained, and the following Dissertation divided into two Parts.

The First Part, That Reason and Philosophy are not the Scriptures Interpreter.
Chap. 1. THe Terms explained, and the Controversy stated. 2. The first
Argument, from the condition of depraved Reason. 3. Exceptions against the
former Argument removed. 4. A second Argument, from the Disproportion between
Humane Reason and matiers of Divine Revelation; An Exception against it
answered. 5. A third Argument, from an absurdity following thereupon. 6. A
fourth Argument, from another great absurdity. 7. A fifth Argument, from the
inconvenience of opening a gap to the worst of Errors. 8. A sixth Argument,
from one great end of Scripture-Revelation. 9. The contrary Arguments examined;
the first from the multiplicity of senses in the Scripture. 10. A second, from
God's being the Author of Philosophy. 11. A third, from the supposed
sufficiency of Philosophy. 12. A fourth, from the nature of a clear and
distinct perception. 13. A fifth, from the supposed practice of former Divines.
14. A sixth, from instances in some considerable Scripture-Assertions, supposed
not Interpretable without Philosophy. 15. A seventh, from the Reasonableness of
Religion. 16. Scriptures alleged by our Divines vindicated. 17. No contrariety
between Scripture and sound Philosophy.
The Second Part, That Scripture is its own Interpreter.
Chap. 1. THe Doctrine of the Reformed Churches in this point cleared. 2. The
first Argument, from the Scriptures sufficiency; the first branch, -- the
Scriptures perfection. 3. A second branch of the Argument, the Scriptures
perspicuity. 4. An Exception against the Scriptures perspicuity from the
ambiguity of words, removed. 5. A second Exception removed. 6. A third
Exception removed. 7. A fourth, from the supposed difference between the simple
sense of the words of scripture, and the true sense of the Author, removed. 8.
A fifth and sixth Exception removed. 9. A third branch of the first Argument,
the Scriptures Authentickness, urged, and an Exception removed. 10. A second
Argument, from the Scriptures being the Rule of Faith. 11. An Exception against
this Argument from Reason, being part of the Rule of Faith, disproved. 12. An
Exception from the Scripture taken materially and formally, removed. 13.
Several Objections against the Scripture being its own Interpreter, answered.
The Conclusion,
REflecting upon some passages in the Exercitators Epilogue.

The Introduction.
1. AN Entrance made into the Discourse. The Question about the Interpretation
of Scripture propounded, and the Terms briefly explained.

2. The Rule of Interpretation distinguished from the Means, which are many and
various.

3. The Doctrine of the Romanists concerning the judgment of the present
Church, and that other about the consent of the Ancients, lightly touched, and
passed by.

4. The Protestant Doctrine in this point, what it is; and the contrary Novel
opinion of a late Exercitator. The following Discourse divided into two parts.

THE Holy Scriptures being I.
designed of God to be the Revelation of his Will to the Children of Men, for
their conduct in the pursuit of their chief end; we cannot but judge it
consentaneous to his unsearchable Wisdom, to order the Writing of them in such
a manner, as that his Mind, in them, might, in the due use of his appointed
means be understood by those, for whose use and benefit they were intended: And
though the subject matter they treat of be often very deep and misterious, yet
the way of proposal is very condescending; and what ever is of necessity to our
duty and happiness, is obvious to the diligent and humble Inquirer.
Nevertheless many passages in these Sacred Records have those difficulties in
them, that may exercise the study of the ablest understandings. Now in our
searching out the Mind of God in Scripture, especially in those darker places,
the question is, what course we are to take, and by what Rule we must be
guided, that we may not bewilder our selves, or wrong the Scriptures by our
mistakes?

To prepare the way for a Resolution of this Question, I must briefly premise
somewhat touching these three Terms, the Scripture, the Interpretation of
Scripture, and the Rule of that Interpretation.

The Scripture we speak of, is the entire Volume of Holy Writ, containing all
those Books both of the Old and New Testament, that are generally acknowledged
to be Canonical. Whereby I mean, not the Words or Phrases of Scripture taken
singly by themselves; but as they are conjoined in Propositions or Sentences;
and as those Propositions stand in such a contexture, and with such a
dependence on and relation to what goes before and after; and as in this Frame
and Order they are the Instrument of declaring the Mind of God to Men. Now,
whereas the whole Scripture, though it have the same Divine Original, and be
directed to the same ultimate end, yet contains in it great variety of Matter,
Doctrine, History, Prophecy, etc. It is the two former that we are especially
concerned in; and therefore shall wave the Prophetic part (what is yet
^fulfill'd) further than it may fall in with any of the other; the best and
most convincing Interpreter of Prophesies being the event, unless God should
beforehand unfold them by extraordinary Inspiration; which we have not in our
days any ground to expect. It is therefore the Doctrinal and Historical parts
of Scripture that I chiefly intend in this Debate.

Interpretation is either Verbal or Real. The former is all one with that which
is commonly called Translation. This I shall not meddle with, further, than as
it is a necessary requisite to the latter; which is usually called Exposition,
which is the opening of the true Sense of Scripture, or unfolding the Mind of
God signified to us by those Words and Sentences of Scripture that we are
searching into. Now we here suppose two things, which to a sober and
considerate Reader need no proof. First, That the Scriptures are not a heap of
insignificant Words, or unsens'd Characters, as some late Romanists, who cry up
Oral Tradition for the only Rule of Faith (so great is the power of prejudice
and partial Interest) have ridiculously and profanely affirmed: but that they
have a true sense Originally and Essentially in themselves, given them by their
Author when they were first indicted. To deny or question this, were to impute
that to the most Wise God, that common Civility forbids us to charge upon any
man of ordinary understanding. Secondly, That the Sense of Scripture is fixed
and immutable, not varying with the times, or altering according to the
differing practice of the Church: which was most absurdly asserted by Cardinal
Cusanus in Epistola contra Bohemos; as I find it attested by many credible
Authors Flac. Illy, Cl. Scr. part. 2. Gerard. Loc, com. de Int. Scr. cap. 2.
Glass. Philol. lib. 2. page 280. And. Rive^. Isagog* cap. 18.
the Sense of Scripture is no other than what it always had, and ever will have
to the Worlds end.

The next thing to be considered, is the Rule of Interpretation: By which we
can understand no more than the Measure, by agreement or disagreement to which
we judge of the Sense of the Scripture, whether it be right or wrong, whether
it be indeed (what it pretends) the true Sense of the Scripture under Inquiry,
or a mistaken Sense unduely fastened upon it. Or, in fewer words, the Rule of
Interpretation is that which gives us the objective Evidence by which the true
Sense of Scripture is discerned, and for which it is received.

Here let it be observed, that it is one 2.
thing to inquire what means we are to use in searching out the Sense of
Scripture, and another what is the Rule that must guide us in determining what
that Sense is. For though the Rule he also a Means, yet every thing that is to
be used as a Means, has not the place of a Rule. The Means are many, the Rule
but one; understanding it not of any subordinate or Ministerial Rule, but of
that which is Supreme and Autocratorical. For that is the Rule under our
present inquiry.

The Means subservient to the Interpretation of Scripture, are either General
or Special.

The General are two, Meditation and Prayer.

1. There must be a fixed intending of the Mind to consider of what we either
read in, or hear from the Scripture; and of whatsoever we meet with that may
help us to understand it. This the Psalmist speaks of, as the daily practice of
every Holy-Blessed Man, Psalm. 1. 1, 2. and professes it of himself, Psalm. 119,
15. 97.

But, secondly, there is need of Prayer also for Divine Assistance to enable us
to understand the Mind of God aright. This the Psalmist used, Psalm. 119. 18.
19, 26, 27, 73. Though he had the Copy of the Law by him (according to that
command of God which we have upon Record in Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.) and did use
daily to read it and meditate on it; yet he thought not this enough, but begs
of God to have his Eyes opened, etc. When our Savior discoursed with his
Disciples after his Resurrection, concerning Himself and his Sufferings, it is
said, Luke 24. 45. that he opened their Undestandings, that they might
understand the Scriptures. He did not only open the Scriptures by External
Instruction, as it is said before, verse. 27, and 32. But (as the Learned
Grotius observes upon the place) he opened their Minds by the Internal
Illumination of his Spirit. This the Apostle prays for in the behalf of the
Ephesians and Colossians (Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18. Col. 1. 9.) though they had the
Doctrine of the Scripture already published to them. And the same Apostle
writing to Timothy, having exhorted him to consider what he had said to him, he
adds this Prayer for him, The Lord give thee understanding in all things. I
would gladly suppose there are none that call themselves Christians, but do own
the need and use of Prayer for the understanding of Gods Will: which
necessarily carries with it an interpretative acknowledgement of the need we
have of something from God, above our natural abilities to understand the
Scriptures. And I do profess my self to have had the better and more honorable
esteem of that great Schoolman Thomas Aquinas, since I read this of him, that
it was his manner, whenever he was Lud. Croc. praeloq. in S. Theol. c. 3. ex
Ludov. Granatensis.
either to study in private or discourse in public, to pray fervently to God
for assistance, that he might learn of Him, what he was to teach others: and
that he did heartily acknowledge in secret to his intimate Friend Reginaldus,
that what Divine Knowledge he had, was attained by Prayer, more than by any
humane Wit or Labor.

But whose expects success in seeking Divine Assistance, it behooves him to
bring with him a meek and humble Heart, awed with the holy fear and reverence
of God and of his Word: For want of which too many have greatly polluted these
Holy Mysteries with the wanton conceits or profane excursions of an unhollwed
Wit; and mortally poisoned themselves and others, by their corrupt handling
this Bread of Life.

The Special Means of Interpretation are twofold. Some are more remote, which
I shall only name, not intending any Discourse about them, because my work lies
another way.

These remote helps are. 1. Some competent knowledge of and recourse to the
Original Tongues, wherein the Scripture was first penned, with a due
observation of the proprieties of each Language. 2. Skill to discern between the
proper use of the Words and Phrases of Scripture, and that which is Tropical
and Figurative. In these, Grammar and Rhetoric have their use. 3. Some insight
into the peculiar Laws, Customs and Proverbial Speeches of those times and
places that the Scripture relates to: which requires some knowledge in History.
There are sundry passages both in the Old and New Testament, that have respect
to the known Customs of the Gentiles, as in their Divinations, Idolatrous
Worships, Public Games, and many more that have relation to the peculiar Rites
and Modes of speech in use among the Jews. So that there is no part of
Phylology but may have its use in the Interpretation of Scripture. 4. There is
great use of the several parts of Philosophy, not only moral, but natural; for
the clearing of many things in Scripture, that are of natural cognizance; as
about the structure of Man's Body, and the faculties of the Soul; the nature,
motion, and influence of the Heavenly Bodies, the temperament of the several
Regions of the World; as also about the Elements and Meteors; about Numbers and
Measures; the Nature and Properties of several Creatures, Beasts, Birds, and
Plants; and many other things treated of in the Bible, either by way of History
or Parable. 5. Logic has also its use here, for the better discerning the
dependence of one thing in Scripture upon another, and collecting of one thing
from another.

The more immediate Means are chiefly two, 1. A due observation of the several
circumstances of the Scripture to be Interpreted; who it is that speaks, where,
and when, and to whom, and upon what occasion. Here also comes in the
consideration of the coherents with antecedents and consequences, together with
the scope and design of the Speaker: all which are of great use to discover the
Sense of Scripture. 2. Comparing Scripture with Scripture, or consulting other
Scriptures whether parallel with, or seemingly opposite to the place under
consideration.

Now to the use of all these forementioned Means or Helps, both General and
Special, Remote and Immediate, I think all agree. But about the Rule of
Interpretation there is not so universal an accord.

The Romanists for the most part will have this Rule to be the Judgment 3.
of the present Church, meaning their own. But I shall not deal with this. It Is
weakness, in what Sense soever taken (for they agree not among themselves) has
been sufficiently discovered by the worthy labors of many, both formerly and
of late Dr. Stillingflect, Dr. Tiliotson, Mr. Pool, etc.
.

Some few there are, who tell us, that the Scripture supposes the Rule and
Summary of Religion delivered from one Age to another, which we are to be
guided by in searching out the meaning of Scripture. And this Rule, they say,
is to be found in the Monuments of the Church, that is, in the Writings of the
Fathers, and Determinations of Councils; from whence we are to receive the
Sense of the Catholic Church, and thereby know what was the Doctrine delivered
by Christ and his Apostles in the first Age; and according to that interpret
the Scriptures. But if this must be our way of proceeding, we may very well
despair of ever understanding the Scriptures, except when they speak with so
much plainness, that they stand in need of no Interpretation.

For what a heap of uncertainties must we lay for the Foundation of our Faith?
It is sufficiently known, that the Fathers do often differ from each other, and
many times, are not consistent with themselves. Councils have determined
contrary one to another. And some things that were (as far as appears to us by
all extant Monuments of Antiquity) agreeable to the common Sentiment in our
Age, were laid aside in another. Besides, either the far greatest part of the
Doctors of the Church in the first Ages wrote nothing, or their Writings are
lost: and of those that now go under venerable names, many are plainly
spurious, and many dubious; nor is it easy in several of them, for the most
sagacious Reader to find out the right. Insomuch as we cannot have any
tolerable assurance what was the consentient judgment of the Catholic Church
in any one age about the whole Doctrine of Faith, if we set the Scriptures
aside. Therefore to frame such a Rule of Interpretation as this, is no better
than to build a House of Straw upon a running Stream. There were very few
Writers in the two first Centuries; and in the two following not very many: and
after this the Church did much decline, and degenerate as well in Doctrine as
Manners. Now suppose we were sure that the Writings in each Age were
undoubtedly theirs whose names they bear (as it is past doubt we are not) who
can assure us, that what was published by those few, was the consentient
Judgment of all, or the major part of the Doctors of that Age wherein they
lived? Might there not be a greater number differing from them, who either
wrote nothing, or whose Works are perished? The plain truth is, That this way
of Interpretation does in the upshot resolve the Faith of Christians, not into
the certain authority of the Divinelyinspired Writings, but into the fallible
Testimony of the most uncertain Tradition. But for the Readers further
satisfaction, I refer him to Monsieur Daille's learned Treatise about the right
use of the Fathers; a Piece of that worth, that the Lord Vicount Falkland, and
his dear Friend Mr. Chillingworth, did highly esteem it, and made great use of
it in their Writings against the Romanists; as we are informed by Mr. Tho.
Smith (sometime Member of Christ's College in Cambridge) in his Epistle
prefixed to the English Translation of that excellent and elaborate Discourse:
who further also tells us that we have in that Tractat, a sufficient
Confutation of Cardinal Perron his Book against King James, and by consequence
of the Marquis of Worcester against King Charles; and of Doctor Vane, and other
Epitomizers of the Cardinal, which I do the rather take notice of, that it may
obviate the groundless prejudices that some have of late entertained against
that Incomparable Piece.

The received Doctrine of the Reformed. 4.
Churches, both ourown and those abroad has been hitherto, that the Scripture
is its own Interpreter. But of late there has been an attempt to justle the
Scripture aside (as to this use) and place Reason and Philosophy in its room.
There is a Belgic Exercitator, who has written a set Discourse to Philosophia
S. Scr. Interpres, Exerci^atio Paradoxa.
this purpose. In the entrance whereof, he tells the World, That for the
extricating of himself out of those perplexities wherein Divines generally are
entangled in their Expositions of Scripture, In Prologo.
he resolved upon mature deliberation, to make use of the same method in
Theology that Des Carts had done in Philosophy, and professes that supposing
Scripture for the Rule of Faith, all the difference in opinion among Dogmatical
Divines (as he calls them, in opposition to Scepticks) appears to him to arise
from hence, that none of them could certainly and infallibly prove their
Interpretations of Scripture: and that after long inquiry, he found this to be
the only sure and Ib. cap. 5. par. 1.
infallible Rule of Interpretation which himself had now found out; viz. the
principals of Reason, and dictates of Philosophy. And in this new way (which he
glories in the invention of) he professedly declares his dissent from Papists,
Protestants, Socinians, and Remonstrants. Cap. 16. par. 8.
But he bends his greatest force against the Reformed Churches, endeavoring
with all his might to invalidate what they unanimously maintain concerning the
perspicuity of the Scriptures, and the singularity of the literal Sense, and
especially about the Rule of Interpretation. For thus like a Miles Gloriosus,
he begins his tenth Chapter, Devictis velitari brevique pugna imbellibus istis,
etc. Having by a light and easy skirmish subdued these weak and feeble Enemies
(meaning the Romanists) let us now march another way, and draw up our Battalia
against those of the Reformation, and all that fight under their Colors. And
in the sequel of his discourse, he has gratified none so much as the Church
of Rome; as in his positive proof (such as it is) of his novel Position, he
has not a little befriended the Socinian; though he would seem to divide
himself from them both. However, both in the Astructive and Destructive part of
his Book, he is a declared Adversary to the Protestant Cause.

For my more orderly proceeding, I shall divide my ensuing Dissertation into
two Parts; in the former whereof I shall deal with this Exercitator's new
Device [of Reason and Philosophy being the Scriptures Interpreter] disproving
it, and answering such arguments as I find alleged, or imagine may be alleged
for it. In the latter I shall endeavor to clear and assert the Protestant
Doctrine [of the Scriptures being its own Interpreter] and answer the
objections against it.

THE SCRIPTURES Genuine Interpreter asserted, etc.
PART I.
Humane Reason or Philosophy no sure Interpreter of the Holy Scriptures.
CHAP. I.
1. The Proposition denying Reason and Philosophy to be the Scriptures
Interpreter, laid down, and the Terms explain^d. 2. How far they have their
use, and what we deny. 3. Who they are that have ascribed too much to them.

FIrst then, I assert against the Exercitator's. 1.
Position Ph. Scr. Int. c. 5. par. 1.
; That Humane Reason, or Philosophy is not to be admitted or allowed as the
sure and sufficient Interpreter of the Holy Scriptures.

For our more clear proceeding, it is requisite I should explain my meaning
before I come to the proof of my Assertion. Let it therefore be considered,
That Reason may be three ways taken.

First, For that power and faculty in Man whereby he is enabled to apprehend,
judge, and discourse of such objects as are presented to his understanding. Now
this falls under a twofold conception, according to the twofold state of Man,
Innocent or Fallen. Man's Reason as it was originally, when God first made him,
was pure and clear, not clouded or blinded, not depraved or distorted, there
was nothing to darken or disturb it. It was then a glorious Beam streaming
forth from the Eternal Light. But Man's Apostasy, as it vitiated his other
faculties, so it benighted his Reason, and exposed it to further depravation by
the prevalency of disordered Passions and sinful Lusts. Yet even in this state
his Reason is not lost, though it be much corrupted I am far from that late
Authors mind, that says, Lud. Walzog. in Censura Censur. p. 59.
Quae fallet, aut falliter ratio, minime ratio dicenda. Reason that deceives,
or is deceived, is not to be called Reason. Man's Reason, notwithstanding its
pravity, is still kept in a Capacity to understand his greatest Concerns, by
the assistance of those gracious aids that God affords him; and has in all
ages been of great use for the good of Mankind, in reference both to men's
personal and politic affairs. Therefore I need not fear to say, that next to
Holiness, Man's Reason is his greatest Glory.

Secondly, Reason is taken for the exercise of this intellectual Power, in
inquiring, discovering, comparing, judging objects propounded. It is by these
actings of our Reason that we search after Truth, and make use of it when we
have found it, for the conduct and comfort of our lives: and by these it is
that we defend the Truth of God against ^ainsayers.

Thirdly, It is taken for the Principles of Reason, known or knowable by
natural light. And these are either Natural, or Acquired. The Natural or
Primary Principles of Reason are those that carry their own evidence with them
and therefore upon the first representation, are forthwith embraced by our
Reason, without any Discourse. And they are called Natural, not as being
formally imprinted, or properly engraven in our Minds by Nature (for we are not
born with Actual Knowledge) but because they are founded in, and do necessarily
result from the Nature of things and their mutual Respects, wherein as in a
Glass, our Undestanding sees them represented, and is disposed to assent to
them at the first view. The Secondary or Acquired Principles are those which
are not so obvious as the former, but by rational Discourse, are truly and
soundly deduced from them.

And here falls in the consideration of Philosophy, which is made up of these
Principles methodically digested. And by it I understand that true knowledge of
God and his Works which is attainable in this mortal state, by the improvement
of that Light that is Connatural to the Mind of Man.

This, though it be much inferior to Scripture Light, yet it is both an
exercise and an advancement, of Reason; a noble Study, and of excellent use if
rightly managed, not only for the beautifying, but the bettering the Mind of
Man, and raising it to an high admiration, and humble adoration of that
Infinite Being, whose Wisdom, Power, and Goodness is so eminently conspicuous
in all the Works of His Hands. And if there be any such in the World (as some
say there are) that deny or reproach sound Philosophy, or the Dictates of Right
Reason, as I know them not, so neither shall I plead their cause.

Now as to the Case before us,

First, It is undeniable, That for the 2.
Interpreting of Scripture, there is a necessary use of the Faculty of Reason,
and the several actings of it, as instrumentally subservient to the finding out
the Sense of Scripture. Faith does not exclude Reason, but elevate and advance
it by giving it a clearer light; it does not silence, but regulate and conduct
it. There is nothing in Religion but what is perfectly rational, and suitable
to man's intellectual nature. It is to our Rational Powers that the Scriptures
are propounded: and as our belief of them is one of the highest acts of Reason,
so it is by our Reason in its due exercise that we search into them, not only
to find out the signification of the Words and Phrases of Scripture, and
discern the difference between proper and Figurative Expressions, besides many
other things that tend to their Verbal Exposition; but likewise to observe the
dependence of one Clause on another, and compare the several parts of Scripture
together; thereby it is that we gather Consequences from Scripture-Principles;
and hereby do we instrumentally judge of the Mind of God, as signified to us by
the Words of Scripture.

Secondly, We also grant, That the Principles of Reason have their use about
those things in Scripture that are discoverable by Natural Light; as that there
is a God, and that God is to be worshipped; that the Soul is Immortal; that
good is to be done, and evil to be avoided; and many such like. But even in
these, considered as they are delivered by the Spirit of God in Scripture, I
think Reason is not Magisterially and Authoritatively to Judge of them, being
(under this notion) to be received as the Decrees of a higher Court, wherein
Man's Reason is but a Servant. In this Case therefore, Reason only gives in its
suffrage, and ministerially subscribes, by virtue of its own impressed notions
to Scripture-Dictates. Aquinas propounding a question Aqu. 2. 2^. Q. 2. (...).
4.
about Man's believing such things as may be proved by Natural Reason; resolves
it necessary for Men's more speedy, more common, and more certain attainment of
Divine Knowledge, that they should receiveby Faith, not only those things that
are above Natural Reason, but those also that are discernable by Natural Light.
Whereby he plainly gives the pre-eminency to Revelation above Reason, even in
the Natural Principles of Religion.

Thirdly, I grant that there is great use of Natural Principles in points of
pure Revelation, viz. To show that these are not against sound Reason, and to
disprove the objections that are made against them from a pretended contrariety
to Natural Light. It was no small advantage to the Christian Cause in the
Primitive Times, that the Ancient Fathers in their Apologies for the Doctrine
of Christ, against the Heathen Philosophers, turned their own Weapons upon
them, and repelled their absurd Cavils by their own acknowledged Maxims.

Fourthly, I further grant, that no Sense of Scripture is to be admitted for
genuine, if we do indeed find it to be certainly inconsistent with or
contradictory unto any true and undoubted Principle of Reason. For God, who is
the Author of all truth, as well natural as supernatural, cannot contradict
himself. This, I confess, is a very ticklish point, and calls for great
wariness and circumspection; it being so ^asie and so ordinary for Men to be
swayed by Imagination, Interest, and Prejudice, to call that Reason which is as
far from being so, as midnight is from being high noon. And Men may, through
Ignorance, Incogitancy, or Perverseness, suppose a contradiction where there is
none. Nevertheless, this we may safely say, that whatsoever is certainly, and
undeniably proved to be a Principle of Reason, there can be nothing in
Scripture that really contradicts it.

But, Fifthly, The Knot of the Controversy lies here, whether Humane Reason by
its own Natural Principles, or those Philosophical Axioms that are thence
deduced, as its Supreme Commanding Rule, must guide and determine us in
examining and deciding what is the Sense of those parts of Scripture that are
purely of Supernatural Revelation? And this is that which is here denied.

The affirmative is maintained by 3.
some: and indeed it seems to be the great Helena of that sort of Men, who have
imbibed the new Divinity of Socinus, and the Foundation of all their
Heterodoxies: upon this account it is that they so vehemently oppose the
Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, the Eternal Deity of our Lord Jesus, the
Personality of the Holy Ghost, the Doctrines of Original Sin, of the
Satisfaction of Christ, and Justification by his imputed Righteousness; with
sundry other material points, that are commonly called to the Bar of Humane
Reason by these Doctors of the Racovian Faith. Not that they have any sound
Reason on their side: for their Novelties are extremely irrational, as has
been abundantly demonstrated by those judicious Authors that have dealt with
them. But trusting to their own Reason and its Dictates in matters so far above
Nature, this has led them into these dangerous precipices.

True it is (whether in pretense to blind the Eyes of others, or out of the
conviction of Truth, or out of the usual fate of Error to contradict it self)
these Men sometimes let fall that which carries with it a fair appearance of
disclaiming the Judgment of Reason in Matters of Faith: as may be seen in their
great Master Socinus Lib. de Author. Script. cap. 1. p. 16 etc. 4. p. 66. and
71.
. And such passages in him and his followers may possibly give some color to
the Exercitator to charge the Reformed Divines with wronging the Socinians, in
saying they make Man's Reason the Rule of Interpretation Phil Scr. Int. cap. 16
par. 7. and 8.
(for himself seems to be ambitious of the honor of finding this out) and it
may be they have no where asserted it in Terminis, or spoken it out so broadly
as this Gentleman has done. But notwithstanding all this flourish, when they
argue against the forementioned Doctrines, received upon clear
Scripture-warrant by all the Christian Churches in the World, from the
beginning of Christianity; their grand objection is drawn from Reason, to which
they appeal in all these Controversies as to their Oracle; and thereupon set
their Wits at work to wrest and wind the Scriptures (alleged in defense of
those Doctrines) every way they can imagine, to evade their plain meaning, and
fasten on them a Sense of their own making, suitable to their beloved Maxims.
Besides many other passages there are of that Party that discover what their
Mind is in this point.

But these are not the first that set this presumptuous Doctrine on foot. I
find it laid to the charge of the Manichees (as irrational and absurd as their
Conceptions were) that they professedly suspended the Articles of Faith upon
the judgment of Reason, and required Men to believe nothing but what they could
prove by Reason. So much we learn from him, who was once one of them, but
happily delivered out of their snare A^g. Retract. cap. 14 and de utilitate
credendi, cap. 1.
.

CHAP. II.
1. The first Argument disabling Reason and Philosophy for being the Scriptures
Interpreter, from the condition of Man's depraved Reason in this lapsed State.
2. The Apostles Words in 1 Cor. 2. 14. urged, and vindicated from some Men's
mistaken Glosses. 3. The Argument enforced from the foul mastakes of the most
Rational among the Heathen in matters of Religion.

NOW that Reason or Philosophy cannot in the Sense given, be 1.
the Scriptures Interpreter, I prove by the following Arguments:

First, Man's Reason, though furnished with the best Principles and Arg. 1.
richest Endowments, that Nature affords it in this lapsed State, is so darkened
and depraved, that it not only is much disabled for apprehending the things of
God, but sets it self against them; and therefore it is not in a capacity by
its own Principles to interpret Scripture-Doctrines.

Something Natural Light discovers of God; but al as! how little? The
Principles of Natural Knowledge are but general and confused, not sufficient to
guide Man in the things of greatest concernment. It teaches Man that there is
a God; but when he comes to determine what an one He is, how lame and
imperfect, how unsuitable and unbecoming are Men's natural apprehensions of him!
The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1. 21. that, in the wisdom of God the World by wisdom
knew not God. Where he means not the rude and ignorant multitude, but the
wisest and most accomplished for Natural Abilities: these, with the study of
Philosophy (which is the consideration of Gods infinite Wisdom in Creating and
Governing the World) did not arrive at the right knowledge of God. The same
Apostle tells us of the unconverted Gentiles, Ephesians. 4. 18. that they had their
understandings darkened, and were alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that was in them, etc. and, Romans 8. 7. he says, the Carnal Mind,
(...), the wisdom of the Flesh, the unrenew'd Mind of Man, is enmity against
God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.

But I shall especially insist upon that of the said Apostle in 1 Cor. 2. 14.
But 2.
the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. By the (...) the Animal or Natural Man the Apostle means him that is
in his mere Naturals, having no other wisdom or understanding given him than
what is common to him with all Mankind. Such an one receives not the things of
the Spirit: that is, he does not approve of them and embrace them; he finds no
relish in them, and therefore rejects them: for they are foolishness unto him;
he scorns the mysteries of the Gospel, as if it were nothing but a heap of
fantastic trash, a confused medly of absurd unintelligible fancies.

Neither can he know them, says the Apostle, because they are spiritually
discerned: that is, he cannot (as he is in this unrenew'd state) discern the
true beauty and excellency of them, because they are not to be discerned, but
by a Spiritual Light, and by a Spiritual Faculty, which the Natural Man is
wholly destitute of. Or, as the learned Bishop of Down expresses it, They are
taught Du^or Dubit^. l. 1. c. 2.
and perceived by the aids of Gods Spirit, Revelation and Divine Assistance and
Grace.

Great endeavors have been used to Exception 1.
wrest this Scripture. Some think to evade the dint of it, by alleging, that
Schlic^tingi^^. Vel^husius, and alii.
by (...) is meant one that is led by Fleshly Lusts; because (...) is sometimes
taken for the sensitive part of the Soul, in opposition to (...), which is the
Rational.

To this I answer two things,

First, Suppose this that (...) Sol. 1.
the Natural Man be taken for one seduced by corrupt and inordinate affections;
yet this will include all men as they are by nature, and as unregenerate;
witness what the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. And you has he quickened, who
were sometimes dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye walked
according to the course of the World, according to the Prince of the Power of
the Air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience: Amongst
whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the Lusts of our Flesh
fulfilling the desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, etc. It is the condition
of all Mankind by our first Apostasy from God, to be in bondage to sinful
lusts, till the Grace of Christ have set us free. And this none but a Pelagian
will deny.

Secondly, It is evident by the context that (...) is in this place opposed to
(...), Spiritual: and the natural man is (as the Apostle Jude explains it in
his Epistle, verse. 19.) one that is destitute of the Spirit: and consequently
he is one that has no higher inward Principle to guide him than his own
Reason. (...), (says the Learned Grotius) Non est idem quod (...), qui
corporis affectibus gubernatur sed est is, qui humanae tantum rationis luce
ducitur. The Natural is not the same with the Carnal, who is swayed by the
affections of the Body; but it is he who is led only by the light of Humane
Reason. Or (as I find the Greek Scholiast cited by a late Author) (...); the
man that is endued with mere humane wisdom. Such an one, whatsoever his natural
endowments may be, and how learned or wise soever, according to the best
improvement of Natures Light, is (...); So our learned Davinant, Philosophus
Expos. ep. ad Coloss. in cap. 2. 8.
qua Philosophus nihil aliud est quam animalis home; and ipsa Ratio non
illuminata fide ad hanc animalitatem pertinet.

But let us hear what the Exercitator Exception 2.
says to this place. The Apostle, says he, speaks not here of a Man that by
Natural Phil. Scr. Int. cap. 7. par. 4.
Light has attained the right knowledge of Truth and Goodness; for a truly
wise Man never censures what he does not discern; whereas the Man here spoken
of, is one that knows not the things of the Spirit, and yet accounts them
foolishness; which cannot be meant of the true Philosopher; for such an one
suspends his judgment of things till such time as he has attained a clear and
distinct perception of them. Therefore the Apostle must needs be understood
either of a man utterly ignorant, or of one that follows the sway of his blind
affections. Such an one, says he, receives not Spiritual Things, that is, the
things that belong to the Rational Soul, which is a Spirit.

To this (passing by so much of it as Sol. 1.
is met with already in the former Exception) I answer several things.

First, Whereas he says, that by the Animal or Natural Man is not meant he that
has by Natural Light attained the right knowledge of truth and goodness. I say
so too; for the Apostle means by it, one that has no other than natural light
in searching after truth and goodness; who may theretherefore easily, yea who
will certainly mistake, having no better guide.

Secondly, Whereas he says, a true Philosopher never is rash in his censure of
things, but always suspends his judgment till he has attained a clear
perception of them, and that therefore such an one cannot be thought to judge
the things of the Spirit foolishness before he know them; this is all one, as
if he had said a true Philosopher is a Chimaera: for (it seems) he is one who
never determines of any thing till he clearly perceives what it is, and then
what he determines is undoubtedly true: whence it will follow, that every true
Philosopher is infallible. And where was such an one ever yet to be found?
Certain it is, that the most eminent Philosophers (not inferior in their
Natural Learning to this Exercitator, or any of his Companions) did in the
first breaking out of the Gospel, make a mock of the whole Doctrine of
Christianity. Thus did the Philosophers at Athens, when they heard St. Paul:
and thus did Porphyrie, Celsus, and others, after the Apostles days.

Thirdly, When this Author will have no more meant here by things Spiritual,
but things belonging to the Rational Soul, which is a Spirit; he is grossly
over-seen, to speak no worse. For the Apostles words are (...), the things of
the Spirit of God: which certainly is not the Soul of Man, but the Holy Ghost.
And when the Apostle Jude describes the (...) sensual, or natural, by (...),
having not the Spirit, surely he did not mean they had no Rational Soul; but
that they were destitute of the Regenerating Spirit of Grace. And that of this
Spirit the Apostle Paul is to be understood in the place under present
consideration, the whole tenor of his Discourse, from verse. 9, to 15. does
undeniably manifest: If at least (by this Gentleman's good leave) the Scripture
might be allowed to interpret it self.

The woeful ignorance and perverseness concerning the things of God, that. 3.
discovered it self in the wisest and best civilized part of the World, and
such as had improved their natural light to as high a pitch as any other we can
read of, is an abundant evidence of what I assert concerning the darkness and
pravity of Man's Reason. They became (as the Apostle says) vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened: professing themselves to be
wise, they became fools, Romans 1. 21, 22. They acknowledged a Deity, and that
God was to be worshipped: but in the manner and way of worship, how woefully
were they mistaken! yea those times and places that were best cultivated, and
that flourished most in all Humane Learning, were of all other the most sottish
in their Idolatrous Worships, giving religious adoration to Brute Creatures, to
Dumb Pictures, to Diseases and Humane Passions, yea to Hellish Furies. And
whereas, some that were more sagacious than the rest (as Socrates, Cicero, and
such like) saw enough to condemn that way of Religion that was then in use
(observing the Rites in fashion, tanquam legibus jussa, non tanquam diis grata,
as St. Aug. de C. D. l. 61. c. 10.
Aug. observes out of Seneca) yet when they came to enquire and determine of
the true Religion, they were confessedly at a loss, and acknowledged that they
could better cry down the wrong than find out the right.

They had what is indelibly planted in all men a desire of happiness: but they
were miserably bewildered in their search after it. And whereas they were, some
of them, sensible of a dreadful blow that Man's Nature had received,
discerning a Combat in themselves between their Reason and their Sensual
Appetite; and saw the World generally overrun with wickedness, and
consequently vexed with a continual succession of calamities; yet as they could
never by natures light find out the source and spring of all this, and what it
was that first brought sin and sorrow upon Mankind; so in vain did they weary
themselves in inventing ways of reconciling themselves to God, and procuring
his Favor, whom they saw to be displeased, and of curing the Maladies of their
disordered and discomposed Natures: in both which they took such strange and
horrid courses, as did but increase the evil they lay under, and exceedingly
multiply their own guilts. Now it being thus, how can the Principles of Reason
and Philosophy be a safe Rule, whereby to interpret the Holy Scriptures.

CHAP. III.
1. Several Exceptions against the foregoing Argument removed, viz. That this
holds only where the Scripture is unknown. 2. That it strikes not at Right
Reason and Sound Principles. 3. That Reason is of God: And that Truth is not
contrary to Truth.

TO this Argument, all the reply 1.
that I can conceive will be made, may be reduced to a few particulars, which I
shall briefly dispatch.

It will be said, That this Argument holds of Man's Reason, while Exception 1.
he is destitute of the Written Word; but reaches not them who have the
Scriptures to enlighten them.

To pass by other Answers that may be gathered from what has been already Sol.
said; This Exception yields the Cause: For it supposes Man's Reason unable to
discover the Mind of God without Scripture Light. And if so, then whatsoever
Revealed Truth is more darkly delivered in any* one part of Scripture, must
receive light from the Scripture it self somewhere else, where it speaks more
plainly: without which Man's Reason (notwithstanding the best Natural
Principles to assist it) would leave him at a loss: consequently it is not the
principles of Reason and Philosophy that must be the Rule of Interpretation,
but the Scripture it self, as shall be shown hereafter.

But, say some, when we say Reason 2.
by its Principles is to Interpret Scripture, we mean it of right Reason,
Exception 2.
proceeding upon sound Principles, and not of Reason depraved, and Principles
corrupted.

I answer, these are smooth Words, but what do they signify? There were Sol.
some color for this reply, if incorrupt Reason (either in the Faculty or the
Principles) were infallibly to be found. The Exception speaks of Reason
abstractly and in the Idea, supposing it freed from all those depravations and
entanglements that have captived and debased it: Whereas we are speaking of
Reason as it is in Men, who are to make use of it. And we know what is said of
Man, Genesis 6. 5. God saw that the wickedness of Man was great in the earth, and
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
Every Man is thus depraved from his birth; so that we have all need of renewing
in our highest faculties, in the Spirit of our Mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. And this
original depravation is increased by a farther contracted malignity through
vicious habits and deceitfulness of sinful lusts. In the most it remains
wholly thus: and in the best in this life it is but in part renewed; and
therefore in danger to mistake, and that grossly, in things Spiritual, when it
goes to work only by its own natural Principles. And whereas it may be thought
or said, there is no danger so long as Reason performs it works aright: I
reply, how shall that be known? by what Rule shall we examine and find out when
Reason passes a right judgment? or how shall the Principles that Reason
pretends to use in matters of Revelation, be tried, if not by the Scriptures?
Shall the unquestionable Word of God be brought to the Bar of Man's Reason, and
be tried by its Dictates? and shall these Dictates of our lame and imperfect
Reason in things of God and Eternity be uncontrolable, and admitted without any
debate in matters of pure Revelation, as if they were the only SupremeLaw,
overruling all supernatural discoveries of God's Will? do we not know that
men's conceptions concerning the Principles of Reason are various? Some say, one
thing is a sound Principle of Reason, and others will plead for the contrary:
besides, there is as great a difference in the application of the same
Principle to particular cases. When Reason alone is the warrant Duct. Dub. lib.
3. c. 3.
and the guide (says the late Bishop of Down) a Man shall not always find out
what (...) pleasing to God: and it will be to no purpose to say, that not every
Man's Reason, but Right Reason shall be the Law; for every Man thinks his own
Reason right; and whole Nations differ in the assignation and opinons of Right
Reason: and who shall be Judge of all but God.

This is certain, that sundry Philosophers of old, who were cried up for Men of
strong Reason, and many learned Men of late, who profess a high esteem of
Reason, and frequently appeal to that, in their Novel Opinions, are chargeable
with many gross absurdities in their Tenets, inconsistent with the plainest
principles of natural light. Yea, are not many learned Atheists reckoned, by
themselves and others, great Masters of Reason? What Natural Principle more
clear and undoubted than this, That two contradictions cannot be true at once.
Insomuch as it is conceived by some, that all Principles that are not thought
fit to be proved in any Natural Science (if they be truly so) may easily be
resolved into this one. A thing cannot at once be and not be. And yet even this
Principle of Contradictions has been denied by some: whereof we have a
pregnant instance in Weigelius and his Followers, and a late Carmelite Friar;
beside what Aristotle says of some ancient Philosophers. Great is Man's
proneness to judge according to his inclinations and interests. It Is a known
observation, Such as a Man is, such he thinks God to be. And according to the
prevailing bent of his Heart, so are his Conceptions of Truth or Falsehood. And
it was an old complaint, Scripturarum esse volumus quae nostra sunt. Be it
therefore granted, that there are some common Maxims wherein all agree, being
such as shine by their own light, and which the Scriptures always suppose: Yet
these are so general and so few, that they will not reach far, to be sure not
beyond those things that are merely natural. And as for those acquired
Principles that are drawn by deduction from the former, there is so great
variety of Men's apprehensions concerning them, that they cannot be allowed in
this case for a sufficient or tolerable Rule of Judgment. For in these we see
that those who are for determining all by Maxims of Reason, are greatly at odds
amongst themselves; and some in that variety must needs err, if not all.

But perhaps it will be said, That Men's Expositions of Scripture are Inst.
likewise various, and many times erroneous; and yet the Scripture is not
rejected, because that is always the same and incorrupt; so though Men's
apprehensions about the Principles of Reason be various and mistaking, yet the
Principles themselves are the same all the World over, and continue in all Ages
incorrupt; and therefore may well be admitted for a Rule.

To this I answer:

As the Scriptures are the same and incorrupt (notwithstanding Men's various Sol.
and erroneous apprehensions and Interpretations) so we can tell where to find
them, and have recourse to them, and consult with them: they are a standing
Record open and obvious to our search. But for the Principles of Reason in
matters of Religion, though they lie fundamentally in the nature of things; yet
if we lay Scriture aside, they are not to be found formally existing any where
but in the Minds and Writings of Men, who are confessed to be various, and
liable to mistake: and accordingly Natural Principles are variously conceived,
and may be dangerously perverted: so that if we had not the Scriptures as a
surer Test to try all by, we should be always at great uncertainty, and in
apparent danger of miscarrying. For I take it to be a certain Truth, that the
Bible is the most perfect comprehension of all Principles of Religion, as well
Natural as Supernatural: Nor know I any of the former of these (for of the
latter no question is made) but what is more evidently and distinctly to be
seen in the Scripture than in any other Record whatsoever.

But Reason, say some, is of God,. 3. Exception 3.
and therefore cannot deceive us.

I answer:

1. Our Senses also are of God, and yet they may and do deceive us. 2. Adam's
Sol.
Reason was of God; and yet that deceived him, even in his first state, much
more may ours now. 3. Though Man's Reason be of God (both as to the faculty and
all its sound Principles) yet every thing that Man's Reason suggesteth is not
of God. There is (as the Philosophers complained) a (...) a spurious and
adulterate kind of reasoning. And how shall I know whether that which pretends
to Reason, and to be of God, be so indeed, but by bringing it to the Test of
Scripture, where God has made known his Mind about Matters of Religion: (for
of them I speak) more plainly and more fully than by the clearest Beams of
Natural Light.

But it is further replied, That Truth Exception 4. Phil. Scr. Int. cap. 5.
par. 7. etc. 8. par 1.
is not contrary to Truth: therefore nothing in Scripture can be contrary to
Reason.

Understanding it of sound Reason, Sol.
this is all granted. But then let it be considered. 1. That every thing is not
to be accounted contrary to Reason that Reason cannot reach. 2. The former
difficulty recurrs; How or where shall we be assured that what is alleged for
sound Reason, is so indeed, excepting self-evident Principles, which are, as I
said but General and Few) where shall it be tried? seeing there have been, and
are many Maxims or Axioms commonly received among learned Men, that will not
hold. 3. What if there be no contrariety, but only an appearance thereof? It
does not therefore follow, that Scripture is to be controlled by Reason: but if
there seem any opposition, the dictates of Reason are to be reduced and
reconciled to Scripture. For the Principles of Reason (such I mean as are true
and sound) may carry an appearing opposition to some Scripture Assertions,
because perhaps the said Principles though generally received, do admit of some
limitations and restrictions, which through the weakness and imperfection of
our Reason, we are not aware of. In this case it were bold and dangerous to
bend the Scripture to those Principles. That which is variable and fallible is
to be overruled by that which is fixed and unerring, as the Holy Scripture
undoubtedly is: and whatsoever is indeed contrary to the Voice of God speaking
in this Sacred Volume, whatever pretense it may have of Reason or Philosophy,
it is but (...), 1 Timothy 6. 20. It is an honest Speech of Aquinas, which I find
quoted Qu. disp. de ^ide art. 8. (...) Davenant de Jud. Controver. cap. 27
by our Judicious and Learned Davenant: Omnis creata Veritas est defectibilis,
nisi quatenus per veritatem increatam rectificatur; unde nec homo nec Angelus
infallibiliter ducit in veritatem, nisi quatenus in iis loquentis Dei
testimonium consideratur. To which I shall subjoin the judgment of Cartesius,
whose Authority may perhaps be of more credit with some now, than either that
of a Schoolman, or of an Apostle. Memoriae nostrae pro summa Carts. Prima
Philos. par. 1. artic. 76
regula est infigendum, ea quae nobis a Deo revelata sunt, ut omnium certissima
esse credenda. Et quamvis forte lumen rationis quam maxim clarum, and evidens
aliud quid nobis suggerere videretur, soli tamen auctoritati divinae potius
quam proprio judicio, fidem esse adhibendam. This (says he) must be firmly
remembered as our chief Rule, That those things which are revealed to us of God,
are to be believed as of all things the most certain. And although perhaps the
most clear and manifest light of Reason may seem to suggest to us some other
thing; we are nevertheless to give credit to Divine Authority alone, rather
than to our own judgment.

CHAP. IV.
1. A second Argument from the disproportion between Man's Reason, and Matters
of Divine Revelation. 2. An Exception removed.

MY second Argument is, That there is no proportion between Man's 1. Arg. 2.
Reason, and the Mysteries of Divine Revelation. These are so sublime, they are
out of the ken of a Natural Understanding; they are of a far different kind
from the highest Natural Principles. How little is it that Man's Reason by its
own Light can discover of the Nature of God, and his Eternal Counsels. The
Heathen, who wanted Scripture Light, did but grope as Men in the dark, Act. 17.
27. How greatly are we to seek in judging of the Wisdom, and Goodness, and
Power, and Justice of God, if we have no higher light than Natural Reason to
direct us? Nor need this seem strange, when we see how much the most knowing
Men are at a loss concerning themselves, the nature and faculties of the Soul,
and the manner of its union with the Body, and how little insight they have
into many of the minuta naturae. Can it then be wondered that Man's Reason should
be unable by its own light to have a clear view of the Divine Perfections that
are infinite and incomprehensible? Whence was it that so many of the wisest
Heathens were so gravelled at the proceedings of a Divine Providence, when they
saw good Men suffer, and bad Men prosper? How did Cato, that severe Moralist,
stumble at the success that Julius Caesar had against Pompey? But what shall we
say to that great Mystery of Man's Redemption by Christ? The line of Man's Reason
is too short to reach these (...) 1 Cor. 2. 10. Therefore Evangelical 1 Timothy 3.
16. 1 Cor. 2. 7. Romans 16. 25. 1 Cor. 2. Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Doctrine is frequently called a great Mystery; containing such things as Eye
has not seen, nor Ear Heard, nor have entered into the Heart of Man to
conceive; things beyond the reach, not of Men only, but of Angels. It is true,
that all Men could not but know God to be very good; they found it and felt it
in the daily effects of his sustaining and preserving Providence, and his
wonderful patience and forbearance toward them: and they did know also that
God is Just, and a Righteous Avenger of Sin; this they might see in the
Judgments that he brought upon the World, beside the inward witness of their
own accusing Consciences. The wrath of God was revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, Romans 1. 18. And they knew the (...) the
righteous judgment of God, that they who do such wickednesses as they were
conscious to in themselves, were worthy of death, Romans 1. 32. But now how to
reconcile these two, the Goodness of God to his Creatures, and his severe
Indignation against Sinners, so as with any satisfaction to hope for pardon and
acceptance with him; here their Principles of Reason faill'd them. They saw
themselves in a very ill case, and that there was a necessity of somewhat to
appease the provoked Anger of the Divine Majesty; but how or which way this
should be, they could not tell; and therefore lost themselves in a Maze of
infinite Mistakes in their attempts about it. Now it being so, it is impossible
that Reason by its Natural Principles should be a competent Judge of
Scripture-Revelations. It must therefore submit its own conceptions and
Dictates to the Doctrine of Faith contained in the Scripture.

Here possibly it will be replied (as 2. Exception.
before to the precedent Argument) That all this may be granted of those that
enjoyed not the Gospel and Written Word: but where this is, Reason may be
allowed to judge and determine by its Principles concerning the things there
revealed.

To this I answer two things:

First, This implies a contradiction; Sol. 1*
for it is not the Words or Sentences of Scripture that reveal any Mystery to
us further than thereby the Mind of God is made known to us. Now if this cannot
be found out from the Scripture it self, but from Principles of Reason, then it
is Reason it self that first discovers the Mystery. I grant that Reason (that
is the faculty of Reason) is and must be the instrument whereby we apprehend
what God speaks in the Scripture. But if there be any part of Scripture so
dark, as that its meaning cannot be gathered from the Words, neither considered
by themselves, nor compared with other Passages of Sacred Writ; I would know
how comes Reason in Interpreting such an obscure place (supposing it to be
obscure) to find that such and such Words so placed do contain in them such an
Assertion, when the Words and Sentences themselves cannot resolve us? You Will
say, our Reason teaches us by the light of its own common notions, that this
and no other must be the meaning of such a place. Is it not then plain, that
Human Reason fetches that Truth (if it be a Truth) from it self, and not from
the Scriptures? For the Scripture (according to this Hypothesis) gives an,
uncertain sound, only Reason determines it. Remember we are speaking of
matters of pure Revelation. Now if the Sentences of Scripture under debate do
neither by themselves, nor with the help of any other, clearly and certainly
signify any such thing as is fastened upon them; such Arguers cannot say, they
have it by Divine Revelation, unless they will pretend to that Enthusiastic
Inspiration, which they profess to decry, and falsely charge upon their
Opposites.

Secondly, I add further, that there are sundry things revealed in Scripture,
whereof God gives us no other Reason than his own Will. And if our Reason will
not rest satisfied with that, it will but weary it self in fruitless inquiries,
and dangerously miscarry by its bold determinations. For instance, what account
can our Reason give why God should provide a Savior for lost Man, and none for
the lapsed Angels? Why he should cloth his only begotten Son with our
dishonored nature, and expose him to so bitter Sufferings for the Sin of Man?
Why he should (...) severely punish the Crucifiers of his Son, when what they
did was fore-determined by himself, in order to Man's Salvation? And why he
should suffer so much wickedness to be done, which himself hates, and could, if
he pleased, by his Almighty Power hinder? These and many more such instances
might be given, wherein Man's Reason is puzzled, as not finding any thing
wherein it can acquiesce, but the Will and pleasure of God that thus it should
be. Again, God requires we should believe him upon his naked Word, though we
know not which way that which he says can be; And accordingly he so manifests
to us his Mind, that he will not gratify our vanity or pride in resolving the
queries, and satisfying the objections that our curiosity may start about the
Truth revealed. It is enough for us to know what he has said, and to take it
upon the Authority of his word without asking how or why? And it is indeed the
highest Reason imaginable, that we should give absolute credit to what he
speaks The Reason of Man (says the Bishop of Down) is a right Judge always when
she is rightly informed: but in many things she knows nothing but the face of
the Article: and in these cases our understanding is to submit, and not to
inquire further: But if it will not consent to a Revelation, until it see a
reason of the proposition, it does not obey at all; for it will not submit till
it cannot choose. Duct. Dubit. li. 1. cap. 2.
.

God's Sovereignty (says the learned Verul. d^ Augm. sciem. l. 9.
Lord Verulam) reaches to the whole Man, extending itself no less to his Reason
than his Will; so that it well becomes man to deny himself universally, and
yield up all to him. Wherefore as we are bound to obey the Law of God,
notwithstanding the reluctance of our Will, so are we also to believe his Word,
though against the reluctance of our Reason.

I shall conclude this with the Words of the learned Grotius, who having
asserted the Doctrines of Scripture to be no way contrary to sound Reason, (but
agreeable thereunto) he De Ver. Relig. Christ. lib. 3.
he has this remarkable passage. Ultra haec pro comperto aliquid affirmare,
aut de Dei natura, aut de ejus voluntate, solo ductu humanae rationis, etc. How
dangerous and deceitful a thing it is to affirm any thing for certain either
of the Nature or Will of God, beyond what we have in Holy Writ, by the sole
conduct of Humane Reason, we are taught by the many dissentient opinions, not
only of Schools, but of particular Philosophers among themselves. Nor is this
any great wonder; for if they ran out into very differing apprehensious when
they disputed about the nature of their own Mind, much more must it needs be so
with those who are desirous to determine any thing concerning that Supreme Mind
that is so far above us. If prudent Men count it dangerous to search into the
Counsels of Kings, which by all our search we cannot discover; who is there so
sagacious, as can hope by his own conjectures to find out what God will do,
among those things that depend upon his mere pleasure.

CHAP. V.
A third Argument from the absurdity of resolving a Man's Faith into himself,
and his own Reason.

IN the third place, If the Sense of Arg. 3.
Scripture be to be regulated and determined by Natural Principles, then the
last resolution of a Man's Faith in those points (as to the formal object of it)
will be into Man himself and the dictate of his own Reason. For the ultimate
reason or ground of our believing in this case will not be the veracity of God,
speaking in the Scripture, but the Voice of our own Reason, persuading us from
its own Principles, when we can see nothing in the Words of Scripture to
require it. And this plainly falls in with the absurd conceit of the Quakers:
who commonly profess to own nothing that is laid down in the Bible, as the Mind
of God, but what is witnessed by the light within them. Which is no more in
other terms than this, That they will take nothing from the Scripture but what
is agreeable to their own Reason. For the light they speak of, with which they
say every Man comes into the World (for which they allege that in Joh. 1. 9.)
is nothing else but Man's Reason, and the common notions of it: which though
some of them have heretofore denied, yet now their chief Heads and Leaders do
openly avow. And this is that which they make the standing Rule of what they
believe and practice, and not the Holy Scriptures. We rather say with an
ancient Schoolman, Apud Aristotelem argumentum est ratio rei dubiae faciens
Altisiod. apud l. Gerbard Loc. com. de S. Script. c. 11.
fidem; sed apud Christum argumentum est fides faciens rationem. The way of
arguing in Aristotle's School is by Reason begetting assent; but in Christ's
School it is by Faith, which is instead of all Reason.

CHAP. VI.
A fourth Argument from another absurdity, viz. That in Matters of pure
Revelation the Mind of God may be better known by Natural Light than by
Scripture; Or that all supernatural Revelation is to be shut out.

FOurthly, It will follow from this supposal, That in matters of pure Arg. 4.
Revelation, the Mind of God may be better known by the common principles of
Natural Light, than by the Holy Scriptures: which carries with it a palpable
contradiction. For matters of pure Revelation are supposed to be supernatural;
and if these as laid down in Scripture, cannot be understood from the Scripture
it self, but must have such a Sense given them, as the Maxim of Natural Reason
shall determine; then certainly it is not Revelation, but Reason that discovers
them: And so what need will there be of Scripture. Indeed this conceit looks
very like that absurd dotage of Weigelius (if it be not the same with it) that
Man's knowledge of all things whatsoever must be fetched from within himself, and
not from without. Tenoris (says he) and omnia noris; omnia enim es, non minus
quam Deus. i. e. Know thy self and thou know all things; for thou art all
things no less than God.
Which (besides many other prodigious absurdities) plainly shuts out all
supernatural Revelation. And that this lies at the bottom of the Exercitators
Discourse, I find reason enough to suspect, if not conclude For (besides what
he says in his sixth Chapter, the first Paragraph which I shall wave insisting
on) in his Epilogue at the end of his Book, he propounds an Objection against
his whole Discourse, viz. That if Philosophy be the Rule of Interpreting the
Holy Scripture, then the Scripture is useless and written to no purpose: for
seeing the truth of all the Senses of Scripture, which are to be searched out
and tried by Philosophy, must first be perceived before they be drawn out and
examined, to what end is it that we should have recourse to Scripture to learn
any thing from it. This is the Objection which himself makes against his own
Position. In answer whereto he runs out into a long Harangue of words, and (as
his manner is) propounds a frivolous distinction, and tedrously dilates upon it
to amuse his Reader. But the sum of all comes to this, That the words of
Scripture are of no further use than as they are signs of conceptions and
things; and under that consideration they cannot be understood, unless the
things signified by them be first known, at least in some gross and confused
manner. Whereof he gives us this instance, that where we sind in Scripture that
God is Omniscient, we cannot understand this unless we first know what God is,
and what Omniscience is. Therefore, says he, all the benefit that any can get
by any Book that is written, is but this, that it stirs up the Mind of the
Reader to reflect upon the clear and distinct Idea's of those things in his
Mind which the Book treats of; not that the Book can, of it self bring him to
the true knowledge of things, much less that it can beget any clear or distinct
Ideas in his Mind which were not there before. And thus he tells us it is with
the Scripture; all the use of it is to stir up the Reader or Hearer to think of
the things that it propounds, and inquire into them, and examine them whether
they be so as they are there propounded; and that they may do this, they must
make use of Philosophy to try what is there written. Therefore (adds he) the
Scripture is to be used, not that it should of it self inform us in the truth,
or render the truth more clear and distinct, or make it more firm to us; but
that it may give us occasion and matter of meditating on those things which
perhaps otherwise we should never have minded. Therefore (says he still) the
utility and excellency of the Scriptures above other Books consists only in
this, That the things it speaks of are of so great concernment to our
everlasting blessedness; not for any use they are of to instruct us in the
Truth. This is all the use that he allows the Scripture: from whence I think
will inevitably follow that he owns the necessity of no knowledge of God or
Religion but what is natural. And so all supernatural Revelation, or at least
all necessity of it is denied. And if there be no other use of the Written Word
but what this Author assigns it, its put into the same rank with a Crucifix, or
a Deaths Head. Indeed the whole design of his Book, and of that other Tractatus
Theologico-politicus
Tract that is prefixed to its latter Edition (written, as is supposed, by the
same Author) is utterly to undermine and overthrow the credit of the
Scriptures. We need not wonder that he so often derides and calumniates the
Protestant Doctrine of the Spirits internal illumination of the Mind, which
consists in curing the indisposition of the Subject, and fitting it for the
right understanding of Heavenly Things: (of which more hereafter in an Appendix
to my present Discourse) when he will not allow the necessity of so much as an
Enternal Light for the Revelation of Supernatural Objects, as acknowledging no
such things. And he that is thus principled, must needs be very ignorant of
himself, and of the ruins that Sin has made among the whole Race of Adam, and
the woeful depravation of Man's Nature by his first Apostasy. But for the
Readers full satisfaction about the necessity of Supernatural Revelation, I
dare commend to his perusal (besides many other useful Discourses that might be
named) that excellent Piece of the Eminently-accomplish'd Sir Charles Wolsly,
concerning the Reasonableness of Scripture Belief.

CHAP. VII.
1. A fifth Argument, That this would open a gap to the most pernicious Errors,
in Matters of Faith. 2. And Practice.

AGain fifthly, This Assertion lets 1.
loose the Bridle to proud and Arg. 5.
wanton Wits to overthrow the Foundations of Christian Religion; for though
there be not the least real repugnancy between the Doctrines of Christianity
and the Principles of Right Reason and Sound Philosophy, which undoubtedly
there is not (as I have already premised and asserted) yet there being no
certain and infallible Record of these Principles, by which, as by the Rule of
Judgment, particular Men's Reasonings may be tried; If Scripture Revelation
must be interpreted by Men's Reasonings, I know not the any Error that has ever
crept into the Church of Christ, either in matter of Faith or Practice, since
the first publication of the Gospel, but may be introduced anew by this Engine.
The heretical Blasphemies of Servetus and Socinus, which sprang up of late
years; and those of the Marcionites and Manichees that infested the Church in
former times; together with the loathsome impurities of the Gnostics (who
esteemed themselves the only knowing Men, or to speak in the new mode, the
only Rational Divines) have fair way made them by this Trim Device.

First, Let us instance in Matters of Faith, whatsoever is said in Scripture
about the Creation of the World, the Conception of our Savior in a Virgins
Womb, the Personal Union of the two Natures, the Resurrection of the Body at
the last Day; these, with many more that might be named, let them be brought to
the Bar of Reason, and tried by its Principles (as they are to be found in the
Minds of Men) and what will it come to? We have seen already what use some Men
have made of this way to subvert the weightiest Truths of the Gospel.

But here it will be excepted perhaps Exception.
by some, That the Fundamentals of Christian Religion being clear and plain in
Scripture, there is no fear of this inconvenience.

To this I answer:

First, If Divine Revelations must be Sol. 1.
no otherwise received or understood, than as Men see ground for them in their
own Reason, the plainest and clearest Doctrines of Scripture will be rejected.
I shall here give two Instances, as I find them quoted by a late learned
Author. The one is of Socinus, who says, That he would not believe Lib. de
Christo Servatore.
Christ to have satisfied for our Sins, though he should read it once and again
in Scripture; the infallibility of the Revealer not being sufficient to
establish it, unless he had declared it by its causes and effects, and so
satisfied Men's Reason concerning the possibility of it. Smalcius is the other,
who says, That Hom. 8. on John 1.
he would not believe the Incarnation of the Son of God, though he should meet
with it in express terms in the Bible. The same Author says elsewhere, that In
prefatione cont. Frantzium.
by Reason alone we determine the possibility and impossibility of the Articles
of Faith. To which I might add the bold assertion of a late English Remonstrant
in a Volume published some years ago, where he says, I verily believe
Redemption Redeem^d cap. 13. sect. 33.
that in case any such unchangeableness of Gods love (viz. as should assure the
Saints infallible perseverance) were to be found in, or could regularly be
deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground to any considering Man to
question their Authority, or whether they were from God or no. And a late
Belgic Tractator, having affirmed that the miraculous Tract. Theologicopo^l.
c. 6.
Works spoken of in Scripture were not any thing against or besides the
established order of nature, absolutely concludes that whatsoever the Scripture
affirms to have been done, did all necessarily come to pass according to the
Laws of Nature: and if any thing contrary to this could be found in Scripture,
or truly gathered from any thing in it; that was certainly added to the
Scripture by some sacrilegious hand, as being against Nature, and therefore
against Reason.

Secondly, Men that resolve to make (...).
their Reason the Rule of Interpretation will not stick to charge the Scripture
with obscurity in its plainest Propositions, if they suit not with their
preconceived notions. The experience of the present age puts it past all denial
or dispute, that when Men have espoused an Hypothesis which they are not
willing to relinquish, they will quarrel with the most evident Scripture,
accusing it of obscurity; and to make their charge good, they will endeavor by
their strained glosses, to raise a dust, and darken the Sense of it, though it
shine never so clearly by its own light to every impartial and unprejudiced
Reader. Hence it is that the Papists do so frequently with open mouth charge
the Apostle Paul with obscurity in his Writings; because indeed he speaks more
clearly and plainly than they would have him, for that great Doctrine of
Justification by the imputed Righteousness of Christ, and against Justification
by our own Works. And it may be, some will be as ready to find fault with the
same Apostle, when he says, Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is
excess; but be filled with the Spirit: as speaking too darkly; because indeed
they think he speaks too broadly against the debauchery that they practice; and
so plainly for the Spirit, which they scorn and deride.

Thirdly, Nay more, some are grown to that height (as I shall have occasion 3.
to show more fully in my second Part) as to assert that the Scripture is plain
in nothing, but universally obscure; and make this their great ground for their
setting up Reason and Philosophy as the Rule to determine the Sense of the
Bible. And let this be granted them, they will soon make the Scripture speak
whatsoever themselves please: and so the Bible shall be but as a dead Image,
and Man's depraved Reason like the Demon within shall give the Oracle.

2. Come we next to matters of 2.
Practice. It is easy to instance in several commands of God in Scripture,
that are directly opposite to the whole corrupt interest of lapsed nature: As,
when he requires the mortifying of our earthly desires, the love of our
deadliest Enemies, the denying our of selves in whatsoever is dear to us in
this World, even to the laying down of our lives for the defense of his Truth,
upon the bare hope of an invisible happiness in another World. Now considering
how Man's Reason is darkened and enslaved, and no where perfectly cured, if Men's
Reason must by its own Principles interpret the Sense of Scripture, how
numerous are the objections that will be made against these and all other
Precepts that are not to the Gust of Man's degenerate nature? Thus did the
Gnostics of old plead for denying the Faith in persecuting times to save their
life: for what! (said they) Does God delight in the death of Men? he stands in
no need of our Blood: Christ came to save Men's lives, and not to expose them to
hazard. And with these reasonings they shisted off the-command of owning the
Truth in the face of danger. And what the Author of the Leviathan has written
of this, with a specious, though falacious pretense of Reason, is not unknown.

But I shall instance in two extraordinary commands given to particular
persons. The one is that which God did by immediate Revelation give to Abraham,
requiring him to offer up his Genesis 22.
only Son Isaac for a Burnt-offering. What would the Principles of Natural
Reason have said to this, might they have been admitted to interpret this
Command. What? Can infinite goodness require such an unnatural act as this, for
a Father to lay violent hands on his own Child? Has not God strictly forbidden
Murder? Has he not always manifested his tender regard to the life of Man? And
has he not planted that tender affection in the Heart of a Parent, that makes
him abhor to embrue his hands in Child's Blood? Therefore surely (would Man's
Reason say) the meaning of this injunction is something else, far different
from what the words seem to sound: there is some more mysterious sense to be
found out, and a milder interpretation to be made of this Divine Oracle, such
as may consist with those Notions of God which we are taught by that Internal
Light that shines in the Hearts of all Men. It is most rational therefore to
interpret it by an Allegory; Isaac must be sacrific^d in Effigy, or a Lamb out
of the Flock must have Isaac's name put upon it, and so offered up to God: or
(according to the notation of his name) we must sacrifice that joy and delight
that we have had in our Son Isaac, wherein perhaps we have exceeded, by
mortifying our affectious to him, and have him hereafter as if we had him not.
The other instance shall be in the command given by our Savior to the Rich
young Man, to sell all, and give to the Poor, and follow Him in hopes of a
Treasure in Heaven. We may probably suppose, by the Man's turning his back, what
objections his Reason made against it. Are not my Possessions the good Gifts of
God? and shall I unthankfully cast away what he has given me? I am to love my
Neighbor as my self; therefore surely not to strip my self of my subsistence to
help my Neighbor, and so lose the use and benefit of what I have. True, here is
a plain Command. But could not this man's Reason have excogitated some hidden
Sense to satisfy the Command, and yet save his Goods? Yes sure, had the Man
learnt but this new Art of Interpreting that some have got now adays, he might
have thought within himself, That selling all was the disengaging of his
affections from them; and giving to the poor, his relieving them in a
convenient proportion, so as still to preserve his Estate; and follow Christ he
might in a good and holy life, though he did not always personally attend him.
But now would not this way of Interpretation in either of the forenamed
instances, have been a plain eluding of an express command? And yet I am sure
the bold attempts of some in our Age, who are great Pretenders to Reason, have
in sundry considerable and clear Points of Religion, gone as far as this comes
to, and much further, in torturing the Scriptures into a Sense as contrary to
that which they fairly give us of themselves, as darkness is to light. And
indeed by the help of this Engine, what will not be adventured by audacious
Wits, that have cast off the awe of God, and of his holy Word; Men whose glory
it is (...)? Let but others follow the Tract that some have already trodden out
to them, and they will make the whole Bible one great Cipher, utterly
insignificant of his Mind and Will by whose Authority it was endited; and that
which Erasmus feared in his time, Ne sub obtentu priscae literaturae caput
erigere tentet Paganismus, may be unhappily fulfilled in our days.

CHAP. VIII.
The sixth and last Argument, from one great end of Scripture-Revelation, to
supply the Defects, and correct the Mistakes of our Reason. An Exception of the
Exercitator answered.

LAstly, One great end of Scripture-Revelation, Arg. 6.
is to help our Understandings in matters of Religion, partly by rectifying our
mistaken and depraved Reason, and keeping us from being misled in the Things of
God by the Principles we have received; partly by supplying the defects of
Reason, acquainting it with those things, which by its own Natural Light it
could never reach, being by their sublimity and mysteriousness wholly above it.
Therefore the Doctrine of Scripture does in its tendency (...), cast down
reasonings, and (...) captivate every Notion or Conception to the obedience of
Christ, 2. Cor. 10. 5. For any therefore in matter of doubt or difficulty about
the Sense of Scripture-Revelation, to run to the Principles of Reason, is to
measure the Rule by that which should be measured by it: And what a base
dishonor is this to the Sacred Oracles, to subject them to the usurped
Dictatorship of that which is to be regulated by them, and to submit themselves
to its final Judgment.

But here the Exercitator replies, Exception. Ph. Scr. Int. cap. 16. par. 9.
That in the present case the Divine Oracles are not submitted to the Judgment
of Reason or Philosophy; but only the Letters and Syllables, the Words and
Sentences of Scriture; which are nothing but loquaces soni, aut horum mutae
notae, some wordy sounds, or the dumb signs of them, framed for the purpose by
Humane Institution, which therefore may without any disparagement be subjected
to the Judgment of Reason and Philosophy, which are the eminent Gifts of God.
And for the better managing of this Plea, he makes great use of a Discinction
which he elsewhere inculcates, to wit, the consideration of the Scriptures
Materially or Formally.

To this I answer:

1. Surely had the Ancient Church been of this Gentleman's Mind, they Sol. 1.
would never have so severely censured the Traditores, that delivered up their
Bibles to the Persecuters, to save their own lives in the days of Dicolesian:
and it might have been pleaded in their behalf, that they did not give up the
Divine Oracles, but only a heap of Dumb Signs or Characters in Ink and Paper.

2. And the same would have justified the rage of Antiochus in tearing 2.
and burning the Books of the Law; 1. Macc. 1. 56.
and the madness of the Papists in doing the like at several times by the
Protestants Bibles: all which might, by the help of this shuffle, have pleaded
for themselves, that they did not burn the Holy Scriptures, (no by no means)
but only a bundle of unsens'd Characters.

3. As for the Exercitators distiction 3.
(which is the foundation of this conceit) I intend to deal with it hereafter,
when I come to speak of Scripture being its own Interpreter. Therefore v. 2.
par. chapter 12
at present I shall let it pass.

CHAP. IX.
The contrary Arguments Examined, and Answered; the first from some Positions
of the Exercitator about the manifold Sense of Scripture, etc.

I Come now to examine what was alleged by the Adverse Part, and to answer the
Arguments whereby they would prove Reason and Philosophy to be the Scriptures
best Interpreter.

1. The Exercitator argues from some Positions by him formerly laid down Arg. 1.
which he supposes himself to have demon Ph. Scr. Int. c. 6. par. 1.
stratively proved in his 4th Chapter, viz. That the next and immediate Sense
of the Scripture is manifold, and whatsoever Truths occur to the Readers Mind
in the perusal of any Scripture, they are all to be taken for the true intended
sense and meaning of that Scripture: and Philosophy being the true, certain,
and undoubted knowledge of the nature of things demonstratively deduced from
the Principles of Natural Light; therefore by this the several Truths that lie
in the Scripture, may be best drawn out and demonstrated, and all false
Interpretations discovered, and consequently this is the infallible Rule of
Interpretation. This is the Sum of his Argument. For answer, Here are Sol.
many things crowded together in this captious Sorites, which must be
particularly discussed, that the vanity and folly of the whole may the better
appear.

1. He supposes the immediate Sense 1.
of Scripture to be manifold, and that one and the same Sentence of Scripture
affords great variety of different Senses. This I deny: and do maintain with
the consentient Judgment of the Reformed Churches, that the Sense of Scripture
is but one. Thus much I grant:

1. That there may be varions applications or accommodations made of one and
the same Li^eral Sense of Scripture, so it be done with due caution; and ^o
otherwise can that threefold Sense which some speak of, Allegoricla,
Anagogical, Tropological, be allowed.

2. That one single Sentence of Scripture may and frequently does contain many
very weighty Truths in it; but these are not Coordinate Senses of the same
Proposition; this is but one; the rest are but either some Specials included in
their General, or some deductions from Scripture Assertions, as of Conclusions
from their Principles wherein they are virtually comprehended.

3. I further grant, That sundry passages of Scripture (especially in the Old
Testament) have a mystical Sense besides the Literal; to wit, when one thing is
propounded as a Type representing somewhat else. But then the thing signified
by the words of Scripture is but one, namely, that only which the Literal
Sense exhibits, which propounds the Type. The Antitype is not signified by the
words in those Scriptures, but by the Type, which those words do immediately
speak of. For example, when we find in Numb. 21. 8, 9. how by God's command
Moses set up a Brazen Serpent upon a Pole for the Bitten Israelite to look on
that he might be healed; these words that relate the History, signify no more
than what they literally import. But the Brazen Serpent there spoken of did
indeed signify somewhat else; for it did tipically represent the future
Crucifixion of Christ for the Salvation of Sinners, as our Savior himself has
taught us, Joh. 3. 14.

Indeed this conceit of the multiplicity of Senses serves our Exercitators turn
very well, because it helps to render the Scripture ambiguous and thereby
obscure; and that is the principal strength of his Cause; of which I shall
speak hereafter in due place. Mean while let us see what he has to say for
this fancy.

Two kinds of proof he uses, the one from Reason, the other from the Testimony
Ph. Scr. Int. cap. 4. par. 4.
of learned Men. His Reasons are drawn from Gods Omniscience and Veracity. God
perfectly knows all the several significations of the words that he has
uttered in Scripture, and whatver the Reader can apprehend in them: and he is
also most true and faithful, and therefore would not deceive or delude any by
his Words. Hence he gathers, that whatsoever sense may be made of any part of
Scripture, if it be in it self a Truth, it must be owned for the true meaning
of the Spirit of God in that place.

To this I answer:

Were all this intended only of the multiplicity of subordinate Senses,
depending on and deducible from that immediate Sense, which is but one, the
Argument will hold firm. For if any thing do truly lie in any Man's words, or
by due consequence be deducible from them, which himself did not mean when he
spoke them, he must needs be charged to be either ignorant or fallacious. But
being intended (as it is by the Author) of a multiplicity of collateral and
immediate Senses, his Argument is a miserable inconsequence.

Next he attempts to prove this by the Testimony of Learned Men; and begins
with the Jewish Rabbis, whose. childish and absurd conceits need no
confutation: witness that instanced by this Author, their proving the
multiplicity of Senses out of Psalm 62. 12. (the 11. in our English
Translation) God has spoken once, twice have I heard this, that power
belongs unto God. That is, say they, God has propounded one single Speech,
but such as I can understand two ways, that is, many ways (a certain number
being put for an uncertain) by drawing several Senses from it: wherein the
Power of God consists, that he can so order and dispose his Speech, as thereby
to teach men a multitude of Truths. And is not this a goodly gloss upon the
Text, and an irrefragable proof of the matter in hand? Whereas the Psalmists
twice hearing what God had once spoken, is no more but his diligent and
attentive minding of that great and weighty Truth, That Power belongs unto God.

What he further cites out of the Fathers concerning the fecundity of
Scripture, containing much in a few words, is all granted, being understood (as
before) of subordinate, not coordinate Senses. For that the Scripture should be
as a formless Mass, capable of being turned by Philosophy into a thousand
shapes (which this Authors conceit tends to) never was, for ought I can find,
any part of their meaning.

2. Whereas he says Philosophy is a true, certain, undoubted knowledge 2.
of the nature of things demonstrated by Natural Light; I ask, does Philosophy
comprehend the knowledge of all things? Or, is the nature of all things
discernable by Natural Light? There are in Scripture many things Historical,
Prophetical, and Dogmatical, the knowledge whereof depends wholly upon
Supernatural Revelation: What can Philosophy do here? And even in those things
that are Natural, and belong to the cognizance of Philosophy, how short is that
knowledge that the most learned have attained? Therefore, whereas this Author
so proudly derides Ph. Scr. Int. cap. 5. par. 4.
our Reformed Divines for complaining of the darkness of Man's Natural Reason;
if he were not too wise to be taught, he might have learnt more modesty from
the ancient Philosophers, the best and wisest whereof did greatly bewail the
darkness of Man's Understanding. Even Aristotle (who never, I think, was judged
to have disparaged Humane Reason) acknowledges that our Understandings, even as
to the most manifest things in nature, are but as the Eyes of the Owl and Bat
to the daylight. And though both he and others of them, being unacquainted
with Scripture, could not clearly discover the true original of this darkness,
yet some weak conjectures some of them have made of it, and (whether by any
Tradition received from the Jews, or by some other means I shall not enquire)
some general and confused intimation they had, that Man had lost his Primitive
Excellency, that the Wings of his Soul (for so they express it) had by some sad
fall been so broken, that he could not arrive at any considerable measures of
knowledge by his greatest industry. And hence arose that fond mistake among
some of them, that the Souls of Men having had a pre-existence before their
union with their Bodies, and having offended in that State, were for a
punishment of their Error, thrust into these gross terrestial receptacles and
that this caused the imperfection and obscurity of Men's Understandings. But to
those who own the Scripture, and may learn from thence what Man's Primitive
State was, and how he fell, and are any whit acquainted with themselves,
methinks it should be no strange Riddle, that the Mind is clouded and benighted
even in things Natural, and therefore in Supernatural much more. But where is
that Philosophy that this Exercitator cries up for so certain and infallible?
and which another Author of like Principles does Lambert. Velthus. de usu
rationis in Theologia.
with profane boldness, magnify as equal to the Holy Scriptures for its
complete perfection and infallible certainty? Where is it? In the Clouds? Sure
it never was extant among men, save in the crazy conceits of some haughty
self-admirers.

3. As to what our Author speaks of 3.
Philosophy being useful to detect false Interpretations of Scripture; I
grant, that where such false Interpretations are given, as do really entrench
upon the undoubted Principles of Reason, the weakness and folly of them may
well be discovered by Philosophy: But all corrupt or perverse expositions are
not to be so limited; nor is this enough to render Philosophy a sufficient Rule
of Interpretation. The heathen Philosophers could discover the error of their
vulgar Religion, but could not direct men to the true and right, as I have
shown before. The like may be said in the present case.

4. Whereas our Exercitator further 4.
adds in the close of this Argument, that from the beginning of Christianity,
those who were the most profound Philosophers, were generally confessed to be
the happiest Interpreters of Scripture, I am far from being of his mind, none
having more corrupted and depraved the Scriptures, than Men of greatest
eminency for Philosophic Learning: which I do not at all impute to Philosophy
(truly so called) but to the rashness and folly of Men, who being desirous to
advance that wherein they would be thought to excel, have adventured to make
use of their Philosophic Principles in matters of a quite different and more
sublime nature. But suppose we the utmost that can be supposed; That an eminent
Philosopher were furnished with all the most necessary accomplishments for the
understanding of Scripture, and should duly improve them for that end; yet
this would no more prove Philosophy to be the Supreme rule of Interpretation,
than Grammar or Rhetoric; which are every whit as necessary and useful to such
a Work, if not more. No further does any thing help us in understanding the
Scripture, than it directs us to those (...) or evidences of the true sense
that lie within the Scripture it self; that is, by helping us to use the
Scripture as the Rule of its own Interpretation,

CHAP. X.
A second Argument, from God's being the Author of Philosophy, answered.

EVery one, says the Exercitator, is the best Interpreter of his own Arg. 2.
Words, and God being the Author Ph. Scr. Int. cap. 6. par. 1.
of Philosophy, to him is to be ascribed whatever Interpretation is made of the
Scripture by the Maxims of Philosophy, and consequently that is to be owned as
the Rule of Interpretation.

But this is a strange way of Argumentation Sol.
in a Man that pretends to Reason. If he have no better skill in Expounding
than he has in Arguing, he will not gain many Proselites to his
Interpretations of Scripture amongst understanding and considerate Men. For,

1. This Argument may with full as much or more strength, be retorted upon him,
and that two ways;

First, If because God is the Author of Philosophy, therefore Philos^phy must
unfold all the difficulties in Scripture: Will it not as well follow, that
seeing God is the unquestionable Author of the Scriptures, therefore the
Scriptures are to resolve all the difficulties in Philosophy? If it be said,
that the Scriptures are not designed for any such end, nor fitted for such an
use as to untie the knots of Philosophy; their use and design is of greater and
higher concernment. I answer, neither is Philosophy designed to clear doubts in
matters of Supernatural Revelation, its use being limited to matters of an
inferior Orb. Again, we may thus also retort the Argument; If God be the best
Interpreter of his own Mind, then doubtless the best Interpretation of his Mind
is to be fetched from that which is the only certain and undoubted Record of
his Mind, and that is the Scripture.

Secondly, That God is the Author 2.
of all true and sound Philosophy, I grant; nor needed the Exercitator to have
given himself the trouble of spending Ph. Scr. Int. c. 5. par. 3.
so many lines to prove it. But I must mind him of some few things to rectify
his mistakes.

1. He is widely out in supposing that the Wisdom spoken of in the Scriptures
by him alleged, is no other than Philosophy. The Holy Ghost in most, if not
all, of those places, speaks of something higher and more excellent than mere
Natural Knowledge.

2. Whereas among other Humane Testimonies that the Author heaps up to prove
Philosophy to be of God, he brings in Lucretius, lib. 5. de rerum natura; the
learned Vogelsangius has discovered Indignat. Justa p. 67.
his shameful mistake, telling him, that the God whom Lucretius there means,
when he says,

-- Deus ille fuit, Deus, inclyte Memmi,
Qui Princeps vitae rationem invenit eam, quae
Nunc appellatur Sapientia, etc.
is no other than Epicurus; and must Epicurus's Philosophy be the Scriptures
Interpreter?

3. This I must add by way of limitation to my former concession, that God is
not so the Author of Philosophy, as he is of the Scripture. He is so far the
Author of the Scripture, as that he has infallibly directed his Servants in
penning its several Parts, and preserved them from Error in that Work: But he
is not so the Author of Philosophy, as infallibly to direct any Man in the
World so as not to Err in his Philosophy. Here therefore is a very great
difference: and seeing that this Philosophy (which we acknowledge, so far as it
is sound and true, to be God's Gift) is no where to be found but in the Minds
or Writings of fallible Men, by what certain Rule shall we judge of the Maxims
of Philosophy in matters of Religion, whether they be undoubtedly true or no?
Or which way shall we be assured that the aforesaid Maxims (supposing them to
be unquestionably true) are duly applied to the matter in controversy?
Whither shall we go in this case to find out such solid satisfaction as may
give sufficient ground for that Divine Faith, that we certainly owe to the
Doctrine of Scripture?

Thirdly, Suppose (what is not) that we had a clear and perfect Model or System
of Sound Philosophy to have recourse to, so as we may truly say of it, that it
is all and every Part and Particle of it of Divine Original, and so complete,
that there is no defect in it; yet still we must remember that Philosophy has
its Bounds, and discovers nothing to us but those necessary Truths which fall
within the compass of nature; and so far we might take it for the Voice of God:
But as for Supernatural Verities, the being and discovery whereof depend upon
Gods absolute Will and Arbitrary Revelation He never intended that Philosophy
should be our guide in these: But here we are to keep solely and wholly to what
he has said in the Scriptures.

CHAP. XI.
A third Argument, from the supposed Sufficiency of Philosophy to Interpret
Scripture, answered.

WHatsoever, says the aforesaid Author, is necessary to the Arg. 3.
Rule of Interpretation, perfectly agrees Ph. Scr. Int. cap. 4. par. 10. etc.
6. par. 1.
to Philosophy and the Principles of Reason. For they are undoubtedly true,
free from all danger of Error, and therefore cannot deceive, being grounded
upon unmovable Foundations; admitting no appeals, impartial, not inclined to
this or that side; in a word, so sure and undoubted, that they will force
assent; provided they be not bended or swayed by Men's prejudices, or vicious
inclinations.

But, as I said before, where is this Philosophy to be found? If it be any Sol.
1.
where, how comes it to pass, that those who have in all Ages been most devoted
to the study of it, and most perspicacious and successful in searching the
secrets of it, have yet in many things, especially that concerning Religion, so
foully erred, and have been at so great odds, not only one with another, but
each with himself? Certain it is, that the Principles of Reason and Philosophy,
let them be never so Sound and Stable, yet they can prevail upon none any
further than they are received into the Mind: and they are no where received
but according to the disposition and capacity of the Subject; the darkness and
imperfection of whose Understanding much alters the conception of the soundest
Principles.

Besides, my third Answer to the precedent 2.
Argument will serve here; for let Philosophy be never so infallible, it must
be kept within its own proper sphere, and not be applied to matters
Supernatural, that are wholly out of its road, and above its reach. Of all
Parts of Philosophy, the Mathematics are generally esteemed the most
demonstrative, and irrefragable. But if any should attempt by Mathematical
Principles to Interpret what the Scripture has revealed about the Creation of
the World, the Incarnation of Christ, the Resurrection of the Body, the
Believers Union with Christ, or the like, he might well be deemed to stand in
need of a large Dose of Hellebore.

CHAP. XII.
A fourth Argument, from the nature of a clear distinct Perception, answered.

BUt (says the Exercitator) there is Arg. 4.
no clear and distinct perception Ph. Scr. Int. cap. 5. par. 5, 6.
of a thing, but it begets an intimate persuasion in the Conscience of the
Truth of what is so perceived; which Perception and Persuasion coming from God
as the Cause, it may not unfitly be called the Persuasion, Dictate, Testimony,
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit of God: which Divines commonly, but mistakingly
ascribe to that which they call Supernatural Light, out of their low esteem of
Reason, and that Natural Light that is in every Man.

This, I confess, the Author does not Sol.
make use of among the Arguments that he produces to defend his Cause: yet
because it tends to beget a conceit (according to the drift of his Discourse)
that what Men apprehend themselves to have a clear knowledge of by Reason or
Philosophy, is infallibly certain, and thereby qualified for the sure
Interpreting of Scripture, I thought fit not to pass it over without some
Animadversion.

This Assertion is a piece of wild somewhat (for whether I should call it
Philosophy, or Divinity, Sense, of Nonsense, I know not) that if entertained,
gives ground to Men of corrupt Minds to father their most enormous Conceits
upon God and his Holy Spirit. Against it I shall propound a few Considerations.

1. Do not all Ages of the Church bear witness that erring Persons may be as
confidently persuaded of their mistaken opinions as others are of the Truth,
strongly conceiving what they hold to be most clear and evident, so far as
cheerfully to lay down their lives in the defense of it? So capable are Men of
being deluded by their own darkened and corrupted Reason, when they give
themselves up to it as their sole guide, that some have denied to the death
those Truths, that are in some degree knowable by Natural Light, as that grand
Maxim, which is the Foundation of all Religion, That there is a God; witness
Caesar Vaninus. But for Doctrines of mere Revelation, how peremptorily they are
denied, and upon what ground we need no farther instance than that of the
Socinians, or (as they are otherwise called from a more Ancient Ringleader)
Photinians; who Dr. Pearson in his Epistle to the Reader prefixed to his
Exposition of the Creed
of all Heretics have most perverted the Articles of our Creed, and found out
Followers in these latter ages, who have erected a new Body of Divinity in
opposition to the Catholic Theology, says the Reverend Bishop of Chester. Yet
this new Socinian Body of Heterodoxies, (called by the Clergy of England in
their Convocation, Anno 1640. a Complication of Heresies,) is by its Fautors
maintained with highest confidence, and that under the plausible pretense of
clear Perception by the Principles of Reason. Upon this account One of that way
denies Gods foreknowledge of future contingencies; and upon Crellius lib. de
Deo and attributis c. 24. Ostorodius Instit. cap. 6.
the same ground another of them denies the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the
two Natures of Christ; because their Reason tells them as clearly and evidently
as the Sun shines at Noon, that these things are false.

2. This countenances the absurd opinion of some ancient Philosophers, That 2.
man is the measure of all things: for according to this, every thing must be
accounted true, that a Man is strongly persuaded to be so: whereas the truth of
our Perceptions lies in their consonancy to the nature of things, which must be
first supposed before we can apprehend them. And therefore that great Maxim
that bears such sway with some, that whatsoever I have a clear and distinct
Perception of, is infalliby true, is so far from being a sure Test of Truth and
Falsehood, that in this dark and degenerate State of Mankind, it infallibly
betrays those who trust to it, to innumerable and pernicious mistakes. For
suppose the Principle it self should be true, That every thing is as we
perceive, provided our Perception of it be distinct and clear: which way shall
we be resolved whether this Perception we have of things be clear and distinct,
or dark and confused? seeing experience puts us out of all doubt, that persons
as far distant in their apprehensions of the same thing as East and West, do
yet both of them with much confidence plead the greatest clearness and
distinctness imaginable. What shall we think (to pass by other instances) 1
King. 22
of the contest between Micajah and the four hundred false Prophets about
Ahab's Expedition? The false Prophets expressed as high a confidence of their
being in the Right, when abused by a lying Spirit, as Micajah, who was truly
guided and acted by the Holy Spirit of God. But the Explication that a Lud.
Welzog. Cens. Cens. (...). 68.
late Author gives of this so much applauded Rule, viz* (That then does Reason
clearly and distinctly perceive a thing, when it perceives it as it is in it
self) renders it plainly ridiculous, supposing the thing in question. For when
I am inquiring how I shall be assured that my apprehension of a thing is
certainly true; the meaning is, how shall I be sure that I understand the thing
to be as it really is (for the verity of my Conception consists in its
agreement with the object.) Therefore to make a clear and distinct Perception,
the (...) of a true and right apprehension, and to explain this clear and
distinct Perception by saying it is a Perception of a thing as it is, is to
make the same thing the Index of it self, and leaves me as much to seek as at
first; for still it will be asked, how shall I know that I perceive a thing as
it is, or that my apprehension agrees with the nature of the thing?

3. I might further add, That we are obliged to believe many things, whereof we
cannot have a clear and distinct perception, as the Trinity of Persons in the
Godhead, the Incarnation of our Savior, the Hypostatical Union of the Divine
and Humane Nature, and such like. Touching which I grant, we must have a clear
perception that they are revealed ere we can believe them; but a clear
perception of the revealed objects themselves we cannot have, they being to us
incomprehensible Mysteries: upon which ground both these and sundry other
Scripture-Doctrines are by some rejected as unintelligible and irrational. But
here Des Carts acquits himself: For he somewhere gives his Readers this
Caution, That we should remember Princ. Philos. par 1* art. 24.
God the Maker of all things to be infinite, and our selves finite; and
therefore if he reveal any thing to us of himself, or other things, that is
above the strength of our Natural Wit (such as the Mysteries of the Incarnation
and the Trinity) we must not deny them credit, though we cannot clearly
understand them. Nor should we at all wonder that there are many things both in
his immense nature, and in the Creatures made by him that exceed our capacity.

4. This fond conceit of the Exercitator 4.
borders upon that of the Enthusiasts; whose high-flown pretenses of the
guidance of the Spirit, and the internal, living, essential, substantial word
within them, comes to no more, when searched to the quick, but their own darkened
and besotted Reason, whose absurd Fancies and Blasphemous Dictates they
daringly imputed to the Spirit of God. This Clause in our Author brings him
under a suspicion of complying with those old Libertines, and present Quakers
(whom he professes to dislike) only with this difference: They put their
crude Conceptions into a more fantastic dress of great swelling words to
amuse the ignorant Vulgar; and this Gentleman has put his opinion into a more
Manly Garb, to render it the more plausible to the Literate World.

CHAP. XIII.
A fifth Argument, from the supposed Practice of the Ancient Fathers,
Schoolmen, and others, answered.

ANother Plea the Exercitator Arg. 5. Ph. Scr. Int. cap. 6. par. 2.
uses, is drawn from the Practice of the Ancients, Justin Martyr, Dionysius
Areopagita, Origin, and others, making use of the Platonic or Eclectick
Philosophy, to Expound the difficult places of Holy Writ, and of the Schoolmen
and others in these latter A^^^, making the like use of the Peripat^^ick
Philosophy, which bore the sway in their times.

To this I answer,

1. Methinks this is a very lose and inconsequent Sol. 1.
way of arguing: For though this Author professes elsewhere cap. 5. par. 2.
that in the present controversy he intends not by Philosophy, the opinion of
Plato or Aristotle, or any other whatever; yet it is plain by his Prologue, and
by several passages in the Body of his Discourse, that he intends the honor of
being the Scriptures Interpreter to the Cartesian Philosophy. And in this very
Chapter, wherein he alleges the forementioned cap. 6. par. 2.
examples of Fathers and Schoolmen, he tells us that other Christians, who had
forsaken the Romish Church, did, in their Expositions of Scripture mostly
(though not exactly) tread in the steps of the Schoolmen (who made Aristotle's
Philosophy their Rule) till that in this last Age the light of the Cartesian
Philosophy shone upon some Divines, Quibus sordescere coeperunt Sacrarum
literarum interpretamenta, quae hujus lucis radiis non illustrata prodierunt.
It seems the Divines of his way despised and vili^ed all Interpretations of
Scripture (whether by Fathers or Schoolmen, or by whomsoever made) that were
not enlightened with the beams of this new-risen Star: so that all Expositions
of Scripture that were made before Des Ca^tes his happy days, must be condemned
to the Dust and Moths, as useless and good for nothing. Which by the way serves
a little to abate my wonder at the daring folly of some Novelists, in whose
Writings I find many absurd, distorted, selfcontradicting Expositions of
Scripture, not without the highest scorn cast upon all dissenting Interpreters.
It seems they are of this Authors persuasion, and perhaps have lighted their
Candle at his dark Lanthorn. But truly, as I do not very well relish the
modesty of our Exercitator in this Discourse, so I do as little admire his
Logic. For what a wild consequence is this, because the Ancients used the
Platonic or Eclectick Philosophy as their Rule of Interpretation, and the
Schoolmen used the Peripatetick as their Rule of Expounding; therefore the
Cartesian Philosophy, that differs widely from them all, is the surest and most
infallible Interpreter? Let no man mistake me, as if I hereby intended any
sinister reflection on that noble Author, whom the person I am dealing with
pretends to follow. I willingly allow him all the honor that his great Parts
and Studious Inquiries may have merited, without the least detraction: Though I
think some of his greatest admirers have done him no small injury, partly by
their Superlative Elogies given to him, together with their ready swallowing,
and pertinacious defending all his dictates; but especially by extending his
Rules and Methods to matters of Supernatural Revelation, beyond his declared
meaning, if his own word may be taken, which I am not concerned to examine.

2. What use soever former Writers Ancient or Modern have made of their
respective Philosophy in expounding Scripture, it does not yet appear that they
owned it for their Rule: and if they did, I am sure they did amiss. I highly
honor the memory of the ancient Fathers; but I never took them for infallible
in their Interpretations, nor did they themselves; nor I suppose does the
Exercitat or, who yet contends for Philosophy to be the Infallible Interpreter.
And for the Schoolmen, himself cites some Authors, and might have cited many
more, and those of great eminency in the Church of Rome it self, who have long
since complained of them for corrupting Divinity by mixing it with their
Philosophic Notions; and yet we never find any of these so absurd as to assert
Philosophy to be the Scriptures Interpreter.

3. Lastly, let it be considered, whether this Author have not greatly
forgotten and grossly contradicted himself, in using this Argument from Example:
for himself professes to maintain a new and strange opinion in asserting
Philosophy to be the Interpreter of Scripture Ph. Scr. Int. c. 5. par. 1. Novam
eamque par^doxam (sententiam) adstruere in praesentiarum est animus, scil. hoc
munus (interpretandi Scripturas) competere Philosophiae, hancque esse normam
certam a^ minime fallacem, tam S. libros explica^di quam illorum explicationes
explorandi.
. And in his Prologue, he tells us, that he had consulted with the Divines of
all Places and Ages (that is, I suppose, with their Writings) to find out what
method they used, and what Rule they followed in their Interpretation of
Scripture; but could find nothing that would give him satisfaction: and
therefore he resolved to lay them all aside, and try what he could do proprio
mart, by his own industry; and that after long disquisition, he at last fell
upon this only sure and infallible way, which he here commends to the World.
Now I would know how he could speak this, and yet believe what he here
alleges, that both Fathers and Schoolmen, and other Modern Writers took this
course of making Philosophy the Rule of Expounding Scripture?

CHAP. XIV.
1. Answer given to a sixth Argument, drawn from instances in some considerable
Scripture-assertions supposed not interpretable without Philosophy; viz. Such
as speak of God after the manner of Man. 2. Our Saviors Words about the
Eucharist. 3. The Doctrine of the Trinity.

IN the next place the Exercitator 1.
argues from instances in some considerable Arg. 6.
Scripture-Assertions, which Ph. Scr. Int. c. 6. par. 3.
(he says) cannot be interpreted but by having recourse to Philosophy as the
Rule of Exposition. And here he insists upon three particulars, which I shall
examine in order.

First he instances in those Scriptures 1.
that speak of God (...), after the manner of Men, ascribing to him the Members
of an Humane Body, and the affections of an Humane Soul; besides Sense and
Motion, with many other things not competible to an Incorporeal, much less to
an infinite and immutable Being. Touching which Expressions, whereas it is
truly cautioned by Divines of all sorts, that these are to be explicated by
such Scriptures as speak otherwise of God, suitably to his immaterial and
unchangeable Being: this Author boldly affirms, that the Scripture of it self
is insufficient to direct us; and that there is no way to resolve us which of
these different Expressions of Scripture are to be taken properly, and which
not, unless we take the Principles of Philosophy and Natural Reason for our
guide.

To this I answer: That Gods infinite and immense Perfections are much more Sol.
clearly and fully discovered to us in Scripture than by Natural Light. The
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2. 11. What man knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit
of Man which is in him; even so the things of God knows no man but the Spirit
of God. Therefore the best and safest Conceptions we can have of God, are those
which we learn from the Spirit of God speaking to us in and by the Scripture.
And if this Author were not extremely prejudiced by a partial fondness for his
own darling conceits, he might know, that plain ordinary Christians, who never
had ought to do with Philosophic Learning, have by their sole acquaintance
with the Scriptures, come to much clearer and sounder conceptions of God, his
Nature, and Attributes, than the learned Philosopher that ever the World had,
could attain by all his Wit and Study without Scripture Light: and that to any
Reader that is not prepossessed with false and absurd Notions of God by his own
vain imagination, and misguided Reason, the Scriptures that speak so
differently concerning that Supreme Being, if prudently compared together, and
the circumstances on each side considered, do sufficiently to the satisfaction
of sober Minds, discover to us their true and genuine Sense, without giving the
least countenance to the sottish and irrational conceits of the
Anthropomorphites; though a cavelling daring Wit may and will find something to
quarrel with, where the matter is as clear as the noonday Sun.

His next instance is, The Words of our Savior at the institution of his last
2.
Supper, This is my Body: which the Papists interpret for Transubstantiation:
The Lutherans for Consubstantiation: The Reformed Churches deny both,
understanding the words tropically; whose Sense he says can be no otherwise
defended but by the Principles of Natural Philosophy.

For answer to this, I grant, That in Sol.
clearing this controversy, there is good use of the Principles of Philosophy
and Natural Reason; and so there is also of Sense; which undeniably convinces
us, that what we see, and feel, and taste, is Bread. Yet sure we are not to
make Sense the Rule of Interpreting Scripture. But the true and proper Rule of
Interpreting our Saviors Words, [This is my Body] is that which the Scripture
it self, and that alone has taught us; viz. That Christ assumed a true Humane
Body: which is a truth that Reason and Philosophy could never inform us of, it
being a matter of pure Revelation. Now this being laid down as the chief
Postulatum; the thing to be inquired into is, What is the nature of an Humane
Body? and what are the essential Properties of all natural Bodies? And this
Natural Philosophy instructs us in, as being no matter of Revelation, but lying
within the compass of Natural Light, which teaches us that every Natural Body
is quantitative and divisible, and confined to one certain place; consequently
that the Bread in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, cannot be properly and
substantially the Body of Christ, which (as Scripture informs us) was once
nailed to the Cross, but is now glorified in Heaven. Now the force of all this
for the expounding of our Saviors Words, lies in the former supposition, That
our Savior assumed a true natural Humane Body, together with what was even now
mentioned; That the same Body of Christ which he assumed, is at the right Hand
of God in Heaven: both which are Scripture-Revelations. Besides, there is a
wide difference between these two, a help to overthrow a false Interpretation,
and the Rule of establishing the true one. Philosophy may do the former, but
not the latter. As in this controversy, the Principles of Reason and
Philosophy do convincingly assure us that Bread is not, cannot be the Body of a
Man. But they cannot assure us what was our Saviors meaning, when holding the
Bread in his Hand, he said, This is my Body: this must be resolved by what the
Scripture it self speaks either there, or elsewhere.

His third and last instance is the Doctrine of the Trinity, which he says 3.
cannot be cleared without having recourse 3.
to Philosophy: and here, having derided the attempts of many to explicate and
confirm this great Mystery by their Metaphysical Speculations; he highly
applauds the learned Keckerman for his happy endeavors in unfolding and
demonstrating it, Ex immotis Philisophiae fundamentis, out of the unmovable
Foundations of Philosophy.

To this I answer, That the curious Sol.
speculations and Philosophic nice^ies of the Schools about the Doctrine of
the Trinity, have done it more prejudice than advantage, and given greater
occasion to the adverse part to reject it, when they found so strange and
incomprehensible a Mystery defended by such thin, airy, cobweb notions. It had
been much better, if Men had contented themselves with those discoveries the
Scripture makes of this inexplicable Mystery, it being a Doctrine purely of
Supernatural Revelation, and not at all discoverable by Natural Light. The
Arguments from Reason and Philosophy brought for the proof of it, by the
learned Keckerman, and by Claubergius a late Cartesian, are examined by
Vogolsangius in his Indignatio Justa, etc. and discarded as insufficient. I
grant, that in this, (as in many other Doctrines) it may be of good use to show
that there is nothing in what the Scripture says of it, that contradicts any
sound Principle of Reason. But to go about by the Principles of Reason or
Philosophy positively to demonstrate the truth of it, is a thing which I take
to be impossible. I choose to say of this Mystery, as one does of the Divine
Essence, Credendo intelligitur, adorando enarratur. It is best understood by
believing, and best declared by adoring. He (says the late Bishop of Duct.
Dub. li. 1. c. 2.
Down) that should go to Revelation to prove that nine and nine make eighteen,
would be a Fool: and he would be no less, that goes about to prove a Trinity of
persons by natural Reason. Every thing must be derived from its own Fountain.
Thus Aquinas tells us, He that by natural Aqu. par. (...). q. 32. (...). 1
Reason attempts to prove the Trinity of persons, does a double prejudice to
the Faith. 1. He derogates from its Dignity, it being proper to the Doctrine of
Faith to be of such things as exceed Man's Reason. 2. He hinders others from
embracing the Faith, by using such Arguments as are not cogent; which renders
it obnoxious to the Infidels contempt. This is plain in Scripture, that the
Father is God, and the Holy Ghost is God: and that these are three, and all
three are but one God: and for other subtleties and curious inquiries of busy
and presumptuous Wits, without and beside the Written Word, I think the Truth
of God never was, nor ever will be beholden to them.

CHAP. XV.
A seventh Argument, from the reasonableness of Religion, answered.

ONe Argument more I shall touch, which I find alleged by two noted Arg. 7.
Socinians, Smalcius and Schlichtingius (as they are cited by a late learned
Author in his Socinianism. Confut.) to prove Reason to be the Rule of deciding
Controversies of Faith: which may be thought improveable upon the same grounds,
to assert that Reason must be the Rule of interpreting Scripture. And it is,
That of the Apostle, where he asserts the Service that God requires of
Christians, to be Romans 12. 1.
(...) a reasonable service, that is, say they, a Service agreeable to Reason.

To this I answer two things,

First, I know no cause to recede from ^ol. 1.
the Sense that is usually given by our Interpreters, seeing it so fairly
offers it self from the Words themselves: and therefore do judge, with the
learned Dr. Hammond on the place, that the Apostle calling upon Christians to
present their Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, even their
reasonble service; does evidently oppose this to the Sacrifices of the
Ceremonial Law, which were no other than irrational Creatures, first killed,
and then offered up to God. But,

Secondly, Be it given (but not 2.
granted) that the Apostles meaning is what these Men put upon it, viz. That
the Service God requires of Christians, is agreeable to Reason: I have already
premised and asserted, that Christian Religion is perfectly rational; whence it
will undeniably follow, that there is an excellent harmony, a full and complete
accord betwixt Reason and Religion. And although some daring Wits that make
high pretenses to Reason, have, by their profane Jeers at the Mysteries of
Christianity, and their turning the Doctrines and Phrases of Holy Scripture
into Drollery, contributed not a little to the Atheism of the present age; yet
I am past all doubt, that no man is or can be an Atheist, that has not first
baffled and besotted his Reason. If any therefore has gone about to set Reason
and Religion at variance, it has been through some misprision, taking some
groundless imagination for Reason, or some corrupt opinion or practice for
Religion. But if any shall hence argue, that Man's Reason is to be the Rule of
Religion, or that Doctrines of Supernatural Revelation are to be interpreted,
and the Sense of them determined by Natural Principles, we deny the
consequence, and leave them to prove it. Our Savior tells us that his yoke is
easy; but if any should thence Argue, that therefore our ease must be the Mat.
11.
Rule of interpreting his Commands, I think few would be found so blind or
foolish (except Men of profligate and debauched Consciences) that would admit
of such an absurd Argumentation: And there is no less absurditity in this, That
because Religion is a Reasonable Service, therefore our Reason must be the Rule
of interpreting the Doctrinces of Religion.

CHAP. XVI.
1. A Transition to the Exercitators Reply to some Scriptures alleged by our
Divines against his Heterodoxy. The fond Conceit of Lud. Wolzogen, That in this
Controversy Scripture is not to be heard, disproved. 2. And his Plea that he
makes for himself in his Censura Censurae, disabled. 3. A return to the
Exercitators Exposition of the Scritures alleged by our Writers. His
self-contradiction noted. And the Scriptures cleared.

THe Exercitator having (after his manner) asserted his own Position, 1.
comes, in the seventh Chapter of his Discourse, to answer the Scriptures that
some have made use of to oppose it. Before I deal with them, I cannot but take
notice of the disingenuity of Ludovicus Wolzogen, who having undertaken the
Patronage of the Protestant Cause against this Adversary, does so shamefully
throw down his Arms, and run out of the Field: For when he comes at this
seventh Chapter of his Antagonist (and again at his twelfth) wherein the
Exercitator endeavors to evade or enervate the Scriptures Lud. Wolzog. de
Scripturar. Interpret p. 217.
brought against him this: valiant Champion not only waves the vindication of
them; but for his own more plausible excuse, expressly maintains it to be a
preposterous thing in this Controversy about the Interpretation of Scripture,
to use or admit the testimony of Scripture at all; and affirms that the Cause
must be decided by Reason: And therefore, as all along his Discourse, he never
makes use of Scripture to defend himself, or strike his Adversary; so he lays
an imputation of folly upon all our Divines that use this way of arguing in the
present Case. And he gives two pitiful Arguments to prove this fond Assertion.

1. One is because the Controversy Id. ib. p. 219.
is about the Scripture it self, which is not to be heard in its own Cause,
unless such places can be alleged in the explication whereof both parties
agree.

To this I answer, Sol.


1. If this be granted, then whatsoever controversy we have with the Papists
about the Authority, Perspicuity and Perfection of the Scriptures, though we
have never so clear proof in the Scripture it self for these things, they must
all be waved as invalid. But these have hitherto been accounted controverted
Points of Faith, and consequently to be resolved from Scripture the only Rule
of Faith: and so is this about the Scriptures Interpretation: however the
Exercitator, and with him this Author, denies it; while yet both of them
acknowledge it to be a Question, wherein the whole of Religion is concerned,
and (next to that of the Scriptures Authority) Exercitator in Prologo, etc. 1.
Wolzog. ubi sup. 5. and p. 90.
the very foundation on which all Doctrines of Faith and Manners rely; and
which involves in it whatsoever Differences or Controversies there are between
dissenting parties in Religion, that own the Scriptures. And is it not strange
that Men should own this Controversy to be so momentous and fundamental, and
yet to deny it to be a matter of Faith, or to be determined by Scripture
Testimony? But,

2. Why may not the Scripture be heard speak for it self, as well as Reason 2.
for it self? The Question under debate is whether the Rule of Interpreting
Scripture, be the Scripture it self, or Man's Reason? Does not this as nearly
touch Reason as Scripture? And yet must that be allowed to give testimony in
its own Cause and not the Scripture? It appears by this (as by many other
passages in his Book) that this Author is a better friend to the Exercitators
opinion, than to the Protestant Doctrine. And indeed,

3. This is the very Language of our 3.
Popish Adversaries; who tell us, the Scripture cannot be its own Interpreter,
because the Question is concerning it self. To which our Writers answer V.
Riveti Isagogen, cap. 19. 30.
truly, That the Scripture being the Voice of God, its testimony for it self
is above all other whatsoever, even in its own Cause.

His other Argument is, Because till 2. Wolz. ubi sup. p. 247.
the dissentient parties have agreed about the Interpreter of the Scriptures
alleged, they have no Sense, and therefore can testify nothing: And upupon
this account he condemns those of the Reformed Churches that allege Scripture
in this Controversy, and blames the Exercitator for answering their
Allegations.

To this I answer,

1. That any part of Scripture is without Sol.
its Sense till it have an Interpreter, is a gross absurdity and falsehood. The
Scripture has its Sense, whether any Man interpret it or no. Interpretation
does not (I am sure it should not) bring the Sense and put it into the
Scripture, but receive it from the Scripture.

2. This Author acknowledges some Scriptures to be so clear, that the Sense is
obvious: and if such Scriptures can be produced in the present Controversy (as
no doubt they may) Why should the difference about the Interpreter, preclude
them?

3. Were this Argument allowed, it would for ever debarr us from alleging
Scripture against the Romanists in any Controversy that we have with them: it
being notorious to all Men, that this is one great difference betwixt us and
them, who must be the Supreme Interpreter of Scripture? which they challenge as
the Privilege of their Church; and we ascribe to the Scripture it self.

But it is a miserable Plea that this 2.
Author makes elsewhere for himself, Lu. Wol. Cens. Censurae p. 233
viz. That he had to do with one whom he esteemed to be no Christian, but an
Heathen (for so he accounts the Exercitator) who would no more regard the
Testimony of Scripture in this Case, than a Jew would regard any proof from the
New Testament; and therefore it was, that he declined dealing with him about
those Testimonies from Scripture. It seems then he would make the World
believe, that what he had said about this, was only spoken ad hominem.

By which it plainly appears, that our Author began to see he could not Sol.
stand his ground, but was not so ingenuous as to confess his Error, and
therefore runs behind this Bush to hide himself. For,

1. His Words, which I quoted before out of his Book, De Scripturarum
Interpret, do evidently show that he speaks according to his own Mind, that it
was a preposterous thing in this Controversy to allege the Testimony of
Scripture; and that in this Case no such proof was to be allowed, (see him page
217. 219. and 247.) and not only so, but alleges the Reasons beforementioned
(such as they are) for this wild Position.

2. He knows very well that the Jews (to whom he compares his Antagonist) do
not at all own the Authority of the new Testament, but professedly reject it:
Whereas the Exercitator (whatever his Religion be) does avowedly own the Divine
Authority of the Scripture, and delcares himself willing to be dealt with in
that way, in that he cites our Divines Arguments from thence, and endeavors to
answer them; for which this Author reproves him. So that the case is not the
same. And yet I appeal to the Authors Reason: Should any Jewish Writer either
cite any Testimonies out of the New Testament for himself, or endeavor, by his
own Interpretations, to evade any Testimonies thence alleged against him
(which is plainly the Case here) whether should a Christian that pretends to
answer him, do well to say, That the New Testament is not here to be heard, and
that it were a preposterous thing to allege it? Should he not rather endeavor
to answer the objections that are made, and clear the places cited? And if in
case he should do, as this Author does here, might he not justly be condemned
for a Betrayer of the Christian Cause? If it be said, Object. Lu. Wolz. loc.
cit.
that though the Exercitator acknowledge the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, yet he holds them to be universally ambiguous and obscure, further
than Humane Reason expounds them; and therefore it was to no purpose to use
Scripture to him, till they had agreed about the Rule of Interpretation. I
answer, The Exeroitator does indeed charge the Scripture with obscurity Sol.
because of its ambiguity; but it is upon this ground, because, hesays, all
words whatsoever are ambiguous: If therefore this should shut out the Scripture
from bearing witness in the Controversy, then all Arguments from Reason, must
upon the same account, be excluded too; for they must be made up of Words and
Phrases, the ambiguity whereof (according to the Exercitators Doctrine) will
render them obscure, as well as the Scripture.

Come we now to speak something to. 3.
the Scriptures alleged by our Divines, Ph. Scr. Int. c. 7.
which the Exercitator labors to evade. But methinks it is a pleasant thing to
see how he betrays his own Cause, by acting against his own Method and
Principles. For having all along cried up Philosophy as the only Interpreter
of Scripture; when himself comes interpret the Scriptures brought against him,
one would think he should bring his own Tools to this Work, and labor, by
Philosophic Principles, to make out the Sense that he gives of these
Scriptures. But he waves this, and seeks to fetch out his own Sense from the
Scripture it self, by examining the Antecedents and Consequents, and the
Authors scope. Now he either takes this way of Interpretation to be right, or
he does not: If he do not, he does but juggle with his Reader, and designs to
cheat him: but if he do indeed think it to be right, he yields the Cause, that
not Philosophy, but the Scripture it self is the Rule of Interpretation.

Now for the Scriptures alleged: The 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20. 21. 1 Cor. 2. 6.
first is that in 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20, 21. where the Apostle speaks very
contemptibly of Humane Wisdom; the like may besaid of the next, 1 Cor. 2. 6.
Now in these places, says the Exercitator, the Apostle does not go about to
deny or condemn true Wisdom, but the earthly, sensual Wisdom of the World, that
is grounded upon vain opinions, and puts Men upon the eager pursuit of earthly
things, such as Riches, and Honors, and Sensual Pleasures.

I answer, The Apostle, having to do with those who thought meanly of the Sol.
Doctrine of Christ Crucified, and affected a name for that which the world
counted Wisdom; endeavors to lay all Humane Wisdom in the dust, and to discover
its insufficiency to conduct man to true happiness; for which he prefers the
Doctrine of the Gospel (which was so derided as foolishness) above that which
the World so much admired. This therefore is no impertinent allegation against
the Exercitators opinion. That in 1 Cor. 2. 14. I have already pressed in the
prosecution of my first Argument; and have vindicated it from the corrupt
glosses that some have put upon it.

The last is that in Coloss. 2. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through ^^l.
2. 8.
Philosophy, and vain deceit. Here, says the Exercitator, the Apostle does not
condemn sound Philosophy, but that which is vain and useless.

I answer, Undoubtedly he does not Sol.
condemn Philosophy truly so called: But he gives a caution to take heed of
being deceived by it; as Men may be, when the use of it is extended beyond its
Line, and is not kept within its own proper Bounds. Thus, says our learned
Davenant, Philosophy or Humane Reason, which is the Mother of Philosophy,
Davenant. in Coloss. 2. 8.
is always found vain and deceitful, when it is carried beyond its proper
limits, That is, says he, when it attempts to determine of those things, that
fall not under the cognizance of Natural Reason; such are those that belong to
the Worship of God, and to the Salvation of Man, as the Points of
Justification, Reconciliation with God, and other Matters of Faith, that are
above the reach of Reason, and depend altogether upon Divine Revelation.

CHAP. XVII.
1. That Sound Philosophy asserts nothing contrary to Scripture granted. 2. Two
Principles instanced in, and Wolzogen's Tergiversation taxed. 3. The two great
Articles of the Creation of all things out of nothing, and the Resurrection of
the same numerical Body proved against the Exercitator, to be asserted in
Scripture.

THE Exercitators next Work is to answer the great Argument, (...).
which, he says, some urge against his Ph. Scr. Int. (...). (...). p. 1
opinion, viz. Philosophy, and consequently Humane Reason, asserts many things
that are repugnant to Divinity and the Scriptures, and therefore they cannot be
allowed for the Rule of Interpreting Scripture. He denies the Antecedent; and
so do I. What Authors they be in the Reformed Churches that thus argue, I know
not. But this I know, that it is no uncommon thing for pugnacious Wits, to draw
the Sword upon the shadow of a Dream, and make Hector-like declamations against
Utopian Adversaries. Set aside those Authors, who are engaged by some
Atheological Hypothesis, which they have espoused (as the Papists and the
Lutherans in the Doctrine of the E^charist) I know not any Man of Learning and
Understanding, who has such a thought, that there is any thing in Scripture
derogatory or contradictory to true Philosophy or Sound Reason; or that
believes any thing true in Philosophy to be false in Divinity. Whatsoever is
true any where, is true every where. Here therefore our Author may put up his
Dagger.

But there is one thing which I cannot 2. Ph. Scr. Int. c. 8. par. 2.
well pass over, That the Exercitator pretending to confute those who assert a
contrariety between the Principles of Philosophy and Divinity, and instancing
in these two, Ex nihilo nihil fit, and Idem non potest, numerice reproduci,
Instead of solving the knot, he cuts it, and plainly affirms both these
Principles to be true, absolutely, and without limitation both in Philosophy
and Divinity, confidently asserting that the Scripture does no where teach us,
That the World was made of nothing, or that the same numerical Body shall rise
at the last day. And here Wolzogen unworthily deserts the Christian Cause, not
vouchsafing to write one word in vindication of these grand Truths against this
bold Adversary; but tells us he is content the Man should enjoy his own
opinion, though, he says, he could easily have refuted him: Which makes his
silence the more inexcusable, and brings him under greater suspicion of
Heterodoxy, notwithstanding all his Rhetorical Flourishes. But it is time I
should return to our Author, who, if he had not been too much in love with
Novelty, might without the least prejudice to his Cause (unless it have some
other Monster in the Belly of it that is not yet come to the birth) have
answered, that these Axioms are true in a limited Sense both in Philosophy and
Divinity; viz. That by a finite created Power, nothing can be made of nothing;
and that by the like limited power, the same numerical Body that perishes,
cannot be reproduced. But that nevertheless to an infinite Power all things
that imply not contradiction are possible.

But it seems by this Authors words,. 3.
that he disowns the received Doctrine of the worlds Creation out of Nothing;
and the Reproduction of the same individual Body.

1. By denying the former, he must necessarily maintain the Eternity of
Preexistent Matter: whereas if God be the Maker of all Beings besides himself
(as the Scripture sufficiently assures us) then nothing besides himself could
be Eternal; but he must in making the World make the Matter whereof the World
consists, which Matter therefore must be made of nothing. The first Article in
the most ancient Creeds (as the Reverend Bishop of Chester has Dr. Pearson
Expos. of the Creed, Art. 1.
observed) had instead of these words Maker of Heaven and Earth, or together
with them, this Clause, The Maker of all things visible and invisible,
agreeably to that of the Apostle, Coloss. 1. 16. which distribution is so
comprehensive, that it will not admit of any Exception, all things whatsoever
being either visible or invisible: and whatsoever can be supposed necessary to
the making of the World, it must of necessity come under one of these two
Members of the distribution, and consequenly be of Gods making. And indeed if
it were otherwise, then something else besides God, must have a necessary,
uncreated, independent Being: which carries with it so broad a Contradiction,
as Man's Reason left fair to it self cannot allow. Again,

2. By disclaiming the latter, this Author evidently denies the Resurrection;
for that imports the rising again of the same Body that fell, according to that
known Speech of Damascen so often cited by our Divines, (...). And if the same
numerical Body rise not, but another is made de novo for the Soul to animate,
this is not a Resurrection but a new Creation; and then the first Creation of
the World may as aptly be called a Resurrection as that which is so styled by
the Holy Ghost in Scripture. But I think the Scripture speaks plain enough in
this Case, (though this Author will not own it) when it says, that at the last
day, This corruptible must 1 Cor. 15. 53.
put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. And that Phil.
3. 20, 21.
our Lord Jesus Christ shall then change our vile Body, that it may be made
like unto his glorious Body. And that, If the Romans 8. 11,
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in us, he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken our mortal bodies by his spirit
that dwells in us. Add to this that Argument from the description of the
place whence the Resurrection shall begin; which I cannot better represent to
the Reader than in the words of the learned Bishop Expos. of the Creed. p. 382.
of Chester, They which sleep in the dust of the Earth (Dan. 12. 2.) and they
which are in the Graves, (Joh. 5. 28.) shall hear the Voice and Rise. And, Rev.
20. 13. The Sea shall give up the dead which are in it, and Death and the Grave
deliver up the dead which are in them. But if the same Bodies did not Rise,
they which are in the dust, should not revive; If God should give us any other
Bodies than our own, neither the Sea nor the Grave should give up their dead.
That shall Rise again which the Grave gives up; the Grave has nothing to give
up, but that Body which was laid into it: therefore the same Body which is
Buried, shall at the last day be revived. And whereas the Socinians (who are
our Adversaries in this, as well as in many other Articles of our Faith) to
evade this Argument, will have the Graves spoken of in Joh 5. 28. to be the
Graves of ignorance and impiety there meant; and the Rising to be Men's coming
to the knowledge of Christ, etc. the aforesaid learned Person answers them,
That Christ expressly, speaks of bringing Men to Ibid. in Marg.
Judgment, verse. 27. and divides those that are to come out of their Graves
into two Ranks, verse. 29. neither of which can be so understood: The first are
those which have done good before they come out of their Graves; these
therefore could not be the Graves of Ignorance and Impiety, from which no good
can come: The second are such who have done evil, and so remain as evil Doers,
and therefore cannot be said to come forth of the Graves of Ignorance and
Impiety, or to Rise by the Preaching of the Gospel to newness of life, because
they are expressly said to come forth to the Resurrection of Damnation.

But if the Exercitators Principles will allow him to write after the rate he
here does, I think none that has any veneration for the Scriptures, will be
over-fond of such a corrupt and fallacious Interpreter. But when Men are
hammering out a new Divinity, they must either find out a new Scripture, or a
new way of Expounding the Old, to countenance their own Dreams, that when, by
this Artifice, they have turned out the true Christianity, they may bring us in
a Pagan Religion finely set out in the stately dress of Eternal Reason.

No wonder they cry out of Systems Lu. Viers in Aug. de C. D. l. 18. c. 41.
Novi ^ominem non tam ^octum quam arrogantem ^actabundumque, qui se and
scripturum multa profitebatur: Et non secus vitaturum quae quis antea dixisset,
quam aspides vel basiliscos: long enim malle se scientem prudentemque falsum
pro vero affirmare, quam alienae opinioni acquiescere.
as Chains and Fetters to their desultorious and volatile Wits. They had rather
(as one says of wanton Heads) ^e the Purchasers of Error than the Heirs of
Truth. Of whom the Lord Verulam Sermon. fidel. cap. de Veritate,
gives us a very fit Character. Certe sunt, qui cogitationum Vertigine
delectantur, ac pro servitute habent fide fixa and Axiomatis constantibus
restringi, Liberi Arbitrii usum in Cogitando non mixus quam in Agendo
affectantes. Verily, says he, there are some who are delighted in a giddiness
of opinions, and take it for a bondage to be restrained by a fixed Faith and
settled Principles, no less affecting the use of their Free Will in thinking
than in acting. And so I have dispatched the first Part of my Work, and proceed
to the second.

Part II.
The Holy Scripture the only sure Interpreter of it self.
CHAP. I.
1. The Proposition asserting the Scripture to be its own Interpreter, laid
down. Lud. Walzogen's rashness and inconsistency with himself in giving the
Sense of our Reformed Divines in this Point. 2. Their true meaning cleared, and
something touched about the Analogy of Faith. 3. The Judgment of Divines
Ancient and Modern in this Business.

HAving endeavored to 2.
disprove the new pretended Rule of Interpretation, I come, in the next place,
to assert the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, and lay down this Proposition,
that the Holy Scripture is its own only sure Interpreter. But before I enter
upon the opening and confirming of it, I must remove something that lies in my
way. Ludovicus Wolzogen in his two Books de Scripturarum Interpret, attempting
to answer the Exercitator, professes to maintain the received Doctrine of the
Protestant Churches in this Point: but pretends to a more clear and distinct
handling of it, than has hitherto been performed by our Divines. Whereas
indeed, that which he propounds to maintain is a novel fancy of his own, never
yet owned by any Orthodox Divine that I have read or heard of: viz. That the
Scripture interprets it self by the Usus loquendi, the custom of speaking; and
that this is the only sure and undoubted Rule of Interpretation. But whereas
he most immodestly charge all that have gone before him, with confusedness in
this Controversy, as not well understanding either it or themselves; his
learned self, when he comes to take it in hand, is so intricate and perplex, so
various and inconstant, that it is a difficult matter to understand what he
would have. He turns himself into so many forms, and winds himself so many
ways, and falls into so many self-contradictions, that he seems to design the
entangling of his Reader, and the hiding of himself in a Castle of Clouds.

First, One while he will have us understand this Usus loquendi, of the vulgar
1. Wolzog. de Scripturar. Interpret p. 26. and 42.
use of speech, common to the Scriptures with other Writings: and gives us his
Reason why this must be the Rule of Interpretation, because common use is the
only Master of Speech, and the Custom of Speakers and Writers gives Law to
the signification of Ib. 46, 47, etc.
Words; and that the use of Speech is formed by much and long Custom, which,
when it has at last prevailed, does, as it were, imprint a public Character
upon Words, which come by tacit consent to be received of all: and Ib. p. 70,
71 72.
he professes he sees no Reason why any should deny that the Interpretation of
Scripture depends upon this use of Speech: which himself says is founded upon
Humane Institution, but adopted and approved by the Wisdom of God in Enditing
the Scripture. Now that this Usus loquendi should be the Rule of Interpreting
the Holy Scriptures, is far wide from the Truth, and from the Judgment of all
Protestants, and as far as I know of all other Expositors. For,

1. When they say the Scripture is its own Interpreter, (or which is all one)
the Rule of Interpretation to it self, they understand it of something in the
Scripture, that is peculiar to the Scripture, and not any thing that is common
to it with other Writings: But the vulgar and customary use of Speech is the
same in all Writings, where the same Language is made use of.

2. It is granted on all hands, that this Usus loquendi, or Custom of Speech,
has its place among those means that I spoke of in the entrance of my
Discourse, that do remotely conduce to Interpretation; but it reaches no
further nextly and immediately than to Verbal Interpretation (which is called
Translation) by guiding us to the right understanding of Words and Phrases, and
the several Modes of Speech. But this comes not up to that which we call Real
Interpretation, which is the Exposition of the Author's Mind signified by those
Words as they are so and so placed. We do not therefore shut out the Use of
Speech, but suppose it, and look at something further. For instance, suppose I
were to inquire into the Sense of that place, Joh. 1. 1. (which is the instance
given by Vander Weayen) I may, by the Use of Speech, Advers. Wolzog. li. 2. p.
12.
know what these several Words, Beginning, and Word, and God, signify: But I
must have something else to guide me to the right meaning of the entire
Sentence, In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. And Wolzogen himself acknowledges, Lu. Wol. li. 2. p. 107.
that there is a wide difference between words taken singly, and in their first
original, and taken as conjoined in Propositions. I may add with very good
reason, that there is also a wide difference between Propositions taken singly,
and taken in such or such a contexture of Discourse. Now the use of Speech will
not help us to distinguish here.

3. How can the common use of Speech be a Rule in Matters of pure Revelation? I
think all acknowledge, that the Sense of Words varies according to the
difference of the subject matter about which they are used. Now matters of pure
Revelation are so remote from vulgar use, that they had never been spoken or
written by any Men, if the Holy Ghost had not Endited them, and communicated
them to us in the Scripture. And the Apostle tells us, that these things are
delivered not in Words which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches. 1 Cor. 2. 13.


4. If the common use of Speech be so sure a Rule of Interpretation as this
Author makes it, I wonder what was in his Mind, to say of the Penmen of
Scripture, That if they were now living amongst us, they could not be the
sufficient Interpreters of their own Writings, because they often wrote they
knew not what. Certainly the customary use of Speech which obtained in the
times wherein they wrote, must needs be much better known to them than it can
be to any now living. Why then might not they interpret their own Writings, if
they were now with us, having the best insight into that which this Author
cries up for the only sure Rule of Interpretation?

5. If the customary use of Speech must be the Rule of Interpretation, the
inconvenience urged by the Exercitator cap. 11. par. 6. will not easily, if at
all, be avoided: viz. the interpreting of Scripture according to the erroneous
apprehension of the Vulgar.

6. If this be so certain a Rule, as he will have it, so as that he who uses
it, shall not fail to find out the true Sense of Scripture (for so himself
speaks Wolzog. ^^. Sc. Int. p. 12.
) how is it that the Sense of Scripture may not be found in all parts one as
well as another? for the use of Speech is the same in all. And yet he
acknowledges, that in many things (not necessary to Salvation) let the Reader
be never so diligent in his search, he cannot find the meaning of Scripture:
and the reason hereof, he says, is to be fetched, not from the nature of the
thing, nor from the darkness of our minds, but ex Id. ib. p. 15, 16 and p. 172,
173, 174.
ipsa constitutione Scripturae, from the very frame of Scripture it self.

Secondly, But now, whether this learned Author did not well consider 2.
what he wrote, or had not well digested his own Notions, or whether he
designed to amuse his Reader with intricacies and ambiguities, or whether he
were aware of the inconvenience of his former Expressions, and their liableness
to exception, or what other were the cause, I shall not inquire: But this is
plain to any that attentively reads his Discourse, that when he had once and
again given the honor of being the only sure Rule of Interpretation of
Scripture, to the common and customary use of Speech; he afterward falls to a
singular use of Speech, Id p. 76, and 227.
distinct from the vulgar, arising from the different Character of the Writer,
the different occasion of Writing, the different nature of the things about
which he Treats; and that under this singularity of the usus loquendi, the
custom of Speech, we are to consider the Antecedents and the Consequents of a
Text, Id. p. 79.
and the parallel places. And elsewhere he says, p. 132, and 137.
all the circumstances of the place under consideration are to be examined: and
this he calls, Usus loquendi Scripturarius p. 127.
the Scripture use of Speaking. And when he objects against himself, p. 138.
that the customary manner of speaking is dubious and uncertain, he answers it
thus, That though it be v. etiam p. 262, 263.
so, yet God's manner of Speech in Scripture is fixed. So that what was before
called the common and vulgar use, is now confined to God's use, and the
Scripture-use of Speaking; which certainly does not receive Law from the custom
and consent of Men; but is wholly framed and ordered by the disposal of Divine
Wisdom, though in it he makes use of such words, as receive their single
signification from common use.

Besides, this Author tells us elsewhere Cens. Cens. p. 121
that Usus loquendi, or custom of Speech, includes in it the Analogy of Faith,
and all other things that are taken out of Scripture, in order to the finding
out of its true Sense. Now if this be indeed the meaning of his Usus loquendi,
his opinion comes very near to that of the Reformed Churches, if it be not the
same with it. But then what needed all this stir, as if our Divines had not
discovered their Minds plainly and distinctly, but this Author must come and
mend it? whereas he has rather darkened and obscured it by his intricate and
inconsistent Discourse. For whoever before him, took Usus loquendi in such a
sense as this? And I much wonder that he who is so much for the custom of
Speech, should vary so widely from it in his Writing. For I am sure this Phrase
Usus loquendi, according to that mode of Speech that has hitherto obtained,
was never taken so comprehensively as to include the scope of the Text, with
the Antecedents and Consequents, and all other circumstances, and the Analogy
of Faith, and what ever lies in the Scripture that serves to the discovery of
its true sense. Except Men will assume a power to themselves of coining a new
Sense of Words, I cannot imagine what ground they can have to talk after the
rate of this Author.

Our Divines speak much more properly (...)*
and clearly in this business, viz. That the Holy Spirit of God has, in
Enditing the Scripture, so attempered his Speech, and so ordered and disposed
the several Parts and Parcels of this Sacred Book, that his Mind (so far as it
is necessary for us to know it) may be discovered, either from the obvious
sense of the particular Sentences and Propositions of Scripture considered in
that Order and dependence wherein they are placed, or by a due comparison of
one part of Scripture with another; so as that the Reader may gather the Sense
of Scripture from the Scripture it self. This is that which our Divines mean,
when they say that the Scripture is its own Interpreter. And when they say at
any time, that the Spirit of God is the Interpreter of Scripture, either they
speak of the Objective evidence that the Spirit gives of the Sense of
Scripture; and then they understand it of the Spirit as speaking in the
Scripture; which being the Voice of the Spirit, is to us (as I said) our
Supreme Rule: Or they speak of the Spirit as the efficient cause of that
Subjective light that is let into our Minds inabling us to understand the
Scriptures. And this belongs to another inquiry, and does not concern the
Question about the Rule of Interpretation. Now when our Writers say, the
Scripture is its own Interpreter, they are to be understood Metonymically. As
when they say the Scripture is the Supreme Judge of all Controversies of Faith,
they mean no more but that it is Judex Norma^is, or the Supreme Rule of
Judgment, according to which Controversies are to be ultimately decided; so by
proportion is it in the present Cafe. And as when the Papists speak of the
infallible dectding of Controversies, whether they say the Pope is the
infallible Judge, or the Sentence given by the Pope is the infallible Rule of
decision, it comes all to one. So when our Divines say sometimes, that the
Spirit speaking in the Scripture is the infallible Interpreter of Scripture,
and other while, that the Scripture is the infallible Rule of Interpretation,
here is no such difference as should just give occasion to any to say, that our
Divines speak variously or uncertainly, or that they agree not one with
another, or with themselves; for in the issue the meaning of them all, is one
and the same.

Now here I must look back upon what I had said in the Introduction to my
Discourse, concerning the special, immediate means of Interpretation; viz. a
due observation of the several circumstances of the Scripture to be Expounded;
and the comparing of Scripture with Scripture. In the use of which means lies
the applying of the right Rule of Interpretation: It is the using of Scripture
to expound Scripture. And when a dark or difficult Scripture is compared with
some other, wherein the same Truth or Doctrine is more clearly and
perspicuously delivered, this is conceived by many learned Men to be intended
in that of the Apostle concerning the Analogy of Faith, Romans 12. 6. Whether it
be so or no, I shall not at present debate, much less determine; No^ shall I
inquire whether that (...) form of sound Words, spoken of by the same Apostle,
in 2 Timothy 1. 13. be the same with this (...) as some conceive it is. But this I
may have leave to say, that I see no incongruity or inconvenience in using the
Expression, or in saying that to explain obscure places of Scripture by such as
are more clear and easy, is to expound Scripture according to the Analogy of
Faith.

Analogy, says Quintilian, is that which the Latins call Proportion, the
force Quintil. ^i. (...). c. 6.
whereof is this, That what is in doubt may be referred to something like it
that is out of question, that so the uncertain may be proved by the certain.
And why may not the like use of the Word be allowed in this case? Sure I am,
eminent Writers both of the Roman and Reformed Churches have thus used it.
Analogy, says Aquinas, is, when the Sum. p. 1. q. 1. a. 10.
truth of one Scripture is evidenced not to oppose the truth of another. The
Analogy Controvers. 1. q. 5. c. 9. Analogia fidei nihil aliud est, quam
constants and perpetua, sententia, Scripture* in apert^s and minime obscuris
Scripture locis.
of Faith, says our learned Whitaker, is the constant and perpetual Sentence
of Scripture in those places that are undoubtedly plain and obvious to our
Understandings. I might allege to the like sense many more Authors, whose
excellent Worth sets them sufficiently above the contempt of the Exercitator,
and others of his mind, that jear and deride the Analogy of Faith. But waving
the terms, that which I am concerned to assert, is the thing it self; that in
expounding Scripture we must be regulated and determined by the Scripture it
self: and that whatsoever it speaks darkly and uncertainly in any place, is to
be explained by it self in those other places; where it speaks more plainly;
which plain places do sufficiently interpret themselves by their own light.

Now this way of Interpreting Scripture by it self, has been approved of (...)
3.
as the best and safest, by most eminent Authors Ancient and Modern. Clemens
Alexandrinus, Iraeneus, Hilary, and others, are cited to this purpose, by
P^^^^ret. ^o. 1. (...). 16. c, 6.
Chamier, Is^gog. ^d S. Sc. c. 18.
Rivet, Lection. Gresham. par. 1, Lect. 15.
Dr. Holdsworth. As Esdras and his Companions of old, so should we now
interpret Scripture by Scripture, comparing among themselves those things that
are Endited by the same Spirit, says the learned De Imp. sum. p^t. ^irc^ sacra.
Grotius, plainly referring to that in Neh. 8. 7, 8. Mr. Ser. on 2. Pet. 3. 16.
Hales of Eaton in his Golden Remains says, Other Expositions may give Rules of
Direction for understanding their Authors: but the Scripture give^ Rules to
expound it self. When the Fathers (says the Duct. Dubit. l. 3. c. 3. p. 36^.
Bishop of Down) confirmed an Exposition of one place of Scripture by the
Doctrine of another, then and then only they thought they had the (...) the
Scripture demonstration: and Matter of Faith and necessary belief: and that
this was the duty of the Christian Doctors, Origin does expressly affirm.

And however, the Roman Doctors (of this latter age especially) have vehemently
contended against this, that the Authority of their Church may take place; yet
we find that in some of them, that comes full up to what we say. I shall give
one instance, Li. 3 d^ Christo revelato c* 21.
Josephus a Costa (as I find him cited by Chamier and Rive^.) Nihil perinde
Scripturam videtur ap^rire atque ipsa Scriptura. Itaque diligens, attenta,
frequensque lectio, ^um meditatio, and collatio Scripturarum, omnium fumma
Regula ad intelligendum ^ihi semper vis^. na^ ex ali^^ Scriptur is aliae optime
intellig^^tur. Nothing seems to me to open the Scripture like the Scripture it
self Therefore diligent attentive, and frequent Reading, with Meditation, and
comparing of Scriptures, has always seemed to me the chief Rule of all for
understanding; for by some Scriptures others are best understood.

CHAP. II.
Argument^ to confirm the Proposition; the first from the Scriptures sole
sufficiency to be its own Interpreter, made good by three things, and first by
its Perfection.

I proceed to some Arguments for the confirmation of this Second Proposition, I
shall pass over many of those that are numerously brought in by other Writers;
choosing to insist upon those that I take to be of greatest force; and against
which the greatest endeavors have been used to overthrow them.

My first shall be this* The Scripture is of all other best fitted to be the
Rule Arg. 1.
to guide us in the determining of its own sense and meaning. Nothing else is
so well qualified for this use. And this may be evinced by its three
properties, its Perfection, Perspicuity, and Authentickness. It is the most
Perfect, Perspicuous, and Authentic Record of the Mind of God. Of these Three
I must distinctly Treat.

First, this, and this only, is the perfect Branch 1.
Record of the mind of God, fully manifesting it to us so far as it is
necessary for us to know it, in order to our duty and our happiness. The
Apostle speaks clearly and fully for this, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. From a child
thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by
inspiration from God, etc. Here two things are evidently Asserted, viz. That
the Scriptures contain in them what is sufficient both for a Minister of Christ
to Teach, and for any Christian to know, to make him wise unto Salvation.
Neither of which can be, if there be not that in the Scripture it self, out of
which the Mind of God therein delivered may be sufficiently understood without
the suppliment of some other overruling Principle. For 1. How can the
Scripture make any man wise unto Salvation, if it fall short in point of
objective Evidence necessary to beget that Divine Knowledge, wherein all saving
Wisdom consists? 2. How can it sufficiently furnish a Minister for his work of
instructing his Hearers* and conducting them to Life, if from thence he cannot
fetch enough to clear the Truth he is to deliver to them?

CHAP. III.
The second branch of the first Argument; the Scriptures Perspicuity proved.

SEcondly, the Scripture is a perspicuous (...)
Revelation of God's Will. Whatsoever may be the ignorance or darkness of Men,
which hinders them from knowing what God has said in these Sacred Records; yet
the objective perspicuity of them is generally asserted by Protestants against
the Romanists. Not that all Truths revealed in Scripture are so low and common
as in their own Nature to be obvious to Man's Understanding: but that (as to
the manner of their delivery) they are so laid down in the Scripture, as that
they may be understood by and from the Scripture: yet we mean not that every
part or passage of Scripture is clear: (For that there are many difficulties
therein we acknowledge.) But that the mind of God is somewhere or other in
Scripture plainly propounded, so far as it is necessary for us to know it, one
part of it giving Light to another; so that the whole Scripture taken together
is a Perspicuous Manifestation of his will. This is proved by Moses's words in
Deuteronomy. 30. 12, 13, 14. Speaking of the Law; and the Apostles words, Romans 10. 6.
etc. Speaking the same of the Gospel. Hence the written Word is frequently
compared to a Light, and is Ps. 19. 7. 8. Ps. 119. 105. 130. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Timothy 3. 15 Matt. 22.
said to give understanding to the Simple. Had not the Scriptures been
Perspicuous, how could Timothy in his Childhood have understood them? How could
our Savior out of them have convinced the Sadduces of the Doctrine of the
Resurrection? Or the Apostles, out of them prove irrefragably the Acts.
truth of their Doctrine against the gainsaying Jews? Or how could the Bereans
try the Apostles Doctrine by searching the Scriptures? These are undeniable Act.
17. 11.
Proofs that the Scriptures are Perspicuous, and that they have a plain and
certain sense obvious to a considerate Reader. But all this will signify
nothing, if the Scripture have not that Light in it that may discover it self,
and clear up its own meaning without borrowing Light from some other Principle.

Now because much of the stress of this Cause lies on this, we must a little
consider what is said against it. The late Romanists do generally cry out, that
the Scriptures are obscure; partly that they may have the fairer color to take
them out of the Peoples hands, lest they should mistake, or pervert them,
(though none among them have been more guilty of that than their Doctors of
greatest name for Learning:) partly, that they may bring in their unwritten
Traditions, as expository of Scripture-Revelations; and partly also, that they
may establish a necessity of an Infallible, Visible Judge here on Earth to
Interpret Scriptures, and decide all Controversies. Yet I know not any of them,
but will own that many things in the Scripture are clear. But there is a late
Writer, that denies this. My next work therefore shall be to deal with him, and
clear the Truth from his exceptions in some of the following Chapters of this
Discourse.

CHAP. IV.
The Exercitators exception against the Scriptures Perspicuity, from the
ambiguity of words Answered.

THe Belgic Exercitator whom I have often mentioned before, that he may make
sure work, rises higher in denying the Scriptures Perspicuity, than any that I
have ever met with: and with confidence affirms the Scripture to be universally
obscure, and that no part of it is of it self clear and Ph. Scr. Int. c. 11.
par. 6. Ibid. c. 6. p. 1. and c. 11. par. 9.
plain; and thereupon denies, that one part of Scripture can be expounded by
another. Yea, this he lays as the foundation of his main Assertion, against
the Scriptures Interpreting it self.

And one great Reason he gives, is Exception. 1.
(what he has taken a great deal of tedious pedantick pains to prove in his
third Chapter,) That all speech being made up of Words and Phrases is abscure
and doubtful, because the words whereof it consists are capable of different
significations, and consequently may be taken in a various sense: and thus it
is with the Scripture, it is universally ambiguous, and therefore obscure.

To this I Answer, 1. If this Reason Sol. 1.
hold, then there is no Speech or Writing in the World, but will fall under the
same unhappy fate. No Law of the Land, no letter of a Friend, no Oral
Discourse, no Treatise of whatsoever Subject, and how accurately soever
written, shall be accounted Intelligible. For all Writings and Discourses are
made up of the same kind of Words and Phrases, and capable of being adorned
with the same Tropes and Figures that the Scripture is, and every whit as
liable to be taken in for different senses. And thus no man shall know how to
speak or write any thing that can be clearly understood: and that excellent
gift of Speech which God has bestowed upon men to be an instrument of society
and converse, shall be of no other use, but to be made an Engine of deceit and
treachery.

Secondly, if things be thus, to what 2.
end did this Author trouble himself to Write, and others to read this Book of
his? if all Speeches and Writings be ambiguous and obscure, and not to be
understood without an Interpreter, of what use is this Jewel of his fancy? Did
he hope to lead the whole World of Interpreters out of their Labyrinths into
the right path, by such an ignis fatuus, that by its ambiguities and
uncertainties may scare and amuse them, and carry them hither and thither
according to the wind of their own imaginations? Or has he attained to a
faculty above all other Writers? even the best and holiest to write in such
Words and Phrases as might open his meaning, without entangling his Readers in
ambiguities? If he thinks his Book be free from this blemish, methinks he might
have had the modesty to conceive, that the Penmen of Scripture knew how to
write as well as he: If his thoughts of his Book were otherwise, he might have
kept it to himself, and fed the Moths with it.

Thirdly, yet again, if it be thus, that all words in whatsoever contexture be
3.
so ambiguous and obscure, what will become of this Infallible Interpreter,
which our Author would set up? For whatsoever Interpretation be made of any
Scripture, it must be framed in such words as other men use, and as all kind of
Writings are drawn up in: and if when all is done, these be obscure, what are
we the better? For certainly according to this Authors argument, even the first
Principles of Nature, and the most unquestionable Maxims of Philosophy, when
turned into Words and Sentences, will be as ambiguous, and consequently as dark
as the Scriptures.

Fourthly, whereas his impeaching the Scriptures of Ambiguity and Obscurity, 4.
is not only to disable them from expounding themselves, but that he may set up
Philosophy as the only Interpreter; he instances in several Scriptures, Ph.
Scr. Int. c. 3. par. 24.
which he says are thus Ambiguous and Obscure; in the clearing whereof
Philosophy cannot possibly afford us any help. As for Example, when he
supposes of our Savior's Words in Joh. 5. 39. (...), That it is doubtful
whether this be to be taken Imperatively, search the Scripture: or
Indicatively, ye do search the Scriptures. Can any Principle of Philosophy
satisfy us whether the Verb (...) there used, be of the Indicative mood, or of
the Imparative? So when he says it is doubtful, whether our Saviors words to
Peter, John, 21. 16, 17, 18. should be taken Interrogatively, Do thou love
me? Or Affirmatively, Thou do love me. And his words to his Disciples, Math.
26. 45. Whether they are to be read Imperatively, sleep on now, etc. Or
Interrogatively, Do ye sleep on, etc? And so of Pilat's words to our Savior,
What is Truth? Whether they are a serious question, or an Irony. In these and
many other, if the matter and coherence do not resolve us, Philosophy cannot
relieve us. How then do these Allegations serve our Authors end? which is that
the Scripture cannot Interpret it self, but all its Interpretation must be
regulated by Philosophy?

But Lastly, I deny this Charge laid 5.
against the Scripture, (of its being Universally Ambiguous, and Obscure) as
highly contumelious to God the Author of it. For it supposes, either that he
could not, or that he would not speak his Mind to the Sons of Men; (for whose
Eternal concerns he designed this Sacred Volume,) in such a manner as they
might understand it, and be bettered by it. As it was out of Love and Mercy to
Sinners that the Scriptures were Endited, that they might have a sure Guide to
Blessedness; so they are Written for all sorts and ranks of Men to make use of:
and therefore they are for the most part drawn in a vulgar condescending style.
But if they cannot be understood without Philosophy (yea a very great insight
into Philosophy, as this Author sometimes intimates) not one of a thousand of
them that have the Scriptures, will be able to understand the Mind of God in
them: they being (according to this Man's words) so totallydark and doubtful.

CHAP. V.
A second Exception, from the Exercitators unsatisfiedness about the meaning of
our Divines, when they speak of any Scriptures being perspicuous in themselves,
removed.

SEcondly, whereas it is usually said Except. 2.
by our Divines that such places of Scripture as are clear and plain in
themselves, do Interpret such as Phil. Scr. Int. c. 11. par. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6.
are obscure; the great Question is, what do they mean by a place that is clear
and perspicuous in or of it self? I have made inquiry about this, (says the
Exercitator) and can find nothing solid or satisfactory.

To this I answer in few words, That Sol.
Place or Text of Scripture is plain and perspicuous in it self, whose sense so
fairly rises out of the Words, and their connection with what goes before and
after, that the Intelligent Reader need not miss of it, if he be not wanting to
himself. And I appeal to any man that is not resolved to cavil, whether there
be not thousands of Scripture-Sentences whose sense is thus clear and evident.

But here the Exercitator Replies, Object.
The words whereof Scripture-Propositions consist have their signification from
Humane Institution, and their Ibid. par. 3, 4. 5.
sense depends upon common use. If therefore the sense of Scripture be any
where so plain as to be known by the Words then it is not Scripture, but Usus
Loquendi, the common use of Speech, that is the Rule of Interpretation. But
this, says he, is of all other the most dangerous and deceitful Rule to go by,
causing many monstrous conceptions of God and things Divine, suitable to the
apprehensions of the Ignorant and besotted Vulgar.

To this captious Objection I Answer Sol. 1.
Two things.

1. We are now speaking of such Scriptures whose sense is obvious, and so
(according Phil. Scr. Int. c. 2. par. 7.
to the Exercitators own Rule given in the beginning of his Discourse) need no
Interpreter. For he plainly says, (if at least there be any plain sayings to
be found) that the proper Object of Interpretation is such a Speech as is
obscure. This Cavil therefore is here is very disingenuous, being against his
own premised Rule.

In Scripture there is somewhat common 2.
with other Writings, and something proper to it self, as each particular
Writing has. The words it uses are of the same kind with those of other
Writings, and, singly taken, are supposed to have the like signification
according to common use. But as those words are framed into Propositions in the
Scripture, and those Propositions conjoined in such a contexture of Discourse;
so they may, and often do, carry a peculiar Sense, which arises not from Humane
Institution appointing the signification of such Words, but from Divine
Ordination placeing those Words in such an Order, without which they would not
signify what they do. And though the several Words and Clauses of Scripture
taken separately from the place wherein they stand, may have a dubious or
indeterminate Sense; yet take them together, with the whole discourse to which
they belong, and whereof they are parts, and the Sense may be undeniably clear
and determinate. And this is one way whereby Scripture expounds itself, as the
other is, (what has been most insisted on) by comparing dark places with those
that are plain.

Take for instance one of those nominated by the ^xercitator; the words P^.
Scr. ^^t. c. 11. par. 5.
of our Savior in Matthew. 5. 34. Swear not at all. What it is to swear is I
think well known, (though not seriously considered) by the most. And the Word
(...) at all, what it signifies in common use we all know. And if this Clause
were taken singly, it would seem to import an absolute* Prohibition of Swearing
at any time, in any manner whatsoever. But take it as it here stands, as a
branch of that whole discourse, that begins at Verse 33. and ends at ver. 37.
And so Interpreters understand our Saviors meaning, either to forbid all
Swearing by the Creature, and in familiar Discourse: or to caution them against
the common conceit and practice that then obtained, of Swearing rashly and
fallaciously by the Creature, upon supposal that such oaths were no^ obliging
because the name of God was not interposed.

CHAP. VI.
A Third Exception, that what is clear to one is obscure to another; where he
denies all Perspicuity and Obscurity but what is Relative.

BUT that which is plain to one Except. 3. Ph. Scr. Int. c. 3. par. 3.
may be obscure to another, says the Exercitator; who thereupon asserts, That
there is no Perspicuity, or Obscurity, but what is purely Relative to the
Understanding of the Reader or Hearer: and (according to his wonted modesty)
condemns the Reformed Divines, (and he might have added the Ancient Fathers)
for affirming the Scriptures to be in themselves Perspicuous, though Obscure,
in regard of the indisposition of Men's Minds.

I Answer, 1. If there be no Objective Perspicuity, nor anything clear in it
Sol. 1.
self, but only as it relates to the actual exercise of Men's apprehensive
Faculties; then it seems there is no difference between a clear day, and a
cloudy, but only in reference to our sight: and the Sun must not be said to
shine bright, because Men that have lost their Eyes, or are shut up in a
Dungeon cannot see it. But I think the vanity of such a conceit is Perspicuous
enough, whether the Exercitator see it or not. It has been hitherto esteemed
by all Men (as far as I know) a considerable excellency in any Writer, that his
Speech and Style is clear and perspicuous; and the contrary, Darkness and
Obscurity has been blamed in those who affect to Speak or Write cloudily and
enigmatically: which certainly implies, that there is a Perspicuity, and a
contrary Obscurity, that is absolutely inhering in the Speech it self. And yet
in the denial of this, Wolzogen, and his friend Velthusius join with the
Exercitator, asserting with him, that there is no Perspicuity in the Scripture,
but what is Relative to those that Read or Hear it. And this they endeavor to
confirm or illustrate by Similitudes. A Speech, says Li. 1. de Scr. Int. p. 104.
Wolzogen, can no otherwise be called Perspicuous absolutely in it self, than a
Man's Blood can be said to be red while it runs in his Veins, and no Eye sees
it; or the Snow that falls in the extreme Northparts, where no man feels the
horror of it, can be accounted Cold. These, (says he) do consist in Sense,
without which, we cannot have any Conception of them. And so nothing is
Perspicuous further than it is perceived. To the like purpose Velthusius De usu
Rat. in Theolog. p. 15.
speaks; That Light is not in the Object, but in the Sense; as heat is not in
the Fire, nor cold in the Ice; but in the Sense of him that Feels either the
one or the other; no more than pain is in the Sword or Knife that makes a
Wound. So says he, neither is clearness in the Object that is to be known, but
in the Minds perception of it. Truly, I do not much admire these Mysteries of
the New Philosophy. Hitherto both Light and Color, Heat and Cold have been
esteemed qualities inherent in their proper Subjects, and not to consist in a
Relation. But if it be as these Men say, it seems nothing is Cold or Hot, Light
or Dark, save only as and when it is discerned by one that sees and feels it.
But on the contrary (to pass by other Arguments) we find in the History of the
Creation, that darkness was upon Genesis 1. 2, 3
the face of the deep. And when God said, Let there be Light, there was Light.
Both which were, before there was any sensitive Creature in being to discern
them. If any shall here say (as some are ready to do when clear Scripture goes
cross to their darling Notions) that those words in the History of the Creation
are used not according to the reality of the thing, but according to Vulgar
Conception; I shall not think such profane boldness worthy a Reply. Perhaps it
will be pleaded, that the Scriptures were not written to teach us Natural
Philosophy. Be it so; neither were they penned to teach us any falsehood, or to
deceive us into mistakes concerning God or any of his Works. All the several
parts of that Sacred Volume are so ordered, as to have some tendency, immediate
or remote, to the great end for which it was End^^ed, the conducting of us to
Happiness. But surely the God of Truth never designed to bring us to Happiness
by a Lie. Verily I have little encouragement to trust Men's Reason in matters of
Revelation, when I find them talking so absu^dly in matters of Natural
Cognizance. And yet when all is done, Wolzogen grants, that Li. 1. de Scr. Int.
p. 104, 105
the Scriptures are so framed, that nothing is wanting in them to render them
perspicuous. And truly, as far as I understand, this is all that our
Protestant Divines mean, when they say the Scriptures are perspicuous in
themselves. What Is the matter then? why he tells us their meaning is very good,
but the Expression is incommodious. Which is but another taste of his Civility;
this being his humor throughout his Book to nibble at somewhat or other in the
most learned Writers of the Reformed Churches. But I return to our Exercitator.
And,

Secondly, I answer, when the Apostle 2.
says, 2 Pet 3. 16. that some of those things whereof St. Paul Treats in his
Epistles, are hard to be understood, if there be no perspicuity or obscurity
but what is Relative, he might as well have said that they are all hard to be
understood: for doubtless there are some Men so stupidly ignorant, or
obstinately perverse, that they understand none of them. But surely when the
Apostle says, that some of them were difficult, he did not intend to say they
were all so.

Thirdly, The Apostles preached the 3.
Gospel in the demonstration of the Spirit 1 Cor. 2. 4
and of Power; and did by manifestation of the Truth* commend themselves 2 Cor.
4. 2.
to ever Man's Conscience in the ^ht of God: with such perspicuity and
convincing evidence did they speak. And yet, as the same Apostle intimates,
their Gospel might be and was ^id to them that were lost, in whom Ibid. v. 3, 4
the God of this World had blinded the Minds of them which believe not, lest
the Light of the glorious Gospel, which is the Image of God, should shine unto
them. There is therefore an absolute objective perspicuity in the Scriptures
themselves, whatsoever may be the incapacity of Men's Understandings.

Lastly, to conclude this, I wonder 4. Ph. Scr. Int c. 3.
at this Authors Wit or Memory, that he so grossly contradicts himself in this
very Chapter, out of which this Exception is taken. For having premised, that
the obscurity of Speech arises chiefly from its ambiguity, and at large
discoursed of the several sorts of Amphibolies in Words and Sentences (all
which do evidently prove, if any thing, an obscurity that lies in the Speech it
self, without respect to the Reader or Hearer) he afterward expressly tells us,
that there is a twofold ambiguity of Speech; the one absolute, Cap. Cit. par.
26.
considered in it self, and the other Relative, and with respect to us. By
which he unravels what he had said in his third Paragraph, acknowledging that a
Speech may be ambiguous, and consequently obscure in it self. And if there be
an absolute obscurity, there is also an absolute perspicuity; for which he
before derided the Divines of the Reformation.

CHAP. VII.
1. A fourth Exception against the Scriptures Perspicuity from the difference
and contrariety between the simple sense of the words of Scripture, and the
true sense of the Author. 2. The instances given to prove this considered. e.
g. Such as speak of the Arm and Finger of God. 3. That in Jo. 14. 16. 4. Our
Savior's Words, This is my Body. 5. Those places where God is said to be Lord
and King, and to have begotten a Son, and to love the World. 6. The aforesaid
distinction condemned, and the Authors self-contradiction noted.

IT is further Objected by the Exercitator, Sect. 1. Except. 4. Ph. Scr. Int.
c. 3. par. 4.
That the sense of Scripture is twofold, either sensus simpliciter dictus, or
Ver^s. And he thus Explains himself: The sense of the Scripture is either the
simple sense of the Words, which they of themselves offer to the Reader; or the
true sense and meaning of the Author in those Words. These says he, are seldom
the same, but different, yea opposite: and the sense which the words offer may
be plain and easy, when the sense that the Author intends by them, which is a
clean other thing, is very dark and obscure. And so confident is the Gentleman
in this conceit, that he superciliously slights Expositors of Scripture for not
minding this distinction, Ibid. par. 7.
and (for want hereof) taking often times the simple sense for the true one.

To make this wild and senseless distinon good, he instanceth in several
passages of Scripture, wherein he would make us believe this Twofold sense is
to be found. I shall therefore before I proceed, endeavor to clear those
Passages, or the principal of them.

Sect. 2. One instance he gives is of those Sect. 2. 1. Ibid. par. 4.
expressions in Scripture, The Arm and Finger of God. The simple sense of
which Words, and that which they do of themselves offer to the Reader, he
says, is very obvious, being known by common use: but ^he thinks no Divine so
void of Wit, as to take that obvious sense for the true meaning of the Author.

By this it appears, this Gentleman Sol.
conceives, that the sense which those Words of themselves offer, is proper
without any Trope or Figure; as if God had a bodily Arm or Finger, as a Man
has. But by his favor, he is greatly out. The Arm and Finger of God,
according to common acceptance with any that are versed in the Scriptures,
have no other than an improper sense, nor do they signify any more than the
Power of God: though the word Arm or Finger either singly taken, or applied to
Men, signifies somewhat else; according to that known Maxim, Verba sunt
intelligenda secundum subjectam materiam, Words are to be understood according
to the subject matter about which they are used. And this holds in all manner
of Speeches and Writings whatsoever; the matter in hand directs to the sense of
the Words.

A second instance is in Joh. 14. 6. Sect. 3. 2. Ibid. Sol.
where our Savior says, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. What obvious
sense it is, that this Author conceives from common use of speech to be in
these words, different from our Saviors meaning, I cannot divine: Nor can I
see how they can signify any more or less to him that is acquainted with the
Doctrine of the Gospel, than what our Savior means by them; who calls himself
The Way, by no unapt Metaphor, because (as himself expounds it in the latter
end of the Verse) it is by Him that Sinners are to come to the Father; that is,
to Reconciliation with him, and fruition of him. It is by Him, that is, by the
Merit of his Blood, by the Light of his Doctrine, by the Conduct of his
Pattern, and by the Power of his Spirit. And herein he is The Truth, that is,
the Substance and real Completion of all the Types and Shadows under the Law;
and consequently he is The Life, (by a known Metonyme of the effect for the
cause) in that he is the Author, that is, the Purchaser and Bestower of that
Eternal Life that Sinners come to enjoy in God.

A further instance is given in those 3. Sect. 4. Ph. Scr. Int. c. 3. par. 7.
words of our Savior, This is my Body; where he affirms, That the plain and
easy sense which the words of themselves offer to the Reader, is that which
the Romish Church takes them in: but the sense of our Savior in speaking them,
which he grants to be that which the Reformed Churches give of them, this, he
says, is dark and obscure.

But I suppose he cannot be ignorant, Sol.
that there are considerable Doctors of the Romish Church, eminent for
Learning, who have acknowledged, that they should never have entertained that
sense of the words which asserts Transubstantiation, if the Authority of the
Church had not moved them. And our Writers have abundantly manifested the gross
absurdity of that sense; and among others, Dr. Brevint in his late excellent
Discourse of the Mystery of the Romish Mass, has clearly, and to great
satisfaction, proved the Protestant sense of that speech of our Saviors from
the very words themselves. I cannot well understand by this Authors discourse,
of what settled Persuasion he is in matters of Religion. He now and then
insinuates something that carries with it a dislike of the Romanists and their
way: But it is plain enough by this, and many other passages in his Book, that
the Reformed Churches are little befriended by him.

Lastly, He instances in those Scriptures Ibid. 4. Sect. 5.
where God is said to be Lord of Heaven and Earth, the King of Nations, and
King of Kings; and where he is said to have begotten a Son, Psalm. 2. and to
have loved the World, Joh. 3. 16. In all which, he says, the obvious, but
mistaken, sense, and that which the Vulgar apprehend, is, that God, after the
manner of men, is a Lord and King, and does beget and love; which he esteems to
be grossly absurd. To these I answer distinctly.

1. As for the places where God is Sol. 1.
called Lord and King, and said to Reign over the Nations, with all of like
import; in these we are taught, by what we find elsewhere in Scripture, to
remove from God whatever savours of imperfection, and to ascribe nothing to him
but what suits with a most excellent and most perfect Being. Nor do the
aforesaid Expressions, in their plain and obvious sense, signify either more
or less, than that God is the Universal Sovereign of the World, Ruling his
Creatures with infinite Wisdom and Power, according to their different natures
and conditions; the Inferior sort by instinct and natural necessity; his
Intellectual Creatures by Laws, as the proper Instrument of Moral Government.
And what the Exercitators sentiments are about this, I cannot conjecture. If he
be for that Novel Opinion of Thomas Anglus ab Albis, that God does not properly
Govern us by Laws, (as Kings do their Kingdoms) but, as an Engineer does his
Engine, by Physical Motion; and that therefore he is called our Lord and King
only in a Metaphorical sense; I must enter a dissent against such an absurd and
Atheistical conceit, and put him to prove his Assertion, and answer the
Arguments that are in print against it.

2. As for the second, Of begetting a Son, Psalm 2. 7. Interpreters do much
(...).
differ about it. Some conceive the first and immediate sense of the words to
respect David, whom God had delivered out of his great afflictions, and raised
to a Kingdom; which deliverance and exaltation was to him as a second Birth.
And this they illustrate by what is said of the Roman Emperors, that they had
two Birth-days; the one of their Persons, when they came into the World; the
other of their Empire, when they were seated in the Throne: and that Christ is
here intended only as the Antitype prefigured by David. Others understand these
words properly and immediately of Christ, and that with respect to one of these
two; either, 1. To his Eternal Generation, in reference to which he is called
the Eternal and only begotten Son of God. The truth of which Generation we are
upon Scripture-testimony to receive, without searching into the manner; it
being a Mystery infinitely above our reach: which therefore he that will boldly
intrude into, may justly fear to be overwhelmed with its Glory. Or, 2. To the
Temporal Manifestation of that Eternal Generation; a thing being then said to
be done, when it is manifested to be done. And so the words are applied by the
Apostle Paul to our Saviors Resurrection; Act. 13. 33
whereby, as the same Apostle says elsewhere, He was declared to be the Romans 1.
4.
Son of God with power. Though I know there is, who understands those words of
Christ's Resurrection immediately and in it self; partly because it was, as it
were, a second Birth to the Humane Nature; partly because it was, as they
conceive, the beginning of his Installment into his Regal Office; which might
be called his Birth by Analogy to what was said before concerning the Roman
Emperors. I shall not take upon me to determine, which of these ways of
Explication is to be adhered to. But be it what it will, this I need not be
afraid to say, that it is Scripture, if any thing, that must clear the
difficulty, and decide the difference; it is not Philosophy in its highest
Exaltation that can be a sufficient Rule to resolve us; the matter in hand
being so wholly foreign to the best and clearest Natural Light.

3. Then for the last instance, Joh. 3. 16. where God is said to love the 3.
World; though in this (as in all other things) we are not to measure God by
our selves; yet this is undoubted, that by Gods love to Mankind, is every where
plainly and clearly meant his Will to do them good, discovering it self in
answerable effects, and the Complacency that he takes in the good that he does
for them, or works in them. Nor do I think that any man, who heedfully reads
the Scriptures, can take it otherwise. And this is no way unbecoming the Divine
Perfections, but fully agreeing to his Nature, and the Manifestations that he
has made of himself both by Natural and Supernatural Light.

Now as to this distinction which the. 6.
Exercitator so much applauds, condemning all others that are not as fond of it
as himself* I find sufficient reason to reject it; and do affirm, that the
Words and Sentences of Scripture taken in such a coherence among themselves,
and connection with the whole, (and otherwise than thus they have no sense that
is properly theirs) do exhibit to the Reader no other sense than what is indeed
the: Authors meaning; being written for no other end but to signify his mind
for our safe guidance to Blessedness. And to think that they have any other
sense than what is indeed the truemind and meaning of the Author, is ^o charge
the Holy Scriptures with the vilest Imposture. What Number De^ vo^is and lingu^
artifex dif^rte loqui non po^^st (...) Imo vero su^ma providentia c^rere fu^o
voluit ^a quae divine sunt, ut omnes intelligerent qua ipse omnibus loquebatur.
Lactant. (...). 6. de vero cultu, c. 21.
would we think of that man, that should either spe^k or write so, as that his
words should carry one meaning, and himself intend another? Would he not be
judged a Deceiver? And shall we dare to fasten such a piece of Hypocrisy upon
the Holy God, and that in a business wherein Man's Everlasting Happiness is
concerned? What thoughts have these men of God, who can talk thus of the
Scriptures that are his acknowledged Word!

But let it be considered, before I leave this matter, whether our Author do
not by this distinction contradict himself. For, 1. When he is (in preparation
Ph. Scr. Int. c. 2. Par. 3. 4. Vocabula (circa quae Interpretatio versatur) ut
habet Cic. in Top. sunt rerum notae, ^ut potius, ut nos putam^s, conceptuum.
Primo enim iis utimur, ut quod me^te concepi^, aliis notum faciamus; cumque
conceptus nil sint nisi rerum repraesentamina in Intellectu, iisdem secundo
etiam illae res denotantur atque designantur.
to his future discourse) explaining what he means by the material Object of
Interpretation, he plainly asserts, that Words are first and immediately the
signification of the inward Conceptions of the Mind; ^and because those
Conceptions are representations of things in* the Understanding, hence the
Words that declare those Conceptions, are used to signify and denote things.
Now if so, how comes it about that the Words of Scripture can have a different
sense from what the Author intends, seeing (as the Exercitator acknowledges)
they are signs or notes of the Conceptions of his Mind.

2. This same Author, when he is proving a multiplicity of true senses in the
same Text of Scripture, and that Phil. Scr. Int. c. 4. par. 8.
whatsoever Interpretations, be they never so many and various, are given, if
they be Truths in themselves, they are also the true Expositions of that place,
uses this Argument, That else God would be chargeable with deceiving Men, by
using such Words as he knew Men would be ready to take in such different
senses, as he never meant* This the Author rejects with abhorrence, as not
agreeing with the Divine* Perfections. How well he agrees with himself, and how
this may be reconciled with the forementioned conceit of such a twofold sense
as we have been speaking of, the simple sense of the Words of Scripture, and
the true sense of the Speaker, let the Reader judge.

CHAP. VIII.
1. A fifth Exception, That the plainest Scriptures may be wrested. 2. A sixth,
from the multiplicity of Commentaries and Expositions, removed.

IN the next place, it will be said Sect. 1. Except. 5.
that the plainest Scriptures are liable to be wrested and perverted by Men of
corrupt minds: therefore they are not perspicuous enough to Interpret
themselves.

Suppose what is indeed too true, (and sufficiently made good by our
Adversaries Sol.
in this cause) that the plainest Scriptures may be perverted. So may the best
and truest Principles of Reason and Philosophy. Nor can any Man devise how to
speak or write so, but a wicked and malicious Wit may put an absurd or horrid
sense upon the most innocent Words. And of this, I think, we have instances
enough every day. But what is this to the sense which the Words and Sentences
of Scripture (in such a Contexture, and with reference to, and dependence upon
the Antecedents and Consequents, and the whole Tenor of the Authors Discourse)
do offer to the Reader? That the Scripture thus considered, is of it self
liable to such ambiguous senses, is a profane and senseless calumny, bringing
that Holy Volume under the same condemnation with the Devils Oracles, that were
purposely contrived by that great Enemy of Mankind, to cheat and abuse the
Pagan World.

But, may some say, do not many Object.
take the Words of Scripture in a far different sense from what the Author of
Scripture intended?

No doubt they do; what then? Sol.
That is not, because the Words give them that sense, but because they impose
that sense upon the Words, to make them comply with their own apprehensions.

In the sixth place, the Exercitator Sect. (...). Except. 6. Ph. Scr. Int. c.
4* par. 1.
argues against the perspicuity of the Scriptures, from the multitude of
Commentaries, Animadversions, Interpretations, (for he loves to heap up words)
written by Learned Men upon the whole Scripture, or the several parts of it:
whence he concludes it as a thing unquestionable, that the Scripture is
obscure, so obscure that it cannot Interpret its own sense.

I answer; That there are some difficulties Sol.
in Scripture, that may exercise, yea, and exceed the ablest Wits, and that
many things in it may be obscure to the Reader, for want of using the right
means to understand, is confessed. But the multitude of Expositions does not at
all prove the Scripture to be so obscure, as to be disabled for being the
supreme Rule to Interpret it self* For whatsoever Notes* or Commentaries are
written upon the Bible by* Learned* Men, they are either such as truly conduce
to the supposed End, the right understanding of the Scripture, and consequently
to the due practical improvement of what is so understood, or they fail of
this, and do rather darken and cloud the Text. These of the latter sort do not
deserve the Honor to be esteemed Interpretations of Scripture; for they render
the sense of it more in^icate and perplex. And truly it has been no unusual
thing for Men that write only to make ostentation of their Learning, and draw
the eyes of others upon them, or to make trial of their Wits in their attempts
upon the Scripture, to vent some odd Notions, that serve rather to amuse than
edify the Reader, and leave him more in the dark than when he perused the Text
alone without their Gloss: as it has fared with some voluminous Commentators
upon Aquinas; who under pretense of expounding their Author, have run out into
so many intricate and frivolous Questions, that by that time they have done,
they have left the Authors Text less intelligible than it was before they
meddled with it: Truly so it is with some that have undertaken to write upon the
Holy Scriptures. But I take such Men's Writings rather for Depravations than
Expositions. And the chief cause of this evil has been (what this Exercitator
is not well aware of) that they made too much use of their Philosophic Notions
in their Endeavors to Interpret Scripture-Revelations. On the other hand, if
Commentaries or Annotations on Scripture be such as do contribute any help
toward the unfolding of the true sense, this has been chiefly by collecting
and comparing the several parts of Scripture together, and considering the
circumstances of each Text expounded, and so fetching the sense of Scripture
from the Scripture it self; which is the only sure and warrantable way of
Interpretation.

CHAP. IX.
1. The third and last Branch of my first Argument, the Scriptures
Authentickness. 2. The Exercitators Exception removed. 3. Wolzogen's Exception,
denying God to be the Interpreter of Scripture, answered.

HAving vindicated the second Sect. 1.
Branch of my first Argument, viz. The Scriptures Perspicuity, from the many
Exceptions made against it; I proceed to the third and last, viz. That the
Scripture is the only Authentic Branch 3.
Record of the Mind and Will of God. For it is the certain and undoubted Voice
of God himself; and what that speaks, He speaks. And who so fit to Interpret
the meaning of his Words as himself? Ejus est Interpr^tari, cujus est condere,
is an approved Rule in the Civil Law; He that made the Law, is fittest to
Interpret it. And in the present case the Reason is evident: God best knows his
own Mind; and he has no where so plainly and fully revealed his Mind as in
Scripture. Certainly there can be none so sure and infallible Interpreter of
these sacred Records, as the Holy Spirit that endited them; and he Interprets
them, not by suggesting to us any thing for their understanding which is not
there already; but by speaking to us more clearly from some part of Scripture,
what is delivered more darkly in others. Can any Man, or sort of Men in the
World, pretend to know the Mind of God better than himself? or give us better
assurance what his Mind is, than the Word which himself has appointed to be
written for this very purpose? Whatsoever sense may be put upon any
Scripture-Assertion, and by whomsoever framed, it cannot challenge our
undoubted reception, unless we can discern the Voice of God in it. And that is
no where to be heard with evidence and assurance, (especially in matters of
Supernatural Revelation, which is that we chiefly deal with in this
Controversy) but from the Scripture it self.

But here the Exercitator comes in Sect. 2. Except. 1. Ph. Scr. Int c. 13.
resp. ad arg. 9.
with his Reply: For acknowledging that without controversy God is an
Infallible Interpreter, and that the Scripture is the Voice of God; he
nevertheless denies that therefore it will follow that the Scripture can be its
own Interpreter, or the Rule of Interpretation to it self; because, says he,
the same Author may write several Treatises, and yet it follows not that the
one should Interpret the other.

To this I answer, The comparison Sol.
is very unequal. Men write of different Subjects many times, and for very
different Ends; and may withal so far forget themselves, or be so unconstant to
themselves, as to cross in one Discourse what they have written in another. But
God, the Author of Scripture, has designed that whole Volume to one and the
same Use and End, to be a Declaration of his Mind to Men, that they may thereby
be directed in their greatest affairs, and have a sure Guide to Happiness. It
is therefore every way most consistent with his Wisdom and Goodness so to order
the enditing of Scripture in matters of so great excellency and necessity, that
his Mind may be known from the Scriptures themselves, either by the plainness
of the particular Sentences, or by the dependence on, and connection with, the
Antecedents and Consequents, or Collation with the more remote parts thereof.

But there is another Author, who Sect. 3. Except. 2. Lud. Wolz. Li. 2. de Scr.
Int. p. 202, 203 and p. 250.
pretending to maintain the Protestant Cause against the Exercitator, deals
less heartily with us than that professed Adversary. For in stead of answering
the aforesaid Exception, he says again and again, That God is not, nor can
properly be said to be the Interpreter of Scripture, or the Expositor of his
own Mind therein. And he gives us this strange reason for it: Because to this
it is necessary that by an Oracle (that is, I suppose, either by audible Voice,
or secret instinct) he should (according to the Enthusiasts fancy) expressly
pronounce to us, that this or that is the sense of such or such a Scripture.
Unless he do this, he cannot be allowed by this Dictator to be the Interpreter
of the Scriptures.

To this I reply; Do we not all acknowledge Sol. Joh. 7. 38, 42. c. 19. 37.
Romans 4. 3. c. 11. 2. Gal. 3. 30.
that the Scripture is the Word of God, and that God speaks to us in it, and
that what that says, God says? And is it not the usual Language of the Holy
Ghost in the Bible, that the Scripture says thus and thus? which sure can be
no otherwise taken for truth or sense, but as the Scripture is the Voice of God
to us. And Wolzogen Li. 1. de Scr. Int. p. 26.
himself says several times that in the Scripture God speaks to us after the
manner of men. And seeing sometimes the Text is so plain, that it speaks
clearly its own mind, and sometimes what is spoken in one part of Scripture, is
explained by what is spoken in another, (both which himself acknowledges) why
may it not with as much propriety be said, that God is the Interpreter of his
own Mind in Scripture, though he use no other Voice than that of the Scripture
in speaking to us? For how improper soever such an Expression may seem to this
Gentleman, it is agreeable to Scripture Language. And me thinks he who so hotly
contends for the Usus loquendi, as to make that the only supreme infallible
Rule of expounding Scripture, might give our Reformed Divines leave to speak
according to this Use, without his supercilious censure. In the mean time this
Author may do well to consider, whose Cause he most favors by such manner of
arguing. I know none that can so heartily thank him for it as the Romanists,
who use the same way of cavilling against us, when we say that the Scripture,
or the Spirit of God in and by the Scripture, is the sole supreme Judge of all
Controversies of Faith. This, say they, cannot be, unless the Spirit of God do,
by an audible Voice, decide the Controversy, telling the one party they are in
the right, and the other they are in an error. And because he does not so in
the Scripture, therefore they deny him to be the supreme Judge of Controversies
by the Scripture. Thus Gretser the Jesuit in the Conference at R^tis^on Seventy
five years ago: Behold, says he, Ann. 1601. V. J. Gerard. Exeg. Tom. 1. loc.
com. c. 22. par. 464. and Dan. Chamier. Panstrat. To. 1. Li. 1. c. 14.
we are here disputing the Cause: If the Spirit of God do, by the Scriptures,
judge and determine Controversies, let him now come, let him come and pass
sentence out of this Book, (the Bible that lay before him) and say, Thou
Gretser art wrong, and thou H. art in the right. Now what does Wolzogen by his
Argumentation, but justify the profane insolency of that petulant Jesuit? The
Ancients were of another mind; they acknowledged God speaking in the Scripture
to be the Judge of Controversies. Thus speaks one of them to his (...); Nemo
vobis credat, nemo Optat. Miiev. li. 5. cont. Parmen.
nobis, de Coelo quaerendus, etc. Let none give credit to us or you; we must
seek a Judge from Heaven: but what need we go thither to him, having his
Testament here in the Gospel? And if the Spirit of God may, with congruity
enough, be said to speak in the Scriptures, as Judge of Controversies, he may
with as good congruity be acknowledged to speak in the Scriptures, as
Interpreting his own Mind there laid down.

And so I have done with my first Argument.

CHAP. X.
A second Argument from the Scriptures being the only Rule of Faith, affording
a double Proof for the Scriptures being its own Interpreter.

MY next Argument follows: That Arg. 2.
which is the only Rule of Faith, is the only Rule to interpret its own sense.
But so is the Scripture. That the Written Word of God is the only Rule of
Faith, is acknowledged by all that sincerely own the Protestant Cause. Now from
hence I thus argue. 1. The supreme Rule of Faith is that which infallibly
guides and determines us per Modum Objecti, what we are to believe. Now it is
the Scripture in its true and genuine meaning that we are bound to believe.
Whatsoever therefore objejectively determines what we are to believe, must
accordingly determine the sense of Scripture. And if any thing else besides the
Scripture be the Rule to determine this, that must eo ipso, upon that very
score, be acknowledged for the Rule of Faith. 2. Whatsoever is the Rule of
Faith, must be the Rule of deciding all Controversies of Faith: This I think no
Man will question. Now let but this be supposed, that the Scripture is the only
supreme Rule of deciding all Controversies of Faith, (which no sound Protestant
can deny) it will necessarily follow, That it must be the supreme Rule of
clearing all Doubts and Difficulties within it self. For where the Scripture is
on both sides owned for the Rule, the knot of the Controversy lies in this,
whether this or that be the sense of the Scriptures that are alleged on both
sides; for were that agreed, the Controversy would cease; and whatsoever
determines that, decides the Cause. Thus Ph. Scr. Int. c. 1. par. 1.
much the Exercitator acknowledges. What ever therefore it be that is made the
Rule of Interpreting Scripture, and determining the sense of it, is thereby
made the Rule of deciding all Controversies of Faith, and is to such as so use
it, the Rule of their Faith.

CHAP. XI.
1. An Exception against this Argument, affirming Scripture and Reason jointly
to be the Rule of Faith. 2. This Novelty disproved and condemned.

AGainst this Argument some may Sect. 1. Except. 1.
have the confidence, it may be, to make this Exception, That Scripture is not
the only Rule of Faith. The Papists join unwritten Traditions with the
Scripture, and will have us take both together for the complete Rule of Faith.
This I shall not deal with, there having been so much said by our Divines about
it in the Controversies between us and the Church of Rome. But there is another
Generation of Men that join Human Reason with the Scripture, to make up the
Rule of Faith. Lambertus Velthusius, one of the Seniors of the Gallo-Belgick
Church at Utrech, is charged with this by Vander Li. t. adv. Wolzog. p. 114.
Weayen, who cites this among many other erroneous Positions, out of one of
that Authors Belgic Tracts, That Scripture and Reason are the Rule of Faith.
So then we have here a new unwritten Word found out to be part of the Canon. So
fertile of Monsters is this Novaturient Age. But, I hope, this Doctrine will
not be so easily received as it is boldly obtruded.

Hitherto Principles of Reason and Sect. 2. Sol.
Articles of Faith were wont to be contradistinguish'd: and though some things
knowable by Natural Light, are likewise propounded to our belief in Scripture,
yet such were never, that I know of, owned for Points of Faith, otherwise than
as they were attested in Scripture. And in all Logic that I have been
acquainted with, Arguments a Testimonio are put into one rank, and those that
are drawn a Natura rei are put into another; these latter properly belonging to
Science, the former to Faith. Our Understandings (says Medit. de usu and ab.
rat. in reb. The^l.
C. Streso, and after him Deuteronomy. Dub. li. 1. c. 2.
Dr. Tailor) apprehend things three ways; The first is (...), whereby it
receives first Principles. The second (...), whereby it draws Consequences from
those Principles. The third is (...), of such things as we assent to from
Testimony. And it is a known speech of St. Austin, Quod intelligimus, De util.
cred.
debemus rationi, quod credimus Autoritati: That we understand, we owe to
Reason; but that we believe, we owe to Authority. And we have hitherto taken it
to be essential to a Christians Faith, that in its Assent it rely upon the
Infallible Veracity of the Revealer, as the ratio formalis credendi.

Perhaps it will here be said, (for I Object.
cannot imagine what else can be said) That the Principles of Reason are the
Word of God, and by him written in our Minds; therefore our Assent to them is a
belief of Divine Testimony, as well as our Assent to what is written in the
Bible: and consequently they are part of the Rule of Faith.

What can be the meaning of this, Sol.
that these Principles are written in our Minds, I cannot understand any
further than this, that there is begotten in our Minds a clear perception and
firm persuasion of them. But the great Question will be, By what Act does God
write these in our Minds, or beget in us this perception and persuasion of
them? Surely, they will not say, that when God creates the Soul of Man, this
perception or persuasion of these Principles is concreated by him in and with
the Soul: for if so, how is it that during our Infant-state we are such
strangers to them, and do so continue, till we come gradually by observation
and experience to be acquainted with them? And when we come to discern them,
and to be persuaded of them, how come we to be assured that they are of God?
There must be some difference between the Testimony and the Thing testified.
The Principles of Reason are supposed to be the Res testata, the Thing
testified. But what is the Testimony, or the Actus Testificandi? My perception
or persuasion cannot be it: for if so, then whatsoever I perceive and am fully
persuaded of, I must believe to come from God: and what will that come to at
last? These Principles of Reason are not Complex Propositions formed by God in
our Minds, or suggested to us by a Divine Afflatus: this would make every Man
an Enthusiast. The best account I can give of them is, that they are such
General Truths, as have their foundation in the nature of things, and their
mutual habitudes and respects; which our Reason apprehending, does therein
discover the aforesaid Principles thence resulting. And because it is God
alone, who gives to all things their several Beings, and constitutes them in
such and such habitudes each to other, and has given us our Reason, whereby we
are enabled to discern them; therefore he is said to be the Author of those
Principles, which lie fundamentally in his Workmanship. And we do not take them
for Truthus upon the credit of any foregoing testimony that God gives to us of
them: but we assent to them propter evidentiam r^i, because our Reason sees
them perfectly agreeable to the nature of things; and thereby finding them to
be certainly true, thence it gathers that they are of God, from whom all Truth
comes. But now the method of Faith is widely different from this: Here we first
own the testimony of God speaking in the Scriptures, and thence we are
persuaded that what the Scripture speaks is true, and so we come to embrace the
many severals therein asserted, by yielding a particular assent to them as we
find them.

But, will some say, before we believe Object.
the Scriptures, we must be convinced by Reason that these Scriptures are of
God.

Very true; but the effect of such a (...).
conviction is not properly Faith, but Knowledge. And when I know by satisfying
Grounds of Reason, that the Scripture is indeed the Voice of God, then do I by
Faith assent to what that speaks as Gods testimony. And whereas there are some
Truths, which are knowable in some measure by Natural Light, and yet are
revealed likewise in the Scripture; it is commonly and truly said by our
Divines, that as they are received by Natural Light, and upon Rational Grounds,
so they are the Objects of Science: but as they are revealed in the Scripture,
so, and only so, they are the Objects of Faith: which (as the Apostle tells us)
is the evidence Heb. 11. (...).
of things not seen, that is, of things not discernable by Natural Light,
whether of Sense or Reason; or at least that are not considered as such, when
we receive them as Objects of Faith; which therefore is called the evidence of
them, because it discerns the truth and reality of them in the infallible
testimony of the Revealer.

Now besides what has been already said, it may further be proved that Reason
is not any part of the Rule of Faith. For

1. Were this granted, it would necessarily 1.
follow, that Scripture of it self is an imperfect Rule, and if so, it is no
Rule at all. That cannot be owned for a Rule that is not adequate and
commensurate to what is to be regulated by it. The known description of a Rule
given by Varinus, and so frequently quoted by our best Authors, has never,
that I know of, been questioned: (...). A Rule or Canon is an immutable Law,
and an unerring Measure, which at no hand will admit of addition or diminution.
This is one great Argument used by our Protestant Writers, to shut out Popish
Traditions from being any part of the Rule of Faith, because the Scripture is a
perfect and sufficient Rule of it self, and must be so, or else it cannot be a
Rule at all. Of which the Reader may see enough for his satisfaction in the
Learned Bishop of Down his Ductor Dubitantium, Lib. 2. Cap. 3. Rule 14. p. 359,
etc. And the Argument is every whit as good to exclude Reason as Tradition in
this case. And that the Scripture is a perfect discovery of the Mind of God,
(so far as is necessary for us to know it) I have proved before in my first
Argument.

2. The Principles of Reason (as I (...).
have formerly showed in the proof of my first Proposition) have no formal
existence any where but in the Minds or Writings of fallible Men, considering
them as separate from the Scriptures: for set the Bible aside, there is no
Infallible and Authentic Record of those Principles, to which we can have
recourse. And this utterly disables them for being so much as a partial Rule of
a Christians Faith.

3. Principles of Natural Reason, (let us suppose them never so fixed and 3.
infallible) are wholly aliene to matters of supernatural Revelation, which are
the proper Object of Faith. And to measure these by them, were as ridiculous as
to attempt by a Carpenters Rule to take the distance of the Heavens, or to
spread a Fowlers Net to catch the Winds. However therefore there is (as has
been already acknowledged and maintained) great use of Reason and its
Principles in subordination and instrumental subserviency to the knowledge of
Divine Matters, yet that it is in any degree to be owned as the Rule of our
Faith, must not, will not, cannot be allowed by any that are true to the
Christian Cause.

CHAP. XII.
An Exception of the Exercitator, grounded upon a distinction of the Scriptures
taken materially or formally, propounded, and the folly and fallacy of it
detected.

BUt here the Exercitator gives us a distinction, which he makes often Except.
2. Ph. Scr. Int. c. 13 par. 1. and (...). 16. par. 9.
use of, as being very fit for his turn, That the Scripture is taken either
materially, and so it signifies no more but the bare Words, Phrases and
Sentences of Scripture: or formally, and so it signifies the sense and meaning
of these Words and Sentences. Now, says he, when we say the Scripture is the
Rule of Faith, we do not mean the bare words, but the sense; and that is the
thing we inquire into by the help of Philosophy; and when we have thereby
obtained the sense of Scripture-Propositions, that sense we own for the Rule of
our Faith, and of deciding Controversies in Religion. But (adds he) when the
Reformed Doctors say, the Scripture is its own Interpreter, they can mean only
the Words and Sentences of Scripture without the sense: for it is the sense
that they are seeking for, and that cannot be the Rule to find out it self.

To this I answer: 1. The distinction Sol. 1.
of the Scripture considered materially and formally, or in respect of the
matter and form, is generally received: But was never, that I know of, taken in
the sense of this Author, but in a far different meaning; viz. The Scripture,
as to the matter, is the Word of God; and formally considered is the same Word
as written. But this Gentleman's Exposition of it serves his turn very well;
viz. That the Words and Phrases of Scripture are as rude matter, till the sense
(as the form) be given it by Philosophy, or Humane Reason.

But, 2. The distinction, as here used, 2.
is a miserable subterfuge, arguing some Wit, but no Honesty. For when we say,
the Scripture is the Rule of Faith, and it is the Rule of Interpretation to it
self; in both we mean neither the words, nor the sense separately, but
conjointly, For, 1. The Scriptures are no otherwise the Rule of our Faith, than
as they are the Revelation of the Mind of God to us. Now the Words or Sentences
separated from the true sense, (supposing they could be so separated) are not
the Mind of God: and the sense separated from the Words and Sentences, (if it
might be so separated) would be no Revelation: for we know not the Mind of God
but by the Words; and his Mind as clothed with these Words, or these Words as
exhibiting his Mind, so they are our Rule.

Again, 2. When we say the Scripture is a Rule of Interpretation to it self, we
mean that if the place under consideration be plain, it delivers its own sense
to the Reader that well minds the contexture and dependence; if it be dark, we
have recourse to some other plain Scripture, and by the evident sense of that,
wherein the Mind of God lies more clearly in the words, we find out his Mind in
that other, where it lay more darkly.

The fallacy of this Author in charging us to mean only the Words of Scripture,
when we say the Scripture is its own Interpreter, lies in this, he would make
the World believe that we mean it of one and the same Sentence of Scripture,
even where it is most obscure. Now, as himself premiseth, Phil. Ser. Int. c. 2.
par. 7.
that Interpretation supposes some obscurity in the thing to be Interpreted; so
he could not but know, that in the case of obscurity, we mean it of the
Scripture according to its different parts; that the Scripture where it is
plain is a Rule of Exposition to it self in those parts that are more
intricate, (which himself also acknowledges Ib. c. 11. par. 1.
to be our meaning elsewhere in his Book.) And yet we use no such incongruity
as he supposes, in saying the Scripture expounds it self, each part of
Scripture being Scripture; no more than in saying that the Civil or Municipal
Law expounds it self, when one part of the Law explains another.

CHAP. XIII.
1. An Answer to some other Objections against the Scripture being its own
Interpreter. e. g. That Protestants assert a necessity of the Spirits
Illumination. 2. What Correspondency has one part of Scripture with another?
etc. 3. Some difficult places of Scripture are not explained elsewhere. 4. Many
Rules of Interpreting Scripture are prescribed by Divines both Ancient and
Modern.

I Shall now consider what may be further Sect. 1.
Objected against my present Assertion, besides what I have already met with in
clearing my foregoing Arguments.

And first, the Exercitator Objects, Object. 1. Ph. Ser. Int C. 10. par. 2.
That the Divines of the Reformed Churches maintain a necessity of the Spirits
Internal Illumination for our right understanding of the Scripture: therefore
the Scripture is not a sufficient Interpreter of it self.

I answer; What the Spirits enlightening Sol.
is, and how far necessary, may be more seasonably discussed in another place,
and therefore I intend to speak something to it in an Appendix to this
Discourse. But at the present we are to consider, that the Spirit is said to
make known to us the Mind of God two ways: 1. Objectively, as it speaks to us
in the Scripture, which is of the Holy Spirits enditing. 2. Effectively, as it
acts in us to help our weak understandings. Now these two are widely different
one from the other. The former notes the Objective Evidence that is given us of
Gods Mind, which is by the Scripture: and this is enough to render the
Scripture a sufficient Rule of Interpretation to it self, whether the other
were necessary or no; because there is in the Scripture a sufficiency in the
nature of an Objective Light to discover the Will of God; the latter concerns
only the Subjective Light which the Spirit affords to our dark understandings,
that we may discern what is in the Scripture; the necessity whereof does not at
all impeach the sufficiency of the former; because that which makes this latter
necessary, is not any obscurity in the Object, but an indisposition in the
Subject or Faculty that is to apprehend it.

But it is further objected, What Sect. 2. Object. 2. Ph. Scr. Int. C. 11. par.
2.
correspondency has one part of Scripture with another? or what right or power
has one Penman of Scripture over the Writings of another, that the words of
the one should be Interpreted by the others? Thus argues the Exercitator.

To which I answer: 1. May we not Sol. 1.
with much more reason say, What correspondency has Philosophy with Scripture?
Have not the several parts of Scripture, all which were endited by one and the
same Infallible Spirit, more correspondency one with another, than any of them
can have with Philosophy, which is the immediate product of fallible Reason?

2. The Author may do well to consider 2.
what good correspondency there is between the several parts of his own Book,
and whether this Objection do not evidence him to be inconsistent with himself.
For in his third Chapter, Phil. Ser. Int. C. 3. par. 21.
when he would prove that the words in 1 Kings 3. 12. concerning the Wisdom of
Solomon, are to be understood by an Hebrew Idiotism, and mean no more than that
the Wisdom given to Solomon was very eminent, and above the ordinary rate; he
appeals to two other places that speak of the Piety of Hezekiah and Josiah, and
says, Hoc ita se habere, ex duobus aliis ejusdem Scriptoris locis non obscure
elucescit, etc. That it is so, appears plainly by two other places of the same
Writer, viz. 2 Kings 18. 5, 6. and C. 23. 25. Which he says, can no otherwise
be truly understood but in this sense, that their Piety was eminent and
extraordinary. It seems our Author was then in the mind that one part of
Scripture may have correspondency with another, and this so far as that the one
may expound the other. But now the case is altered. If it be replied in his
behalf, That these places by him quoted, were penned by one and the same
Writer, and therefore might well have correspondency each with other; but this
makes nothing for those who interpret one part of Scripture by some other that
was not written by the same Hand: I rejoin, That the first and second Book of
Kings were endited by the same Spirit, I grant, and shall make some use of it
in my third Answer to this Authors Objection: But that they were both written
by the same Hand, or (suppose they were) that the Writer intended by the latter
to explain what he had written in the former, is more than he, or any other for
him, can prove.

3. The Scriptures, though written 3.
by parts, and at several times, and by several persons, yet they all own God
for their Author, by whose Spirit they were endited; and they are all together
to be taken for his Counsel to Sinners. And then what injury or incongruity is
there in making use of what one has written more plainly, to unfold what was
more darkly written by another? When we compare the Evangelists together, to
explain what one says more briefly, by what another lays down more fully; we do
not in this so much inquire into the sense and meaning of the Evangelists, as
into the Mind of God whose Secretaries they were. The like may be said of the
Prophets: If the Prophets or Apostles spoke of their own heads, or wrote only a
signification of their own private Sentiments, there might be some color for
this Objection. But the Apostle tells us, That no Prophecy of Scripture is of
private Interpretation: 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
that is, This sense is given by Learned Camero, Rivet, Dr. Pearson on the
Creed, and I take it for the most genuine. P^. Ser. Int. C. 4. par. 5.
the Prophets in their Writings were not the Interpreters of their own Mind,
but of the Mind of God by whom they were sent, and by whose Spirit they were
acted; as it follows in the next Verse, For Prophecy came not in old time by
the will of man; but holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost: And thus much the Exercitator acknowledges, where he says, That God is
the Author of the Scriptures, and that he did always guide his Amanuenses to
write the Truth, giving them the assistance of his unerring Spirit; and that
whatsoever they wrote^ pure Truth, free from all mixture of F^^shood or Error.

But there is another Discourse prefixed Tractatu^ Theologico. Polit. cap. 7.
to a latter Edition of the so oft-mentioned Exercitation, (and thought by many
to come from the same Author) the Writer whereof sticks not to assert this
audacious Falsehood, That the Prophets in their Narkatives, and in all matters*
of Speculation, (that is, whatsoever was not matter of moral Duty) did disagree
among themselves; and ^onsequently that what is said by one, is not to be
explained by the words of another. Which (with other passages of like import)
does at once call in question the whole Truth, and consequently the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures. For if the P^^men of Scripture elash one against
another, in their Writings, either God was not the Author of wh^^ they wrote,
but themselves, or the God of Truth must be charged with Falsehood; for of two
di^ent Opinions both cannot be true. Whose design it is that the Author of that
Theologico-Political Tractat drives, except that of the great Enemy of Mankind,
I know not: But he sufficiently manifests a vile esteem of the Holy Scriptures,
and a desire to beget the like in others: For he takes very earnest pains, V.
Trast, cit. c. 9. 10.
with the utmost of his art and skill, to ^^ke up and exagitate their seeming
disagreements, as real contradictions, casting a great deal of scorn upon all
Expositors, as Fools or Madmen, that attempt to reconcile them. His discourse
in this and sundry other odious passages, which I ab^or to mention, does
apparently tend to promote the cause of the Antiscripturists; besides the help
(...) affords (which is not a little) to the Romish Interest. The Author indeed
would seem, by some Expressions here and there, to intimate his dislike of the
Pon^ifician Party. But we know it is consistent enough with the Politic
Principles of Men of that way, to speak much more than he has done, against
that very Cause that they are studiously projecting, under that Covert, to
advance.

But I return, from this Digression, to what I was about. If any thing in the
Laws of a Kingdom be difficult and perplex, and there be something in some
other Law of the same Kingdom, (though written or printed by other hands) that
speaks more clearly of that matter; what wrong is it to the Law, or the
Lawmakers, or Printer, if a Learned Council, comparing one with another,
expound that which is more dark in one part of the Laws, by that which is more
perspicuous in another, both proceeding from the same Authority, and both
obliging to the same persons? Judge alike in the present case. This Objection
therefore is of no force.

But it is further urged, That there Sect. 3. Object. 3. Ph. Scr. Int. c. 1
par. 7.
are some difficult places of Scripture, that are no where explained in any
other part; and some things that being but once spoken in Scripture, cannot be
explained by any parallel place. And here our ^^ercitator refers us for
instances, to his great Friend Stapleton.

For answer, 1. Whereas it is said, Sol. 1.
there are difficulties in some parts of Scripture, that are no where cleared;
how does any Man know this? Does it follow that there is no such thing because
we cannot find it? Do we think our selves of so piercing or capacious
understandings, that nothing in the Scripture that is intelligible, can escape
our discovery? Those who have acquainted themselves with Ancient and Modern
Expositors, do know that many difficulties which former Interpreters have in
vain struggled with, and some that they have wholly left untoucht, (either as
not apprehending them to be difficulties, or conceiving them insuperable) have
been made very clear and plain by some later Writers. Verily, God will have us
know, that the opening of his Mind does not depend only or chiefly upon the
pregnancy of Man's Wit, but upon his gracious assistance and blessing, which he
affords or withholds when and where himself sees fit.

Again, the Scriptures were penned not only for the past and present, but 2.
for all succeeding Ages of the Church to the end of the World: And as some
parts of them, which peculiarly concerned some Ages past, were perhaps better
understood in those Ages than they can be by us now (as certainly many things
were that belonged to the Jewish Economy) so I know not but we may rationally
suppose, that some other parts of Scripture, which to us seem unintelligible,
may have special reference to the Church in after-Ages, and that those whom
they so nearly concern, shall have more light afforded for the understanding of
them in their days, than we have in ours: As without doubt some Prophetic
Scriptures not yet accomplished will be made clear by the event, when they come
to be fulfilled.

If there be any difficulties in any one 3.
part of Scripture, which cannot be cleared from some other by the best inquiry
we can make, it will be a vain thing to attempt the finding of it out any other
way: but we must be, in such cases, content to be ignorant of their meaning.
Nor yet will those Scriptures be utterly useless or in vain to us, if from
their obscurity we can learn this needful Lesson, the more reverently to adore
the Majesty of the written Word, and more humbly to acknowledge our own
ignorance and weakness. And to this may be referred what is objected about the
(...), where the sense is not obvious.

Yet again it is objected; If the Scripture be its own sufficient Interpreter,
Sect. 4. Object. 4. Pb. Scr. Int. c. 11. par. 8.
what mean those many Rules that Divines give for the right understanding of
Scripture? If the Scripture it self be the only Rule, what need is there of all
these? Thus the Exercitator, who makes a particular enumeration of several
Rules that are given by St. Austin and others.

To this childish Cavil (which the Author brings in by the by) I answer;
Whatsoever Rules are given by Divines for the right Interpretation of
Scripture, (such as are sound and good) are only to direct the Reader how with
most ease and greatest certainty to fetch the sense of Scripture from the
Scripture it self. Those Rules therefore being but subordinate and ministerial,
do no way contradict or overthrow this which is the Supreme and Auto^ratorical.
Suppose a Master-workman having a Building to frame, employ some under him, who
are as yet raw and unskilful, till they have gotten some insight into the
Carpenters or Masons Art; when he shows them (as they must have a learning) how
to use the Square, or the Rule, or the Plumb-line; surely his direction that he
gives them does not at all argue the uselessness or insufficiency of those
Instruments for the purpose to which they are designed; but rather the
contrary: so is it in the present case; those inferior and subservient Rules
that are prescribed by any for the expounding of Scripture, are designed and
directed (if they be such as they should be) to teach Men how to make use of
the Supreme Rule, the Scripture it self, for the better finding out of the Mind
of God in it.

Having confirmed my Proposition, vindicated my Arguments for it, and answered
the Objections against it, it is time for me to draw to a Conclusion. As for
the Exercitator, with whom I have mostly dealt in this Controversy, when I
weigh his Arguments, I cannot but wonder at his confidence. But he who has no
better Weapons, must fight with a Bull-rush. And it is now become the mode of
Polemick Writers that have Prurient Wits, to sharpen their dull Arguments with
high confidence in themselves, and a proud contempt of their Antagonists: in
both which this Author excels; but it is such an excellency, for which no Wise
or sober Man will envy him.

THE Conclusion.
THE Author whom I have chiefly and designedly dealt with hitherto, having
engaged himself in a Contest with the whole World of Christian Writers,
especially with the Expositors of Scripture, and having, in his own
apprehension, won the day, comes in his Epilogue to make preparation for his
Triumph, bringing forth his Spoils, and telling us how greatly he has blessed
the World with his Exploits; and lest we should be ignorant of our Happiness
acquired by his Victorious Arms, he sets it out in six considerable Points.

1. He tells us, This new way of Interpretation being sure and infallible,
will, if it be taken, forthwith banish all Disputes about the sense of
Scriptures, and thereby restore Peace to the Christian World. But I wonder how
this should be effected by Philosophy, which is it self so full of Disputes,
and the Professors whereof are at such variance among themselves. Let them
first reconcile their own Differences, before they undertake so great an
Enterprise elsewhere.

2. It will be a great ease to the Interpreter; because whatever sense he can
make of any part of Scripture, if Philosophy allow it for a Truth, he may be
sure it is the sense of that Text; this way allowing a plurality of immediate
senses in the same Scripture, and where it is thus, it is easier (says he) to
find the true meaning, than where (according to the Protestants opinion) the
sense is but one. And yet sure, when we speak of inquiring after the sense of
Scripture, we mean the whole sense, not part of it only. And if many senses may
be more easily found out than one, then perhaps our Author may find it an
easier thing to gain a thousand Proselytes than one to his new way.

3. This will save Men the labor of searching Commentators; because in this
way they may, by their own industry, find out the Mind of God, without any help
from others. And so they may, according to his Principles, without ever looking
into the Bible at all.

4. By this way we may best find out all Corruptions, Depravations, and
Mutilations of the Original Text, whether Hebrew or Greek. And is it not pity
the Ancient Church did not think of this happy Expedient, that they might have
called a Council of Learned Philosophers (such as Porphyrie, Celsus, and
others) to draw them up a more correct Copy of the Bible?

5. and 6. By this we may know how to judge of all various Lections, which are
Genuine, which not; yea, by this we may discover the Errors of Translations
made out of depraved Copies, or Spurious Readings, though we have no skill at
all in the Original Tongues. Doubtless a singular Receipt, that will help a Man
to distinguish of Colors in the darkest Midnight as well as at Noonday. We
see what a rare Pampharmacon this AEsculapius has prescribed, (which he may
well call his Nostrum) that can work as great Wonders as the Headsman's Ax,
that infallibly cures all Diseases with one Blow. For that his grand design is
utterly to cashier the Scripture as useless and unprofitable, is plain enough
by sundry passages in his Book; but especially that in his Epilogue, which I
lightly touched at in the first part of my Discourse, Chap. 6. but deserves a
more severe Castigation. The Scripture with him is of no use to instruct us in
any thing we know not, nor yet to confirm us in what we know. All the use he
allows it is only this, that by reading therein we may be occasioned and
excited to consider of the things there treated of, and examine the truth of
them by Philosophy: And as much as this might be said of the Jews Talmud, or
the Turks Alcoran. Was there ever any who called himself a Christian, since the
Christian Name was heard of, that has manifested a more vile esteem of Gods
Written Word, or a more bold contempt of the whole Christian Doctrine? Has God
in mercy left us this only Authentic Record of his Mind to conduct us in our
way to Blessedness? and is this all it is good for? It seems by this Man's
account all the Knowledge that we have any use for, is in us already by Natures
Light, and whatsoever is delivered in Scripture, must be tried by that. What
could a blind Pagan have said more to the Scriptures dishonor?

As it is past all doubt that the Lord of Heaven and Earth, in whom we live,
and move, and are, ought to be worshipped and served by his Rational Creatures;
so me thinks it should be as unquestionable that he cannot be served rightly
and acceptably, but by such a Worship as is according to the appointment of his
own Will. The meanest Man living, that has any depending on him, looks they
should serve him according to his Mind, and not according to their own
arbitrary choice. And shall we think the Great Sovereign of the World will be
pleased with a Worship of Men's own ^^aming, without any order or direction from
him? Now by which way or means could we know what that Worship is which God
approves, if we were in this inpsed state, left to the mere conduct of Natural
Light, and had nor Divine Revelation to inform and guide us? What pi^ful Work
did the ^st and learned of the. Heathen make about this? (...) what (...) did
they admit into their Religious Worship? as I have already (...) in the first
part of my Discourse.

Besides, there are in Scripture many things Historical^ and many Prophetical:
Can these (...) known by Natural Light? or can we judge whether these be true
or no by the help of Philosophy? Moses gives us the H^story of the Creation,
(...) the general Deluge, of the Destruction of Sodom, of Isreal's Deliverance
out of Egypt by strange Wonders; and the bringing of them (after forty years
wandering) into the Promised Land, and their Establishment there for some years,
till for their Idolatry, and other sins they were removed, is recorded by other
sacred Writers: besides many other remarkable Histories of more personal
concernment. Now if we must not take these for truth from the testimony of
Scripture, which way shall we be satisfied? Reason indeed may convince us that
these things are not impossible: But whether they were really so or so done as
is reported, all the Principles of Reason, all the Maxims of Philosophy will
never resolve us. The like may be said of the many Prophesies concerning
Christ, and the after-state of the Church; and about the four great Monarchies
that were successively to arise, with their progress and period: If these and
such like be examined by Philosophy, what can it say to them? Must these be all
rejected? So it seems by this Author's Discourse: for he has no kindness for
any thing in Scripture, but what may mind us of what we know naturally, and may
by the Principles of Reason be examined and determined. And then what shall we
say to the great Doctrine of Man's Salvation by Christ, which is the grand
Subject and principal Scope the of Scriptures? Was there ever any syllable of
this made known to the World otherwise than by Revelation? There is indeed a
Natural Theology; but I could never yet see ground to be persuaded that there
is a Natural Christianity. The knowledge of God as our Creator and Preserver,
is in some measure (but very imperfectly) attainable by Natural Light: But the
knowledge of Christ as the Redeemer of Sinners, reconciling them to God, and
delivering them from the power of Satan, had never been attained, had there not
been something above Nature to discover it. If any think otherwise, let them
tell me how it comes about that in those Countries where the Doctrine of the
Scriptures was never published, there is not the least print or footstep of
this great Mystery to be found. But certainly he that talks of the Scriptures
after the rate of this Author, cannot be thought to apprehend himself to stand
in any need of a Redeemer; or to have any better esteem of the Gospel, than
that Triple-Crowned Gentleman at Rome Leo 10.
is said to have manifested long since in his discourse with Cardinal Bembus.

For ought I see, this Man owns nothing in the Scripture but what may be
reduced to three Heads; 1. The Being of God, and his Attributes; 2. The
Immortality of the Soul, and consequently Man's future state in another World;
and, 3. The Rules or Laws of Moral Duty: because of these we have some notice
by Natural Light. But how miserably defective is that Light even in these? So
that here also we stand in need of a further Guide. Some knowledge the Heathens
had of God, and of Man's future state: but, alas, what does all that they have
written hereabout come to, but some faint guesses, and probable conjectures?
And though they have in their Ethics many excellent things, and of great use;
yet they fall extreme short in sundry particulars of very weighty concernment,
whereof we should have been utterly ignorant, if the Holy Scriptures had not
afforded us a more clear and perfect Rule of practice. And it has been
observed by some, that those Gentile Philosophers, who flourished after the
general promulgation of the Gospel, though they continued still in their old
Gentilism, yet they wrote much more clearly and sublimely of the Nature of God,
and of Man's Duty here, and his Eternal state hereafter, than those who were
before them. Whether the cause of this were the converse they might have with
Christians and their Writings, or whether that plentiful effusion of the Spirit
that was vouchsafed in those times might in some degree (as to common
enlightenings) extend it self beyond the Churches Pale, I will not determine.
But sure something there was beyond mere Natural Light, that made them, in
their Notions of God and Religion, so much (...) of their Predecessors.

I shall shut up all with this hearty and serious Wish, That all who call upon
God by Jesus Christ, would highly honor and esteem the Holy Scriptures, making
them their study and delight in order to the bettering of their Hearts, and
manifesting the power and purity of this Word by a sober, righteous, and godly
Conversation: which would more effectually vindicate this Blessed Book from the
Scorns and Reproaches of Atheists and Antiscripturists than all Disputes.

AN APPENDIX Concerning Internal Illumination, And other Operations of the
Spirit upon the Soul of Man.

Vindicating the Doctrine of the Protestants and the Practice of all Serious
Christians from the Charge of Enthusiasm, and other Unjust Criminations.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for Robert Boulter, at the Turks Head
in Cornhill, over against the Royal Exchange. 1677.

A brief Account of the Contents of the following Appendix.
CHAP. I. THe Protestants Doctrine concerning the Spirits Illumination,
explained and defended. CHAP. II. The Nature of Distresses of Conscience and
Spiritual Joys opened, and the reality of them proved. CHAP. III. True Zeal in
the Exercises of Religion justified.
An Appendix concerning Internal Illumination, and other Operations of the
Spirit upon the Soul of Man, etc.
CHAP. I.
1. What our Protestant Divines mean by that Illumination of the Spirit, which
they assert as necessary to the understanding of the Scriptures: and the
Exercitators censure of it as Enthusiasm, approved by Wolzogen. 2. The Falsehood
of that Calumny discovered. 3. Wolzogen' s disingenuity and inconstancy. 4. The
necessity of the aforesaid Illumination proved. 5. In what sense it is
supernatural. 6. Some of the Exercitators Cavils answered. 7. In what sense
this Illumination is immediate.

IN the foregoing Papers (designed Sect. 1.
to clear and vindicate the Protestant Doctrine concerning the Supreme Bule of
Interpreting Seripture) I have had occasion frequently to deal with the Belgic
Exercitator, and to take notice of what he has said that seems to be of any
moment, so far as concerns that point. But whereas he is pleased in the
procedure of his Discourse to step out of his way, and deridingly to oppose the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches about the Spirits assistance in the
Interpretation of Scripture, as savouring of Enthusiasm; I then waved meddling
with that part of his Book; thinking it more expedient to say something to it
in an Appendix by it self, this being a Question altogether distinct from that
other of the Rule of Interpretation.

In the Fourteenth Chapter of his oft-mentioned Exercitation, he quotes several
of our Protestant Authors of great Name and Worth, giving in the words of some
of them, and referring us for others to the cited places. The drift of their
several Discourses about this point seems to be, that there needs an effectual
operation of the Holy Spirit, to enlighten Men's understandings, and cause them
rightly to apprehend, and readily to approve the Mind of God in Scripture. That
their meaning may be more clearly propounded, we must distinguish of a twofold
understanding of Scripture. There is a Natural and merely Grammatical
perception of the truth of Scripture-Propositions, which a Man, destitute of
the Spirit of Grace, may attain by common assistance in the use of ordinary
means. And there is a Spiritual apprehension of the things themselves contained
in those Propositions, (which includes in it a hearty believing and embracing
them) that is not attained without the sanctifying work of the Spirit, renewing
the mind by enduing it with an heavenly, supernatural Light. This I find thus
expressed and illustrated by the late Reverend Bishop of Norwich: Natural Men,
says he, have their Principles Treat. of the Sinfulness of Sin, p. 119.
vitiated, their Faculties bound, that they cannot understand spiritual things,
till God have as it were implanted a new understanding in them, framed the
heart to attend, and set it at liberty to see the Glory of God with open face.
Though the Veil do not keep out Grammatical Construction, yet it blinds the
Heart against the spiritual Light and Beauty of the Word. We see even in common
Sciences, where the Conclusions are suitable to our innate and implanted
Notions, yet he that can distinctly construe and make Grammar of a Principle in
Euclide, may be ignorant of the Mathematical sense and use of it: Much more may
a Man in Divine Truths be spiritually ignorant even where in some respect he
may be said to know. For the Scriptures pronounce Men ignorant of those things
which they see and know. In Divine Doctrine Obedience is the Ground of
Knowledge, and Holiness the best Qualification to understand the Scriptures. To
this Spiritual Understanding there is need of the aforesaid Supernatural Light.
And this is that which (as far as I can understand) our Divines mean, when they
assert the necessity of the Spirits Illumination. Thus speaks the Church of
England, 2 Homily of the Scripture.
The Revelation of the Holy Ghost inspireth the true meaning of the Scripture
into us: In truth we cannot without it, attain true saving knowledge. Yea, of
this mind was Erasmus (no Enthusiast) who thus speaks; De rat. conc. li. 1.
Errat vehementer, qui credit se consequi posse veram Canonicarum Scripturarum
intelligentiam, nisi afflatus eo Spiritu quo proditae sunt.
He erreth vehemently, who believes he can ever attain to the true
understanding of the Canonical Scriptures, unless he be inspired by the same
Spirit that endited them. And again; Ib. li. 2.
They have the Book of Scripture, but not the Scripture, that want the Spirit;
without which the Scripture is not understood. And M. Luther Luther on Genesis 47.
cited by Gerard in Exeg loc. com. de S. Script. c. 15. par. 336.
quoting a Speech of Aben-Ezra, Sine supra and infra, (i. e. without Points and
Accents) the Scripture cannot be understood; adds a third, sine intra, without
somewhat within, viz. the Light of the Holy Spirit.

Now let us hear the Judgment of the Exercitator, and his pretended Answerer
Wolzogen about this: As for the former; If, says he, the meaning of Ph. Scr.
Int. c. 14. par. 1.
these Divines were this, that no sense of Scripture, by what way or method
soever found out, can be fully certain to any, unless by the Natural Light of
our understanding we can clearly and distinctly perceive it, and be fully
persuaded of its truth, and that this clear perception, and the sense a Man
has of it, be that inward persuasion and testimony of the Spirit which they
intend; this will be granted them: But if they mean not the Natural Light of
Man's understanding, or what is built upon that, but a Supernatural Light, above
and beyond Man's Natural Reason, not included in the Mind, or acquired by Ib.
par. 3.
it, but infused and inspired from above; this, says he, we disclaim and
condemn for Enthusiasm. This is the sum of the censure that he passes upon
this Doctrine. And Lud. Wolzogen, who pretends to take up the Bucklers against
him in defense of the Protestant Cause, in stead of vindicating the forecited
Authors and their Doctrine, joins with the Exercitator in the calumny; as
appears undeniably by his own words; for thus he speaks; Because Lib. de Sc^.
Int. p. 125, 126.
the Holy Spirit does indeed still exert some power in the minds of Men,
therefore some have believed that he opens the sense of the Scriptures, and
interprets them to the Faithful. Which opinion the Exercitator does justly
decry, and determine that it contains mere Enthusiasm. Where he expressly
approves and applauds what the Exercitator had said against the Doctors of the
Reformed Churches, charging them with Enthusiasm for maintaining a necessity of
a Supernatural Light for a saving perception of the Mind of God in Scripture.
And himself does so frequently strike upon this string in several places of his
Book, that he seems to design the blemishing and defaming of our most eminent
Protestant Writers, and the Doctrine which they have asserted against Papists
and Pelagians.

These Men cannot be ignorant, that Sect. 2.
the Divines whom they thus impeach, have all along, in answer to the like
imputation from Popish and Socinian Authors, expressly and vehemently disclaimed
all compliance with Enthusiasts, and that some of them have written learnedly
and smartly against that sort of Men. They utterly disavow their expecting any
such Illumination, as was given to the Prophets and Apostles; and do plainly
deliver their minds, that what they assert, does not consist in discovering any
new Doctrine unreveal'd in Scripture, but in qualifying and disposing the mind
for a right understanding and receiving that which the Scripture propounds: For
they suppose (what the Scripture plainly affirms, and what none ever denied but
Pelagius and his followers) that the mind of Man by the Fall is blind in the
things of God, that it cannot rightly and sufficiently, unto salvation, discern
the things of the Spirit, when presented to it, unless that inward blindness be
removed: That the Scripture propounds to us the Truths we are to receive; but
the Spirit disposes us to receive them; which the Reverend Bishop of Chester
thus expresses: Dr. Pearson on the Creed, p. 327.
The same Spirit which reveals the Object of Faith generally to the Universal
Church, (viz. by the H. Scripture, which was given by the motion and operation
of the Spirit of God, as he had said a few lines before) does also illuminate
the understanding of such as believe, that they may receive the Truth: For
Faith is the Gift of God, not only in the Object, but also in the Act. And a
little after, concluding his Discourse on this Head, he says; Thus we affirm
not only the Ib. p. 328.
Revelation of the Will of God, but also the Illumination of the Soul of Man,
to be part of the Office of the Holy Spirit of God, against the old and new
Pelagians. That Subjective Light whereby the mind of Man is enabled to see
Divine Truths, this all sound Protestants own to come from the Spirit of God,
immediately irradiating the mind, and curing that spiritual darkness that
possesses it, whereby it is indisposed for understanding spiritual things in a
spiritual manner: but all the Objective Light or evidence that we have of the
Mind of God, they acknowledge to lie in the Scripture it self. And therefore
our Learned Whitaker, in his Contest with the Romish Doctors, makes this clear
and candid profession in the name of all the Protestants: Internas Persuasiones
Whitak. Op. in fol. Tom. 2.
sine externo Verbo tanquam Satanae ludibria cavemus. Ex Scripturis Sapimus,
cum Scripturis Sentimus, propter Scripturas Credimus. We shun Internal
Persuasions without the External Word, as the Delusions of Satan. We fetch our
Wisdom from the Scriptures, we regulate our Sentiments by the Scriptures, we
build our Faith upon the Scriptures.

But Wolzogen, as he deals most disingenuously with our Protestant Divines
Sect. 3.
in reporting their Doctrine, inserting somewhat of his own that quite changes
its meaning, and so rendering it more obnoxious to censure; so he is very
variable and uncertain in delivering his own mind. And yet in the winding up
says as much as all that comes to, which he, together with the Exercitator,
calls Enthusiasm. For he tells us, That the Spirit corrects that Lud. Wolzog.
de Script. In^. p. 64, 65.
corruption of the mind which hinders us from discerning the sense of
Scripture. -- And, -- That he exerts his power about P. 253.
the constitution of our minds, (which he had acknowledged before to be covered
P. 13.
with the darkness of a natural ignorance) by enlightening them. But then he
says, This is not by putting any new light into our minds, for all that shines
in the Scripture. Where he strangely confounds the Objective and Subjective
Light, as if they were all one. Sure, it is not enough for a Man's seeing of
visible Objects, that there be an External Light in the Air, but there must be
an Internal Light in the Eye; and if this be lost, (as it is in the blind) it
must be restored, or the Man will never see, though there were never so much
Light about him. Yet after all, the aforesaid Author tells us elsewhere, That
the Spirit of God so powerfully and efficaciously Censura censurae, 144.
affects our minds by enlightening, exciting, moving, leading them, that the
darkness of our natural ignorance being dissipated, we may savingly perceive
the Divine Objects presented to us in the Scripture. And again, -- he says, Ib.
p. 266.
The Eye of the mind being vitiated, the Holy Spirit restores its sight. And
yet more, I grant, says he, that in this business the Spirit of God imprints a
new Ib. p. 280.
light upon our minds, if by this be meant that he gives us as it were a new
faculty of receiving that Light that shines in the Scripture, not any new
Light, (i. e. not any new Objective Light) distinct from the Scriptures. Now
truly this (for any thing I can see) is that very Doctrine of our Reformed
Divines, which the Exercitator had so boldly charged with Enthusiasm, and that
with this Authors approbation.

But I perceive there are some Men, Sect. 4.
(whereof the Exercitator is one) who make account that all the darkness Men
are in, even as to matters Spiritual, is only a want of such a Light as shall
discover the Object, without curing the Faculty. Thus Schlichtingius writing
against Meisuerus in defense of Socinus, says, Homo intellectu praeditus in
divinis mysteriis ita caecus est, quemadmodum is qui oculos quidem habet, sed
in tenebris sedet: amove tenebras, and lumen affer, videbit. Oculi hominum sunt
intellectus, lux est Christi doctrina. Man endued with understanding is no
otherwise blind in Divine Mysteries, than as he who has eyes, but sits in the
dark: remove the darkness, and bring him a light, and he will see. The eyes of
a man are his understanding, the light is Christ's doctrine. To this purpose
speaks the Author of a late Pamphlet, that when once the mystery Treatise of
Hum. Reason, p. 58.
of Christ Jesus was revealed, even Humane Reason was able to behold and
confess it; not that Grace had altered the eyesight of Reason, but that it had
drawn the Object nearer to it. But that defect of the Mind of Man which the
Scripture speaks of, is evidently an internal darkness; not only a darkness
about him, but a darkness within him; which the greatest external light,
without something else, will never redress; no more than the bringing of a
light into a dark room, can make a blind Man see. And if it were not thus, I
see no reason why Man should be counted any more blind or ignorant in reference
to matters of Heaven and Eternity, than in reference to Arts and Sciences, and
common Trades, which he is wholly at a loss in, till the Principles of them be
clearly and distinctly propounded to him. But lamentable experience makes it
abundantly manifest, that Men of quick understanding and greatest proficiency
in these matters, yet remain as blind as Beetles in Divine Mysteries,
notwithstanding all outward means of Instruction. The Apostle Paul was trained
up in the Doctrine of the Law at the feet of Gamaliel, and very strict he was
in the righteousness of the Law, according to the understanding that he had of
it. And yet being destitute of the Spirit of Grace, he tells us, that he was
all that while without the Law; because he was destitute of the true spiritual
Romans 7. 9.
knowledge of it. That Disciplinary knowledge that he had from his Teachers,
was not sufficient, because he wanted the inward light of the Spirit to cure
his blindness, and remove his prejudices. This the Apostle John calls, Giving
us an understanding that 1 Jo. 5. 20.
we may know him that is true. And this was promised of old, when the Lord says
by his Prophet, I will put my Law Jer. 31. 33
into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; which, besides an
external Revelation, implies necessarily an internal Illumination. Most true it
is, that as the light of the body is the eye, so the light of the Soul is
Reason: but if (as our Savior says) this light which is in us be darkness, how
great is that Mat. 6. 23.
darkness? And that it is so with this internal eye, as to matters Heavenly,
till the Spirit of Grace enlighten it, is Ephesians. 5. 8.
evident by Scripture and all experience.

But as far as I can understand, there Sect. 5.
are two things in the present point that are especially quarreled at: viz.
That the Spirits enlightening of our minds is affirmed to be Supernatural, and
to be Immediate. I shall say something to them both.

First, Some are angry at our Divines for maintaining such a thing as
Supernatural Illumination. The Ph. Scr. Int. c, 5. par. 6. etc. 14. par. 3.
Exercitator rejects all Supernatural Light as a Figment. And De usu ration. in
Theol. p. 8, 9, 10.
Velthusius (for whose Orthodoxy Wolzogen's credit lies at stake In Epist. ad
Academiae Franckeranae Senatum, Anno 1667.
) denies the distinction of Natural and Supernatural Light, and affirms
peremptorily, that our knowledge of whatsoever Object, whether natural or
revealed, is attained by one and the same Internal Light, and that with him is
no other than the natural light of reason. Now if his meaning were no more but
this, that whatsoever Objects are presented to us, Natural or Supernatural,
they are all perceived by the same natural faculty of Reason or Understanding;
I know no Man so absurd as to deny it. But if he means (as he must if he mean
any thing) that our Reason or Understanding apprehends all Objects of what kind
soever, by no other inward light but what is connatural to it, needing no
supernatural light to help it; he must pardon us, if we prefer the Authority of
Scripture, and the Judgment of the Catholic Church before his Novel Conceits.
Surely, when David prayed for the opening of Ps. 119. 1^
his eyes to see the wonders of God's Law, and when St. Paul prayed that the
Ephesians might have the eyes of Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.
their minds enlightened, they did not conceive that by the Spirits
enlightening no more was meant than the natural light of Man's Reason: for they
knew, that themselves, and those they prayed for, had that already, as they
were Rational Creatures; and therefore there was no more need to pray for that,
than to pray that God would make them Men.

But for the further clearing of this, the word Supernatural may have respect
either, 1. to Man's nature as finite, and so far innocently imperfect; or, 2. to
Man's nature depraved, and so sinfully defective. If we consider Man in his
first state, though his actual knowledge was short of what by further
experience he might have attained; and at the best, had its bounds from the
finiteness of his being; yet I doubt not, but he had sufficient light
connatural to his understanding for the perception of the highest Mysteries,
whenever they should have been propounded to him with clear Objective
evidence. But it is not so with Man fallen. The light of Man's natural
understanding is now so weak and dim, that there needs a new supervenient
light, raising and quickening the mind to a greater perspicacity than lapsed
Nature has, or can of it self attain to for the right understanding of
spiritual things, how plainly soever propounded. And in this sense we own and
assert the saving light of the Spirit to be supernatural, in that it elevates
the understanding to such a power or ability of knowing heavenly Mysteries, as
Nature in its ^apsed state has not of it self, nor can recover by its own
greatest industry without the special Grace of God Dicimus habere singulos
sideles supernaturale ^umen, quod per verbi ministerium Spiritus illorum
mentibus infundit; in quo lumine ips^ judicant, and propriae, mentis oculis
percipiunt dogmata illa, quibus assentiuntur actu Fidei Catholicae, esse
divina. Davenantius de Judice and norma controv. cap. 30.
. It is an acknowledged truth, that every thing is received according to the
capacity and fitness of the Recipient. To a right understanding of any thing,
there is required a suitableness between the Faculty and the Object. The eye
cannot perceive smells, nor the ear hear colors. Nor can any sensitive power
reach to the apprehension of things purely intellectual: so neither can the
mind of a mere natural Man that is darkened and depraved by sin, (while it so
remains) duly apprehend matters spiritual and heavenly. It is the Observation
of a late Author, that the Mr. Gla^vil in his Philosophia Pia, P. 45.
best and most effectual remedy for the through curing of our Intellectual
diseases, is that which alters the Crasis and disposition of the mind; because
(as he very well argues) it is suitableness to that, which makes the way to Men's
Judgments, and settles them in their persuasion: there being few (as he further
adds) that hold their Opinions by Arguments and dry reasonings; but by
congruity to the understanding, and consequently by relish in the affections.
Now as sound Philosophy does (according to the aforesaid Author) go far for the
cure of Men's mistakes, by giving their minds another tincture; to wit, in such
things as lie within the sphere of Nature; so where this comes short, (as in
things of supernatural Revelation it certainly does) there is need of
supernatural aid. This Mr. Baxter has very well expressed; I think, says he,
that in the very hearing Animadversions on the Lord Herberts Book De Veritate,
P. 135, etc.
or reading, Gods Spirit often so concurreth, as that the Will it self shall be
touched with an internal gust or savor of the goodness contained in the
Doctrine, and at the same time the understanding with an internal irradiation,
which breeds such a sudden apprehension of the verity of it, as Nature gives
Men of Natural Principles. And I am persuaded that this increased by more
experience and love Modus Sciendi in dogmatibus fidei est per inspirationem,
per testimonium Spiritus, and per modum gustus; ut verissime Halen^is, Part. 1.
q. 1. art. 2. Sic Daven. de Judice and norma controv. c. 30. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
and inward gusts, does hold most Christians faster to Christ than naked
reasoning could do: And were it not for this, unlearned, ignorant persons were
still in danger of Apostasy by every subtle Caviller that assaults them. And
I believe that all true Christians have this kind of internal knowledge from
the suitableness of the truth and goodness of the Gospel to their new quickened
illuminated sanctified Souls. The Apostle tells us, God who commanded the light
to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. Where he manifestly
compares the great Work of God in enlightening the dark heart of Man with
spiritual knowledge, to the first forming of Light, which was Genesis 1. 2. 3
the Act of a Creating Power, when Darkness covered the face of the Deep. Let
the greatest External or Objective Light be afforded, if there be not likewise,
in order to the reception of that, a Subjective Light infused, it will prove,
as we find in Joh. 1. 5. The Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehended it not.

Two passages in the Exercitator I Sect. 6. Ph. Scr. Int. c. 5. par. 6. Object.
1.
shall here take notice of. The one is, where he says, That the opinion of our
Divines concerning this Supernatural Light, seems to him to have had its
Original from the received Axiom of the Aristotelick Philosophers, That nothing
is in the Understanding that has not been first in the sense. Which, says he,
the Divines receiving for an undoubted truth, did never call off their minds
from their senses; and finding the knowledge drawn from thence to be very lame
and imperfect, and next to nothing, they judged all rational knowledge to be no
better: yet happening by chance sometimes to make use of their mere
understanding in the perception of some things, and thereby attaining some true
and solid knowledge, which they found to be of a far other nature than that
which they used to fetch from the senses, therefore they took this latter kind
of knowledge to be something Divine and Supernatural.

To this I answer, 1. By what Power or Authority does this confident Gentleman
Sol. 1.
break Windows into the breasts of others, and take upon him to know the secret
thoughts and inward conceptions of their minds? Did they ever tell him, that
this was their apprehension of things? or that their Doctrine of Supernatural
Light was built upon the Authority of Aristotle, or deduced from any of his
Axioms? Or does his New Philosophy furnish him with skill sufficient to search
the hearts of Men touching their particular Sentiments, as he pretends it does
to show him the mind of God in Scripture-Revelations? I think it furnishes him
for both alike: But I wish it had taught him better to know himself.

2. Neither were Aristotle nor his Followers such Dolts or Blockheads in
maintaining the forementioned Axiom, as to take it in that absurd meaning, that
nothing could be received into the Understanding, but what is the Object of
Sense: For they clearly maintain the knowledge of those things that fall not
under sense; as of God, and Angels, and of Universals that are abstracted from
sense. But that all our knowledge of things without us, comes in by the Senses,
especially by those two that are not unfitly called the Senses of Discipline,
Sight and Hearing, is, I think, evident enough by all Experience, besides what
we find in Scripture concerning the knowledge we have of God; which is either
Natural, or by Revelation. Now as for the former, the Apostle sure was not
deceived by Aristotle's Axiom, when he tells us, That the invisible things of
God from Romans 1. 20
the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead. And for the knowledge of
things revealed, we are taught by the same Apostle, that Faith comes by Romans
10. 17.
hearing. And our Savior's most usual method of Preaching by Parables, may
show us how requisite it is for Man in this state to have his understanding
informed even in things Spiritual and Heavenly, by the help of sense and
sensible Objects.

The other passage is that where he says, That this Supernatural Light is
Object. 2. Ph. Scr. Int. c. 14. par. 3.
a thing unintelligible, he knows not what to make of it, nor how to conceive
of it: Is it (says he) something ordinary, or is it extraordinary?

To his Demand I answer, It is beyond the reach of corrupted and depraved Sol.
1.
Nature, and so it is extraordinary: but it is the inseparable privilege of
renewed Nature, and so far it is ordinary, for it is communicated to all who
partake in the saving Grace of Christ.

But, 2. Whereas this Author says, 2.
He knows not what this enlightening of the Spirit is, I easily believe him,
considering what our Savior says of the Spirit of Truth, which he promised to
his Disciples; That the World could Jo. 14. 17.
not receive him, because it sees him not, neither receives him. And it is no
wonder for Men to speak slightingly or contemptuously of the things they know
not: Upon which very account many excellent Truths plainly revealed in the
Gospel, are, by audacious Wits, exploded and derided as unintelligible
Mysteries.

Yet, 3. Me thinks Men's Reason 3.
might tell them, (if it were not woefully blinded by pride, prejudice, or
passion) that the unaccountableness of the nature of a thing, or of the manner
how it is, can be no sufficient Argument against its existence. The most
perspicacious Inquirers into the Secrets of Nature, do acknowledge themselves
convinced of the certain existence of many things, the nature whereof, and the
manner of their production, they are not able to conceive, much less to
discover. Thou know not (says Solomon) what is the way of the Spirit,
Eccles. 11. 5.
nor how the Bones do grow in the Womb of her that is with Child. It is beyond
the ken of Man's understanding infallibly to know, or demonstratively to prove,
1. The way of the Spirit or Soul, whether it be produced by Creation, or
Traduction, or what other way. And, 2. How the Body is formed in the Womb. I
know some learned Men have gone far in their Discoveries, but the ablest of
them have been put to a stop, meeting with some knots which they could not
untie. I might ask these Curious Questionists, How they can solve the many
Doubts that may be raised about the Species of sensible Objects, and about the
Phantasms in the Mind; or give us a satisfying account, whence they come, how
they are framed, and where it is that they are first received? Or, I might
demand of them, Which way the Soul and Body are united to each other, and how
they come to act one upon another, with a thousand more difficulties that
occur, where the (...) is unsearchable, though the (...) be undeniable. How
much more may this be affirmed of things purely revealed, the sublimity whereof
so vastly exceeds the former?

Secondly, Another thing these Men Sect. 7.
dislike is, That the Spirits enlightening of the Mind is said to be Immediate.

1. Now if the word Immediate be 1.
taken as it is sometimes explained, for such as supersedes Man's use of God's
appointed means, as if he were to expect some internal voice or impulse to
reveal to him the Mind of God; we disclaim all Immediate Actings of the Spirit
in this sense. But if Immediate be taken (as it may very properly) for such an
operation of the Holy Spirit as does Immediate attingere mentem; that by it
self, without the interposition of any second cause, reaches the mind of Man;
so we maintain, that there is no effectual operation of the Spirit of God upon
the Soul of Man, but what is in this sense Immediate. For what created Agent is
there to come between the Spirit of God and the Soul of Man? or that can by its
own efficiency come at the Soul of Man to work upon it? This nothing can do but
an Infinite Spirit, If any will say, That there is something else comes between
the Spirit of God and the Soul of Man, in this business, let them assign what
it is. Is it the Scripture it self? That can act but Objectively; nor can it do
that, further than it is understood and believed. That therefore which works
upon the Mind by a proper efficiency to redress the indisposition of the
Faculty, and to enable it to know and believe, must be something else; and that
can be no less than the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, which the Apostle
prays for in behalf Ephesians. 1.
of his Ephesians.

I further add this, that an Immediate (...).
Work of the Spirit is defensible also in another sense, viz. as it is opposed
to a necessity of outward means on the Spirits part. For as it is in the
outward and visible Administrations of Providence, God has tied us to the use
of means for our own preservation and subsistence, yet he has not tied up
himself to means, so but that he can, and sometimes does, step out of his
ordinary way, and work for us more immediately, where means are wanting, or
whenever he thinks fit to act without them: So may it be said in this case,
(the invisible Dispensations of Grace) it is our duty to use the means afforded
us for our information in the things of God; and it were bold presumption for
any Man to expect the Spirits help in the neglect of those means. But God has
no where told us, that I know, that he has bound up himself from communicating
his Light and Grace in a way extraordinary without means, either where the
means are denied, or whenever he is pleased to wave their use. And therefore
that distinction given by De Scr. Int. p. 58. etc.
Lud. Wolzogen of the Spirits power, into Soluta and Ligata, will not, without
some limitation, be received by considerate men.

CHAP. II.
1. Wolzogen' s bitter Invective against the Pastors of the Reformed Churches.
2. The Nature of Distresses of Conscience, and Spiritual Desertions opened, and
the reality of them proved. 3. Of Spiritual Joys from the sense of Gods love;
the reality of them also asserted. 4. A Conjecture at the Original of that
conceit that resolves the aforesaid different apprehensions and impressions
into the different temper of the Body.

BEfore I shut up my Discourse, I Sect. 1.
cannot let pass, without some Animadversion, what Lud. Wolzogen has written
in the latter part of his second Book, De Scripturarum Interpret: where he
thinks it not enough to have owned and applauded the Exercitators profane scoff
at the aforesaid Doctrine of the Reformed Churches about the Spirits
enlightening, as a piece of Enthusiasm, Pb. Scr. Int. c. 14. par. 3.
the effect of a deluded fancy, attributing that to the Spirit of God that is
the natural effect of the mind, or the apprehension of some imaginary good. But
(as if he were glad of such an occasion) he breaks forth into a most bitter
Invective against the Doctors and Professors of the Reformed Religion, (for
that his aim is at them, is evident by the whole Series of his Discourse,
notwithstanding all his palliations) for owning and De Script. Interpr. p. 257,
etc.
maintaining any such supernatural and immediate Operations of the Spirit; and
daringly ascribes all to the heats of an exalted Imagination, or the vapors of
melancholic Blood, and the unusual Joys of a recreated Temperament, or perhaps
to the clearer light of some discovered Truth, and sometimes to the deceitful
Dreams or wild Commotions of a distracted Mind, falsely conceited to be the
Divine Breathings of the Holy Spirit: And this he especially censures in those,
who having attained to some eminent Gifts of Utterance, a tenacious Memory, a
lively and ready Fancy, with a fluent Elocution, are fervent in their
Devotions; whose Performances, he says, are cried up for the actings of the
Spirit; not that the Persons thus qualified are so weak, as to think that this
comes from the Spirit of God: but that they are willing others should believe
so, that they may make the better advantage of such a reputation to gain power
into their hands, and as a torrent carry all before them, filling all with
Schism and Sedition. This is the sum of his angry Rhetoric in this matter. And
his Friend Velthusius speaks in the same Dialect. And no doubt De usu ration.
in Theolog. p. 71, 72.
there are others in the World of like mind with them: by whom those strong
impressions of joy or sorrow that are made upon the hearts of Christians from
the sense of sin and wrath on the one hand, or of the saving love of God on the
other; and those fervors of spirit that they sometimes feel and express in the
solemn services of Religion and exercises of Devotion, are censured as
proceeding from the different temperament of the Body, and the suitable
workings of a deluded fancy, or aseribed to Enthusiastic impulses, or such
like imaginary causes. But let the whole be brought under an impartial
examination, and I doubt not but this will appear a groundless calumny, to all
that shall give sober Reason leave to judge without the interposure of
Prejudice or Passion.

First then, let us consider of those different apprehensions and impressions
beforementioned, and see what Scripture and sound Reason teaches us concerning
them.

Man, as he is an Intelligent Creature, has a power connatural to him, of
reflecting upon himself, and judging of his own state and ways, as he stands in
relation to God and Eternity. This power of Reflection is commonly known by the
name of Conscience; which, as it is appointed to be Man's Domestic Guide and
Monitor to show him his way, and mind him of his duty; so it is a constant
Inspector over him, not only as a Witness of what he is and does; but as a
Judge also in the Name and place of God to pass sentence upon him, and give him
some fore-taste of those future joys or sorrows that shall be the portion of
the Children of Men in another World.

Begin we with the Distresses of an Sect. 2.
afflicted Conscience, arising from the sense of Sin, and Gods deserved wrath
for it. This may be considered, either as the case of one newly awakened by the
Terrors of God to a sad debate with himself, having hitherto been a stranger to
the state and way of Holiness; or of one already regenerated and begotten again
by renewing Grace; one that has formerly experimented in some degree the
sweetness of a Heavenly Life, but is now brought into a dark uncomfortable
condition, through want of the sense of Gods saving love, not without sad
impressions of his dreadful displeasure.

Though I shall not wholly exclude the former out of my present debate, yet it
is the latter that I intend chiefly to treat of. Those to whom this befalls,
during this distress, walk disconsolately, find little or no sweetness in any
duty they perform, any Ordinance they attend upon, any blessing they make use
of. Sometimes they strongly suspect, if not peremptorily conclude themselves to
be reprobates and castaways, to have no Grace in their hearts, no part in the
Redemption of Christ, but to be Enemies of God, Captives of Satan, and Vessels
of Wrath fitted to destruction. And this is one part of God's Paternal
Discipline, wherewith he is pleased to exercise some of his beloved Children;
whether to correct their unthankfulness under former enjoyments, or to put
their Graces to greater trial, or to fit them for some special service, or to
humble them for some heinous sin, and make them more watchful for the future,
or to magnify his own Grace in upholding them under all their Agonies, and
reviving them after their violent Conflicts; or for what other holy ends he may
have in it, which we are not now concerned to discuss. This Spiritual
Desertion, (as it has been hitherto called by sober Divines of all
Persuasions, as far as I know) admits of degrees, being not so sharp and
dreadful to some as to others* some are but for a while under it, others for
several months or years: some have a taste of it in the time of their health
and strength, and outward prosperity, others under bodily weaknesses, or
outward disquiets, or upon a Deathbed.

The case of one in this distress of spirit must needs be sad. Solomon tells
us, The spirit of a man will sustain Prove. 18. 14.
his infirmity: but a wounded spirit who can bear? So long as the spirit
remains whole and untoucht, it can bear up under all other pressures and
troubles. But when the wound reaches the Soul, when Conscience affrights the
Sinner, when this tells him, (whether truly or mistakingly) that God has
forsaken him, and cast him off, that the Almighty reckons him his Enemy, and
sets him up as a mark whereon to spend the arrows of his indignation; this
breaks him all in pieces, this proves a weight so heavy, that the burdened Soul
would certainly sink under it, were there not a secret support vouchsafed by
God's gracious hand. This makes David cry out, My sin is ever before me: and
elsewhere; Psalm. 51. 3.
Thine arrows stick fast in me, Psalm. 38. 2. and seq.
and thy hand presses me sore. There is no soundness in my flesh because of
thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin. For mine
iniquities are gone over my head; as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for
me. -- Besides other instances that might be given. Nor can this be a wonder to
any, were these few things considered.

1. The loving kindness of God (as the Psalm. 63. 3.
Psalmist speaks) is better than life. This is it that makes all a Christians
enjoyments truly comfortable, and that allays the bitterness of the most
afflicting crosses, that animates against the sharpest and most dreadful
conflicts against all other evils. Let a Christian live under the sense of Gods
reconciling love, and he passes cheerfully and undauntedly through whatsoever
befalls him. Let this therefore be withdrawn, and he is presently overwhelmed
with darkness; Psalm. 88. 14
the sweetest blessings are tastless, the lightest afflictions are intolerable.
He looks upon God as an Enemy, and now every thing appears to him as a
messenger of death.

2. As the love of God is highly valuable, so who knows the power of his wrath?
If the sense of this, when it Psalm 90. 11
fell upon the Innocent Son of God for the sin of Man, made HIM shrink, and
drew from Him those doleful complaints, Now is my Soul troubled, and Joh. 12. 27
what shall I say? And, My Soul is Mat. 26. 38
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. And again, My God, my God, why have Mat.
27. 46
thou forsaken me? How can guilty Sinners think to grapple with these Terrors?
Well might Job cry out as he did in his distress; O that my grief Job 6. 2, 3,
4.
were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together! For now
it would be heavier than the sand of the Sea, therefore my words are swallowed
up. For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks
up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. And
Heman, Thou have laid me in the lowest Psa. 88. 6, 7
pit, in darkness, in the deeps. Thy wrath lies hard upon me: and thou have
afflicted me with all thy waves. And Ib. v. 14, 15, 16.
again, Lord, why castest thou off my Soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? I
am afflicted and ready to die, from my Youth up: while I suffer thy terrors, I
am distracted. Thy fierce wrath goes over me: thy terrors have cut me off. How
bitterly did Francis Spira express the dolors of his woeful Soul! O (says he)
that I might but feel Relation of the fearful state of Fr. Spira, p. 89.
the least sense of the love of God but for one small moment, as I now feel his
heavy wrath that burns like the torments of Hell within me, and afflicts my
Conscience with pangs unutterable!

3. In this case the poor distressed Creature is his own Tormentor. He musters
up discouraging Arguments against himself; and catches hold of whatsoever may
strengthen his fears and increase his own suspicions of himself; and studiously
disputes against whatsoever comforts are offered him. Whatsoever threats he
finds in the Word against Hypocrites and Apostates, he is ready to apply to
himself: Whatsoever dreadful Examples of God's fierce wrath upon the worst of
Sinners he either reads or hears of, he presently puts himself into their
place, and conceits their condition to be his. The precious promises of God,
and the former experience he has had of Gods goodness to him, all are now
turned into matter of terror and torment. The presence of God is a trouble to
him, as Job 23. 15
Job says; and the remembrance of God terrifies him, as the Psalmist speaks;
Psalm. 88. 3. Ib. v. 2.
and his Soul refuses to be comforted.

4. Satan, by God's permission, taking advantage of such a gloomy season,
endeavors, by his horrid suggestions, to heighten the tempest that is already
raised in the heart of a Christian, as violent winds increase the storms in a
raging Sea. It is the main design of that devouring Adversary to destroy
utterly. In order to which, as he labors to encourage careless Sinners in
their security and presumption, so on the contrary he endeavors with all his
might to drive distressed Souls into utter desperation. And though he attain
not the utmost of his aims, yet thus much he usually accomplisheth, to
exasperate the present trouble, and increase the disquietment by his bold and
violent injections. This is sufficiently intimated to us by the Apostles
discourse concerning the incestuous Corinthian, who had been cast out of
Church Communion; whom he persuades 2 Cor. 6. 7.
them to receive and comfort, lest he should be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow; adding afterward, how ready himself was to forgive him, lest Ib. v. 10.
11
Satan should take advantage, etc. Whence we may gather, that this is one of
Satan's devices to tread down such as he finds already cast down with sorrow,
and to lay on more load, where he sees the burdened Soul now ready to sink.

5. In such a condition as this, till God himself be pleased to let in some
beam of light into the disconsolate Heart, no succor from the Creature, how
excellent soever, can give any relief. The wound is in the Soul and Spirit,
which none can come at to bind up and heal, but the Father of Spirits, and the
God of all consolation. If he Job ^23
hide his face, says Elihu, who then can behold him? As it is he who had the
chief hand in giving the wound, so it is he alone that can work the cure.

Now what is there in all this, that is any way inconsistent with the grounds
of Religion, or principles of sober Reason? Is not the guilt of sin, and the
wrath of God to be trembled at? And is not sinful Man capable of feeling the
bitterness hereof? Nay, does it not stand him greatly in hand to be affected
with them? Are these nothing but the reeks and vapors of melancholy
overwhelming the fancy, and filling it full* of fears and dreadful
apprehensions? This indeed would be very grateful to the Mad Crew; who will
readily gather from hence, that whenever Conscience gives them any close
stinging gripes for their wickedness, (as I doubt not but it does sometimes) it
is but making themselves believe that this is nothing else but a Melancholic
Qualm; and then they will soon conclude, that the best way to be rid of such an
unpleasing Guest, is to run to a Tavern or a Playhouse, to drink or sport away
these Fanatic Vapors, and Superstitious Fears, that break People of their
ease, and are Enemies to the peace of Mankind. And such Mountebank-Medicines
may possibly for a while skin over the sore, and smother the checks of
Conscience, by casting the careless Sinner into a Frolick-Fit: But whenever God
comes thoroughly to grapple with the guilty Soul, and set his sins in order
before him, casting Fireballs of wrath and horror into his Conscience, the
Poor Wretch will find that these Anodynes will prove but miserable Comforters,
and that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of Heb. 10. 31
the living God.

But what do we think of the Scripture-instances given before, Job, David,
Heman* What of the lamentable state of Fr. Spira, besides other Examples, not a
few, of later years? What, were they nothing but Melancholic Fancies, that
drew from those distressed Souls such bitter complaints, and dreadful outcries?
When the last-mention'd Person fell into that woeful Agony, his Friends
supposing that Melancholy, The Relation before cited, p. 49, etc.
overshadowing his judgment, might be the cause of his trouble, conveyed him to
Padua, a noted University in Italy, and had the advice of three eminent
Physicians; who, after due examination, and mature consideration of things,
returned this Verdict, That they could not discern that his Body was afflicted
with any dangerous Distemper originally from it self by the predominancy of any
humor: but that extreme grief oppressing the Spirits, stirred up ill humors
in the Body, and thereby discomposed him. And when they had endeavored, by
Physic, to consume those humors, or at least to divert the course of them
from the Brain; but all without the desired success; Spira nothing it, thus
bespeaks them; Alas, Poor Men, how Ib. p. 52.
far wide are you? do you think that this Disease is to be cured by Potions?
Believe me, there must be another manner of Medicine; it is neither Plasters,
nor Drugs that can help a fainting Soul cast down with the sense of sin and the
wrath of God. It Is only Christ that must be the Physician, and the Gospel the
sole Antidote. The Physicians, says the Relator, easily believed him, having
understood the whole truth of the matter, and therefore wished him to seek some
spiritual comfort.

I grant indeed, that Melancholy, where it is predominant, gives great
advantage to the increase of sadness, and the multiplying of perplexing fears:
and when Conscience is awakened, its fears and disquietments may be heightened
by Imagination, and this set on work by small accidents, as the sound of a
Knell, or the rattling of Thunder, or some frightful sight. But still the first
and principal cause of the distress is something really formidable to a sober
and sedate Mind. And if any should judge otherwise, I think, I may without any
imputation of rashness or uncharitableness, suspect them to doubt whether
Vindictive Justice, and the Everlasting Pains of Hell, be a reality. And if any
should be of that. mind, let them, if they think good, solace themselves with
such dreams, till experience resolve the question.

Come we in the next place, to speak Sect. 3.
something of the joys that are begotten in a Christians heart by the discovery
of God's love to him. Touching this, thus much we find;

1. That the love of God is shed abroad Romans 5. 5.
in the hearts of Christians by the Spirit of God. And that the same Holy
Spirit witnesses with their spirits that they Romans 8. 16, 17.
are the Children of God, and Heirs of Glory. Where the Apostle speaks of a
twofold witness of our Adoption. 1. The Spirit of God witnesses this, partly
by begetting that Grace in the heart that is the peculiar Character of Tit. 3.
5. 2 These. 2. 13. Ephesians. 4. 30.
a Child of God, (in which respect he is said to seal Believers to the day of
Redemption; viz. by stamping the holy image of God upon them) partly by
enabling them to discern this work, and see this seal stamped upon them. 1 Cor
2. 12
2. The regenerate Conscience, enabled and assisted by Gods Spirit to see this,
does thence infer a Christians Sonship.

2. Where this is wrought, it serves to fill the heart with exceeding joy above
what the greatest earthly comfort can beget. Witness that of the Psalmist;
There be many that say, Who Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon
us. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their Corn
and their Wine increased. And that of the Apostle, who speaking of Christ,
says; Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom 1 Pet. 1. 8.
though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of glory. The testimony that Conscience 2 Cor. 1. 12.
gives to a Christian of his Integrity, is (as St. Paul tells us) matter of
much joy. But there are who conceive, that besides this, there are sometimes
afforded some more immediate refreshments from the Holy Spirit. And of this
mind is a learned Author, in a Treatise published some few years ago, where he
thus speaks: The Feast of a good Conscience Causes of the Decay of Christian
Piety, Chap. 1.
is the true Christians daily diet; and sure, whatever the rich men of the
World think, he only can be said to fare deliciously. Nay, he has yet more
supernatural food, Manna rained down immediately from Heaven, the Holy Spirit
sent on purpose to refresh and support him; those Joys which differ rather in
degree than kind from those which are to be his final portion.

3. Hence are Christians enabled to pass cheerfully through the sharpest trials
and sorest afflictions that can befall them in this their mournful pilgrimage.
We rejoice, says the Apostle, Romans 5. 2, 3
in hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in tribulation
also. And the Hebrews took joyfully the spoiling Heb. 10. 34.
of their goods, knowing in themselves that they had in Heaven a better and an
enduring substance.

4. Where these Joys are in their full tide, they carry the Christian
triumphantly through the bitterest pangs of death: of which there are numerous
examples in all Ages of the Church.

These comforts are not afforded to all in like measure, nor to any always at
the same height. It seems good to the Wisdom of God so to dispense them, as
that those who have the largest portion, shall know that there is a wide
difference between Earth and Heaven; and that they are yet but Pilgrims, and in
their wilderness-state, though he sometimes gives them for their encouragement
a Pisgah-sight of that Heavenly Canaan, toward which they are passing.

But what! must all the forementioned joys and refreshing comforts that the
Holy Scripture speaks of, and the experience of the Saints bears witness to, be
counted no better than a juggle or a cheat? the transport of frantic raptures,
or the mere illusion of an Enthusiastic fancy, refreshed with brisk and active
spirits, and filled with warm and sprightly imaginations? Was it such an
imaginary comfort that David prayed for, when he says, Make me to Psalm. 51. 8.
hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. And
again, Restore to me the joy of thy Salvation. Ib. v. 12.
And when the Psalmist says, In the multitude of my thoughts within Psa. 94. 19.
me, thy comforts delight my Soul. And again, To the upright there arises
light Psa. 112. 4.
in the darkness. Is this nothing but the raising of the Blood, and the
breaking out of the natural spirits from the oppression of melancholic fumes,
and refreshing the drooping fancy? When the Apostle professes, that he was
filled with comfort, and exceeding joyful in all his tribulations: Was this
nothing but 2 Cor. 7. 4.
the effect of a Sanguine Complexion, or the product of pleasing Phantasms? Did
this make Paul and Silas sing in their chains? or was it this that cheered the
hearts of those Blessed Martyrs, who with so much joy and triumph embraced the
Stake, and clapped their halfconsumed hands in the midst of the flames? To say
nothing of the many instances that might be given, both in elder and later
times, of Persons, eminent for Wisdom and Holiness, who, in languishing
sicknesses, when their Bodies have been so wasted, and their strength so
impaired, that they could not stir to feed or help themselves, (the whole frame
of nature being broken by cruciating and consuming pains) yet have then felt
those inward Joys in their Souls which they could not siother; but as Men that
stood upon the threshold of Glory, and had a ravishing sight and sense of the
unconceivable pleasures of that other World, have, with that vigor and alacrity
(and yet with judgment and prudence) poured out Praises and Thanksgivings to
their Gracious Redeemer, that it has at once delighted and astonished the
hearts of their intelligent Friends that came to visit them.

I cannot think it possible that the truth of these things should be questioned
Sect. 4.
by any that do indeed believe the Scriptures, and have felt the power of the
Word upon their hearts. But there is a Scoptick Generation of Men, whose minds
are so tinctured with a profane gaiety, that the whole Bible is become to them
no better than a Play-Book or a Romance, upon which they love to exercise their
drolling Wits, by putting the Doctrines and Discourses of the Prophets and
Apostles into a ridiculous dress, the better to expose them to the scorn of
Infidels; as if they read that sacred Volume to no other purpose, than (as a
late Author speaks of some) Gentleman's Calling, Sect. 6.
to enable them to blaspheme God in his own style.

I have indeed often wondered what should betray any to this fond and i^rational
conceit of resolving the Agonies of distressed Consciences, and the contrary
Joys of serious Christians under assurance, into the different temperature of
their Bodies, and the suitable workings of their Fancy; till I met with a piece
of new Divinity in a late Belgic Tractator, and then I began to suspect out of
what Chimny came all this smoke. For this account does that Gentleman give us
of the Holy Prophets mentioned in Scripture: That their Revelations proceeded
from the Tractat. Theologico. Polit. cap. 2.
strength and height of Imagination, and were diversified according to the
different temper and constitution of their Bodies, which caused different
workings in their fancy. Hence, he says, those Prophets that were of cheerful
and debonair complexion, prophesied altogether of Peace and Prosperity, Victory
over Enemies, and all things to Men's hearts content, these being such things as
best suited with their Imaginations. On the other side, those Prophets that
were sad and melancholic, or of angry and morose tempers, they altogether
prophesied of War and Bloodshed, Desolation and Destruction, these being such
things, as their drooping and dejected Fancy did most run upon. Accordingly he
tells us, that whatsoever Revelations the Prophets received, they did not at
all better or advance their Understandings, or beget in them any solid
knowledge: They were good honest Men indeed, but none of the wisest: for Men of
note, for Wisdom, never were Prophets; that being a work that belonged to the
Imagination, and not to the Judgment. In the same Chapter he undertakes to give
us a reason why Josiah, when he had heard the Book of the Law read in his ears,
and was thereby made apprehensive of some impendent calamity; would not send to
the Prophet Jeremy, (though then living) because (forsooth) he was a
Melancholic Man, and one, who, by his many sufferings and hard usage, Let the
Reader take notice of this Tractators foul mistake: for where do we find that
the Prophet Jeremy met with any such hard usage till after Josiah's death?
was grown weary of his life, and therefore was not likely to prophecy any
good. But he chose to send rather to the Prophetess Huldah, who being a Woman,
and so [it seems, according to the softness of that Sex] more inclined to
tenderness and compassion, was a fitter instrument for God to reveal his Mercy
by. This is a piece of that Authors Political Atheology. And truly I know no
kind of Divinity (if we may call any such thing by that name) from which this
conceit, that we have under consideration, can more fairly be thought to derive
its original. But if we must look any higher for its pedigree, I cannot tell
whom to father it upon, (next to the Father of Lies) unless it be that Arabian
Philosopher of great note for Avicenna.
Learning, who is said to ascribe the Miracles wrought by the Primitive
Christians to the power of an exalted Imagination; by virtue of which, he says,
they had entertained a strong conceit of the Deity of their Master: and this
fancy (in his apprehension) was that which wrought such Wonders in Christ's
Name. Whether that which heightened this Pagans confidence to so bold and
absurd an assertion, were any extraordinary skill he had in the Anatomy of the
Brain, or the Laws of Mechanism, I know not. But whatever grounds he might be
supposed to have, I think none that heartily owns the Christian Name, will
ascribe such a ridiculous persuasion to the depth of his Philosophy, but to the
height of his Infidelity.

CHAP. III.
1. Regular Zeal in the Duties of Religion justified: 2. And vindicated from
the charge of Enthusiasm; 3. Madness; 4. Dissimulation, and placing the whole
of Religion in such fervors; 5. And of aiming at ill ends.

I Come now in the last place, to speak something of the prejudices taken Sect.
1.
at those fervors that appear in some in the Exercises of Religion, breaking
forth in earnest and pathetical Expressions, whether in bewailing of Sin, o^
petitioning for Mercy, or Thanksgiving for Blessings received, or dispensing
the Word of Reconciliation to the People. This is sharply censured by the
aforesaid Author Lud. Wolzogen, as savouring of Enthusiasm, or bordering upon
Frenzy, and cunningly designed for the driving on of some ambitious ends.

To this I Reply, We are commanded to be fervent in spirit, serving the Romans
12. 11. Eccl. 9. 10.
Lord: and that whatsoever our hand finds to do, we should do it with our
might. The Psalmist says, I cried with Psalm. 119. 145.
my whole heart. And even that Heathen Prince, to whose Royal City the Prophet
Jonah was sent with a threatening message, requires his Subjects to cry mightily
unto God. The Apostle Jon. 3. 8.
says, It is good to be zealously affected Gal. 4. 18.
always in a good thing. And is there any thing so good, as that it can better
challenge the height and heat of our affections and endeavors than Religion,
in the services whereof we have so immediately to do with God, who calls for
the heart, and has declared his abhorring of a dull, lukewarm Rev. 3. 15, 16.
temper? I grant, that it is too possible for Zeal to have its excesses and
irregularities: And among the rest, there is an indiscreet Zeal sometimes
appearing in some well-meaning Persons, that wants the conduct of a wellorder'd
Judgment: which as I take to be much more pardonable than a careless or
profane indifferency; so I conceive it may have ministered some occasion to
those vile reproaches that are cast upon all that are seriously and heartily
Religious.

But that fervor of spirit that I undertake for, and assert to be not only
justifiable, but commendable in the Duties of Religion, is that which is raised
by a right apprehension of the Object about which it is conversant, guided by a
composed understanding, and attended with an humble awful Reverence becoming
sinful dust in its appearance before the Great and Holy God.

Should not Sinners in their addresses to the Most High, have their hearts
deeply touched with sorrow for the sins that they apprehend themselves, or
others for whom they are concerned, to be guilty of, or liable to? Does it
become an Offender, that is to beg his Pardon, to do it in a stupid manner, as
if he had no more sense of his fault than a Stone or a Brute? And what
incongruity is it for us in our Petitions for Mercy, to have our desires raised
to the highest pitch that we can reach? Is the pardoning and purifying Grace of
Christ of so little worth or use to us, as they need be but coldly or carelessly
asked, as if our words freezed between our lips, or as if we did not greatly
pass whether we were heard or no? Or can we expect that God should hear those
Petitions, which we our selves scarce feel when they go from us? Did ever any
Malefactor plead at the Bar for his Life, or an hunger-starved Beggar crave an
Alms at the door, after this dull and sleepy rate? And when we are blessing God
for his Benefits, should we not, with the Psalmist, call upon Psalm. 103.
all our powers to praise him? And should not those, whose work it is to
dispense the Word of Life, deliver their Message in such a manner, as that
their Hearers may discern they are in good earnest, and that the Word spoken to
them is that whereon their Eternal Life or Death depends? Is it not requisite
that the Servants of Christ should, in this work, be (as is recorded for the
honor of Apollos) fervent in spirit? Act. (...)*
especially considering the quality of most Hearers, who are so hardly raised
to a due point of zeal and fervency, that (as Mr. George Herbert speaks) they
need a Mountain of Fire to kindle them. Priest to the Temple, Chap. 7.
The said worthy Author advises Preachers to make choice of moving and
ravishing Texts: and to dip and season all their Words and Sentences in their
Hearts before they come into their Mouths, truly affecting, and cordially
expressing all that they say, so that the Auditors may plainly perceive that
every word is heart-deep: with other passages of like import. In short, what
cause of blame is it for any in the exercises of Devotion, whether public or
private, to endeavor what they can to have their own and others hearts
affected in some measure suitable to the work in hand, and to have their
expressions in some due proportion answerable to the affections of their
hearts? This is all I plead for; and the utmost (as far as I know) that can be
charged upon the Generality of the Persons accused. What some particular here
and there may be guilty of, I am not concerned to vindicate. That there are
many follies and extravagancies in some of all Persuasions, he must be a great
Stranger in the World that knows not; and miserably enslaved to the Interest of
a Party, that confesses not. But the Lord knows we have all more cause to
blame our selves for our coldness and remissness, than others can have to blame
us for too much fervor. I heartily wish, that both they and we were all more
thoroughly Baptized with this Fire.

But let us a little examine the pretensions Sect. 2. Object. 1.
of our Accusers. As for the charge of Enthusiasm, which some make use of to
asperse what they dislike in Religion: Sol. Vox per se bona, vitio hominum est
i^famata: est enim sanctus Enthusiasmus, de quo Hesychius. (...), M. Martinius
in Lexic. Philolog.
The Word (says a late Learned Author) is of it self good, but fallen into
discredit by the vice of Men; for there is an holy Enthusiasm; when the Soul is
wholly irradiated or enlightened of God. But taking it in the worst sense, as
it is by these Objectors, I may say of it, as Mr. ^iales of Eaton once said of
the words Schism and Heresy, that it is made a Theological Scarecrow. For it
being inconsistent with some Men's Principles to acknowledge any efficacious
supernatural Operations of the Spirit of Grace upon the heart of Man, and as
contrary to their disposition and practice to be seriously fervent in Religion,
it becomes their Interest, to brand whatsoever lies out of their road with the
opprobrious name of Enthusiasm; that is, (as they sometimes explain it) a
pretense of being acted by the Holy Spirit, or a false conceit of Inspiration.

What the Sect of Enthusiasts was, appears sufficiently by the testimony of
those Learned Men who have written against them both in former and later times.
From whom we have this account; That those who were censured and condemned by
the Church of Christ under that Notion, were such as slighted, if not rejected,
the Scriptures as a dead Letter, a lame and imperfect Guide, insufficient to be
the Rule of Faith or Practice; in room whereof they professed to be acted by
Immediate Revelations, which they called the Internal and Spiritual Word,
teaching them higher Wisdom than any contained in the Scriptures. And
whatsoever was strongly suggested to them, or made any vehement impression upon
their minds, as that which they thought they should believe or do, they
embraced it as a Divine Inspiration, and Magisterially imposed it upon others,
were it never so inconsistent with, or opposite to the Doctrine of the Holy
Scriptures, or the Dictates of sound and sober Reason. And being by this means
laid open to Satanical Delusions, they were easily drawn to believe the
grossest absurdities, and some of them to practice the vilest wickednesses,
contrary to common Honesty and the Public Peace, justifying all by their
pretended Revelations. This is the Character we have of Enthusiasts, both
Ancient and Modern, from Authors of unquestionable credit. And if there be any
where in this World any of the remainders of that Sect, (as it is probable
enough there are) that entertain such wild and frantic Conceptions, let them
bear their sin and shame. But of this I am sure, that the Persons thus charged
by Wolzogen and his Accomplices, can safely appeal to all unprejudiced Persons
that know them, and to the most Wise and Holy God, who is greater than all,
that they are as clear from any compliance with that Infatuated Generation, as
the best of their Accusers. For,

1. They heartily own and submit to the Holy Scriptures, as the only sure and
sufficient Rule of Faith and Life. Accordingly whatsoever Conceptions may rise
within them, or be suggested to them in matters of Religion, they bring them to
the Bar of Scripture, to stand or fall according to its Judgment, not imposing
their Sentiments upon the Scripture, but receiving the sense of Scripture from
the Scripture it self; according to what has been asserted in the precedent
Discourse.

2. In matters difficult and obscure, that are more darkly laid down in
Scripture, (especially in the Prophetic parts of it) they forbear to determine
peremptorily, choosing rather to satisfy themselves with a modest hesitancy,
and abhorring to make their Judgments the measure of another Faith, or
superciliously to censure or despise any for their different apprehensions.

3. They plead for no other Spirit of Revelation, than what the Apostle prays
for in behalf of the Ephesians, Chap. 1. Verse. 17, 18, 19. which Revelation
consists not in discovering any New Object to be received, unreveal'd in
Scripture: but only in qualifying the Subject by curing the native and acquired
blindness and carnality of our minds, that we may rightly understand and
embrace the Truths which the Scripture propounds.

4. They solemnly profess and declare to all the World, that whatsoever they
are taught by the Holy Spirit, as it is by and from the Scripture, so it is in
the regular exercise of their rational Faculties; and such as they are ^eady at
all times to give an account of from Scripture-grounds to any sober intelligent
Person that shall demand it. They therefore disown and reject the absurd
Principles and arrogant Presumptions of the falsly-call'd Mystical Theology,
(set on foo^ anciently, and revived in later years) that pretends to Ecstatick
Raptures and Deifications of the Soul, by an utter cessation of all
Intellectual Operations. The Original of which Fantastic Theology, Dr. Meric
Casaubon derives from Treatise concerning Enthusiasm, Chapter 3.
the Heathen Philosophers; intimating withal, the great Affinity between this
and the New Method so much cried up of late: Which those whom it concerns, may
consider of at their leisure.

In the mean time I take that for granted, which has been (agreeably to plain
and evident Scripture) the acknowledged Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
however denied and derided by some late Innovators; That the Holy Spirit of God
is (according to Christ's own promise) given to dwell Joh. 14. 20 Chapter 15. 26. 1
Jo. 3. last. Romans 8. 9, 14. Ps. 143. 10 Ephesians. 3. 16. Romans 8. 15 and V. 26. 27
Chap. 5. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 18 Ephesians. 5. 18, 19, 20. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
in the Hearts of Christians, to beget and preserve spiritual life in them, to
conduct them in their way, to strengthen them with might in the Inner Man, to
shed abroad the love of God in their Hearts, and witness their adoption, to
assist them in holy services, and gradually to perfect the work of
Sanctification in them. To spend many words in proving this, which is already
so clear to all unbiased Judgments, were to to light a Candle before the Sun.
As for that ridiculous sense that some have endeavored to fasten upon these,
or some of these Scriptures, as if they were to be understood only of the
Spirit as given to the Church in common, and not to particular Christians, it
is so utterly inconsistent with the scope of those respective places, and runs
so contrary to the whole stream of Scripture and all Antiquity, that I think it
needless to waste time in refuting it. He that will but considerately read over
the several places, and faithfully examine the Context, may easily see the
vanity of it. That of the Learned Grotius is clear and full, Not only Non
tantum ^ota fideli^ collectio, ^e^ and fideles s^^gu^^ recte appel^antur
^^mplum, q^ia in i^sorum men^ib^s* (...) Spir^^us* (...) Dei habitat, ^rot.
A^not. a^ Ephesians. 2. 22.
the whole Collective Body of the Faithful, but also particular Believers are
rightly called the Temple [of the Holy Ghost] because the Spirit of God
dwells in their Minds. And if those who are careful (according to the
Apostles counsel) not to quench the Spirit, but to stir up the Grace of God in
them, have their hearts more warmed and enlarged in holy Duties, than others,
who either want that measure of Gifts, or are defective in improving them, I
cannot conjecture why this should be made a matter of reproach, but that some
Men are angry at every thing that is not just of their own size, or not
suitable to their gust; and therefore are resolved to revile and calumniate it,
though by those wounds the heart and life of Religion be found to lie a
bleeding.

To shut up this, I might here mind the Objector, and those of his way, how
much it concerns them to acquit themselves of that Enthusiasm which they
impeach others for. It Is known to be one of the first Principles of that Grand
Enthusiast Valentius Weigelius; V. Commentarium Jo. Hoornbeck de paradox^ and
heterodoxis Weigelianis.
That he who would know the truth, must forget whatsoever he has learnt from
Men and Books, and lay it all aside, as if he had never been acquainted with
any thing, and retreat into himself, and fetch all his knowledge from thence.
Let Carts. diss. de Methodo, and de Principii^ Philosophi^.
this be referred to our Authors Consideration, wherein this differs from the
great Principle of his admired Master.

But let us hear what is further Objected, to justify these Men's prejudices.

Secondly, It is said by some, These Sect. 3. Object. 2.
heats are but the Frantic Freaks of a Crazed Brain, and the product of a
Religious Frenzy.

I answer: 1. We need not be much moved with this senseless charge, when Sol. 1.
we find the Penmen of Sacred Writ to have little better measure made them by
the same hand. For of them we are told, that they wrote many times they knew
not what, and gave forth Oracles, Lud. Wolz. de Script. Int. p. 1* 6.
when they were beside themselves: (his word is alienata mente:) which was one
of the vile Positions of the Montanisis and Cataphrygians V. Riveti ^^^gog. ad
S. Scr. c. 2. Sect. 5 ubi ^uper hac r^ citat. Hieronym. pro. in Esaiam.
, rejected and condemned both by Ancient and Modern Divines. And yet to
justify this Assertion, our Author C^n^^ra Ce^sura, p. 131, 132
gravely cites Cicero de Divinatione, calling the Raptures of their Pagan Vates
by the Name of Furor; and Virgil calling Sibylla a Mad Prophetess: and Justin
the Historian, Lib. 24. where speaking of the much-famed Oracle at Delphos, he
tells us of a very deep Cave in the Mount Parnassus, near Apollo's Temple, out
of which proceeded a cool Air, which being driven upward by a certain Wind, did
turn the minds of the Prophets into Madness; who being thus inspired, were
forced to give Responses to those who came to consult with the Oracle.

Wolzogen is much briefer in citing this of Justin, for he says no more out of
him but this, That the minds of the Prophets were turned into madness, when
they were filled with God. But I have related it something more largely out of
the Author himself, that the Reader may the better understand the Historians
meaning. And is it not a goodly piece of service, and greatly for the honor of
Religion, that a Christian Writer should compare the temper of the Lords
Prophets, speaking by Inspiration from Heaven, to the Fanatic Fury of those
Diabolical Prophets, that were evidently acted by a blast from Hell? He that
has so little Reverence for those Worthies, who were infallibly asssted in
what they preached and wrote, as to speak thus reproachfully of them, no wonder
if he trample upon the Servants of the same Lord now. But what do I speak of
the dishonor done to the Servants of God by a Man, that speaks so irreverently
of God himself and his Holy Word in many passages throughout his Book? as is
obvious enough to the view of every unbiased Reader.

2. Let it be considered, what color there can be for this Imputation, 2.
when the Persons thus charged are known to be sober and considerate, and in
all their discourses and affairs as rational as other Men, and as composed
every way as any of those who thus traduce them. As therefore when some said
blasphemously of our blessed Savior, He has a Devil, and is mad, Joh. 10. 20,
21.
why hear ye him? Others made answer, These are not the words of him that has
a Devil. As if they had said, Men possessed or mad do not speak after this rate,
or carry themselves after this manner. So may I say of those who are now
reproached for Madmen by a Generation of the same profane temper; Examine the
behavior of those who are thus calumniated, observe their grave deportment,
their serious discourse, their circumspect carriage, their prudent conduct of
affairs; and let sober Reason judge whether these be the effects of Madness.

Tush, may some say, this is nothing. Exception.
Men may have a partial or particular madness, that takes them in some things,
while they remain sober in others. They may be very sedate and composed in
their other affairs, and yet in matters of Religion they may be quite beside
themselves.

For a Reply to this: 1. Be it so; Rep (...)
then perhaps the Objectors may be as much concerned in this as any others, and
the charge may be retorted upon themselves; though they speak and act like Men
of Reason in other things, yet it seems in matters of Religion they may be mad.
Ipsi viderint. Let themselves look to it. The Prophet Jeremy Jer. 50. 38.
says of the Babylonians, that they were Mad upon their Idols. And I have
heard many years ago, that Doctor Holdsworth, then Vice Chancellor of
Cambridge, did, in his Speech at the Public Commencement, complain of some in
his time that were ad insaniam usque superstitiosi, superstitious unto madness.

But, 2. We will not let it go thus. The Persons we are speaking of, and 2.
pleading for, are such as can and do give as intelligent an account
(whenever required) as any other, of what they profess and practice in
matters of Religion, from the unerring Word of Truth. This they plead for; to
this they appeal; by the Precepts of this they live; and in the hopes of what
is there promised, through the Grace of Christ, they resolve to die. And if
this be the Cognizance and Character of Madmen, then let us henceforth look
for Sober Persons no where but in Taverns, Play Houses, and Bedlams, and reckon
all other for Mad.

3. Many instances might be given 3.
of those, who while, in the days of their vanity, they were strangers to the
power and life of Godliness, had the same contemptible apprehensions of these
things, and have, with a kind of disdain, wondered what those persons ail^d,
whom they perceived to be zealously affected in matters of Religion above the
common rate. But after they came to feel the persuasive efficacy of that
Regenerating Grace, which some are bold to deride, changing their hearts, they
have seen things with other eyes, and with indignation wondered at themselves,
that they should be so slight and stupid in matters of so infinite concernment.
I doubt not but St. Paul, while he was a persecuting Pharisee, wondered at the
Christians, as a company of Madmen, for what they professed and did: But
afterward, when his eyes were opened to see his error, he counted himself no
better than Mad for what he had formerly done against them. Act. ^6. 11


To which I may add, in the last 4.
place, That many of those, who, in the days of their health and jollity, have
derided the persons we speak of, for a company of silly, distracted Fools; when
a Deathbed has awakened their Conscience, and brought them to a more sober
use of their Reason, and a more serious view of Eternity, have then changed
their minds, and heartily wished themselves of the number of those whom they
have formerly reproached, and would be glad to have some of their Oil to put
into their own dying Lamps, before they were to engage in their last conflict,
and pass from hence into another World. But however, the time is hastening,
when these Calumniators will be sufficiently convinced of their folly, and take
their own reproaches home to themselves; when that shall be fulfilled that the
Author of the Book of Wisdom tells us; That the Righteous Man shall Wisd. 5. 1,
to 6.
stand with great boldness before the face of such as have afflicted him, and
made no account of his labors. When they see it, they shall be troubled with
terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his Salvation, so far
beyond all that they looked for. And they resenting and groaning for anguish of
spirit, shall say within themselves, This was he whom we had sometimes in
derision, and a proverb of reproach: We Fools counted his life madness, and his
end to be without honor: How is he numbered with the Children of God, and his
lot is among the Saints!

But, may some say, there have Sect. 4. Object. 3.
been many Pretenders to the Spirit, both in former and latter Ages, who have
abused the World.

1. Very true; and what will you Sol. 1.
conclude from thence? There likewise have been, and are, many Pretenders to
Learning and Honesty, who, by their cunning slights and artifices have deceived
many. Is this any prejudice to Learning and Honesty where they indeed are? Or
must we resolve that these are no where to be found, because of such false
Pretenders? Is this to argue like Men of Reason?

2. The Apostle tells us, That the 2. 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15.
Devil transforms himself into an Angel of Light, and teaches his Ministers the
like art of Imposture. It is one of his grand methods of deceit, to imitate in
and by his Servants, the operations of the Holy Spirit of Christ, that he may
thereby cheat the World, and bring the true workings of the Spirit of God into
suspicion and disgrace: As in former times he made use of Apollonius Thyanaeus,
and others, to do strange wonders, the better to discredit the true Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles.

But, 3. Without further debate, let 3.
Men's fruits evidence by what Spirit they are acted. If Men be proud, boasters,
self-admirers, scoffers at Holiness, fierce, unpeaceable, implacable, haters of
those that are good, greedy Prosecutors of this present World, etc. These, and
such like, we are sure, are not led by the Spirit of Christ, but captivated by
that unclean Spirit, that works effectually in the Children of disobedience.
But if I see in any the evident fruits of the Spirit of God in humility, love,
meekness, self-denial, crucifixion to the World, and an heavenly conversation;
I should be as loath to charge such with false pretenses, as I would be to fall
under their coudemnation, who call good evil, and evil good.

But perhaps it will be further said, That Men's fervor and fluency in Object.
4.
exercises of Devotion, are made the heights of Godliness, and mightily cried
up as if they were the whole of Religion.

I answer; It is past all doubt that there are, among Persons of all
Persuasions, Sol.
some self-deceived Hypocrites, who place the All of Religion in Externals.
Thus many among the Papists place their Religion in saying over so many
Prayers, (though in a Language that they understand not) in going on Pilgrimage
to the Image of this or that Saint, in using certain Rites prescribed them by
their Guides, and performing the Penances injoined them, and other such like
outward Observances. And I doubt not but amongst Protestants there are too many
(of several Persuasions) that place their Religion in being for this or that
particular way of Worship, different from others, and in the practice of those
things, which are (at the best) but subservient means, instrumentally conducing
to express or excite the inward Devotion of the Heart, wherein the life of
Religion consists. But as they who thus do are in a miserable mistake; so who
they are that do so, falls not under the cognizance of any Mortal, unless they
discover their hypocrisy by their open wickedness. Indeed whoever they be that
take up with any (though the most plausible, costly, and laborious) services of
Religion, while they indulge themselves in their sin, and walk in contrariety
to Christ's Gospel; By the Grace whereof Tit. 2. 11, 12.
we are trained up to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World, (as I fear multitudes do) such
are self-condemned Hypocrites. But where there evidently appears a serious care
to credit the truth professed by a suitable Conversation, by laboring to walk
in all good Conscience toward God and toward Men; to censure such (whatsoever
Persuasion they be of) for making any outward Exercises of Devotion, the All,
or the Chief of their Religion, is such a piece of uncharitableness, as is
enough to nullify any Man's Religion in the World who so judges. Would Men be
persuaded to dwell more at home, and be better acquainted with searching their
own hearts, they would not be so ready to step into Gods Throne, and take upon
them to censure the hearts of others, which none can have the immediate
inspection of, but that Omniscient Spirit, to whom all secrets are open.

And the like reply might serve to Sect. 5. Object. 5.
the last and bitterest part of the charge, viz. That these fervours and fluent
Wolzog. ^oc. cit.
expressions in the services of Religion, are made use of to drive on some
ambitious design, to get a name in the World, that being cried up for Men
divinely inspired, they may have the advantage to get power into their hands,
and rule all, and so fill the World with Schisms and Seditions.

We are now come to the bottom of Sol.
the Vessel, where we have the dregs of the Adversaries passion. It seems he
would parallel those he thus bitterly calumniates with those Demagogues of old,
who, by their bewitching Oratory charmed the Hearts of the Vulgar, and thereby
accomplished their own ends upon them. For answer to this, I shall say in the
general, (as once one said in another case) Grave crimen, mi homo, si verum;
aeque gravis calumnia, si falsum. This is indeed a grievous crime, if true; and
as grievous a calumny, if false. More particularly, I shall reply these few
things.

1. The best Actions in the World 1.
are capable of being blackt and blemished by a malevolent Spirit, fastening
the vilest ends upon them. Holy Job, as upright as he was, (God himself bearing
witness thereto) yet was slandered by the Devil, as aiming at base unworthy
ends in all the Service he did for God. And the like has been the lot of God's
most faithful Servants in all Ages. When their Enemies knew not what fault to
find with their known and declared Actions, they would either feign some horrid
crime to accuse them of, or (more plausibly) make use of this malicious
artifice of the great Accuser of the Brethren, to blemish their most innocent
practices, as intended for a cunning Engine to carry on some base design; by
which means they have endeavored to raise suspicions of them in the minds of
their jealous Governors, and enrage the Rulers of the World against them. Thus,
when the Jews, after their return from Captivity, Ezra 4. 7. to 17. N^h. 2. 19.
c. 6. 5, 6, 7.
were busy in rebuilding the City Jerusalem, in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah,
their Adversaries calumniate them for it, as if they intended to rebel against
the Sovereign Powers that were over them. Our blessed Savior and his Apostles
were charged with Sedition for Preaching the Gospel. And thus were the
Primitive Christians after them, accused by their Pagan Persecutors for their
Religious Assemblies, as designed to practice Sedition, and hatch mischief.
Many such instances might be given: But all experience does abundantly witness
it, that the wisest, holiest, and most commendable Works that ever were wrought
by Men, are liable to be thus perverted by the cunning malice of an imbittered
Enemy.

The calumny that we are to encounter, 2.
is so grossly senseless and irrational, that to any considerate and impartial
Eye it overthrows it self. For whosoever he be that designs to insinuate
himself into the minds of Men for his own advancement to rule over them, must
use such means for the attainment of his ends, as shall best comply with the
humor of the multitude, and gratify them in what they best like. But this is
evident, that the greatest part of Men every where are at enmity with all
seriousness and fervency in Religion, and cry it down, as not suiting with
their careless worldly temper. They best relish such a dull kind of outside,
heartless Devotion, as may stand with the quiet enjoyment of their lusts, and
not disturb their dead and sleepy Consciences: And therefore the less life and
vigor there is in those exercises of Religion, wherein they think good to bear
a part, the more pleasing they are to them: they dread all other as much as a
Child does the sound of a Trumpet, or the terrible crack of Thunder, as that
which amazes and affrights them, and breaks them of their beloved ease. Who is
there that looks abroad in the World, and sees not this? And therefore whenever
any have hardened themselves into the confidence of casting reproaches upon
such as are observed to be most hearty and fervent in the Worship of God, they
usually have the Vogue of the profane multitude to side with them; and are by
that advantage emboldened more freely to pour out their venom, though sometimes
they run so far beyond all bounds of Cand^r, Modesty and Truth, that they give
the deepest wounds to their own reputation in the esteem of those who are sober
and ingenuous.

Did the Persons thus accused take 3.
to themselves the honor of what good they have or do; or did they endeavor
or attempt to gain or exercise any Dominion over the Faith or Consciences of
their Brethren, there might be some better color for this Imputation. But it
is evident to all, that they disown all such self-admiring and self-exalting
conceits, making themselves Servants to all, in order to the furtherance of
their Masters honor, to whom they desire to sacrifice all they have, not
seeking their own emolument or advancement, but the profit of many, that they
may be saved.

But it is usual with those, whose Worldly Interest is their Summa Ratio, to
measure others by themselves, and to lay that at the doors of those whom they
distaste, which they are conscious of in their own hearts, and which every one
can discern to be too conspicuous in their lives. I shall conclude this with
those words of the Apostle, Judge nothing before the time, till the Lord 1 Cor.
4. 5.
come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will
make manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then shall every Man have praise
of God.

FINIS.
Books to be sold by Rob. Boulter, at the Turks-Head in Cornhil, over against
the Royal Exchange.
FOLIO.
RUshworth's Collections.

Baronage of England, in two parts, by William Dugdal Esquire

Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy.

Cursellei Opera.

Bishop Taylor's Cases of Conscience.

Spiritual Refinings, in two parts, by Anthony Burgess.

-- His 145 Sermons on John 17.

-- His Treatise of Original Sin.

Curia Politiae, or the Apologies of several Princes, justifying to the World
their most eminent Actions by Reason and Policy.

A Concordance to the Holy Scriptures, with the various Readings both of Text
and Margin, by S. N.

Sixty five Sermons by the Right Reverend Father in God, Ralph Brownrig, late
Lord Bishop of Exeter. Published by William Martin, M. A. sometime Preacher at
the Rolls, in two Volumes.

QUARTO.
An Exposition with Practical Notes and Observations on the five last Chapters
of the Book of Job, by Jos. Caryl.

Husbandry Spiritualized, or the Heavenly use of Earthly things, by J. Flavel.

A Treatise of the Sabbath, in four parts, by Mr. Dan. Cawdry.

Vindiciae Legis, or a Vindication of the Law and Covenants from the Errors of
Papists, Socinians, and Antinomians, by Anthony Burgess.

The Saints Everlasting Rest, or a Treatise of the blessed state of the Saints,
in their enjoyment of God in Glory, by Richard Baxter.

-- His plain Scripture Proof of Infant Baptism.

The saurus medicinae practicae, ex praest^ntissimorum tum Veterum tum
Recentiorum Medicorum Observationibus Consultationibus Consiliis and Epistolis,
summa diligentia collectus ordineque Alphabetico dispositus, per Tho. Burnet.

A Treatise of the right use of the Fathers, by John Dailly.

Annotations on the Book of Ecclesiastes, by a Reverend Divine.

The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, by John Owen, D. D.

Man of Sin, or a Discourse of Popery; wherein the numerous and monstrous
Abominations in Doctrine and Practice of the Romish Church are by their own
hands exposed to open sight, that the very Blind may see them. By no Roman, but
a Reformed Catholic.

De Origin Moribus and rebus Gestis Scotorum Libri december. Authore Joanne
Les^aeo Episcopo Rossensi.

Large OCTAVO.
A Discourse of Growth in Grace, in sundry Sermons; by Samuel Slater, late of
St. Katherines near the Tower.

The Grounds of Art, teaching the perfect work and practice of Arithmetic,
both in whole Numbers and Fractions, by R. Record.

A Cloud of Witnesses, or the Sufferers Mirror; made up of the Swanlike Songs,
and other choice Passages of several Martyrs and Confessors, to the end of the
Sixteenth Century, in their Treatises, Speeches and Prayers, by T. M. M. A.

A Treatise of the Divine Promises, in five Books, by Edw. Leigh Esquire

The unreasonableness of Infidelity, in four parts, by R. Baxter.

-- His Method for getting and keeping Spiritual Peace and Comfort.

-- His safe Religion against Popery.

Quakerism no Christianity, clearly and abundantly proved out of the Writings
of their chief Leaders, with a Key for the understanding their sense of their
many usurped and unintelligible words, by John Faldo.

(...). Hesiodi ASCRAEI quae extant, Cum notis Cornelii Scrivelii.

A Treatise of the Bulk and Selvedge of the World, wherein the Greatness,
Littleness, and Lastingness of Bodies, are freely handled, with an Answer to
Tentamina de Deo, by N. Fairfax, M. D.

Small Octavo and Duodecimo.

A Saint indeed, or the great Work of a Christian opened and pressed from Prove.
4. 23. by J. Flavel.

Artificial Arithmetic in Decimals, showing the Original, Ground, and
Foundation thereof, by R. Jagar.


