Conscience Satisfied: IN A Cordial and Loyal Submitting to the Present
GOVERNMENT of King WILLIAM AND Queen MARY, In Three Discourses: Justifying the
Williamites against the Jacobites.

The first being Animadversions on a Book entitled, The Doctrine of
Non-Resistance or Passive Obedience no way concerned in the Controversies now
depending between the Williamites and the Jacobites.

The second on 1 Samuel 23.30. Then said David, Will the men of Keilah deliver me
and my men into the hands of Saul? And the Lord said, They will deliver thee up.

The third on Dan. 5.20. But when his heart was l^fted up, and his mind
hardened in Pride, he was deposed from his Throne, and they took his glory from
him.

By TIM. WILSON, Rector of Kingsnoth in Kent.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1690.

To the Impartial Reader.
Reader,
THE Justification of my own Actions in this present Revolution ingages me, and
the love of Truth constrains me to this Task. What I have done, upon the
strictest Examination of my own heart, I have done with a pure Conscience, and
with just abhorrence of Popery and Slavery, And I am ready to Answer all
Objections that may be made against those Principles of Government, and
unmovable Foundations which I have laid. I assert nothing but what agrees with
the Reason of Man, with the Word of God, and with the Practice of all Ages in
like Exigents. I give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are Gods; and I also justify the Liberty of my Native Country.
And this occasioned me to make Reflections upon the Discourse of this Gentleman.
For my own part, I desire to Fear God with the most Devout; I Honor King
William and Queen Mary with the foremost, and I love the Liberty of an
Englishman with my whole Soul. I confess, I was zealous against Reading the
Declaration of the late King in Churches.

First, Because it was Illegal, and seemed to me to own Arbitrary Government,
and the Dispensing Powers.

Secondly, Because it evidently conduced to the Change of the established
Protestant Religion, and the Introduction of Popery as the National Worship.
But I was then, and am now for the Ease of Tender Consciences: only I would
have all done Orderly by the Legislative Power of the Nation; that is, by King,
Lords, and Commons.

Now as for this Gentleman, I have plainly shown his Mistakes about Conquest;
about God's Providence; about the Lawfulness of Defensive Arms, etc.

I submit the whole to thee, Christian Reader, Lay aside Prejudice, Consider
exactly, Judge impartially, and God be with us all.

A Justification OF The VVilliamites.
I Cannot but greatly approve the Design of this Gentleman, which seems to be
the Glory of God, in asserting his Providence about disposing Kingdoms; the
Honor of King William, in making him a lawful Prince; the Peace of the Nation,
in persuading the Jacobites to Submission; the Preserving the Reputation of the
Church of England, in allaying the heats and animosities of the Williamites,
etc.

And I will not accuse him of luke-warmness, in neither assisting, nor
resisting the late King; because he that is not against us, is on our side, in
some sense. And this was the case of Hundreds in England, who could not sound
the depth of these Doctrines, and did not trouble themselves about Passive
Obedience.

And no doubt, many will commend him for his Prudence and calm temper, in
standing by unconcerned, and observing which side would have Success. But if
all Men had been as wise as this Gent. or as subtle, I fear we should have been
overrun by Popery and Arbitrary Power before this day. For who should help us?
not this Gent. nor any of his Persuasion; because he must in no case resist.
Who should then invite the Prince of Orange over, and Promise him Assistance?
Let Fools and Rebels do that, this Gent. has more wit, and is bound in
Conscience to be Passive. Prayers and Tears are his only Weapons. And I make no
doubt (for truly I believe him to be a devout Man) but he prayed to God for
Deliverance: But when the Deliverer came, join with him who will be him, he
must not assist, nor resist. Now in all others cases, Divines call this a
Tempting of God.

But let us see particularly wherein we agree, and wherein we differ.

First, It is agreed, That the Prince of Orange, (now our Gracious Sovereign)
had just Cause to make War upon James the Second, P. 5. And if he had a just
Cause (I will not say to invade us, or the injurious Prince, as this Gent.
says, but) to right himself, and come over and help us to right, then surely
our cause was just also, and it could be no Sin, but a Virtue to join with him
against our Common Enemies.

Secondly, It is agreed, That this Prince was no Subject to King James, nor to
any other Prince, and consequently was no Rebel, P. 5. And if He could not have
Right without Force, He might lawfully compel him by force to do what He ought
to have done without it, but would not.

Thirdly, The Author very sensibly and pathetically represents the Tyranny,
Oppression, and Grievances of the Nation. He says, P. 5. All Protestants grant
the late King's design was certainly to Extirpate the Protestant Religion; to
Inslave, and consequently to Extirpate the English Nation. And P. 16. He
Persecuted that Church he Promised and was bound to Protect, and did not treat
us like Englishmen, but like Slaves. And P. 18. It may suffice to say in
general, Never any of our Princes so openly attempted the Ruin of an
Established Religion, or by more Illegal Courses than He. Nor Law, nor Oaths,
nor Promises, nor Gratitude could restrain Him. He broke thorough all the
Barriers God and Man had put in his way, and seemed resolved to ruin us, or
himself, etc. And Page 23. All his Solemn Promises were easily broken, or
rather never intended to be kept at the very time they were made, and all those
He has since made have been violated in Ireland, where only He had Power to
keep or break his word, etc.

Fourthly, It is agreed, That the Doctrine of the Lawfulness of defensive Arms
is not proper at all seasons, or may be an unseasonable Dispute, P. 2. And that
very great Caution must be used, lest the People Rebel; and it is a sign of a
crazy Nation, when the Fundamentals of Government must be laid open. But yet if
it be a truth, in extreme Necessity, it must be manifested to satisfy men's
Consciences. And this Gentleman confesses, P. 1. That the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience was indeed dangerous to them, (that is, Their present Majesty's) when
He first entered England; because all that believed themselves bound by it,
were obliged not to take up Arms for Him against King James, and so
consequently it deprived Him of their Assistance: and for this reason I
conclude (if it be false, as I have elsewhere demonstrated) it ought to be
extirpated out of the World.

Fifthly, It is Agreed, That they that believe Passive Obedience, were not
thereby bound to Assert the Misgovernment of James the Second. Because though
they are to justify His Authority, yet they must not His Crimes.

Sixthly, As for Desertion, I need not meddle with it; be it as he says, P. 6.

Let us now see wherein we differ.

First, I have with some Impatience (to use this Gentleman's words in the
beginning) read the Scandalous Reflections that He makes upon those who have of
late opposed Passive Obedience, and justified Defensive Arms in some Case:
without which we had been all Slaves. His Design in this Discourse (he says) is
to put an end, as far as he can, to this unseasonable Dispute; P. 2. and yet he
justifies Passive Obedience at a very high Rate; as if a Man could not be a Son
of the Church of England, yea, scarce a good Christian that denies it. And he
loads it with this Odium, P. 2. They can be no Friends to Government in
General, nor to Him, (that is, K. W.) or His, in Particular, who are so Zealous
to have the Doctrine of Nonresistance Extirpated out of the World. And he
charges us with this ridiculous Consequence, That it is Lawful for every man to
Rebel against his Lawful Prince, whenever he thinks it necessary.

Answ. This is a foul Aspersion. We say the Cause must be real, plain and
evident. And in this present Case, supposing Defensive Arms lawful, I desire no
better Advocate or Orator to represent our Grievances than this Gent. See P. 5,
8, 16, 18, 23. And yet I suppose few Men accuse him of Irreverence to Crowned
Heads, as the Phrase is: Though a man that opposes Passive Obedience, would be
invidiously declaimed against for half so much. But we know that St. Paul,
speaking of the Emperor's Persecution, calls him a Lion, the most fierce and
cruel of Beasts: But at another time, owning his Authority, and in respect of
that, (to use the words of a Learned and Eloquent Presbyter, of my
Acquaintance) His Christianity allows him as high Complements to King Agrippa,
Acts 26.2, 3. With great deference to his Authority and Knowledge, nay, and to
his Honor and Goodness, though a Heathen, or little better, and otherwise very
obnoxious. But because we are so often charged, as if we did not give due
Honor to Kings, give me leave to illustrate our Case in no very long Speech.

Great Sir, We are your Majesty's most humble and most dutiful Servants and
Subjects, we look upon our selves as bound in Conscience to hazard our Lives
and Fortunes in the Preservation of your Majesty's Person, Crown, and Dignity,
and of our Religion, Liberty, and Property. But we fear that Evil Counselors
move your Majesty against us, and endeavor Innovations, and our Ruin by
Illegal Courses. It is a great Grief and Sorrow of heart to us to see these
Evils, and in all Humility upon-our Knees, we beseech your Majesty to Redress
our Grievances: But if your Majesty is resolved to persist in these mischievous
Courses, as we humbly conceive, we believe we may with a good Conscience defend
our selves, and not offend God and his Laws. The King perhaps may wax hot with
anger, and call us Factious, Seditious, Rebels, and cast us into Prison, etc.

Then comes another sort of the King's Subjects,

Dread Sovereign, We your Majesty's most faithful Subjects and Servants,
without any Reserve, will stand by your Majesty against all Enemies whatsoever;
and we esteem it our bounden Duty Actively to obey all your Commands, that are
not contrary to the Word of God, and our Religion, and when they are, Passively
to submit to your Majesty's Pleasure under our Oppressions, and never to Resist.

The King trusts these Men; is exceedingly pleased with their great Expressions
of Loyalty; Honors them, makes them his Confidents, takes them into his
Councels; rewards them with great Preferments in Church and State.

Not long after, the King is in great Fear and Distress by reason of Enemies.
He sets forth a Proclamation to all his Loving Subjects to assist Him, and
Repel the Force of the Invader, and his Rebellious Subjects, who join with him.

They return this Answer. Great Sir, Our Lives are at your Majesty's Service,
but we have many Grievances first to be redressed, and we see your Majesty is
resolved on these illegal Exorbitant Courses, p. 8. and therefore we are not to
be blamed, though we withdraw from your Service: And the best of the Primitive
Christians would have done the same thing, if it had been their Lot to have
fallen under such a Prince. We deny that we your Majesty's Subjects are bound to
stand by you, and fight for you, p. 7. For your Majesty has notoriously
invaded and destroyed all our Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties, and
designed the Ruin and Destruction both of them and us, and would give us no
assurance we could rely on, to do otherwise for the future. And therefore if it
be unlawful to Resist, it is also as unlawful to Assist and Enable your Majesty
to destroy the true Religion, the English Liberties and Immunities; nay, the
very Nation.

I dare swear, if the late K. were made Judge, He would say, the first sort of
Subjects were honest, plain dealing, true-hearted Men, and if He had hearkened
to their Counsel, both He and His Subjects might have been happy. But what He
would say of the other sort of Subjects, I cannot tell, though I can shrewdly
guess. And Now I hope they will never tell us more of being irreverent to
Crowned Heads.

Adam got Fig Leaves to hide his Nakedness: and the Sons of Adam are too like
him, and love to hide their Sins, rather than confess them. But what a Juggle
is this? God forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lord's
anointed; but if my Neighbor will, though I have strength enough, I will not
oppose him, I am not bound to assist the Lord's Anointed: for He will not call
a Free and Legal Parliament, and redress our Grievances, P. 2. and 6. and
elsewhere. If this be the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, I dare say every wise
Prince (as soon as he understands it) will root it out of his Dominions, by not
trusting such men. If I resist, I am damned: if I assist, our Religion and our
Nation is ruined. I never taught Active Obedience to the lawful Commands of the
King, (if I did, I have forgotten it) though I taught Passive Obedience, when he
commanded illegally. And therefore if Cutthroats with a barbarous
Assassination will Murder the King, I will stand by, and see them, and wash
mine hands in Innocence when I have done, because the King would not call a
Free Parliament, when I thought it necessary. I perceive, that though this
Gentleman would not Subscribe the Association with David's Confederates, and
take up defensive Arms against Readiness Tyranny and Oppression; yet if Saul would
not Redress Grievances, when he thought it necessary, if Abishai would kill
King Saul, he might for him, he is not bound to assist: It is God's Providence,
who pulls down one, and sets up another. Does not God and Man abhor such
Sophistry and Collusion? Well fare Passive Obedience: it deserves contempt and
scorn, and to be rooted out of the world, if this be it. And Good men will make
it their business to ridicule and confute it, P. 37. for this is one of the
worst and most exploded Doctrins of the whole World, P. 35. I am sorry he gives
such advice (as I cannot hearken to) to speak modestly of it, especially as he
has represented it, P. the last. And indeed Passive Obedience began to be
ridiculed and exploded by diverse of the Clergy and Laity, in my hearing, some
Months before we dreamed of the Prince of Orange's coming to deliver us from
our cruel Taskmasters, the Jesuits and Evil Counselors, being convinced of
this Error, and the many Mischiefs thereof, by sense and experience the
Mistress of Fools, according to the Proverb, as this Gentleman says, P. 22.
And now (I dare say, without transgressing that Rule of Christianity of not
rendering railing for railing) we are even with this Gentleman for calling us
Rebels, and inferring this absurd Consequence from our Doctrine, That it is
Lawful for every man to rebel against his Lawful Prince, whenever he thinks it
necessary.

Object. But if Defensive Arms are Lawful, who shall be Judge when we are
oppressed?

Answ. In our Case this Gentleman has already determined for us, that never
any Nation was more oppressed. And if any man will not stand to his
Determination, he must, I think be wilfully blind. However there is no Judge
but right Reason; for, what has God made us reasonable Creatures, but to Judge
between Good and Evil? Why even of your selves judge ye not what is right? is
our Savior's question, Luke 12.57. But indeed great and universal oppression
is commonly a thing sensible, of which our Senses may be Judges. We who
justify Defensive Arms in some Case, are as zealous for Government in General,
and for Monarchy and the English Government, and for King William in
particular, as this Gent. For we have ventured Lives and Fortunes with Him,
which the Author confesses he has not. And at the rate that he Writes, all the
Subjects of England or Scotland, who came over in Arms with King William, are
Rebels; all that Joined with Him; all that Prayed for his Good Success; all the
Protestants who defended themselves in Ireland, especially Mr. Walker, and the
Londonderry Protestants, are all Damned Rebels, because they were Subjects,
and ought not in any Case to resist the late King. And is this the manner of
Man, O Lord God? as he says. But let this Gent. know, that the Innocent, (I
mean the Legally Innocent) may defend themselves by the Law of Nature, and this
is written in his, and every man's heart. And he says, P. 1. The contrary
Doctrine was dangerous to the Prince of Orange at his first Landing. And indeed
if half the People had believed Passive Obedience, as most of the Clergy
taught, and most of the Army seemed to believe, He might have lost his Head by
venturing to Save us. But blessed be God, Englishmen would not be frighted out
of their senses by a causeless Curse from some weak Prophets, or full of
prejudice. And how any man could declare too soon for the Prince of Orange, his
now Majesty, and so forget his Duty as he says, P. 3. is a Mystery that I
would have this Gent. unfold. If his Cause was good and just, as this Author
acknowledges, who could declare too soon for him? Passive Obedience deserves
to be rooted out of the World, if for no other reason, yet for this, because it
has blinded this honest Gentleman, that he cannot speak well of his best
Friends; I mean of those who have been Instruments of his Deliverance from that
Infatuated Monarch, as he writes, under whose Government he dreads to live
again. I hope we have no Court-Parasites, and Flatterers, who follow the old
Maxim, Oblige your Enemies, Neglect and slight your Friends. Cursed be such
Policy. I confess I am for forgiving Enemies, and encouraging the Penitent: I
hate Cruelty, or Severity, especially considering so many misled Souls as we
have had in England. May the King's Throne be Established in Righteousness, and
may Mercy and Truth preserve the King: But let not those, who have cheerfully
spent their strength in this Cause be slighted, or exposed to the Malice of
their Enemies.

Object. Christ, and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians did not resist
the Heathen Roman Persecuting Emperors. And this was true Doctrine in
Tertullian's time ( Apol. 1. Cap. 37.) as he quotes, Page 10. If we Christians
would become your public and declared Enemies, or secret Revengers of our own
Wrongs, (should we want Force and Number to support it?) We exceed the Moors,
the Marcomans, and the Parthians, or any other one single Nation in the whole
World; we are but of Yesterday, and yet we have filled all your Places, your
Cities, your Islands, Castles, Corporations, Councels, Tribes, Companies,
Palace, Senate, and Forum or Marketplace: and we have left you nothing to
Enjoy alone, but your Temples; Now we who so willingly lay down our Lives, are
we not thereby fitted and prepared, do you think, to manage any War, though we
were very much inferior in Number, if our Religion did not oblige us, rather
to suffer Death than to Inflict it? We might without Arms or Resistance, barely
by disagreeing with you, and the Envy of a Separation, very much endanger and
disquiet you; for if so great a part of the Empire, as we now make, should
break it self off from the rest; and retire into any remote Corner of the
World, it would certainly confound your Dominions, to lose so many Subjects, be
their quality what it will; yea, our very departure from you would be a severe
Punishment; the Desolation and Silence we should leave behind us, would strike
you with an Horror and Amazement, as if the World were expiring; you would be
forced to seek for new Subjects to supply our places; and perhaps we should
leave you more Enemies than Subjects or Defenders. This place has been often
cited to prove the Doctrine of Passive Obedience; and in truth it is a Noble
Testimony, of the Faith and Patience of those Saints.

Answ. The Laws of the Empire were against them: Now Christ came not to destroy
or alter Political Government, but left, it, as he found it. And he sent his
Apostles to reform the world, to turn men from darkness to light, and from the
Power of Satan unto God: And accordingly their Weapons were not Carnal, but
Spiritual. They did not, like Mahomet and his Followers, Conquer the World by
force of Arms, but did Convince and Convert Jews and Gentiles by working
Miracles, by the Sword of the Spirit, by the Word of God, and by Reason,
Disputation, and Argument. But this is not our Case. I will state the Case;
Suppose a whole Nation Christian, and the true Religion fixed by Law, so that
it is our Birthright and Property, as it were, and we have a Legal and Civil
Right, or Human Right as well as a Divine to our Religion, and yet this is
evidently Invaded by Evil Counselors about the King, and he is drawn to
destroy Religion. If this Gentleman can show any Primitive Christian, or
ancient Father and Doctor of the Church, who says in this Case it is not
Lawful to Defend our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Properties, I yield the
Cause. Otherwise we grant all his Examples and Instances, as nothing to our
purpose. They show indeed the Peaceableness, Meekness, Humility, Patience, and
Faith of those Primitive Christians, their Zeal and Affection for the Happiness
of the Empire, and their Submission to the Government, Laws and Usages of their
Country, and to their Superiors in their most rigorous Execution of them, to
the destruction of them and their Religion, which is called the Abuse of Power,
and Legal Tyranny, in which case we also own Passive Obedience.

Secondly, I differ from this Gent. about Conquest. He would have King William
a Conqueror, though He claims not by it. And so tho he was none of them that did,
or durst have resisted or rebelled against King James, yet after his Desertion,
he forsook him, P. 13.

Answ. If the Prince of Orange had designed an Invasion and Conquest, as this
Gent. calls it, both he and we had been bound in Conscience to Oppose him,
because there is a Loyalty to our Country, as well as to our King. And Invasion
and Conquest are dismal things, as well as shameful. But blessed be God, He
came not as the Enemy of our Country, but as our Friend; as our Joshua, our
Savior; to deliver us from Popery and Slavery. He ventured his Life to save us
from Oppression, not to Conquer us. Besides, if he conquered King James, and
this Gentleman, He did not Conquer those that joined with him, which were by
far the greatest part of the Nation. I am sure in our County multitudes
Subscribed the Association, to stand by the Cause with their Lives and
Fortunes, not to Enslave themselves by Conquest. And then it followed, That
they humbly desired the Prince of Orange to take the Government upon him, and
Circular Letters were issued out for a Convention; and that Convention (or
Parliament) Elected him King, and the Princess Queen, and He accepted it as a
Trust: (and all Government is a Trust, and founded in Covenant, as I have
elsewhere proved) and then we honored Him, and prayed for Him as our King.
According to those Exhortations in Scripture, which order us to Fear God and
the King, Prove. 24.21. to be subject to the higher Powers, which are of God,
Romans 13.1. and to pray for Kings, and all in Authority, that under them we may
lead a peaceable and quiet life in all Godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.1. and
2. All which are as much now due to Their present Majesty's, as to any that
ever sat on the Throne.

It is true, by His Affection to our Nation, and Zeal for our Religion and
Liberties, he conquered our Hearts, and will for ever reign there, and He
merits our Lives and Fortunes: but it is not for the Honor of our Nation to
say, He Conquered us. And indeed 14000 Men cannot subdue England by force,
which is properly Conquest. We received him as sent from God, with hearts full
of joy, and with cheerful countenances. And were it not for that Doctrine of
Passive Obedience in its vast extent, (with which many devout Christians, and
many Learned, Pious, and great Bishops and Doctors, through prejudice were
possessed, I will not say infected) the whole Nation had sounded with Songs of
Triumph and our Churches and Pulpits with Praises and Hallelujahs, as if we had
had Heaven upon Earth. So great was the Mercy of our God in delivering us and
our Posterity from Popish Ignorance, Error, Superstition, and Idolatry, and
restoring our Laws and Liberties! For my own part, I was transported with joy,
and I care not, if all the world says, as some said in Hosea his time, c. 9.
v. 7. The Prophet is a Fool, the spiritual Man is Mad. But surely in truth and
reason, they are Fools and Madmen, that reject so great Deliverance and
Salvation out of fondness to a silly Opinion. There need no Eloquence, (if I
could use it) our great Fears and imminent Dangers are Oratory sufficient,
Popish Judges, Popish Officers in the Army, Popish Priests and Jesuits at
Court, Popish Heads of Colleges in the University, Popish Justices of the
Peace, Mayors, etc. with the Dispensing Power, might well affright us. And though
we perhaps might have spun out a slavish life without great Persecution, yet
our Children could expect nothing but French Dragoons and Torture, or voluntary
Exile, if not the Marian days of Fire and Faggot. But as for those who plead
Conquest for the King, they know not what they do in making this Plea, as a
Learned Man speaks. For if there were no other right, neither Precedent, nor
consequent, but merely because such an one was stronger and got it, and so
holds it now; then whosoever is strongest at any time he has right, and if a
stronger than he comes, he shall have right. This is no good Divinity, nor
Policy to Plead thus. That which subjects my Conscience to such an one, is
Submission upon some Compact, Covenant, or Agreement. Besides, this sort of
Men, by flattering Monarchs, and deluding the People, with crying out, The
King, the King; have wholly forgotten the very Heathens Lesson, It is sweet and
comely to Die for our Country, that is, our Laws, Liberty, Property, etc. I
must confess, Conquest makes way for Subjection, as it did in Caesar over the
Jews: but I hope no man will say this is our case: nor do they do their King or
Country any Service, who put the Controversy upon this Issue.

Thirdly, I must consider what this Gentleman says about God's Providence in
disposing Kingdoms. And here I must needs say, that he is honest in the main,
but he has not read and digested Divinity enough to handle this subject, and
therefore he is very confused. And I will not arrogate so much to my self, as
to say, I have sounded this depth, which has cost me some years study, and yet
I must admire (for I am ignorant or unsatisfied about many things concerning)
God's Providence. I will not at this time engage in the Controversy between
the Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants. God's Providence, and Man's free
acting are not inconsistent, that is certain. How they concur is most
mysterious, and the Highest Point in School Divinity. And I may safely say,
that it is above my strength to cut asunder, or my wit to untie this knot. But
it is mine, and every man's Duty, to do God's Will, and submit to his Pleasure,
who does whatsoever pleases him in Heaven, and in Earth, in the Seas, and all
deep places. However I beg leave of the Learned and Judicious to make a
favorable Interpretation of my design upon this abstruse subject.

First, It is certain, and agreed upon by the Calvinists, and Arminians, that
God is not Author of Sin. He is the Author of the Evil of Punishment, but not
of the Evil of Sin, Amos 3.6.

Secondly, God permits many things, which he does not approve; as the
Persecution of good men for righteousness sake.

Thirdly, God in his Providence, for the wickedness of a people, or for their
probation and trial, may suffer his Church to fall into the hands of Tyrants
and Oppressors, and to be carried Captive, or to be Exiles.

Fourthly, Though such wicked Instruments as Tyrants sin greatly in their Pride,
Cruelty, and Oppression of Gods own Inheritance, yet in his Providence he may
make use of them, as Scourges and Rods to punish the wicked, and chastise the
good, for their trial, as the exercise of their Faith, Patience, Humility, etc.

Fifthly, God in his Providence may, and sometimes does create Deliverance for
his People in an unexpected manner. And we may well say of this great
Deliverance of our Nation, This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes, Psalm. 118.23. So much for God's Providence.

Now I must distinguish about Governors; which this Gent. does not. Governors
are either Lawful Princes, or Usurpers.

First, A lawful King is he, who has a true Title to the Throne, either by
Succession, or Election.

Secondly, An Usurper is he who has gotten Possession, but has no right. This
latter is by God's Permission. This Usurpers have; for God suffers them to
rule: and some call this a Providential Right, very incongruously. For this
gives no just Title, and consequently there is no Subjection due. The vilest
person may have this, in Judgment to a Nation, (as one speaks) on purpose to
try them, that so by such unlawful Subjection, that Nation may fill up the
measure of their Iniquities, and God may destroy both them, and their
Governors: of which there are many dreadful Examples in History.

This Gent. is very confused. He says, That the Primitive Christians never
regarded the Right, Title, or the Claim of Princes and Emperors. And by this
seems to own Oliver Cromwell, as well as any Lawful King. And he makes no
Distinction between a Lawful King, and an Usurper.

I must confess, the History of the Primitive Christians about Governors is
very imperfect. (Because they minded Religion more than Political Government,
and an Heavenly Kingdom more than an Earthly.) But it will be very hard for
this Gent. to prove, That the Primitive Christians owned any Emperor, that was
not first owned by the Senate, and People of Rome. In times of Confusion, many
things are suffered or endured, which are not approved. And when the Empire was
in Distraction, through Emulation of men aspiring to the Throne, both the
Christians, and the Senate, and the (...) might not know what to do in
Prudence, or what course to take, as well as this Gentleman in our late
Confusions, and yet not be blameworthy, nor own an Usurper.

And it is a Case of Conscience of great concernment sometimes, How far we may
live quietly under an Usurper.

First, No man is bound in Conscience to tell an Usurper that he is so, no more
than he is bound to tell a Thief upon the Highway that he is a Rogue.

Secondly, Any man may with a good Conscience take upon him the Office of a
Judge, or any other Legal Trust, or a Preacher of God's Word, in time of
Confusion under an Usurper, provided he owns not his Authority, nor Swears
Allegiance as to a Lawful Prince. Because Government must be, and Good Laws may
be put in Execution in any time of Confusion, and somebody must do these
things. In short, in my opinion, a Conscientious man, living under an Usurper,
may do whatsoever conduces to Order, Natural Right, Public Good and Justice,
and the Preservation of the true worship of God, without owning his Authority.
But this I am sure is very unseasonable, and I almost tremble to say this
little about it at this time, for fear of giving Scandal. But I think my self
able to prove against any man, that King William and Queen Mary, by the
Election of the People (in Convention) have as true a Title, as ever any Prince
had. And if this Gent. can prove what he says, P. 10. with all my heart be it
done, I must out of awful fear and reverence say nothing of it more. I hope by
God's grace I shall ever render fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor, Romans
13.7.

Thirdly, Every man is bound (though not unseasonably, rashly, and furiously,
when there is no probability of good Success) to endeavor that the right
Governor be placed on the Throne. As for instance, when O. C. had possession,
all the true Sons of the Church of England, and many of our Presbyterian
Brethren, to my knowledge never owned his Authority, but were very zealous, and
heartily prayed for the Restoration of the King and Royal Family. And they
thought it their Duty, when they could not actively serve and obey the King, to
suffer with him, and lie at the Mercy of the Usurper, till God should pardon
the Sins of the Nation, and send Deliverance.

Now, as this Gentleman writes, P. 13. Did God give the Empire of the World to
Nero, to Domitian, to Julian the Apostate, all Usurpers, and some of them
Murderers of their Predecessors? nay, to Marius, who was the very Image of O.
C.? And has he not since that done any thing of that Nature? Did not he that
gave the Kingdom of England to King James, give it also to King William?

Here he seems to own O. C. as much as King William, I hope he means not so;
and I will not positively charge him, though I grievously suspect him. Sure I am,
this is no Doctrine of the Church of England.

O. C. was permitted by God's Providence, as a Scourge and Plague to this
sinful and unworthy Nation; both to Prince, and People: according to the third
Premise. And for the transgressions of a land many are the Princes thereof,
Prove. 28.2.

But King William was sent to us by Divine Providence as a gracious Gift, and
the greatest Temporal Blessing, that God could vouchsafe a poor, distressed,
distracted Nation: according to the fifth Premise.

And indeed (to do this Gent. right) I charitably presume that it is want of
Distinction in Divinity, not in his thoughts to compare O C. and King William.
For, P. 12. he applies Dan. 4.17. where God is said to set over Kingdoms the
basest of men, such as O. C. was, Kings given to a sinful Nation in his wrath,
and sometimes as suddenly again taken away in his anger, and at other times
continued longer for the Trial of his People, or the Chastisement of wicked
men: which is good Divinity.

I shall conclude this about God's Providence with the words of our Royal
Martyr, of ever Blessed Memory, King Charles the First, ((...). p. 295. with
me) Gods wise Providence (we know) often permits many Events, which his
revealed Word (the only clear, safe, and fixed Rule of good Actions and good
Consciences) in no sort approves.

Let not the meanest in understanding mistake me, I am not for Election every
Reign, but for Succession, just as it is in England. But I say, Election is the
true Title of all Government originally, and this is the Foundation of all the
various Forms in the World. Power is Gods: but the Form (as St. Peter says) is
an Humane Creation, Constitution, or Ordinance. I never loved to lie for God's
Cause: (it needs it not) nor daub with untempered Mortar; (God forbids it).

For my part, if I did not in Conscience believe that the late King by his
Maladministration deserved what he has suffered, not only from the hand of
God, but also from the hand of his Subjects: and that in this Revolution they
are innocent, who defended themselves and the Laws of their Country against his
Arbitrary Proceedings, I should think my self bound by the Oath of Allegiance
to pray for his Restoration. But because he has broken his Covenant,
Coronation Oath, and Promise, I am sure our part of the Bond and Covenant is
cancelled also. And that Kings were at first by Election, I prove thus, in the
words of a great Divine not much altered:

What first invested such a Family with Regal Power more than another? It must
be either God from Heaven designing it, as David: or man appointing it; or
taken by Force; there is no fourth. It was not the first, and to say the third
is right, is an extreme wrong to the King. If mere Force can give right, then
whosoever is most forcible has right. It must therefore be something else.
What can that be but the consent of the People in Parliament to such a Family?
which is in effect all one with Election: you may give it what name you will.

But says this Gentleman, P. 28. The Primitive Church in the best times took
the words of S. Paul in their plain and literal sense, The Powers that are
((...)) i.e. in Possession) are ordained, or ordered of God, Romans 13. They
never formalize or make any Exception, but Conquest, Election, Usurpation, were
to them all alike, if once the man was Established in the Throne.

Answ. I will not here take occasion to consider what learned Critics say
about the word, (...), on which he seems to lay some stress, (but they say it
signifies the True (or Lawful) Powers) nor will I expatiate in Analyzing this
Text, though I have a Discourse upon this subject by me. And I have read such
Doctrine as this in some Oliverian Pamphlets in our late Anarchy and Confusion.
And if occasion be, I can produce one, which perhaps this Gent. has seen, and
has been corrupted by it, or by some like it. But sure he never read this
Doctrine in any Book, written by any Divine of the Church of England.

I have before distinguished between a Lawful and an Usurped Magistracy,
according to the best Divines of all Churches, that ever I read: insomuch that
I wonder at this Gentleman, who professes himself of the Communion of the
Church of England. According to this Doctrine it is a poor, weak thing to be a
Martyr, or to suffer for Loyalty to our King or Country. Whereas it has in all
Ages, not only among Christians, but also among Heathens, by the light of
Nature, been accounted a most Heroic Virtue to lay down our Lives for these.
If this Gent. had been alive, and of years to advise, no Subject should have
suffered with King Charles the First, if he had been their Counsel. I am so
angry, that if I knew Thieves designed to rob this Gent. House, I would not
counsel one Neighbor to assist against these Rogues, but would commit it to
God to determine as he thought fit, as his Cant is, P. 3. which vergeth very
near to Blasphemy. And this very Phrase makes me think that this honest Gent.
has been misled by some Fanatic Book. I cannot think that he ran into this
Error wittingly, and willingly, and deliberately: he is a good Christian
surely: because, P. l. he speaks against those that despise all revealed
Religion, and that sort of Men who have their All in this world, and pretend to
nothing in the next: (and therefore I must in Charity believe he has the Hope
of a Christian) but I cannot but explode his Doctrine. O put'd Divinity! Phy
upon this gross Machiavelian and Hobbean Policy!

But to be serious, seeing this Gent. has advised us, I will return kindness
for kindness, and for once be so free with him as to advise him.

Good Sir, In the fear of God review that part of your Discourse which concerns
God's Providence, and the Government of Kingdoms and States: and learn to
distinguish between good and bad, perhaps your second thoughts may be wiser.
Consult with some learned and conscientious Divine, and see if he will tell
you, that in the Primitive times their Loyalty was one of their lesser Virtues,
upon which they never valued themselves as you say, P. 3. You discourse in so
loose and extravagant a manner, that I must beg leave to enter my Dissent, and
Protest against this Dose of Opium. And I never read so much Poison administered
with a good design before in my life. And if any applaud you for this
Discourse, I will pray with our Church in the Litany, Lord have mercy upon us,
Christ have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us; for surely we are not in
our senses. God save King William and Queen Mary from such Defenders of their
Right and Title. If you will not be admonished to revoke this, in my Opinion
you deserve (to speak plain English: for by God's Providence, and King
William's Protection, we Priests of the Church of England breathe in a free
Air. I wish all of us could see our own happiness: I hope in time men's
Prejudices will be removed: and through the Clemency of His most Gracious
Majesty cheerfully perform their Duty, I say, you deserve) not only to be
Excommunicated the Church of England, but also the whole Church of God, for
this wicked Error.

But I hope our English Blood is still Noble, and will count it their Honor,
and the Glory of their Religion, to die for their King and Country, when
occasion is, and God shall call them thereunto. And this is true Church of
England Loyalty, and approved by all the Churches of God. But at the rate that
you talk, if Corah, Dathan, and Abiram had had success, it had been God's
Providence, and Approbation, and so farewell Moses. If Absalom had been
prosperous, and in Possession of the Throne, right or wrong, see to thy house,
David. What need we commend the Fidelity of Ittai, (that loyal Heart; that
noble and constant Spirit) when he says, As the Lord lives, and as my Lord
the King lives, surely in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in
death or life, even there also will thy Servant be, 2 Samuel 15.21. And they that
furnished David with Provisions, especially Barzillai the Gileadite, (according
to this Gent. Doctrine, and indeed his whole Discourse of this Matter is mere
Enthusiasm, as if God did all things without means) might have been wiser and
saved Charges, and committed the thing to God to determine as he thought fit.
But I am weary of lashing this Doctrine, (with which none but poor, weak, crazy
Heads can be deceived, or vile, lewd, and Atheistical men) because it teaches
such Nonsensical, Disloyal, Unchristian, and Unnatural Behavior toward our
King and Country. Voluptuous and Effeminate Epicures indeed by this Doctrine
may sleep in a whole skin, as we say: but if they do not betray, they will do
no service to the Throne and Kingdom in time of Difficulty. And as much as I
think the late King was to blame, I cannot but pity him, if all his Adherents
were of this Gent. Mind. But let God be true: and every Man a Liar. Is there no
distinction to be made between Lawful Kings, and Usurqers, or Tyrants in Title?
And again, between Lawful Kings having Authority, and ruling according to Law,
and Princes, that have Authority, but are Tyrants in Exercise, and would
subvert the Ancient Government, and rule Arbitrarily. Again, he does not
distinguish between God's extraordinary and immediate, and his ordinary and
mediate Providence; between what he does by his Almighty Power immediately, and
what he does mediately, by Men as Instruments: and these Instruments are Good,
or Bad. And here should be considered in what manner he works by good
Instruments, and in what manner by bad. And though this Subject is difficult, yet
surely the Primitive Doctors and Fathers of the Church made distinction. I have
ever thought that all Government in Church and State stands most firm upon its
own Foundation. Let us have true Divinity, and true Policy once more in England
for God's sake.

Fourthly, I must consider what he says to the Williamites. And here what he
says, P. 35. is true, We are satisfied and highly pleased with the present
state of Affairs. But I observe here, that he fails in the usual Complement and
Address of a Gent. He might (if he had thought of it) have honey'd the bow with
us, as we say in our Country: and at his first Aggress given us thanks for
assisting in our several Callings and Places, to preserve our Religion, and
that Church, (of which, this Gent. says he is a Member) and our Laws,
Liberties, and Properties. But oh! this Passive Obedience. I have a mind to say
once more, that I would have it rooted out of the world, because this ingenious
Gent. (and, verily in my heart I believe, a good Christian) has forgotten the
common courtesy of the Nation, and falls foul upon us with some morosity. He
says, We have appeared very pertly against the Doctrine of Non-resistance and
Passive Obedience. Very pretty! This Gent. in Conscience could neither resist,
nor assist: and therefore though he is glad of the Deliverance, yet he cannot
thank the Deliverers. Well, but at least he might be silent, and not speak evil
of those who with a good Conscience could, and thorough God's blessing did
deliver him from that Bondage under which he ^^^ned. If I were in the mire, and
the greatest Villain upon Earth helper me out, so far I would be thankful to
him, and own his kindness, as not to expose him, when I am not bound in
Conscience. But this Gent. design is to put an End to this unseasonable
Controversy, p. 2. Very well: Why then does he assert and defend Passive
Obedience, as the Glory of the Church of England, and the Bulwark of all
Religious Kings and States, against the rage of mutinous and rebellious
Spirits, who pretend to fight for God's Truth, against the Laws and Governments
of their Countries? P. 36. This foolish and sottish Charge would move a stone,
as we say. Surely he had a mind to provoke us, and quicken this Controversy,
almost buried in the Grave of Silence.

I could here fairly illustrate, and make it probable, that Passive Obedience
has been (I will not say the Cause, but) the Occasion of the Ruin of two
Kings, and of a Civil War, and of the Church of England once, and almost the
second time: (for what reasonable man, endued with flesh and blood, can endure
this Church Tyranny, that in any case whatsoever we must not resist?) Would to
God this Gent. would have been quiet. Does he think that we will be beat out of
our Senses once more, and that so soon after our eyes have been opened? I will
rebuke him in the words of Job, cap. 27. verses 5, 6, 7, 8. God forbid that I
should justify you: till I die, I will not remove my Integrity from me. My
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: My heart shall not reproach
me so long as I live. Let my Enemies be as the wicked, and he that rises up
against me as the unrighteous. For what is the hope of the Hypocrite, though he
has gained, when God takes away his Soul? I will stand by it, there is no
other way in Conscience to justify our cause, but by asserting defensive Arms
in some Case.

But says this Gent. We had no disloyal Exhortations from the Press or Pulpit
to persuade men to sight against their Prince: nor had we any to persuade us to
sight for Him: but the thing was committed to God to determine as he thought
fit, P. 3.

God a mercy Prejudice I Suppose our Reverend Fathers, and Brethren can give an
Account to the world of their own Behavior, without asserting God's Providence
in this Gent. wild notion. But for once I will write a Latin Sentence, Turdus
sibi^^^lum cacat. Every man must Answer for himself. I Will blame no man that
does not blame me. But some Writings from the Press we had, and from the hand
of a Person, who is now dignified in the Church, if we are not all mistaken.
And he is highly approved of by His present Majesty, and all the Clergy that
are without Prejudice, and honor real worth, speak honorably of him.

As for our Gracious King, the whole series of his Proceedings since He Landed
on English Ground, shows his most Excellent Virtues, Justice, Mercy, Clemency,
Fortitude, and Magnanimity. And I am confident He can say, what the Emperor
Trajan said to a Tribune, when he set him over the Praetorian Band, delivering
the Sword, Use this for me, when I Command just things; and against me, when I
Command unjust things. And now (with due Submission to my Governors in Church
and State) I come to the main Matter of Controversy.

First, I assert, That Defensive Arms are in some case Lawful, and consequently
that the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Nonresistance is false. This I have
proved in a Sermon on 1 Samuel 23.12.

Secondly, That this Doctrine of Defensive Arms in some case was never censured
by the Church of England, till Innovation began to creep into the Church, and
Arbitrary Power into the State. The Church of England has always been so wise
and moderate, as to allow difference of Judgment in these Speculative Matters.
No man can Preach Obedience to Governors, who are God's Ministers, God's
Vicegerents, and called Gods, too Zealously. But to say, that if we are never
so innocent, nor never so much oppressed, we may not defend our selves, is
worse than to make us Gally-slaves and Asses of Burden.

Thirdly, I never read any Church in the Christian World, which did not
justify defensive Arms in some case; and though I never read that any man called
Passive Obedience an Antichristian Doctrine; yet, I say, it is an Unnatural
Doctrine. I have read that the every renowned Luther, the Author of the
Reformation, and the first Defender of the Protestant Cause against the Tyranny
and Innovation of the Papists, was called (Tuba Rebellionis) the Trumpeter of
Rebellion. And I remember not long since, that diverse Popish Officers in the
Army Drank such a kind of Health is this, Confusion to the Cornet and his
Trampeters. But God has abated their Pride, assuaged their Malice and
confounded their Devices. And He, who was the first Confessor (as I may say) of
our Church, I mean, the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of
London, by his Constancy in the true Religion, now shines like a Star of the
first Magnitude in the Firmament of our Church. We know that Elijah was called
the Troubler of Israel. St. Paul was called a mover of Sedition. And the best
men, and most zealous for God's Truth, in their several Ages have been revi'ed
by Insolent, Imperious, and Devilish Spirits. But what has the Righteous done?
We have helped to save the Nation. We have been Instruments under God to set a
Protestant King and Queen over us, who are so humble in their Greatness, that
they are greater in Goodness, than in Place; to whom we are obliged, not only
in Duty, but in Gratitude, for accepting the Rule over us. (For His Sacred
Majesty has the trouble, but we have nothing but ease and quiet; we sit under
our own Vines, that is, enjoy all that is ours with great Security.) We have a
Nursing Father and a Nursing Mother to our Church. Is there, or can there be a
Murmurer in our Israel? O foolish People and unwise! O miserable Mortals that
are never contented! What can we wish? what can God do more for us? Those
Protestants, that are not pleased with the Government, must go to Heaven, for
they will never be pleased on Earth, if they are not now.

But after this rapture, let us return to our Honest Gentleman. He says, P. 35.
The Doctrine of Non-resistance has been often proved the genuine Doctrine of
the best Ages of the Church, and that so fully and clearly, that they who would
not yield to the force of the Proof, have not been able to deny the truth of
it, but have been forced to Pretend it was only Temporary, and does not oblige
all Ages: which is hardly sense.

Answ. If any of our side say, that it was only Temporary, let them justify
it, I cannot undertake their defense; but I could never meet with any of those
that say so. I confess I have read this Objection before now. And some Popish
Author says, that it was Occasional, which in this case is equivalent to
Temporary: but I believe what the Scripture says in this case obliges all
Ages. But then I deny, That the Doctrine of Non-resistance has been often
proved the Genuine Doctrine of the best Ages of the Church. This Gentleman
knows, That the Old Testament was given by Inspiration of God, as well as the
New. And he knows (I suppose) that the Jews were under the same Covenant for
Substance that we Christians are, though not under the same Administration
thereof. They (says Nazianzen) were Christians in Work or Deed, though not in
Name. Now we know that the Primitive Church of Christ was under Heathen
Emperors, and that the Civil State was never Christian. But the Precepts.
Rules, and Examples of Governors in Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, are
Patterns for us in like case. And here, we say, David's Example is plain and
undeniable. And this Gent. produces no Scripture but Romans the 13th, which I
have already considered, and (if occasion be offered) have much more to say.

Object. The Church is now in other Circumstances than she was then; which is
not true neither.

Answ. I am sure it is true of the Church of England. We do not li^^encer
Heathen Emperors, neither are there any Laws against us, but all are for us.
Our Religion is Established, and is part of our Property as it were, which no
man can invade, as I have said before, and need not repeat. It is confessed
that Christians under the Turk must submit to Death, or Fly, because the Laws
of the Country are against them: and Christ came not to alter Political
Government. But what is this to us, where Governors and Governed are all
Christians, and make one Political as well as Ecclesiastical Body? And what
David did, being causelessly and illegally wronged by Saul, we may do in like
case.

He has some more Rhetorications, and Amplifications; but there is nothing
new, and all is already answered: only I must take notice of one thing that he
says, P. last. It is certain the greatest part of the Nation did not Resist,
but refused to Assist. This Notion he hugs dearly: but I think I have showed
the weakness of it, in all that justify Passive Obedience. As for others, I
blame them not. There are degrees of Knowledge, and degrees of Virtue, and
degrees of Zeal. Some have Heroic Zeal, which is not indispensably required of
all. And God knows what Circumstances many were in, who wished well to the
Cause. And no Divine thinks that the Protestants in the West of Ireland are at
this day bound to Publish their Thoughts with the hazard of their Lives. But be
it ^s it will, I dare Poll with this Gentleman. I am sure about us there were
five to one, to speak within compass: Nay, scarce a man that was not Zealous
for the Prince of Orange, but was branded, and perhaps misrepresented. But I
confess Number, great or small, makes not a Cause Good or Evil; yet in our Case
it shows, that most of the Lay-Members of the Church of England, did not
believe the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and Non-resistance. But God forbid
that I should justify some of the things that were done in the Heat of the
late Revolution, as this Gent. speaks, P. 36. Some were guilty of
Irregularities, which according to the strict Rules of the Gospel cannot be
justified. And O that God would give all that were Active in this Cause his
Grace, that they may be true Christians as well as true Protestants, and their
Souls Eternally happy. I hope that God will accept of what was well done, and
Pardon our Infirmities, thorough the Son of his Love.

Let us now come to the hardest Task, and most unpleasing Subject, The Power of
Deposing Kings, and disposing of their Kingdoms. There are Learned, Pious and
Judicious Protestant Divines that are of this Opinion; whose Arguments I
imagine this Gentleman would be puzzled to Answer. Our Convention (if I mistake
not) did declare that the late King Abdicated the Kingdom, broke his Original
Contract, and vacated the Throne; and what is this but that he deposed himself?
Almost all, Nobility, Clergy, and Commons were for a Regency without Scruple,
and what is that but a milder word for Deposing? This was a Fig-leaf to hide
the Nakedness of those who rashly had asserted the Divine Right of Monarchy,
and Passive Obedience, and Non-resistance in any Case. But I suppose the late
King would not thank these Gentlemen for putting him into the state of a
natural Fool, a Madman, or a Lunatic. I confess those Noble Persons, and Wise
Lords, and Great Counselors of State, who did never believe Divine Right,
Antecedent to Agreement, in Prudence might Vote for a Regency: Because all
Alteration in Government, (much more so great an Alteration) is troublesome, as
shaking the very Foundations of the Building. And all wise Men and Politicians
never change but in extreme Necessity, taking Solomon's Advice, Meddle not with
them that are given to Change. But yet if a Nation be forced to take up
Defensive Arms, they must be Secured before they lay them down; and if the King
be so Perfidious, as this Gent. represents him, even at this time to the Irish
Protestants, p. 23. it would have been (as he says in the same place)
Incorrigible folly to have trusted him; and consequently in this Case, it is my
Opinion and Conscience, that he was justly Deposed. See Discourse on Dan. 5.20.
And this Gentleman if he is consistent with himself about his Notions of God's
Providence, must needs say, that it is not only God's Permission, but
Approbation: though P. 35. he rails at it, as from the Devil. But I leave him to
reconcile his own Sentences, for to me they seem a contradiction. I beg His
Sacred Majesty's Pardon upon my knees, and I am sorry if I have Scandalized the
great Counselors of State in revealing this Mystery: But I am a Preacher of
God's Word, and I believe in my Conscience our present Cause can be justified
no other way. And seeing all was at stake, as this Gent. confesses, our
Religion, our Laws, Liberty, Property, Wives, Children, and Posterity, and
whatsoever is done is God's Providence; methinks this Gent. might pronounce us
Innocent, and not Damn us. But however if he will Damn us, we possibly may
escape his hands: for he is not God, but a poor, weak man. And I could afford
to give him another piece of my advice, but I will let it alone for this time.
Let me add, The Church of England, being truly Loyal, could not dream of such
an extraordinary Case. But blessed be God, some were wise as Serpents, though
harmless as Doves: Let me use the words of St. Paul, Rom 9.1. I speak the truth
in Christ, I lie not: my Conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost;
Those Noble Patriots of the Protestant Religion, and Liberties of their
Country, into whose Hearts God put it to invite the Prince of Orange over,
deserve this Motto. And though we Canonize no Saints, nor give Divine Worship to
any but God, yet I wish their Names were known, that the Nation might Erect a
Monument for them, with this Inscription, Hitherto has the Lord helped us, and
these are the Names of those Great Souls, who run the hazard of being accursed
by the Papists for us their Protestant Brethren. O most Sage Politicians, and
most Heroic Christians! though this Gentleman's Doctrine calls them Traitors and
Rebels. O brutish and ungrateful Prejudice! what can any free Mind think of
these Effects of Passive Obedience? Had it been an uncircumcised Philistin, a
subtle Jesuit, who had thus defied the Armies of the Living God, and called
them Rebels, it had been no wonder: But for a Gent. a Subject to King William
and Queen Mary, a Protestant thus to dip his Pen in Gall, and sadden the hearts
of those who should fight the Lord's Battle in Ireland, by calling them Rebels,
is a Riddle that I cannot unfold. I dare say that the most Reverend Father in
God the Archbishop, and the other Right Reverend Bishops, who cannot satisfy
their own Scruples, (which is their Calamity, and our Grief, though there is all
the reason in the world, that all should swear Allegiance to Their present
Majesty's, and they cannot be helped) do not censure us as Rebels, who
according to our Consciences have assisted the Prince of Orange in this
Revolution. When I reflect on this, I am tempted to lay aside my former good
opinion of this Gentleman, and must say what Michael the Archangel said, when
he contended with the Devil about the Body of Moses, The Lord rebuke thee. God
give him repentance and a better mind; for he seems like wicked Doeg and his
Confederates, that Enemy of David, and false accuser of his Brethren, of whom
the Prophet says, Psalm. 140.3. They have sharpened their tongues like a
Serpent: Adders Poison is under their lips.

I have Studied these Controversies about Government in Church and State for
some Years: but more exactly upon the rising of the Disputes about the Bill of
Exclusion, I have always been Inquisitive, and have striven to give a Reason of
my Faith, and to search to the Bottom, that my Principles might be unmovable,
and unblameable with Wise and Good men. And what I have written by way of
Assertion, (to use Dr. Fern's words,) Conclusion, or General Rule, is but a
Sacrificing to Truth from a Conscience not simply devoted to man. And I have
always esteemed it the greatest Preferment to have Liberty to speak Truth. I
was not for the Bill of Exclusion, because necessity of Change was not palpable
to me; but I was against it, as an Act of Imprudence, not an Act of Injustice,
(as I then said) if King, Lords and Commons should think fit. But as for
Monmouth's Rebellion, I abhor it at this day; because the late King had
Promised upon the word of a King, that he would Protect us, and Rule accordding
to Law, and he might have made himself and us happy, notwithstanding his
Religion, and I do not remember, that he had commanded any thing against Law at
that time. And I have been taught, and teach others, that Subjects must not be
Jealous of their Prince, and that Defensive Arms are Lawful only in Extreme
Necessity. And I verily believe that the late King designed not at the first,
what he Acted afterward. His Bosom Friend, his Priests, and his Jesuits (like
a pack of half-witted Knaves and Fools) stirred him up to his own, and the
Destruction of them all.

Thus I have (discreetly, or indiscreetly, rationally or not, I must leave the
indifferent Reader to judge, but I am sure with greatest Satisfaction of my own
Conscience) laid open my heart to my Countrymen. And I am ready to Answer this
Gentleman, or any of my Brethren, in these Problems following.

First, That the Church of Rome is an Idolatrous Church.

Secondly, In some Case Defensive Arms are Lawful.

Thirdly, In some Case it is Lawful to Abdicate a King.

Fourthly, King William and Queen Mary, by the free consent and Election of the
People (in Convention) have as good a Title as ever any had.

Fifthly, Neither Monarchy, nor Episcopacy, nor Presbytery, nor any one Form of
Government in Church or State, is of Divine Right Antecedent to Law and
Agreement.

Sixthly, That if the Bishops and Fresbyterians could Unite in one National
Church and Worship by a Comprehension, it would be a blessed Agreement.

Seventhly, That Liberty of Conscience for all Dissenting Protestants, of what
Sect soever, with some Limitations and Restrictions as to Government; yea,
Papists themselves in some Degree not Excepted, is a piece of Prudence and
harmless Policy at least, if not of Christianity, which commands universal
Charity.

Lastly, I think that I can show that these Problems are not contrary to the
Practice of this Church and State in the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
whose Memory is for ever blessed among Protestants. And if I could have the
License of the Press, I doubt not to make these things probable,
notwithstanding the Present Prejudices of many.

I have read that there was no Persecution for Religion in the Beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and if I were worthy to advise, there should be no
Persecution for Religion in the beginning, nor in the whole Reign of King
William and Queen Marry, that Glory may be to God on High (as the Angels Song
is) on Earth Peace, good will toward Men; that Man may be at Peace with Man,
and all Men may be reconciled to God. I hate Bigotism for an Opinion, though I
think every Man is bound in Conscience to lay down his life for his King and
Country (when God shall call him thereunto) and earnestly contend for the Faith
which was once delivered to the Saints, against the Abominations of the Roman
Synagogue. As for Protestants, they agree in the Main: and though I approve of
the Saying of a Learned Presbyter, if Opinions make Saints, or Saints make
Opinions, we shall quickly have more Opinions than Saints; yet St. Paul says,
They that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please themselves, Romans 15.1. And I like Gamaliel's Council, as most seasonable
for our times, for this reason among others, because it is a good natured
thing, and all men's Minds are so full of Prejudice, that what one calls Saint,
another calls Devil. Wherefore refrain from these men, and let them alone: for
if this Counsel, or this Work be of men, it will come to naught. But if it be
of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against
God, Acts 5.38, 39. I believe in my Conscience, that the Church of England in
her Liturgy and Ceremonies, as by Law established, is fairly defensible against
all Antagonists: But the Church her Self never thought them equal to God's
Word, or unalterable in some Exigents, as the Right Reverend the Bishops and
Great Men of our Church have with no less Prudence than Piety acknowledged in
all times, and more especially in their late Petition to King James, wherein
they say, that they want not due tenderness toward Dissenters, and that they
shall willingly come to such a Temper as shall be thought fit when Matters come
to be settled in Parliament and Convocation. And this is all that ever I
designed, for the great End of Peace and Union among Protestants. And now I
have Cause to be angry with this Gent. for he has heated me, and set me on
fire, and that in Hell too. But if he will Damn the Priests and Jesuits, he may
for me; for they deserve the Curses of the Nation, but if ever he Damns us
again, I think what I Will do, and I need not care if I tell him, though I am a
Reprobate, and the worst of Reprobates, a Rebel, I will do what I can to save
his Soul, by reducing him to a more Charitable Opinion of the Friends of his
King and Country, and that he shall never produce Romans 13. against us more,
though perhaps I may shame him in this world. The Righteous is as bold as a Lion,
says Solomon, Prove. 28.1. What Evil have we done? Nay, what Good for this Cause
have we not done? Was ever any Man before Damned for helping to Save his
Country? What does this Gent. mean? I tell him again, we have Cause to be
Angry. But I have read excellent advice of St. Paul, Ephesians. 4.28. Be ye angry and
Sin not: let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Neither give place to the
Devil, v. 27. And therefore before I bid him, God be with you, Sir, this Gent.
and I will shake hands, and be Friends: for we are resolved that (if we can
hinder it) the late King shall never return to England again. Hear what he says
to the Jacobites, p. 24. If they admit all the dreadful Consequences that
attend this relapse, and yield up both Church and Nation to certain and
inevitable ruin, only that they may not be Damned for Perjury and Disobedience
to a King, that has left them when he might have stayed, and now offers to
return and do what he then refused; What shall we also Consent and Sacrifice
our selves and our Posterity to the humor or scruples of these men? Shall we
suffer the English Church, Liberties, and the very People of England to be
destroyed to gratify two or three hundred Persons? And it is a remarkable
Speech, if it be true, which, he says, he has been told from good hands, that
one of our Bishops, (Bishop Ken) said, Though he could not satisfy his own
Scruples, yet he thought the English Nation fools, if ever they suffered King
James to return. And Page 33. he says, It is now the same Sin to resist them,
(that is, King William and Queen Mary) it was formerly to resist Him (that is,
King James.) And we will Join our hearts in Prayer, Cloth all their Majesty's
Enemies with shame, O Lord: but upon themselves (and their Posterity) may the
Crown flourish (for ever) Ps. 132.18. Long live King William and Queen Mary,
(Deliciae humani Generis) the Darlings of England, and the Favorites of
Heaven, and may they late enter into Celestial Joys. Amen.

1 Samuel 23.12. Then said David, Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men
into the hands of Saul? And the Lord said, They will deliver thee up.


SAul was appointed by God, anointed by the Prophet Samuel, and chosen by the
Children of Israel to be their King. And in the beginning of his Reign, being
the first King of Israel, he was very prosperous against the Ammonites, and
other Enemies of God's People: and all the Men of Israel rejoiced greatly. But
Saul did not long continue in this happy Condition. He rebelled against God, to
whom Kings ought to be subject, and did not hearken to his Commands. Whereupon
God rejected him, and determined to translate the Kingdom to David. The Spirit
of the Lord departed from Saul, and a evil Spirit from the Lord troubled him.
Which melancholic Distemper occasioned him to seek out a Skilful Musician to
divert his perplexed Mind. And one of his Servants mentioned David as an
excellent Artist, and a mighty valiant Man, and a Man of War, and Prudent in
Matters, and a comely Person, and one much in God's favor.

This wrought upon the King, and he sent for him: and was well pleased, and
much refreshed with David's Music. David had not been long at Court, but by
his Prudent Behavior, Integrity, and great Valor he became very renowned.
Saul made him General, and he was accepted in the sight of all the People, and
also in the sight of Readiness Servants. And after David's Victory over the
Philistines, they, Playing on Instruments, highly exalted David in their Songs
of Triumph. This filled Readiness heart with envy: and from that day forward he
eyed David. The King greatly jealous of him, would have killed him with a
Javelin: and was very angry with his Son Jonathan for holding Correspondence,
and making a League of Amity with him. When David understood the King's wrath,
he fled. But Readiness envy and malice increased, and he persecuted him from place
to place David still protested his Innocence and Loyalty: and not only barely
protested, but sufficiently manifested it by saving the King's life, when it
was in his power to kill him. In this his Distress, David, being a Man of
Valor, gathered together about Four hundred Men, and became Captain over them.
And did good Service to his People against the Enemies of the Lord.
Particularly, in this Chapter, he saved the Inhabitants of Keilah from the
Philistines. When Saul heard that David was at Keilah, he resolved to Besiege
him. David, being informed of this, inquired of God, whether King Saul would
certainly come down with his Army: and whether the men of Keilah would deliver
him up into Readiness hands. The Lord answered him, and said, Saul will come down,
and that the men of Keilah would deliver him up.

The words are a Question proposed by David to God. And from this place some,
both Divines, and Statesmen, have been of Opinion, That it is very lawful for
Subjects to defend themselves by force of Arms against the oppression and
violence of their Kings. Which matter, being very great and weighty, (and of
present practice) is worthy of most serious Consideration.

This may well occasion two Questions.

First, Whether it may be deduced from this Text, that it is lawful for
Subjects to defend themselves by force of Arms against the Oppression and
Violence of their Kings.

Secondly, Whether it may be deduced from any other grounds.

First, I shall consider whether it may be deduced from this Text. They, who
are for the Affirmative, say, That it is very clear that David did intend to
defend himself against King Saul by force of Arms. And to this purpose desired
to know of the Lord, whether the Keilites would prove treacherous to him, or
would stand by him, and fight to defend him. They say, that David would not
have fled, if he had not understood their design to deliver him up into the
hands of Saul. Now it cannot be denied, that David was the Servant of God, a
very good and religious man, and therefore if this had been Rebellion, and
Rebellion so heinous a Crime, David would not have intended, that which they
say he did intend, to defend himself by fortifying the place; yea, and giving
Saul Battle. Again, it cannot be denied, that David was Readiness Subject; that he
was injuriously treated, oppressed, and persecuted by Saul. And upon the whole
matter they conclude, That this example or instance of David will justify
Defensive Arms in case of Oppression of Governors. And I must confess that I
cannot answer the Arguments, if what they, who maintain this Opinion, say, be
true, to wit, That David did intend to oppose Saul by force of Arms.

I am of Opinion, and fully convinced, that David intended to defend himself
against his King in Keilah, if he could have been sure that they would have
helped him. Because he might have fled before the Inquiry, seeing David knew
that Saul secretly practiced mischief against him, v. 9. Whether David (says
no mean Divine) would have defended Keilah against Saul, I leave to the
Conscience of the Reader, considering that this only is made the reason of his
removing from Keilah, because the men of Keilah would not be faithful to him.
For he did not inquire of the Lord whether it were lawful for him to abide in
Keilah: but having inquired whether Saul would come down against him, and
whether the Keilites would deliver him up into Readiness hands, he removed from
Keilah, because the Lord answered him, that they would deliver him up: not
because it was unlawful for him to keep the City, but because the City would be
false to him. And the end, why he desired to know whether the Keilites would
deal falsely with him, or no, was, that he might by his more early flight
prevent their design of delivering him up into the hands of Saul. It is certain
by the event, that as soon as their ungrateful treachery was discovered to
David, he forthwith arose, departed out of Keilah, and escaped. And Pelacher (a
very Learned Analyzer) says, that this flight was commanded to David by the
Divine Oracle, at which he inquired.

The Supposition then is plain and clear, that David would have defended
himself in Keilah against Saul, if the Keilites would have been true to him.

Which may be proved by these Considerations.

First, It is certain by Scripture, that David had a Company, Six handred men
at least. And why should he gather so many men together, or what use of such an
Army, if not to defend himself by force of Arms against the injustice of Saul?
This will be more plain, if we reflect on Chap. 22. the Chapter before the
Text. Where we read that David departed from Achish King of Gath, and escaped
to the Cave of Adullam: and when his Brethren, and all his Fathers house heard
it, they went down thither to him. It is supposed to be a Town in the Tribe of
Judah, fortified by Nature and Art. He received all that came to him, and was
their Captain. He secured his Father and Mother with the King of Moab, to whom
Saul was an Enemy at that time, 1 Samuel 14.47. Which had been needless, if there
had not been an Association to defend themselves. The Prophet Gad, one of God's
holy Prophets was on his side: and commanded him in God's Name to go into the
Land of Judah. Then David departed, and came into the Forest of Hareth, where
were many secret places, v. 5. And Abiathar, the Priest, who escaped Readiness
cruelty, fled to David, and joined with him, v. 20, etc. Which still justifies
Self-defence in case of Oppression. He had the Ephod in his hand. Whether this
were by chance, (as some Expositors say) or by choice, he light upon the High
Priest's Ephod, (says Mr. Trappe) that had the Vrim and Thummim in it. It was
surely a sweet Providence of God for the comfort of his poor Servant David.
Hence God answered not Saul by Urim and Thummim, 1 Samuel 28.8. For it was now
with David, not with Saul. This Ephod thus brought, says one, was more than if
many thousand Soldiers had come to David. After his departure from Keilah,
David abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained in the Mountains in
the wilderness of Ziph: and God still preserved him, v. 14. of this Chapter of
our Text. Ziph belonged to the Tribe of Judah: and the Mountains of this Region
were craggy, and full of clefts of Rocks: and therefore places of good shelter
and defense. Yea, David's cause was so plain and good, that Jonathan, Readiness
Son, would not join with his Father agianst David, but made a League with him,
v. 18. Again, v. 29. David dwelt in strong holds at Engedi. He would not trust
Saul. For he knew the disposition of Saul, his inconstant mind, and unbridled
violence, especially since an evil Spirit had troubled him. Again, 1 Samuel 24.2.
Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seek David,
and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats. What need Saul have three
thousand men, if David did not defend himself? And, v. 22. David and his men
gat them up into the hold. He would not trust Saul, who had so often promised,
and broke his word. And verily in Matters of so great concernment Credulity
argues great Folly. (Tr.) Saul was faithless, and David had no reason to
believe him. And, 1 Chronicles. 12.8. the men of might, and the men of war forsook
Saul, and joined themselves to David. The Tribe of Gad was near to Moab, and in
a desert place, through which David wandered, and therefore they joined with
him. And, v. 17. David went out to meet them, and answered and said unto them:
If ye be come peaceably to me to help me, my heart shall be knit to you: but if
ye be come to betray me to mine Enemies, seeing there is no wrong in my hand,
the God of our Fathers look thereon, and rebuke it. Did not David (though yet a
Subject to Saul) take up Arms, and make forcible Resistance? It is said
expressly, v. 18, 19. Then David received them, and made them Captains of bands.
And there fell some of Manasseh to David, when he came with the Philistines
against Saul to Battle. And when ever Amasai uttered those words, v. 18.
(whether before, or after David had the Kingdom, I need not dispute) it is
evident, that they argue the goodness of David's cause. The Spirit came upon
Amasai, who was chief of the Companies, and he said, Thine are we, David, and
on thy side, thou Son of Jesse: Peace, Peace be unto thee, and Peace be to thy
helpers: for thy God helps thee. It was a Form of Salutation familiar with
the Jews, when they wished prosperity and good success to any person. And the
Ingemination shows their Zeal. And the whole demonstrates, that for the
Innocent to defend themselves, even by force of Arms, is very pleasing to God.
Thus I have demonstrated, that it may be deduced from this Text, That it is
lawful for Subjects to defend themselves by force of Arms against the
oppression and violence of their Kings.

I shall now enter upon the second Question, Whether it may be deduced from any
other Grounds.

I am for the Affirmative of this Question, It may be deduced from Scripture,
or Reason, That it is lawful for Subjects to defend themselves, etc.

And here it will be convenient to set down what is agreed upon on both sides.

First, That all Governors in their several Dominions and Places are to be
honored according to their several Dignities and Titles with due homage and
Allegiance of all their Subjects. We must render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's: Honor to whom Honor is due: Fear to whom Fear: Tribute to whom
Tribute. And this out of Conscience, and for the Lord's sake, who has made
them his Ministers.

Secondly, It is a most heinous Sin; a Crime of a deep dye, by thought, word,
or deed to derogate from the honor of our Governors, or to endeavor to raise
Factions and Discontents among their Subjects. He that any way despises
Dominion, or speaks evil of Dignities is a vile Transgressor.

Thirdly, To resist Governors, when they rule according to Law, is to oppose
God's own Ordinance. And therefore Rebels ought to be most severely punished by
Governors themselves, and shall certainly endure God's wrath, without
Repentance, and receive Damnation.

Fourthly, Every Subject is bound by all good means to assist his Governors in
the due Execution of Law and Justice: and to hazard Life it self upon his
Lawful Commands: and to discover all Conspiracies, Treasons, or Violence
offered or intended to be offered to his Person.

Fifthly, Every Christian Subject, living under the Government of a Prince of
an idolatrous, heathenish, or false Religion, is not therefore loosed from the
Bond of his Allegiance. But he must readily yield Active Obedience to all
lawful Commands of his Governors, and Passive Obedience, so called, that is,
He must quietly and meekly suffer, when the Laws of his Governors Command that
which is against the Laws of his God, and his Savior, whom he ought to fear in
the first place.

Sixthly, Every Governor is bound in Conscience to defend and protect his
Subjects in their lawful Rights and Liberties: and not to Command any thing
that God has forbidden. And if he does oppress them by illegal Impositions, or
punish them for a good Conscience, he is guilty before God, and must expect the
vengeance of God, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Seventhly, Every Oppression or Corruption in Government is not presently
sufficient to defend our selves by force. But it must be such Oppression, as
tends to the Dissolution of the Government; to the Destruction of Liberty; to
the Ruin of the Subjects; or to the Change of Religion by Law Established. And
in this Case also Defensive Arms are not Lawful, till Petitions, and all other
good means, which may prevail with our Governors, be used, and yet fail of
their end.

Thus (as I conceive) I have impartially represented both parts. And I know no
man of Worth, Piety, or Learning, who will not easily assent to these
Conclusions.

I shall now confirm my Opinion, that it is lawful for Subjects to defend
themselves by force of Arms against the Oppression and Violence of their Kings.

First, Because God never gave the Magistrate Power or Authority to tyranize
and oppress.

Secondly, Because Governors are appointed for the good of the People.

Thirdly, Because this is a violation of the Law of Nature.

First, Because God never gave the Magistrate Power or Authority to tyrannize
and oppress. So that to resist illegal Oppression is not to resist God's
Ordinance, but man's Usurpation; not the King's Authority, but his Lust. Hence
the Prophet Elisha defended himself, 2 King. 6.32. Elisha sat in his house (and
the Elders sat with him) and the King sent a man from before him, and ere the
Messenger came to him, he said to the Elders, See ye how this Son of a Murderer
has sent to take away my head? Look when the Messenger comes, shut the door,
and hold him fast at the door: Is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him?
He calls him the Son of a Murderer, because his Father Ahab had killed God's
Prophets, and he was like him in disposition. But that which is to our purpose
is, that he resisted the King's Messenger: he calls upon the Elders to assist
him, as knowing that God gives no Power to Princes to punish the Innocent. And
therefore they may defend themselves.

There is, First, Private defense. Secondly, Public. Private defense is proved
by this Text. It is lawful against a sudden and illegal assault of a Messenger
sent by the King. If against a sudden, (as one says) why not against
deliberated and plotted? for they are worse. This example of Elisha is brought
to prove the lawfulness of using force against a King in using violence.
Prayers and Tears are very good means against tyranny, but they are not the
only means. To kneel down, and say, Lord help us, and not stretch forth an hand
to help our sevles, is not to trust God's Providence, but to tempt God, and to
try whether he will work a Miracle for our safety. It is Presumption, and not
Piety, so to trust to a good Cause, as not to use all lawful means to maintain
it. Here is forcible Opposition allowed against a Messenger Commissioned by the
King. The Elders are desired to seize him. This act of Elisha was plainly
contrary to the King's Command.

Secondly, Because Governors are appointed for the good of the People. He is
the Minister of God to thee for good, Romans 13.4. But if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid: for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the Minister
of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. He has not
Arbitrary Power, but his Power is limited. And this is the end of his
Government, even the welfare of the Kingdom. Now if the Subversion of the
Government be designed, and the Destruction of the People aimed at by Evil
Counselors, then the Law of God allows, and the Law of Nature requires the
People to defend themselves. The Magistrate is the Minister of God. He sustains
the Person of God, as a Legate, (as one glosses) and as is the Lord, so is the
Minister. But God does not punish the good, but praise them. Therefore the end
of Government is, that we may live justly and quietly: and that the Body
Politic, and Public Honesty may be defended. If these are violated in an high
measure, the People are not bound to stand still, and have their Throats cut.
The Sword is to defend the good, and punish the evil: but if the Sword be used
to the contrary, then the People must defend themselves. Finally, The cause of
the Institution of Magistracy is to defend and honor the Good. This is the
call that Magistrates have: for they ought not to rule for their own sakes
only, but for the public good. And they are not possessors of an unbridled
Power, but with such as is for the safety of their Subjects.

Thirdly, Because this is a Violation of the Law of Nature. The Subject (as
several Authors speak) may be said to take up Arms, either, First, As an Act of
Self-Preservation. Or, Secondly, As an Act of Jurisdiction exercised toward
his Prince. The first way, we say it is lawful: The second way we contend not
for it: because Jurisdiction properly signifies Power of Office. The Schools
out of Aristotle (says Wendel. Philos. Mor. b. 1. c. 29.) distinguish Natural
and Civil right by the Properties. He assigns three Properties of Natural right.

The first is taken from the Efficient. For Natural right has its Original and
Authority from God: who first put it into the Minds of men in the Creation, and
after the Fall also in some manner preserved it in the Posterity of the first
Men. Hence it is called by Aristotle, The first Right, or the first thing that
is Just.

The second is from the Force and Efficacy. The Right of Nature is understood
by all endued with a sound Mind, and every where among all has the same Force.
Hence it is immutable, and cannot be abrogated.

The third is from the end. The Right of Nature is chiefly referred to Honesty.

There are also three Properties of Civil and Legal Right taken from the same
Arguments.

The first is from the Efficient. Civil Right has its rise and authority from
men, by whom it is constituted with common consent with probable Reasons taken
from the Law of Nature, or some Circumstances.

The second is from the Force and Efficacy. This Right obliges no body, before
it is established and constituted: but after it is established and confirmed,
it begins to oblige under pain of Transgression. Hence it may be changed and
abrogated.

The third is from the End. It is chiefly referred to Profit: though it
presupposes Honesty from Natural Right.

Here it will not be amiss to lay down a few Definitions, and Rules, for the
more ease understanding what we mean by the Law of Nature.

First There is an Eternal Law, which the Schoolman out of S. Aug. (b. 6. Of
Free Will) describes thus, The Eternal Law is the highest reason, which we must
always obey: by which Evil Men deserve Misery, and Good Men a good Life: by
which that which is Temporal is rightly made, and rightly changed.

From this Eternal Law flows the Law of Nature. And accordingly Aquinas tells
us, The Law of Nature is nothing but a Participation of the Eternal Law in the
reasonable Creature. And Grotius (says Culverwell) describes it thus, The Law
of Nature is the Dictate of right Reason, showing that there is Moral
filthiness, or Moral necessity in some Act, from the convenience or
inconvenience (or disagreement) thereof with the reasonable Nature it self: and
consequently that such an Act is either forbidden, or commanded by God himself,
the Author of Nature. The Laws of Reason (says the everrenowned Hooker, Eccl.
Pol. b. 1. Parag. 8) have these Marks to be known by.

First, Such as keep them, resemble most lively in their voluntary acts that
very manner of working which Nature her self does necessarily observe in the
course of the whole World. The works of Nature are behooveful, beautiful,
without superfluity or defect: even so theirs, if they be so framed according
to that which the Law of reason teaches.

Secondly, Those Laws are investigable by Reason, without help of Revelation
supernatural and divine. Finally, in such sort they are investigable, that the
knowledge of them is general. The World has always been acquainted with them.
It is not agreed upon by one, or two, or a few, but by all. Which we may not so
understand, as if every particular man in the whole world did know and confess
whatsoever the Law of Reason does contain: but this Law is such, that being
proposed, no man can reject it as unreasonable and unjust. Again, there is
nothing in it, but any man (having natural Perfection of Wit, and ripeness of
Judgment) may by Labor and Travel find out. And to conclude, the general
Principles thereof are such, as it is not easy to find men ignorant of them.

Now the Primary right of Nature, so called, cannot be changed, because it is
written in the hearts of men, as S. Paul testifies. Hence it cannot be blotted
out, unless Nature be blotted out, and Reason cease to be Reason. No Pope,
(says a witty Author) nor Prince, nor Parliament, nor People, nor Angel, nor
Creature can absolve you from it. This Law (Tully) does not put on one Aspect
at Rome, and another face at Athens, but looks upon all Nations and Persons
with an impartial eye. It shines upon all Ages and Times, and Conditions, with
perpetual Light. It is yesterday, and to day the same for ever. There is but
one Lawgiver, one Lord and Supreme Judge of this Law, God blessed for evermore.

Natural Right is that which a man knows and can execute without peculiar
Institution. And the Primary Right of Nature is that which to know and execute
a man is carried by an inbred ( impeius, or) motion: whose Precepts are as it
were born with us.

As for Example, In natural Theology, God is to be worshipped. He will reward
the good, and punish the wicked. In Oeconomicks, our Parents are to be
honored. In Politics, Defend thy self against force. Hence are drawn these
Conclusions:

First, No man ought to hurt us, when we are Innocent.

Secondly, If any man endeavors to hurt us, when we are innocent, we may
defend our selves.

Thirdly, Neither God, nor Man gives Authority to Governors to hurt the
Innocent.

Fourthly, If Governors hurt the Innocent, they may defend themselves by the
Law of Nature. So that Romans 13. is to be understood of Authority, Power, or
Jurisdiction in it self, according to the first Institution: as also when it is
lawfully laid upon any person. For otherwise when it is either wrongfully
taken, or unjustly used, it may be resisted in diverse cases: for then it is not
Lawful Authority. May Papists take up Arms with Royal Countenance, and
Privilege, and Prerogative, against Law, and to destroy Law? And may not
Protestants take up Arms to defend their Laws? Surely he must needs be full of
Prejudice, very malicious, or very weak in his Judgment, who cannot see the
unreasonableness of the one, and the reasonableness of the other. All Nations
in all Ages, by the very Light of Nature, have constantly defended themselves
by force of Arms, when their Princes have turned Tyrants, and by their
Instruments sought to spoil them of their Liberties, Privileges and Estates.
What Nation ever denied Defensive Arms against the unjust Encroachments,
Invasions, and Oppressions of their Princes to be Lawful? In England the
Barons, Prelates and Commons took a Solemn Oath; to maintain their Laws,
Liberties, and Charter, yea, and to wage War against the King, if he refused,
and to compel him to confirm their Charter in the year 1214. Likewise in King
Henry the Third's days, in the year 1258: and they threatened Death to all that
resisted. Again, in the reign of King Edward the Second, they confederated to
live and die together for Justice, and to their Power to destroy the Traitors
of the Realm, especially the two Spencer's.

All the Reformed Churches have taken Arms to defend themselves. The Lutheran
Churches against the Emperor Charles 5th, and they were justified by Luther
Melancthon, and other Divines.

The Protestants in France defended themselves against the French King, 1559.
The Netherland Provinces against the Duke of Alva, and the Spanish Tyranny. And
Queen Elizabeth, King James the First, and King Charles the First, did
countenance and aid all these. Which (any well minded man ought to presume)
they would not have done so constantly and deliberately, if they had thought
Defensive Arms had not been Lawful.

And Dr. Bilson (who was a zealous Defender of our Church and Realm, both
against the Papists and against the Puritans, in his Book of The True
Difference between Christian Subjection and Unchristian Rebellion, Perused and
allowed by Public Authority, P. 3. Page with me 279.) says, I will not rashly
pronounce all that resist to be Rebels. The Case may fall out even in a
Christian Kingdom where the People may plead their right against the Prince,
and not be charged with Rebellion. If the Prince should go about to subject his
Kingdom to a Foreign Realm, or change the Form of the Commonwealth from Impery
to Tyranny; or neglect the Laws established by common consent of Prince and
People, to execute his own pleasure. In these and other Cases, which might be
named, if the Nobles and Commons join together to defend their ancient and
accustomed Liberty, Regiment, and Laws, they may not well be counted Rebels.

Fifthly, The Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance is the high way
to bring in Popery and Arbitrary Power. For if the King is a Papist, and
Zealous for the Propagation of his Religion, the Jesuits, who account
Protestants damned Heretics, will never cease to stir up such a Prince to
promote his own Principles, and to discountenance those that resolutely adhere
to the established Religion. And what will Prayers and Tears signify to such a
Prince? when his Prejudice, or his erroneous Conscience, or his Priests, or his
Desire of being Absolute, or some such like Affections furiously carry him to
promote the Catholic Cause, as they call it. Yea, this Persuasion may tempt a
just Prince other ways, (for all Kings have Flatterers) to forget his Faith and
Promise, and to take such courses, as will in the event ruin and subvert his
Crown and Dignity. I wish Experience did not confirm this.

Now to say, We may and ought to deny Obedience to such Commands of the Prince
as are unlawful by the Law of God, (as all grant) yea, by the established Laws
of the Kingdom, (as few will deny). This does no way destroy Arbitrary
Government, but rather erect it; (Says a Learned Author.) For Government is
not said to be not Arbitrary, because the Subjects may deny in word, and so
left to suffer. For then the Turkish Government is not Arbitrary: for when the
Great Turk Commands his Subjects to do any thing, if they will deny and suffer
for their denial, they may, and do sometimes deny their Obedience. If there be
Laws whereby a King is to rule, which he shall command his Subjects to break,
and his Subjects are neither bound to obey, nor suffer by him, then his
Government is not Arbitrary. But if there be Laws made, and he may enforce his
Subjects either to keep them, or break them, and punish them at his pleasure
that shall refuse, and the whole Kingdom bound in Conscience to suffer
whatsoever he shall inflict for not breaking those Laws, then is his Government
Arbitrary. For Arbitrary Government is that whereby a Prince does rule ex
arbitrio: which he does, when either there is no Law to rule by but his own
Will, or when he has a Power to break those Laws at his will, and to punish
the Subject at his pleasure for not breaking them. And in truth, this latter is
rather an Arbitrary Government than the former, as it shows more Liberty in the
will, that it has a Power to act, when Reason persuades to the contrary, than
if there were no Reason dissuading, and else there should be no Arbitrary
Government in the world. For no State but has some Laws whereby they rule and
are ruled, even the very Indians: only here lies the Arbitrariness of a
Government, that notwithstanding the Law, the Ruler may pro arbitrio force his
Subjects according to his own pleasure.

In our present Case ( December 88.) we may well consider these things.

First, The Matter of Fact is evident, That the King's evil Counselors, Popish
Priests and Jesuits have tyrannized over us, and oppressed us in an high
measure. This is known to the whole Nation.

Secondly, I believe in my Conscience that it is the most Heroic and Virtuous
Action that Mortal Man can do to deliver poor Innocents from Tyranny and
Oppression.

Thirdly, The Prince of Orange, under God, has been the great Instrument of
our Deliverance from Popish Tyranny, and Slavery.

Fourthly, We ought to give Thanks to God first, and then to his Servant, our
David, the Captain of our Israel, for saving us from our Enemies.

In short, This Cause, (which I account God's Cause, and the Cause of the whole
Nation) and the Prince of Orange, (now our most Gracious Sovereign, whom I
account God's Instrument) have conquered my Heart: and consequently shall have
my Tongue, my Pen, the utmost of my Strength and Zeal. Yea, I hope through
God's grace, that I shall neither be ashamed, nor afraid to lay down my life
for the Protestant Religion and Interest, and the Liberties, Laws, and
Properties of my Native Country.

There are some Objections, taken from Examples out of Scripture, which seem to
favor the contrary Opinion, but I need not, nor cannot consider them all: and
I persuade my self that they are obviated by what I have said. And I am sure
that he that confirms Truth, by it confounds Error.

Yet I shall consider the main Objection. See (say many) David's behavior to
Saul, 1 Samuel 24. Ye know that King Saul persecuted David causelessly: he sought
his life for no reason. David was a good and loyal Subject, neither did Saul 's
violence and persecution tempt him, or prevail with him to change his Loyalty,
or forget his Duty. David did but cut off the skirt of Saul 's Robe privily,
and his heart smote him for it. And he said to his Men, The Lord forbid that I
should do this thing unto my Master the Lord's Anointed, to stretch forth my
hand against him. And he hindered his Servants from hurting Saul. And when he
called to Saul, he said, My Lord the King. And when Saul looked behind him,
David stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself. He called him my
Father, which is a Title of reverence. Insomuch that Saul, his Enemy, was
melted into kind Expressions by his goodness and righteousness. Read and
consider the whole Chapter at your leisure. David heaped Coals of fire on Saul
's head, as the Apostles Phrase is, not to burn, consume, or destroy him, but
to win him to a good Opinion, both of his Innocence, and Loyalty. Hence they
infer, that the Supreme Magistrate, the King, though he suffers his Subjects to
be never so much oppressed, is not to be resisted, but we must submit with
Patience, commit our Cause to God by Prayer, and make our Appeal to Heaven, who
judges righteously, and suffer our Throats to be cut, or flee away, leave our
Posterity to Slavery, and so expect a Reward in Heaven for suffering.

I Answer. The Subject (as several Divines say) may be considered two ways.
First, Divisively. Secondly, Conjunctively, The Subject considered Divisively
has always applied himself to Prayers and Tears, the oppression being only
Personal, and perhaps without remedy. Some Inconveniences and Grievances will
be in the best Government, and we must not think to have all that we desire, or
perhaps may really deserve in this world. And therefore we ought to get Public
Spirits, and hate Private Designs and Self interest, when it would destroy the
Public Good.

Secondly, The Subject may be considered Conjunctively. And thus when the
Oppression is General, and Universal almost, then the People must look to their
own Preservation: all Government being for the good of the whole Body Politic.
And in this case the safety of the People is the Highest Law. All Government,
and all Laws suppose this as a Principle or Foundation.

Again, The Subject is said to take up Arms against the King, either, First, As
against the King's Person: and of this we do not speak. Thus who can stretch
forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? Hence it may be
inferred, That private Assassination of a Prince is wicked and abominable.
Secret, or open Murder of any Man, much more of a Prince is an heinous Crime.
We are taught by this Example, that the hand is not to be lift up against the
Magistrate: but still David defended himself by force of Arms.

Some Expositors (as I find in the Author of the Synopsis) say, That David had
Power to kill Saul. Power was given by these words, v. 14. The men of David
said unto him, Behold the day of which the Lord said unto thee, Behold, I will
deliver thine Enemy into thine hand, that thou may do to him as shall seem
good to thee. He that is invaded, may prevent the Invader; as Lessius, and S.
Thomas teach. (Lavater.) No Subject or Private person (says a great Divine)
may invade a Tyrant, (without lawful Defense) though he has occasion: as David
could indeed kill Saul, whom yet he dismissed: because there was not extreme
Necessity. I will not (says he) put forth my hand against my Lord, for he is
the Lords Anointed, v. 10. For God knows to draw Tyrants to Punishment, either
by the ordinary Power of every Kingdom, or by any other miraculous way. The
Consequence (says another rational Divine) that follows from hence is clearly
this; That no private man in his own Cause (for so was David's then) by his own
Power may seize upon the Person of a King in an offensive way, especially such
a King, who had his Call immediately from Heaven: what farther Consequence,
that concerns our business in hand, let any show from this place that can.

And some say, That David arose with a purpose to slay Saul: but changed his
Mind in the midst of his Proceedings. But I think that David was but a private
Person, and so had no Authority: It is plain that David's heart smote him,
because he had cut off Readiness Skirt, v. 5. Some think his Conscience checked
him for the thought of his heart to kill the King. But still his Conscience
never checked him for keeping men in Arms to defend himself from Readiness
oppression: for this he did many Years The Person of the King ought to be
Sacred; but our persons and lives also ought to be defended. We may zealously
defend our own Innocence.

Secondly, The Subjects may be said to take up Arms as against the King's
Command for their own Preservation: so we affirm it, That it is lawful for
Subjects Conjunctively considered, (or when the Laws of the Country are
generally violated, and the Oppression is almost Epidemical) to take up Arms
for Self-preservation against the King's Commands. And justify their Cause by
the Law of Nature, and right Reason: which is not only the Common Law of
England; but of all Nations. For the Law of Nature (as Alex. de Ales says) is
in us without our Cooperation, and of God's putting in and impression. Thus
having heard my Judgment, and our present Cause defended, pray have a little
Patience to hear my Affection.

It is written, Psalm. 2.11. Rejoice with trembling. First, Let us rejoice, that
God of his infinite goodness has delivered us from our merciless Enemies; from
a Religion so false, and from such foolish Counselors, as would have made us
Slaves.

But, Secondly, Let it be with trembling, when we consider, First, Our own
sinfulness and unworthiness of so good and gracious a Providence.

Secondly, When we consider the dismal Calamities that have befallen His Sacred
Majesty through evil Counselors. Let us rejoice that the snare is broken, and
we are delivered: let us tremble to think of God's righteous Judgments. O that
my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day
and night for the calamities that have befallen this Nation, and the Royal
Family, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 9.1. Our Religion teaches us Love,
Goodness, Mercy, and Compassion. Let us not rejoice at the Calamities of our
Enemies; but at God's wonderful Mercy to us, that our Religion, our Laws, our
Liberties, our Lives, and our Posterity should be freed from the sink of all
Mankind, the Tyranny of Jesuits, and blood-thirsty Papists. Let us bewail our
Sins, the Cause of Afflictions. Necessity, nothing but Necessity to defend our
selves, and our Religion, and our Posterity from Popery and Slavery, forced us
to this last Remedy. I rejoice that we are escaped: I am sorry even for the
trouble of our very Enemies. Well then, let us Sin no more, lest a worse thing
befall us. It is true, (as the Prophet says) The whole head is sick, and the
whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even to the head, there is no
soundness in it, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores, Isai. 1.5, 6.
Sacred Majesty, laid in the dust, requires our Tears: our Religion and our Laws
revived, require our joy. Let us be grieved that the Crown is fallen from our
Heads, for we have sinned: Let us rejoice that God's Honor and Glory is
manifested in the Salvation of his Church. And as a Testimony of our
Thankfulness to God.

First, Let us be humble and lowly in heart, ascribing all our Deliverances to
God's gracious Providence over his Church.

Secondly, Let us be merciful to others in their distress. Let us lighten every
burden, and break every yoke. Let us be patient toward all men, and zealous of
nothing more than good works, and easy to be entreated in a good Matter. Let
us not oppress the Poor and Needy: Let us ease Tender Consciences, and perform
our Vows made in our distress, and do as we would be done by. Let us be wise as
Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Let us practice that Religion, which we have
defended with our utmost Zeal and Lives. And this consists in Faith and Good
Works; Love and Peace; Courtesy and Mercy, that Glory may be to God in Heaven,
on Earth Peace, and good Will toward Men.

Thirdly, Let us strive for Union among our selves. A Kingdom divided against
it self cannot stand. Let us join against the common Enemy of our Faith and
Religion. Let us lay aside our Animosities, and not strive for private
Interest, but for the Public good. Let us seek Peace, and ensue it, as those
who love life, and may see good days. Let us imitate David's Example, not
seeking private Revenge: but the Peace of our Jerusalem, and the Prosperity of
our Sion, that is, the Happiness of Church and State. Let us heap Coals of Fire
on our Adversaries, giving them what they denied to us, the tenderest thing in
the World, except God's Glory, even Liberty of Conscience. It is true, (as
Solomon says) He that wins Souls is wise. But this must be done by
Arguments convincing the Judgment, not by force and violence. He that wins the
Heart, gains a sure Friend; but he that forces the outward man, loses with
great disadvantage what he seemed to have gained, when the Compulsion cease.
Faction may be promoted by rigorous Execution of Laws: but Religion never got
footing but by Reason and Argument. Not that I am against preserving true
Religion by Civil Laws, if any be so wicked as to invade the Rights of the
Established Religion, but I am against Persecution for Conscience sake. We have
all suffered for our Divisions. Let this not be a price in the hand of a Fool
(as Solomon says, Prove. 17.16.) to get wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it.
I hope God has taught all Protestants by their Afflictions to lay hold of this
present Opportunity, to Unite: else we are very mean Proficients in the School
of Christ. It is true, very few (or perhaps none) of us here present this day
before God, have suffered in our Persons, Estates, or Livelihoods. But if we
are Christians, we should have a Sympathy and Fellow-feeling with our Brethren
in Affliction; we should be grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph, I mean, for
the Calamities, Disgraces, Reproaches, and Imprisonment of our Fathers and
Brethren; of the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Commons, who opposed Popish
Innovations and Arbitrary Power. And even we our selves were just at the Pits
brink, almost fallen: but God, who heard the Publican's Prayer, has been
merciful to us Sinners. If we are stubborn, obstinate, and will nothing relent,
God can yet consume us by sending an evil Spirit among us: but I hope there is
a Blessing behind for us, and our Posterity. If we are Atheists, Neuters, or
Lukewarm; like the Church of Laodicea, neither hot, nor cold; if it be
indifferent to us, whether God, or Baal; the Ark, or Dagon; Christ Jesus, or
Saints and Images be invocated, and worshipped; if we care not whether Papists,
or Protestants rule over us, then our Condition must needs be miserable. But
let us take Jacob's Advice to his Sons, see that you fall not out by the way.
Let us with one heart and one voice earnestly contend for the Faith that was
once delivered to the Saints. In short, if we have wise Heads, and Christian
Hearts and Spirits, we may easily unite. We read in Holy Scripture of an hot
dissension between Paul and Barnabas, and they separated one from another, but
it continued not long. Let us be English Men, and Christian Spirits, Valiant
for the Truth, and full of Mercy and good Fruits. We took up Arms, not to hurt
others, but save our selves.

Let it then be known to all Men, what the (late) King is reported to say of
us, when he returned to London, that though we hated his Religion, yet we
loved, honored, and pitied his Person, so grievously misled by foolish and
evil Counselors.

Fourthly, Let us beware of a Relapse into the same Misery. Let us be joyful,
but not secure and careless: Such a condition ruined the men of Laish. Let us
so triumph, as to be sober and watchful. For if we fall again, who shall raise
us up? A Relapse, we know, is worse than the first Sickness. Therefore let us
pray for Men over us, who fear God, and hate Covetousness; Men of Knowledge,
and Men of Courage; Men of Fidelity and Merit; such as cease to do Evil, and
learn to do Well; that seek Judgment, and relieve the oppressed. So God will
rejoice over us to do us good, and will never leave us, nor forsake us. Amen.

Daniel 5.20. But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in Pride,
he was deposed from his kingly Throne, and they took his glory from him.


IN these words we may observe these two general parts.

First, Nebuchadnezzars's Crime; His heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened
in pride. Secondly, His Correction and Judgment; He was deposed from his kingly
Throne, and they took his glory from him.
For the illustration of the former, I may briefly consider, First, Who this
Nebuchadnezzar was. Secondly, Wherein his Pride chiefly consisted.

First, I shall consider who this Nebuchadnezzar was. He was Emperor of
Babylon, the Queen of Nations, and the most famous City of the world. And he
was the greatest Monarch of his Age. He fought against the Syrians, Phenicians
and Egyptians. He made the Ammonites, Moabites, Philistines, Idumeans, and all
Egypt Tributaries. He conquered Tyrus also: As ye may see in Jeremy and
Ezekiel: He took the City of Jerusalem, and put Jehoiachin to death. He made
Jehoiachin (or Jeconiah, or Coniah, Jer. 2.24) King, and returned to Babylon.
In the eighth year of his Reign, going back to Jerusalem, (for he feared that
Jeconiah would rebel, and revenge the death of his Father) he took Jeconias,
Mordecai, and three thousand Jews of the Nobility, and carried them Captives to
Babylon. Nine years after he came again to Jerusalem, and besieged the City,
because of the Impiety and Rebellion of Zedekiah, and within a while utterly
destroyed the City of Jerusalem, carrying then the Vessels and Ornaments of the
Temple to Babylon. But it is thought that he took Daniel, and his Companions
captive, and brought them to Babylon in his first Expedition.

Secondly, I shall consider wherein his Pride chiefly consisted. I shall name
these three things. First, In not giving God the glory of all his Victories.
Secondly, In commanding Image Worship. Thirdly, In persecuting the Servants of
God for not worshipping Images.

First, Nebuchadnezzars Pride consisted in not giving God the glory of all his
Victories. God prospered Nebuchadnezzar, but he sacrificed to his own Net, that
is, he ascribed it to his own Policy, Strength and Wisdom, and did not give
glory to God: This was his Pride. Thou, O King! (says Daniel, c. 2. v. 37.)
art King of Kings, for the God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, power, and
strength, and glory. And wheresoever the Children of Men dwell, the Beasts of
the Field, and the Fowls of Heaven has he given into thine hand, and has made
thee Ruler over them all. Notwithstanding this, the King gloried in an Arm of
flesh, and Boasted in the multitude of his Hosts.

Secondly, His Pride consisted in commanding Image Worship. Of this we read, c.
3. He made an Image of Gold, and commanded all to fall down, and worship it. It
was not the Image of Bell or of other Gods of Babylon, but of Nebuchadnezzar
himself. Neither was this unusual among the proud Heathen Tyrants. For
Alexander the Great, Antiochus Epiphanes, Caligula, and others, would be
worshipped as Gods, while they lived.

Thirdly, Nebuchadnezzars Pride consisted in persecuting the Servants of God
for not worshipping his Image. He was not contented, that the Heathens, who had
been bred up in Slavery and Idolatry, worshipped the Image, but he must force
Gods Servants against their Consciences to fall down and worship also.
Maldonate (says Cor. a Lap.) probably conjectures that the King had erected
this Image upon the suggestion of the Chaldees, who envied the three Jews,
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, the Government of the Province of Babylon: and
therefore to make them odious to the King, and turn them out of Office, they
put the King upon making this Image, which they knew that the Jews would by no
means worship, and thereby the King would be provoked against them, as it fell
out. They served the King faithfully in the Trust committed to them, but they
obeyed God rather than Man; and therefore told the King, that they could not
commit Idolatry to please him: For they were the Servants of God, and must
adore him only with Religious Worship. This incensed the King against them, and
in his wrath he commanded them to be cast into the burning fiery Furnace, and
that it should be heated seven times more than it was wont to be heated. The
Chaldees accused them, and with all malicious insinuation stirred up the King
against them: As it is the nature of envious and wicked men to inflame Princes
against the true Worshippers of God. But the Jews, notwithstanding all this
fury, and threats, and cruelty, continued resolute, and persevered in the
Faith, and God miraculously delivered them.

When God pleases to show his power, the proud Helpers must stoop under him.
They destroy themselves that go about to destroy Gods Servants. The flame of
fire slew those men that took them up, c. 3. v. 22.

The righteous is bold as a Lion, says Solomon. They answered the King with a
mighty courage: As who should say, It is plain, O King! that there is only one
God, whom we worship, and he can deliver us out of thine hand; but if not, yet
we will worship him only, and not thy Idols. Observe here the undaunted
resolution, liberty, fortitude, and courage of these three Servants of God.

I go on to the second general part of the Text, Nebuchadnezzars Correction and
Judgment, He was deposed from his kingly Throne, and they took his glory from
him.

Here I shall show these three things.

1. By whom he was deposed. 2. Why he was deposed. 3. That it was just.
1. By whom Nebuchadnezzar was deposed. 1. By God. 2. By his Subjects.

1. He was deposed by God. Though God is not the Author of the evil of sin, yet
he is the principal Efficient in the evil of punishment. Now this was the
punishment of the King for his Pride, Oppression and Impiety. And the Prophet
tells, Psalm. 75.6, 7. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor from the South. But God is the Judge: he puts down one, and
sets up another. This the King acknowledges, c. 4. v. 2, 3. I thought it
good to show the signs and the wonders that the high God has wrought toward
me. How great are his signs? and how mighty are his wonders? his Kingdom is
everlasting, and his Dominion is from generation to generation. And v. 17. This
matter is by the Decree of the Watchers, and the Demand by the word of the holy
ones. The Watchers, that is, the Angels of God, who are God's Instruments and
Servants, in punishing the evil, and rewarding the good. See v. 31, 32. God,
who gives grace to the humble, resists, or fights against the proud.

This may comfort those that are oppressed. God is the Avenger of all such. I,
even I am he that comfort you (says God by the Prophet, Isa. 51.12, 13.)
Who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the
Son of man, who shall be made as grass? And forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that
has stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the Earth? And
have feared continually every day, because of the fury of the Oppressor, as if
he were ready to destroy; and where is the fury of the Oppressor?

2. Nebuchadnezzar was deposed by his own Subjects. They shall drive thee from
men. c. 4. v. 25. And if any say, this is spoken neutrally, Thou shall be
driven; yet still here is the person understood, be it spoken neutrally, or
impersonally. Some body must do it. And v. 33. He was driven from men.

By whom? I answer. He was either driven out by Tumult, as it often happens to
Tyrants; or by the Conspiracy of the Nobles and Commons; or by his Son
Evilmerodach, who (as the Hebrews report) affected the Kingdom, while his
Father lived. Some think that he had oppressed, and tyrannically used the
Chaldeans, Magicians, and Wisemen of his Kingdom, because they could not tell
his dream. See c. 2. v. 5. where he threatens that they should be cut in
pieces, and their houses should be made as a dunghill. This Tyranny over their
Liberties, Properties, and Lives, engaged them to depose the King according to
the Law of Nature.

And this leads me to the second, Why he was deposed.

1. Because he was in a deep Melancholy, and so unable to rule.

2. Because he was a Tyrant and Oppressor, and so his Subjects would not trust
him with their Liberties and Lives.

1. He was in a deep Melancholy, and so unable to Rule. See c. 4. v. 33. He was
driven from men, and did eat grass as the Ox, and his body was wet with the dew
of Heaven, till his hairs were grown like Eagles feathers, and his nails like
Birds claws. The sense is, that his hair, beard and nails, were very much grown
out, because there was no body to cut them, and he himself did not think of
cutting them, loving the likeness of beasts through black Choler or Melancholy.
His heart was changed from man's, and he had a beasts heart given to him, v. 16.
He was not truly transformed into a beast, as I believe; but, because his
imagination was corrupt, and his reason eclipsed, through this adust humor, he
seemed to himself a beast. And the most learned Physicians speak of this kind
of Melancholy: And our own Experience may confirm it in some of our own Age,
that have been troubled with Hypochondriack Passions and Melancholy. He
remained a man truly; but Humane Sense and Reason, as to the Exercise, was
taken from him.

2. He was deposed, because he was a Tyrant and Oppressor, and so his Subjects
would not trust him with their Liberties and Lives. His severe and cruel Edict
against the Magicians and Wisemen was intolerable, and they could not but
resent it. See c. 2. Nebuchadnezzar dreamed. and forgot his dream, and yet
would imperiously and tyrannically force his Magicians to tell the dream, and
the interpretation. They make humble supplication to the King, and tell him,
that no Ruler ever asked such a thing of any Magician, or Astrologer, or
Chaldean. None but God could reveal such secrets. But notwithstanding the King
was angry and very furious, and commanded to destroy them. This cruelty (as it
is thought) stuck in their minds: they treasured it up in their hearts, and, as
soon as opportunity served, were glad to throw off his tyrannical Yoke.

The word Magician, (to tell you that by the way) among the Persians, and other
Eastern Countries, at first was used in a good sense, for a wise and
understanding man; for a Philosopher, who spends his days in contemplation and
meditation. These were Astronomers, and Astrologers, or Mathematicians, who by
the influence of Stars, and calculating Nativities, foretold many strange
things. And, for my part, I believe there is much Truth and Innocence in this
Art: at least I am far from condemning so many wise men of all Ages: But as for
Sorcerers, Diviners, etc. they are deluders of the People, full of Imposture
and Superstition. And this sort of Diabolick creatures were forbidden by Moses
Law, Levit. 19.31. Regard not them that have familiar Spirits, neither seek
after Wizards, to be defiled by them. And Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. There shall not be
found among you any one that makes his Son, or his Daughter to pass through the
fire, or that uses Divination, or an Observer of times, or an Inchanter, or a
Witch, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar Spirits, or a Wizard, or a
Necromancer. (But to return) This Demand and Decree of the King in it self was
unjust: for man, though most skilful, and most wise, (Lap.) cannot reveal
secret dreams, especially already past, much less their signification. But
some, who write of Oneirocriticks, do own that great Conjectures may be made
from some certain and unwonted dreams. A learned Author says, That the Chief
Priests of the Chaldeans were addicted to Astrology: And you will easily
believe, that Priests do not love to be oppressed, and murdered without cause.
This was (says Synop. out of Calvin) a beastly rage of the King, because he
demanded that which was above the power of man, and that which the Chaldeans
never arrogated to themselves. Yet this was a reward of their arrogance,
because they assumed to themselves more than was meet.

3. I shall show that it was just to depose Nebuchadnezzar.

To this purpose we must consider, 1. That all Government is a Trust. 2. That
all Government is for the safety and good of the Community. 3. That there may
be such crimes, as may forfeit the Crown and Throne, and reduce all to first
Principles.


1. We must consider that all Government is a Trust. The Dominion of one man
over another is by consent, and is founded in Covenant. All men are free by the
Law of Nature to choose what kind of Government they think most convenient. And
the Positive Law of God has left this to their Election. The Nomination of the
person, and the Limitation of the power is originally and radically in the
Community. Hence some Nations have Lords, Dukes, etc. their supreme Governors.
Some Nations have Kings by Election every Reign: Others have Succession in one
Family. Some have Queens to rule over them; others will not allow Women to
reign. Some are absolute Monarchs; others are limited. Some have
Aristocratical; others Democratical Government. And almost all Nations vary in
these Circumstances.

It is true, Authority is from God. There is no Power but of God, says St.
Paul, Romans 13.1. And, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, says God
by Solomon, Prove. 8.15. But though the Donation of the Power is of God, yet the
Designation of the Person, and the Limitation of the Power, how much, or how
little, or in what manner Mankind must be ruled, and give Obedience, and owe
Submission, is wholly by Positive Law and Agreement at the first Constitution,
or afterward.

Thus we read, 2 Samuel 5.3. All the Elders of Israel came to the King to Hebron,
and King David made a League with them in Hebron before the Lord: and they
anointed David King over Israel. Here was an Assembly or Parliament, who chose
David King and covenanted with him. God, and Man are not opposite, but
subordinate in this case. That which is of God (says a learned Divine) may be
of Man also. For the second cause does not exclude the first, or contrarily.
Because the fruits and increase of the Earth are obtained by the care and
labor of Man, therefore are they not given of God? So that as the Prophets and
Apostles in old time were called immediately by God, not by Men: but other
Pastors and Bishops of the Church, being not immediately called by God, but by
men, yet cease not to have their Vocation from God. Because God cease not to
do what he does by means. As God designed Timothy Bishop, not immediately, as
Paul: but by the Imposition of the hands of Paul, and the Presbytery. So God in
old time by an immediate call set Magistrates, and some Kings upon the Throne,
as Moses, Joshua, the Judges, David, Jehu, etc. But he gave Power and does not
cease to give Power to others, as to the seventy Elders, by Man's counsel and
means, and that according to the Laws and received Customs of the People:
either by Election and the consent of the Senate, as now the Roman Empire; or
by the Suffrages of the People, as Consuls, Governors of Cities, either
merely, or mixtly Democratical: or by the will of the Soldiers, as the old
Empire of Rome: or finally by Hereditary Succession, as the Kings of France, of
Spain, and of Great Britain, etc. and the Princes of the Empire. For there is
no Power but of God. And certainly the Authority of one, or a few, in humane
Consideration would not suffice to govern and contain so many in Duty, and many
times very cruel and evil Men, unless there were something of the hand of God
in it. Therefore God himself is the proper and first Cause of Magistracy, though
Men are the next Cause.

The Prince is bound (says no mean Divine) to look to the safety and welfare
of the Kingdom, as is agreed by all. And therefore he is bound to it, because
he receives this Power originally (I speak not in opposition to God, but, I
say, originally) from the People themselves: as appears by the Government of
Judah, and the Kings of Israel. For, Judge. 8.22. The men of Israel came to
Gideon to make him their King. It is true, Gideon refused this offer (says Mr.
Rogers in his Commentary) with great resolution and wisdom, telling them that
the Lord should rule over them, v. 23. His meaning was, that the Order that God
had set (of Governing by such as had no continued Government) should stand, and
not be perverted by or for him, or his: but contrarily, to his Power he would
hinder it. And God reigned indeed in the Commonwealth of Israel, which
flourished in Gideon's time: wherein the Elders were chosen by common consent:
some Ecclesiastical, to give the meaning of the Law: and others Civil and
Temporal, as men call it, to rule the people thereby, etc. And if any War fell
out, the Lord himself stirred up Guides and Judges: and they were not chosen (I
suppose, he means only, or in a usual course) by Men, as appears, c. 1. v. 1.
neither did their Children succeed them. And thus the Lord both in Peace and
War ruled over them: and so Gideon meant that the Office of a Judge was no
ordinary Magistracy, such as the King is: but a Temporary and Occasional, much
like to the Dictatorship of the Romans, in respect of the use whereto it
served: though otherwise of divine Election, immediately, not by Men. And, Judge.
9.6. They gathered together, and made Abimelech their King. And, Judge. 11.8, 9,
10, 11. the people covenanted with Jephtha, and made him their King. And as for
Saul, (though he was designed by God for the Kingdom, yet) the people themselves
chose the kind of their Government first, when they said, Give us a King to
rule over us after the manner of the Nations. After that God had anointed Saul,
it is said, 1 Samuel 11.15. And all the people went to Gilgal, and there they
made Saul King before the Lord in Gilgal. And as for David, though he was
anointed King by Samuel, yet we find that he continued subject unto Saul after
that. And, 2 Samuel 2. He came to Hebron, and thither the men of Judah came, and
there they anointed David King over the House of Judah, v. 4. After that he was
thus anointed by Judah to be King over them, yet he did not rule over Israel,
till the other Tribes also went out and made him King over them, 1 Chro. 12.38.
It is said, That all these men of war came with a perfect heart to Hebron to
make David King over all Israel. And as for Solomon, (though he was designed by
God to the Kingdom, yet) it is said of him also, 1 Chro. 29.22. That all the
Congregation did eat and drink before the Lord, and they made Solomon the Son
of David King the second time, and anointed him to the Lord to be Chief
Governor. Solomon being dead, 2 Chro. 10.1. it is said of Rehoboam, that he
went to Shechem, where all Israel came to make him King. And in Deuteronomy. 17.15.
Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall
choose. One from among thy brethren shall thou set King over thee. The Election
of a King is attributed to God, but the Constitution to the People. God's
choice, and the Peoples choice are consistent. So God approved Saul and David,
and they were anointed by the Prophet Samuel, and chosen by the People also. In
the Commonwealth, Magistrates are called the Ordinance of Man, or an Humane
Creation, 1 Pet. 2.13. Because, though Magistracy in general be the Ordinance of
God, yet this or that special kind of Magistracy, whether Monarchy,
Aristocracy, etc. is of man. Governors covenant to defend the people, as well
as the people covenant to obey them: and the Obligation of Conscience is
consequent to this Agreement. And our present Sovereign Lord and Lady King
William and Queen Mary, have as good a Title, and we are bound in Conscience as
willingly and heartily to honor and obey them, according to the Law of God,
and our Country, as ever we were to submit to any Prince.

2. We must consider that all Government is for the safety and good of the
Community. We must eye (as one says in another case) the end, which always
steers the Action among such as be Agents by counsel. In all Combinations there
is, and will be some common end: that end must have means to attain it: to
these means and rules each man must bind himself to attend, and in case he does
not, to submit to another, to be directed and reformed or else to yield to the
whole, that he may be censured and removed therefrom. For otherwise the End
cannot be attained, nor the Means attended with profit, or any powerful success
in reason. For if each man may do what is good in his own eyes, proceeding
according to his own pleasure, so that none may cross him, or control him by
any power, there must of necessity follow Distraction and Desolation of the
whole, when each man has liberty to follow his own Imagination and humoursome
devices, and seeks his Particular, but oppose one another, and all prejudice
the Public. Mutual subjection is as it were the sinews of Society, by which it
is sustained. As for the Governor, S. Paul says plainly, He is the Minister
of God to thee for good, Romans 13.4. This is the End of Government, That the
People may be happy. The Preservation of our Lives, Liberties, and Properties
is the Reason of Rule and Subjection. See the former Discourse. Kings are not
set over us to make us in a worse condition than we were by the Law of Nature:
(which I am sure is the unwritten Law of God, only written in the heart, as S.
Paul says) but that we may be safe, and live without fear of wicked men, who
have extinguished the Light of Nature and Reason. And like Brutes, that have no
understanding; like Beasts of prey, Lions and Wolves would devour the poor
innocent man; the good and righteous, who lives according to his reason and
conscience. It concerns all Mankind with utmost zeal to preserve their Laws;
for otherwise the Sons of Belial will conspire, and oppress the poor righteous
man: and they will make their Strength the Law of Justice, as the Son of Sirach
says, This I Will, and this I Command, and my Will shall stand for Reason.
This is the Voice of Proud Oppressors. They make their Lusts their Law, and
their Will their Ruler. But Reason, the Candle of the Lord, and Scripture, the
revealed Will of God, inform us, that Order, and Dominion, and Rule is, not to
make us slaves, but that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all
godliness and honesty.

3. We must consider that there may be such Crimes, as may forfeit the Crown
and Throne, and reduce all to first Principles.

Here it will be convenient to consider, 1. What Crimes we suppose make a
Forfeiture. 2. To demonstrate that such Crimes forfeit the Crown.

1. I shall consider what Crimes we suppose make a Forfeiture. And this may be
done for more plain understanding, 1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.

1. Negatively. Personal Crimes do not forfeit a Crown. A bad Man, morally, may
be a good King Politically. Dominion is not founded in Grace: though it is much
to be desired, as being their bounden Duty, that Kings would live in the Fear
of God. However (as a most zealous Divine on our side grants) There is required
in Subjects a Toleration of the spots, blemishes, or infirmities of
Magistrates. For the Magistrate has a burden no less laborious than
dangerous, under which he must necessarily often faint, and endure Extremities:
so that sometimes he has scarce place or time to breath. And therefore it is
no wonder, if he be sometimes drawn away by Humane Affections, as Pride,
Ambition, Intemperance, Pleasure, Sloth, Forgetfulness, Security, Anger, Fury,
and Passions of like kind. To which they are wont to be more obnoxious than
others, as they are urged with greater Troubles and Assaults. Therefore then it
is the Duty of Loyal Subjects patiently to bear those Infirmities, as it is
meet that Children should hide the blemishes of their Parents. It is true, a
Prince ought to be just, and judge as for God; but a wicked Prince, as Ahab,
must have Obedience, and a good Obadiah may be his servant. An habitual sinner,
whom God will judge and condemn, may not be questioned by his Subjects. David's
Adultery and Murder of Vriah was not sufficient to depose him. Such Crimes must
be left to God's vengeance. And private Oppressions are not Causes sufficient;
but here Prayers and Tears must take place: and we must (as our Savior
advises) in Patience possess our Souls.

2. Affirmatively. Such Crimes as are Epidemical, or Universal, and are of
great concern to the whole Body Politic, to the whole Nation. As invalidating
Laws made for Public Security, endeavoring to subvert the Rights of the
Subject, Liberty and Property; or subverting of the Religion by Law
established, whereby Thousands of poor Innocents must be ruined; breach of
Covenant, Oath, and Promise, whereby Public Faith is endangered, and all
Subjects with reason are made jealous. And here pray imagine me in Vtopia, and
take it for a supposition, If a Kingdom is in such danger, whether they ought
not to secure themselves.

I could wish it had consisted with Gods Providence that I had not lived in
such unhappy days, wherein a man that speaks truth is envied by his Neighbor:
Or I could wish that I had not such unlucky Stars, as that I must necessarily
go against my Conscience, if I should justify or connive at the late
Proceedings of the Court Faction, and Jesuitical Society.

I was as true and faithful to the late King, notwithstanding his Religion as
long as he kept his Oath and Promise, as any Subject in Reason, Knowledge, or
Conscience could be. But when I evidently perceived that the design was to
Subject us to Rome, and Arbitrary power, my Heart grew cold, my Affection was
lost, and I could not, as an English man, nor a Christian, nor a Priest, who
ought to teach Truth, comply with such wicked and mischievous designs. And I
have ever since prayed (or wished in my heart) that God would send us a
Deliverer. He has sent us a Deliverer: And blessed be his holy Name. And this
discourse I may well call a justification of their present sacred Majesty's,
and of the Proceedings of the Lords, and Commons, and all the People of the
Land at this day. And I hope that every good man, who makes Conscience of his
ways, will not be backward to advance this public design. All that hate Popery
and Slavery, and have any love for true Religion, will stand to this cause.
There is Loyalty to our Country: and an Heathen could say, It is sweet and
comely to die for our Country. And the true Protestant Religion by Law
established is of unexpressible value.

To this purpose consider seriously, and without prejudice, the Distinction
mentioned by Civilians, and applied almost to our case by a great Scholar.

There is a difference between disposing of things by way of Donation and Sale,
and disposing things by way of Trust. True, those things which we dispose of by
way of Donation and Sale, are not afterward in our power to recall, as they
were before the Donation and Sale. As if a man gives his Land to Children, or
sells Land to his Neighbor, it is not in the power of the Father, or Neighbor
to recall or dispose of the Land, as before the Donation or Sale. But if a
thing be disposed of by way of Trust, then if the Fiduciary or Trusted shall
not discharge his Trust, it is in the power at least of the Trusting to look to
the matter himself. As in case a Steward be trusted with a man's house. And thus
when any Governor is set up in a Land by the People, they trust the Governor,
they do not give away Liberty or Right, but trust them in the hands of the
Governor; who, if abused, that he do not perform his stewardly Trust as he
should, the People or Representative Body, as an act of self-preservation (I do
not say as an act of Jurisdiction) are to look to it. Neither do they herein so
reassume their Power, as to take away any thing which they gave to the King,
but so as to act that power which they always had left in themselves, (as the
power of self-preservation.) (By the way observe, I do not believe that the
People have power of Jurisdiction; for that properly connotates an Office,
which the People have not: but they can never give away power to preserve
themselves; and they have power virtually to elect an Officer, to rule and
exercise all Jurisdiction.) And the end of the King's Trust being to look to
the Kingdom, though there be no such words expressed in the Covenant or Agreement
between the King and his People, that in case he shall not discharge his Trust,
then it shall be lawful for the State of the Kingdom by Arms to resist, and to
look to their own safety; yet their safety being the end of this Trust, and the
reason of the Law is Law, in reason that must be implied.

As for Nebuchadnezzar, his impious Pride and Oppression, and perhaps
consequently the Magicians hatred and opposing of him, brought him into a deep
Melancholy and Distraction, and so he was Abdicate. And from this Example very
Learned Divines and Statesmen infer the lawfulness of Abdicating a Prince for
such Maladministration. And I shall prove it thus.

What the wisest and best men in all Ages and Kingdoms have done by the Light
of Nature, and have been commended for it, that is lawful and agreeable to the
Will of God.

But the wisest and best men in all Ages and Kingdoms have deposed Kings by the
Light of Nature, and have been commended for it: Therefore it is lawful and
agreeable to the Will of God.

I suppose none will deny the Major, because the Law of Nature is the unwritten
Law of God, and acknowledged by all Divines to be the most certain Rule of Life.

It is the Minor that I must establish, which is, The wisest and best men in
all Ages and Kingdoms have deposed Kings by the Light of Nature, and have been
commended for it.

I need not here mention the Feats of Semiramis, related by the Historian
Justin, and (as he says) admired by all wise men of Babylon, and honored for
her Prudence in Government, and Valor, (not two hundred years after Noah's
Flood.) Neither shall I speak of Sardanapalus, King of Assyria, mentioned by
the same Justin, an effeminate Prince, deposed by Arbactus, President over
Media, and his Associates, for ill Government. I will also omit the Monarchy of
the Medes and Persians; in which ye will sind that Darius was chosen by the
neighing of his Horse; and that the best Kings among them, and their Posterity,
were not esteemed so sacred, but for Mis-rule they might be deposed.

In the Grecian Monarchy, which was the next, all the World knows what strange
changes happened After the death of Alexander the Great, the Empire was divided
according to Tumult, or Prudence, and several Dukes or Captains obeyed. And
this was divided into the Kingdoms of Egypt, Syria, and Macedonia. All which by
all wise and conscientious men of those days were required to obey their
several Governors.

The next Monarchy was the Roman. And as to the Roman, it is evident by the
Historian Livy, etc. that Tarquinius Superbus was justly deposed. And all that
opposed him were accounted Patriots and Defenders of their Country; good men
and true, that would not see common Justice excluded, and their native Country
inslaved. Brutus (says Livy, b. 2. decad. 1.) deserved glory for expe^ling
King (Tarquinius) Supcrbus. They expelled wicked Rulers and Tyrants, especially
Nero: and are commended in all Authors for it. When the Head of Maximinus (that
tyrannical Emperor) with his Sons were brought to Rome, all ran to the Altars
to thank the Gods. And Balbinus Sacrificed Hecatombs for his deliverance,
commanding the same to be done through the Empire. I do not hereby intend to
justify all circumstances, or all persons, or all their actions: But I bring
these Instances to show, That by the Light of nature Government is alterable,
and that a Supreme Prince may be deposed.

And Dr. Bilson, Warden of Winchester confesses, (in his book entitled, The
true difference between Christian Subjection and Unchristian Rebellion, perused
and allowed by public Authority, and dedicated to Queen Elizabeth) There may
fall Extremities, when Princes are not able to guide themselves much less their
Realms. ( P. 3. p. 145.) As if the right Heir to any Crown be a Natural fool,
or he that is invested in the Crown wax mad, and runs beside himself: In either
of these two cases any Realm by public consent and advice may choose another.
As Childerick was deposed for a Fool, (and Pipin elected.) And Charles the the
third, the last Emperor of Pipins Line, was deposed by the same people for a
Bedlam. As also when Justinus the younger was distracted of his wits, Tiberius
was placed in the Empire. So he.

And if Governors may be deposed, and the Succession altered for natural
defects, and calamities, then much more for Moral defects, such as universal
Oppression and Tyranny over their Subjects. Because the other might be helped
by Protectors and Guardians: but this neither will nor can. Again, p. 179. If
any Prince were repressed, (since the Foundation of the Earth for five thousand
years) it was done by their own States and Realms, and that for their Extreme
Tyranny. Priests always refrained those attempts, and never thought it any part
of their vocation, to meddle with the changes and alterations of Kingdoms, (as
Gregory the seventh, called Pope Hildebrand, did.)

Now to return to Nebuchadnezzar, that which happened (says a learned Divine)
to the furious King in his madness by the decree of God, why may not, ought not
that be done to other impious Kings also? Calvin indeed speaks dubiously, in
his Commentary on Dan. 4. It is uncertain, whether he was cast out by Tumult,
and the Conspiracy of the Nobles, or also by the consent of the whole people.
This is doubtful, because the Histories of that time are unknown to us. While
Calvin thus doubts, he denies not in the mean time, that the furious King was
removed by public Authority. The Text is express, They shall drive thee from
men, v. 32. And verily by force of Gods Decree and Command. Therefore other
impious Kings, taken with like fury, may fear the same punishment. Like
Oppression at any time will justify like defense and proceedings.

The famous Doctor of the Church, Oecolampadius, judges right, whose words are
these in his Commentary; Observe the equity of the Judge, that the Lord
measures to us with the same measure that we measure to others. He was much
exalted, and much humbled: he received many gifts from God, many are taken
away: he banished many, and he also is driven from men: he had delicious meats,
now he feeds with beasts: he was clothed with purple, now he is wholly covered
with frightful hair: he was anointed with balm and precious Ointments, now he
is wet with showers and the dew of Heaven.

And here I shall sum up the whole in principles according to the use of
Mathematicians in Postulata, Definitions, and Axioms. Such things (says the
renowned Hooker, Eccl. Pol. b. 1. par. 8) As soon as they are alleged, all men
acknowledge to be good. As, God is to be worshipped: Parents are to be honored.
The main Principles of reason are in themselves apparent. For to make nothing
evident of it self to man's understanding, were to make away all possibility of
knowing any thing. And herein that of Theophrastus is true, They that seek a
reason of all things, do utterly overthrow it. In every kind of knowledge some
such grounds there are as that being proposed, the mind does presently embrace
them as free from all possibility of error, clear and manifest without proof.

Postulatum 1. Every creature by the instinct of nature preserves itself, and
promotes its well being. For, as the Philosopher says, all defire Good, and
Happiness naturally is to be sought.

2. No Positive law ought to, or can invalidate, or destroy the Law of nature,
which is the highest reason in man. Because positive Laws are to better the
condition of mankind, not to make it worse.

3. The primary right of nature so called cannot be changed, because it is
written in the heart of man, as S. Paul testifies. Hence it cannot be blotted
out, unless nature be blotted out, and reason cease to be reason. See the
former discourse.

4. The great End of Government is the security of the Community. Were the
People first, or the King first? Surely there were People to be governed,
before there were Governors. Did Kings descend from Heaven, and were they
immediately appointed by God, or mediately by the Election of the People?
Surely the Fathers of Families and Elders of the People chose one to be their
Head and Governor. Did they choose him to make themselves in a better
condition, or in a worse? Surely that they might live better, and more secure;
that no one Person or Family might wrong another, because they were stronger.
The Law of Nature tells us, it is not necessary (as one says in another case)
That they that give, should always formally have beforehand received that Power
which they give: it is enough if they have received it virtually. For instance,
a multitude of free People may Elect and Ordain a King over them, and yet none
of them had beforehand received Kingly Power: It is enough they have a Virtual
Power, to set up, and to submit to any Lawful Form of Government, which they
see good for themselves in the Land.

5. Defend thy self against Foroe is the first Principle of true Politics.
There can be no Time, Age, Person, wherein this is not true, according to the
former Postulata. Hence are drawn these Conclusions, mentioned in my former
Discourse.

1. No man ought to hurt us, when we are innocent. 2. If any man endeavors to
hurt us, when we are innocent, we may defend our selves. 3. Neither God, nor
Man gives Authority to Governors to hurt the Innocent. 4. If Governors hurt
the Innocent, they may defend themselves. All this presupposes my former
Discourse, to which I refer the Reader.
The general and perpetual Voice of men (says Hooker) is as the Sentence of
God himself. For that which all men have at all times learned, Nature her self
must needs have taught: and God being the Author of Nature, her Voice is but
his Instrument. By her from him we receive whatsoever in such sort we learn.
Infinite duties there are, the good whereof is by this Rule sufficiently
manifest, though we had no other warrant besides to approve them. The Apostle
Paul having speech concerning the Heathens, says of them, They are a Law to
themselves, Romans 2.14. His meaning is, that by force of the Light of Reason,
wherewith God illuminates every one that comes into the world, men being
enabled to know truth from falsehood, and good from evil, do thereby learn in
many things what the Will of God is. Which Will himself not revealing by any
extraordinary means to them, but they by natural discourse attaining the
knowledge thereof, seem the makers of those Laws which indeed are his, and they
but only the finders of them our.

I now proceed to Definitions.

1. Defense is the preserving the Innocent from wrong.

2. Tyranny is the wilful Oppression of the Innocent, against Law, or
Conscience. Yet there is Tyranny in the Legislative Power, when Princes, and
men in Authority make wicked and unjust Laws: and here submission is due, or
Passive Obedience so called. Thus Daniel, and his Companions could not Actively
obey Nebuchadnezzar, (because we must obey God rather than Man) but they humbly
submitted to the King's pleasure, and cruel Edict. Thus the Primitive
Christians cheerfully laid down their Lives for the Name of Jesus, and resisted
not; because the Laws of the Heathen Roman Empire, as those of the Chaldeans
before, were against them. This is called Abuse of Power in Kings and
Governors. And in this case Prayers and Tears are the Weapons of Christians,
and all upright men, or flying from Persecution. But where there is no Law,
there is no transgression, Romans 4.15. This is an universal Proposition
mentioned by Paul. If I defend my self against the Illegal Will, or Lust of a
Governor, who has received no such Authority from God, nor Man, it is neither
transgression, nor resisting of the Power.

Defin. 3. Obedience is a willing and hearty performance of the Commands of our
Governors according to Law.

Defin. 4. Law, the Rule of Obedience, is a Sentence proceeding from the right
Reason of the Commander. And therefore no man must yield Active Obedience to
Laws against the Law of Nature, or against the written Law of God. I go on to
Axioms.

1. The whole is to be preferred before any one part, and the greater good
before the less. Therefore self-preservation is before the preservation of
another; because Charity begins at home. And the whole Kingdom is to be
preferred before the King himself, when be, who is the principal part, stands
in opposition to the good of the whole.

Axiom 2. All natural good may be desired; and all natural evil may be avoided.
And here comes in the Rule of Justice, and first Principle, mentioned by our
Savior, Mat. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do you even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets. And what you will
not have done to you, do not you do to another. This is a clear and undeleble
Principle; a first and Alphabetical Notion, as one speaks. Therefore I may
preserve my Liberty and Property; and oppose those that would by violence and
illegal preceedings invade them. And here I shall offer four or five more
Postulata.

1. Our Savior did not countenance Oppression, nor taught no Doctrine in
favor thereof.

2. Nothing in Christian Religion contradicts natural Religion. The reason is,
both are from God. So that if Natural Religion allows Defense, then Christian
Religion forbids it not. As for Mysteries of Faith, they are said to be above,
but not against Reason.

3. Our Savior never designed to set down a Form of Government and Polity; but
taught Obedience to Lawful Authority. Render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar 's. Polity was before the Law of Moses, or the Law of Christ. The Law of
Moses commanded Moral, and Ceremonial performances. And as for Judicial Laws,
they bind us only as to the Equity, as all acknowledge. And the Law of Christ
compleats, fulfils, or advances the Moral Law indeed; and withal, adds some
Mysteries of Faith to be believed of all Christians. But Christ, and his
Apostles leave Political Government as they found them in the world.

The Gospel (say Theol. Wit.) is a Doctrine of a Spiritual and Eternal Kingdom
in the hearts of men; neither does it externally overthrow Political Regiment,
but rather establish and confirm it. Therefore it follows that the Gospel
permits all Natural and Legal Defense, agreeing with the Civil Laws. The Gospel
takes not away Polity, or Political Laws.

4. No People could be so sottish as to set Governors over them to undo them:
For safety, happiness, or well-being, is the End of Government. It is a
self-evident Principle, No man is bound to think well, or speak well, or do
well to his Oppressors, but may throw off their Yoke, as soon as be can. And so
may a whole Kingdom likewise.

Again, This is another self-evident Principle and needs no proof, Trust not
him with thy Life, Goods, and Posterity, who has once endeavored to ruin
thee. I am confident few men would lend such a man Ten pounds upon his word. A
man cannot make any doubt of it, but that it is most agreeable to reason, and
the common Interest of those in Society, that they should be true to their
Compacts. Out of what Author (as an ingenious Scholar questions) can they show
us a Nation that ever did allow the breach of solemn Compacts? The lowest
inanimate beings have a power and propensity to their own welfare; a blind
tendency and inclination to their own Security. And such a noble being as man
is, must needs have it in a more sublime and eminent manner. A noble Author of
our own tells us, in his Book of Truth, That he for his part takes them for the
Catholic Church that are constant and faithful to first Principles; that
common Notions are the bottom and foundation upon which the Church is built.
Excuse our diffidence here, great Sir, The Church is built upon a surer and
higher Rock; upon a more Adamantine and precious Foundation; yet thus much is
acceptable and undeniable, That whoever they are that by any Practice, or
Custom, or Tradition, or Tenet, shall stop the passage of first Principles, and
sound Reason that flows from them, they are in this farther from the Church
than Indians or Americans, while they are not only Antichristian, but Unnatural.

5. If any should consent to such unreasonable Conditions, their Posterity
could not be bound by their mistakes. The Precepts of the Law of Nature are so
potent and triumphant (as he speaks) as that some Acts which rebel against it,
become not only unlawful, but void, as both Schoolmen and Lawyers observe: they
are not only Irregularities, but mere Nullities. Because man wants power to
make such Laws. God gives no man Authority to contradict the Law of Nature,
which is his own Law, and Commands nothing but what is reasonable: so that what
contradicts this, must be unreasonable. He that lays violent hands upon himself
for wickedness committed, though commanded by the Magistrate, (says Wendelin.
Philos. Mor. b. 1. c. 28.) wrongs himself by executing that Command: because
the Command of such a Magistrate is unjust, and against Natural and Divine
right: therefore Obedience performed to it must be unjust.

And verily if a Kingdom may not defend it self by Force of Arms, when
grievously oppressed, then this Absurdity will follow, that we, our Liberties,
Wives, Children, and Religion may be destroyed, when Tyrants and evil Rulers
please. And all the Remedy is, Lord have mercy upon us, and our Children. But
surely this is against common Sense and Reason: (as I have showed) and God, and
Nature has not placed Mankind in such circumstances. If this be so, then we
are in worse case than the Heathens, and all other Humane Commonwealths: (as an
Enemy of ours says) which both before, and after Christ, have had means to
deliver themselves from such Tyrants as were intolerable, and evidently
pernicious to Humane Society, and the good of the People: for whose peace and
preservation they were created by Men, or ordained by God. This wicked Doctrine
may put us into the hands of men as cruel as the Irish were in 41. At which
time King Charles I. said, Those barbarous Rebels practiced such inhumane and
unheard of outrages upon his miserable People, that no Christian Ear can hear
witthout horror, nor Story parallel.

Let us conclude with Application.

1. This teaches us the vanity and uncertainty of all worldly things. Kingdoms
themselves are not so fixed, as not to be subject to change. God changes the
times and seasons, (says Dan. c. 2. v. 21.) he removes Kings, and sets up
Kings. God has rejected many Kings for their wickedness. He rejected Saul, and
took his Kingdom from him. The most High rules in the Kingdoms of men, and
gives it to whomsoever he will, c. 4. v. 25. God has an hand in all these
changes. His Providence rules over all. Of this no Christian doubts. And this
some call (how properly I need not dispute) a Providential Right, which is by
God's Permission. Traitors and Usurpers have this Right to the Thrones that
they possess. This Right (as one says) a Slave (through God's just Judgment on
a Nation) may have to the Throne: for not a Sparrow falls to the ground without
God's Permission. This Right both lawful Kings and Usurpers have to the Thrones
they possess. Athaliah, that Murderer of the Royal Family, had only this
Providential Right, which she made appear only by Possession. But this Right
(being neither by Succession, nor Conquest, nor Compact, nor lawful Call of the
People) gives not just Title, nor can expect any Subjection merely upon that,
and no other right. And the Reason is, because when Providential Right crosses
Civil Right, a man is not bound to follow Providence, but to guide himself by
Moral and Divine Precepts. For Divine Precepts are perpetual standing Laws, by
which the Actions of men ought to be guided. But Providential Acts were never
ordained for Laws or Rules by which men should walk: and therefore to such a
Right there is no Subjection due.

2. It teaches us the heinous nature, and ill consequent of Pride. It is
enough to ruin a whole Nation; the King as well as his Subjects. A proud Man is
not under God's Protection, but forsaken of Him.

3. It teaches the great Mischief of Tyranny and Oppression. God and Man hate
Oppressors, who obstinately refuse good and reasonable Advice. Any Bishop or
Teacher (says Dr. Bilson, P. 3. page 1.) may reprove Princer, when they
violate the Precepts of God. For God has placed them in his Church to teach,
reprove, correct, and instruct in righteousness; 2 Timothy 3.16. as well Princes
as others, and charge them not to conceal one word of that he has spoken,
neither for favor, nor terror of any Prince. The Will of God must be declared
to all, and Sin reproved in all without dissembling, or flattering any sort, or
state of men. And that is most expedient for all, even for Princes themselves,
rather to hear with Humility what God has decreed for their Salvation, than to
run to their own destruction without recalling or warning. So Samuel reproved
King Saul, 1 Samuel 15. Ahijah King Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14. Elijah King Ahab, 1
Kings 21. Elisha King Jehoram, 2 Kings 3. John Baptist King Herod, Mar. 6.
Neither were wicked Princes only, but also the good and virtuous Kings of Judah
reproved by the Prophets. As namely, King David by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12. King
Jehosaphat by Jehu, 2 Chro. 19. And Hezekiah by the Prophet Isaiah, 2 Kings 20.
But this reproof reached no farther than to putting them in mind of God's Grace
and Mercy toward them, and their Duty again toward him, etc.

4. It teaches Kings to rule justly: for otherwise their wickedness will flnd
them out. If in stead of saving the lives of their Subjects, they endeavor to
destroy them, if instead of punishing the wicked, they punish the good and
God's Servants; if instead of reasonable and lawful Commands, they will have
their Lusts their Wills, and strive to ruin the People committed to their
charge without Law: or with cruelty, rigor, and severity without mercy, rage
against their Subjects, they may well expect Divine vengeance and the Judgments
of God, either immediately, or by the hand of their own Subjects, who have been
threatened, or cruelly used, and unmercifully or illegally dealt with. God hates
Oppression in all, even in Princes: especially the Persecution of his Servants
for his true worship, and renouncing Idolatry. Kings must give Account to God,
as well as meaner Men: for there is no respect of persons with him. God is the
Judge, and he puts down one, and sets up another, as he pleases. To him
be Glory and Dominion for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

