Strange and Wonderful News from ITALY, OR, A True and Impartial Relation of
the Travels, Adventures, and Martyrdom of four emient Quakers of Yorkshire.

Who in the Year 1672. Traveled through France, Italy and Turkey to propagate
their Religion.

Wherein is fully and faithfully declared the Designs, Endeavors and Attempts
of these zealous Quakers for the Conversion of the TURK and POPE.

With a summary account of the event and success of the business, and of all
the most remarkable occurrents. As also a faithful Narrative of their private
discourses, conferences and disputes which passed between these Quakers and the
Pope, the Cardinal Nephew and Cardinal Barbarini.

ALSO Of their Voyage to Constantinople, and of their most barbarous, cruel and
bloody death by the special command of the Mufti and the Vizier Bassa.

Faithfully and compendiously related by Elias Wilson Esquire, who was an
eyewitness to a great part of these transactions.

LONDON, Printed by John Lock, living in the Long Walk near Christ-Church
Hospital, over against the sign of the Drawers. 1673.

IT was toward the end of March in the year 1672. that John Watson, William
Stubbs, Nathaniel Golden, and Rowland Jenkins, all of Yorkshire, and eminently
known in that County to be Leading-men among the Quakers: It was I say, about
that time that these men said they had the spirit of Burning and the Holy
Anointing in them, and were called and sent by God to preach the everlasting
Gospel to the Nations and Heathens. And they said that the child Jesus within
them had assured them of great success, and that the Lord would be wonderfully
with them in this Dispensation, that they should break the Bread of Life to the
Nations, and that the Springs of Life should break forth out of their Bellies.
It is a wonder to fee what strange effects and boldness these Enthusiastical
persuasions and Phanatical Dreams caused in these poor Men. They were now
swelled with hopes and expectation of Wonders. They now resolved to leave
England and embark for France, and begin this great work of converting Nations
and Heathens.

Reader, I do intend to give you a true and impartial account of these men's
actions in Foreign parts, as I have received it from their own mouths, and
also been fully and faithfully informed by several other Persons of known worth
and integrity, who were eye witnesses to the same.

John Watson was a Gentleman of a pretty considerable Estate, and had been well
educated, he had spent some years at University and had also formerly been a
Traveller into France, Spain and Italy, all which Languages he thoroughly
understood, and spoke very fluently. The other three were plain Countrymen,
and knew no other language but their own, but fully persuaded themselves they
should have the Gift of Tongues, and be endued with power from above.

It is not my intent to write a Journal of these men's actions, for that would
swell this little Pamphlet into a huge book. I intend only to relate some of
the most signal and most remarkable of their affairs and transactions, which I
heard from their own mouths when I was in Italy, and which have been also
related and attested by other Persons of known integrity.

In Easter-week they took Shipping at Dover, and were soon wafted over to
Calis. I find not that they had any Impulse of Spirit to say or attempt any
thing, but that they traveled on very peaceably and quietly, paying for what
they had, and so came to the great City Paris, where they spent 2 days only and
then advanced toward Lions, where they continued about a Fortnight. Here it
was that the tumultuous spirit began first to exert and show it self to the
French Nation. On April 27 William Stubbs said he had received a command from
God to speak; and he signified as much to John Watson and the rest On the next
day which was Sunday, about 10 of the Clock in the Forenoon they went all 4 to
the great Cathedral, or St. John's Church, where they were celebrating high Mass
(as they call it) about the middle of the Mass William Stubbs on a sudden
climes over the ralls and goes up to the high Altar, where as he was beginning
his Discourse in English (for as yet he had not received his Gift of Tongues)
the Church Officers presently lay hands on him and carry him out, and commit
him to Prison until the next day. On Monday the Officers have him before the
Magistrate, who refuses to meddle in this case, but causes him forthwith to be
sent to the Archbishop. The Archbishop is highly offended with him for his
bold attempt, and resolves to punish him with all severity imaginable, he
remits him to Prison, and orders that the next day at 10 of the Clock in the
Morning, he be brought before him again. On Tuesday he is strictly examined
what his intentions were, and how he durst be so bold to commit so great a
crime in so public and confident a manner; His answers were altogether
impertinent, and withal so insolent and saucy, that the Bishop sent him to the
House of Correction where he was soundly lashed. On Friday morning the Bishop
ordered him to be brought before him again; and seemed to be much incensed
against this poor Phanatick, Now the reason why his Grace was so fierce against
this poor Man was, because some of his Servants had maliciously suggested to
him that he was set on and encouraged to offer this public affront to their
Divine Service by some of the Hugonot Ministers: which was a most malicious
untruth, for as yet these Quakers had not had any the least correspondence or
converse with any Protestant in France, as they did all very soberly attest to
me in Italy. The Bishop was resolved to give him a full hearing, and to sift
the business to the bottom. He asked him if he was not set on to do this
irreverent action by the Hugonot Ministers? He replied no, he was moved by the
Spirit of God within him, and that it was the Spirit of Burning and the Holy
Anointing that had caused him to do what he had done. And here he entered into a
long discourse, telling the Archbishop, and the Canons who were there present,
that the Law of God was written upon Men's hearts, and that now the time was
come that they should all be taught of God: Now the Lords people were all to be
Prophets, they were all to have fresh springs arise in their hearts. And that
the Lord had sent him and three Friends more into these parts to break the
bread of Life to the Nations, to open the hidden Mysteries of Christ's Kingdom,
to overthrow the Babylonish Practices of Rome, to break the Serpents Head, and
wound the great Leviathan.

The Archbishop* the Canons, and the whole Company were much astonished at
this Man's confidence, and his wild and Fanatic discourse and answers, and
began now to relent, and to pity this poor Man, and look upon him as a madman
and one out of his senses, and so accordingly gave order to have him to the
Hospital of mad people, and there carefully to be looked after until he gave
further order.

About a week after this, 3 English Gentlemen hearing what had passed, and how
that an Englishman who was mad was committed to the Hospital of mad men: The
Genttlemen went immediately to the Hospital to enquire the truth of the matter,
when they came the Keeper very courteously informed them of the whole business,
brought them to the sight of Stubbs; who was locked up in a small Cell by
himself alone, and an iron Chain about his Leg, and his head shaved, (for it is
the custom here to shave all mad people.) When the Gentlemen came in they
found him sitting in a melancholy sullen postuee: he would not so much as look
up or speak one word to them for the space of above an hour and half,
notwithstanding they spoke very kindly to him, and asked him concerning his
condition, and the causes of his distemper, and promised him all the assistance
and kindness that lay in their power. At last this sullen Spirit was overcome,
and he began to enter into a long discourse of the spirit within him, and that
God had sent him and his 3 Friends to break in pieces the great Leviathan of
Rome. Now the Gentlemen quickly perceived his Spirit, and plainly discovered
him to be no madman but a Quaker. They asked him concerning his other Friends
where they were? And withal promised to do their utmost for his releasment,
and so giving the Keeper some Money to be kind to their Countryman they bid
him farewell. At Evening they went to the Inn to vifit the other 3 Quakers, and
had much discourse with them, endeavoring to persuade them to desist from this
so hazardous and fruitless an enterprise, and speedily to return to their own
Country, demonstrating the great dangers and inconveniences they would thrust
themselves upon if they did still persist or any farther prosecute this fond
and ridiculous undertaking; and so they parted. The next day they addressed to
the Archbishop, who was pleased to entertain them with much civility and
respect. They returned humble thanks to his Grace for his great care of their
Countryman, in sending him to such a place where he was so well accommodated
in all thing in order to his cure, and withal represented to his Grace his
condition, quality and Religion; and how that he was not a madman but one of
those Sectarians which in England are called Pha^aticks and Quakers. And
withal informed the Archbishop and Canons how that party do desire to appear
different from all others in their manner of speech, their apparel, and
manners. And also humbly petitioned his Grace for a releasment, promising
within a day or two to dispatch them out of the Town; The Arch-Bishop-readily
condescended to all their demands, and presently gave order that Stubbs should
be set at liberty, which was accordingly performed. And the day following they
all 4 left the Town, and hasted their Journey to Italy.

When they came to Milano in Italy, they had another enthusiastical impulse of
Spirit. And now John Watson, Nathaniel Golden and Rowland Jenkins, who hitherto
had been silent, or (as they expressed it themselves) humbly waiting at the
Feet of Jesus, who had now given them command to begin to preach the
Everlasting Gospel to the Italians. Here Stubbs accompanied with his 3 friends
did now (as formerly at Lions in France) upon Sunday enter the Domo or
Cathedral of the City, and made a great and public disturbance when they were
in the height of their solemnities. Watson began to make a discourse in
Italian, but was presently seized and carried forth, and had before a
Magistrate, who forthwith committed them all 4 to Prison, but withal gave
order they should be civilly used and lack for nothing until further order,
About 4 or 5 days after, they were commanded to appear before the Governor of
Milan himself who was resolved to have a full account of the matter, The
Governor when he saw their uncivil behavior, their sullen looks, and heard
their wild discourses, he presently concluded them madmen, and gave order to
have them confined and carefully looked after, and also appointed 2 Physicians
to visit them and to do their utmost for their recovery. The Physicians
presently made a visit to the Hospital and had a long discourse with Watson
(who spoke Italian well) And then returned to the Governor to give him their
sentiment of the business, they told his Excellence that they were mad, as did
evidently appear to them by their very countenance and manner of discourse: and
that one of them (meaning Stubbs) had a manifest and signal token of his
distemper, viz. his head was shaved according to the usual practice of all
Physicians in the World, who always use to shave madmen thereby to cool the
brain, and for the more comodious applying fomentations and other proper
Remedies for the Head, the seat and subject of the distemper. They added also
that they did verily believe they were Dutchmen who had made an escape from
their Keepers. The Governor was well satisfied with this account the
Physicians gave of the Quakers, and accordingly ordered them to take care of
them, and let no means be wanting, that might be used for their recovery, and
that they should be used with all tenderness imaginable. The 2 Doctors return
to the Pazzi or madmen, and cause them to be shaved and purged, and the next
day they bleed them all in the arms and feet; and every day twice a day cause
their heads to be bathed with cold water, and their whole bodies also in a pond
made for that use only. Here the poor Quakers went through a rigorous course of
Physic: for in a months time they were let blood about 17 or 18 several times,
besides frequent and violent purgings. Golden a fortnight after he had been
thus confined, forbore eating, whether it was out of a sullen dogged humor, or
out of an enthusiasme or expectation of new Revelations, I cannot certainly
affirm, but by his wilful and contumacious abstinence he gave up the Ghost and
died after he had been a month thus shut up. The other 3 by bleeding and
purging were brought very low, the Physicians now were much troubled and
disheartened, and did altogether despair of their recovery, and did signify as
much to the Governor withal telling his Excellence that they supposed it was
some Religious melancholy that these men were afflicted with, and that it was
insuperable and not to be overcome by any Art, and so desired the Governor to
release them, which was accordingly performed. After they had regained their
liberty, they continued some days in the Town, and would frequently make
speeches in the Churches, and exhort the people to embrace their Doctrine and
follow the Light which was within them. The Italians after their enlargement
were very civil to them, and if at any time they caused any disturbance in the
Church, the Officers would gently force them out, without using any manner of
rigor or severity to them. For the whole City looked upon them as 3 distracted
men, so whatsoever they said or did was looked upon, as proceeding from the
Distemper of their brain, and civilly connived at and passed over without any
notice.

Toward the beginning of June they left Milano and set forward for Rome. For
their chief design was to go thither, to convert the great Leviathan (as they
usually called the Pope) and to reform Babylon. I heard not of any considerable
action in their Journey from Milan to Rome; but you may imagine by their bald
Sculls and morose carriage what thoughts the people had of them, for now
wheresoever they came the people looked upon them as men distracted and mad:
some were afraid of them, others laughed at and derided them, no body at all
regarded any thing they said,

June the 18 they came to Rome the place they so much desired to see, upon the
Sunday following they according to their old Custom entered a little Church
called San Jacomo Scozza Cavaelli, where Watson made a fierce and zealous
discourse against the Babilonish Idolatry of that City, and said that the Pope
who was the Man of Sin and the great Leviathan was now to be crushed in pieces,
and God had sent them from the utmost parts of the Earth to convert that City,
and to confound the Pope and all his Adherents, and that now all mankind was to
expect and seek for the holy Anointing, for they were all to be taught of God,
and not any longer to follow Monks and Priests, who were all false Prophets,
and that now God would pour out the full Vials of his wrath and fierce
indignation upon them, and bring them all to utter ruin shame and confusion. I
know the Reader will admire to hear that the Romans were so patient, and let
them run on so long in these discourses, and not cause them to be carried out
of the Church and punished for this disturbance. But the reason of this
connivance was not for want of zeal, but because the Church and Congregation
was very small, so that the people were affrighted and all kept at a good
distance, for by their very looks and manner of discourse the people generally
concluded them 3 Bedlams, and were greatly afraid of them, until at last one
who had more courage and resolution then the rest, went and fetched some
Officers and put them into the inquisition os Heretics. But those of the
inquisition soon rid their hands of them, and the same day toward Evening set
them at liberty, saying that it was their business only to take notice of
Heretics and not of madmen. The next day which was the great solemnity of St,
John Baptist, they caused the same disturbance in the great Domo, that famous
and renowned Church of St, Peter, but here they were quickly carried out, but
no other severity used, because all the world now looked upon them as madmen,

I am weary of relating these frantic attempts and discourses which they made
in several of the Churches of Rome, and so shall pass by a great many of them
in silence, and come to their attempts upon the Pope himself. They went to the
English College and desired the Govemours assistance to bring them to the
presence of the Pope. The Governor refused to meddle in that matter, alleging
the dangerous consequents of it, that it would not only bring particular ruin
to themselves, but would also be a shame and reproach to the English Nation it
self: Wherefore he earnestly prssed and urged them to desist from that
dangerous attempt, and return home. Hereupon the Quakers fell in a great
passion, and told him that he savoured not the things of God, but was yet
wholly carnal, and that he was like Herod, and with him went about as much as
in him lay to murder the child Jesus, and to hinder the peoples conversion from
Idolatry, and embracing the everlasting Gospel, and so in great discontent they
left him.

The conference of Cardinal Barbarini with the English Quakers, and how he
brought them before the Pope.
These poor Quakers had not been a month in Rome but the whole City-took great
notice of them; and generally condoled their condition, as being distracted and
far from their own Country, July 6 Cardinal Barbarini, hearing much of these
men's frantic actions, was very desirous out of curiosity to see them, and to
discourse with them, hereupon he caused them to be before him, and was pleased
with much patience to discourse an hour with them; and then civilly dismissed
them, and sent then to their Lodgings. About two days after he made report to
the Cardinal Nephew and to the Pope himself of what had happened, and of the
strange and unparelleld enthusiasms of these 3 English Pazzi (for so he always
termed them) and how they had a great desire to have some conference with his
Holiness; and that they affirmed that God had sent them to deliver some secret
Revelations to him. The Pope at first was a little surprised with the novelty
and strangeness of he thing, and gave order to have them privately brought
before him and these 2 Cardinals. When they were admitted into the presence,
Watson saluted the Pope with this address. Art thou that Man of Sin, that
Antichrist and great Leviathan, Verily God has raised us up from the utmost
parts of the earth to preach the everlasting Gospel to thee, and to conver thee
from thy Idolatry, Errors and sinful ways, unto the true way and to the Light,
etc. The Pope was much amazed at this strange confidence and prodigions
boldness, and did really believe that the common report had not at al belyed
them, but that they were very much distempered in their minds, and distracted,
and gave a strict command that none should offer any violence to them; but
withal privately appointed some of the English College to persuade them to
return home, or else to take charge of them in their Colle^ge, and not let them
thus run about the City, disturbing the people. The business was effected
according to the Popes desire, for about the end of July seeing how
unsuccesfull their endeavors had been they resolved to leave that Babylonian
City, and go preach the Gospel to the Turks and Mahometans. In order thereunto
they took Shipping for Constantinople, where after two months tossing upon a
dangerous and tempestuous Sea they at length safely arrived.

They had not been above a fortnight in that great City, but they went into the
Mahometans Mosco's and Temples, and caused great tumult among the People. For
this offense they were condemned to be bastinado'd, i. e, to receive 300 blows
upon the soals of their Feet, which was accordingly executed with the extremity
of rigor and cruelty, so that in few days the putrified flesh came off from
the bones, which was a miserable spectacle to behold, But this spirit of
Fanaeticism had so transported and infatuated them, that they got wooden
crutches, and once more went to their prophance Mosco's, and caused a much
greater disturbance then before. Hereupon the Turks were exceedingly incensed,
and presently had them before the Mufti himself, who forthwith in a great fury
and rage passed this cruel sentence upon them, viz. That they were to have
their hands chopped off, their tongues cut out, their eyes bored out, and each
man to have a sharp wooden stake run in at his Fundament and so quite through
his body, all which was accordingly put in execution. And so these poor
wretches after all their sufferings ended their miserable Life, This rashness
of these Quakers had like to drew a great storm upon all the English Merchants
who were in great danger of having their Estates and Goods seized by the
Janisaries, but that the English Ambassador nobly and notably bestirred
himself, and gave the Vizier Bassa a full and satisfactory account of the whole
matter.

Conclusion.
Reader, in this short account of these Men's actions, I have not studied to set
it out with eloquence and ornament, but I have wholly and only aimed at truth,
resolving to give you a true and impartial Narrative of the whole business. I
was well acquairted with these Men in Italy, and had often conference with
them. And of some things I was informed by others. As concerning their actions
and crew death in Turkey I received a full account by Letter when I was at
Venice fron two of my Friends and faithful correspondents resident in
Constantinople, who were eyewitnesses of their cruel and most barbarous
deaths. Whose Letters I have still by me, and am willing and ready at any time
to exhibit them to the view and perusal of any who shall desire a more full
account of this matter.

FINIS.

