Spadacrene Dunelmensis: OR A SHORT TREATISE Of an Ancient MEDICINAL FOVNTAIN
OR VITRIOLINE SPAW Near the City of DURHAM.

TOGETHER* With the Constituent Principles, Virtues and Use thereof.

By E. W. Doctor of Physic.

London, Printed by W. Godbid, 1675.

REVERENDO DOMINO Dno JOHANNI SUDBURIO, Decano Dunelmensi optime merito, Nec
non amplissimis ejusdem congregationis Prebendariis jugiter observantia
colendissimis.
EXpectabunt forte nonnulli (amplissimi Domini) me in hoc proloquio gratiam
benevolentiamque vestram aucupaturum vestrae laudis (ut moris est) encomia
texere velle. Patet equidem ampla dicendi materia, spatiosus dilatandi Campus,
sed meis ut fateor viribus impar, and vestris sane virtutibus supervacaneum;
altius insonuit virtus vestra quam ut tubis indigeat, clarius eluxit quam ut
facem praeferam. Est mihi profecto jubilandi simul ac congratulandi sed non pro
meritis vestris collaudandi facultas, plus potestis praestatisque opere, quam
calamo me decet explicare. Accedo itaque non tanquam aliquid honoris
collaturus, sed beneficium postulaturus; ut nimirum jugis haec nostra acidula
agrorum Dunelmensium irrigua, vestro pariter favore ac patrocinio efflorescat.
Hoc tantum Enimvero posuit Deus morbum simul ac medelam, illum nobis peperit
peccatum, hanc libere profudit mundi piaculum. Jacuissemus alioquin in sordibus
iniquitatum, and truculentam adhuc hostium sustinuissemus atrocitatem, nisi
(...) salutiferum nobis itidem conciliasset medicamentum. Oh immensam amoris
flagrantiam, oh inauditum pietatis argumentum. Verum enim vero inter tot
tantasque rerum creatarum varietates nihil magis cedit in humani generis
conservationem, quam faecundum illud aquarum seminarium: hinc est quod Spiritus
Domini ferebatur super aquas, Haebraice Merahepheth incubabat aquas, ob
insignem vitalitatis virtutem a Spiritu Sancto in aquarum procreatione
concessam; unde non immerito Chimici jactitant, ab aqua sunt omnia, and in
aquam reducuntur omnia. Quapropter (Colendissimi) accipite hunc nostrum
libellum votumque tanquam amoris simul ac debitae venerationis symbolum, quo
plurimos adhuc semper faelicius invicem succedentes annos, and tandem, sero
licet, aeternae faelicitatis gaudium supplicat apprecaturque

Humilimus dominationum vestrarum servus ODOARDUS WILSONUS.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AS the powerful Hand of God made all things for the use of man, so was it His
Divine Will and Pleasure, that he should be completely furnished with all such
Remedies as principally concerned the perfect preservation of his health. Hence
it is, that all things created have their peculiar Medicinal faculty: Every
particular mixed Body, virtually respects one part or other of our human Bodies,
and by a mavelous strange Character points out that which respectively it is
appointed to maintain, nay it is as it were with a certain weight carried unto
that with which it holds an amical and natural correspondence. And because our
human constitution consists of many sulphurous, nitrous, saline, vitrioline,
and oleaginous parts, thence it is that Spawwaters, which perfectly partake of
those mixtures, perform such admirable effects upon disaffected Bodies. But
some may say, and that truly, that it is a great controversy among the
Metallascopical Philosophers, whether Metals can truly and properly be mixed
with water? To which I say, that the mixture is confusaneous, though not
perfect, as appears in Aqua Regia, in which Gold it self is resolved into
insensible Atoms, and even ordinary water admits of a virtual mixture at least,
as Experience evidenceth in Chalybiate waters. Again, Minerals are not so solid
and compact in their subterraneous veins, nor have they their due perfection,
but of a more moist, soft, and glebish consistence, so that by a caustic
water, or spirituous sulphurous liquor, even the Metalline Spirits are easily
separated, and their raments communicated, however a specific virtue is
certainly commixed, and a vigorous propriety at least imbibed. If Metals may be
thus incorporated, much more may Minerals, which are only Metals in fieri. And
therefore with some probability we may say, that Mineral waters may not only be
impregnated with a virtual propriety existing in the Spirits, but also with the
very substantial particles of the said Minerals. Now the next, and indeed the
chief thing to be enquired into, is the giving an exact account of Mineral
waters, since upon this hinge depends the whole safety of such as drink them.
Therefore I shall as briefly as may be discharge this incumbency. First then,
the virtues and properties of these waters are known from the mixture of their
terrestrial Glebes and Minerals, and the manner of knowing and distinguishing
them is twofold; the first depends merely on the senses, the other (which
Philosophers call a posteriori) is gathered from the recrements which their
channels leave behind them. Now there is an innate faculty in the nature of
Man, to know things ex evidenter apparentibus and sensibilibus, and therefore
the essence or substance of Mineral waters are to be known, how they are
differenced in their qualities from simple waters, by their color, taste,
smell, and sometimes quality of touch. These virtues, thus distinguished, are
either elementary, and such as perform their operations by the first qualities
of hot, cold, moist, and dry; or specific, such as some call heavenly, as far
surpassing both the power of all elements, and much transcending the reach of
our senses, being such in their effects, as leave nothing less than wonders in
our understanding; which unintelligible virtue, if it exert it self in any mixed
body, it is principally observable in Spaws; neither is there any Fountain that
is not favorably breathed with some Divine Rays, and affected with some
singular and peculiar good, the finding out of which, is so much more
difficult, as the closet of their causes is inaccessible. This infinity of
variety congeminates difficulties, in so much that Nature enthrones her self in
no mixed body so gloriously as in this her Paranymphs Kingdom; witness those
innumerable different species of waters, which are so many as there are
different species of terrestrial Glebes, Minerals, Metals, liquid and concrete
Juyces, which as they exceed Arithmetic, so likewise do the waters partaking
of them, especially if the several combinations with their several mixtures be
duly considered. Hence it is that Seneca, lib. 3. not. quaest. de Aquis, Ad rem
inquit seriam, gravem, immensam accessimus, sustinemus and opus nescio an
superabile, etc. And Pliny, lib. 31. cap. 1. Plurimas aquarum vires
differentiasque conspicatus cunctas, exclamat, quis mortalium enumerare queat?
Some honest Philosophers have been affrighted hereat, because an infinity
cannot be fathomed; others taking heart have said, that miscellae quibus aquae
tinguntur and praedominium qualitatum, sensuum officio experimentorumque
possunt quidem (etiamsi difficultate) comperiri. Yet notwithstanding all these
difficulties, Non ita deterremur (says that Object of the Worlds wonder,
Kircherus,) ut proinde nobis hastam abjiciendi animus sit; est aliquid prodire
tenus, si non datur ultra. Let us wish therefore we had Pliny's fontem
Leontinum cujus aquas qui bibisset scientem evadere medicum recitat, and being
armed with this fantastical conceit, take upon us to tell you, that all waters
are either mixed with different Glebes of terrestrial matter, wherein we
comprehend all species of Earth, or with the different sorts of Salts which are
called concrete Juyces, and so there will be as many different species of
waters, as there are different sorts of Salts; or they are adjoined to the
different species of liquid juyces, such as are unctuous and fat as Bitumen, or
not unctuous, as are all strong caustic waters; or they are mixed with the
Metalline Bodies, and so invest themselves with the same nature they are tinged
withal; or lastly they are imbodied with diverse kinds of stony Se^inalities,
such as that at Knarsborough. Out of the manifold complication of all which,
arises that admirable variety of waters, which if you conjugate according to
the principles of Art combinatory, there will be according to renowned Kircher,
479001600 different species, that is, four hundred seventy nine millions one
thousand and six hundred sorts of waters. Let none therefore wonder, if we be
not dogmatically positive in our Assertions concerning the Virtues of waters,
since no less than an approach to infinity can determine the various
complications of Mineral, Metalline, and Saline Principles, with which these
are empowered; yet so far as sensata experientia and natural Philosophy, which
is an experimental Chemistry and mechanical knowledge of things, can carry us,
we may safely believe, as one well observes, Spagyria sola est speculum very
intellectus, monstratque tangere and videre veritatem. I shall not therefore go
about to obumbrate the Truth under the veil of obscure Appellations, nor attach
other Men's Reasonings of weakness, nor sing Matins and Eveningsong to my own
(...), by a sort of big and exotique expressions, calling, with Basilius
Valentinus, Hippocrates's Ignis and Aqua, Gladiatores and Asa and Phalaia; nor
with Paracelsus, shrowding the same Instruments of Nature under the names of
diverse Spirits, Spiritus alter trahit, alter protrudit, idem autem uterque
facit; nor with Helmont, stiling the animal, vital, and natural Spirits of the
Ancients by that bugbear name of Archaeus, which can be nothing else but the
most fine, volatile, and Aetherial parts of the Blood, contained in the Veins,
Nerves, and Arteries. But I shall endeavor clearly and spagyrically to
demonstrate the true Principles and Constituents of this our Spaw in our
following Discourse. Soli illi docent qui per causas and principia docent. In
the interim, for more clearness sake, I shall set down (since the first
qualities give us but an uncertain and conjectural rule of finding out the true
Essences of waters) a threefold manner of proceeding, for discovering in
general the genuine and true mixtures of all Medicinal waters.

I. The first is by Concoction, thus:

Take a glass vessel, or an earthen one glazed, and boil therein your Mineral
water, 'till a third part be wasted, afterward let it settle well for three
days space for separating its Faeces, then take a gross thick Cloth fit for
filtration, and shape it in the form of an inverted Pyramid, hang the pointed
pyramidal end in the water, and let the other extremity first being moistened
hang down without the vessel; and it will come to pass, that the moistened end
hanging without the vessel, shall draw the water in the other extremity of the
filter, which was plunged in the water, and thus by little and little all the
water, and only the pure water, shall be drawn out, the sediment remaining,
which being exposed to the Sun, you may thence discover the mixture of the
Minerals.

II. The second way of judging Mineral mixtures in Spaw waters is by
evaporation, thus:

Take a glass vessel with a large orifice, place it midway deep in another
earthen vessel full of sand, and evaporate all the moisture, and dry the
sediment or Faeces in the Sun, and you shall know the mixtures by the diversity
of the Mineral particles; the difficulty of this way of trial is, that together
with the water the Mineral Spirits fly away, which happens not in the former
nor in this following way of proceeding.

III. The third, and indeed the securest way, of finding out the nature of
Mineral waters is by distillation, because hereby not only the grosser
particles of every Mineral, but even the predominant spirits and vaporous are
infallibly made known, and it is thus:

Prepare a furnace with vent-holes, and place therein a proper earthen vessel
full of sand, in this sand another vessel filled with water up to the middle,
v. g. a Cucurbita, or glass still bottom, with a pretty strait mouth, to this
Cucurbita you must fit a Capitellum with a nose or an alembick rostrated, being
well luted that nothing can expire, and to this nose of your Capitellum you
must adapt another Fistula, or glass pipe, well luted, which pipe must run
through a wooden vessel full of cold water, this done, put fire to your
furnace, and draw off all the water, and what remains of sediment expose to the
Sun to be dried; which done, for dissolving the several species of the Minerals
proceed thus: Expose the sediment upon a polished Iron Table red hot, and being
mixed with water the Chalk, Marble, and Gypsum* or Plaster will not be burnt,
but after all the others are burnt, they will remain more shining white than
formerly, the Gypsum presently, but the Chalk and Marble require more time. If
there be Brimstone, it discovers it self by its accustomed strong sent; Salt
and Niter sparkle, Salt with crackling but Niter without any. If Ceruss be
there, it is turned into an intense redness, an evident sign of Lead; Alum
being melted turns white like Milk, and Vitriol darkly reddish like Colcothar;
and this effect had the sediment of this our Spaw-water, without any
sulphurous smell at all; the Faeces whereof I gathered both by Coction and
Distillation, but less remained of Faeces by Evaporation, an evident sign of
the spirituous subtilty of the Mineral mixture.

Now as to the discovery of Metalline tinctures in waters, they are known by
their proper excrements and corruption of their sediments, therefore the manner
of proceeding is thus:

If Metal be in waters, infuse the sediment of the Metalline water in some
Chemical corrosive water, or in some generously sharp Vinegar, and if you see
an Ironish rust upon the sediment, you may be sure of the mixture of Iron with
the water; and so of Brass, Gold, and all others.

Thus have I given some Remarques in general, and hinted only by the by at my
greatest concern, the Constituents of our Spaw, of which hereafter; I shall now
only beg pardon, if I make an useful, though as to my present intention
somewhat impertiment digression.

Raimundus Lullius tells us of an Apparition he had, of Madam Nature's weeping
unto him, for Men's endeavoring to discover her Secrets, and prostitute them to
the hands of her Enemies, meaning the Illiterate. And Beguinus gives advice,
and makes it his request, that Physicians would not acquaint Mountebanks, and
bold Intruders into the Practice of Physic, with his Antimonial Preparations,
Ab usu (says he) horum ut illegitimorum se abstineant. And that great Chemist
Libavius, as well as Galenist, complains of that fatal liberty in the
Profession of Physic, Illud Cavendum (says he) ne audaculi imperiti in
medicando id adhibeant quod est medicorum circumspectissimorum
exercitatissimorumque, veluti si essentia ex sublimato and regulo fiat* etc. tu
qui imperitus es methodi medendi and impudens, nec tibi, nec aliis horum
permit usum cum temeritate. Nam nobiles medicinae in manu temerarii hominis
sunt ut culter vel fax ardens in manu pueri aut dementis. And doubtless (says
Dr. Castle) as there is more danger* that a Child may do mischief with a knife
of steel rather than with one of bone; so the hazard that Men run of their
lives in taking Chemical Remedies at the hands of Empericks, is much the
greater, by how much the Preparations which they use are of more force and
virtue And upon this occasion, it will be no grand presumption (good Reader)
especially being backed by authority and truth, to tell you of the strange and
shameless impudency that a great many, Fanatics especially, assume in the
Practice of Physic, holding all Learning unnecessary, and Latin the Language
of the Beast. Universities (say they) teach nothing but jejune, notional, and
chymerical Conceptions, and their License ad practicandum signifies no more
than a set form of Prayer does in Devotions. Thus they trample all Learning
under foot, and set no greater estimate upon Philosophy, than some make
conscience in killing one by inspiration; whilst they by their mysterious and
aenigmatical canting, hard words, and God knows what unintelligible, and indeed
nonsensical expressions, draw their poor Patients, the vulgar Rabble
especially, into an admiration of their high parts and knowledge in Physic.
Thus they steal though illegally into practice, and cunningly pick Men's purses
with applause and satisfaction. This promiscuous toleration sharpened Dr.
Castle's Pen, telling us, That our Nation is of late grown so fond of
Enthusiasticks in Physic as they are of those in Divinity, and ignorance among
some Men is become as necessary a qualification for the practice of Physic, as
it is for Preaching. I cannot believe (says he) that the delight which the
Vulgar (nay and some wise Men) take in being cheated by Quacks and Mountebanks,
proceeds from any principle in Nature which inclines them to it, but rather
think it to be caused from Impostors being more industrious in deluding the
world, than the true Artists are in undeceiving it. And indeed this growing
evil, in rejecting the method of the Ancients, and best endeavors (after a
strict examination at the Universities) of graduate Physicians, and following
the whimsies and follies of some fantastical Pseudo-Chymists, is like the
Americans, who barter Gold and Silver for Beads and Glass. To this purpose I
could instance, but am not desirous to make any personal reflection, in a
particular passage here in Durham, of one who very seriously said he was a
beguifted Apothecary: I imagine he is the same now in Physic and Chyrurgery;
haud aliquid in ullo. But of this no more, only give me leave to tell such
precarious Practitioners, that their petulancy is too saucy, in presuming so
magisterially to direct in Cases where life and death are so nearly concerned,
especially when as neither Learning nor Reading, nor lawful Authority gives any
encouragement thereunto* It Is not sufficient for a conscientiou^ Physician, to
know Receipts, how to purge, vomit, or sweat, neither is it only requisite, that
he understand the nature and force of the Remedy, but likewise the constitution
and strength of the Patient, and the nature, times, and motion of the Disease,
it being certain, that the same Remedy in the same Disease, which
advantagiously may be given to day, may perniciously destroy tomorrow.
Therefore let me admonish thee, good Reader, not to credit too much those
touchy headed Chemists, who pretend to Panacaea's, Universal Medicines,
Secrets, and such like whimsical Remedies, but let their Materia Medica be
wholly founded upon Experience, Crebro singularium tentamine, by a frequent
trial of each Medicine: And this was the opinion of the learned* Varandaeus to
Dr. Primrose, telling him, that those Remedies are the best which are no
secrets but best known, as being confirmed by more certain experience,
considering that credulity is in no Art of so dangerous a consequence as in
Physic. And therefore the learned Mr. Boil, in his Skeptical Chemist, warns
us not be forward in believing Chemical Experiments; For (says he) as the
obscurity of what some Writers deliver makes it difficult to be understood, so
the unfaithfulness of too many others makes it unfit to be relied on. What
circumspection ought therefore to be used in managing the Cure of a Disease?
when the least inadvertency or error in judgment, costs many Men no less than
the price of their lives. And to this purpose is the Dialogue betwixt Socrates
and Phaedrius: If any one should tell me, (says Socrates) Truly I know how to
apply those things to the body, with which I can, when I please, make i^ hot or
cold, vomit and purge, and cause other evacuations, upon the understanding of
which, I profess my self a Physician, and affirm, that any Man instructed with
this knowledge may be one; what answer do you think a sober Man would return to
him? Truly (said Phaedrius) none at all, but ask him, whether he likewise
understands to whom, and when, and in what proportion every one of these
Medicines are to be given, of which if he be ignorant, the man must certainly*
be mad, who upon the score, either of gleanings from Authors, or for having
been present at the Cures of some Physicians, and understanding nothing solidly
and rationally of the Art, thinks he is presently become a Physician. Many safe
Medicines have been abused by being given by Emperiks, and have killed instead
of curing, they not suiting them to the temper, age, sex, and strength of their
Patients: This Senner^us witnesses, telling us of two Children killed by two
old Women with Oil ^f Amber; the one broke out all over the body, as if
scalding water had been ^oured upon it, and presently dyed; the other dyed
vomiting and purging. Nay, that very safe Remedy Mercurius dulcis (called by
Sir Theodore Meyern Calomelanos, from one Fair-black his man, who prepared it
for him) has been to some constitutions accompanied with hazardous symptoms;
and no Ptyolismus, or Salivation, can be given, it being from Mercury, without
a great deal of circumspection. I therefore heartily advise our new-coyn'd
Physicians, since they must be dabbling, not too much to Idolize Monsieur
Mercury, nor fond too much of their late skill in Salivation, those that know
it full out as well as they must, tell them by way of friendly advice, that it
ought to be given to none but such as are (...),

And now, good Reader, I have even wearied thee out, and therefore will hasten
to my matter, and conclude this Preface with Hippocrates, Qui vocat medicinam
omnium artium nobilissimam, sed propter ignorantiam eorum qui eam male
exercent, esse omnium vilissimam; fundamentum enim, quo pedem figunt, non
habent, de quibus etiam Seneca, semper distant, nunquam ad veritatem
perveniunt; and the reason is, because they have no guide for direction, they
are so enthusiastically wise, they scorn a Master to instruct them methodically
in the true fundamentals of Physic, but shooting at random, with all their
industry nothing is produced but rudis indigestaque moles. And the same Author
going on tells us, Ignorantia est quae omne malum in medicina generat, adeo ut
medicus nunc passim ludibrio expositus, comicis in facetias and mundo in
proverbium ivit. And beside the ignorance of some, the malicious detracti^ns of
others, even among our selves, ^ender us contemptible, which very thing
occasions a good Galeno-Chymi^al Author to break out into exclama^ion, thus:
Ubi (...) quam tan^opere commendat Hyp. nostro seculo unus vilipendit alterum,
dicta and facta taxat, rixatur a tergo, con^radicit, quae non intelligit,
seipsum apud ignaram plebem extollit sordida spe lucelli. Pardon this Pa^ergy,
I shall expatiate no more upon ^o sordid a subject; what I am now to say, shall
be Observations from Experiments, and therefore ought to force a faith, as to
matter of Fact; if the manner be but any way well, it is well, so farewell.

Thine, E. W.

SPADACRENE Dunelmensis.
CHAP. I. Of simple Water, its qualities and use.
THat there is naturally pure simple water to be found, without any
heterogenial admixture at all, is paradoxical, therefore by simple water I only
mean such as has a proper color, taste, smell, weight, and consistence, thin,
light, cold, and moist, and no other thing discernable, either by senses or
effects: And it is requisite that water should have these qualities, in regard
of the many and necessary uses of it, both for Men, Beasts, Vegetables, and
Minerals; in so much as there is no living for any Creature where there is no
water. (...) begins Pindar's Olymp. Od. 1. It was our first drink to quench
thirst, and by its tenuity distributes our nourishment as a Vehicle, nay after
the invention of Wine it was usually mixed therewith, as Virgil says of
Bacchus,

Poculaque inventis Acbeloia miscuit uvis. I could heartily wish, that even
Bacchus himself might herein become our President, especially since in other
things he has taught our too docil world, as v. g. by the same purity and
tenuity of the parts of water, how to make Beverages of sundry sorts. The
Egyptians have their Zythum, the Spaniards their Cerea, the Turks their
Coffee, and we our Ale and Beer; all extracted by water, the fittest Menstruum
for receiving the Faculties of all Medicaments and nourishment, especially the
second qualities of mixed Bodies, and for this reason was it called Panspermia.
That simple water is cold, is without question, for being heated accidentally,
it soon returns to its natural coldness, the cause of heat being removed; but
whether it be colder than Air is much to be doubted. I shall not now undertake
the determining, whether Air be bred of water originally, or whether it be not
a distinct substance of it self, and receives only watery vapors, and after
mature condensation in the middle Region, exonerates it self by Rain, Hail,
Snow, etc. Only thus much I dare affirm, that the Sun beams are of much more
force to elevate substances from the Earth, than most imagine, and consequently,
those that hold the materiality of the Air to be from water, are not in opinion
altogether paradoxical, but verisimilitudinary. And to prove this vigorous
extraction of the Sun from sublunary Bodies, give me leave to give you an
instance of what Athanasius Kircherus (whose company much honored me from
Marseilles to Rome) most faithfully relates, in Magicae Parastaticae, Parastisi
I* Naturae, thus:

Morgana Rheginorum. In the midst of Summer, when the Sun boils the Tyrrhene
Ocean with most fervent rays, then is it that wanton Nature entertains the
wondering Eyes of the Inhabitants of Rhegium, (a Town in Calabria, most
ancient, and no less famous, for having been the Seat of many Philosophers)
with a prodigious Spectacle in the Air. There may you (whether with more
delight or wonder is not soon determined) behold a spacious Theater in the
vaporous Air, adorned with great variety of Scenes and Catoptrick
Representations, the Images of Castles, Palaces, and other Buildings of
excellent Architecture, with sundry ranges of Pillars, presented according to
the Rules of Perspective. This Scene withdrawn upon the Sailing by of the
Cloud, there succeeds another, wherein by way of excellent Landscape were
exhibited spacious Woods, Groves of Cypress, Orchards with variety of Trees,
but those artificially planted in uniform rows, like a perfect Phalanx, large
Meadows with companies of Men, and herds o^ Beasts walking, feeding, and
couching upon them: And all these with so great variety of respondent colors,
so admirable a commixture of light and darkness and all their motions and
gesture^ so counterfeited to the life, tha^ to draw a Landscape of equal
perfection seems to humane Nature altogether impossible.

Now to our purpose: This parastatical Phantasm was not cause^ in the Cloud
from any reflected appearance of any such things, either on the shore or
adjacent fields, because no such thing was there which indeed increased the
ardou^ of curiosity in renowned Kircher t^ cross over from Messina to Rhegiu^
at the usual time of the apparition where he detected the Causes of the whole
Phenomenon; observing first, the Shores subjacent to the Mountain called
Tinna, as also the bottom of the Sea, to be covered with shining Sand, being
the fragments of Selenites, Antimony, and other pellucid concretions devolved
from the eminent parts of the Land and contiguous Hills, that are richly
fraught with Veins of those Minerals. Then he observed, that these translucid
Sands being, together with Vapors from the Sea and Shore, exhaled into the Air
by the intense fervor of the Sun, did coaless into a Cloud, in all points
respondent to a perfect polyedrical or multangular Looking-glass, the various
superficies of the respondent Granates making a multiplication of the Species;
and that these, being opacated behind by gross and impervious Vapors, directly
facing the Mountains, did make reflection of the various Images of Objects,
respective to their various positions, to the eye. The several rows of Pillars
in the Aerial Scene are caused by one single Pillar erected on the Shore, for
being by a manifold reflection from the various superficies of the tralucent
particles, opacated on the hinder part by dense vapors in the speculary
Meteor, it is multiplied even to infinity; no otherwise, than if one single
Image, posited betwixt two polyedrical Looking-glasses confrontingly disposed,
is so often repercussed or reflected from superficie to superficie, that it
exhibiteth to the eye almost an infinite multitude of Images exactly
consimilar. Thus also does one Man standing on the Shore become a whole Army in
the Cloud, one Beast a whole Herd, and one Tree a thick set Grove* Some perhaps
may judge this assertion, of the elevation of those shining Grains of Vitreous
Minerals into the Air by the mere attraction of the Sun, and the coalition of
them there with the Cloud of Vapors, to be too large a morsel to be swallowed
by any throat, but that cormorant one of credulity. If so, all we require of
them is only to consider, that Hairs, Straws, grains of Sand, fragments of
Wool, and such like festucous Bodies, are frequently found immured in
Hailstones, which surely are sufficient arguments, that those things were first
elevated by the Beams of the Sun, recoiling from the Earth into the middle
Region of the Air, and then coagulated with the Vapors, condensed into a
Cloud, and frozen in its descent. The truth hereof is evicted by the conspiring
testimonies of many other Authors, whose Pens are not dipped in the fading Ink of
an unjustifiable Tradition, nor their Minds deluded with the affectation of
fabulous wonders. Now to reassume the debate, I shall only give my judgment of
the temperature of the Air, as to heat or cold, and that it is of its own
nature cold is most manifest, (though Aristotle concluded the contrary, from
its efficient cause which rarefied it.) The Stoics were also of this opinion,
because they made the matter of Air to be water; and this is also confirmed by
its return to coldness (as formerly was said of water) in case it be
accidentally heated; and we know that under the Zona torrida, so long as the
Sun is within their Horizon and strikes the Air with its perpendicular Beams,
it is exceeding hot, but after Sunset the Air reassumes its natural coldness
'till Sunrise again, nay though Aristotle thought it uninhabitable because of
the extremity of heat, yet being the days and nights are there of the same
length, Josephus Acosta concludes that the only Paradise upon Earth is under or
near the Aequinoctial; neither can there any other reason be given why the
Mountains which reach the middle Region of the Air are continually cold, and
mostly covered with Snow, but because they wanting the reflection of the
Sunbeams, the Air does then enjoy its natural qualification. As for that
whimsey of an Antiperistasis in the middle Region from the Element of Fire
above, and the reflection of the Beams beneath, it is an equal phantasm with the
Man in the Moon, who would have hot sitting if Elementary Fire were immediately
under him. But this opinion is exploded, and if such Fire were, it would rather
heat than cool the Air. Is not the Air most cold near the Poles, where the long
absence of the Sun, and its oblique Beams when present, give way to its natural
coldness? Nay it is very probable that it is colder than water, since we see by
a condensative faculty it congeals water into Ice, Snow, Hail, etc. which
certainly is from the Air, being that underground, where the water is not
freely ventilated with Air, there is no congelation; neither do I think other
but the great coldness that is in Ice and Snow, depends merely upon the mixture
of Air, which being per minima interwoven with Salnitrous particles, is
heightened to such a degree of coldness as makes it vigorous for producing a
congelative effect. That water is most moist is the opinion of Galen, and very
probably true, notwithstanding Aristotle's reason to the contrary, concluding
Air to be most moist, because it is hardly contained within its bounds, which
indeed is by reason of its tenuity and incontiguity of parts, being that dry
exhalations extend themselves as well as moist vapors, and as density
compacts, so rarity causes extension. I shall need say no more of the
qualities which simple water ought to have, being such as are every where
obvious in Authors, and the senses will discover either by taste, color, smell
or touch, or else the effects will make manifest.

CHAP. II. Of the Original of simple Waters and Springs in general.
GReat controversies have been betwixt the Stoics and Peripateticks, and are
yet amongst the Moderns, concerning the original of true Springs, which are no
other than those of mixed waters. All difficulties and arguments touching this
grand Debate are reducible into three heads; for either our perpetual and
lasting Springs, called Fontes perennes, proceed from vapors congealed by cold
in the second Region of the Air, and so fall down upon the Earth in Rain, Snow,
or Hail; or they are engendered in the bowels of the Earth; or they are
percolated through sandy subterraneal channels from the Sea. For the first, it
may be granted that diverse Springs and Rivers receive supply of waters from the
Rain, as we see our Rivers do; the Rhine and Danubius swell upon the
dissolution of Snow, and in much drought our Springs fail us, but those are
such as materially depend upon the fall of Rain or Snow, and these surceasing
the Springs also become dry, they being principally ordained by Nature for
fertilizing and irrigating the Earth in its production of Herbage, Fruit, etc.
for the benefit of Mankind; but such are only Land-springs, and in no sort to
be called perpetual Springs, which notwithstanding the want of Rain or Snow for
a long time are still the same, and though great Rivers may almost be dried up,
by a long and lasting discontinuance of wet, by the dryness of the superficies
of the Earth imbibing it in its passage, for the satisfaction of its drought,
being elementum siccissimum, yet the heads of those Rivers flow plentifully at
the same time; so that another causality must be found out than Aerial
supplies; and supposing there were (which some wittily contend for) certain
commissures, chinks, and hollow veins in the Earth, to receive much Rain that
falls, yet what sinks into those clefts and caverns bears no proportion at all
with that plenty which hurries headlong into Rivers, and thence conveyed into
the Sea, and consequently very improbably proposed to be in a manner the
adaequate causation of lasting Springs, there being also subterrraneal
generations, which for their production require also a continued supply of
water. The second opinion seems much less plausible than this, for if the cause
be engendered in the bowels of the Earth, then it either proceeds from Earth it
self changed into water, as Seneca, which being a thing against all reason and
experience, and backed by no other authority than his own, needs no other
confutation than pretermission; or which is more probable, these Springs are
made of Air pent up in the caverns of the Earth, and by the coldness thereof
condensed into water; this likewise, by Master Aristotle's good leave, who here
philosophiseth after his manner abstrusely and metaphorically, exceeds all
rational belief; for how is it imaginable, that there are so vast and so many
empty spaces in the Earth as to contain so much Air for the making such a
quantity of water, and that in a moment, as springs daily out of the Earth; nay
how can so much Air be allowed, as to furnish such abundance of water, without
exhausting the whole stock, and consequently make a Vacuum, not only
disseminatum, which according to some is (...) and natural, but also
coacervatum and (...), to wit, such as is totally repugnant to the fundamental
Constitutions of Nature; this I say cannot be granted, especially being that
very many parts of Air serve for the making of one part of water containable in
the same place, as Dr. French has well observed; neither can any such
transmutation of Elements be granted, for though according to Helmont water is
convertible into vapors, and the same vapors into water again, yet are these
vapors nothing else but rarefied water materially, and Air will yield no more
water that it contains vapors; but Air taking it purely of it self, quatenus
Air, is merely Aetherial, without any mixture at all, or the least atoms of
vapor, such as is only above the Atmosphere, and wholly unfit for respiration,
or a pabulum, for sustaining the flame of Life, which necessarily must have a
Niter therein for that intent. The third opinion is most ancient and most true,
being also a divine Epiphonema of Ecclesiastes, Omnia flumina intrant in mare,
and mare non redundat, ad locum unde exeunt flumina revertuntur ut iterum
fluant. All Rivers, says Solomon, run into the Sea, and yet the Sea overflows
not, into the place from whence the Rivers come, thither they return again.
Some one Man, desirous to prove all Springs to be from Rain and Snow, puts a
strange gloss upon this evident place of Scripture proving all Springs to have
their original from the Sea, and he tells us, that the question is not about
Rivers but Springs, and therefore Solomon's asserting the Rivers to come from
the Sea, makes out nothing for that of Springs; Quasi vero; as if Rivers were
not from Springs, and if Rivers, then by necessary consequence Springs also are
from the Sea. The same Assertor tells us also, that Solomon speaks of the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea in great Rivers, into which the Tide runs, they
being near the Sea, which truly is but too great a stress put upon the Text;
first, because he tells us, that all Rivers, as well such as admit of Ebbings
and Flowings of the Sea as those where no such thing is, come from the Sea; and
secondly, it cannot be imagined that the whole bulk of water, which is running
continually into the Sea, comes up again with the Tide, since the fresh is many
Miles distant from the Tide, and no more of the River comes back again by
tiding than what the Sea forced up at the time of its tiding, which shortly
after at ebbing is again by the current of the River hurried back from whence
it came. How then is it possible that the wisest of Men should positively
affirm all Rivers to come from the Sea, since it is evident that the whole River
can in no sense be called the Tide, no more than the Tide can be called the
whole River? Surely such as venture thus to paraphrase upon so plain Texts,
must either conclude the Writers of the Holy Writ endowed only with natural
ratiocination and not inspiration, or which is as bad, they must admit in
Divinity what is now in Physic, a legality or promiscuous toleration as to
Scriptures interpretation. But of this no more. Let us proceed now in proving
the Seas sole sufficiency of affording so great and lasting a supply of water
for feeding of Springs. This Assertion certainly is of a most indubitable
truth* being we see in almost innumerable places waters bursting out of the
Earth, not after the manner o^ boiling Fountains, but like vast impetuous
Rivers, which in no probability can be granted to arise either from the
condensation of Air or Rain and Snow falling, or any such like imaginary
causation. Bu^ to make good the truth of this Hypothesis, by evidencing the
manne^ how the Springs are at such distances deduceable from the Sea, even to
the tops of highest Hills; Hi^ labor hoc opus est. I imagine the only difficulty
herein consists (as I have said) in this, that the adverse party cannot
conceive (granting the Sea to be lower than the tops of Mountains) how it
should, contrary to its natural propension, be elevated to such a height. For
the better solving of which doubt, I will first tell you, that not only Tully
and Aristotle, but many solid Divines, hold that the Sea is as high if not
higher than the highest Mountains, otherwise the Sea and Land make not up one
global figure, and if so, the motion of the Sea to the tops of Hills is
natural, and not at all beyond its level; but I go not about to defend this
opinion. Granting therefore the Sea to be lower, I then argue thus, that it is
not unknown to any that this Terrestrial Body, especially the bottom of the
Sea, has innumerable meatuses, and is perforated with sundry voraginous inlets
and patent mouths, into which and through which, as so many hydragogical
channels, water may freely pass, otherwise why do winds proceed more
apparently, and after a more violent manner from the Sea than from the Land
they being caused by the eruption of exhalations from those fissures in the
bottom of the Sea: which being granted, it is no hard matter to allow the afflux
and reflux of the Sea pressing the other water with their exceeding great
weight, to exalt the same through those subterraneal channels even to the tops
of highest Mountains; for the water being thus pressed with the adventitious
access of water, either drawn thither by the Moon, or caused as some think by
the Earths motion, must needs force it self downward spontaneously; and finding
those patent passages, is (as I may well say) thrust into those hydrophalacia
of the highest Mountains, where seeking out an exit, being thus burdened with
weight, bursts forth into Springs and Rivers. If it should be objected, that
the flux of the Sea and Tides are spent in their course into Rivers; I answer,
that these subterranean caverns will be first served, as being more immediately
under the weight, and what is to spare only runs into Rivers, it being natural
to all heavy bodies, even having no force put upon them, to descend
perpendicularly, rather than in an oblique line. Others may say, that if the
flux of the Sea, or weight of accumulated waters, should cause Springs, then
would our Springs cease running when the Tide or flux of waters is out from our
parts, and so the like of other parts of the world; to which I reply, that the
Sea ebbs and flows every twelve hours over the face of the world where ever any
such reciprocation is, and therefore little or no time is left for such a
surcease of weight, as to alter the current of Springs, and not only those that
have the same Meridian as London and Dunbar, though some Degrees different in
Latitude, have every twelve hours full Sea at the same time, but also such as
have a different Meridian, and not the same in Longitude, have notwithstanding
the same returns as to space of time, though not at the same time. If any Seas
be without these Tides, as the Baltic Sea is said to be, its being so near the
Northern Pole, and some part thereof within the Artick Circle, where the Air is
thick and gross, may supply the want of Tides as to Springs. Which that I may
make good, and thereby answer all other imaginable doubts and objections
against this assertion, I shall take occasion of producing a second reason
persuading to this original, viz. the mighty Tempests and turbinious Winds, the
descent of Vapors, and chiefly the incumbency of the Air it self, by all which
the water is both pressed and expressed; and for further manifestation hereof,
give me leave to illustrate as a most convincing argument, the great weight of
Air upon this terraqueous Globe, which is apparently made out by Torricellius
his Experiment in a Vessel of Quicksilver, instanced by that truly Noble and
Illustrious Gentleman Mr. Boil, thus: Having prepared a Glass Tube, and
stopped up one of its extremities with a Seal hermetical, fill it with
Quicksilver, and stop the other extreme with your middle finger, then having
inverted the Tube, immerge the extreme stopped by your finger into a Vessel
filled with Quicksilver, not withdrawing your finger until the end of the Tube
be at least three or four Inches deep in the subjacent Quicksilver, for so you
prevent all insinuation of Air. This done, and the Tube fixed in a
perpendicular position, upon the subduction of your finger from the lower
orifice, you may observe almost half the Quicksilver contained in the Tube to
descend speedily into the restagnant or subjacent Quicksilver, leaving almost
half of the superior part of the Tube, according to all appearance, at least
void and empty. Now place this Vessel thus fitted upon the top of an high Hill,
for example, where the Air is less weighty and incumbent than at the bottom of
the Hill, and you shall perceive the Quicksilver in the Tube to descend, and
that in the Vessel made higher; whereas if you remove the Vessel to the bottom
of the Hill, where the Air is grosser and more incumbent, that Quicksilver in
the Tube will ascend, and the other in the Vessel descend; so that the variety
of places where the Air is various, makes a variety of motion higher or lower
in the Quicksilver, which cannot be from any other cause than the different
gravity of Air in different places; for the Air of its own nature is heavy, and
can be said to be light only comparitively, or as it is less ponderous than
Water or Earth, nor can there be given any more manifest reasons for the Airs
tendency upward from the convexity of the Earth than this, that being in some
degree ponderous in all its particles, these descend from the upper Region of
the Atmosphere, and bear upon and mutually compel each other until they beat
upon the surface of the Earth, and are by reason of the solidity thereof
repercussed up again to some distance, so that the motion of the Air upward is
properly a resilition not natural but violent.Now whether this gravity be
congenial and inherent in the Air, or whether it be caused by a conformity to
the magnetic attraction of the Earth, matters not at all as to our present
purpose, being we have a depression amongst the particles of the Air, in their
tendency from the Atmosphere down to the surface of our Globe, and the diameter
of the Sphere of Air being much larger than that of the terraqueous Globe, we
have thereupon from the unequal to the concave thereof a compressing weight upon
the surface of waters equivalent to that upon the restagnant Liquor in the
foresaid Vessel. I shall further urge some Arguments de facto, and tell you,
that Pliny writes of a Spring which punctually observes the Seas motion in its
ebbing and flowing. Antonius Vasconzello, a Father of the Society, in his
Description of Portugal, mentions a strange and remarkable Lake on the top of
the Mountain Erminius, whose nature is, says he, ut aestuante oceano and ipse
pariter aestuans sit lacus, that is, punctually to observe the Seas
reciprocation, even as to its raging more or less with fourges; luculentum sane
(says Kircher) occulti cum oceano per hydragogos canales corresponsus signum,
an evident sign of the subterraneal correspondence this Lake has with the
Ocean through hydragogical conveyances and caverns. And learned Kircher also
assures us hereof when he says, Aliqui fontes fluxum and refluxum maris
aemulantur, and in particular, relates a lepid story of a Fountain, or rather a
River in Westphalia, in a sabulous Plain, breaking out with the Tides twice
every natural day, with such a violent force and noise (whence it is called
Bollerbrum) that it overflows all the circumference of that Valley, and
decreasing after the same manner as it increased, at last hides it self totally
in its head. Bishop Theodorus (says he) in media hujus superficie mensam
opipare lauteque construxit, etc. made a most magnificent Banquet in the middle
of this Valley, and thither invited and brought with him diverse Ladies, when on
the sudden the River bursting forth, whilst they caressed Nature and made
merry, did so wet them, even more than midway up, that they were forced to
wade out, when as those that were conscious to the design, withdrew themselves
by time, and sufficiently derided the poor Females infortunity. Interdum seria
ludis, and e contra. And thus much, as far as we poor haggard Mortals can reach
by the Light of Nature, being Moles rather than Men ever since our first Fall,
whose weak and narrow Optics lead us only to the inspection of the exterior
and obvious parts of Nature, not perspicacious enough to penetrate her
interior and abstruse excellencies; nor can we speculate, faith Doctor
Charleton, her glorious beauty in the direct and incident Line of Essences and
formal Causes, but in that reflected and refracted one of Effects, nor that
neither, without so much of obscurity as leaves an incertitude in our
apprehensions, and restrains our ambition of an Apodictical Science, to the
darksom Region of merely conjectural Speculation. If therefore I have erected
any verisimilous conjecture concerning the causation of Springs, and their
derivation from their proper Originals, and given but any probable Solution of
that abstruse Phenomenon, I hope others as well as my self will rest contented.

CHAP. III. Of the true Essence and constituent Principles of Vitriol.
GReat, pregnant, and teeming Constitutions, and such as are constellated unto
knowledge, think they come short of themselves, if they outgo not others; and
indeed they may well think they do nothing, 'till they outdo all. But my
Minerva bids me say, Nos numeri sumus, and I shall think I have done well, if
in the disquisition of the true nature of Vitriol, I hold the stirrup to
Pyrotechnical Philosophy, and so urge nothing, but what Autoptical experience,
reason and authority, shall illustrate. First then, I define* Vitriol to be a
Mineral Body, generated in the Bowels of the Earth from a sulphurous Spirit,
Water, and the Mineral either of Iron or Copper, or both; and that these are
the material Ingredients of its composition appears from hence, because its
acidity and caustical acrimony it necessarily has from the Spirit of Sulphur,
its clarity and fluidity from Water, and its color and metalline taste either
from the Mineral of Copper or Iron; and of these three, viz. Spirit of Sulphur,
Water, and an Ironish or Copper Glebe, is Vitriol composed, which is also
called Atramentum Sutorium, and by the Greeks (...). Some notwithstanding will
have it composed of Alum and Sulphur, because, say they, take a Vitrioline
Loam or Clay, and dilute it with water, and upon standing in a cold Cellar you
may gather thence an alluminous Efflorescence; to which I yield so far, as that
there may be a mixture of Alum with Vitriol, in regard of their affinity, but
it follows not thereupon, that Alum makes up its composition of parts; for
though as all other Minerals have their acidity from Spirit of Sulphur, and are
both under that general notion of Salt and Concrete Juyces, yet cannot they,
Vitriol especially, be called purely and properly Salts, but make up specific
differences of such Salts. Others deny Sulphur to be an ingredient, because in
the calcination of Vitriol there is no smell of Sulphur, as is when Antimony,
Orpin, or Marcasites, are calcined, though these be far more compact solid
Bodies; but the reason of this is, because it partakes only of the Spirit and
more subtle parts of Sulphur, the others of the grosser substance. Now to show
you how Vitriol becomes a specific Salt, I must first premise this general
Hypothesis, that there is a common Salt of Nature, and Water, which diffuse
themselves throughout all the particles of this Geocosm, and being considered
in themselves, are indifferent Subjects for the reception of various forms,
accordingly as they meet with diversity of Glebes in the bowels of the Earth;
therefore when Water impregnated with Spirit of Sulphur, or a Vapor from that
accensed Body of Sulphur, passes thorough a salsuginous Glebe, already endowed
with the common Salt of Nature, it produces Salt, when thorough nitrous Veins
Niter, when thorough alluminous Alum, when thorough a Copperas white Vitriol,
when thorough a Silver Mine blew Vitriol, and lastly when thorough an Ironish
Glebe it shares of some particles of Iron (more or less according to the
proportion of the Waters acidity and the fertility of the Vein) and produces
green Vitriol. So that if Water be thus tinged with this acid Spirit, it
becomes the true and proper Menstruum for the dissolving of all sorts of Glebes
whatsoever, and this Liquor thus replenished, v. g. with the raments of Iron,
is condensed into this Vitriol which now I speak of. And that I may further
declare some genuine Effects of this Vitriol, I say that it is caustical, and
eats into and corrupts all sorts of Metals, excepting Lead, which it cannot
penetrate by reason of its Mercurial parts, which resists and represseth its
activity. But to analize it more intrinsically, this Vitriol consisting of the
aforesaid three sustances yields spagyrically seven several Medicaments;
first, there is extracted from it per Balneum vaporosum Water, which is called
Ros Vitrioli, because of its Aerial lightness, and partakes least of all of the
Spirit of Sulphur; this corroborates the Bowels, mitigates the inflammation of
the Blood, and strengthens the Brain with its heat and siccity. Secondly,
there is another Water drawn per arenam, and this partakes more of the Spirit of
Sulphur, and is called the second Water of Vitriol; it purges the Reins, opens
obstructions in the passage of Urine, and helps all internal corrosions, if
taken in Veal Broth fasting. Thirdly, there is extracted another substance of
Vitriol, which is the most subtle portion of Sulphur, and called the Spirit of
Vitriol, a most admirable Prophylacticon or preservative against all sorts of
Diseases, for whatever it finds in the Body putredinous, poisonous, or
apparently disposed to any capital Disease, it presently incides, attenuates,
and wastes, it purifies the Blood from all fuliginous damps, prevents the
Stone, purges the Reins and Bladder, consuming all mucilaginous and tartarous
viscosity whatever. Fourthly, being tortured with a further degree of Fire it
gives a certain Oil, not so safe to be taken inwardly, though some, by reason
that it is a Narcotick, use it in Maniacal Distempers; but outwardly it is used
for curing Imposthumes. Fifthly, a certain Vitriol is brought over the Helm,
which Chemists call Purificatum or Sal Vitrioli, being only the remaining Dregs
from the acid Spirit, representing a purplish thin Earth, and good externally
used as aforesaid; this is not Sal Vitrioli Vomitivi so much used at present,
being a repeated Solution of white Vitriol, with frequent filtrations. Sixthly,
all the Spirits being drawn off, there remains a certain Aerial substance,
being a most subtle dust of Vitriol, which may be called Ferrum or Aes
Vitrioli, being it may be reduced into either of them; this cleanses rotten
Sores, and is an Incarnative. And seventhly and lastly, all Distillation ended,
there remains in the bottom of the Retort or Reverberatory a Caput mortuum or
Colcotar, or Terra Vitrioli, and inservient for mixing with cicatrizing
Plasters.

Thus have I, to my weak ability, analyzed the whole Body of Vitriol; In quod
quid resolvi potest, ex illo necessario debet constare. But before I advance
further in my journey homeward, I will instance only in one process of making
artificial Vitriol, for the better clearing and understanding the nativity of
natural Vitriol, which Dr. Brown, as an Eyewitness, says in Hungary to be
thus: There is (says he) a Vitriol Mine nigh the Golden Mine, the Earth or Ore
whereof is reddish, and sometimes greenish, infuse this Earth in water three
days, then pour off the water, and boil it seven days in a leaden Vessel,
'till it comes to a thick granulated whitish or greenish substance, according
as the Ore is either of Brass or Iron, and this is then pure Vitriol, and being
reduced to a Calx in an Oven serves to make Aqua fortis. But there is besides
the Ore or Glebe of Vitriol, a natural crystallized Vitriol in a Mine in
Paradise-Hill in Hungary, and the same Doctor was conducted by a Mine-man at
Schemnitz under ground, 'till he came where he showed him great quantities of
natural Vitriol, it shooting upon the stones and earth, upon the floor and
sides of the passages, as it does by Art in the pans and about the sticks, not
hanging from the top, as ordinarily it does, like Isicles. The Principles and
Nativity of Vitriol being thus cleared, I shall now only evidence the great
affinity betwixt Iron and Copper, and consequently betwixt the Vitriols of them
both, and if you please of their Effects also, and this not only as much
conduceable to my present purpose, as for the oppugning that received Opinion
of Philosophy, which admits no transmutation of Metal. This aforesaid learned
Traveller writes of two Vitriol waters in the Copper Mine of Herongrundt, which
turns Iron into Copper; these Springs lie very deep in the Mine, and the most
useless old Iron is hereby turned into the purest Copper; the Iron being left
therein about fourteen days is rendered more ductil, malleable, and easily
melted Copper than any other. The miraculous, because universally learned
Kircher, and other sound Naturalists, will not have this to be a transmutation
of one Metal into another, and their reason is, because this water saturated
with a Vitriolum Veneris, and meeting with such a Body, so ready to receive it
as Mars, it deposes Venus, who immediately insinuates her self so far into
Mars, that she does dividere and imperare, and at last substitutes her own
Body, and precipitates that of Mars. But Dr. Brown averreth, that though in
the changing of Iron into Copper in these Springs, many parts are precipitated
and lie at the bottom in powder, yet these parts, says he, are not Iron but
Copper, for that he took of this powder out of the Spring and melted it into
excellent Copper, so that if the Iron be not totally changed into Copper, God
knows what becomes on it. If this be so, (and we have no reason to think the
contrary) why Art, in the imitation of Nature, may not make the same
transmutation I know not, and then welcome to Town the Philosophers Stone. I am
sure I saw in the Grand Duke of Florence his Gallery of Rarities, a
Horse-shooe, half Gold half Iron, that part which is now Gold having been
formerly Iron, as the universally received tradition of that place asserteth.
But this is not all, for the same Doctor says, he drank out of an handsome Cup
made out of this sort of Copper, which formerly was Iron, and gilt all over,
and had a piece of Silver Ore fastened in the middle of it, with this
Inscription graved on the outside.

Eisen were ich, kupser bin ich,
Silver trag ich, goldt bedeckt mich.
Copper I am, but Iron was of old;
Silver I carry, covered am with Gold.
I would willingly beg pardon, and expatiate a little further into this large
field of Physiology, and say something of the Seeds of Petrifaction, or
lapidifical Principle, which converts all Materials it meets withal into a
stony concrete; but I shall only hint at some one president, with the
definition of the thing it self; whereby you may be more confirmed in that
opinion of a corporeal transmutation of of Substances. Succus lapidificus
(says Kircher) nil aliud est quam humor insensibilium corpusculorum ex
lapidosis veris nitrosis salinisque locis abrasorum mistura constitutus
elaboratusque; and these corpuscula being perfectly mixed together and united,
make up this Succus lapidificus, or humor, and being they have a natural
tendency of reduction to their own former state and condition, hence is it,
that through their spirituous Subtilty they penetrate the most abstruse and
most minute fibrous particles of whatever convertible Body they meet withal,
and by their acrimonious acidity consume, and as it were eat up their softer
parts principally, and in their place substitute themselves, by means whereof
they imbody themselves into a stony concretion. This definition thus evidenced,
is made good by a Manifesto from the forenamed Doctor: For (says he) the hot
Bath of Eisenbach petrefieth, so as those Trees with which they built the sides
of the Bath, next above the water, are entirely turned into Stone, and it is not
unpleasant to observe, how Nature does here assist Art, and out of the Body of
a Fir frames a most stately Column of of Stone. I will end this Chapter with a
remarkable piece of Difcourse this Doctor had at Buda, the digression I hope is
pardonable. One Mortizan Ephendi, (a Turkish Person of Note, and who had been
Envoy Extraordinary with our Emperor at Vienna) treated this Doctor very
kindly, and amongst other discourses asked him what was the King of Poland's
Name, and after he had told him his Name was Michael Wisnowitski, his Reply
was, What? Michael, that is a good Name, that is the Name of the greatest Saint
in Heaven, excepting Mary. An Expression I must confess no less admirable in a
Turk, than commendable in a Christian.

CHAP. IV. Of our Vitrioline Spaw at Durham.
I Confess I have even shipwrackt your patience, and kept you out too long at
Sea. If I have been your faithful Pilot, so far as to land you at the safe
harbor of the knowledge of Truth, I have much more than I can deserve, and as
much indeed as I can desire; especially since our Voyage has been full of
difficulties, which have cast us upon those inevitable Rocks of incertitude and
obscurity; but however, though I have been through those Foggs and Mists of
various Opinions so benighted, that I dare not be magisterial in any of my
Physiological Disquisitions, yet I can boldly take the confidence to welcome
you to Durham, where you shall find the entertainment of a most delightful
Field, raised and heightened almost round from its adjacent continents,
ventilated with a most sweet and open Air, accommodated naturally with
convenient Walks, and neighboured with an useful Wood. Out of the midst hereof
rises this our wholesome and plentiful Spring, which as it enricheth our
Inhabitants with an inestimable Treasure of Health, so will it compensate the
pains of Foreigners in order to the same. And that I may the better evidence
the truth hereof, and come directly to the prosecution of our main Design, I
will draw a Map or Scheme of the Heads of our intended Enquiries, that so we
may prepare the Minds of our Readers to accompany us more smoothly and easily
to a right understanding of what we intend to prove. First then, let me demand,
what is wanting in this our Vitrioline Spaw to make up the true Body of
Vitriol, and complete its definition expressly laid down in the foregoing
Chapter? That it has Water in a most plentiful current is evident, that it
has also a Spirit of Sulphur is apparent from the acid taste thereof, for
nothing can make this taste in Minerals but Spirit of Sulphur, as the renowned
Kircher expressly manifests in these words, Basis unica and absoluta origo
omnium aciditatum Mineralium est a Spiritu Sulphuris acido; neither need we
much doubt of Sulphur and its vaporous Spirit where we have so much Coal. The
only doubt then will be, whether this our Water thus impregnated with acidity
has in it a Mineral Glebe of Iron or not? And that this may clearly appear, I
first call in the Senses of Smelling and Tasting to attest, it having both a
Vitrioline or Ironish taste and odor. Secondly, let our own Experiments
witness the same, for having distilled it, both after the manner expressed in
the former Chapter and by Retort ex arena, from a Pottle thereof there remained
in the bottom a rusty Iron-like powder, in quantity about ten grains, which in
taste had a piercing sharp Vitrioline pungency, somewhat harsh. After
distillation I tried it by coction, 'till a third part was consumed, the
remainder I let settle for three days, that the contentum might be the better
separated, and the sediment was the very same as formerly. Indeed by
evaporation I had much less sediment remaining, which makes me more than
probably conjecture, that it is impregnated, not so much with the corporeal
substance as with the spiritual and subtle particles of the said Vitriol; for
the Water being acuated with a sulphurous acidity, and passing swiftly through
some hungry Vein of Iron, corrodes lightly its more tenuous and Aerial parts,
resolving them so, as the Water imbibes in a manner only the volatile Atoms,
with which it becomes thus saturated; I say volatile, because though distilled
in a Glass Still and luted hermetically, yet are the Spirits sooner sublimed
than the Water, and take wing so swiftly, that before any Water come over they
are unbodied and evaporated, no odor nor taste at all remaining in the Water,
neither will it then become any otherwise tinged with Gall than common
Spring Water, though before distillation, with the mixture of two or three
grains of the powder of Galls, an ordinary Glass full becomes as purpureously
red as our genuine and best colored Claret. And hereupon I now come to my
third Argument, desumed from the tincture it has from the powder of Galls, and
truly this is a work easily performed upon one leg, notwithstanding a
Gyantobjection, or rather Assertion, of a learned, industrious, and
Pyrotechnical Physician, to the contrary. I remember the Hyperaspistes of
Scarborough-Spaw is highly charged with a Non sequitur, in saying, a small
quantity of Gall being put into the Spaw-water does turn into a dark colored
Claret, Ergo, there is Vitriol in it. I hope I have no great guilt in
intermedling with others Affairs, having, God knows, but but too much to mind
at home, but when Justice, Truth, and my own present Concern command, I must
though with reluctance affirm, that his Ergo stands good, and if the unburnt
Allum-stone Experiment be the same with that his Antagonist relates of Coal,
they neither will hold water, I mean tinctured water. For having followed his
own directions, I took a pretty quantity of Coal, powdered it, added
Springwater, sharpened with Spirit of Sulphur for its dissolution, filtered it
'till 'twas clear, then put powder of Gall thereto, and what thence was the
result? truly the adding of the Gall added no more change as to color, than
what was before the Gall was added, that is, the water both before and after
had a dark dusky color, such as is the natural tincture of all Coal, and that
was all. Let not my good Friend say, (which was his Answer to the
Scarborough-Buckler) that I made only an infusion, and no dissolution, for I
sharpened the water to diverse degrees for its more intim penetration and
dissolution. I am confident this conscientious good Man grounded this position
upon some imaginary probability, no autoptical attestation, but I shall excuse
him better presently. I have made no trial of the tincture from unburt
Allum-stone, but I dare aver, that if it tingeth upon the mixture with Gall,
it is quatenus there is Vitriol mixed therewith, there being such an analogical
agreement 'twixt Alum and Vitriol, both as to sense and sensible operations,
that it is no hard matter to admit of a combination, they being both under the
genus of saline concrete Juyces, and whether so differenced as to make a
distinct species of Salt I shall not here endeavor to determine; especially
since Kircher affirms from experience, in vitriolo alumen continetur, luto enim
ejus aqua diluto, alumen ex eo efflorescit; and if in Vitriol Alum, why not in
Alum Vitriol? The same also may be said of Coal (to make good my late promise
to my Friend) that, it may be, all Coal is not alike, some without, and some
with an intermixture of Vitriol, disseminated and interspersed amongst its
sulphurous Veins, and therefore it may be our good Brother in his Experiment
light casually of a Coal thus vitriolated, but then we must not conclude the
Coal, but the Vitriol in the Coal, to give the tincture with Gall. And that
this my precarious Hypothesis may have some Pillar to lean upon, I must confess
I have seen much, and have diverse pieces of a Mineral Marchasite or Pyrites, in
which, though doubtless there be much Sulphur, as appears by its scintillation
and odor, the powder thereof being cast into the fire, as also from its
unctuosity upon distillation; yet may this be only the embrionated Sulphur of
Copper or Iron, and the acid water passing through the Coal Mine interspersed
therewith, licks up only some corpuscles of the Metalline parts of this
Marchasite in its passage, as being its desired Alkali, and being impregnated
herewith, renders it self thus enriched for our use; neither can it be
rationally said, that the Sulphur is likewise imbibed, for being an unctuous
and inflammable ingredient in the compositum, it resists the activity of the
acid Vehicle, as is manifest from the very Essence of Sulphur, out of which is
made an Ointment for preserving Cables and such like from corrosion, and makes
them live, (speaking metaphorically,) in the water everlastingly. But admit
this water should participate of the Sulphur, is it therefore to be rejected?
'Pray how many wholesome Preparations of Sulphur are taken inwardly and
successfully in Phthysical Disaffections? But however it be, as to this, here
we certainly have a Vitriol yielding a proper tincture upon the access of Gall,
which is all I contend for. I will yet argue further for this our Vitrioline
Spaw. Let any one drink Vitrioline of Iron dissolved in water, and he shall see
his Excrements tinctured either black or greenish, from the precipitation of
the Vitriol by the internal Alkali, and the very same effect is produced by
drinking of this our Spaw: This cannot be from the Vitriol of Copper, because
this Metal makes white Vitriol, not green as Iron does, neither will any say we
have any Copper Mine, as we have Iron, in these parts. Moreover, write what you
please with the Solution of ferrugineous Vitriol, and after it is dry there
shall nothing appear, but besmear what is written with a simple Infusion of
Gall, and in a moment the Alkali of the Gall makes the Letters black; and again
by any potent acidity, as v. g. Aqua fortis, they are quite deleted; and yet
again by any fixed Alkali, they become black as before: By which foundation of
Cryptography it is apparent, not only that the acidity of Vitriol tingeth not
black, without it be imbibed and absumpted with an Alkali, but also that no
Alkali tingeth black without a vitrioline acidity. This my positive Assertion
is sufficiently backed by that inquisitive Chemist and experienced Philosopher
Ot. Tachenius, who after much pains taken in this Disquisition concludes thus:
Unde liquet (says he) quod Sal volatile vel Alkali gallarum vel corticum
granatorum vel herbarum vulnerariarum, non tingunt color* nigro, nisi cum
ferro in minerali acido soluto. But why is not our Urine tinged black as well
as the Excrements? This I say is because the Colcothar is precipitated before
the Liquor comes into the Miseraicks, so as it necessarily remains in the Guts.
Cyprus Vitriol indeed, being much from Copper, turns black with Galls, but this
is by reason of its intermixture with Iron, for Vitriolum Veneris purely
without Mars turns not black with Galls, as that of Mars without Venus will,
though they being as Man and Wife joined together, cannot well be found the one
without some mixture of the other. White Vitriol of Corinth partakes of both,
but more of Venus, for which cause, as being also not enriched much with the
Acidum natural, it slowly becomes black with Galls. But Roman Vitriol, which
partakes most of Iron, presently tingeth black; so does artificial Vitriol that
is made of the shavings of Steel and Spirit of Vitriol, the Vitriol corrodes
and resolves the shavings and becomes sweet; and hence it is indeed, that all
chalybiate Medicines are so powerful in all cochectical and obstinate Diseases,
the Alkali of the Steel imbibing the acidity and sowreness of the Blood, and
consequently dulcifies the same. And this is the principal reason our Spaw,
being impregnated with Vitriol of Iron, produces such rare effects. If it be
demanded, why these ferruginous or vitrioline acid Fountains make not the
Tongue and Mouth black, as it does the Excrements? I answer, that this happens,
because the acid Spirit, mixed with the water, corroding the immature Vein of
Iron, or whilst it is in principiis solutis, is not as yet saturated, we
drinking it whilst it is in the very action of corrosion, and has not yet time
to precipitate in the Tongue, but so soon as this grateful acidity is snatched
into the Stomach, the Colcothar being precipitated gives the tincture, the
acidity being then perfectly coagulated with its Alkali, and whatever
mucilaginous matter it meets withal in that coagulation, it turns all into its
own nature of constriction, as we may see in the nativity and concretion of
that Herculean Disease the Stone, and this coagulum is that which ordinarily
Physicians call Oppilation or Obstruction, a noted hard word amongst our
Water-casters, those pedantick Pretenders to Science, who if they can but shake
an Urinal, and gravely tell you of crudities and obstructions, or that the
Archeus is enraged, etc. believe themselves wise enough to rival Solomon, when
indeed they are as truly ignorant of the original of those words as their
deluded Patients, who even gape with admiration of their profound Physiology.
But to return home from the country, this our water is therefore to be drunk at
the Fountainhead, for if it be let stand and settle any long time, the action,
and consequently the benefit and virtue cease, the acid Spirit being imbibed
and drunk up by the immature Iron or Vitriol thereof, enfeebled and disarmed of
its acidity, and together with the resolved Mineral is precipitated into Oker,
which lies at the bottom in a yellowish, not a black color, as it is seen in
all Vitrioline Spaws, it having then no other proper Alkali that it meets
withal, as it does in the Stomach or elsewhere, to cause a blackish
precipitation; neither is its acidity so disarmed by the corrosion of the Iron
Vein, that it quite loses its resolving and coagulating force, with other
Alkalies in the Stomach, etc. for the acidity is yet predominant, and after it
has spent part of its virtue upon the Iron raments, there is yet sufficient
remaining for resolution and coagulation elsewhere, accordingly as it shall
meet with other Alkalies for that purpose; for if this were not so, we should
not have that acidity which sensibly we perceive and taste in this water, and
then divites dimittuntur manes. Besides this sulphurous acidity in the water,
there are unspecificated acids in the humors of our Body, which run headlong
with a natural propensity to the Vitriol or Esurine Salt of Iron, and therewith
coagulated and ejected, together with the obstructive humors, upon a strong
irritation of Nature to expel her Ironish Enemy, and upon this account it is,
that Iron and Steel, or rather their Vitriol, are said to open Obstructions. I
would not have any think, that because Nature rises in arms against all that is
offensive, as Iron is, and endeavors its expulsion, that therefore Purgatives
are not convenient, for even then are they most fitting, when the coagulation
after fermentation is most prevalent; Nature can but do her utmost endeavor,
and when that is not sufficient, then the Physician takes up the Cudgels for
her assistance. And here, to rectify the misapprehensions of some, I must beg
pardon to tell them, that what Purgatives we administer work not by attraction
or election (unless we of that freedom to Druggs which some deny to our selves)
but by irritation in the primis viis and Bowels, and by fermentation in the
Blood and Humors, and this purgative power by irritation depends not of the
five Principles, Salt, Sulphur, Water, Earth, and Spirits, disjunctim and
singly, but of most or all of them conjunctim, though I confess the
fermentation is almost only from the Salts. I fear I have spoken Aenigmatically
and in the dark to somes understanding, in so often repeating the word Alkali,
I will therefore briefly explain the Etymology and signification thereof. By
Alkali therefore, or Sal Alkali, is meant all such Salts as mortify whatsoever
acidities they meet withal, not only in the Vegitable, but also in the Animal
and Mineral Kingdom; I say, whatsoever imbibes or sucks up the acid Salts, and
consequently sweetens the Blood and Humors, is called by the name of Alkali,
whether it be a fixed Salt or volatile, manifest or occult. This Alkali is made
of the Herb Kali, brought to us out of Egypt, being there burnt into ashes,
and so transported: Some call it Soda, others Alumen catinum, but properly it is
called Sal Kali or Alkali. I will now hasten to speak of the Virtues of this
our Spaw, which indeed was my main Design proposed in this trifling Treatise.

CHAP. V. Of the Virtues of this Spaw.
I Must confess the subtle and penetrating Spirit, called by Theophrastus his
Arcanum, and by Helmont primum ens Salium, Spiritus esuriens, by Paracelsus Sal
circulatum, which indeed is his Albahest or universal embrionative Solvent;
this Spirit I say cannot be extracted out of this water, neither can it scarce
be found in its pure spirituality, but as infolded and locked up in the arms of
some Mineral after coagulation, yet by a skilful Artist it may be extracted out
of the totum mixtum or entire Body of Vitriol, without being any way corrosive
at all. And with this Spirit it is, that our Spaw has its great affinity, and
consequently its excellency, penetrating by its tenuity of parts the most
secret and secluse parts of our Bodies. This being premised, 'twill be obvious
to every ones capacity, to know and acknowledge the great advantages which are
accrued, as well for preventing as curing most stubborn and lasting Diseases.
However for the better satisfaction, of the Vulgar principally, I shall briefly
say something in general, and not omit in particular what autoptical
Observations I have made these two or three last Summers bypast. Having in the
precedent Chapter expressly demonstrated the manifold Operations of Vitriol, and
consequently not a few of this our Spaw, my Province now will be of an easy
charge, and therefore I will briefly acquaint you, that the first qualities of
this water, quatenus water, actually moistens and cools, but as it is
befriended with a Mineral mixture it heats and drys, so that it becomes hereby
effectually prevalent for the accomplishing of different indications, and
reducing even contrary Distempers to their natural tone and constitution;
Nature her self being more prone to help on, being accompanied with an
Assistant, her own welfare and restitution to her beloved enjoyments, than to
yield to the assaults of a destructive Enemy.

The second qualities indeed are such as conquer our greatest Antagonists, and
give a total rout to the most obstinate Diseases; for being most powerfully
diuretical, after they have attenuated, cut, resolved, and so altered the
mucous and tartarous humors of the Body, and prepared them for excretion, they
then carry them off by urine, which is the most safe and effectual conveyance
(for all sharp and saline juyces especially) of all other sorts of evacuation
whatsoever. This water also thus enriched, ferrets out such latent passages and
abstruse retirements of the Bowels and other parts, as other Medicines cannot
reach, and after a discovery made, does not only dispossess what is
preternatural of its usurped jurisdiction, but also by a corroborative and
reinforcive power, intitles Nature to her former right of inheritance, so
firmly, that scarce any other than an act of old age can cut off the intail.
It Is an easy thing for Critics to raise doubts, make objections, and lavish
out there censures against these Encomiums; but that work needs not smell of
Oil that answers them: Some may say, Oh I drunk it so long that it swelled me
all over, whose fault was that? even so may the best Purgative, not finding a
Body duly prepared, either naturally or by Art, fall short of its performance,
and in stead of relieving, poison the Body, swell it, and often times break out
(an accidental good turn) into Scabs, and other sordid impurities of the skin.
For preventing of this, and the like inconveniences, I shall give directions in
the ensuing Chapter. In the interim I will set down such Diseases as it both
prevents and cures, as Apoplexy, Epilpsie, Carus, Vertigo, Cephalalgia, and
Cephalaea, but this only if they be symptomatical and depend upon the
disaffections of the Stomach, Hypochonders, Womb, or other Bowels, as most of
them do. It is good against Diseases of the Nerves, as Convulsions, Cramps,
Scorbutic Palsy, etc. especially if they proceed, as generally they do, from
Sal-nitrous vellicating and twitching humors. It specifically respects the
Stomach, because there the water partakes both of its grosser and more
spiritualized particles, dissolves all crudities, the true original of all
obstructions, restores a decayed, and advances a present Appetite to meat, and
by that means begets much more acquaintance with the Kitchen than the Buttery;
it opens and strengthens the Lungs, and consequently is good against
Astma's and difficulty of breathing, provided they be not consumptive that
drink it. The like it does to the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, and Pancraeas,
dispersing thereupon all Hypocondriacal Winds and Melancholy Vapors, which are
now become our Epidemical Disease; as also the Palpitation of the Heart, being
ordinarily a result from the aforesaid flatulencies and winds. It helps the
Dropsy, Black and Yellow Jaundice, Rickets, and Scurvy, by being briskly
operative, purging and purifying the Blood by urine. It cures the Gonorrhea,
Diarrhea, Disenteria, and such like Fluxes of the Abdomen. It opens the
suppression of Urin, and carries off the conjunct cause thereof, allays its
sharpness, and expells such gravel and stones, as either the Ureters or Uretra
can discharge; and when any Exuleration happens in the passage of Urine,
causing pissing of blood, it consolidates and heals it perfectly. It is
exceeding good against most of the Distempers of the Womb, suppressing all
overflowings thereof, as well the white as the red, procures the menstruous
purgations; and by its tenuity of parts, and penetrating Faculty, cures the
Chlorosis or Green Sickness, and consequently changes that chachectical color
in the habit of the body into a florid and rosy complexion: It helps much
the Mother, makes often the barren fruitful, and in diverse cases may
successfully be used by way of insession or injection, for then it acts more
immediately upon the parts affected. It is good for such as bleed often, and
whoever are troubled with a pricking and itching in the skin, with certain
lumps arising thence, it infallibly remedies them by urine and insensible
transpiration also, in case you exercise whilst you drink it, ad ruborem only,
not ad sudorem, 'till you be pretty warm but not sweat; and this I have often
experienced. If you drop it into the Eyes, it quells their inflammation and
strengthens the sight. Moreover it is peculiarly good for all Wounds, Ulcers,
Itch, Sores, and Scabs, being both drank and outwardly applied, in so much as I
have known diverse inveterate and malign Ulcers in the Legs and elsewhere cured,
nay even the Kings Evil it self much relieved thereby.

Briefly, I know no Distemper in the Body, which depends on obstructions or
acid sharp griping humors, but it much helps it, and which is most
praiseworthy it strengthens the parts after the morbifick matter is removed.
How far and how safely this Water may be used by Children, old Men, and Women
with child, I shall refer you to Dr. French and Dr. Wittie's Books of the
Spaws, and others Animadversions thereon. Only I will say briefly, for Children
and old Men, that if their temper and constitutions be otherwise good, they may
safely drink thereof, proportionably to their vigor and strength of natural
heat; but for Women with child, for some important reasons I would advise them
to forbear.

CHAP. VI. Directions concerning the rational and methodical use of this Spaw.
It Is a vulgar and unpardonable error to drink these waters without a due
preparation of the Body, therefore let every one, who expects the true benefit
thereof, consult some honest and able Physician for their instruction, such an
one as can judge aright of the age and constitution of the Patient, the nature
of the Disease, its motion, and the strength both of the Party and the
Medicine. Such an one will surely direct some gentle Vomit, in case the Stomach
be fowl, and the Patient has an inclination and be apt to Vomit; otherwise
some Cathartick, such at least as may disburden the primas vias, and remove
such viscous and vicious matter, as may either hinder the waters journey into
the parts affected, or that may be carried along therewith into the narrower
passages and nobler parts, and there produce stronger and more dangerous
obstructions, Dropsies, Tensions, Gripings, etc. yet if any Purgation in
general may be recommended, I dare prefer the use of chewing Rubarb before any
other, or in case this disgust, then those delicious hydragogical Tablets,
which are to be had at Mr. Dents an Apothecary of Durham, together with the
true Dose and manner of using the same. The Body thus prepared, let him drink
cheerfully about three half pint glasses at a time, more or less, as his
Stomach can bear it, then exercise according to strength for a quarter of an
hour or thereabout, avoiding all such exercise as may cause them to sweat, for
by sweating the water may be drawn into the habit of the body, and produce that
Dropsy called Anasarca; whilst he walks or rides, etc. he must eat some Orange
Chips, Caraway Confects, Citron or Limon Pills, or chiefly Elicampane Roots
candied, for these comfort the Stomach, promote the waters passage, and make
its operation more effectual; when he finds his Stomach somewhat emptied, then
three or four more glasses, exercising as formerly, and so on 'till he has
taken his full Dose, which will be when his Stomach cannot conveniently receive
any more without vomiting, oppression, and naufeating the same. Next day he may
advance to one, two, or three glasses more than he took the first day, and so
every day more, 'till he arrive unto a pottle or three quarts, more or less,
according as his Disease requires, and his Stomach can pass it off, and then
stand at that quantity 'till he thinks of giving it over, and then, as he
increased daily at the beginning, so must he decrease and lessen his Dose,
'till he come to the same quantity he began withal. The time of continuing its
drinking must be proportioned to the nature of the Disease, for some two weeks,
some three, others a month or more, may be necessary; during all which time,
'twill be requisite to take something to keep your Body soluble. If any one, by
reason of his weakness, can neither exercise nor come to the Spaw, let him
drink it in bed, the natural warmth thereof compensates the benefit received by
exercise. Now, though this water may of it self in some good measure help most
Diseases, yet can it not be thought, but for rendering it more successful in
some particular cases, 'twill be convenient to take such other things often
times as the Disease specifically requires, and these may be intermixed with
the first two or three glasses, v. g. some Steel-wine, or other Preparations
thereof, in case of great obstructions or other Diseases of the Liver, but then
no more water for about half an hour after; nay I altogether admit of Sugar, or
some opening Syrup, in the first glass, it being thereby the better accelerated
to the Liver, as also a glass of White or Rhenishwine mixed with three or four
glasses of the water, or some drops of Spirit of Salt or Vitriol, or Crystals
of Tartar, so that the Crystals be made of Tartar and not of Alum, as some do,
for having with less labor the greater quantity of Crystals. All these I say,
and such like, being piercing and attenuating, make way for the speedy and free
conveyance of the water, and of themselves contribute much to some Cures.

After you have drunk all you intend, you must then necessarily use some
hydragogical Medicine, or such as evacuateth waterish humors, which for the
most part remain in the abstruse crannies of the Body, as likewise such things
as cool and moisten the Bowels, otherwise they may partake too much of the
potential virtue of this chalybiate water, being hot and dry, and thence incur
the prejudice of Sore Eyes, and other Inflammations, as I my self have
experienced. Before you drink the water, every morning, disburden Nature of her
ordinary excrements, either naturally or by Art. Those who have strong
digestions may drink half the quantity in the Afternoon, about four or five
hours after Dinner, but then they must eat little or nothing at Supper, others
had better forbear.

If any one find himself, after due preparation and several trials, not able to
drink the water, without reluctance and oppression thereupon, let him forbear,
and address himself to other Remedies more agreeable to his constitution.

CHAP. VII. Directions in order to Diet, and time for drinking it.
THe truth is, though a regular Diet be commendable, and of great concern at
all times, especially when we run any course of Physic for repairing health,
yet I approve not so much of being so sceptically scrupulous, as many are,
either in directing or observing so precise and narrow compass of Diet. The
only great fear is that of excess, the quantity is much more considerable than
the quality, and the rather, because the water in most, if not in all,
begets appetitum caninum, a devouring appetite, so as Men are apt to receive
more than they can well digest, and thence arise crudities and corruption, in
stead of concoction and chylification. A temperate Diet both prevents and cures
many Diseases, and is the chiefest medium we have for a lasting and possibly an
everlasting life; hence it is that Italians say, Manger molto e manger poro,
who desires to eat much must eat little, for by eating little he lives long,
and consequently eats much.

All things that are of laudable juice, and of easy digestion, may be
admitted; I shall only forbid Meats too much salted, Geese, Eels, Salmon, all
sorts of fat, and in fine such things as are found disagreeable to the temper
and constitution of the party; but if otherwise Nature takes delight in a Meat,
though not at all proper for the Disease, yet is it allowable; and therefore
Hipp. l. 2. Aphorism. 38. affirms, Paulo pejor sed suavior cibus and potus
meliori quidem sed ingrato praeferendus. Sometimes we must permit Meat and
Drink, though something worse for the Disease, if otherwise it be grateful.
Your Drink also must be suited to your Stomach and temper, cold Stomachs may
drink strong Ale or Sack, hotter and stronger Stomachs must be content with
smaller Beverage and Wine diluted.

It Is not good to eat any thing 'till the water be most, if not all, passed
thorough your Body, which is known best by the color of your Urin, changing
from a pale to a higher tincture. To close all, as to Diet, I advife all never
to eat so much as their appetite may crave, but, as we commonly say, to leave
off with a stomach.

As to the time and season of the year, it is certainly then best (generally
speaking) when the weather is hottest and dryest, which happens most commonly
in June, July, and August; though we have by no little cost and labor; (having
the benefit of a declivity) so ordered the adjacent parts thereof, that the
Rain glides off without sinking any wise considerably into the ground, and
consequently it may be drank in rainy weather without any apparent diminution
of its virtue. I have observed it before Sunrise to be inclined to
luke-warmness, which after two or three hours of a Solar influence, becomes
briskly cold, which alteration is doubtless from the constriction and
dilatation of the pores of the earth, locking up or ventilating the fuliginous
Vapors, accordingly as the coldness of the night or heat of the Sun disposes
them, and therefore it is fittest to drink) it after the Sun has by its luster
and beams dissipated those Vapors, and enlivened the Mineral Spirits.

What further may be said (in imitation of the Rabbis Revealments by Elias)
rescrvetur in adventum alterius.

Sit laus Dei Patri, summo Christo decus,
Spiritui Sancto, tribus honor unus, Amen.
FINIS.

