THE Spirit of Delusion REPROVED: OR, The Quakers Cause FAIRLY HEARD, AND
JUSTLY CONDEMNED.

Being an Answer To William Penn, George Fox, George Whitehead, George Keith,
Edward Buroughs, and several other the most leading Men amongst them.

Wherein their horrid Perversion, and false and dangerous Interpretations of
above 50 distinct Texts of Holy Scriptures are plainly Evinced.

By Thomas Wilson, Rector of Arrow in Warwickshire.

Imprimatur Guil. Jane, Jan. 28. 1677.

London, Printed for B. Harris at the Stationers Arms in Sweetings-Rents in
Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1678.

QUAKER'S FALSE INTERPRETATIONS OF SCRIPTURE.
ONly of this at present. Hereafter perhaps I may Treat of their Doctrines and
their Manners. All that I desire of the Reader, is, that in the several Texts I
shall instance, he consult the Bible; because words separated from the
Discourse, may seem, even to a wise man, to signify what the Inspired Authors
never intended, and the like expressions, and sometimes the same, do mean
different things, as in all other Books, so in holy Writ.

G. K. Immed. Revelat. p. 21. We may not, nor dare not make use of the
Scripture, but in the Life and Spirit, as that opens and influences. -- We dare
not, nor ought not to speak the Spirit's words in our own Spirit. -- We tie the
words of Scripture unto the Spirit, so as not to use them, but in and by the
Spirit. G. K. Help in need p. 77. Away with that manner of interpreting
Scripture, and searching truth, by drawing and knitting consequences, by the
fallible erring mind, and natural understanding. Keep close in all things, to
the determination of the Spirit of God, and where that leads you to draw a
consequence, or frame an argument, do it, else forbear. W. Duesbury's discovery
p. 48. The word of the Lord came upon me in the common Gaol in Warwick 13. of
1. Month 1664. which constrained to be given forth from the Spirit of the
Lord, etc. N. Love to Lost, p. 1. The things following are not of Man, nor did
I receive them but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Atkinsons Standard of the
Lord p. 30. Written from the Spirit of the Lord. Burrough's Trumpet p. 1. The
Order and Authority given unto me by the Spirit of the Living God 31. of 10.
Month, in the Year 1655. about the 4 th hour in the Morning, when my
Meditations were of my God upon my Bed in Kilkenny City, at that time the word
of the Lord came unto me, saying, Write, etc. Given under my hand, and Sealed
with the Spirit of the eternal God. Foster's Guide, p. 59. Do you not [
Professors] confess your selves to be fallible?

If then I can prove, that you have Interpreted Scripture in a false Sense, you
must grant that you have not Interpreted only in and by the Spirit of God, but
in your own, and by the natural understanding, and fallible erring mind. And I
hope if it appear to you that you have thus done, you will not lay the error,
how little soever it may be, upon that Holy One, but take it to your selves,
though it contradict your Glorious Pretense, and abate your Credit, and Shame
you never so much. And in the name of Christ, I admonish you that you do so,
that God be not Dishonored, and his excellent Spirit Vilified. The trial
follows.

G. K. Im. Revel. p. 72. Out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem. And he (The word: for that is his name, Rev. 19.)
shall judge among the Nations, [Isa. 2, 3, 4.] (1) Your reason why the Word of
the Lord must here signify Christ (for that is it you mean) viz. Because his
name is, the Word, is infirm; unless you can prove it always so signifies,
which it does not; as you may see in many places of Scripture; particularly in
this Prophet's writings, Chap. 39.5. Hear the word of the Lord of Hosts. That
is, not Christ, but this Sentence which follows. Behold, the day is come that
all that is in thine House shall be carried to Babylon. Chap. 28.14. Hear the
word of the Lord, Namely this, Thus says the Lord, behold I lay, etc. verse.
16. (2) As in these former words, Come and let us go up to the house of the God
of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways. He refers to God, and not to house.
So it is manifest that in these latter, For out of Sion shall go forth the Law,
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and he shall judge among the Nations.
He refers to Lord, and not to the Word. For (3) it had been all one if it had
been only said, Out of Sion shall go forth the Law of the Lord; and he shall
judge. The Law of the Lord, and the Word of the Lord, being here the same. And
then as the Law here is not Christ, so neither is the Word. (4) And thus was it
fulfilled concerning the Gospel, as that being distinct from Christ. For it was
first Preached at Jerusalem, and from thence proceeded to the Gentiles. Luke
24.47. Thus it is Written, that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be
Preached in Christ's Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Thus
Tertullian understands the Text. Adv. Marc. L. 3. C. 21. Ex Sion exibit lex,
and sermo Domini ex Jerusalem. Haec erit via sua novae Legis evangelium, and
novi sermonis in Christo, non in Moyse. And Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 78, (...),
etc. For Out of Sion, etc. From Jerusalem went twelve men into the World, who
declared to all Mankind, that they were sent of Christ to Preach the Word of
God to all.

Ibid. p. 66. I desire the Reader to weigh what word it is David speaks so
frequently of in Psalm. 119. -- It is not any word writ, any outward word or
words. -- But the eternal word, which created the Heavens and Earth. -- The
word in the beginning which taught him the Laws, Judgments, etc. -- Jesus
Christ: [ P. 67.68. 65.] You may as well say, Testimonies, Statutes, Judgments,
Commandments, Law, are not a written and outward word or words. For they are
all used promiscuously; and what is spoken of the word, is spoken of these. As
it is said, I beheld the Transgressors and was grieved, because they kept not
thy word: So, Rivers of Waters ran down mine Eyes, because they kept not thy
Law. As, I rejoice at thy word: So, Thy Testimonies are the rejoicing of my
Heart. As, I have hoped in thy word: So, I have hoped in thy judgments. As, Thy
word is very pure; therefore thy Servant loves it: So, Upright are thy
judgments: I love thy Commandments. As, For ever thy word is settled in Heaven:
So, Thy testimonies thou have founded for ever. The word then here spoken of
being the same with Testimonies, Statutes, Judgments, Commandments, Law, it is
as much outward, written and spoken as they are: and you may as well say the
Testimonies, Statutes, etc. are Christ, as that this word is; and that they
taught the word, as that the word taught them. As is evident by the reading of
almost any two connext verses in the Psalm, and especially those single ones
which contein both words; for that where they thus occur, there is no
difference to be discerned. As verse. 16. I will delight my self in thy
Statutes: I will not forget thy word. verse. 160. Thy word is true from the
beginning: and every one of thy Righteous judgments endures for ever. Verse.
172. My Tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy Commandments are Righteous.
That what is spoken of the word of the Lord in this Psalm, cannot agree to a
written and spoken word, to such Promises, Statutes, Judgments, Law; and that
Christ of necessity must be understood; I believe you will no sooner prove,
than that, Thou shall not Kill: There is one God: Trust in the Lord: God
forgiveth Sins: He will bless thee: And the like Commandments, Promises, and
Doctrines were not written and spoken, and that they are Christ, and they
Created Heaven and Earth. And that such is the word here, is again manifest
enough in that David says, I will keep it, and meditate in it. My Tongue shall
speak of it: For all thy Commandments are Righteous. One thing more I will
inform you of: viz. That Word in several places of this Psalm signifies Gods
Promise, and particularly to David. As verse. 65. Thou have dealt well with thy
Servant according to thy word. Verse. 170. Deliver me according to thy Word.
Verse. 49. Remember thy word unto thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to
hope. Verse. 38. Stablish thy word unto thy Servant. Compare herewith 2 Samuel
23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure. And Chap. 7.25. The word
which thou have spoken concerning thy Servant and concerning his house,
establish it for ever. And that was this: Verse. 12. I will set up thy Seed
after thee, and establish his Kingdom. My mercy shall not depart away from him.
Now is this word, Christ? Did this Word create Heaven and Earth? This, I will
set up thy Seed, etc? And was it not an outward word spoken by Nathan? Ibid. p.
69. Pro. 6.24. Reproofs of instruction are the way of Life* to keep thee from
the evil Woman. That is, the false deceitful Whorish Spirit, the Spirit of this
World, which bewitches the whole Earth.] That it is a real Woman, I am as sure,
as that any Whore in England is a Woman. For the discourse being continued,
thus it is said: Verse. 29. He that goes in to his Neighbor's Wife shall not
be innocent. Verse. 32, 33, 34. Whosoever commits Adultery with a Woman, lacks
understanding. A wound and dishonor shall he get, for Jealousy is the Rage of
a Man: therefore he will not spare in the day of Vengeance. And thus Chap. 7.
(where the same Woman is spoken of, as appears verse. 5.) She caught the Young
man and Kissed him, and said, I have decked my Bed with Tapestry, and perfumed
it with Myrrh, come let us take our fill of Love until the Morning, for the
Goodman is not at home, etc. Now prove you if you can, that the Holy Ghost
means by the Whorish Woman, in this place, a Whorish Spirit, the Spirit of
error. If I should say, Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge:
that is, Idolaters: I believe my reason would be as good as yours. For yours I
question not is, because St. John in the Revelations speaks of a Whore of
Babylon: and mine would be, because Ezekiel in his Prophecy speaks of
committing Adultery with Idols, and going a Whoring after the Heathen. But then
he that reads what goes before my Text, viz. Marriage is honorable in all,
and the Bed Undefiled: would wonder at my interpretation. So no less may he
wonder at yours, when he reads what follows your Text, viz. He that goes into
his Neighbor's Wife, etc. Or if this be not the reason of your Interpretation,
produce what is, and I question not but I can give you as good for mine: And so
likewise for this other: Pro. 31.4. It is not for Kings to drink Wine: that is,
the Wine of Fornication which the Whore of Babylon pours forth, the Doctrine
of the false Prophet.

Ibid. p. 75. The seven Spirits of God are one Spirit.] Angels are spirits. And
as it is said of these seven, that they stand before the Throne, and are sent
forth into the Earth, Rev. 1.4. and 5, 6. So is the same said of Angels, Chap.
5.11. Heb. 1.14. Now whether St. John mean by these seven Spirits, Angels, or
the Holy Ghost, is to be considered. And (1) to say that the Holy Ghost stands
before the throne, seems harsh, and we read not so elsewhere. (2) They are
called Angels, Chap. 8.2. I saw the seven Angels that stood before God. Which
refers to the seven Spirits often before mentioned as standing before the Throne,
Chap. 5.6. and 4.5. and 1.4.

Ibid. p. 6.7. The Seed and Birth of God is not an Accident, but a substance.
-- It is not a particle of the Godhead: but it is of the Heavenly, Spiritual,
and Invisible substance and being; that is, the most Glorious being and
principle, in which God, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, does dwell and
tabernacle, and shine forth in the most Glorious Brightness, Beauty, Sweetness,
and Majesty, that the noblest of Creatures in the highest supernatural
elevation can reach unto, behold him and have fellowship with him; which is the
Holy of Holies, and the Heaven of Heavens, or that third Heaven, in which Paul
on Earth saw and felt things unutterable. And out of these Heavens, etc.] Of
your opinion, that the new birth is a substance, and of that spiritual
substance in which God dwells, the Heaven of Heavens, perhaps I may speak
another time. As to your interpretation of 2. Cor. 12.2. (1) Why say you St.
Paul was on Earth when he heard the unspeakable words, when he tells you that
himself knew not? for his words are these: I knew a Man (whether in the Body, I
cannot tell; or whether out of the Body, I cannot tell: God knows.) Such an
one caught up to the third Heaven. Which must signify whether this was really
done, or whether it was only a vision, he knew not. (2) But suppose he was
really caught up in the Body (which for ought any man knows he was;) how could
that be, if he remained still on Earth, and was not removed an inch from his
place? (3) And yet how caught up (...), even unto the third Heaven (which
signifies the greatest distance) and yet not removed? for according to your
Opinion, Heaven is as near to us, as our own Souls, for where the new Birth is,
there it is, that birth being (as you say) of the same spiritual substance in
which God dwells, which is Heaven. (4) And then St. Paul having that Birth
before, was in Heaven before he was caught up thither: and so is every
regenerate man at present. So that it is no strange or peculiar thing, which
our Savior said of himself, viz. that he was then in Heaven whilst he
discoursed with Nicodemus, Joh. 3.13. (5) And I would then know how he passed
through two Heavens, or thought he did so: (for whether this were real, or a
vision, is all one, the vision signifying as much as the real motion.) And if
you please, I would understand also from your inspiration (not conjecture) what
these two Heavens are, which he passed to come to the third. For alas! I only
take the one to be that of the Clouds, and the other that of the Stars; it
being of old said, The Clouds of Heaven: And the Stars of Heaven. But perhaps
you can inform me of two other, as well as a third, hard by us, somewhat alike
comfortable. (6) Being curious, I would yet know how St. Paul's Body was, or
might be caught up Unto this third Heaven, a spiritual substance just before
his Face. For methinks it should then rather have been said, his Body was
caught or drawn into it. Be truly serious and tell me, whether Christ ascended
up above the Clouds: I mean, ten or twenty Miles distant from Earth upward. And
since we read that at his Death, he said to the Thief, This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise; whether their Spirits ascended upward, (as the Spirits of
Men do:) especially since this Paradise is the third Heaven, verse. 4. In the
mean time I go on with your words.

Ibid. p. 7. And out of these Heavens does the Seed of God come, who sows it
in the heart of Man, and forms it by his own immediate power, and waters it
with influences from Heaven, which have of the virtue and breath of his own
eternal Life and Spirit in them, whereby this Seed grows up into a perfect
substantial birth of one Heavenly and incorruptible nature, which is Christ
formed within, the Body of Christ, his Flesh and Blood, which comes down from
Heaven, and gives Life unto that Soul or Life of Man, which eats it and
feeds upon it: and it is called the Body, and Flesh and Blood of Christ,
because his eternal Life and Spirit dwells in it immediately, and
communicates unto man the knowledge of the glory and beauty of himself, only in
and through this Seed and Birth. G. F. Catechism p. 142. They tell me of
Christ's human Flesh, and human Body. Does Scripture speak of such things? is
not his Flesh from above? and does not Christ say, his Flesh comes from above,
which was the Bread? Ans. It was the first Adam who was earthly; but the second
is Heavenly Note that this is all the Answer to the Question.
.] The Text which proves (as you suppose) that Christ has another Body besides
that which was visible, Flesh and Blood of a spiritual substance besides the
material which he took of the Virgin; which gives Life unto the Soul which
feeds on it, by the Spirit which dwells in it, communicating of the
knowledge of the glory of himself through the Seed of God: is Joh. 6.50, 51.
This is the Bread which comes down from Heaven, that a Man may eat thereof and
not Die. I am the living Bread, which came down from Heaven. If any man eat of
this Bread, he shall Live for ever. And the Bread which I will give is my
Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World. From whence I suppose you
would argue thus: The Flesh here spoken of, came down from Heaven: The visible
flesh came not down from Heaven: Therefore the visible Flesh is not here spoken
of. I deny the Major: and for this reason, because the Text says not the Flesh
came down from Heaven. Which therefore you must prove by consequence thus: The
Bread came down from Heaven: The Flesh is the Bread: Therefore the Flesh came
down from Heaven. I Answer: The Bread in the Major signifies whole Christ. As
it is said, I am the Living Bread: and verse. 48. I am the Bread of Life. And
though he speak of himself as then he was, both the Word and Man, that he came
down from Heaven ( I came down from Heaven;) yes and said that he the Son of
Man came from thence; (verse. 62. What and if you shall see the Son of Man
ascend up where he was before? Chap. 3.13. No Man has Ascended up to Heaven,
but he that came down from Heaven, the Son of Man which is in Heaven:) Yet as
the Son of Man he came not from thence, but as the Word. But Flesh in the Minor
is not the Bread as that signifies whole Christ, but only part of Christ. Now
that may be affirmed of whole Christ, or of his Person, which cannot be
affirmed of every part of him. As your selves will grant that he came from
Heaven, and yet deny that his visible Flesh, which is part of him, did.
Wherefore though the Bread came down from Heaven, and the Flesh is Bread, it
will not follow from hence, that the Flesh came from Heaven; unless either all
the Bread, which is Christ, came from thence, or the Flesh is all the Bread;
that is to say, all Christ. Form the Syllogism (as it ought) thus, and you may
the easier discern your error: All the Bread of Life came down from Heaven: The
Flesh is some of the Bread of Life: Therefore the Flesh came down from Heaven.
Or thus, all the Bread of Life came down from Heaven: Some Flesh is the Bread
of Life: Therefore some Flesh came down from Heaven. For the Major is false,
which affirms all the Bread of Life to come down from Heaven. For all the Bread
of Life is all Christ: and all Christ came not down from Heaven. For his
visible Flesh did not; and yet his visible Flesh is some of the Bread of Life.
I will use the like Arguments for Proof of the descent of Christ's visible
Flesh, and leave you to answer them, because in so doing you will answer your
selves The Bread here spoken of came down from Heaven: The visible Flesh is the
Bread here spoken of: Therefore the visible Flesh came down from Heaven. The
Minor I prove: That which Christ gave for the Life of the World, is the Bread
here spoken of (as the Text affirms: The Bread which I will give is my Flesh,
which I will give for the Life of the World:) The visible Flesh Christ gave for
the Life of the World: Therefore the visible Flesh is the Bread here spoken of.
Again, the Son of Man came down from Heaven: The Son of Man is visible Flesh:
Therefore visible Flesh came down from Heaven. Again, all the Bread of Life
came down from Heaven: The visible Flesh is some of the Bread of Life:
Therefore the visible Flesh came down from Heaven. Perhaps an Instance may be
more clear to you, and therefore say I thus: Redemption came from Jerusalem:
The Money is the Redemption: Therefore the Money came from Jerusalem, Which yet
will not necessarily follow, because it might be taken up (suppose) in England
by him that came from Jerusalem and redeemed Slaves by that Price paid. Now to
show the contrary to your assertion. (1) Let us put into the Text the visible
Flesh, and see whether it cannot be said, as it is without any incongruity. I
am the Living Bread which came down from Heaven: If any Man eat this Bread he
shall Live for ever: And the Bread which I will give is this my Flesh which
your Eyes behold, which I will give for the Life of the World: or say we, And
the Bread which I will give is my Life, which I will give for the Life of the
World: (for that that is the meaning of giving his Flesh for the Life of the
World, shall be showed anon. And that he gave his Bodily Life, that which he
took of the B. Virgin, for the Life of the World, I hope you will not deny Yet
I find some odd passages in your Writings. K. Help. p. 2. The letter and
outward teachings so much cried up, with all the Fruits and effects of the one
[ the Crucified Body of Christ] though a very Blessed and Comfortable enjoyment
in its place and kind, yet being but that which made nothing perfect, is now no
less necessary to be parted with than at that time it was; else the Comforter
as the blessed effect of the other [ the Living Body of Christ] can not come.
F. Truth and Deceit. p. 55. Then came Christ according to the Flesh to be
Crucified, the Lamb slain, that Flesh of his which is a mystery; when the first
Adam's and Eve's Flesh was defiled. P. 57. Yet his Flesh never corrupted, which
Flesh is the offering, for as he was not God he did not Die: and this Flesh is
a mystery, and in this Flesh is the Belief which takes away the Sin, that never
corrupted, that is the offering for Sin, and the Blood of this Flesh cleanses
from Sin. -- This offering who is found in the Shape of a Man. -- And where
this belief is entered into his Flesh, it knows Adam's Flesh that corrupted. --
Through his Flesh he does reconcile, and by the offering up his Body, his
Flesh, that which has been Slain from the Foundation of the World, and yet
never corrupted, he breaks down the Partition Wall betwixt Jews and Gentiles.
p. 59. So this pure Flesh, this offering is set over all, which never
corrupted, which must be your Meat if you Live, though there is more in all
these things, which is hard to be uttered, and cannot be uttered yet.
.) But the words being thus put, there is no incongruity, but it is the very
same in sense with the Text, and therefore the visible Flesh of Christ is here
meant. So that the whole is this: Christ who now was Man, having said that he
is the Bread of Life which came down from Heaven, shows in one eminent
particular wherein he is so, viz. in Dying for us: (he being likewise the Bread
of Life in other respects, namely, as to his Doctrine and Spirit; and raising
unto eternal Life at the last day.) Which Death is our eternal Life, as Bread
is our Temporal. (2) From these last words, I will give my Flesh for the Life
of the World, I prove that the Flesh and Blood here spoken of are not a
spiritual invisible substance, which you Imagine Christ always dwelt in and
brought from Heaven with him, but that visible which he took of the Virgin. For
to give his Flesh for the Life of the World, signifies to offer up himself a
Sacrifice for Sin by Death upon the Cross, thereby obtaining Life for the
World, Pardon and Redemption. As is manifest from the like expressions which
frequently occur. Mat. 20.28. The Son of Man came to give his Life a Ransom for
many. Ephesians. 5.2. Christ has given himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to
God. Heb. 9.28. He was once offered to bear the Sins of many. Chap. 3.14. As
the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he himself likewise took part of
the same, that through Death he might destroy him that had the power of Death,
the Devil. And it being altogether thus spoken of his visible Flesh, it is sure
enough that this place speaks of the same Tertullian understands the Text of
the visible Flesh: De Carne Chr. Chap. 13. In Christo invenimus animam and
carnem simplicibus and nudis vocabulis editas, id est, animam animam, and
carnem carnem -- Quid anxia est anima mea usque ad mortem? Et, Panis quem ego
dedero pro salute mundi, caro mea est. -- Si una caro, and una anima, illa
tristis usque ad mortem, and illa Panis pro mundi salute, salvus est numerus
duarum substantiarum, in suo genere distantium, excludens Carneae animae unicam
speciem.
. For, show another Text if you can that speaks thus of a spiritual Flesh of
his. But then the importance of the Phrase being such as you have heard, you
must affirm that the spiritual Flesh was offered and Died and so obtained
Redemption for us. Which is altogether a stranger to the Scripture. Whether you
will affirm this I cannot tell. But this we all see, that you Interpret the
Life which is by Christ's Flesh ( viz. The spiritual, which you fancy) of his
quickening of our Souls by his Life and Spirit which dwells in us. Which is
quite another thing than to give it for the Life of the World, that importing
Dying as a sacrifice, and atoning for Sin. (3) The Flesh and Blood here are two
distinct things, verse. 53. Whereas the spiritual substance which you imagine
can have but one part. And moreover the Flesh, forasmuch as the giving of it
(as has been proved) signifies Christ's Death, must needs be that which was
Broken; and the Blood, that which was shed. And accordingly the Bread and Wine,
which our Lord Ordained in remembrance of his same Death, are symbols of this
same Flesh and Blood, and of no other. 1 Cor. 11. Mat. 26. This is my Body
which is Broken for you: This is my Blood which is shed for you. But spiritual
Flesh cannot be broken, nor spiritual Blood shed; (and indeed there are not
these two distinct parts in a spiritual substance:) nor are the Bread and Wine
in the Lord's Supper symbols of such: and therefore we must conclude that such
are not here meant.

Im. Revel. p. 55. Scripture is frequent in its testimonies concerning the
appearance of Jesus Christ in his Saints. -- Can any thing which is without Man
speak so immediately to the Soul, as Christ who made it, and is in it, and comes
in for that end, to reveal himself and his Father therein, and so to fulfill
that Prayer of his, Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they whom thou have given
me be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given
me?] But this Text speaks not of the Saints being with Christ, and beholding
his Glory whilst they are upon Earth by his operation in their Hearts, but of
their real presence with him in Heaven after this Life, and then, and as so
present beholding his Glory. For as he departed out of this World to be in the
place where he is, and to receive the Glory there which he has: (verse. 1. The
hour is come: Glorify thy Son. Verse. 5. Glorify thou me with thine own self.
Ver. 11. I am no more in the World, I come to thee. Chap. 7.39. Jesus was not
[yet] Glorified. Chap. 20.17. I am not Yet ascended to my Father. Ephesians. 1.20.
God raised him from the Dead, and set him at his own right hand in the Heavenly
places. 1 Timothy 3.16. Received up into Glory. vide Joh. 6.62.) So must we
likewise depart hence, that we may be in the same place with him, and behold,
as there present, his Glory. For thus it is said, 2 Cor. 5.6. Whilst we are at
home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. Phil. 1.23. I have a desire to
depart and be with Christ. 1 John 4.2. When he shall appear, we shall be like
him; for we shall see him as he is. And plain enough is it that our Savior
speaks not of our Beholding his Glory, whilst we are absent from him, but when
we are in the same place with him: I will that they be with me where I am, that
they may behold my Glory. And that really and personally there, by a proper
local removal hence, as himself went thither. For thus says he, verse. 11. I am
no more in the World, I come to thee. Whereas then he prays, that they that are
his may be with him, it is manifest, he means that they might come to the
Father as he did, be removed from Earth into Heaven, for the same says he of
those that lay down their Lives for him. Which must therefore needs mean their
being with him in the other World, so as to be glorified and receive eternal
Life. Chap. 12.25.26. He that hates his Life in this World, shall keep it unto
Life eternal. If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am there
shall also my Servant be. So says he to the Jews, Chap. 7.33.34. Yet a little
while I am with you, and then I go unto him that sent me. Ye shall seek me, and
shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come. i. e. Ye cannot come
unto God in Heaven, and dwell there with him and me: or, ye cannot be saved.
For thus says he again to them, Chap. 8.21. Ye shall Die in your Sins: Whither
I go ye cannot come. So that you may as well say, that the Saints on Earth see
the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. are entered into it, and are possessed of eternal
Life, which yet we are told they receive in the World to come, Chap.
33.5.15.16. Luke 18.30. as that they are where Christ is, beholding his Glory,
whilst they remain likewise upon Earth. For hear further what he says, which
will again show you his mind. Chap. 14.2.3. In my Father's house are many
Mansions. I go to prepare a place for you. I will come again and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there you may be also. Which is to be taken up
into Heaven really at Christ's coming to judge the World, when the Dead shall
rise. According as his Apostle speaks, 1 These. 4. The Lord shall descend from
Heaven: and the Dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and
remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord
in the Air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. You might also have observed
a difference betwixt Christ's being with us in our hearts, and our being with
him in Heaven. Which is as much as betwixt the Sun's being with us here below,
which is by its Beams and influences, and our being with it above, which cannot
be without our local ascent.

I again desire the Reader to remember that these Men pretend to be Prophets,
and to Write by Inspiration, and not to interpret, nor so much as make use of
Scripture but as the Holy Ghost leads; and to judge all along as he reads,
whether they have so done, as knowing that that Spirit is not the Author of any
falsity or folly: and to remember withal that my present business is only
concerning the Interpretations of Scripture: which may be monstrously false and
ridiculous, though no error in Doctrine should be asserted. As if I should say,
Mat. 1.1. The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David: The
Book is the Soul of Man, in which is written good or evil, according to which
every one shall be judged. Here Jesus Christ is to be formed, in the heart: I
Travel in Birth again till Christ be formed in you. And he is truly the Son of
David, sits upon the Throne; whose Kingdom is here, within, comes not with
observation, and has no end. And where he is thus begotten and formed, and
thus rules, there he is Jesus, which is by interpretation a Savior. Who (I
say) can condemn this Doctrine? But who reading what follows the words which I
have thus descanted upon; viz. The Son of Abraham; Abraham begat Isaac: The
Birth of Jesus was on this wise: when as his Mother Mary was espoused to
Joseph, etc. Would not count me an idle Fellow, and conclude that I have
grossly erred, and was in no wise assisted by the Holy Ghost to Interpret
thus? Or should I say: The Son of Man shall come in the Glory of the Father,
and shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and before him all Nations shall be
gathered, and he shall separate the Sheep from the Goats: Now he is upon his
Throne judging the World; in his glory has he appeared, manifesting himself in
great power to his Saints; and the Sheep have heard his voice and follow him,
follow the Lamb that sits upon the Throne wheresoever he goes; the
Righteous and Pure and Harmless are separated from the Goats, the Unclean and
Carnal. Who, I pray you, could condemn me for error? But I believe some that
mind the Text, Mat. 25. would think I had a little Madness, a pure Fanatic
Brain, and was temerarious and ignorant; they seeing it accompanied with these
expressions, Then shall the King say to them on his Right Hand, come ye Blessed
of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the
World. And to them on his Left Hand, Depart ye Cursed into everlasting Fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Im. Revel. p. 77. And the other Apostles pointed at the same principle in the
heart. James says, Chap. 5.9. Grudge not against one another, Brethren, lest
ye be condemned. Behold the Judge stands before the Door. Christ stands by
at the Door. If ye grudge, he will hearken the least motion of that nature, and
condemn it by his light which shines in your Consciences.] But (1) How read
you before? verse. 1. etc. Go to now ye Rich Men, Weep and Houl for your
Miseries which shall come upon you. -- Your Riches are Corrupted. -- The Hire
of the Laborers which have Reaped down your Fields, which of you is kept back
by Fraud, Cries: and the Cries are entered into the Ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. -- Ye have Killed the Just. -- Be Patient therefore Brethren unto the
coming of the Lord. -- Stablish your Hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws
nigh. What is more plain than as these Sins were committed, the coming of the
Lord, means to execute Judgment for the same? As is expressed, Weep for your
Miseries which shall come upon you. And is signified again by those other
Words, The Cries have entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Which is to
say, he has heard, and he will avenge. Next follow the Words in debate: Grudge
not Brethren one against another, lest ye be Condemned. Behold, the Judge
stands before the Door. Which is the same as the coming of the Lord draws
nigh. And that the whole context has showed us to be, to Punish for Sin. So
that, Lest you be Condemned, must mean, Lest you also be punished with these
evil doers. Which is quite another thing, than to be Condemned by the Light in
the Conscience. (2) And indeed, who can believe but that the Apostle deterrs
them from Sin by a greater Argument than the Condemnation of the Light within
them, the Condemnation of their own Hearts, the reproof of their Conscience? As
if he only said, Grudge not one against another, lest you be reproved by the
Light of Christ in you. Behold, the Judge stands before the Door, and he will
so reprove you. Especially when he speaks of the coming of the Lord against
Sinners after another manner than by conviction of their Consciences, of a most
dreadful time of Vengeance, and that a peculiar time, such an one as is not
always; whereas Christ's reproving by his Light within, is common to all times.
Lest you should think, because it is said, Lest ye be Condemned, conviction of
mind must therefore be meant, and not any external Punishment, I observe to you
that external punishment is frequently meant by the same Word. As you find 1
Cor. 11.32. 2 Pet. 3.6. Mar. 16.16. And of Christ's speedy coming to Judge, or
his being ready to execute punishment upon the Wicked (which is the importance
of The Judge stands before the Door;) as also to deliver, comfort, and reward
the Righteous, you read in many places of Scripture. As Rev. 22.12. I come
quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be. Heb. 9.36.37. Ye have need of Patience, that after you have done the
will of God, ye might receive the promise. For yet a little while, and he that
comes shall come, and will not tarry. Luke 21.26. Watch and Pray always, that
ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass,
and to stand before the Son of Men. Verse. 20. When ye shall see Jerusalem
compassed with Armies, then know that the Desolation thereof is nigh. Verse. 25,
etc. Upon the Earth shall be distress of Nations with perplexity; Men's Hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on
the Earth: for the powers of Heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they see
the Son of Man coming in a Cloud in Power and in great Glory. And when these
things begin to come to pass, then lift up your Heads; for your Redemption
draws nigh.

I. Parots Wren. p. 5. Christ shall come the second time without Sin unto
Salvation. Thus unto you he is come: in whom his coming is completely
perfected. Forster's Guide. p. 39. His second appearance is in Spirit, which no
Fleshly Eye can behold and Live: and Blessed are all they who wait for his
second coming, to wit, without Sin, unto Salvation. For his second coming is to
put an end to Sin. P. 50. Ye Men of Galilee why stand ye here gazing? The same
Jesus which has been taken up from you into Heaven, shall in like manner come
again: to wit, in a Cloud; for so he went up. This is a mystery to the Wise of
this World, that the Light of the World, and Life of Men should come* in a
Cloud. But so it is: to the Children of Light, it is revealed by the Spirit:
They can tell you that as Christ's first appearance was in the Flesh, and the
Fleshly Eye saw him; so his second appearance is in Spirit, and no Fleshly Eye
can behold him, he being now a Spirit. W. Nature of Christianity. P. 29. Is his
appearing the second time without Sin unto Salvation in this Life or hereafter?
Thou say, after the Bodily Death you shall be raised out of the Grave, and
made partakers of that Salvation. P. 24. Thou put Salvation at a great
Distance.] As for the Text, Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to bear the Sins
of many: and unto them which look for him shall he appear the second time
without Sin unto Salvation. You falsely Interpret these latter words of
Christ's appearing in the Heart to destroy Sin and free from its power. For (1)
Whereas to appear without Sin is, as the opposite does show, without being
offered to bear Sin, or (as it is verse. 26.) without putting away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself; can any one imagine that the Apostle would go about to
inform us of that which could not be, and which none could ever Imagine? viz.
that Christ shall not Die again, and make atonement by way of Sacrifice for
Sin, in his appearance in our Hearts? And that this is the meaning of (...),
without Sin, as you have seen the opposite does manifest, so you may the rather
be convinced, when you have observed that Sin does sometimes in Scripture
signify the offering for Sin, and that as applied to Christ in his first
appearance. Chap. 10.6. In burnt offering, (...), and for Sin, [i. e. in
Sacrifice for Sin] thou have had no Pleasure. So verse. 8. And Romans 8.3. What
the Law could not do in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his Son
in the likeness of Sinful Flesh, (...), and for Sin, [i.e. a Sacrifice for Sin.
Or if you read, and for Sin Condemned, it is the same: i. e. by a sacrifice for
Sin condemned:] Condemned Sin in the Flesh: that the Righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. 2
Cor. 5.21. He made him Sin [(...),] for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. Isa. 53.10. When thou shall make his Soul Sin
[(...): i. e. an Offering for Sin] he shall see his seed. And thus the Greek
Word (...) is answerable to the Hebrew (...), which as it signifies Sin, so is
used in the Old Testament for the sacrifice and offering for Sin. Lev. 4.25.29.
Psalm. 40.7. Ezekiel. 44.27.29. and 45.19. Our Text then lies plainly thus: Christ
came into the World to Die for Sin: and whereas he is gone out of the World (
verse. 24.) he shall come again into it, but not to Die, but to give that
Salvation which by his Death he Purchased for us: He who was made Sin for us,
shall appear the second time without being made Sin: He was once offered here;
he shall appear again here, but shall not then be offered again. (2) The
Apostle had said just before, that Christ entered into Heaven, the true Holy of
Holies, verse. 24. He speaking then of a second appearance must needs mean his
Coming out of this place, and that after the same manner that he went in, viz.
by local motion: he Ascended, and he shall so Descend: Just as the High Priest
entered into the Holy of Holies of the earthly Tabernacle, and came out again:
only with this difference, that whereas the High Priest entered into that
Earthly Holiest, and came out of it, once every year, so often sacrificing and
making atonement for Sin; Christ entered into Heaven and comes out thence but
once, and that in the end of the World, and not then to offer another Sacrifice
and make a new atonement: (for that he did sufficione for all, viz. at his
entrance there:) but to judge the World, and to give Salvation to them that
diligently wait for him. Thus the Apostle here writes. Verse 12. By his own
Blood he entered in once into the Holy Place, having obtained eternal Redemption
for us. Verse. 24. etc, He is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in the
presence of God for us: nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the
High Priest enters into the Holy Place every year with Blood of others. But he
was once offered to bear the Sins of many, and to them that look for him he
shall appear the second time without Sin unto Salvation. Chap. 10.11.12.13.
Every Priest stands daily Ministering and Offering oftentimes the same
Sacrifices, which can never take away Sins. But this Man after he had offered
one Sacrifice for Sins, for ever sat down at the Right hand of God: from
henceforth expecting till his Enemies be made his Footstool. And when his
Enemies are made his Footstool, then shall he appear here again, and shall
destroy the last Enemy, which is Death, and then shall he deliver up the
Kingdom to God even the Father, 1 Cor. 15. Hereby you may see how far you have
erred from the Apostles mind, whilst you understand the second appearance of
Christ, which he thus speaks of here, of his appearance in our hearts. (3)
The Similitude shows the second appearance of Christ here spoken of to be at
the last day. As it is appointed unto Men once to Die, but after this the
Judgment: so Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of many, and shall appear
the second time without Sin to them that look for him unto Salvation. Which is
to say, as Men Die, and appear here again to be judged, but no more here until
then: so Christ Died, and shall appear here again at that day, and not till
then: (for Heaven must receive him until the times of restitution of all
things, Act. 3.21. Joh. 14.3.) but then more Gloriously, without Death,
suffering, or any means, in the Glory of his Father, to be Glorified in his
Saints, and admired of all Believers, and to give them Rest and Glory, 2 These.
1.7. Col. 3.4. (4) The appearance is unto Salvation unto them that Look for
him. And therefore it is his coming from Heaven at the last day. For until then
do we all look for him, even the very best, in whom he is already come as to
the destruction of Sin in their Hearts, and the manifestation of himself there;
and then is the Salvation given which he obtained for us by the Sacrifice of
himself, and we had a right unto upon the account of our Faith, Regeneration,
and Obedience. 2 Timothy 4.8. I have finished my Course, I have Fought a good
Fight, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge will give me at that day: and
not to me only, but unto all them also which love his appearance. 1 These. 1.9,
10. Ye turned from Idols to serve the Living God, and to wait for his Son from
Heaven. Ph. 3.20. From Heaven we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall change our Vile Body, that it may be Fashioned like unto his Glorious
Body 1 Pet. 5.4. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown
of Glory which fades not away. And because you say we put Salvation at a great
Distance, because we expect it at the last day; observe yet further these
Texts: 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his Body. Mat. 25.31, 32, 34, 41, 46.
When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him,
then shall he Sit upon the Throne of his Glory. And before him shall be
gathered all Nations. Then shall the King say unto them on his Right hand, Come
ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc. Then shall he say also unto
them on his Left hand, Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, etc. These shall
go into Everlasting Punishment: but the Righteous into Life Eternal. Luke
14.14. Thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just. Act. 3.19.
Repent and be Converted, that your Sins may be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall show Jesus
Christ, which before was Preached unto you: whom Heaven must receive until the
times of Restitution of all things, etc.

As for the other Text, Act. 1.11. This same Jesus which is taken up from you
into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as you have seen him go into Heaven.
He went up (say you) in a Cloud, and shall come in a Cloud, no Fleshly eye
shall behold him, for that he is now a Spirit. And you call it a mystery to the
Wise of this World: understanding likewise the coming of Christ here spoken of
to be his invisible coming in the Heart. Whereas it is in a visible manner, in
a Body, locally descending from Heaven, in the real Clouds, accompanied with
Angels. For thus he ascended: He was taken up, removed from Earth, a Cloud
received him, his Disciples saw this, and two Angels then appeared, verse. 9,
10. Luke 24.51. And just so shall he come again says the Text: (...); after the
same manner without a metaphor. And exactly so do we read of his coming at the
last day. The Man Christ shall Judge, Act. 17.31. He has now a Glorious Body,
according to which he will fashion our Vile Bodies, Ph. 3.21. Whom Heaven must
Receive, until the times of restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. But he shall
Descend from Heaven with all the Holy Angels, and sit upon a Throne, and before
him shall all Nations be gathered, and the Righteous then Living shall be
caught up in the Clouds together with them that rise from the Dead to meet him
in the Air, Mat. 25. 1 These. 4. Now when as Christ locally and visibly
ascended, and the Angels said he shall come again after this manner; you are to
judge, Reader, whether this coming be not his Local descent from Heaven, and
visible appearance at the last day: or whether, as the Quaker says, it be his
coming in the Heart, which is neither local nor visible.

Immed. Revelat. p. 77. Till that time that the Day Star arise in their Hearts,
Peter directs them unto a light that shines in a dark place, which is Jesus
Christ in his first appearance; a seed of light sown, but not come forth to the
perfect day. And this he calls the most firm word of Prophecy, whereunto they
do well to take heed for the time. Duesbery's Discovery. p. 33. Oh thou
inflamed Soul under the power of Babylon, mind the Light in thee, which is the
sure word of Prophecy, whereunto, etc.] That the word of Prophecy in 2 Pet.
1.19. Is not Christ in the Heart, in his first appearance there, the light
within, not come forth to the perfect day: will appear if you consider how the
words lie (which I believe you seldom do:) And that is thus: verse. 16. etc. We
have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto you the
power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; but were eyewitnesses of his
Majesty in the Holy mount. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy [(...),
a prophetic Word.] whereunto you do well that ye take heed. Knowing this
first, that no Prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation. For the
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of Man: but Holy Men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. [all Scripture is given by Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16.] But there were false Prophets also among the People, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you. So that the Prophetic word is that which
came peculiarly to Prophets: (whether St. Peter mean that which God had
revealed to themselves the Apostles and other Prophets of Christ, or that which
he had revealed to the old Prophets and they had published, or whether both:)
which they spoke and wrote for the use of others, and as thus published; that
which others, that had it not in themselves, were to take heed unto, and they
that did so, did well; that which was to be Interpreted, and which every one
was to have a care how he Interpreted; an inspired Word, inspired Scripture,
Prophecy, Prophecy of Scripture. All this the Words show. And therefore the
prophetic word is not (as you say) Christ in the Heart in his first
appearance, a seed of Light there sown, but not come forth to the perfect day.
For have all a prophetic word, that have Christ and the Light within? Are all
such Prophets? Are they moved by the holy Ghost to give forth Prophecy, like
those Holy Men that gave forth the Scriptures? Is their Light within to be
interpreted by themselves and others; or is their word to be interpreted, like
as the Scripture and prophetic word is? Further you make the Apostle say thus:
You do well to take heed to the seed of Light in you, not yet come to the
perfect day, which is a more sure word; knowing that no Prophecy of Scripture
is of any private interpretation. The congruity of which you are to show. But
further St. Peter having immediately before spoken of the power and coming [the
powerful coming, or coming in power] of the Lord Jesus Christ (as you have
seen) and how that they the Apostles had not followed devised Fables, when they
made known to the Christians this coming, but were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty
when they were with him in the Holy Mount, and upon this saying, And we have a
more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well that you take heed; this word
may mean more distinctly that which concerned this coming, which both the
Prophets of old had spoken of, and the Apostles themselves also. For-speaking
again Chap. 3. of this coming of the Lord, and giving them warning of Scoffers
which should arise, saying, where is the promise of his coming, he desires them
to be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the Holy Prophets, and
of the Commandment of themselves the Apostles. As then that Scripture of Joel,
The day of the Lord comes, a day of Darkness, etc. And that word of Malachy,
Behold, the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, etc. And those words which
the Apostles so often spoke and wrote, The Lord comes: The coming of the Lord
draws nigh: He comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they
which pierced him: The day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the Night: And
that Prophecy of Enoch, The Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints to
execute Judgment upon all: As this, I say, is not Christ in the Heart, or the
Light within; so neither in the prophetic word, it being the same with this, a
Prophecy namely of Christ's coming.

G. K. Looking Glass. p. 28. The Heathen once had the Spirit. This is our
Faith, who say, the true light which is the Spirit, does enlighten every man
sufficiently unto Salvation: and that a manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal Barcly Theses Theolog. p. 9. Some in those parts of
the Word, where the knowledge of the History of the Gospel is wanting, may be
made partakers of the divine Mystery, if they resist not that grace, a
manifestation whereof is given to every man to profit withal: 1 Cor. 12.7.] The
Apostle does not say it is given to every man, but to every man to profit
withal. Which does not signify that every man has it, any more than when I
say, Tongues and Miracles, Riches and Dominion are given to every man to profit
withal, does signify that every man has Tongues and Miracles, Riches and
Dominion; (which we know is not true, there being many that have none of them:)
but that what gift so ever of the Spirit any man has, it is for good, so
designed by God which gives it, and so ought to be used. Nor does hk speak of
Heathens, but of Christians only. As appears by what next follows: For to one
is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom; to another the word of Knowledge; to
another Faith; to another Gifts of Healing, etc. For to whom were these gifts
given but to the Christians? And verse. 28 (where the same is spoken again) God
has set some in the Church: first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, after that Miracles, then Gifts of Healing, etc. And you might have
observed that the manifestation of the Spirit means not the common light and
grace in every one (as you interpret) but some eminent Gift, whereby the Spirit
manifestly appears, and for which the Man is known to be (...), Spiritual. As
appears from the whole discourse, and particularly from verse. 1. Now concerning
the Spiritual: (whether that mean Men or Gifts. as again it is said Chap. 14.1.
Desire Spiritual Gifts. Verse. 37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet or
Spiritual.) And from the enumeration of the particulars, which follow as
instances hereof: The word of Wisdom, the word of knowledge, Faith, Gifts of
Healing, working of Miracles, etc. It can only be doubted of Faith, and the
word of Wisdom, and the word of Knowledge. But that these are extraordinary, as
the whole discourse shows, and the company they are joined with; so we may also
learn from Chap. 13.2. where Faith is such as works Miracles, and the Wisdom
and Knowledge are of Mysteries: and in that our Text asserts they are variously
distributed, to one this, to another that, whereas the ordinary Faith, Wisdom,
and Knowledge, every true Christian has. You then in saying every man has the
manifestation of the Spirit, affirm every man has some or other extraordinary
Gift, and is (...), the Spiritual. Which is so far from being true of Heathens,
that it is not true of Christians; there being many, and good Christians too,
which are not the Spiritual, endued with some eminent Gift, either this
knowledge of Mysteries, or Faith to remove Mountains (or to do somewhat the
like) or Tongues, or Healing: it being enough to make a good Christian that he
has Charity, which is the fulfilling of the Law. As speaks the Apostle in the
close of this discourse: Verse. 31. Covet earnestly the best Gifts: yet show I
you a more excellent way. And that is Charity, as we see Chap 13. And this
shows that he spoke before (when he discoursed of the manifestation of the
Spirit) of Gifts, and eminent ones too, and not of Graces or Virtues, and those
that are also the most common, as you make him speak. For according to you, the
manifestation of the Spirit, does signify as to some men, Heathens namely and
the darkest and wickedest, the least measure of light and the smallest
spiritual operation and motion in the Heart, you understanding that it is given
to every man. And this so ill agreeing with the Apostles discourse, it was
necessary that you should take away the emphasis, as you have done, saying a
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man. But what reason and
authority you have for so doing I know not, the Greek having its Article, which
commonly enough is emphatical, (...); but especially there being the greatest
emphasis in the thing it self, the manifestation of the Spirit, the Apostle
expressing it by many eminent Gifts, such as Tongues, Miracles, etc. and not
saying one ordinary thing of it, such namely as is the light in every man,
Heathens as well as Christians.

G. K. Help. p. 2. Eating and drinking Damnation spoken, of 1 Cor. 11. is where
this discerning of the Lord's Body is not rightly made, the Dead and Crucified
Body from the Living Body, the living Soul as it is first from the quickening
Spirit which follows after.] Surely men may say any thing when they assume the
liberty of proving nothing. The Text is this; He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's
Body. Not discerning it; in what I demand? In eating and drinking you must say,
if you will speak according to the Apostle. I demand further, in eating and
drinking what? This Bread and Wine you must answer, which the Lord ordained in
remembrance of his Death, if you will again speak as the Apostle does. Friend,
Do thou eat and drink this? I neither do, nor will, must thou reply according
to thy opinion and practice. I tell thee then, that thou discernest not the
Lord's Body according to the mind of the Apostle in this place. And it is no
wonder that thou have invented a strange interpretation hereof, so long as thou will have nothing to do with the Institution, Do this in remembrance of me. But
since the Apostle speaks of the Lord's Supper, show that he means here that
another body is to be discerned than that which is to be remembered as
Crucified, whereof the Bread and Wine are Symbols. Show a syllable here that
intimates a spiritual body. I will show thee (and I wish thou would learn
thy duty) what it is according to the Apostles mind to discern the Lords Body:
viz. to come to the Supper of the Lord, not as to a common Feast, but with
heavenly affection, and all due preparation of Soul, minding his Death, the
death of so great an one as the Son of God, the Lord of Glory, and not of an
ordinary man; and that ignominious and painful, the death of the Cross; his
Love herein, and the Love of his Father, and our inestimable benefit, eternal
Redemption; so as to be sutably wrought upon by all. Thus much you might have
learned from the Apostle, if you had observed his words, who tells us, that as
for eating and drinking (that is, after the common manner) we have houses to do
that in; but this bread is Christ's Body broken for us, and this Cup is the New
Testament in his Blood; and we are to examine our selves, and to receive these
in remembrance of him, showing forth his Death herein. And I pray you what is
here unworthy of a Christian, and unfit for you to do? what that is mean and
elementary, and not divine enough for the best? But as for your discerning of
the Lord's Body, his dead Body from his living Body, the living Soul from the
quickening Spirit, as you intend it not of his Supper, so has it nothing to do
with the Text.

J. N. Love to the Lost, p. 54. etc. This was Instituted by Christ as they sat
at Meat and did eat: and so often as they did eat and drink thereof, they were
to do it in remembrance of him, showing his Death till he came. And this was
that the Apostles received of the Lord, and was practiced in the purity of the
Church, which breaking Bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness, and singleness of heart: And this was to be done at all seasons when
they eat and drank: in their eating and drinking they were to do it to the
Lord, and herein to have communion with his Body and Blood. Yea, when they were
to have communion with the Gentiles, they were to partake of the Table of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 10. -- Many, excess having overtaken them for want of eating
always in his fear, and in remembrance of his coming, have put his coming afar
off into another world, and are become reprobate in the Faith as to his
appearance: and to avoid this it was, that the Lord Jesus commanded his
Disciples in eating and drinking to show forth his death till he came. -- It
must needs be that they return into the pleasures of the flesh, that discern
not his Body in their eatings, who is the Body of all creatures. -- And this is
known from the Lord in the Eternal to be the true end of the Supper of the
Lord, instituted and appointed, that in remembrance of his death they might be
kept from all excess.] It is easy to say, This is from the Lord, but nothing
is more dreadful than to lay Error upon the Holy Ghost, notwithstanding the
people out of reverence to that holy one, believe it, and reverence the
Assertor. Show a syllable that intimates that our Lord instituted his Supper
for a remembrance of his Death in our ordinary daily eating and drinking: or
that the reason he took Bread and Wine when he did eat the Passover with his
Disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my Body: Drink ye all of it; for this
is my Blood: This do in remembrance of me: was to show us that whenever we take
our common meals, we should feed our selves in his fear, as the remembrance of
his Death requires. Nothing is more clear than that he means a peculiar
eating and drinking. For says he, This is my Body, This is my Blood. Is all
Bread and Wine his Body and Blood, or do they so signify? Nay, though there be
on our Tables neither of these creatures, but only Butter, and Cheese, and
Eggs, Beer, and Water, and Milk? Again, the Apostle does not say, as often as ye
eat and drink, but as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, you show
the Lord's death, 1 Cor. 11. manifestly distinguishing this Bread and Wine from
Cabbage and Ale, and whatsoever else is our common food. And again, 1 Cor. 10.
The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the Blood of
Christ? Is every Cup this? And chap. 11. Let a man examine himself [(...), fit)
and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. I pray you must we
examine and fit our selves whenever we eat, and unless we do so, forbear all
food? Christ then has ordained that all the wicked, who are always unfit, must
be famished; or else you must say they sin when ever they eat, and to save
their lives may indeed eat though they do sin. But further, could you not see
that this was done in the Church, when many of the Christians came together
into one place for this very end, and not in their own houses, not by every one
apart in every eating? Could you not see it is called the Lord's Supper, with
express distinction from their own? It is written plain enough, verse. 20.21.22.
When ye come together into one place; this is not to eat the Lord's Supper, for
in eating every one takes before other his own Supper. What, have ye not
houses to eat and drink in? So far are you from the Truth, when you say, the
Christians did partake of the Lord's Table when they eat with the very Heathens
and whenever else.

Ibid. p. 58. Christ charged his Disciples to wait for his coming at Jerusalem,
the promise of the Father, of which he had told them before his Death, which
they were to show so often as they brake bread till he came: (1 Cor. 11.26.)
and after he was come to the Apostles, they continued it for their sakes who
were weak in the Faith, to whom he was not appeared. R. Barclay Catechism, p.
98. This was to continue till Christ came. Which coming is inward.] (1) The
Commandment of our Savior, Do this in remembrance of me, according to you
belonged only to the Apostles, and those that were Disciples before his Death,
and was obligatory but till the descent of the Holy Ghost, that is, but fifty
days after his Resurrection; and that after this time it was arbitrary, and
they might observe it or forbear. But this is false, for St. Paul tells the
Corinthians, that he had received this of the Lord, and accordingly delivered
the same unto them, 2 Cor. 11.23. So that that which was commanded the Apostles
before Christ's death, was given in charge again to St. Paul, and that after
Christ's coming to the Apostles in Jerusalem at Pentecost: (for after this time
was he called to the Ministry:) and moreover was delivered by him as a command
to be observed by the Church. Nay, though Christ was come by the descent of the
Holy Ghost at Pentecost, yet still says the Apostle, As often as ye eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show [or, show ye, (...)] the Lord's Death till
he come, 1 Cor. 11.26, So that he means another coming, and until that be, he
teaches us that this is to be done. (2) Not only in that first descent of the
Holy Ghost, but also in all Divine operations in the heart by the same spirit
was Christ come already when the Apostle wrote; for unless he was so come,
working graciously upon the heart, the Corinthians were not to receive the
Supper of the Lord, v. 27.28.29. Wherefore that inward coming cannot be meant
by the Apostle, for as much as that which he speaks of was not as yet, as is
manifest by those words, Till he come. (3) If the Apostles continued it (as you
further say) for the sakes of the weak, why do not you likewise continue it for
the sakes of the same? What, are there no weak ones among you? Is the Church of
the Quakers better than the primitive? Or are you wiser than the Apostles,
judging that unfit, which they judged fit? But, dear Souls, in good earnest, is
the Lord's Supper below you, too mean and beggarly for your strength and
spirituality? What Christian (how great and perfect soever he be, if as perfect
as St. Paul) does it not become to commemorate Christ, and show forth his Death
as this Solemnity requires? Which is* to declare by this outward Rite to all
the world his Faith in this Crucified Person, whom the Jews by reason of his
vile death despised and rejected, 1 Cor. 1.18.23. and to profess himself his
Servant, and to admire his love, and the Love of his Father, and to acknowledge
that our eternal Redemption is by his Bloodshed, and for all to offer most
ardent thanks, and the profoundest Praises and Adorations of his heart. This
reason is perpetual, and equally concerns all. And further, was there ever any
Church which discontinued the Supper of our Lord? Or was there never heretofore
the glorious appearance (till which time your selves say it was to be observed)
until now among you Quakers? I add, you discern not the wisdom of our Lord in
this matter; in that he has enjoined us to come, and yet forbids unless we
prepare our selves. So that he provokes and even compels us to Devotion and
Piety, and does what may be, not only to excite and animate our coldness, but
to continue us in our goodness, and to bring the more profane to a godly mind
and life; viz. by the frequent repetitions of this grand and serious solemnity.
(4) Christ's coming therefore, until which time his Supper is to continue, is
that in the end of the world; which is so eminently spoken of every where in
the Gospel, and all Christians wait for. Of which you read again in this
Epistle, c. 15.23. Christ the First Fruits is risen, afterward they that are
Christ's shall rise, at his coming. Then comes the end.

G. K. Help p. 22. This is Antichrist who denies Christ the Son came in the
revelation of himself in the heart; for that coming of Christ in his Bodily
appearance at Jerusalem Antichrist will not, does not deny: being he knows it
will never harm his Kingdom so to confess him come, provided Christ's Kingdom
be not set up in the heart. Tomlinson word of Reproof, p. 5. The spirit of
Antichrist does not confess Christ come (i. e. when he comes or appears) in
flesh or in his servants. Parker's Discovery, p. 20. Every Spirit that
confesses Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God; but the Pope and his
Train, and the vilest persons have confessed Christ come in his flesh at
Jerusalem, yet are not of God. -- They who deny Christ come in their mortal
flesh to destroy sin, are Antichrists.] I am sorry to hear such words come out
of the mouths of men pretending to Christianity. I trust it is out of ignorance
and inconsideration you speak, not malice. For will not Antichrist deny Christ
come in his Body, when he took that Flesh, that through Death he might destroy
him that had the power of Death, the Devil; and when through the offering of
his Body we are all sanctified? when by that Blood he entered into the holy
place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us; and when it is that which
cleanses us from all our sins? when in this body he rose again, without which
Resurrection we had yet been in our sins; and in the same ascended, without
which ascension the Holy Ghost had not come? When without this Body the world
had never had his Preaching, nor Miracles, nor Example, nor his Apostles, nor
any of his Religion, for ought we know; all depending, as the History of the
Gospel shows us, upon his being made the Son of Man? In Conscience can you say,
that to deny all this, does nothing advantage Antichrist's Kingdom? Or to
confess it all, it being our right Faith, does nothing hinder his Kingdom, and
advantage Christ's? Wherefore then has Christ given us this Faith? Will not
Antichrist deny Christ's coming in his Flesh, that he may frustrate all the
benefits that proceed from thence, and spoil our whole belief on him? You may
be sure he will, if he can do it by any means handsomely; either covertly, or
more openly, as he sees he can prevail: and that he has done it you shall see
anon. No, but say you, He will not deny his bodily appearance at Jerusalem,
being he knows it will never harm his Kingdom so to confess him come, provided
Christ's Kingdom be not set up in the heart. If this be right, I may likewise
say, Nor will the Devil deny God, being he knows to confess him will never harm
his Kingdom, provided God be not worshipped. Upon this account I begin to
conjecture that by and by we shall indeed have no Antichrist. For it may
likewise be said, Neither will he deny Christ's coming from Heaven, his
Divinity, his being the Son of God and the Christ; being he knows it will never
harm his Kingdom so to confess him, provided Christ's Kingdom be not set up in
the heart. Yet he is said to be the Liar, that denies Jesus to be the Christ
and the Son of God, 1 John 2. Who then at last is Antichrist? He, say you, That
denies him the Son come in the revelation of himself in the heart. But say I
again, Nor will Antichrist deny this, seeing to confess him so come, will never
harm his Kingdom, provided yet Christ's Kingdom be not set up there. So that it
is come to pass (as I feared it would) that at this rate we have no Antichrist,
neither one nor other. And it were happy for us, if he were thus whifled out of
the world. But hereby the vanity of your proviso appears. Say we then bluntly,
without any proviso at all, as St. John does, He truly is this wicked
Antichrist, that either denies Christ come in his Flesh, or denies him to be
the Christ, or denies him to be the Son of God. You say further, Every Spirit
that confesses Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God. But the Pope and
his train and the vilest Sinners have confessed Christ come in the Flesh at
Jerusalem, yet are not of God. So say I, Whosoever confesses Jesus to be the
Son of God and the Christ, is of God, is Born of him, and God dwells in him
and he in God: (you know the same St. John likewise asserts it.) But the Pope
and his Train and the vilest Sinners have confessed Jesus to be the Son of God
and the Christ, and yet are not of God, nor are Born of him, nor dwell in him
nor he in them. Yet for all this he that confesses not Jesus to be the Christ,
is Antichrist, as the same divine Author also asserts: and therefore likewise
so may he be, and so say I still notwithstanding your reasoning he is, that
confesses him not come in his Flesh at Jerusalem. Yes and hear you again, the
Pope and his Train and the vilest Sinners have and do confess that Christ come
in the Hearts of his Saints, yet are they not of God. If you mean, or shall so
reply, they resist him when he comes in their own Hearts: I tell you every
Wicked man does so, and yet every Wicked man is not Antichrist in St. John's
Sense. And surely you know the difference betwixt resisting him, and denying
him; and discern I hope what kind of persons our Apostle speaks of, when he
says in this place, Try the Spirits: because many False-Prophets are gone out
into the World. Namely that he does not mean, that every Wicked Man be Tried,
but some sorts of Prophets, that we may not be Poisoned with false Doctrine. As
you may learn again from these his precedent words, Believe not every Spirit.
They, say you again, that deny Christ come in their Flesh to destroy Sin, are
Antichrists. So say I, are they that deny him come in his own Flesh to destroy
the Devil. But Antichrist (say you further) does not deny this. Well, if there
be not such an one now, the times are altered: for I am sure there have been
many such heretofore. Or if you think I am mistaken in calling them by so ill a
name, that have only denied Christ's Flesh and Bodily appearance at Jerusalem,
speak it out, and let us moreover hear what we may more truly call them. They
have ignominy enough among the Ancients. Some of whose words I will recite,
that you may be convinced there have been such Men, and may see what they
thought of them. Ignatius Ad Tral. (...), etc. There are some vain Talkers and
Seducers, mixing poison with sweetness. -- They reject Christ's Nativity of the
Virgin. -- Some as if they were Infidels and without God, say Christ was only
in appearance a man, and took not a true Body, and suffered and died in
appearance. Fly these ungodly Heresies: for they are the invention of the
Devil. Ad Smyrn. I warn you of these Beasts that have the shapes of Men. For if
the Lord was seemingly in a Body, and Crucified in appearance, then I am now
likewise bound for him in appearance. -- He that says Christ had not Flesh,
perfectly denies him. -- If any man believe him not to have been conversant in
Flesh, and confesses not his passion and his blood shed, he cannot obtain
eternal Life. Ad Phil. He was truly Born, truly increased, did truly Eat and
Drink, was truly Crucified, truly arose. He that believes not this, differs not
from his Crucifiers. For the Prince of the World rejoices when any one denies
the Cross, as knowing that the confession hereof is his destruction. Thus again
Ad Ephesians. Hear we another, Irenaeus L. 1. C. 22. Saturninus affirms the Savior
was not Born, nor had a Body, but was only man in appearance. Chap. 25.
Carpocrates says Jesus was not Born of a Virgin, but was the Son of Joseph and
Mary after the manner of other Children, and that after his Baptism Christ
descended into him from the supreme God in the shape of a Dove, and in the end
Christ flew away from Jesus, and Jesus suffered and rose, L. 3. C. 11. The
Gnostics affirm that the Word and Christ did not come into the World, that the
Savior had not Flesh, nor suffered. But some of them say Jesus was incarnate
and suffered, whom they affirm to have passed through Mary as Water does
through a Pipe. The opinion of all the Heretics is that the Word was not made
Flesh. Hear another: Tertullian Adv. Haer. Chap. 46. Basilides the Heretic
says Christ was without the substance of Flesh, that he suffered not of the
Jews, but Simon in his place, so that we are not to believe in him that was
Crucified, lest we believe in Simon. Chap. 49. Valentinus the Heretic says
that Christ was not in the substance of our Flesh but brought I know not what
kind of Spiritual Body from Heaven, and passed through the Virgin as Water
through a Pipe taking nothing thence. Chap. 51. Cerdon affirms him to have been
only a Phantasm; not to have truly suffered, but as it were to have suffered,
not to be Born of a Virgin, nor to be Born at all. After these comes Apelles,
and he says Christ was neither in the appearance nor in the substance of a true
Body; but for as much as he descended from the superior Places, in his descent
he wove for himself a Flesh of the substance of the Stars and Air; and in his
ascent restored to each Element what he had borrowed; and the parts of his Body
being thus dispersed, only his Spirit went to Heaven. [See the same Author De
Carne Christi: per totum.] Thus you have seen Antichrist has denied Christ to
have come in his Flesh: And I hope therefore you will correct your assertion,
that he does not deny this nor will: lest you should be thought to judge this
monstrous error not foul enough to be called Antichristianism. And thus your
foundation, viz. Antichrist confesses Christ to be come in his Flesh and Bodily
appearance at Jerusalem, being thrown down; that which you have built upon it,
falls with it, viz. That therefore Antichrist, denying Christ to be come in
Flesh, must be understood of his coming in the Flesh of his Servants, his
revealing himself in the Heart. I add, as for Christ's coming in Flesh, as this
signifies his own Flesh, his incarnation, or his mean condition, we every where
read of it in Scripture. As, The Word was made Flesh. God sent his Son in the
likeness of Sinful Flesh. God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under
the Law. He was made like unto us in all things. He took upon him the form of a
Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men. But in what places of Scripture
his coming in Flesh signifies his appearance in our Hearts, I require you to
show; and withal, what Heretics have denied this coming, as I have showed many
that have denied the former.

But there is another rendering of St. John's words, which perhaps may give you
a better understanding both of the confessing of Christ, and also of his coming
in Flesh: viz. every Spirit (1 John 4.2, 3.) which confesses Jesus Christ, who
came in Flesh [(...),] is of God. Every Spirit which confesses not Jesus
Christ, who came in Flesh, is not of God. And then the Sense is plainly this:
He is the true Prophet, which confesses Christ, though he was in the mean
condition of a Man, made Man, and made a Servant. And he is the false Prophet
which denies him, and does so upon this account. Which confession is the
acknowledgment of his Person, viz. That he is the Christ and the Son of God;
and the acknowledgment of his whole Doctrine. And which denial is likewise the
denial of both. According to this Sense we read throughout the Epistle. Verse.
14.15. We have seen and do Testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the
Savior of the World. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him and he in God. Chap. 2.18.22.23.26. Even now are there many
Antichrist's. Who is a Liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He
is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. Whosoever denies the Son,
the same has not the Father. These things have I written to you concerning
them that Seduce you. Chap. 5.1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ,
is Born of God. Verse. 5. Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that
believes that Jesus is the Son of God? Verse. 20. We know that the Son of God
is come. Thus also in his 2 Epist. Verse. 7. Many deceivers are entered into the
World, who confess not Jesus Christ coming [or who did come, (...)] in Flesh.
Verse. 9. Whosoever abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God. If any
bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your House. In his Gospel we have
the same. Chap. 20.31. These signs are written, that ye may believe that Jesus
is the Christ. This was the principal thing to be Preached and Believed, Act.
9.20.22. and 2.36. Romans 10.9. And hereby True and False Prophets were known. 1
Cor. 12.3. No man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed
[anathema, vile, Mar. 9.39. and no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost. This is the same with our Text. The importance then of the
whole is this: The true Prophets confess that Christ the Son of God is come,
and that Jesus who came in Flesh, is he. The false Prophets deny both, So that
according to this rendering of the words (which is so much strengthened by what
is so often repeated in this Epistle, and is a chief design of it) your mystical
interpretation can not likewise stand, Christ's coming in Flesh here also
plainly signifying his bodily appearance in the World in the condition of a
Man, and not his spiritual appearance in the Hearts of his Servants as he is a
Spirit and the Word.

G. K. Woman Preacher. p. 6. Outwardly Christ told her only concerning her
Husbands that were Dead, and how the man she had was not her Husband, ( Joh.
4.28.29.30.) And certainly in so short a time they had together (perhaps but an
Hour) words could not tell her half, nor the hundredth part of all that ever
she did. Christ therefore in her Heart told her all these things, as he well
could even in a moment bring all things before her and tell her all things in
her Life.] And many an honest man says as she did, who never means as you do,
who understand this Woman's words in the strictest Sense, that Christ told her
not only half, but even all that she ever did in her whole Life, not an ace
abated; and that not only belonging to her Sins, but all, of what nature so
ever. Such universals not only in our common speech, but in the sacred writings
have their limitation. Joh. 3.32. No man receives his Testimony. Yet Verse. 33.
He that has received his Testimony, etc. And Chap. 1.11. As many as received
him, to them gave he power, etc. Mat. 23.3. All whatsoever the Scribes and
Pharisees bid you observe, observe and do. Yet verse. 16. They were Blind
Guides; and said, to Swear by the Temple was nothing: and taught men to break
the Commandment of God, and taught for Doctrine the Commandments of men Chap.
15. Again, Chap. 10.22. Ye shall be hated of all men. Yet verse. 40. He that
receives you. Again, Chap. 3.5.6. All Jerusalem and Judea went out and were
Baptized of John. Yet Luke 7.30. The Pharisees were not Baptized of him. See
Luke 2.1.3. Act. 24.5. and 2.47. Ephesians. 5.24. Ph. 2.21. But indeed told he her
inwardly of every word she had spoken, and of every thought she had conceived,
every step she had taken, every scrat she had given her Head, every bit of
Bread she had eaten, every sigh, prayer, bargain, cough, breath, spitting, that
she was concerned in from her youth to that present time? Did he bring all
these before her? To what purpose should it be? I can sooner believe that a
Saint, or Angel especially, in Heaven, can hear all the Papists that call upon
him at once throughout the world. And from hence let them fetch a proof for
their Doctrine and Practice in that particular for ever after, which I believe
they never dreamed on before; and do you Quakers answer them. I believe (choose
you whether you will or not) that if after this discourse one had asked this
Woman of an hundred things which she had done, yes of an hundred sins which she
had committed in thought, word, and deed, she would have been found as ignorant
of them as you are, and that not only (as you may say) because they presently
after their appearance vanished away again, but because they never appeared at
all.

Ibid. p. 17.18, 19. But say the Preachers of the Man-made Ministry, Women
ought not to Preach, because the Apostle expressly says, But I suffer not a
Woman to Teach, nor etc. 1 Timothy 2.12. What if I should understand by the Woman
in this place the flesh, as Bernard does? -- Let them leave off their insolent
words against Quakers, as if they understood the Scriptures all contrary to the
mind of the Ancient Fathers. -- Some going about to represent it as a
ridiculous Exposition to expound the Woman the Flesh, I give them this advice,
Let them hear Bernard. -- If I should so far condescend to them, as to take the
words of Paul for Women in the common sense of speech, what would they gain by
it? Forster's Guide. Pref. Thou have lost thy state of happiness by hearkening
to the Woman, thy fallen reason, who is not to speak in the Church.] For my
part I was in some doubt whether you did thus expound the Text when I read the
charge in your Adversaries Books, conceiting you might only make an Allegory or
allusion. But now I see it is granted to be your downright exposition, and to
take Woman literally is a condescension to us. But we need not your favor, for
from the Apostles words, we shall extort it from you. Which are these v. 8.
etc. I will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and
doubting. In like manner also that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel,
with shamefacedness and sobriety: not with broidered hair, or Gold, or Pearls,
or costly array; but as becomes Women professing godliness, with good works.
Let the Woman learn in silence with all subjection. But I suffer not a Woman to
teach, nor to usurp authority over the Man, but to be in silence. For Adam was
first formed, then Eve. For (1) as men here are real men, and what is spoken of
them ought to be taken in the literal sense: so are Women here real Women, and
what is spoken of them ought so likewise to be taken, there being not the least
expressed that signifies the contrary. Women adorning themselves with Apparel,
Women professing Godliness, signifies as much literally, as Men Praying, Men
lifting up hands without wrath does. And therefore so does the Woman's learning
in silence, the Woman's not Teaching, not Usurping Authority over the Man; the
plural Number being only changed into the singular, which singular also has a
plural signification, as is usual, and as you find again v. 15. and as is
evident from the parallel place where the plural is expressed: 1 Cor. 14.34.
Let your Women keep silence in the Churches; for it is not permitted unto them
to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also says the Law;
and if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home; for it
is a shame for Women to speak in the Church. Where observe (lest you should
still resist) the Women are such as have Husbands, and those at home, and that
as distinct from the Church, viz. in their several houses; and unto real Women
in the literal sense did the Law speak, commanding them to be under obedience,
even as of real Women in the literal sense, it spoke in the same place of their
bringing forth children in Sorrow, Genesis 3.16. Such therefore, and in the
literal sense are here to be understood: and therefore such in the same sense
in our present Text, it being altogether the same with this. (2) Men and Women
are here distinguished; the different Sexes, Male and Female, are spoken of;
such as Adam and Eve were. For the Apostle shows distinctly what the one should
do, and what the other. Whereas according to your sense no such distinction
ought to be understood, for that flesh or fallen reason belongs to the Male as
well as Female. So that if that be (as you say it is) the meaning of Woman,
then the Male as well as Female is prohibited to teach and usurp authority. And
so one of you speaks. Parker's Testimony, p. 30. Christ is one in the Female as
well as Male, and where he Rules, he may and ought to speak: and this is
according to Scripture, But let the Woman be silent. According to this Author,
the Man as well as the Woman is flesh and fallen reason; for that it may be
likewise said, Let the Man be silent, let Christ only speak. Thus the Woman is
become the Man, which is contrary to the Apostles discourse, which makes an
absolute difference. (3) You make the Apostle say thus: I suffer not the flesh
and fallen reason to teach and usurp Authority over the man; for Adam was first
formed, then Eve. Which is incongruous, and therefore not the Apostles mind.
Thus having showed the true sense to be the literal, I tell you now (as you
ask) what we shall gain by it: viz. That you have false interpreted; and a
greater thing than that, your suffering Women to Teach is contrary to the
Apostles Doctrine, who says, I suffer them not. But you will reply, not so
however. For thus says G. K. Ibid. p. 21. What sort of Women is it that Paul
does not permit to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 1 Timothy 2? Let us look into
the Context of both places, and that will clear it. For they are (1) Unlearned.
(2) Tatling. (3) Unruly, proud Women. All which is implied in these words, Let
the Woman learn in Silence with all Subjection. (4) Vain, given to gaudy
Apparel. (5) Such as Usurped Authority over the Man, (6) Such as were in the
Transgression, as the first Woman was. (7) Such as Transgress the Law, and are
not come to be under Grace. So a sevenfold sort of Women are not permitted by
Paul to speak in the Church.] Well, then the literal sense is granted, and we
need not your condescension in admitting it. For unlearned, tatling, unruly
Women are real Women, and their speaking is real speaking. And then I require
you to show, and not barely to say it, that St. Paul means by Women, the flesh
and fallen reason; not that you may so use his words, but that this is his
mind; for to expound (as you do here) is to give the sense intended If yet
notwithstanding your words, you do not grant the literal sense, then you have
done vainly in giving us diverse sorts of real Women, and your whole discourse
following in your Book which proceeds of these, is idle. But I must take it for
granted that real Women are meant: and now my task must be to consider, whether
the Apostle so speaks as that we may see he does not forbid all sorts of Women
to speak in the Church. The Context of both places (which you say will clear
that he does not) shall be represented, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. But let your Women
keep silence in the Churches; for it is not permitted to them to speak; but
they are commanded to be under obedience, as also says the Law. And if they
will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home: for it is a shame
for Women to speak in the Church. This is all he speaks in this place. And
where is the distinction he makes, telling us these may, these may not speak in
the Church? or what is that which intimates so much? But observe, your women:
means not this all sorts? And, They are commanded to be under obedience, as
also says the Law. Are not good as well as bad to be under obedience? And said
not the Law so to all, Genesis 3.16? Again, It is a shame for them to speak in the
Church. Why so, but because this is to Usurp Authority? Which to do is a shame
to the best as well as worst. And know you, that the Apostle discourses
throughout the Chapter of such persons as had gifts of the Holy Ghost, and upon
that account are called spiritual, v. 1.12, 15, 16, 37. See c. 3.1. and 12.1.
Gal. 6.1. So that these Women as well as others must keep silence in the
Church. The other place, 1 Timothy 2. runs thus, v. 9. etc. I will that women
adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety, not with
broidered hair, but (as becomes women professing godliness) with good works.
Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection. Is this to say, Women that
adorn not themselves in modest apparel with shamefacedness, nor good works,
must learn in silence? Or is it not to say, Women must adorn themselves so, and
they must learn in silence? If this be not the sense, I despair of ever
understanding plain words. And then, as all Women must so adorn themselves, so
must all learn in silence, even they that are so adorned, as the Text plainly
shows. For, say if you dare, such are not to learn in silence with subjection.
It follows: But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to Vsurp Authority over the
Man, but to be in silence. Not a Woman: this is as universal as can be spoken,
and cannot signify a vain, foolish, proud Woman only. For then it would follow,
such as are not so, may Usurp Authority over the Men. And then the better Women
are, the worse will Men's condition be, if to be usurped over signify ill to
them, as I think all men will grant, though perhaps some Women will not. And
note, this Woman-teaching is either the same, or else such another thing, as
usurping authority over the Man, which to all right minds signifies bad enough.
It follows: For Adam was first formed, then Eve. Speaks this to idle Women
only? It speaks to all the Sex, telling them that Man was designed of God to be
the Superior, in that he was first created, and the Woman after him, and out of
him, and for his use. Such another universal reason follows: And Adam was not
deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the Transgression. How good and
wise soever Women are, the consideration that all sin and misery first came
upon us by their Sex, should keep them in subjection. Now when the Apostle
says, I suffer not a woman to Teach, nor to Vsurp Authority over the Man;
whether his mind be (as you say it is) that such Women may not Teach as usurp
Authority: or whether it be not, as his very words are, Women, none of them,
may Teach, nor usurp Authority, I leave to the Reader to judge. And so when he
subjoins, For Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the
Transgression: whether it be not a reason, why no Woman whatever should Teach
or usurp Authority over the Man: or whether (as you say) his meaning is, that
such as are in the Transgression as Eve was must not Teach, or usurp Authority
over the Man; let the Reader also judge. Thus I have showed both that real
Women in the literal sense are meant, and all sorts of them.

But yet you say p. 22. What if Paul had said concerning all Women at Corinth
and Ephesus, that he did not permit them to spoke? will it therefore follow
that Women are not to spoke in any case in the Church? They might at that time,
being but young, not have the requisite qualifications.] (1) He forbids not any
sort of speaking, but Teaching, and any such speaking which signifies usurping
Authority over the Man, and is contrary to the Woman's subjection, as his words
sufficiently express. (2) Since the Church of Corinth was enriched in all
spiritual gifts (1 Cor, 1.5.7. Chap. 12. Chap. 14. it is not probable that none
of the Women were partakers of the same, and sufficiently qualified, as the Men
were. (3) There is not the least intimation of any such thing as their
imperfect qualifications, and that this was the reason of the Apostles
prohibition; but his Arguments (as has been showed) are all of an universal
nature, and his prohibition absolute. To conclude: As you say, Hear Bernard; so
say I hear Tertullian. De Veland. Virg. Chap. 9. Non permittitur Mulieri, etc.
It is not permitted a Woman to Speak in the Church, nor to Teach, nor to
Baptize, nor to Offer, nor to do any of the Man's Office, much less to exercise
the Priestly function. And how can that be lawful to a Virgin, which is not
lawful to any Woman? Advers. Haer. Chap, 4.1. The Heretical Women are so
malepert, that they dare to Teach, to Contend, to Exorcise, to undertake cures,
and perhaps to Baptize.

Women-Preach. p. 15. They have scraped out of many old Authors. They have
stolen the words of God concerning the experiences of the Saints, as the False
Prophets of old, of whom the Lord said, Jer. 23.30, 31, 32. Behold I am against
the False Prophets which steal my Words. -- They shall not Profit my People at
all. And is not this fulfilled abundantly? where is the Profiting of the
People? do they not remain still in their Sins?] These Prophets spoke Peace to
the People when all manner of impieties were committed, and told them that evil
should not come upon them, as other Prophets had denounced. And this they spoke
not as their own private judgment, but pretended to have received it from the
Lord immediately by Dreams and Visions: and so encouraged them the more in their
Wickedness. Verse. 17. They say still unto them that despise me, the Lord has
said, ye shall have peace, no evil shall come upon you. Verse. 25. They
Prophecy Lies in my Name, saying, I have Dreamed. So in our Text, I am against
them that Prophecy false Dreams, and cause my People to err by their Lies, yet
I sent them not. So also Chap. 6.14. and 8.11. and 28.8, 9. Now is this to
speak the experience of the Saints, true and sound Doctrine, the very word of
God? And is God against us for so doing, as he was against these false
Prophets, who both feigned a vision, and also corrupted the truth, speaking
peace to the wicked? Is he angry when we like honest men, having no vision,
pretend none, but as faithfully warn men of their Sins as if we had, saying to
the Rebellious they shall Die, and endeavor to turn every one from his evil
ways, and preach the Truth as we have learned from his written Oracles? If we
should receive the word immediately from his Mouth, it would be but the very
same. Conscience, where art thou? blush for this accusation, and for the abuse
of sacred Scripture. If we were Knaves, we might pretend Inspiration as well as
others. It is an Argument of our Honesty and fear of God, that we do not, when
we might gain admiration and a crowd of Disciples as well as others, if we did.
But see we whether you have not likewise erred as to the other words, They
shall not profit this People at all. Which you understand thus, they shall not
edify their Souls in Righteousness. I thus, Destruction shall fall upon this
people, though these Prophets say it shall not, but Prophecy peace to them:
Their word which is concerning good, shall not come to pass. Verse. 19. Behold a
Whirlwind is gone forth: it shall fall upon the head of the Wicked. Chap.
14.13.15.16. They Prophecy a false Vision, and a thing of naught. They say
Sword and Famine shall not be in the Land. By Sword and Famine shall those
Prophets be consumed: and the People to whom they Prophecy, shall be cast out
in the Streets of Jerusalem because of the Famine and the Sword. Thus in many
other places we read, where also the same word (...) is used. As Chap. 7.8. Ye
trust in words which cannot profit. The meaning you have verse. 14. I will do
unto this People as I have done unto Shiloh. Vide etiam Chap. 12.13. Isa. 30.5.
and 44.9. and 47.12. and 57.12. But because you say no Preachers can profit the
People unless they receive their word immediately from God, let me add, as you
have no proof in this place, so I challenge you to produce any other Text for
this assertion: and admonish you that you make not the efficacy of the word to
depend altogether upon the Persons that Minister. For Paul Plants, and Apollo
Waters, but God gives the increase. It is a rational word, and carries
conviction in its divine nature: and what makes it more prevalent, it bears the
authority of God, and is accompanied with the operation of his Spirit. Moses
and the Prophets were Dead when our Savior spoke those words, If they hear not
them, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the Dead. So that he
thought the hearing of their writings read in the Synagogues, or the peoples
reading of them themselves, or their knowledge of them, was sufficient for
their repentance; and if this prevailed not, neither would Moses and the
Prophets themselves, if they should come again. For alas what prevailed they,
when they did Preach, upon obdurat and profligat Sinners? And the persons which
commonly Ministered among the Jews, you know were not Prophets nor Inspired,
received not their word immediately from the Lord, but read the Book of Moses
and the Prophets to the People. Which also our Savior did. And St. Paul
charged that his Epistle should be read unto the brethren in the Church. Luke
4.26. Act. 15.21. Col. 4.16. 1 These. 5.27* 1 Timothy 4.13. Farnsworth's Priest's
ignorance. p. 2. The Teachers of the World have the chief places in the
Assemblies, are called of men Masters, stand praying in the Synagogues. Jesus
Christ forbad such things, Mat. 6.5. and 23.6. So they show themselves
Antichrist, Seducers, and Dissemblers. G. Fox. Catechism. p. 64. Are we to hold
up such Teachers as stand praying in the Synagogue, and have the chiefest place
in the Assembly, which Christ cried woe against? Parker's Testimony. p. 7. Their
Man-made Churches, their standing Praying in high places there, and being
called of men Master, are contrary to the plain words of Christ, Mat. 33.] As
for praying standing in the Synagogues, Mat. 6.5. (1) It is not Praying in
those places, because they were made by Men (as you Interpret) that is
condemned. For in the same the Law was read every Sabbath day without any
reproof from Christ or his Apostles, Act. 15.21. And Christ commonly Taught in
them, Joh. 18.20. Mat. 4.23, and 13.24. Luke 4.16. And so his Apostles Act.
13.5.13, 14, 15, etc. and 9.20. and 18.4. and 17.1, 2. (2) Nor is standing in
Prayer here forbidden. For that was done both by the best Jews, and by
Christians also, without fault: 1 Kings 8.14.54, 55. Neh. 9.4, 5. Mar. 11.25.
Luke 18.13. And standing refers to Corners of Streets as well as to Synagogues:
(...). But if they had Kneeled in the Corners of Streets, yet would they have
been equally condemned: and so likewise would they, if they had Kneeled in the
Synagogues. It would be all one, if it had been thus said, standing being not
expressed, they love to Pray in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the
Streets, that they may be seen of Men. (3) Nor is Praying in High Places in the
Synagogues, as our Ministers do in Pulpits, forbidden, as you Interpret again.
For the word (...) does not so signify of it self, nor is their any thing in
the Text which imports so much, but rather the contrary. For whereas they stood
also in Corners of Streets, it is altogether improbable that they had
High Places built there for this purpose, or that they climbed up upon the
Walls of the Houses. And if this were the thing reproved, then if they had
Prayed in a Low place, they would have escaped the accusation; which in no wise
is to be believed. Nor do I think you will acquit our Ministers when they pray
in their Seat below. True, the Pharisees had High Places in the Synagogues. But
those do not necessarily signify high from the Ground, but high in esteem; the
Worthiest, not the Tallest. For such they had also at Feasts, which surely were
not as high above the common Table, as a Pulpit is from the Ground: and others
that sat lower than they, yet sat as high in the Air; and indeed all of them
sat, if not lay down, upon the very Ground, or Floor, or not two yards above
it. For the words of the Text are these, They love (...), the first places at
Feasts, and the first seats in the Synagogues. So again Mar. 12.1.39. Luke
11.43. and Chap. 20.46. from whence I question not but your mistake arose,
because our Translation says, they love the highest seats in the Synagogues:
which is the same word, (...), and signifies no otherwise high, than high
signifies Chief or upermost, as our Translation renders it in the other places,
and the like word (...) here. But you should have observed that our Text, Mat.
6. does not mention the Pharisees, but speaks of Hypocrites in general. And
certainly such there were besides that sect, and moreover all of that sect that
were such, were not Doctors and Rulers: and therefore all that Prayed
Hypocritically in the Synagogues had not high places in your Sense. And
further, I cannot think you condemn of hypocrisy all that Pray in our
Galleries. And yet you may do it with as much reason as condemn our Ministers
of hypocrisy for Praying in Pulpits, both being equally high places. And now
that you may understand the Text better, note that it is hypocritical Praying
that is there condemned. As is plain enough from the words themselves: When
thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites: for they love to pray
standing in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the Streets, that they may be
seen of Men. And sure enough their praying in the Synagogues was such as their
praying in Corners of Streets, with which it is joined, a sure indication of
hypocrisy. Which all praying, or standing praying is not. And particularly it
was this: Going to the Synagogues commonly to make their private Prayers. As the
opposition shows, But when thou Prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou
have shut thy door, Pray, etc. And thus to do must argue hypocrisy. For to
what end should they go to a public place to make their private Prayers, unless
it were to be seen of Men? But be sure our Savior knew that they did it for
this end, and it was not Religion and Devotion that acted them, and therefore
condemned them. And the very same would it have been, if they had gone to these
Synagogues to read in their Bibles, which might as well be done at home as to
any edification, if that were the thing they sought. And yet the Law was read
in the Synagogues every Sabbath day without fault. The same would it be, if you
should go commonly to your Meeting Houses to Pray, when you have no public
Service there: or if you should Pray even in your Closet, your door being left
open or but half shut, that others may look in and see you. And yet in both
these places you pray, and condemn not your selves. So that you see our public
Service in our Churches is quite another thing than the praying of the
hypocrititical Jews in the Synagogues. And I put it to your consciences,
whether you believe our Ministers ascend the Pulpits for ostentation (I do not
say, to be seen of Men: lest you should quibble:) or whether they ascend them
for this end any more than yours that stand upon a Stool, or raised Planks
Whether again our people sit in Galleries out of hypocrisy. Whether again they
come to our Churches to be seen of men, any more than yours come to your
Meeting Houses upon the same account. And if your Conscience will suffer you to
affirm it, I then require you to show some sign of hypocrisy in our doing.

Your other accusation (from Mat. 23.6. etc.) is, that the Teachers of the
world have the Chief-places of the Assemblies, and are called of men Master.]
(1) You have left out the principal Verb, for the Text says, They love
Chief-places, and to be called Master. Which omission signifies no good mind,
since in all the places of the Gospels where this matter is mentioned, it is so
expressed. As besides the present Text, in Mar. 12.38. Luke 11.43. and 20.46.
And know you that Christ no otherwise condemns here Chief-places, than he does
borders of Garments and salutations: it being likewise said of him here, They
enlarge the borders of their garments, and love greetings in the Markets. Which
greetings himself and his servants approved and used, Mat. 5.47. and 10.12.
Luke 10.4.5. Joh. 20.26. 1 Cor. 16.20. And which borders were used at this time
by virtue of the Law, Numb. 15.38. The thing condemned is plainly expressed,
viz. The Love of Chief-places: the chosing of them out of pride. As we again
learn from our Savior, Luke 14.7. He put forth a parable to them that were
bidden, when he marked how they chose out the chief rooms, saying, etc. Now can
you say our Ministers choose the Pulpit, when they are appointed there to
officiate? Or do they thrust forward before others for the place, when no one
offers to take it from them? Or do they covet the Chief-places at Feasts, or
strive with any about them? (2) Nor is the Title Rabbi simply forbidden. Which
being interpreted, is (...), or (...), a guide, governor, ruler, or teacher,
or doctor; a Master in that sense: As you find v. 8.10. Joh. 1.38. and 31. and
20.16. For God himself has taught us to call his Ministers so, Ephesians. 4.11. 1
Cor. 12.28. Heb. 13.7.17. 1 These. 5.12. Nor is this the common title (...),
Master, Sir, which in civil respect is given to all sorts of people, but it is
that which is peculiar to literate persons, Scribes and Teachers of Religion.
As every one a little skilled in the Language and Customs of the Jews knows;
and you may learn from the title Father in this place, it being of the same
importance, verse. 9. Call no Man your Father upon Earth. For it is as absurd to
call a Laic or Secular person, suppose a Gentleman, or Farmer, or Tradesman,
Rabbi, as it is to call him Father. And to call such an one Master in the sense
here intended, and according to the signification of the word, is to call him
Father, Rabbi, Doctor, Teacher, or Guide; which is absurd enough: and just so
absurd is your interpretation. But that which is forbidden here is, (1) That
the Teachers be not ambitious, affecting great Titles; nor usurp authority over
the people, ruling as Lords their persons and their faith, setting themselves
in the place of Christ, as if the Doctrine were their own, and they were the
Masters to be obeyed, and the people were their subjects and their disciples,
verse. 7.8, 10, 11, 12. The Scribes and Pharisees love to be called of men
Rabbi, Rabbi. But be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master [(...),
Ductor, Guide, Preceptor] even Christ, and all ye are Brethren. Neither be ye
called Masters, [(...), Ductors] for one is your Master, even Christ. But he
that is greatest among you, shall be your servant: and whosoever shall exalt
himself, shall be abased. These latter words confirm my interpretation. One
part of which, viz. that which concerns secular dominion, I have also taken
from our Savior's words, cap. 10.21.26. Grant that these my two Sons may sit,
the one on thy Right hand, and the other on thy left, in thy Kingdom. (And note
ye that there was a strife among the Apostles, which of them should be counted
greatest, Luke 22.24. and moreover they expected Christ would rule as a secular
King, Luke 19.11. and 24.21. Act. 1.6.) But Jesus said, ye know that the
Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are great,
exercise authority upon them: but it shall not be so among you. But whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your Minister. The other part of my
interpretation which concerns Mastership over the faith of people, I have from
St. Paul's words; 1 Cor. 3.4, 5. While one says, I am of Paul, and another, I
am of Apollos, are ye not Carnal? who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but
Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every Man? The faith is
not ours, but the Lords: we only Minister it in his Name, and as we have
received it; we did not make it. ver. 9. We are Laborers together with God,
[only such] ye are God's building [not ours.] 2 Cor. 4.5. We preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake.
chap. 1.24. We have not dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy.
(2) Another thing here forbidden is, that as the Preachers should not assume
this Authority, so neither should the people give it them: not look upon them
as their Masters, but only as God's Servants ministering to them: not set them
in the place of God and Christ: not profess themselves their disciples, nor
their subjects, servants, and children. verse. 9. And call no man your Father
upon earth. And this interpretation I have likewise from St. Paul, 1 Cor.
1.12.13. Every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas, and I of Christ. Was Paul Crucified for you, or were you Baptized into
the Name of Paul? Which is to say, you are not to profess your selves any
mans-disciples, but his only who was Crucified for you, and into whose name ye
were Baptized, that is, Christ's. c. 2.21. Let no man glory in Men, whether
Paul or Apollos, or Cephas, all are yours. Ye are Christ's. They are only
appointed of God to Minister to you. Christ is only your Master, Father, Head,
chap. 11.3. and 7.23. Heb. 3.6. Again chap. 4.1. Let a man account of us as the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. No more than such,
v. 6. And these things I have in a figure transferred to my self and Apollos
for your sakes, that ye might learn in us not to think of men above that which
has been written: viz. That we are Ministers of Christ, and dispensers of
God's Mysteries, and no more; not your Masters, nor Teachers of our own
Doctrine. Thus you may see how far wide of the true sense you have erred,
whilst you expound our Savior's words, as forbidding to call, or to be called
Master, or Sir, in civil respect. And you may discern that they which would
have their doctrine pass for Oracles, without examination, and their commands
for Edicts, without contradiction, and they that yield up themselves to such,
are the offenders, though they neither give nor receive this title. I cannot
but admonish you here to look into your Bibles, and consider how the Texts
stand which you cite, and not to conclude every portion of Scripture which
comes into your mind, to be infused by the Holy Ghost, for you to make use of
to the purpose which you intend, and therefore not daring to examine it for the
right sense, lest you should disobey that Holy One, and the work should smell a
little of human study and care. For certainly you have erred, even where the
words have no obscurity at all. And if you will not make use of your eyes to
see, and your understanding to consider, and will take no more pains than to
speak and write, it is just that God suffer you to fall into mistakes that may
justly shame you, that you may be more vigilant.

G. Fox's Catechism, p. 26. We have held up such Teachers as bear rule by their
means: which Jeremy says, was an horrible and filthy thing. And such as seek
for their gain from their Quarter. G. F. Truth and Deceit, p. 7. Jeremy cried
against the Priests that bore rule for their money. Nayl. Love to Lost. p. 74.
The Ministers of Christ never sought to the people for means, nor bore rule by
it.] The words of Jeremy are these, c. 5.31. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and
the Priests bare rule by their means. I cannot but wonder that all of you
should so grossly mistake, as to understand by Means, Tithes and Riches, and
that of the Priests; for nothing is plainer than that the Priests bearing rule
by means of the Prophets is spoken of; and that that signifies by their help,
power and authoriy: (...) by their hand. In which signification you find the
word, 1 King. 10.29. 2 Chronicles. 1.17. Mal. 1.9.

G. F. Catechism, p. 124, 125. They tell me that Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, is
the Original, by which I may know the Scriptures. A. The Beast which killed the
Saints had power over Tongues, and the great Whore sits upon Tongues. (Rev.
17.15. and 13.7.) G. F. Message to Parliam. p. 7. The Teachers say Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, are the Original. Now with the light of Christ Jesus this
Doctrine is seen to be contrary to the Scripture. -- They that keep in many
Languages, keep from Christ; for he redeems out of Languages, Tongues,
Kindreds, Nations, and People. All who are in Christ are one; and all who are
in Tongues, Kindreds, and Nations, and Languages, are in confusion. Thus also
Smith in his Lamentation, p. 8.] And (1) why not as well, All that are in
people, are in confusion? The palpable grosness of the absurdity would not
permit this. And yet it might as well have been so said as the other, people
signifying in the Text the same as Tongues, Kindreds, and Nations, and
Languages do. (2) Who told you Latin is the Original? You might with as much
Truth have told the world the Teachers say the Scriptures were first written in
English or Dutch. Write next time, Chaldee, Hebrew, and Greek. (3) The Great
Whore sits upon Tongues, say you. Upon Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, you mean. And
I ask what this means. Alas, that you cannot discern what Tongues here
signifies, when so many words are used to make you understand, Nations,
Peoples, Kindreds, Multitudes, and all that dwell upon the Earth, Rev. 17.15.
and 13.7.8. (4) What Scripture says Hebrew and Greek are not the Original?
Don't answer, Christ is the Original, lest I bid you prove it from the
Scripture, and you being not able to do it, become ashamed; for I have not read
in all that Holy Book, that that Divine Person is Hebrew and Greek. Which yet
unless you take to prove, you will be shamed by your quibbles and impertinences.

G. F. Catech. p. 10. As in the first Adam all Died, so in the second Adam are
we all made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22. How Died all in the first Adam, and how are we
made alive in the second? he transgressed, so is in Sin, out of life in the
Death. -- Who be in the first Adam, they be out of the light, Now Christ is he
which quickens from the Trespasses.] The whole Chapter is of the Resurrection
of the Body, and not of the Soul; of rising and being made alive after this
life in the last day, and not of Regeneration before our Death. And that the
present words spoke of this last Resurrection, the context abundantly shows.
Verse. 16. etc. If the Dead Rise not, then is not Christ Risen. and if Christ be
not Raised, your Faith is vain, ye are yet in your Sins. Then they also which
are fallen asleep in Christ are Perished. If in this Life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all-men most miserable. But now is Christ Risen from the
Dead, and is become the first Fruits of them that Slept. For since by Man came
Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead. Now follows our Text: For
as in Adam all Die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his
own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his
coming. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God
the Father. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. Now note these
things: The quickening by Christ or rising by him is of them that are fallen
asleep in him, and is such as himself did partake of, and such as by which he
became the first fruits, and such as they that are his shall receive at his
coming, even in the end of all things, when the last enemy Death shall be
destroyed. But now they that are Christ's are already quickened and raised from
Sin, and such of them as are fallen asleep and are dead shall not receive this
quickening at his coming in the end of all things, and Christ himself was never
so quickened, as being never so Dead, nor therefore became the First Fruits by
this Resurrection, and finally notwithstanding this Resurrection Death still
remains. So manifestly have you erred in Interpreting these words mystically,
As in Adam all Die, so in Christ shall all be made Alive. Dear Souls, ask your
selves whence it is that you make such mistakes. Is it dullness of
understanding? is it carelessness? or pride, or perverseness of mind? Do not
conceit vainly, that every thing that is mystically spoken, is excellently
spoken. Let the Scriptures stand as they do, having been so ordered by a wiser
than your selves. For you can not put upon them greater purity and
spirituallity than they have, though you should Interpret all mystically which
they spoke literally. And take heed of making void by such Interpretations
those Texts which in their literal Sense contein the Chief Articles of our
Religion, lest others learn of you to do the same, and so the whole Gospel be
turned into mystery, and we have no foundation for our belief of a future
Resurrection, a Judgment-day, Christ's coming from Heaven to judge the World,
our ascension thither, and entrance into that blessed place the Kingdom of God,
the wicked's departure into Hell and endless Torments, good Angels and evil,
the Crucifixion of Christ, etc.

Ibid. p. 45. What is the higher power to which the Soul must be subjected? Is
there a power which must not be subjected to? What is that power? That is the
power which did not abide in the Truth which must not be subjected to: but that
is the higher power which must be subjected to, which is above that. So this
power is above that which did go out of the Truth, which spoke of himself; the
Devil spoke of himself. Romans 13.1. Joh. 8.44. Ibid. p. 119. What is the higher
Power to which the Soul must be subject to? The higher power is ordained of
God, and is that which goes over all Transgressors upon the Earth, and over
the Devil. -- The power which is immortal; that which answers the principle of
God in every man. G. F. Gospel-Liberty. p. 20. Every Soul must be subject to
the higher power. Mark, The Soul is immortal and the power is so. -- When
Magistrates acted contrary to the power ordained of God, he sent his Prophets
to cry against their corruptions.] Barely to cite the Text is enough to
convince others (I dare not say you) of your error; viz. that the higher power
there spoken of is not the immortal, which goes over all Transgressors and is
above the Devil; but the supreme Magistrate, Rulers, Men in Authority, Romans
13.1. etc. Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers (you should have kept
to the letter, which you despise, and not have written power for powers.] For
there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of God. Rulers
are not a terror to good Works, but to evil. Will thou not then be afraid of
the powers? They are God's Ministers. Render tribute to whom tribute is due.
Thus again speaks St. Peter 1 Epist. 2.13. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as to them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Certainly if you speak so as
you make Scripture speak, there is no understanding of you: that is, if you
mean another thing than your plain words signify. For nothing can be spoken
plainer than what the Apostle has written here of the higher Powers; which yet
you understand not of Rulers, but of the immortal power, which is over all
Transgressors and above the Devil, contrary to which the Rulers Act through
their corruptions, and to which those higher powers are to be subject.

G. F. Catech. p. 71. If they were acquainted with the Gospel Christ Jesus,
which is the power of God, Romans 1.16. they would be all in unity.] The Text
says not, I am not ashamed of the Gospel, Christ, but the Gospel of Christ: so
distinguishing it from him. As St. Paul again does when he says, Christ has
brought Life and Immortality to to light through the Gospel. And, God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel. Lest the
Reader should think the Printer has omitted the word of, let him know that
they frequently thus write. Return to Priests about Beverly: p. 10. You have
put the Books, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, for the Gospel, which are the carnal
letter, and part of the declaration of the Gospel, which Gospel is Christ.

G. F. Catech. p. 59. The Teachers of the World say, To the Law and to the
Testimony: and they call the Scripture so. The Testimony of Jesus is the
Spirit of prophecy, and the Scriptures are not the Spirit, and the Law is
Light, Rev. 19 10. Pro. 6.23.] And the Testimony was put in the Ark, and the
pot of Manna was laid up before it, unto it the Tribes went up unto Jerusalem;
and the Testimony Jehojada brought forth and gave it to Jehoash. The Spirit of
Prophecy was not put in the Ark, nor the pot of Manna laid up before it, nor to
it went the Tribes unto Jerusalem, nor did Jehojada bring forth the Spirit of
Prophecy and give it unto Jehoash. Again, the Gentiles had not the Law, we are
not now under it, we are delivered from it. But the Gentiles had the Law
within, which is Light, and we are still under this, we are not delivered from
it. Again, the Law is Light. Then we may be sure that is so which Moses wrote,
forasmuch as that is the Law. The just conclusion therefore is that there are
more Laws and Lights and Testimonies than one. Yes and more Testimonies of
Jesus there are than the Spirit of Prophecy; for the Scriptures testify of
him, and you your selves say they are not the Spirit. Well, be it known unto
you that as there is a Law within, so there is a Law without: and this is a
greater and more perfect Light, being added to that within since the corruption
of it by the Fall, for the better information of mankind: insomuch that all
that partake hereof are in a better condition than they that want it, as
partaking of a peculiar privilege and special benefit. This was the difference
of the Jews, and Gentiles: they had the Law, these not. And what I pray you was
this Law which the Jews enjoyed, but that which was published by Moses and the
Prophets? for as for the internal, that the Gentiles had as well as they. Romans
2.14. When the Gentiles which have not the Law; do by nature the things
contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves.
Chap. 3.1, 2. What advantage then has the Jew? much every way: chiefly that
unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Chap. 9.4. To them was the giving
of the Law, and the Services of God, and the Promises. Now when God says to
the Jews; to the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no Light in them, Isa. 8.20. Let any man judge
whether he sends them for the knowledge of his Will to the Law of the Gentiles,
or to that given by Moses, which is peculiarly called their Law ( It is written
in your Law, Joh, 8.17. and 10.34. Moses gave you the Law, Chap. 7.19.) whether
to the Light of their own hearts, or to his Oracles, Statutes, and Judgments,
as they were externally published. Or when he says the same to us Christians,
whether he sends us to the Light in us, that we may know whether this Doctrine
or the other which Men Teach be the Truth, or to the Scriptures; the Light,
especially in every one to whom this is said, being not perfect, especially not
so perfect as the Scriptures in which God has declared all his Will, every one
being not like Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles. Let any man
judge, since God has sent Prophets, and by them has published his Will, and
that in writing, he yet sends us to the Light in us for the knowledge of his
Will and for the determination of all controversies: And whether if he had not
externally published a Law and Testimony by his Servants the Prophets, he would
say to us, To the Law and Testimony. Let me know whether the Light in the Jews
told them God would have them circumcise, burn incense, offer sacrifice, and
slay such and such Beasts and not others, keep holy the seventh day, abstein
from several sorts of Meats, from Blood and things strangled: and if a
controversy should arise about these, whether they were to go to the written
Law of Moses, or to the unwritten Law of Light in every one of their own
Hearts. Let me know whether the Light within sufficiently tells us, that the
Messiah is come, or indeed that one was promised; that Jesus Born of Mary is
he, or indeed that he was Born at all of a Woman and had real Flesh; that he
Died, and by that Death redeemed us, and through his Blood shed we are Saved
upon our Repentance and an holy Life; that our Spirits do not Die, we shall be
made Alive again and rise from the Grave, the Wicked shall have endless
Torment, the Righteous endless Joy: insomuch that if Christ and his Apostles
had never spoken a word, and we had never received the Scriptures, nor had
heard a syllable of all this Preached by Men, we should have known it all, and
as firmly have believed it as now we do. For it is said, we are built upon the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. And, Jesus Christ has brought Life
and Immortality to light through the Gospel. The Life was manifested, and we
have seen it, and show unto you the Eternal Life, which was with the Father,
and was manifested unto us. The mystery hid from Ages, is now made manifest.
The things which God has prepared for us have not entered into the heart of
Man, but God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit. And these things were
Preached unto others that they might know them, and believe, and have Eternal
Life. Lastly, the Spirit of Prophecy in the Text you cite (Rev. 19.10.) is not
the Spirit as it is in every man, as you understood it; unless you will say
contrary to St. Paul, all are Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.29. Ephesians. 4.11. for it is the
Spirit as Prophesying, and that in the strict signification of the word, which
is to praedict, as the Angel and St. John did, of whom it is here spoken. For
thus are the Words: I fell at his Feet to worship: and he said unto me, see
thou do it not: I am thy Fellow Servants and of thy Brethren which have the
Testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of
Prophecy. Which is to say, I am but as thy self; thou have the Spirit of
Prophecy as well as I; I am but a Prophet, testifying of Jesus, like thy self.
As Chap. 22.9. I am thy Fellow Servants and of thy Brethren the Prophets. So
that when Isaiah says to all, to the Testimony, exhorting them to keep close
to that word, and to enquire there whether that which any man shall spoke be
Truth, he cannot mean the Spirit of Prophecy, because all have it not in
themselves, nor is it the Will of God they should: for he dispences the gifts
of the Spirit severally, to one Wisdom, to another Miracles, to another
Prophecy, 1 Cor. 12. Let me hear you say, all men, Heathens as well as
Christians, have the Spirit of Prophecy in their Hearts, which testifies of
Jesus, and Prophesies of him, speaks of things to come, of his Name, his
Servants, his worship, his Enemies, his Kingdom and Church; as it spoke,
testified, and prophesied in the Angel and the Apostle, as appears by the whole
Book.

G. F. Truth and Deceit. p. 10. To all as stumble at the silent waiting upon
the Lord. Hear what Isaiah says: Sit thou in silence, get thou in darkness, O
Daughter of the Caldeans: thou shall no more be called Lady of Kingdoms, Isa.
47.5. -- You must witness silence before you come to speak. For when the Devil
was cast forth, the Dumb spoke. Let the Lips be put to silence that spoke
grievous and proud things contemptuously against the Righteous. All you lying
Lips that speak contemptuous things against the Righteous, you are to be put to
silence before you speak, Ps. 31.18. Kir of Moab was brought to silence,
because he was in the Night, Isa. 15.1.] In all these places Destruction and
Misery, that which is to be dreaded, is meant by silence, and not waiting upon
the Lord, which is desirable, and which we are exhorted unto. In Isa. 47.5. it
is manifest from the latter words: Sit thou in silence, get thee in darkness:
thou shall no more be called Lady of Kingdoms. And from verse. 1. Come down and
Sit in the Dust, O Virgin Daughter of Babylon, sit on the Ground: there is no
Throne, O Daughter of the Caldeans: for thou shall no more be called tender and
delicate. In the other of Isaiah, it is likewise manifest from the Text it
self, which if you had cited it fully, would have discovered your abuse. Chap.
15.1. The Burden of Moab: because in the Night Kir of Moab is laid waste and
brought to silence. As clear is it in that of the Psalmist: Let the Wicked be
ashamed, and let them be silent in the Grave. Let the lying Lips be put to
silence, which speak grievous things and contemptuously against the Righteous,
Ps. 31.17, 18. Does this signify, they must wait on the Lord in the silence of
their Souls before they speak? Or does it not signify, they shall be punished?
As Ps. 12.3. The Lord shall cut off all Flattering Lips, and the Tongue that
speaks proud things. Verse. 5. For the oppression of the Poor now will I arise
says the Lord: I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him. And Ps.
52.4.5. Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful Tongue. God shall
likewise destroy thee for ever. He shall destroy thee for ever. He shall take
thee away and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the
land of the living. Such is the silence before spoken of, as when the Psalmist
says, Unless the Lord had been my help, my Soul had almost dwelt in silence,
Psalm. 94.17.

G. F. General Epistle, p. 10. The Apostle says Tongues must cease. Then that
which makes, as you say, Orthodox Divines, must cease.] And in the same place
he says, Prophecies shall fail, and knowledge shall vanish away, 1 Cor. 13.8.
And then that which you say makes Orthodox men and Divines, must cease. So that
the Apostle speaks no more against Tongues than against Prophecy and knowledge.

Ibid. p. 10.11. The word which was in the beginning, is called the word of
Reconciliation: by this word are men sanctified and made clean: which is
Christ, whose name is called The Word of God.] True, his Name is the Word of
God; but his name is not the Word of Christ: and yet something is so called.
Say Christ is the Word of Christ, and prove there is no incongruity in that
saying. Christ is manifestly distinguished from his word, as every man is from
what he speaks and teaches, as the Philosopher is from his institutes. For it
is called his Word, his Doctrine, his sayings, that which he spoke with his
lips, and the people heard with their ears, Joh. 15.20. and 14.23, 24. and
7.16. and 8.31. And the same is the Word, through which the Text says, men were
made clean; it being in the very terms clearly distinguished from himself, Joh.
15.3. Now are ye clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Which is
no more Himself than, Blessed are the Merciful; the poor in Spirit; the pure in
Heart: Love your Enemies; ask and you shall receive; believe on me, and
whatsoever else he taught, is himself. For thus you read again, Joh. 4.41.42.
Many more believed because of his own word: and said unto the woman, Now we
believe not because of thy saying: for we have heard him our selves. c. 8.30.
As he spoke these words, many believed on him. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat
he us with the word of Truth. Such also is the word of Reconciliation committed
unto the Apostles, viz. The doctrine of the Gospel which they had heard and
learned of Christ, and had also received by the inspiration of his Spirit, and
Preached unto the world; as is likewise manifest from the Text, 2 Cor. 5.18.
God has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the
Ministry of Reconciliation. Which is the same as He has committed unto us, the
word of Reconciliation. And what that is, you may understand by this which
follows, We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, for he has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Go, said he, Preach the Gospel to all Nations;
teach them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you: He that Believes, and
is Baptized, shall be Saved: And told them that Repentance and Remission of
Sins should be Preached in his Name. Accordingly they Preached, Act. 13.38, 39.
Be it known unto you, that through this man is Preached to you the forgiveness
of Sins; and by him all that believe are justified from all things from which
they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Act. 2.38. Repent and be
Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of Sins. They labored
in the Word and Doctrine, and exhorted the Believers that the word of Christ
should dwell in them richly. By all this you may understand what is the word of
Reconciliation committed to the Apostles, the word of Christ, the word which he
spoke, through which his Disciples were made clean, and may learn to
distinguish it from himself.

Farnsw. Priest's Ignorance, p. 4.5. The Teachers of the world say, that the
Spirit is the Letter, and they are inseparable: when the Spirit says, The
Letter kills, and is Death. And thou who would raise the Spirit out of the
dead Letter, art a Conjurer. They say that Salvation is in the Scripture, and
that the Power goes along with the Letter, which is Death. Buroughs Trumpet,
p. 20. You say Christ commands it, when the Letter does but declare it: and say
in such a Verse of such a Chapter, such a command is, not having received the
command by the same Spirit. -- You are in Witchcraft who observe commands
without from the Letter, thereby drawing from the teachings within by the
Spirit. They that obeyed Christ, were led by the Spirit, and not by the Letter:
for they were not Ministers of the Letter, but of the Spirit. Return to Priests
about Beverly, p. 10. You put the Books Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, for the
Gospel, which are the carnal Letter. G. K. Help. p. 27. The finest, truest
words out of a bad man's mouth, can never reach the seed of God, either to the
raising it up, or refreshing it, but kills and burdens it: as said the Apostle
of the false Apostles, who had the Letter, and were Ministers of it out of the
Spirit and Power, The Letter Kills.] I begin to believe that some of you
understand by the Letter and the Scriptures, the very Characters and the Books;
forasmuch as it is usual with them to call them Ink and Paper. But others of
you are more skilful, calling them also words spoken. By which yet I hope they
do not mean the sounds only, which are made by the mouth: (which, if they do,
they mend not the matter at all, the sounds being to the Ear no other than what
the characters are to the Eye:) but I would believe they mean, as they ought to
do, the sense and doctrine: for Scripture is all one, whether it be expressed
by the Pen, or spoken by the Mouth, or only conceived in the mind, that is to
say, the doctrine is. Now we are to consider, whether the Doctrine of the
Scriptures be dead and liveless, carnal and killing. Here you differ again,
some saying it is so in it self alone without the Spirit, or as it is Preached
from the Scriptures without immediate revelation to the Preacher, though that
Preacher be neither wicked, nor a seducer: others saying it is so as Ministered
by such vile persons. We are again to consider of what Scriptures or Doctrine
the Apostle speaks, when he says, We are not Ministers of the Letter, but of
the Spirit. And (1) can you in good conscience say, the doctrine of the Gospel
is a dead and carnal word? Or which is all one, that those Scriptures are,
which express that Doctrine, and that after the most lively manner, even
according to the mind of God himself, who so delivered them by his own Spirit?
Thus we read there, and thus it is spoken to us from thence by our Preachers.
Sinners, you must forsake your evil ways, and become new creatures; not only
outwardly reform, but be inwardly holy, and changed in your natures; must
cleanse your selves from all filthiness, not only of the flesh, but of the
Spirit also; you must walk in the fear of God, and observe diligently all his
Commandments, love them, and delight in them; or else you cannot be saved, but
must burn, as God has pronounced, in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, and
suffer his wrath and indignation for ever. His love is exceeding great to us,
who is not willing that any should perish, but that all should have everlasting
life: and to that end has given his only-begotten Son to die an ignominious
and painful death, and to bear our sins on his own body on the Tree, and to
make atonement for us, and has set him upon the Throne with himself to rule
over all things for our good, and has sent forth his mighty and gracious
Spirit to enlighten, convert, strengthen, and comfort us. Courage poor Soul and
look up: Glory is provided for thee who have offended, greater than the most
magnificent Prince on earth enjoys. Harken to the holy Guide in thy Soul, cease
thy Rebellion, and thou shall inherit Heaven, dwell with God in that supernal
Palace, beholding his Face in Peace, and have fullness of joy, all perfection,
and life for evermore Blessed art thou, O man, who have subdued thy Lusts,
overcome the World, and have put on Jesus Christ; for unto thee belongs this
blessedness, Kingdom, and Glory. Though we Die, we shall be made alive again,
and stand before the Judge, which knows what we have done, and what has been
in our hearts, and who will accept no man's person, but will render to all
according to their deserts: so that our portion in the end will be either that
bliss, or that misery: and this is not our word, but the Mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. Now call you this a carnal Letter, a dead, insipid, spiritless
thing? Has it no more power in it to move the Soul, than characters of Ink
drawn upon a Paper? It pierces the Sinner like a Sword, and comforts the humble
Soul more than Wine. The very contrivance of the Scriptures spits shame in the
face of your bold assertion; they being adorned with all perspicuity, that we
may understand the truth; and with the strongest arguments to persuade us to
our duty, as the love of God, the Death of his Son, the assistance of his
Spirit, the filthiness and incommodities of Vice, the purity, and beauty, and
benefits of Virtue, the Resurrection and the Judgment, the Glory of Heaven, and
the Torments of Hell. And so long as men have understanding, fear, hope, and
love of themselves, this word can not be as a mere block and stone to them. And
you may hence discern that there is a force in the very things themselves, in
that the same person works more upon the auditors when he Preaches clearly,
pertinently, and the weightiest matters, than when he speaks of more extrinsick
Points, and Doctrines of the least moment, and makes Childish descants, and
involves all he says in obscurity. I demand, if the Scriptures be such a dead
letter, and killing thing, death it self, why the Apostle wrote, or why do you?
Did he contradict his Tongue with his own hand at the same moment? Did he
believe that he sent the Corinthians a word as dead as his Ink, and a letter
that Kills? or will you say it was not so with him, because he had the
Spirit, and that went along with it from him to them? If so, you must tell us
why the Spirit may not as well accompany the same to us, which we likewise have
received. But know you, however it was that life came into the dead thing, they
acknowledged that his Letters were mighty and powerful, 2 Cor. 10.10. And it
seems some of you perceived that this Doctrine, and these good works which the
Scriptures contein, are not altogether so weak and dead as others would make
them, for that they have added, that out of a wicked man's mouth they can do no
good, and yet further, that the Apostle speaks this of false Apostles, The
Letter kills. Well then, our Ministers may still Preach them with comfort, if
they be righteous; out of such mouths they may do good, reach the seed of God,
raise it up, and refresh it; and there is virtue in them, if they be not
Ministered by false Teachers; who yet you should observe Minister not them, but
another thing, the figments of their own brains in their place, false Doctrine,
as they are false Teachers; whereas I thought you had understood by the Letter,
the Scriptures without their corruption, and so you do, however you thus speak.
But I like not these words, The truest words out of a bad man's mouth kill and
burden the seed of God in others. It might be more innocently said, his
sinfulness does this, or is the occasion of it, than to lay the blame upon the
pure and incorrupted Doctrine of God, or to charge it with so dreadful and
dismal an effect. I hope such a conceit as this lies not at the bottom, viz.
that the sin in the man infects the Doctrine, and so it becomes noxious to
others that hear it, like as breath receives contagion from a contagious Body,
and conveighs the same to them, into whose Lungs it enters. Nor do I like this
saying, The truest words out of a bad man's mouth cannot reach the seed of God,
raise it up, or refresh it. For that hereby you spoil the word of Christ of all
power, and render the Doctrine of the Gospel as impotent in it self as is
silence and a dead Mouth, or as it is our hand to work any good upon the Soul;
which yet is of such a nature (as I have showed) as that it must needs have a
force in it, and is called the power of God, and even herein excels the Law, in
that it is more vivid and quickening. And hereby you make all the efficacy and
the effect to depend upon the goodness of the Preacher; as if his Soul rightly
moving affects the Holy Ghost with whom she is conjoined, and that great Spirit
which fills all places, transfers the motions unto the Souls of others, like as
some say impresses being made upon the Spirit of nature, are carried by the
same from Body to Body, just as a stroke given at one end of a line runs unto
the other; so that no good can be done, let the Doctrine be never so right and
excellent, unless such a motion can be made, and no such motion can be made but
by a Pious Soul. If this be the mystery, I leave it to them that love it. Only
let me say, The Wind blows where it lifts, and thou hear the sound of
it, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one
that is born of the Spirit, Joh. 3.8. As thou know not what is the way of
the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the Womb of her that is with Child:
even so thou know not the works of God who makes all, Eccl. 11.5. So is the
Kingdom of God, as if a man should cast Seed into the Ground, and should sleep,
and should rise night and day, and the Seed should spring and grow up, he
knows not how. For the Earth brings forth Fruit of it self, first the
Blade, then the Ear, after that the full Corn in the Ear. The Seed is good,
cast it into the Ground, and as for the success, leave that to God: who we may
be sure has a blessing for his own word of truth: and as his blessing
accompanies the goodness of the Man, so it does the goodness of the Doctrine;
and his Spirit which waters and quickens and brings forth Fruit, proceeds not
from man, nor depends upon his sanctity as to others reception of it, but
proceeds from himself, and he sends it forth whither he pleases, and it is
willing to work in us all. Paul Plants, and Apollo Waters: but God gives the
increase. So then, neither is he that Planteth any thing, nor he that Waters:
but God that gives the Increase, 1 Cor. 3. That we may know whether the Spirit
in one can act upon another, let the Spiritual man keep silence, and let a
particular Doctrine or some particular Sins be proposed to him privately, and
let us see whether he can instruct the minds of others in that Doctrine, or
convince them of those Sins. St. Paul makes me despair of any effect, in that
he says the Spiritual man that speaks in an unknown Tongue (and that is as much
as he kept silence) effects nothing, 1 Cor. 14. (2) Because you condemn our
Preaching from the Scriptures without immediate Revelation, calling us for that
cause alone Ministers of the Letter: let me tell you, that whilst our hearts
are honest, and we entirely desire and labor after the Conversion and
Salvation of Souls, and God has blessed us with the knowledge of his Will, and
with zeal for his Glory, and with the sanctification of our natures, and with
good success of our labors, we will not be ashamed of this Ministry, though it
please him to give us no more than ordinary assistance of his Spirit (which he
that has not, is none of his;) and we receive not his word as the Apostles and
Prophets did by extraordinary inspiration, and by inspiration alone; but
meditate and study, and so Preach as we have learned the truth from the
Scriptures through the help of God which we have had in our diligence,
according to the good sense of divine things upon our hearts. For whereas St.
Paul received not the Gospel of man, nor was taught it, but by the Revelation
of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. you read otherwise of Timothy and Titus and other
Preachers. 2 Timothy 1.3. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have
learned of me. Chap. 3.14. Continue thou in the things which thou have learned
and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that from
a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise
unto Salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given
by Inspiration, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction,
for Instruction in Righteousness: that the man of God. [Timothy, or any other
such Preacher, 1 Timothy 6.11.] may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good
works. 1 Timothy 4.11. These things command and teach. Verse. 13.15. Give
attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Meditate upon these things,
give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. Chap. 3.14,
15. These things write I unto thee, that thou may know how to behave thy
self in the house of God. 2 Timothy 2.2. The things which thou have heard of me
among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to Faithful men, who shall be able
to Teach others also. Vide etiam. Tit. 1.9. and 2.15. Here then are Ministers
of the Doctrine which they had learned and had been taught of men, and of
things committed to them by others, and studying Ministers. If they had
received the word by Revelation like St. Paul, what need he teach and direct
them? Did he teach and direct the other Apostles thus? Was the word committed
to them by men? Had they learned it of others? Were they who were sent forth
immediately by Christ and the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, chosen of men as
being judged Faithful? (3) But now let us view the Text from whence you have
taken occasion to speak as you do: a little consideration of which would have
delivered you from your errors: viz. 2 Cor. 3.5. etc. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficience is of God. Thus having told them from whence they had their
ability, he next tells them what a word it is which they Preached: Verse. 6. Who
also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but
of the Spirit. For the letter Kills, but the Spirit gives Life. And so goes
on in commendation of the same Doctrine, comparing it with the Law, that the
glory of it might appear to exceed the Glory of the Law; saying, The Law is the
Ministration of Death and Condemnation, but this the Ministration of Life and
Righteousness. And Moses put a Veil upon his Face, and until this day remains
the same Veil untaken away in the reading of the Old Testament: but this Veil
is done away in Christ, and we use plainness of Speech; and with open Face,
beholding as in a glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image
[Vid. verse. 7. to 12.] as by the Spirit of the Lord. Wherefore he concludes,
Chap. 4.1. Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received mercy we
faint not. So that the Letter is such a word as is external, obscure, dead and
lifeless, which is without the Spirit, and which Concondemns: And therefore by
no means can be the Doctrine of the Gospel, which on the contrary is of an
internal nature, perspicuous, quick and powerful, which is accompanied with the
Spirit, and which holds forth justification. And that it is the Law, is
manifest, in that as the Letter Kills, so he tells us of the Ministration of
Death, which you your selves will acknowledge to be the Law: and this
Ministration, which is the Law, so exactly answers the Letter, that it is said
to be (...), in Letters: and as the Letter signifies that which is external
(Romans 2.28, 29.) so this Ministration is (...), Engraven in Stones, verse. 7. In
this sense we find him using the same terms, Romans 7.6. We are delivered from
the Law, that we should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in oldness of the
Letter. And as for the killing of the Letter, we read it thus, v. 11. Sin
taking occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and slew me. Again, c. 8.2.
The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of
sin and death. But I have an argument which I dare say you will not deny, viz.
G. Fox says, the Letter here is the Law. Treatise of Swearing, p. 52. And so
the Apostles were made able Ministers of Christ, and of the New Testament, and
not of the letter of the Prophets, and of the law in the Old Testament, in
which there was Swearing; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
Why the Apostle calls the law the letter, in opposition to the Spirit,
belongs not to our present business to explain. I only therefore refer the
Reader for satisfaction to verse. 7.8, 17, 18. Heb. 8.10. and 10.1. and 9.10.
Gal. 3.2, 24. and 4.3, 9. 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. Tit. 3.6. Joh. 7.39. Romans 5.5.
And how it Kills, and is the ministration of Death and Condemnation, he may
learn from Romans 7.5, 8, 11. with Mat. 6.17.27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 38, 39, 43,
44. Romans 8.3. Heb. 9.9. and 10.4, 10. Gal. 3.10, 21. and 2.16. Act. 13.39.

G. F. Christian Liberty, p. 9. It was matter of Conscience toward God that
Mordecay did not bow to Haman, Esther 3.2. Clarks Wise, page 59. If they had
put off their hats before you [ Judges] respecting your persons, then they had
transgressed the Law, Jam. 2.9. Christ respected no man's person: and God says,
ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shall not respect the person
of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, Lev. 19.5. Mordecay would not
bow to Haman, nor do him reverence according to the King's command, which was
contrary to God's command. And yet I say, God commands to honor all men. Which
is not to rise up and bow down to them, and to stand bare-headed before them,
but to do good to all men, and to love them. Parker's Discovery, p. 30. Doffing
the Hat is honor below, which men seek, and give one to another, respecting
persons, bowing to the Rich, giving them titles of Lords, Masters, Sirs, but do
not so to the poor, who are in vile raiment. Ibid. p. 65. Christ respected not
the persons of men, as his Enemies did confess, Luke 15.21, 22.] (1) If
Mordecay refused to bow to Haman, and show him reverence out of Conscience, I
wonder his Conscience permitted him to receive greater honor himself, in
riding clothed with the Royal Apparel, and upon the King's Horse, through the
City, with Proclamation made before him of the King's favor, Est. 6. If the
King had commanded him to see this honor performed toward Haman, I believe he
would have refused as well as he did to bow; and that he would likewise have
refused to run before him, or to wait upon him at his Table, if he could have
done it with equal safety. For that his refusal was not out of Conscience, we
have this evidence, Many of as good Conscience as he both gave and received
this reverence: (you take for granted that no other bowing and reverencing is
meant than what is ordinary among us at this day:) and they gave and received
also titles of Honor, 1 Kings 1.23. Nathan the Prophet bowed himself before
the King with his face to the ground, and said, My Lord, O King, c. 18.7.
Obadiah fell on his face, and said, Art thou that my Lord Elijah? v. 12.13. I
thy servant fear the Lord from my youth. Was it not told my Lord, etc. Gen
23.7. Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the people of the Land. c. 33.3,
14. Jacob bowed himself to Esau, and said, Let my Lord pass over before his
servant. 1 Chronicles. 29.20. All the Congregation bowed down their heads, and
worshipped the Lord and the King. Now let the reason be showed, why the single
example of Mordecay should prevail against all these. But besides examples, we
have a precept: Lev. 19.32, Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and
honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God. (2) And from this Text it is
apparent that you speak just contrary to the mind of God, in saying, that to
rise up is not to honor men, when he says, Rise up and honor. And whereas you
interpret that command of our Savior by his Apostle, Honor all men, to
signify that we love them, and do good to them, as if this were all; common
sense teaches you that these are two distinct precepts: and you might have
learned so much from that very place which you cite, where they are distinctly
named: 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all men: Love the Brotherhood. So Romans 12.10. Be
kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love; in honor prefering one
another. (3) You miserably confound two sorts of respect, that in judgment with
that of civility. And it is a wonderful thing that you cannot discern the
difference, when you cite the very Text which plainly shows it; Lev. 19.15. Ye
shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shall not respect the person of
the Poor, nor honor the person of the Mighty: but in righteousness shall thou
judge thy Neighbor. Where you might have observed, that respecting of the
Poor, is as well forbidden as of the Rich: and that it is a peculiar injunction
to Judges. The true sense is this, Let neither the Poor be favored for his
poverty, nor the Mighty for his greatness; but judge the Cause just as it is in
it self, without any regard to the persons. Which is quite another thing than
to put off the Hat, Rise up, or Bow, or say Sir, in our common discourse. Which
kind of respect you would prove our Savior gave not, from the testimony of his
Enemies: but with the like perverting of the Text; which like the former,
speaks of giving faithful judgment, and of declaring the Truth, without favor
to any person; as the bare recital of the Text will show. Luke 20.21.22.
Master, we know that thou say and teach rightly, neither acceptest thou
the person of any, but teach the way of God truly: Is it lawful to give
Tribute to Caesar, or no? (4) As for St. James's words, let us consider them
diligently. c. 2.1. Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of
persons. That St. James speaks this, not against all respect, but that the Poor
as well as the Rich should be regarded, and that they should not be contemned,
will appear by what follows. For says he next: For if there come into your
Assembly a man with a gold Ring, in goodly Apparel, and there come in also a
poor man in vile raiment, and ye have respect to [(...), look upon] him that
wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, sit thou here in a good place, and
say to the poor, stand thou there, or sit here under my Footstool, are ye not
then See c. 3.17. Act. 15.9. 1 Cor. 11.29.
partial in your selves, and are become judges of evil thoughts? Take away then
this partiality, and let the poor be respected, and then the Apostle is
satisfied. Let them not be put under the Footstool, but be put in a good
place, as the Rich are, and he will not condemn us. He speaks not against the
respect of the Rich, but the neglect and contempt of the Poor. In favor of
them he writes; telling us withal that we judge amiss, and not as Christianity
has instructed us, if we think that there is any great matter in a few fine
clothes, and in riches, and that a poor man may be slighted merely upon the
account of his poverty; for the Rich may be a very Enemy of God and all
goodness, and the Poor may be as much adorned with virtue, which is the true
Riches, as the other is with gold. As it follows: Hearken my beloved Brethren,
has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith, and heirs of the
Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him? But ye have despised the
poor. These last words show again whereunto the Apostles discourse tends,
viz. That the Poor be not contemned. God, says he, has considered them, he
has not overlooked them in his distribution of divine things, having made them
rich in faith, and so heirs of his own Kingdom; and for this some of them you
see are worthy to be regarded: but however, to despise any of them, is to do
contrary to God, who has chosen such. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw
you before the Judgment-seats? Do they not blaspheme that worthy name by which
you are called? Riches make not men better; for some that have them, are the
greatest sinners, and your Persecutors; and therefore there is no reason to
regulate your esteem of men altogether for their sake. If ye fulfill the royal
law, according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye
do well. It is well done be sure to observe the great Commandment of the Law,
which is also the Commandment of our Lord Christ in his Gospel, love thy
Neighbor as thy self. And this requires love to all, to the poor, for he is
equally thy Neighbor: and if we must love him, we know then that this cannot
consist with the contempt of him. And as we would not be despised, if we were
poor, so should we love others, as we do our selves, and not despise them that
are in that condition. But if you have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and
are convinced of the law as Transgressors. But know you, to respect persons is
directly forbidden in the law. As Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall not respect persons in
judgment: but you shall hear the small as well as the great. And to honor the
Rich, and not the Poor, to look upon the one highly, and to despise the other,
is just such another partiality as to hear the great, and not the small, to do
justice to the one, and not to the other; and therefore if you do thus, ye are
alike convinced of the Law as Transgressors. But now, said the Law, you shall
not honor man, not any man whatever? We know the contrary: for it is said,
Honor Father and Mother: Honor the Face of the Old Man. And therefore when it
says, Have no respect of persons, it cannot mean in this sense. Acceptance of
persons, and giving of honor to men, are two very different things. Wherefore
St. James speaking of that respect of persons which the Law did condemn, he
cannot be understood of that which it did not condemn, namely, the honoring of
men; as if he absolutely prohibited it. Which we may know further cannot be his
meaning, in that it is contrary to St. Peter, who says, Honor all men. And
all that I can observe from his whole discourse (which we have seen) is, that
he pleads for the due observation of this Precept, which is inconsistent with
giving honor to the Rich, and none to the Poor, respecting those, and
despising these, which is the thing he condemns. If it had been said, If you
have respect to the Rich, and your friends and kindred, and bestow gifts upon
them, and do them courtesies, and receive not the poor, and enemies and
unallied, nor show them any kindness, are you not partial? Would this signify
that no such thing ought to be done to our Kindred and Friends, and the rich?
By no means so: Yes, notwithstanding our Savior says, When thou make a
dinner, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy rich neighbors, Luke
14.12. So when it is said, If you have respect to the rich man, and say to him,
sit thou here in a good place, and say to the poor, sit thou here under my
footstool, are ye not partial? Neither does this likewise mean, that a Rich man
may not be respected, honored, and set in a good place. I would willingly
know, since he says, to respect persons is to be partial, how I am partial if I
respect all, by putting off my Hat, rising up, and bowing to all. Which respect
he that gives to the Rich, and denies it to the Poor, is the person St. James
condemns* And truly if a man has either the fear of God, or the love of men,
or but common civility, he will pay his fellow creature this respect, and much
more of the same sort, how mean soever he be, as he does to his Superiors. The
refusal of which, what does it argue but pride and contempt? Well, but you then
further say, St. James would have no difference made, but that one be respected
and honored as much as another, the Poor as much as the Rich, the meanest as
much as the mightiest. Not so, my Friends, for in the same place where it is
said, Honor all men, it is said, Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. which denotes
something peculiar, which is due to him, and not to others. And it is said
again, Render to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to
whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor, Romans 13.7. In that it
is said, Honor to whom Honor is due. It denotes here somewhat more than that
which is due to all men, even as he says the same of Tribute, and Custom, and
Fear, which we know are not due to all. It is said moreover, as for greater
Emphasis of a lamentable condition, The faces of the Elders were not honored,
Lam. 5.12. And note our Saviors words, Luke 14.10. When thou art bidden to a
Wedding, sit down in the lowest room, that when he that bad thee comes, he may
say unto thee, Friend, go up higher; then shall thou have worship in the
presence of them that sit at meat with thee. This is honoring of one more than
another, and our Savior allows it. You may observe also that God himself has
given Titles of Honor with difference; for he styles some Gods, Kings,
Honorable, Lords, Ladies, and does not call all so, nor all these by the same
name. And that you may know when he thus speaks, it is not as if he said,
whom the world calls so; remember but that one sentence, I have said ye are
Gods; together with our Savior's words, If he called them Gods, etc. John
10.34, 35. My Friends, why let you the poor man stand at your doors, and beg
for bread, and give him a piece only, and that of the coursest sort, and yet
invite the rich man into your house, set him at your Table, and feast him with
the best? Is not this respect of persons? and are you not partial? Yes, and
when the King (suppose) feasts with you, why do you give him the silver Plate,
and damask Napkin, and provide attendants of the better sort, when the poor man
must have the wooden Trencher, and the hurden Towel, and scarce any observance,
or none at all? Do ye offer the King a wooden dish to drink in? which yet you
give the poor man, and for no other reason, but because he is so. Set you the
Beggar down by the Noble? Or if he place himself at the head of the Table; in
such a presence, do ye not bid him change his place and come lower, and so
shame him? which also you would not do, if it had been among his
Fellow-beggars. Are not these unrighteous things? Is not this partiality? And
have you not, Because of this, the Faith of our Lord Jesus, with respect of
persons? Think of it. And think again, whether thus to do, be not as much as to
put off the Hat.

Clark's Description of Prophets, p. 26. Mat. 5. Swear not at all. But you will
say, this is meant of ordinary Swearing. But whoever thou art, by thy earthly
carnal wisdom know not what Christ meant. Is there not Swearing before
Magistrates every day in one place or other, at Terms, Sizes, Quarter Sessions,
Court-Leets? would you have it commoner?] Thus lies our Saviors words, Mat.
5.33. etc. You have heard that it has been said to them of old time, Thou
shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths.
Though the latter words, which belong to promissory Oaths, seem to infer, that
the former, whose opposite they are, do so too: yet I shall understand false
assertions, as well as nonperformance of promises made by Oath to be here
forbidden: as if it had been said thus, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but
shall swear truly, or, and moreover, thou shall perform unto the Lord thine
Oaths: which then would plainly have taken in both. For I doubt not but those
words, as they stand in the Law, forbid both, and no question but as the Jews
swore commonly of their own accord in the one sort, so they did in the other;
and our Savior intends equally to rectify the fault. It follows, But I say
unto you, Swear not at all. This must be more than the Law said, and therefore
prohibits Swearing, though the Truth be asserted, or the promise performed. For
as much as the Law it self prohibited false assertions by Oath, and
nonperformance of promises so made. But now this Swear not at all, denotes a
voluntary act, and relates to the evil custom of the Jews. As if it had been
said, Swear not at all, as you commonly do of your own accord: No, though you
swear truly. And therefore it belongs not to the taking of an Oath before a
Magistrate, which is a constrained act; as every one knows the difference
betwixt Swearing and being adjured. Next he says: Neither by Heaven, nor by
Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by thy head* This is another indication that the
swearing which our Savior forbids, is that which men use freely of themselves
in their converse: for that the Magistrate never administered an Oath in his
judiciary process in these forms, but only as the Law required, in and by the
Name of God. But the people used commonly such Oaths in their ordinary converse
and private business. And that they did, partly out of reverence to the Name of
God (as we learn from Philo Judaeus De Spec. Leg. p. 594. (...), etc. If
necessity require an Oath, it is more fit to swear by the health and old age of
Father and Mother, if they be living; and if they be dead, by their blessed
memory: because God is not to be rashly named. -- Some are wont to say, So help
me, omiting the rest: which might be completed, not by adding, the most High,
but Earth, Sun, Heaven or the World. But others are so hasty, that passing by
the creatures, they are bold to swear by the Creator himself.
:) and partly because they thought themselves the less obliged by these; as we
learn from our Savior, Mat. 23.16, 18. Woe to you blind guides, which say,
whosoever shall swear by the Temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall Swear by
the Gold of the Temple, he is a Debtor: Whosoever shall Swear by the Altar, it is
nothing; but whosoever shall Swear by the Gift that is upon it, he is a Debtor. So
that our Savior says thus much: Swear not at all; I do not mean only by the
Name of God, but in any of those other forms which are in use among you, as by
Heaven, Earth, the Temple, the Altar, etc. which clearly signifies that the
swearing which he forbids, is in that manner in which those forms were used:
which was in ordinary converse, not in solemn judicature. He adds further thus:
For Heaven is God's Throne, Earth his Footstool, Jerusalem his City, and thou
can not make one hair white or black. Which is to say, Though you think it
less, because you do not use God's name in these forms, I tell you it is all
one; for even herein you do Swear by him, c. 23.21, 22. Whosoever shall Swear by
the Temple, swears by it, and by him that dwells therein; and he that shall
Swear by Heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and by him that sits,
thereon. Lastly, it is said, But let your communication [(...), speech, word,]
be yea yea, nay nay; for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil As if he
had said, only say to one another, It is so, or it is not so: I will do it, or
I will not do it. Which further shows, that our Savior's prohibition is
limited to our common converse with one another. As for the reason of the
prohibition, it signifies thus much, This common voluntary swearing arises
from some evil principle or other, as the malignity of nature, pride, vanity,
profaneness, passion, irreverence of God, or the instigation of the Devil. But
now, if only voluntary swearing be here forbidden, it may be said, The Law
forbad as much, and therefore our Savior has added nothing to it; whereas he
tells us in the same place ( verse. 17.) that he came to fulfill and complete it;
and this is one particular in which he has done so, as is evident by his
making it an instance of his superaddition. To which I answer, It cannot be
questioned but that our Savior has expressed the Law in its full latitude;
especially considering he now intended to complete it. And as he did express
it, it is manifest he has completed it. For whereas it is said only, Thou
shall not forswear thy self: is not this more which he says, Thou shall not
Swear at all in communication? If the Law said this, how could our Savior
speak as he does by way of addition, But I say it? Which signifies plainly that
the Law did not say, Swear not at all in communication? But what then? Might
the Jews swear as much as they pleased in common speech and converse, so that
they swore truly? I ask likewise, forasmuch as the Law said only, Thou shall
not commit Adultery: might the Jews therefore lust after Women as much as they
pleased, and was there no sin to them in so doing? By no means so: neither the
one, nor the other; for though the Law expressed no more, yet they might
discern by the common light of nature, and much more by that light which the
Law of God (which Moses delivered to them) afforded, that God's name was not to
be used in vain, and that they were not to Swear rudely, lightly, irreverently;
and that likewise unclean desires ought not to lodge in the heart: As, though
the Law expressed not the promise of eternal life (as say some) yet they could
not be altogether ignorant of it, nor were they, but expected some such reward,
which is now fully manifested. I will add one thing more: Is not St. Paul's
(...), By your [al. our] rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus, (1 Cor.
15.31.) as much as the common Oath (...), By God? or as much as By the Temple?
which our Savior tells us is an Oath, Is not his (...), God is true, or, as
God is true. (2 Cor. 1.18.) as much as the Oath (...) The Lord lives, or, as
the Lord lives, or, God's life? Jer. 12.16. 1 King. 17.1. Is not his, I call
God to record upon my Soul (2 Cor. 1.23.) as much as God do so to me, and more
also, etc. Ruth. 1.17. 1 Samuel 4.14. Do not these former as much express the
nature of an Oath as the latter? or as much as so help me God, By this light,
By this Drink, which are used as forms in Swearing? For my part I would as
unwillingly use the one, as the other. And I put it to your Conscience, whether
in Witness-bearing, or in the matter of Allegience and Supremacy, or any other
public concern, you will say before the Magistrate, I call God to record upon
my Soul, or, As God is true, or, By our joy in Christ Jesus, this is so, or,
thus will I do. Well then, St. Paul speaking thus more than once, and
deliberately in writing, certainly he did not understand our Savior's words so
strictly, but that a Christian may upon weighty consideration swear sometime in
the fear of God, when he is not required by the power of the Magistrate. And my
reason for this is, not only that Holy Man's example, but because this kind of
Swearing proceeds not from evil, neither irreverence toward God, nor vanity
of mind, no inconsideratness, nor any corrupt principle; which is the reason of
our Savior's prohibition. To prevent your censure, let me publish, that to my
knowledge I never Swore any sort of Oath but before an Officer that required
it: I thank God for his grace.

Bishops Jesus Christ. p. 18. Christ was with the Church in the Wilderness, and
with the Angel, who spoke to Moses in Mount Sina, and with the Fathers who
received the lively Oracles, but they would not obey, but thrust him from them,
Act. 7.38, 39.] The Text says not Christ, but Moses was with the Church in the
Wilderness, and with the Angel, and with the Fathers; and Moses, not Christ,
they thrust from them. And whether you mean the Fathers, or Christ, (as the one
you must mean) received the Oracles, the Text tells you likewise it was Moses.
For thus it runs: This is that Moses which said unto the Children of Israel, a
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren, like unto
me; him shall ye hear. This is he that was in the Church in the Wilderness with
the Angel that spoke to him in Mount Sina, and with our Fathers: who received
[(...)] the lively Oracles to give unto us. To whom our Fathers would not obey,
but thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt,
saying unto Aaron, make us Gods to go before us: for as for this Moses we wot
not what is become of him.

Gibson's Everlasting Rule, p. 45. Christ said Think ye that I came to send
peace upon Earth? I tell you nay, but a Sword: Mat. 10.34. Now you
carnal-weaponed men, this Sword was not like your Carnal Sword, which Kills the
Creatures in their Sins, but was a Spiritual Sword, which did enter into the
Hearts of the Wicked and cut down the Sin.] But say I, the Sword which the Text
produced speaks of, is the Carnal, which Kills the Creatures, and not the
Spiritual which cuts down Sin; that which Kills the Body, the Bodies of
Christ's Disciples, and not that which enters the Hearts of the Wicked; that
which the Wicked use against the Righteous, and not that which Christ uses
against the Wicked. Or which is all one, it is Persecution, Hatred, Reproach,
Variance, and (as the Sword strictly taken does signify) it is Death it self,
the Killing of the Body. For it follows, For I am come to set a man at Variance
against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother; and a man's foes shall
be they of his own house. And such foes they are that Kill the Body: as we find
a little after this in these Words, He that loses his Life for my sake shall
find it. And as appears by those a little before our Text, verse. 28. Fear not
them that Kill the Body: And verse. 21. Brother shall deliver up Brother to
Death. The whole discourse is of Persecutions, which should arise by reason of
the word of Christ which his Disciples were to Preach and profess openly; of
evil which they should suffer upon the account of their Religion. Wherefore
when our Savior says he sends this Sword, he only means that it will come upon
his account. And whereas he expected tranquillity and great earthly prosperity
from him (he being the King that was to Rule; whose Kingdom also they thought
should be like other Princes, with external pomp and dominion, Chap, 18.1. Act.
1.6.) he faithfully tells them before hand the contrary, that they shall meet
with many troubles, to the end they might be armed against them. And for the
Exposition of his sending a Sword I give his own words, verse. 12. Ye shall be
hated of all men for my sake. Joh. 16.33. In the World ye shall have
Tribulation. Mat. 13.21. Tribulation or Persecution arises because of the Word.

Reb. Trevers Testimony. p. 21. Had I not come into the World ye had had no
Sin. But now your Sin remains, because ye believe not on him whom God has
sent: for I am come a light into the World. This his coming thou would have
only at that time at Jerusalem, as if he had not come before nor since. I would
enquire of thee, was there no Sin till Christ was manifest at Jerusalem? The
cause of all Sin was and is the not coming to him which saves from Sin, who was
and is and is to come: and so he that was the Light says, I am come a Light
into the World.] Yes, this his coming, this spoken of in the Text, was only at
Jerusalem, that in his Body among the Jews. As will appear from the words: Joh.
15.22.24. if I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin: but now
have they no Cloak for their Sin. If I had not done among them the works which
none other man did, they had not had Sin. For when did Christ speak unto those
Jews then Living, and do those works among them, but since his Birth of the
Virgin Mary? Means he not by that which he spoke unto them, that which he spoke
with his Carnal Mouth, and they heard with their Carnal Ears, his Preaching in
their Cities, Synagogues, and Temple? Means he not by his Works, those that he
did in Corazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, which they saw with their Carnal Eyes (as
the healing of Diseases, the expulsion of Devils, etc,) and for the contempt of
which he pronounced woes against them? so sure is it that his coming here
spoken of is only that at Jerusalem in his Flesh. And how is it possible to
understand any other coming than this by those other words which you cite, God
has sent me, I am come a Light into the World? As well may you understand
these words also of God's sending him, and his coming into the world before his
incarnation, God sent his Son in the likeness of Sinful Flesh. In the fullness
of time God sent forth his Son made of a Woman. I am come forth from the
Father, and am come into the World. To this end was I Born, and for this end
came I into the World. For thus lie the words, speaking plainly of a sending
and coming lately into the World, and such a sending and coming as that he had
a Mouth to speak with to Men's Ears: Joh. 12.44. He that believes on me,
believes not on me, but on him that sent me. I am come a Light into the World,
that whosoever believes on me, should not abide in darkness. And if any man
hear my words and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the
World, but to save the World. (And when was this?) The word that I have spoken,
the same shall judge him in the last day. For I have not spoken of my self; but
the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say: (2) This
coming of Christ at Jerusalem being only spoken of, in respect of this alone
must he therefore be understood when he says in the same place, If I had not
come, they had had no Sin? And to your enquiry, was there no Sin before, I
answer there was. But if you put the question as you ought to do, had not these
Jews had Sin if Christ had not come in his Body and so spoken unto them and
done his works among them? the Text would have answered you, they had not.
Which is not to be taken absolutely (as you take it, saying, if Christ had not
come a Light into the World before in the hearts of men, then indeed there had
been no Sin at all. Which is another false interpretation of yours.) but
comparatively, They (those Jews that heard Christ's Doctrine and saw his
Miracles, and yet believed not, nor repented) had not had Sin in comparison of
what now they have; their Sin had been less, they had been more excusable.
Which sense is manifest from those Words in the Text, But now have they no
Cloak for their Sin. For if they will not see when they have the clearest
Light, nor believe when they have multitude of miracles, nor repent when they
have the best instruction, what can they plead for themselves? And in like
manner we had not had Sin, if the Gospel had not come unto us: our Sin would
not have had those aggravations which now it has, it being now the abuse of
far greater Grace.

G. W. Authority of Ministry. p. 2. Baptizing people in outward Baptism does
not Baptize Men into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. p. 7. That
Baptism which Christ commanded, Mat. 28. and Mark. 16. is of necessity unto
Salvation. For by it they were to Baptize men into the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. Now without being Baptized into this name a man cannot be
saved. For by no other name under Heaven comes Salvation, but by the name of
Jesus. But there is not a necessity upon Water Baptism, and therefore it was
not Water Baptism, but the Spiritual Baptism, which was an effect of the Gospel
which is the power of God, which the Disciples Preached. -- The Disciples
obeyed this command, when they Ministered the Spirit and turned men from
darkness to light. And a Testimony of this was manifest when the Holy Ghost
fell on them that heard the Disciples Preach.] But (1) Water Baptism is meant
in that command of our Savior, Mat. 28. and Mark. 16. For with Water the
Apostles to whom the command was given, Baptized, and in all places, and all
sorts of persons, both Jews and Gentiles, and the very best converts: three
thousand Jews that repented at St. Peter's Sermon and gladly received the word,
Act. 2. Men and Women of Samaria, Simon Magus, and the Eunuch of Ethiopia,
Chap. 8. Paul, Chap. 9. Cornelius and his company, Chap. 10. Lydia. and her
household, and the Jailor and his. Chap. 16. Crispus and many Corinthians, Chap.
18. Twelve Ephesians which were John's Disciples, Chap. 19. Now what necessity
was there, or what reason, that the Apostles did thus constantly Baptize all
sorts of proselytes, the most Holy and the most Perfect not excepted, and yet
add, those that did not desire it of them, if they did it not in obedience to
Christ's cammand? And if they might altogether forbear, why said Peter thus,
Can any forbid Water, that these should not be Baptized which have received the
Holy Ghost as well as we? And why commanded he them to be Baptized? Act. 10.
And why did he not forbear, when he knew that to Baptize these Gentiles would
give offense (as it did) to his Brethren of the circumcision? verse. 28.34, 35.
Chap, 11.2.3. And especially why did he not forbear for a season, till he had
satisfied his Brethren by certifying them of his Vision? For might not such as
you have said, what need of Water whilst they Believe and have received the
Holy Ghost? what commandment is there for it? what offense would be given to
any, if this arbitrary Ceremony were omitted? which if they had said, you see
who would have reproved them, as is manifest by his words. Add we further, and
just as it is in our Savior's command, so the Apostles practiced in their
Water Baptism. Which is an indication that what they did was in execution of
that command, and therefore that Water Baptism is there meant. For as he said,
Preach the Gospel, and them that Believe Baptize: so we find they Preached and
required Faith before they Baptized. Act. 8.12. When they Believed Philip
Preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus
Christ, they were Baptized. Verse. 35. Philip Preached Jesus unto the Eunuch:
and the Eunuch said, see here is Water, what does hinder me to be Baptized? And
Philip said, if thou Believe with all thy heart thou may. And he answered,
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. And they went down into the
Water, and Philip Baptized him. Further, they Baptized such (both Jews and
Gentiles) with Water as had been Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and that as that
signifies either Sanctification or other gifts of the Holy Ghost: as appears in
the former instances, Act. 2.37, 41. and 8.12.37, 38. and 9.15, 18. and 10.47,
48. And if they did not thus upon the account of Christ's command, you must
produce some Scripture which tells you another reason why they did it. But if
you can produce no such Scripture, then it is sure that Water Baptism was meant
in that command. For when they ordained that the Gentiles should abstain from
Meats offered to Idols, and from Blood and things Strangled, the reason is
assigned, Act. 15.21. And so likewise is it, when Paul Circumcised Timothy, and
when again he purified himself with others, Act. 16.3. and 21.20. etc. Finally,
whereas St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 1. Christ sent me not to Baptize but to Preach,
it implies that he did send others to Baptize whom he also sent to Preach. And
moreover he speaking there of Baptizing Gentiles, to what mission can his words
relate but to this, where we find the Gentiles expressed, Go teach all Nations,
Baptizing them? especially considering it was to the other Apostles that Christ
spoke those words, St. Paul at that time being not chosen into the number, and
that when he was chosen it was not so said to him as it was to them, Preach and
Baptize, but only, Preach, Act. 9. and 22. and 26.16. etc. And that he speaks
there of Water Baptism, is evident, and you grant it, alleging the same words
frequently against the necessity of it. Wherefore according to St. Paul
Water Baptism was intended by our Savior in that command to his Apostles. And
thus having proved this, I need not prove the necessity of it unto Salvation,
and that hereby men were Baptized into the name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; forasmuch as the Text asserts both, as your selves grant of that Baptism
whereof it speaks, which I have proved to be the Water Baptism. But yet because
these are the reasons why you cannot believe this external Baptism to be there
meant, I will proceed to show the invalidity of them. And therefore (2) I
assert contrary to you, that by water men were Baptized into the name of Christ
(or, unto, (...), as it is said, 1 Cor. 10.2. All our Fathers were Baptized
(...), unto Moses.) This I prove from the following Texts. 1 Cor. 1.13. Were ye
Baptized into the name of Paul? The answer must be, we were not, but into
Christ's name. Verse. 14, 15. I thank God I Baptized. none of you but Crispus
and Gaius, lest any should say I Baptized into my own name. To think so was
amiss. And why, but because they were Baptized only into the name of Christ? As
then it was into Christ's name they were Baptized, so is it as manifest that it
was by water: for he thanks God (by reason of their quarrels) that he Baptized
so few of them: which he would not have done, if he had meant the Spiritual
Baptism. And of the same Baptism he speaks again those words, verse. 17. Christ
sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach: which you your selves understand of
Water Baptism. Again, from Act. 19.5. When they heard this, they were Baptized
into the name of the Lord Jesus. Which is the same Baptism that they had
received before by John, and therefore with water: there being only this
difference, John's was that they should believe on him that should come after
him, the person being not named, verse, 4. (for those words, that is on Jesus
Christ, are St. Paul's:) but this was unto Jesus Christ expressly named. And
besides, the Spiritual Baptism (which, according to your own words, is the
falling of the Holy Ghost upon others by the Ministry of the Apostles) followed
this. As we read in the next verse: And when Paul had laid his hands upon them,
the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with Tongues and Prophesied. Again,
Act. 1.16, 17. As yet the Holy Ghost was fallen on none of them: only they were
Baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus. That it was with water is manifest,
in that Simon Magus was one of them that were Baptized, verse. 13. and he being
yet in the bond of Iniquity, had not received the Spiritual Baptism, verse. 23.
And Philip it was that Baptized them, verse. 12. who, as we read verse. 38.
Baptized with water, where again it is manifest, that as it was with Water he
Baptized the Eunuch, so it was into the name of Christ. For he making
profession that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, Philip Baptized him. Which
must needs signify that he Baptized him unto the same Jesus, or unto his name,
which is all one, as you may see by verse. 12. Romans 6.3. Gal, 3.27. (3) I assert
contrary to you, and prove, that Water Baptism was necessary unto Salvation,
viz. in that sort as the Text expresses it: Mar. 16.15, 16. Go into all the
World and Preach unto every Creature. He that Believes and is Baptized, shall
be Saved. Which requires that those which embrace the Gospel, do solemnly by
the rite of Baptism declare so much, and that they are Christ's Disciples, and
that they will openly profess him and it, and that by this rite they be
admitted for his Disciples unto this public profession. That this is the
meaning of Baptizing and being Baptized into his name, appears from Scripture.
Act. 19.4, 5. John Baptized, saying unto the People that they should believe on
him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard
this, they were Baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus. Which must needs
signify unto the profession of him. Joh. 4.1. Jesus made and Baptized more
Disciples than John: (...); made them Disciples by his Preaching, and converted
them unto his Doctrine, and then admitted them by Baptism as Disciples unto the
public profession of himself and it. Which is the same with our Text, (...),
Disciple, and Baptize. 1 Cor. 1.14, 15. I thank God I Baptized none of you but
Crispus and Gaius, lest any should say I Baptized into my own name. i. e, Since
some of you say they are of Paul (verse. 12.) I am glad I have Baptized so few
of you as I have, lest any should think (as they might the rather if I had
Baptized many) that I intended to gather Disciples unto my self, as if the
Doctrine were mine. Baptism then into Christ's name signifying admission of
Disciples unto public profession of his Person and his Religion, I hope you
will not deny that thus to do is necessary, as if it were sufficient to
Believe in the heart: especially when you remember it is said, With the heart
man Believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto
Salvation. And, whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess
before my Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men,
him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven. And that those chief
Rulers were in danger enough, that believed on Christ, but because of the
Pharisees durst not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue,
loving the praise of men more than the praise of God, Joh. 12. Faith then is
the necessary intrinsic thing, and Baptism the necessary extrinsick unto
Salvation. Therefore is it said, Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus for the Remission of Sins: And they were Baptized, Act. 2.. And
again, Why tarriest thou? Arise and be Baptized and wash away thy Sins, calling
on the name of the Lord: And he arose and was Baptized, Act. 22. and 9. And it
is manifest that VVater-Baptism is here meant, for that it is said, be
Baptized, and they were Baptized. Why tarriest thou? Arise and be Baptized. He
arose and was Baptized. For what necessity of arising to be Baptized with the
Spirit? and how could it depend on man's will, as this did, Ananias being ready
and having in his power to Baptize him whenever he would go with him, or say he
should Baptize him? Wherefore Water Baptism is spoken of in Scripture as
necessary unto Salvation, it signifying public profession of Christ, and it
being for the remission of sins.

Burrough's Answer to Quaeries, p. 5. Quest. Whether none be accounted
righteous in God's sight, in whom there is any corruption or failing, or who do
not fulfill the Law, and answer every demand of justice. Ans. Here thou polluted
Beast have made it manifest, that thou would have corruption to be accounted
righteous in God's sight, that so thou might lie in thy sins; but John
says, He that commits sin, is of the Devil: those that love God keep his
Commandments. And God does not accept any where there is any failing, or who do
not fulfill the Law, and answer every demand of Justice. Smith's Catechism, p.
68.69. Do you believe. that in such of you as are grown into such strength, as
to have Victory over the World, Flesh, and Devil, the motions of the Flesh do
not sometimes stir to commit sin? Ans. Though they may tempt us, yet they
prevail not; for by Christ we are preserved in the hour of Temptation, and the
wicked one touches us not, p. 104. The Children of God do not those things
they ought not to do: for whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin.]
Because I have heard many speak after this rate, but have not yet known the man
that is so bold as to affirm so much of himself, I urge thee therefore to write
down, and say of thy self, I am righteous without any corruption: I keep the
Commandments, fulfill the Law, answer every demand of Justice without any sin
and failing: The motions of the flesh do sometimes stir and tempt me to commit
sin, but they do not at any time prevail so that I commit it: I do not any of
those things which I ought not to do. But if thus thou dare not say of thy
self, and yet so interpretest St. John's words, then must thou likewise
conclude from him that thou art not born of God, but art of the Devil. And if
thou will say thus of thy self, but wilt not affirm the same of every Child of
God, the newly regenerate, and the weakest, and the ignorantest, then must thou
confess that St. John is not so strictly to be understood; for he speaks
without limitation, Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, 1 John 3.9.
And that indeed he is not so to be understood, is evident from many places of
Scripture, which affirm that the regenerate have weakness, imperfection,
corruption, and fall into sin, and do things which they ought not to do, Eccl.
7.20. There is not a just man upon earth which does good and sins not. Mat.
15.16. Are ye also yet without understanding? c. 17.17. O faithless and
perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you?
-- Why could not we cast him out? And Jesus said unto them, Because of your
unbelief. Mar. 4.40. Why are ye so fearful? How is it that you have no faith?
c. 8.33. He rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me Satan: for thou savourest
not the things of God, but the things that be of men. Luke 9.55. He rebuked the
Disciples, and said, ye know not what manner of Spirit you are of. c. 22.24.
There was a strife among them, which of them should be greatest. -- Ye shall
not be so. Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all, 1 Cor. 3.15. If any man's
work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet
so as by Fire. Heb. 5.12. when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have
need that one teach you again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of
God. St. John spoke his mind plain enough to deliver you from mistake, if you
would consider his letter, and not speak all without Book. chap. 2.29. Every
one that does righteousness, is born of him. But is every one that does any one
righteous act, so born? No, but as he says, c. 1.6. If we walk in the light,
etc. Again, you may perceive his mind by what he says a little before the Text
in debate, v. 3. Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself. And
ver. 8. He that commits sin, is of the Devil; or which is the same, He is a
Child of the Devil, ver. 10. Is every one so, that commits one act of the
least sin? No, but Scripture teaches us thus, They are of their Father the
Devil, that will do his lusts, Joh. 8. that walk according to that Prince,
according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2. that are servants of sin, Romans
6. Again, says he, after the Text, v. 10. Whosoever does not righteousness, is
not of God. And c. 5.19. We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies
in wickedness. So that St. John by committing sin, means such sinning as not
to do righteousness, not to walk in the light, not to purify our selves, but to
lie in wickedness. And as in this aggravated sense, we in common speech use the
same expression, so does the Scripture most frequently. As Heb. 3.17. With
whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that sinned, whose
carcasses fell in the wilderness? You know it means a stubborn people, that
hardened their hearts, for whose great provocations, God swore in his wrath,
that they should not enter into his rest, v. 8.10, 11. I thought every one had
known the difference betwixt sinning and sinning, sinner and sinner. Romans 2.9.
Tribulation and anguish upon every Soul of man that does evil. v. 12. As many
as have sinned without Law, shall perish without Law. Must all be damned, that
have an evil thought, or word, or deed? No, we read what he means, when it is
thus written immediately before, v. 4.5, 8. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to Repentance? but after thine hardness and impenitent heart,
treasurest up unto thy self wrath. -- To them that are contentious and do not
obey the Truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath. Thus again we
read, Ezekiel. 18.20. The Soul that sins shall die. That is, as it follows, The
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. When the righteous turns away
from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to all the
abominations that the wicked man does, he shall die in his trespass and sin.
Since no man knows how often he offends, Psalm. 19. Since if we know nothing
by our selves, yet hereby we are justified, but he that justifies is the Lord,
1 Cor. 4. Since he is greater than our hearts, and knows all things, 1 John
3. I advise you to pray always, Our Father which art in Heaven, forgive us our
Trespasses. And as the Psalmist, Lord, cleanse us from our secret faults. And
since our Savior has said, Ask and ye shall receive: And St. John, If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins: forbear not
asking pardon, lest you receive it not; confess your sins, lest God should not
forgive them: remembering St. James's word, Ye have not, because ye ask not: And
what Solomon says, He that covers his sins, shall not prosper. And know ye
that it is better that men reckon us like others to have failings, and not to
live altogether so exactly as we ought, so that we have pardon; than that they
look upon us as absolutely pure and perfect, and we be thrust away from God
without it like proud Pharisees.

W. M. Lament. over England, p. 17. We freely give Tribute to whom Tribute is
due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor, Romans
13.7. Now all this does not belong to Caesar, for Fear belongs to God; and
therefore we cannot give all to Caesar. Tribute and Custom we give, and in
that, with obedience to all. his just commands, we honor him. -- But it is
written, Fear God.] Yes, and so it is written, Honor the Lord: and yet it is
written too, Honor the King: and you acknowledge Honor due to him, and give
it him. So, though it be written, Fear God, yes, and more than that I add, Fear
not Man: yet it is written also, Ye shall fear every man his Mother, and his
Father, Lev. 19.3. And, Let the Wife see that she reverence [(...), fear] her
Husband, Ephesians. 5.33. 1 Pet. 3.2. Ye wives, be in subjection to your own
Husbands; that if any obey not the word; they also may without the word be wone
by the conversation of the wives, while they behold your chaste conversation
coupled with Fear, v. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. c.
2.18. Servants, be subject to your Masters with all fear. See 2 Cor. 7.15. Ephesians.
6.5. Understand you not the difference betwixt fearing God, and fearing men? If
you do not, but esteem the latter unlawful, being now excited to use your wits,
I am ready to instruct you at your request. But why will you not look into your
Bible, and consider the Text which you cite before you write? Which if you had
done, you would have seen that the Apostle (Romans 13.7.) speaks not of God, but
altogether of men: As the first words show, Render to all their dues: And the
next following, Owe no man any thing, but to love one another.

Duesberry's Discovery, p. 15. Now after the witnesses have sealed up their
Testimony, the Beast, which is thy will, that ascends out of the bottomless Pit
of thy deceived heart, has made War against the Witnesses, Christ in thee, and
slain them, and they lie dead in the spiritual City of Sodom and Egypt, where
our Lord is Crucified, Rev. 11.7, 8. So again, p. 33. G. K. Immed. Revelation,
p. 117. Christ's Spirit shall consume this Antichrist that sits in the Temple
of God, man's heart, and rules as Lord there. And this Antichrist, is not a
person, or persons particular, but a Spirit, Joh. 4.2. and is the spirit of
Satan, which rules in the children of disobedience. In this Temple the heart,
the Whore Mystery Babylon, sits as Queen, 2 These. 2.] Thanks says the Pope. I
and my Clergy were wont to be branded peculiarly with these ill names: but it
is now declared by immediate revelation, that we are no more Antichrist, and
the Whore of Babylon, than are other sinners, and even those among the
Heathens; for a wicked spirit was in the hearts of men before we ever came to
our dominion in the Church, and is now in those with whom we have nothing to
do, as being gone out from us, and in Heathens that never were of us; and this
Antichrist sits in every vicious man's heart, and so rules in the Temple of God,
notwithstanding many of them are contemptible persons, and have no authority
over others like as we have. The Beast has Seven Heads, and Ten Horns, which
are Seven Mountains, and Ten Kings. And though it be somewhat odd, and I do not
understand it, yet now sure I am (or else Revelation fails) that this Beast,
with all his Power, Pomp, and Kingdoms, is the will of every naughty sinner,
how mean and impotent soever he be. And the woman, the Mother of Harlots,
drunken with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs, that sits upon the Beast the
will, and upon many waters, is the Spirit of Satan ruling in the children of
disobedience: and so this Woman drinks blood in every such Child's heart: and
whereas one would think she shed the blood of others, and those Saints and
Martyrs, it is only the wicked man's own blood: and though it seems that blood
is really shed, and men are literally killed, it is in truth quite another
matter, namely, Christ Crucified in the wicked man's heart by lusts; which we
know may be without the loss of one drop of blood. And though the Two witnesses
prophesying, and being slain, has been judged to signify something acted by
men among themselves (the faithful Servants of Christ, contending for his Truth
against a company of evil men, and this evil company overcoming them, and
treating them with all injuries:) yet it only signifies what is done betwixt
Christ and the Heart, Christ speaking there, and the will crucifying him there,
viz. in the deceived heart, which is the great City where [(...)] he was
Crucified, spiritually called Sodom. Good Children, go on and tell the
Protestants from the Spirit of the Lord, that that Spirit did not point at our
Papal Power in those names of Beasts, Antichrist, Babylonish Whore. I stroke
you, my Dearest, and lay my hands upon you, and give you my Blessing. Thus
glories the Pope. But Friends, whereas St. John Prophesies of Witnesses and of
a Beast and Whore, and makes accurat descriptions of these, can you think he
means no particular persons, but only speaks of the common strife of the Flesh
and Spirit in men. And I would have you consider, whether common vicious
Persons that neither propagate nor hold Errors and Heresies, nor persecute and
offer injuries to the Church, are called in the Scripture Antichrist. But
albeit you say the Beast is the Will, and Antichrist is not any particular
person or persons, yet I find one of you, and he a great man, contradicting,
telling us plainly that the Pope is the Beast and the Antichrist. G. Fox Few
Words p. 6. This is clear, that the Pope is the Whore and the Beast that rose
out of the Earth. p. 8. The Pope says, they can forgive Sins, viz. his
Jesuits, Priests, Friars. Here is the Beast with his many names, the many
Antichrists. Seeing then some of you say the Beast is the Will, some the Pope:
some that Antichrist is not any particular persons, some that he is the Pope
with his Jesuits, Priests and Friars, I had best stop here till you are agreed.
And truly, may some say, you might have stopped long ago, and even have spared
all your pains, for any hope you can have of convincing them who esteem
themselves infallible, they knowing the shame of Recantation, and what injury
it will be to their Credit, and what damage to their Party. But I am not
altogether without hope. For who knows what the Lord may do? However, my Labor
may not be in vain to some of their Followers, who scarce believe what the
Doctors so confidently boast of themselves. And especially may it conduce to
prevent the lapse of others, who by reason of their glorious pretense are
smitten with some admiration of their persons and their way.

Besides the instances which I have given of your false Interpretations, I can
produce near Forty more which I have observed in reading a few of your books.
By which any one may perceive what sad work you make with the Scriptures. But
these may suffice, to show that you are far from doing according to what you
affirm of your selves, as in the beginning I cited your own words: viz. That
you dare not make use of Scripture but as the Spirit opens; dare not speak the
words of Scripture in your own Spirit, but tie them to the Spirit so as not to
use them but by the Spirit; do not Interpret Scripture by the fallible mind;
the things which you write, you received by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and
you are not fallible. For certainly they that pretend no more than the ordinary
divine assistance, could not have erred more grossly than you have done. I wish
with all my heart that you had more of the Spirit, and that you were Prophets
indeed, that we might have more Truth, and need not spend our time in
correcting follies. And admonish you in the Lord, that you make your humble and
ardent supplications for wisdom to him that gives and upbraideth not: And that
withal you labor and search for her as for hid Treasure, and despise not the
light which God has set up in any; who has variously distributed his gifts,
as he has the members of our Body, for mutual assistance. Seeing your
failings, watch against them, and take more heed, and amend. To ascribe any
thing that is false to the Holy Ghost, you know is wicked impudence, and of the
worst consequence, the Profane and Atheistical being the more tempted hereby
to believe there is no such Divine power. How horrid is it to say that Spirit
lies? How nigh to which you come by asserting him to be the Author of your
errors, in your seriousness consider. If I have erred, I have erred as a man:
and yet I think and know I have the Spirit of God, and for all the World would
not be without it. It would do well since you say you are Prophets like them of
old, sent from the Lord immediately and guided infallibly, that you tell us in
all your writings distinctly what the Lord says, and what you say of your
selves. As St. Paul gave notice when he spoke his own judgment, saying, This
say I, not the Lord: This not I, but the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.6.12.25, 26, 40. And so
much I expect of him, that shall reply to what I have written, and that in
every particular, that I may know with whom I have to do: viz. that he say, I
have received by inspiration this Interpretation: but this I have not, but
deliver it according to my best judgment. Or else declare apertly, that you
write nothing at all but what you have by inspiration. I admonish further, that
if you believe the Holy Ghost did not intend that sense in which you use the
words of Scripture, you plainly and honestly declare so much. But then reflect,
whether it be not better to let the Scriptures stand in that sense which the
Holy Ghost has given them: lest every one using this liberty, they come at
last to signify just nothing, but like the Air be blown hither and thither
with every breath as every one pleases, and be turned into all shapes like a
piece of soft wax. Think not that to interpret mystically is profound wisdom,
and ought to be admired of the People. For alas they that are weakest are
aptest to this, and hither they fly when the Letter is too hard for them. And
take heed especially of thinking your selves spiritual because you talk
spiritually: as knowing that none are so; but who are born of the Spirit, and
walk according to it; who are Holy in their Life, and holy in their Nature.
Which they that turn the Letter into Spirit may be as far from, as the Swinish
Adulterers, and the Rude Swearers.

And now because I know not whether I shall speak to you any more, take that
serious word which I have sometime had in my mind to dispense to you. Which is
this: Insist on the particular duties of a Christian man, and deliver them with
all perspicuity of speech; as knowing they are not to be practiced in
Phraseology and pure mystical notion. Cry not out against Ministers for taking
of Tithes, calling them for this cause Hirelings and Wolves, Covetous Balaams,
Deceivers, and Antichrist's: since you see such walk soberly, righteously, and
godly, and seek the conversion of Sinners, and would part with their Estates
and Sacrifice their Lives for the sake of Christ: Since you know that it is
false Doctrine, pernicious errors and heresies, which makes the false Prophet;
and this may be, and is found in them that take no Tithes, and in them that
decry them; and they that do receive them, may be orthodox, and are so; and
have not the temptation to corrupt the truth for the pleasing of men that they
might receive the more from them, like as others have that live upon the
bounty. Since again you know that there are hundreds of these Tith-takers which
would exchange their ten or twenty pounds a year for the maintenance of your
Preachers, who ride about and work not with their hands. You that plead the
Apostles examples, consider whether they who forsook all and followed Christ,
turned Merchants, kept Shops, constantly traded in the World, sought after
Riches, as many of your Preachers do. You that condemn a Lace and the Fashions
of the World, should remember your bands that are broader than an Inch, your
Cloaks that cover not the Breast, with Capes that are of no use, your Gowns,
Hoods and Scarves, your Borders and Periwigs, your Colored Garments, Died by
man's Invention. You that plead the Spirit, consider whether the manner of your
writings signify inspiration, when we see exultation, exasperation, carping
playing upon words, contention about matters of no moment, poor flashes of wit,
quibbling and evasion, obscurity and impertinence, and abundance of ill names
poured forth without cause and provocation. You that speak so much of the Law
and Christ the light within, should understand that all our knowledge is so, in
our Souls, which are not in our Bibles, but in our Bodies: and no man ever
thought that Ink fashioned into Letters, can instruct him that cannot read for
want of learning, or for want of eyes, For what is the Bible in Hebrew and
Greek Characters to them that know only English? know ye therefore what you
talk of? I would have you consider again, what knowledge the World would have
had, what Nations had been Converted, how the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ had
been propagated, if he and his Apostles and others had not spoken and written,
and men had not heard ard read: or what we should come to within two ages, if
we should all shut our eyes, and stop our ears, and tie up our tongues. Yet say
I with you, Christ is within, and Christ is light. Next I admonish and beseech
you to bear others burdens, and to help their infirmities, and to know your
own. For we are not perfect, neither we, nor you. Lay aside all bitterness of
Spirit and censorious judging, scoffs and jeers, pride and haughtiness, strife
and vain jangling, wrath and clamor, love of the world and greedy pursuit after
it, unjust gains and base contrivances, dissimulation, lying, backbiting,
contumelies, and false accusations, all excess and intemperance, voluptuousness
and drunkenness, lasciviousness, uncleanness, fornication and adultery. Speak
without ambiguity; seek not the praise of men; receive instruction and hearken
to reproof. Pray in your Families, and Pray in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
Pray for the pardon of your Sins. Give thanks at your Meals: Instruct your
Children: Love your Enemies: Render to every man his due: follow peace: Make
not the Kingdom of God Meat and Drink, the Hat and a Lace; and cast off all
superstitions. Search the Scriptures, and read them with diligence. The fruits
and effects of the Death of Christ part not with: That Blood remember which he
offered; that Death of the Cross Preach which he suffered, whereby he made
atonement and obtained eternal redemption for us. And firmly believe the
Resurrection of the Dead at the last day. For if they rise not, What does it
advantage me, says St. Paul, that I have Fought with Beasts at Ephesus? and why
stand we in jeopardy every hour? 1 Cor. 15. And what I say to you, I say to
all: Abstein from those abominable Sins, which dishonor our Christian
Religion, provoke our gracious God, and Damn men's Souls everlastingly. And with
all your might pursue the other Righteous things and whatsoever else is divine
and praise worthy. The Lord Jesus be with your Spirits, Amen.

He that Replies, let him do it in order, and distinctly to every thing
material, and not dictate, but produce his Reasons. The Reader I desire to
consult the place in my own Book, to which the Reply is made; as knowing that
the neglect of this may be injurious to himself and me. And once more I desire
him, seeing our present business is about Interpretations, to consult the Text
as it stands in the Bible.

Pro. 15.28. The heart of the Righteous Studieth to answer: but the Mouth of
the Wicked pours forth evil things.

FINIS.
THE TEXTS Vindicated.
ISa. 2.3, 4. Out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, and he shall judge among the Nations.

Psalm. 119. The word of the Lord.

Prove. 6.24. -- To keep thee from the evil woman.

Rev. 5.6. Seven Spirits of God.

2 Cor. 12.2. -- Caught up to the third Heaven.

Joh. 6.50, 51. This is the Bread which comes down from Heaven -- And the
Bread which I will give is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the
world.

Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that those thou have given me, be with me where I
am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me.

Jam. 5.9. Grudge not, lest ye be condemned. Behold, The Judge stands before
the door.

Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many: and unto them
that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto Salvation.

Act. 1.11. This same Jesus that is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so
come in like manner as you have seen him go into Heaven.

2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well
to take heed, etc.

1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.

1 Cor. 11.29. He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body.

1 Cor. 11.25. This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. c.
10.21. Ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table, and the Table of Devils.

1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye show the
Lord's Death till he come.

1 John 4.2, 3. Every Spirit that confesses Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh,
is of God. And every Spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh, is not of God. And this is that Spirit of Antichrist, etc.

Joh. 4.29. Come see a man which told me all things which ever I did.

1 Timothy 2.12. But I suffer not a Woman to Teach, etc.

1 Cor. 14.34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches; for it is not
permitted to them to speak: but etc.

Jer. 23.30, 31, 32. I am against the Prophets which steal my Word every one
from his neighbor; that say, He says; that Prophecy false Dreams, and cause
my people to err by their Lies, yet I sent them not. Therefore they shall not
profit this people at all.

Mat. 6.5. -- They love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners
of Streets, that they may be seen of men.

Mat. 23.6. And love uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and Chief-seats in the
Synagogues, and greetings in the Market, and to be called of Men Rabbi, Rabbi;
but be not ye called Rabbi, etc. neither be ye called Master, for one is your
Master, Christ.

Jer. 5.31. The Prophets Prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their
means.

Rev. 17.15. and 13.7. Power was given the Beast over all Kindreds and Tongues,
etc.

1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive.

Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers.

Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, etc.

Rev. 19.10. The Testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy.

Isa. 47.5. Sit in silence, etc.

Isa. 15.1. Kir of Moab is laid wast, and brought to silence.

Psalm. 31.18. Let the lying Lips be put to silence.

1 Cor. 13.8. Tongues shall cease.

Joh. 15.3. Now are ye clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.

2 Cor. 5.19. And has committed unto us the word of Reconciliation.

2 Cor. 3.6. Who has also made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit, etc.

Est. 6.2. Mordecay bowed not, etc.

1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all Men. Honor the King.

Lev. 19.15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shall not respect
the person of the Poor, nor Honor the person of the Mighty, etc.

Luke 15.21, 22. Master, we know thou say and teach rightly, neither
acceptest thou the person of any.

Jam. 2.2. Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus with respect of persons; for if
there come, etc.

Mat. 5.33, 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, etc.

Act. 7.38, 39. This is he which was in the wilderness.

Mat. 10.34. I came not to send Peace, but a Sword.

Joh. 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin. c.
12.46. I am come a Light into the world.

Mat. 28.19. -- Baptising them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Mark 16.16. He that Believes and is Baptized, shall be saved.

1 John 3.9. Whosoever is Born of God, does not commit sin.

Romans 14.7. Render to all their dues, Tribute, etc.

Rev. 11.7, 8. The Beast shall kill the two Witnesses, etc. c. 17.5. Mystery
Babylon, the Mother of Harlots. 2 These. 2.4. The Man of Sin sits in the
Temple of God.

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be Sold by Benjamin Harris, at the Stationers-Arms,
at the East End of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
Octavo and Twelves.
A Confession of Faith, put forth by the Elders and Brethren of many
Congregations of Christians (Baptized upon Profession of their Faith) in London
and the Country. Lately Published. Price 1 s. War with the Devil: Or, The
Young-Man's Conflict with the Powers of Darkness; discovering the Corruption
and Vanity of Youth, the horrible Nature of Sin: In a Dialogue: To which is
added, An Appendix, containing a Dialogue between an old Apostate, and a young
Professor. The Fifth Impression. price 1 s. The Second Part of the War with
the Devil: The Grand Impostor Discovered: or, The Quaker's Doctrine weighed in
the Balance, and found wanting; a Poem by way of Dialogue, wherein their chief
and most concerning Principles are laid down; And by the Authority of God's
Holy Word, thereby Refuted. price 10 d. Summons to the Grave: or, A Timely
preparation for Death; Demonstrated in a Sermon, Preached at the Funeral of
John Norcott, with two Elegies thereunto praefixt; price 8 d. All five written
by Benj. Keach, Minister of the Gospel.

The History of the Young Converted Gallant: or, Directions for the use of that
Divine Poem, War with the Devil; Here showing the Readers thereof, how to read
the same Poem right in these four Respects, etc. First, In reference to the
Substance or History thereof. 2 dly, In reference to the Intent or Mystery
thereof. 3 dly, In reference to the Consequent Doctrine thereof. 4 thly, In
reference to Practical Application thereof; Compiled in a Poem, by John Mason,
Gent. of Fordham in Cambridgshire. price 1 s. Blessed Rest for the Burdened
Sinner: or, The only Center of the Soul; wherein is discovered, 1. Who he is
that Invites and calls Sinners to this Rest. 2. The Encouragement to come unto
him for Rest. 3. Many Obstructions and Impediments which keep back sinners,
with their Unreasonableness answered. 4. The Rest that every one shall have
that comes unto Christ: Delivered in several Sermons; from Matthew 11.28. By
John Hopwood, Preacher of the Gospel. price 2 s.


