THE ORNITHOLOGY OF FRANCIS WILLUGHBY OF Middleton in the County of Warwick Esquire
Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY. In Three Books: Wherein All the BIRDS HITHER TO
KNOWN, Being reduced into a METHOD suitable to their Natures, are accurately
described. The Descriptions illustrated by most Elegant Figures, nearly
resembling the live BIRDS, Engraven in LXXVIII Copper Plates. Translated into
English, and enlarged with many Additions throughout the whole WORK.

To which are added, Three Considerable DISCOURSES, I. Of the Art of FOWLING:
With a Description of several NETS in two large Copper Plates. II. Of the
Ordering of SINGING BIRDS. III. Of FALCONRY.
BY JOHN RAY, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Psalm 104. 24. How manifold are thy works, O Lord? In wisdom have thou made
them all: The Earth is full of thy riches.

LONDON: Printed by A. C. for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society, at the
Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
WHo the Author of this History of Birds was, and why after so many Books of
this Subject already published we should attempt to set it forth, the Reader
may perchance desire some information and account, which we shall endeavor
briefly to give him. As for the Author the Title Page presents him with his
Name and Country. He was the only Son of Sir Francis Willughby Knight,
descended of two very ancient Families, both Willughbyes, the one Honorable,
viz. that of Eresby in Lincolnshire, by the Fathers side; the other Worshipful,
viz. that of Willughby on the Woulds in Notinghamshire, by the Mothers. His
Mother was the Lady Cassandra, Daughter to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Londonderry. He was moreover endowed with excellent gifts and abilities both
of body and mind, and blessed with a fair Estate. Howbeit, as he did duly prize
these advantages of Birth, Estate, and Parts, so did he not content himself
therewith, or value himself thereby, but labored after what might render him
more deservedly honorable, and more truly be called his own, as being obtained
by the concurrence at least of his endeavors. First then, as God had given him
a quick Apprehension, piercing Wit, and sound Judgment, so by his great
industry and constant use of these gifts he did highly improve and advance
them. He was from his Childhood addicted to study, and ever since he came to
the use of Reason so great a husband of his time, as not willingly to lose or
let slip unoccupied the least fragment of it, detesting no Vice more than
Idleness, which he looked upon as the Parent and Nurse of almost all others.
Nay, so excessive was he in the prosecution of his studies and other
employments without any intermission or diversion, that most of his Friends
were of opinion he did much weaken his body and impair his health by his
uncessant labors and perpetual intention of mind upon business. However that
be, hence it came to pass that he attained very good skill in all parts of
learning, and particularly got a deep insight into those Sciences which are
most abstruse and impervious to Vulgar Capacities, I mean the most subtle parts
of the Mathematics. Of his skill in Natural Philosophy, chiefly the History of
Animals, [Birds, Beasts, Fishes, and Insects,] I shall say no more at present,
but that it has not yet been my hap to meet with any man either in England or
beyond Seas of so general and comprehensive knowledge therein.

But secondly, what rendered him most commendable was his eminent Virtue and
Goodness. I cannot say that ever I observed such a confluence of excellent
qualities in one Person. For 1. Notwithstanding the forementioned advantages,
which are wont to puff up men's minds with pride, he was so truly humble, that I
have not known any man of the meanest fortune or birth exceed him in that
virtue. He despised no man for his Poverty or mean Parentage; honored all men,
was affable to the meanest, not preferring himself before others, but
condescending to them of low degree. 2. He was so resolutely sober and
temperate, that neither the importunity of company or pleasure of sense could
ever tempt him to excess. 3. Of that exemplary chastity and purity, that his
life condemns the dissoluteness and corrupt practices of the present Age, and
demonstrates the possibility of restraining and regulating those motions and
desires, which of all others are wont to be most violent and inordinate. 4. So
scrupulously just and righteous, that he had rather a great deal suffer wrong
than do any. 5. So true to his word and promise, that a man might safely
venture his Estate and Life too upon it: His word being, as an honest man's is
said to be, as good as his Bond. 6. So faithful and constant to his Friend in
all conditions, as well adverse as prosperous, that one might be secure of him,
and confident of his help and assistance, whatever distress or calamity might
befall one: He never deserting any man only because fortune frowned upon him,
as the common sort of Friends are wont to do. 7. He was of so diffuse and
comprehensive Charity, that he could heartily affect and embrace good men of
all persuasions; Good men, I say, to exclude such opinions as are destructive
of, or inconsistent with true goodness.

To these I might add his Patience and Submission to the Divine Will, which did
eminently appear in the time of his sickness, when he professed himself
contented to leave the world, if it pleased God to have it so, though then in
the height of his strength and parts, and in the hot pursuit of useful studies
and designs, and in such circumstances, as to his private affairs and concerns
in the world, as rendered some continuance of life very desirable to him, and
would have tempted a man of ordinary virtue to express some anger and
discontent at the sentence and expectation of death. And lastly, his due fear
and reverence of the Deity, deep sense of his goodness, and thankfulness for
the same, sincere Piety in all his carriage toward him, and great abhorrency of
whatever tended to his dishonor.

Thus much, though less pertinent to the Argument of this present Work, I
thought fit to premise concerning his Virtues, partly to do him right by
procuring him the honor due to his memory: And partly to provoke young
Gentlemen of this Nation, by the proposal of so illustrious an example of their
own Rank, to prosecute the study of ingenuous Literature, and aspire to true
honor by the constant exercise of Virtue.

I proceed now to give an account of this Work, and acquaint the Reader with
the occasion of his attempting it, and what progress he made in it. Observing
in this busy and inquisitive Age the History of Animals alone to have been in
a great measure neglected by English men (for that since Turner and Mouffet
none that I know of has performed any thing therein worthy of commendation) he
made the study thereof his Province, applying himself with all diligence to the
cultivating and illustrating of it. Which that he might the more effectually
do, he not only read what had been written by others, but did himself
accurately describe all the Animals he could find or procure either in England
or beyond the Seas, making a Voyage into foreign Countries chiefly for that
purpose, to search out, view and describe the several Species of Nature. And
though he was not long abroad, yet traveled he over a great part of France,
Spain, Italy, Germany, and the Low Countries. In all which places he was so
inquisitive and successful, that not many sorts of Animals described by others
escaped his diligence. For my part I know no man who has seen more Species,
been more exact in noting their differences, and inventing Characteristic Marks
whereby they may be certainly distinguished; or more curious in dissecting
them, and observing the make and constitution of their parts as well internal
as external. Howbeit I do not deny but some have been more accurate in
anatomizing one or two particular Animals. The reason of this his diligence
was, because he observed that some of the descriptions of former Writers of
this kind, either by reason of their brevity, or because they contained only
general notes, were very obscure, and gave occasion to many errors and
mistakes, but chiefly unnecessary multiplications of Species; the Readers often
mistaking several descriptions of the same Animal, which they meet with in
diverse Authors, by reason of their generality and obscurity, for so many
descriptions of several Animals. Now that he might clear up all these
obscurities, and render the knowledge and distinction of Species facile to all
that should come after, he bent his endeavors mainly to find out (as I before
intimated) certain Characteristic notes of each kind. But if in any kind no
singular mark occurred whereby it might be certainly distinguished from all
others, he did minutely and exactly describe all its parts, that at least a
Collection of many accidents, which all together could not be found in any
Species else of the same kind, might serve for a Characteristic: That the
Reader should not by a general and ambiguous description be left in suspense,
or incur the danger of error. But because a prolix and operose description is
tedious to most Readers, and to the unattentive seems rather to obscure than
illustrate the thing described, to relieve and gratify such, besides the
description he often adds some short notes, by which the Animal described may
be distinguished from others of the same kind like to it, and wherewith it is
in danger to be confounded. Now though I cannot but commend his diligence, yet
I must confess that in describing the colors of each single feather he
sometimes seems to me to be too scrupulous and particular, partly because
Nature does not in all Individuals, (perhaps not in any two) observe exactly
the same spots or strokes, partly because it is very difficult so to word
descriptions of this sort as to render them intelligible: Yet dared I not to
omit or alter any thing.

But to proceed, our Author having made so good progress in this Work, that few
of our Europaean Animals described by others had escaped his view; that he
might (as far as in him lay) perfect the History of Animals, he designed a
Voyage into the New World, but lived not to undertake it. For about the
beginning of June, in the year 1672, being seized with a Pleurisy, which
terminated in that kind of Fever Physicians call Catarrhalis within less than a
month after he took his bed, on the third of July in the thirty seventh year of
his Age he departed this life to the immense grief of his Friends and all good
men that knew him, and the great loss of the Commonwealth in general.

Viewing his Manuscripts after his Death, I found the several Animals in every
kind both Birds, Beasts, Fishes, and Insects digested into a Method of his own
contriving, but few of their Descriptions and Histories so full and perfect as
he intended them; Which he was so sensible of, that when I asked him upon his
deathbed, whether it was his pleasure they should be published, he answered,
that he did not desire it, nor thought them so considerable as to deserve it,
or somewhat to that purpose, for the very words I do not well remember, though
he confessed there were in them some new and pretty observations about Insects.
But, considering that the publication of them might conduce somewhat 1. To the
illustration of Gods glory, by exciting men to take notice of, and admire his
infinite power and wisdom displaying themselves in the Creation of so many
Species of Animals; And 2. To the assistance and ease of those who addict
themselves to this most pleasant, and no less useful part of Philosophy; And 3.
Also to the honor of our Nation, in making it appear that no part of real
knowledge is wholly balked and neglected by us, (he not contradicting) I
resolved to publish them, and first took in hand the Ornithology.

As for the scope and design of this undertaking, it was neither the Authors,
nor is it my intention to write Pandects of Birds, which should comprise
whatever had been before written of them by others, whether true, false or
dubious, that having already been abundantly performed by Gesner and
Aldrovandus, nor to contract and Epitomize their large and bulky Volumes; lest
we should tempt Students to gratify their sloth so far as to take up with such
Epitomes, and neglect the reading of the Authors themselves at large, which
would be much more satisfactory and improving: and besides, this were but actum
agere, such Epitomes being already made by Johnston: But our main design was to
illustrate the History of Birds, which is (as we said before of Animals in
general) in many particulars confused and obscrue, by so accutately describing
each kind, and observing their Characteristic and distinctive notes, that the
Reader might be sure of our meaning, and upon comparing and Bird with our
description not fail of discerning whether it be the described or no. Nor will
it be difficult to find out any unknown Bird that shall be offered: For
comparing it with the Tables first, the Characteristic notes of the genus's
from the highest or first downward will easily guide him to the lowest genus;
among the Species whereof, being not many, by comparing it also with the
several descriptions the Bird may soon be found. This then being our design,
that we might surely effect it, we did not as some before us have done, only
transcribe other men's descriptions, but we our selves did carefully describe
each Bird from the view and inspection of it lying before us. That this
diligence was not superfluous or without effect will appear in that we have
thereby cleared many difficulties, and rectified many mistakes in the Writings
of Gesner and Aldrovandus. If it be asked, what caused these great Authors to
mistake? I answer, short and general descriptions of Birds of the same Species
under different Titles, either sent them by their Correspondents in several
parts, or found in Books. Hence their mistakes are especially in the
multiplying of Species, and making two or three sorts of one. This is easy to
observe in reading of their Works. For their own descriptions of such Birds as
themselves saw, are for the most very accurate and full, but those communicated
by others are of a different stamp, as being composed by men not well versed in
describing of Animals, containing only a few general and ambiguous notes, so
that one description will fit diverse Species, or two or three descriptions suit
one and the same; which must needs occasion such mistakes as we mentioned of
repeating the same Bird two or three times for different kinds, under diverse
Titles. Many such errors occur in Aldrovand, which the Reader shall find noted
in this Work, and some also in Gesner, notwithstanding his great skill and
circumspection. Yet do we not pretend to have discovered and rectified all the
mistakes and errors in these Authors: There remain yet sundry descriptions of
this nature, which we are doubtful of whether they be of Birds specifically
distinct or no: Nor do we see any means left to resolve our selves, unless
perchance by traveling to those places whence such descriptions and titles
were sent, where we might probably learn what Birds the Inhabitants understand
by those names.

Having acquainted the Reader with our principal aim in this Work, which was to
give certain Characteristic notes of the several kinds, accurately to describe
each Species, and to reduce all to their proper Classes or Genera: We shall
further add, that we have wholly omitted what we find in other Authors
concerning Homonymous and Synonymous words, or the diverse names of Birds,
Hieroglyphics, Emblems, Morals, Fables, Presages, or ought else appertaining to
Divinity, Ethics, Grammar, or any sort of Humane Learning: And present him only
with what properly relates to their Natural History. Neither have we scraped
together whatever of this nature is any where extant, but have used choice, and
inserted only such particulars as our selves can warrant upon our own knowledge
and experience, or whereof we have assurance by the testimony of good Authors,
or sufficient Witnesses. And, because what is straight does both manifest it
self, and also discover what is crooked, we contented our selves to put down
only what we approve, not thinking it necessary to spend time in confuting the
contrary error.

Concerning the names of Birds we did not much trouble our selves, there having
been disputing enough about them long ago; but have for the most part followed
Gesner and Aldrovandus, being unwilling to disturb what is settled, or
dispossess Names, that may for their use now plead prescription. For to what
purpose is it eternally to wrangle about things, which certainly to determine
is either absolutely impossible, or next door to it? Especially seeing if by
immense labor it might at last be found out, by what Names every Species was
known to the Ancients, the advantage that would thence accrue would not
countervail the pains. About the Phrase and Style we were not very solicitous,
taking greater care to render the Sense perspicuous than the Language ornate.

But because Mr. Willughby (though sparing neither pains nor cost) could not
procure, and consequently did not describe all sorts of Birds; to perfect the
Work, I have added the Descriptions and Histories of those that were wanting,
out of Gesner, Aldrovandus, Bellonius, Marggravius, Clusius, Hernandez,
Bontius, Wormius, and Piso; disposing each kind, as near as I could, in its
proper place.

Now because elegant and accurate Figures do much illustrate and facilitate the
understanding of Descriptions, in order to the Engraving such Figures for this
Work, Mr. Willughby made a Collection of as many Pictures drawn in colors by
the life as he could procure. First, He purchased of one Leonard Baltner, a
Fisherman of Strasburgh, a Volume containing the Pictures of all the Waterfowl
frequenting the Rhene near that City, as also all the Fish and Water-Insects
found there, drawn with great curiosity and exactness by an excellent hand. The
which Fowl, Fishes, and Insects the said Baltner had himself taken, described,
and at his own proper costs and charges caused to be drawn. Which curiosity is
much to be admired and commended in a Person of his Condition and Education.
For my part, I must needs acknowledge that I have received much light and
information from the Work of this poor man, and have been thereby enabled to
clear many difficulties, and rectify some mistakes in Gesner. Secondly, At
Nurenberg in Germany he bought a large Volume of Pictures of Birds drawn in
colors. Thirdly, He caused diverse Species, as well seen in England as beyond
the Seas, to be drawn by good Artists. Besides what he left, the deservedly
famous Sir Thomas Brown, Professor of Physic in the City of Norwich, frankly
communicated the Draughts of several rare Birds, with some brief notes and
descriptions of them. Out of these, and the Printed Figures of Aldrovandus, and
Pet. Olina, an Italian Author, we culled out those we thought most natural, and
resembling the life, for the Gravers to imitate, adding also all but one or two
of Marggravius's, and some out of Clusius his Exotics, Piso his Natural History
of the West Indies, and Bontius his of the East.

The Gravers we employed, though they were very good Workmen, yet in many
Sculps they have not satisfied me. For I being at a great distance from London,
and all advices and directions necessarily passing by Letter, sometimes through
haste mistook in my directions, sometimes through weariness and impatience of
long Writing sent not so clear and full instructions as was requisite; and they
as often neglected their instructions, or mistook my meaning. Notwithstanding
the Figures, such as they are, take them all together, they are the best and
truest, that is, most like the live Birds, of any hitherto engraven in Brass.

It is requisite now that we inform the Reader what compendious ways we sought
to avoid unnecessary expenses in graving of Figures. 1. Of the same Species of
Bird when more Figures than one occurred either in diverse Authors, or our own
Papers, or both, we caused only one, which we judged to be the best to be
engraven. 2. We have for the most part contented our selves with the figure of
one Sex only, and that the Male. 3. We have omitted all such dubious Icons as
we knew not whether they were of true birds or not, or could not certainly
determine of what Species they were. 4. Of such as differ only in bigness, or
if otherwise in such accidents as cannot be expressed in Sculpture, we have
given only the Figure of the greater. Of this kind are the greater and lesser
Curlew, the common Snipe, and Jack-Snipe, or Judcock. And yet some Birds we
have caused to be graven twice when the first time the Gravers mist their aim,
and shot too wide of their mark: Such are the red-leg'd Partridge, The common
Swallow, the Swift, the common Blackbird, the House-Dove, the Royston Crow, the
Witwall, and the Dottrel. I might add hereto the Canada Goose in the seventieth
Plate, for I now persuade my self that the Bird graven in Plate 71. is the same
with it. The Sheldrake was through mistake twice figured in Plates 70. and 71.
so was the Auk or Rozor-bill in Plates 64. and 65. The figures of the Rock
Ouzel, Bittern, and Stone-Curlew first graven, though they were passable
enough, yet having afterward gotten very exact Figures of those Birds, we
caused them also to be Engraven.

The whole Work we have divided into three Books. In the first we treat of
Birds in general; in the second of Land-fowl; in the third of Waterfowl. The
second Book we have divided into two parts: The first whereof contains Birds of
crooked Beak and Talons; The second, such whose Bills and Claws are more
straight. The third Book is tripartite: The first part takes in all Birds that
wade in the waters, or frequent watery places, but swim not; The second, such
as are of a middle nature between swimmers and waders, or rather that partake
of both kinds, some whereof are cloven-footed, and yet swim; others
whole-footed, but yet very long-leg'd like the waders: The third is of
whole-footed, or fin-toed Birds, that swim in the water.

As for fabulous Birds, such as are confessedly so, viz. Phenixes, Griffins,
Harpyes, Ruk, and the like, I have omitted them, as being no part of our
subject, and all that can be said of them having been more than once written
already. I have also omitted some that I only suspected for fictitious, as the
Scythian Bird, the Aquila Heteropus, etc. Yet because I would not rely too much
upon my own judgment, I have put in the Appendix the descriptions of some of
that nature out of Hernandez, which I refer to the Readers censure.

It remains that I make a grateful mention of such of our learned and worthy
Friends, as have given us any considerable information or assistance; as well
to do them right, as to acquaint the Reader whom we mean by some names recorded
in this Work. Those were Sir Thomas Brown of Norwich before remembered: Francis
Jessop Esquire of Broom-hall in Sheffield Parish, Yorkshire, who sent us the
Descriptions and Cases of many rare Birds, and discovered and gave us notice of
many Species thereabout, which we knew not before to be native of England: Sir
Philip Skippon of Wrentham near Bliborough in the County of Suffolk, Knight,
who communicated the Pictures of several Birds we wanted: And Mr. Ralph Johnson
of Brignal near Greta Bridge in Yorkshire, a Person of singular skill in
Zoology, especially the History of Birds, who besides the Descriptions and
Pictures of diverse uncommon, and some undescribed both Land and Waterfowl,
communicated to us his Method of Birds, whereby we were in some particulars
informed, in many others confirmed, his judgment concurring with ours in the
divisions and Characteristic notes of the Genera.

Thus much may suffice to have spoken by way of Preface of the Work in general.

It may now be expected that I give some account of the English Translation.
But I have not much to say concerning it; I shall only acquaint the Reader what
I have therein amended, and what I have thereto added.

First, The errors and mistakes which since this Work was published I have
discovered, and in the Translation noted or corrected are these. The first
mistake is in the placing of the Toucan, falsely called the Brasilian Pie, among
the Birds of the Pie-kind: It properly belonging to the Woodpecker Tribe, as
having a like disposition of Toes, two standing forward, and two backward, and
in like manner hewing a hole in a Tree to build its Nest in. This I did before
suspect, but am now assured of by an exact description of this Bird I met with
in Jo. Faber his Explications of some American Animals of Recchus. 2. In making
Bellonius his greater red-leg'd Partridge or Greek Partridge to be a different
kind from the common red-leg'd Partridge, which upon diligent comparing the
Descriptions and Histories, I find to be the same with it. 3. In putting down
the Fringilla spuria cum calcari Alaudae, Page 188. for a distinct Species from
the precedent Bird, entitled Montifringilla major, or the great Brambling. This
mistake was committed by mere accident, and forgetfulness. 4. In the conjecture
that the Larus Maximus, described page 261. was the Skua of Hoierus, whereas I
find that our Catarractes, described page 265. is his Skua, the descriptions
exactly agreeing. 5. In putting down the Bird entitled, Anas fera capite
subruffo minor for a distinct Species, whereas I am now assured by our Fowlers,
that it is the Hen Golden-eye. I do also suspect the Anas fera capite subruffo
major, described for a distinct kind in page 282. to have been no other than a
Young Cock -Golden-eye, that had not moulted his Chicken-feathers. 6. In
placing the Anas fera fusca or Pochard. And 7. the Havelda of Wormius among the
River or Plash-Ducks, whereas they belong to the Sea-kind. 8. In making the
Bird described, page 289. under the title of Phascas fortasse Gesnero, to be a
distinct Species, which I find by comparing the Birds themselves to be a
Hen-Wigeon. Besides these, I find remaining still to be corrected, 1. A mistake
about the situation of the blind-guts in Birds: For they do not descend from
the stomach downwards, but ascend from the intestinum rectum upwards, being as
it were two branches of the intestinum rectum, and so in that respect differ
not from the Blind-guts of Quadrupeds, as is affirmed page 7. 2. Among the
Birds that want the back-toe, enumerated, page 3. the Dottrel is omitted. 3. I
am now persuaded that the Stella Avis of Aldrovandus is a different kind from
the Bustard, and that the Bird we saw in the Market at Modena was this Stella,
for to my best remembrance it was much less than a Bustard, and therefore I
revoke what was said in contradiction to Aldrovandus his affirmation, that the
Bustard is a stranger to Italy: But it is very likely that this Stella Avis is
the same with the Anas Campestris of Bellonius. Besides these the Reader shall
find corrected those oversights and errors noted in the (...) in the Latin,
and others which I cannot now call to mind.

Secondly, For additions there are so many throughout the whole Work that it
would be too tedious to enumerate them, I shall only mention the three
principal and most considerable, which might pass for just Tractates on those
Subjects.

1. An Epitome of the Art of Fowling, collected partly out of Olina's
Uccelleria, written in Italian, but chiefly out of Gervase Markham's Book,
entitled, Hungers prevention, or the Art of Fowling; something also being added
out of a late English Book, entitled, An Epitome of the Art of Husbandry, the
Author whereof was pleased to conceal his name.

2. An Idea of Falconry, being an abridgement of the Authors long since
Englished and put together by Turbervile; and of our own late and best approved
Writer Latham, with something out of Aldrovandus.

3. Directions for the ordering of Singing Birds contracted, out of the
forementioned Epitome of the Art of Husbandry, Olina's Uccelleria, and
Aldrovandus. In all which Discourses I have corrected some mistakes in my
Authors, illustrated what was obscure, and intermingled some observations of my
own. Here by the by I cannot but reflect upon the Author of a late English
Book, entitled, The Gentleman's Recreation. For having had occasion to examine
and compare Books upon these Subjects, I find that all that he has
considerable concerning Fowling is taken out of the forementioned Book of
Markham, and yet has he not to my remembrance made any mention of his Author:
What he has of Hawking is likewise an Epitome of Turberviles Collections, with
some addition out of Lathams Falconry, without acknowledgment that all was
borrowed. I doubt not but I could have traced him in his other Discourses of
Hunting and Fishing, had I had leisure or will to compare his Book with
Turberviles, Waltons, and other Treatises of those Subjects. I do not blame him
for Epitomizing, but for suppressing his Authors names, and publishing their
Works as his own, insomuch that not only the Vulgar, but even Learned men have
been deceived by him, so that they have looked upon him as a considerable
Writer, of extraordinary skill in such Arts and Exercises, and one that had
advanced and improved them. By the way therefore it may not be amiss to caution
Learned men that they be not too hasty nor lavish in their public commendations
of new Books before they have taken the pains to compare them with former
Treatises on those Subjects, lest they render themselves ridiculous by
publishing those for advancers of knowledge, who are indeed mere Plagiaries and
Compilers of other men's Works.

I might have added a censure of the flesh of Birds in reference to wholsomness
in Diet, but that is done in the particular Species, and by many Authors in the
Dietical part of their Institutions of Physic; only in general we have taken
notice, 1. In Land-fowl, that the flesh of no Carnivorous Bird is good meat,
neither of the Rapacious kind that touch no Vegetables; nor yet of the
Crow-kind, which feed promiscuously upon Flesh, and Fruits, or Seeds. 2. That
the flesh of such birds as feed only upon Insects is not approved good meat,
for example, Woodpeckers and Swallows. As for small Birds of slender Bills that
are reputed good, they feed as well upon Fruits and Berries as upon Insects,
though it may be chiefly upon Insects; but they are best when they feed upon
Fruits, as the Beccafigo in Fig-time, 3. The Birds that feed upon Gram and
Seeds only, (if any such) or upon Fruits, or Seeds, and Insects, as the
Poultry-kind, are the best of all. 4. Of Waterfowl, such as feed only or
chiefly upon Fish are not good meat; Yet the Young of some of these are
approved as a delicacy, though I scarce think very wholesome: Such are young
Soland-Geese, Puffins, Pewets, and Herons. Besides these, all Waterfowl,
though feeding only upon Insects, are esteemed good to eat, and admitted to our
Tables: The most delicate of these are those we have termed Mudsuckers, that
with their long Nebs thrust into the Earth suck out of the Mud or Ouze a fatty
juice, by which they are nourished.

Two or three Observations communicated by Mr. Martin Lister of York, my
honored Friend, being through forgetfulness omitted in their proper places in
the Book, I shall thrust into this Preface. 1. The Curruca or Hedg-Sparrow lays
Seagreen or pale-blue Eggs, which neatly emptied and wired I have seen fair
Ladies wear at their Ears for Pendants. 2. One and the same Swallow I have
known by the subtracting daily of her Eggs to have laid nineteen successively,
and then to have given over. 3. The Bunting breaks not Oats, but hulls them
most dexterously, as I observe, having of them by me at this present in Cages.
4. The Robin-red-breast will not touch a hairy Caterpillar, but will gladly eat
any smooth one that I have given him; and there is no better way speedily to
tame and make wild Birds sing than to give them a pleasing Insect or two daily.
5. Neither slender nor thick-bill'd Birds but will gladly eat Spiders, as I
have experienced in some.

I have no more to add, but only to advertise the Reader, that by the breadth
of a Bird we understand the distance between the tips of the Wings extended; by
the flag-feathers, or beam-feathers, or quil-feathers, or prime feathers, or
sails of the Wing, we mean those of the first row. That when we say from Bill
to Tail, we mean from Bill-point to Tail-end: That for brevities sake, and want
of English words, I was in this Translation often forced to use Latin, as for
the circle about the Pupil of the Eye, Iris, and in the Plural, Irides; for the
liminary stomach described page 8. Echinus, and some others: And so I bid him

Farewell.
Errata.
PAge 13. line 10. for or read as. 22. 61. Witwall. 38. 14. Glass. 46. 50. for
the read to. 58. 6. after called add by the. 64. 18. Oripelargus. 65. 4. Cloak.
66. 39. after several add sorts. 94. 56. Pauwius. 109. 32. unusual. 129. 27.
after head put in of. 135. 26. lower. 137. 20. down. 143. 43. for of read to.
153. 32. wallowish. 159. 32. gate. 201. 9. Line. 203. Birds. 233. 22. dele the
rest their lower. 252. 36. after says add being. 254. 39. seven or eight. 256.
17. cinereous. 257. 16. after lower add joint. 260. 17. six or seven. 270. 11.
tooth. 294. 17. eight or nine. 308. 8. Eggs. 311. 38. Aberdovey. 332. 27. for
small read broad. 337. 45. for yard read foot. 369. 18. Schellent. 378. 22.
Anas. 379. 2. Ipecati apoa. 385. 41. for White read Yolk.

Fill up the blank page 40, line 12 with these words, (Tab. 2. Fig. 7.) That,
page 46. line 45 with these (9. Tab. 2.) Page 369. line 25. blot out
thesewords, In the lesser rows of covertfeathers is also a great spot of white.
Page 374. this Figure is omitted. The Birds marked with an Asterisc are such as
we our selves saw not, nor described, but borrowed their descriptions of
others. But others there are besides which ought to have been marked, viz.
Bontius his Indian Raven, page 126. Toucan 128. Jaguacati guacu 147. The Dodo
153. Mitu 158. Pauxi 160. Mituporang Ibid. Jacupema 165. Jambu 167. Damascus
Partridge Ibid. Indian Quail 171. Canne-petiere 179. Attinga guacu mucu 198.
Calandra 208. Giarola 209. All the Birds described page 210, 211. Humming birds
230. though we have often seen many sorts of these. Wood Titmouse 243.
Aldrovands first Yellowhammer 269. Cariama 276. Anhima Ibid. Aldrovands third
ash-colored Heron 278. Squaiotta 281. The other green-footed Water-hen 313.
Another green-footed Waterhen of Bellonius 314. All the Water-hens described
page 317, 318. The Penguin 322. Greater crested Doucker of Aldrovand 339.
Water-hare or crested Mexican Doucker Ibid. The sharp tail'd Island-Duck of
Wormius 364. Ipeca guacu 383.

Some other literal faults or omissions, and errors in pointing there are,
which because they are obvious and easy to be corrected, and cannot likely
occasion any doubt or mistake, I have not here put down, lest I should seem too
much to distrust either the Readers judgment, or his ingenuity. For my part, I
can easily pardon so few faults of the Printers as I have observed in this
Work, especially being printed from a Manuscript; as knowing by experience how
difficult a thing it is for the most quick-sighted, circumspect and diligent
Corrector that is, to espy all the faults that the Compositors will commit,
even in one sheet of Paper, at once or twice reading over.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ORNITHOLOGY OF FRANCIS WILLUGHBY Esquire
Of Birds in general.
CHAP. I. Of the external parts of Birds.
WE do not intend to treat of all the parts of Birds, but of those only which
are either proper to this kind, or if common to other Animals, have in Birds
something peculiar in their shape, size, temper, use, or some other remarkable
accident.

1. All Birds in general, without exception of any, want Teeth, in stead
whereof they are furnished with a Bill of a The Bill and its uses.
horny substance. By Teeth we understand Teeth properly so called, viz. such as
are distinct and separable from the Mandibles. For in some Birds, as for
example Diverse, the Bills themselves are toothed or indented after the manner
of a Saw. The Bill in Birds has two principal uses; the one as an instrument
to gather and receive their food; the other as a weapon to fight with, either
by assaulting others, or defending and revenging themselves. These, I say, are
the principal uses, besides which it serves them also for other purposes, to
wit, building their Nests, feeding their Young, preening their Feathers, and
some for climbing, as the Parrot and Shell-apple.

2. In all Birds, except Nocturnal ones, the head is smaller and bears less
proportion The Head.
to the body than in Quadrupeds, that it may more readily divide the Air in
flying, and making way for the body render its passage more easy.

3. In Birds and Fishes the eyes are more flat and depressed than in
Quadrupeds. The Eyes.
A circle of small plates of bone placed scalewise under the outward coat
[tunica sclerodes] where the processus ciliares are, encompasses the pupil of
each eye in Birds, to strengthen the eyes, and defend them from injuries.
Moreover most, if not all Birds, have a Membrane for Nictation, called in
Latin Periophthalmium, wherewithal Membrane fornictation.
they can at their pleasure cover their Eyes, though their eyelids be open.
This has its rise from the greater or more obtuse corner of the Eye, and
serves to wipe, cleanse, and perchance moisten the Supersicies of it. This
Membrane is not proper to Birds only, but common with them to many Quadrupeds.
Of the General. of Animals Exer. 18.
Dr. Harvey, treating of the Eyes of Birds has this observation: The Eyes of
Birds (says he) never contract themselves to that proportion which is between
the eye and head of a viviparous Animal. For if in Hens or other Birds you take
off the skin covering the eyes, you shall find that either of them will at
least equal the whole bulk of the brain: But in a Woodcock, and the like,
either eye is greater than all the rest of the head, setting aside the Bill. In
general the orbit or cavity containing the eye in all Birds exceeds the brain
it self, as may be seen in their skull. Their eyes indeed outwardly appear but
small, because excepting the pupils they are wholly covered with skin and
feathers. In our observation the cavity containing the brain is greater than
the orbit of either eye in many, not to say all, Birds.

4. All Birds want the external ear, standing out from the head. For though
there The Ear.
is a sort of Owl called in Latin Noctua aurita, or the eared Owl, yet has it
not ears properly so called, but only feathers sticking out on each side the
head, somewhat resembling Ears or Horns, and is therefore called also the
Horn-Owl. I suppose the feathers encompassing the Ear-holes in Birds supply the
defect of the exterior Ear. In most sorts the Ear-holes are open and uncovered;
but in all nocturnal, and some diurnal rapacious Birds provided with covers.

5. The Bridle of the mouth, or the Membrane connecting the Mandibles at each
The Bridle of the mouth.
corner, either falls inward when the mouth is shut, as in most Birds, or
outward, as in Larks. By the softness, color, and thickness of this part young
birds may be distinguished from old ones.

6. All Birds want the i. e: The cover of the Windpipe.
Epiglottis; whence it is manifest, that part is not at all necessary The
Epiglottis.
to the modulation or articulation of the voice; seeing many Birds can tune and
modulate their voice most melodiously, and some also speak articulately,
notwithstanding they want it. The cranny in the top of the The head of the
Windpipe.
Larynx, through which the Air passes to and fro in respiration, lies directly
under the fissure or cleft of the Palate, or the hole which leads to the
Nosthrils.

7. Such Birds as have long Legs, have also a long Neck; for that otherwise
they The Neck.
could not commodiously gather up their food, either on Land, or in the water.
But on the other side, those which have long Necks have not always long Legs,
as appears in Swans, Geese, and other Waterfowl; whose Necks serve them to
reach to the bottoms of Rivers, Lakes, and Pools of water, to fetch up thence,
Snails, Whilks, Insects, Seeds, and Herbs, while their bodies swim on the
Surface of the water.

8. All Birds, instead of Channel-bones [Claviculae] wherewith many Quadrupeds
are furnished, have a bone which we in English commonly call the Merrythought
The Merrythought.
[furcula.]

9. All Birds whatsoever have Wings, or rudiments of Wings; which answer to the
forelegs in Quadrupeds. Among Land-fowl the Ostrich, Cassowary, and Dodo; The
Wings.
among Waterfowl the Penguin have wings altogether useless and unfit for
flight. Those especially of the Cassowary are so very little and next to none,
that I cannot imagine what use they should be of to her. As for the Ostrich,
her Wings extended and agitated assist her in running, being like Sails to a
Ship. Insects indeed have Wings, and so have Bats, but of a different kind from
those of Birds; the former Membranaceous, the latter Cutaneous: Only Birds have
Wings made up of Feathers. All Birds toward the extremity of their Wings have a
certain finger-like Appendix, which wear wont to call the Secundary or Bastard
Wing: It is made up of four or five small feathers. Besides this under the
wing, or on the inside of the Wing, some Birds, especially The exterior
Bastard Wing.
Waterfowl, have a row of feathers growing, which we call the Interior
bastard wing; which in most Birds is white of color. The interior Bastard
wing.


10. All Birds are two-leg'd, which is common to them with man; who is
therefore defined by Plato, Animal implume bipes, a two-legg'd Animal without
feathers, to The Legs and Feet.
distinguish him from Birds. But this definition being rendered ridiculous by
Diogenes, turning loose a Cock with his feathers plucked off, and crying Ecce
hominem Platonicum, See Plato's man: To mend the matter and secure the
definition from cavil and derision, they added to it (...), with broad nails,
thinking that thereby they had perfectly excluded all Birds; whereas had
Diogenes been well skilled in the History of Birds, he might have soon fitted
himself with a Bird to pluck, that should have answered their reformed
definition, as well as a Cock did their original, viz. a Didapper or Loon, and
also a Stork, that having broad nails as well as man. But to leave that, and
return to the matter in hand; some Swallows indeed are called Footless.
Apodes, not because they do altogether want feet and legs, but because they
have very short, little, and infirm ones. These by reason of the length of
their wings and shortness of their legs, if they happen to fall on the ground,
can hardly raise themselves again. But that the Birds of Paradise, so called,
should want feet, as was not long since generally believed, Birds of Paradise.
not only by the Vulgar, but also by the greatest Naturalists themselves, even
such as were most conversant in the History of Animals, because those brought
out of the Indies were wont to be mutilated and bereaved of their feet, is now
sufficiently convinced to be false by the testimony of eyewitnesses, and by
the Birds themselves brought overintire, so that no man in his right wits can
any longer doubt of that matter.

11. Most Birds have four Toes in each foot, three standing forwards, and one
The Toes.
backwards. Some few have only three, all standing forwards, for these want the
back-toe. Such are among the Birds hitherto known, 1. The Cassowary or Emeu;
What Birds want the back-toe.
2. The Bustard; 3. The Stone Curlew or Oedicnemus of Bellonius; 4. If it be
distinct from the precedent, the Bird called Stella by Aldrovandus; 5. The Anas
Campestris of Bellonius; 6. The Sea-Pie or Haematopus of Bellonius; 7. The
Himantopus of Pliny; 8. The Green Plover; 9. The Sea-Lark, called Charadrius by
Aldrovandus; 10. The Sanderling. And of whole-footed Fowl, 11. The Penguin; 12.
The Coulterneb, Pope or Mullet, i. e. Anas Arctica Clus. 13. The Auk, or
Razor-bill; 14. The Guillemot or Sea-hen; 15. The Mergus of Bellonius, if it be
a different Bird from the Auk, which we doubt of; And lastly, The Greenland
Dove. The Ostrich only has but two Toes: Yet Marggravius gives three to the
Brasilian Ostrich. More than four toes in each foot (whatever the Ancients
report of the Porphyrio) Nature has bestowed on no sort of Bird, unless you
take the Spur in the Poultry kind for a Toe. Of those which have four Toes, the
most have them standing three forward, The situation of the Toes.
and one backward; some have two forward, and two backward, as the Cuckoo, all
sorts of Parrots are rather of the third sort, that can move one Toe either way.
Parrots and Wood-peckers, etc. Some have two forward, one backward, and a
fourth movable outward, so far as to make a right Angle with the middle Toe, as
the bald Buzzard, and perchance some other Birds of prey, and all Owls. And
lastly, some have all four standing forward, as the Swift. Those which want the
back-toe never sit upon Trees. The middle-toe and Leg-bone in most Birds are of
equal length. In some whole-footed Birds the inmost Toe has an external welt
or border of skin all along the length of it, of a good breadth; but never the
outmost.

12. In all Birds that have four Toes, excepting only the black Martin or
Swift; The bones of the Toes.
the back-toe has but one bone, the outmost of the fore-toes two, the
middlemost three, and the inmost four. Which order, so constantly observed by
Nature, has not as yet been taken notice of by any Naturalist, that I know. Of
all the Birds (as I said) that we have as yet taken notice of, the Black Martin
is only to be excepted, whose feet are of a singular make, and different from
those of other Birds as shall be shown in its History. The hinder-toe, in those
Birds which have it, is situate on the inner side of the foot, supplying the
place and use of a Thumb. The Claw or Talon of the hind-toe, at least in
Land-fowl, is the greatest and strongest of all. In those Birds that have but
one back-toe, the outmost of the fore-toes for some space from the bottom is
joined to the middle toe, that it may not fall backward, nor so much as run
outward, [in most Birds, not in all.] This conjunction is either immediate by
cohaesion, or mediate by an intervening Membrane.

13. All Birds that we have yet seen and examined, even such as want a Tail,
have The Rump and its Glandules.
a Rump. Upon the Rump grow two Glandules, designed for the preparation and
secretion of a certain unctuous humor, and furnished with a hole or excretory
Vessel. About this hole grows a tuft of small feathers or hairs, somewhat like
to a Painters Pencil. When therefore the parts of the feathers are shattered,
ruffled, or any way discomposed, the Bird, turning her head backward to her
rump, with her Bill catches hold of the forenamed tuft, and pressing the
Glandules, forces out the oily pap, and therewithal anointing the disjoined
parts of the feathers, and drawing them out with her bill, recomposes and
places them in due order, and causes them to stick faster together. But here we
are to take notice, that the Glandules of the Rump are lesser in those Birds
that want Tails, as Colymbi, and the like, than in those that have them.

14. The Orifices of Excrements and that of the Womb have a contrary site in
all feathered Harvy of Generat. Exer. 5.
Fowl to what they have in other Animals: For in these, that of the Excrements
is placed immediately under the Tail, and beneath it that of the Womb: In
those, the vent or Orifice of Excrements is situate lowermost, the aperture of
the Womb between that and the Rump. Ornithol. lib. 14. c. 1.
Aldrovandus thinks the convenience of coition is the cause of this position of
parts: For (says he) in these Animals engendring, the Male getting upon or
treading the Female, the Instruments of generation ought to be near one
another, that they may more easily and readily couple together. Which reason is
not to us satisfactory, for that Quadrupeds which mingle also by supergression
or leaping, though they have not their Genitals so situate, experience from
thence no difficulty or inconvenience in their Coition.

15. It is common to all Birds to have their whole body, or at least the
greatest part All Birds feathered.
of it, covered with feathers growing thereon. By the word body in this place I
understand only the Trunk of the body: For in most Birds the legs and feet, and
in some also the head is uncovered. I add [the greatest part] for the Ostrich
sake. For though the legs and feet (as I said) in most Birds, and in some also
the heads are naked, as for example in the Turkey, the Crane, the Emen, etc.
yet besides the Ostrich we know no Bird that has any other part of its body
bare of feathers. What is reported of a kind of Hens, that bear wool instead of
feathers we take to be false and fabulous. Now though the words Penna and
Pluma, which we may English Quill How Penna and Pluma differ.
and Feather, or hard and soft feather, be sometimes promiscuously used, at
least Penna in good Authors contains under it Pluma, yet we in this work for
greater perspicuity distinguish these names, with our excellent Harvey, in this
manner: Pennae differ from Plumae in their shape, use, place, and order of
growth. Chickens are first plumigerous before pennigerous. [Herein I must crave
leave to dissent from him, unless he comprehends the first Lanugo or Down upon
Chickens under the name of Pluma, for I think the Quils begin to spring as soon
as the rest of the Feathers.] For the Pennae or Quils are found only in the
Wings and Rump, and spring deeper from the lower part of the skin, or the very
The skin investing the bone.
Periosteum, and serve for motion and slight; the Plumae or feathers spring
from the upper part of the skin, and are found every where in the body for
defense and ornament. The Down, wherewith Birds newly hatched are covered,
sticks, for the most part, to the tips of the primigenial feathers. In very
many Birds the middle parts of the feathers are black.

16. The Tails of Birds are made up of feathers. Most Birds have this part,
some The Tail and its uses.
few want it, as the Doucker or Loon, and a sort of Hen. The Tail serves them
for steering their course, and turning in the Air, as it were a Rudder. This is
chiefly seen in Kites, of which Pliny says thus, This kind seems to have
taught men the Art of governing a Ship by the flexures of their Tails, Nature
showing in the Air what was needful to be done in the deep. Hence those Birds
that have but a short Tail and long legs, stretch out their Legs backward in
flying, to supply the defect of the Tail; whereas other Birds, which have long
or indifferent Tailsfly most with their Legs drawn up to their body, some few
with them hanging down, as Water-Hens. Besides, the Tail does not only serve
for directing and governing the flight, but likewise for supporting and keeping
even the body. Hence the Douckers or Loons.
Colymbi, which have no Tails, fly very inconveniently, as it were erect in the
Air, with their heads straight upward, and their Tail almost perpendicularly
downward. In many Birds the outmost feathers of the Tail are whiter than the
middle ones. The two middle feathers are not situate in the same right lines
with the rest on each side, but a little higher or more forward. The number of
Tail-feathers in no sort of Bird is odd. We have not as yet observed in the
Tail of any Bird fewer than ten feathers; though Marggravius mentions some
Brasilian Birds that have but eight feathers in their Tails: And it has been
told us, that the Tropic-bird has only two, but those very long ones.

17. The tips of the Flag-feathers of the Wings run out into a point on that
side the The Flag-feathers of the Wing
shaft in such as are gradually longer, which respects the feathers that are
longer, or that run out further; so in the ten outmost feathers the exterior
Vanes run out into points, because the exterior of those feathers are longer
than the interior, or at least by reason of their situation in the Wing
complicated run out further. In the rest of the Flags toward the body, the
interior Vanes run out into points, because from the tenth inwards the interior
feathers run out further than the exterior, by reason likewise of their site in
the Wing closed. In diverse Birds the tips of the middle Flag-feathers are as it
were indented, the Vane on each side the shaft running out equally beyond the
shaft. This happens when the feathers are of equal length, the Antecedent being
neither longer nor shorter, nor any way more produced than the Consequent. The
inner Vanes of the Flag-feathers of the Wings are in most Birds broader than
the outer.

18. All Birds, as far as we yet know, moult all the quills and feathers of
their Birds moult their feathers yearly.
whole bodies yearly. The bottoms of all the feathers, (that is, the lower
parts that appear not to sight) in Birds of all sorts are of one and the same
color, and for the most part different from what is exposed to view.

19. The Pectoral Muscles, and such as serve to move the Wings, are of all
others The Pectoral Muscles.
the thickest and most fleshy. For since the flight of Birds is not performed
without a strong motion, and vehement agitation of the Wings, to which force is
required, it was requisite the Organs designed for that exercise should be the
strongest and most able. On the contrary, in man the Muscles which serve to
move the Legs are greater and stronger than those which belong to the Arm:
Because their action, being to hold up the whole body, and transfer it from
place to place, requires great ability and vigor. Whence, if it be possible
for Man to fly, it is thought by them who have curiously weighed and considered
that matter; that he that would attempt such a thing with hope of success, must
so contrive and adapt his wings, that he may make use of his legs and not his
arms in the managing of them.

CHAP. II. Of the inward parts of Birds.
THe learned Doctor Willis in his Book of the Anatomy of the Brain, Chap. 5.
does largely treat of the Brains of Birds, where he accurately describes their
Teguments, Parts, and Ventricles, in these words:

The upper part of the Dura matter.
Skull covering the Brain being taken up, the thicker Membrane or Tegument,
called, Dura Menynx, straightly embraces the whole bulk within contained. In the
middle of this Membrane, where the Brain is divided into two Hemispheres, there
is a Sinus [a hollow Cavity or Vessel] extended long-ways; which (no Sithe-like
process being there let down between the Hemispheres, as in Men and Quadrupeds)
is not very deeply inserted into the Brain: In that part of this Membrane which
interposing it self divides between the Brain and the Cerebellum, there are
formed two lateral Sinuses. There is moreover in Birds the fourth Sinus, but
situate something more backward than in Man or Quadrupeds. For a little below
the Conarion or Pine-like Glandule a round hollow process is let down from the
The exteririour and thicker Coat or Tegument of the Brain.
Dura Matter upon the legs of the spinal marrow [pith of the back-bone]
produced, where it is straightway divided into two branches, of which it
sends on each side one upwards into the Cavity situate in the hinder part of
the Brain between the striate Membrane and the Hemisphere of the Brain.

This uppermost Membrane, called Dura Menynx, being cut off round about, and
laid aside, the very thin Membrane immediately investing the Brain, called Pia
Matter, comes in view: Which is not adorned with such a thick contexture of
Vessels as in Man and other perfect Animals; but consisting of a very subtle
web of Fibers, does only wholly invest and closely embrace the plain and even
Surface of the Brain, devoid of all windings or plaits [Gyris and ansractibus.]

The Fabric of the brain in Birds, is unlike to that of Men and Quadrupeds: For
besides that it has no windings [anfract us] or inequalities in its exterior
part, inwardly also the callous body, the Fornix or arched Roof, and also the
striate bodies, such as we have before described; moreover, the whole frame of
the Brain is otherwise contrived and figured. That these things may be the more
clearly perceived, take for dissection the Brain of a Goose or Turkey, and
having cut open the Teguments, pressing gently where the sissure of the Brain
is, separate by degrees the one half from the other, till you come to the very
bottom, in which are two pithy bodies, which being stretched out transversly
like Nerves, connect the Hemispheres of the Brain together. Both sides of the
Interstice are invested with a whitish Membrane, marked with strakes as it were
rays, drawn from the whole compass or Circumference thereof toward the inferior
Angle: Which strakes are concentred about the insertions of the medullary
bodies. This Membrane being cut there will appear underneath it in each
Hemisphere of the Brain a Cavity extending it self over the whole space on that
side the Interstice, and also covering the hinder Region of the Brain, the Roof
whereof is the said Membrane. Both Cavities about the bottom open into an
intermediate common passage or channel going out into the The funnel or hole
leading to the Pituitaria Glandula.
infundibulum, and from both sides of that passage are stretched forth the legs
of the produced spinal marrow [Medulla oblongata] on which the Hemispheres of
the Brain on each side are hung by the two medullary bodies; to wit, from the
main bulk of the Brain lying under the Ventricle the one half of the spinal
marrow proceeds, and from the striate Membrane covering the Ventricle the other
half. From both these placed in both sides certain medullary bodies, already
mentioned, shooting forth transversly like Nerves do connect the two
Hemispheres of the Brain. Moreover, these two uniting and growing together on
both sides, do fasten both Hemispheres of the Brain to the legs of the spinal
pith produced, [Medullae oblongatae.]

So that the figure of the Brain in Birds, compared with the Brains of Men and
the more perfect Quadrupeds, seems to be as it were inverted. For as in these
the cortical part is exterior and uppermost, and the medullary spread under
it; so in Birds the lower part, consisting of a thicker and more bulky body,
answers to, or is in stead of the bark; the external and superior Membrane
covering the Ventricle being above any part the most pith-like. Furthermore,
the Ventricles in the Brains of Men and Quadrupeds are situate beneath, near
the base or bottom of the Brain; in Birds uppermost, and near the outside. The
reason of this difference seems to be, because in a more perfect Brain, such as
are those of Men and Quadrupeds, the Animal Spirits have both their original
and exercise therein; viz. they are generated in the cortical part, and in the
Medullary (spread copiously under the cortical) circulated and variously
expanded for the actions of the several faculties. But in the Brain of Birds
there is indeed space sufficient for the generation of Spirits, but scarce any
room aflorded for their circulation. For the Brains of Birds seem not to be
much employed in the functions of Fancy or Memory. Yea, moreover it is to be
thought, that the Spirits produced in the Brain are exercised for performing
the animal function chiefly in the spinal pith produced, [medulla oblongata]
for there (as we shall show anon) the Medullary substance, which is in stead of
the Corpus callosum.
Callous body, is placed: And to the Corpora striata.
striate bodies in others, answer the striate Membranes in these; by which the
Spirits procreated in the Brain, without any marshalling or ordering there, are
forthwith carried into the prolonged pith. But because the Spirits generated in
the Brain must somewhere depose their serous Excrements, therefore from the
complicature of the striate Membranes over the hind-part of the Brain and the
legs of the prolonged pith, do result Ventricles fit enough for that purpose.
Howbeit in the brains of Birds, the The vaulted roof.
Fornix being wholly wanting, there are only the two anteriour Ventricles;
within which the Plexus Choroides is spread out; the Venose portion whereof (as
was just now said) has its rise a little lower from the fourth Sinus, but the
Arteries come from both sides the prolonged pith.

Neither does the Heterogeneity, or conformation different from that in Men and
Quadrupeds, appear more in the Brain of Birds than in the Spinal pith produced:
for in the first Branching or division.
Section thereof, whence the Optic Nerves arise, two eminent protuberances or
bunches grow to each side. These are in proportion much greater than the
Orbicular Prominencies in more perfect Brains, so that they seem to be a
secundary or subordinate Brain: Both are of a whitish color, and purely
Medullary, with an internal Cavity: So that in this sort of Animals are found
two Ventricles in the Brain, and as many in the prolonged pith. And whereas in
these, as in all other Animals, there is also a Cavity under the Cerebellum,
the Ventricles in the whole Brain differ as well in Number as in Figure and
Position.

In the middle of the The body of the pith of the pith of the backbone.
Medullary Trunk, to wit, where those prominencies grow to its sides, is a
cranny or incisure leading to the funnel [infundibulum] into which both
Ventricles have their outlets or apertures; so that there is no doubt, but the
Watery Excrements.
Serosities there collected are that way avoided. Moreover, it is very likely,
that these hollowed and medullary prominencies in Birds do supply the place and
use of the Callous body; the Animal Spirits being in them circulated for the
exercise of their Faculties. For the room in the Brain is but strait, so that
within its limits the Spirits cannot be both produced and circulated.
Furthermore, whereas in Birds there is more use of Animal Spirits for the
actions of the loco-motive faculty, than those of the Fancy or Memory,
consequently their chief place or rendezvous, where they both convene and are
exercised, ought to be situate in the prolonged pith, rather than in the Brain.

The Arteriae Carotides.
Carotide Arteries, which bring blood to the Brains of greater Birds, are so
small that they bear no proportion to the same in Man and Quadrupeds. Their
trunks being entered, the Skull without any divarication into the Net-like
Textures or complication of vessels
plexus, after the same manner as in other Animals, ascend by the Pituitary
Glandule, and proceed strait to the Brain, and so distribute certain slender
twigs both to its exterior circuit, and through its interior recesses. For
indeed the Brains of Birds are irrigated with a very small portion of blood in
respect of other Animals; because not much blood is required to the refection
of the Animal Spirits, where the fancy and imagination are not much exercised.

Birds (contrary to what some assert) have both the Procissus mammillaris; Pap
like.
Mammillary processes, and the Os cribrosum.
Sieve-like bone: for the anteriour productions of the Brain very much
extenuated and involved in the harder Tegument or Membrane, [Dura Menynx]
running forward almost to the middle part of the Bill, are inserted into a
Triangular bone, wherein is a double Sinus or Cavity, divided by a thin
partition [Septo.] These processes of the brain being brought into the Sinus or
Cavities of the foresaid bone, end in bladders full of a limpid water, which do
plainly resemble the Mammillary processes in a Calf, replete with the like fair
water. Moreover, seeing that from the fifth pair of Nerves a remarkable branch
in each side passing through the orbit of the eye, enters the Cavern of the
Nosthril, a branch sent forth from its trunk is bestowed upon the very Orifice
of the Nosthril; in the mean time both the greater trunks being compassed about
by the Cribrose bone, meet together, and by and by again separating or receding
from each other, and being brought to the end of the Bill are distributed
through the palate. After this manner Birds as well as men and Quadrupeds are
furnished with a peculiar Organ of smelling, viz. a double mammillary process,
and have moreover within their Nosthrils accessory Nerves from the fifth pair;
by whose action, and the communication of their branches to other parts, there
is even in them contracted so near an affinity between the senses of smelling
and tasting. The other pairs of Nerves agree most-what with those of man and
Quadrupeds. We have likewise observed, that as to the little Brain [Cerebellum]
and the remaining portion of the prolonged Pith, there is no great difference
between Birds and those other Animals we have before considered: Save that the
Orbicular Prominencies before the Cerebellum, and those other annulary ones
under it, which occur in those, are both wanting in Birds. Indeed, these latter
seem not at all needful, and as for the former, those medullary hollow
prominencies, which we have shown to be in Birds, supply their rooms, and make
amends for their absence.

Thus far D. Willis: All which things we have by experience found to be just so
as he has delivered; though perchance the Reader that is not well skilled in
Anatomy may experience some difficulty in understanding them, especially not
being illustrated by figures, to assist his fancy.

The Lungs in all birds that we have dissected, and without doubt in all others
whatever, The Lungs.
stick so fast to the sides, ribs, and back, that they can be but very little
dilated or contracted. Moreover (which yet, says Lib. de Generat. Animal.
Exercit. 3. The perforation of the Lungs.
Dr. Harvey, I do not remember to have been hitherto observed by any man) the
ends of the branches of the windpipe are in them perforated into the cavity of
the belly, and do convey the air drawn in by breathing into certain membranes
stretched out along the length thereof. So that in Birds the Lungs seem rather
to be a way or passage to respiration, than the adequate organ thereof. But
those membranes now mentioned (at least with the assistance of the Muscles of
the belly) serve for respiration, and perform the office of the Midriff. This
perforation of the Lungs is not obscure or hardly discernable, but so open and
conspicuous, that in those of an Ostrich I have found many holes, that would
easily admit the tips of my fingers. In a Turkey, and even the common
Dunghil-cock, and almost all Birds, thrusting a Probe into the windpipe, you
may find open passages out of the Lungs into the hollow of the belly. Air blown
into their Lungs by bellows passes forcibly into the lower belly. Now Birds
have either no Midriff, or at least not such a musculous one as men and
Quadrupeds; the forementioned membranes, supplying (as we said) the defect, and
performing the office of a Midriff.

No Birds have more stomachs than one, unless you will take the Craw for a
stomach: The Craw, and its use.
which for the most part hangs without the trunk of the body, at the lower part
of the neck before the breast, by the bone called the Merry-thought. The use
thereof seems to be to moisten and so to mollify, macerate, and prepare the
meat for the stomach. Hence some Birds (says De Generat. Animal. Exercit. 7.
D. Harvey) do cast up the meat so macerated into the mouths of their young,
and feed them therewith, (after the same manner as Quadrupeds nourish theirs
with milk) as may be seen in the Pigeon-kind, and in Rooks. Perchance also
because the stomach, in such birds as have a musculous one, is not of capacity
enough to receive and contain so much food as may suffice for the uses of the
body; either in Winternights or long fasting, which for want of food by various
accidents Birds are not rarely necessitated to undergo, the Craw is given them
by nature for a Satchel wherein to store up plenty of food, when it is
afforded, which afterward it may little by little deliver over to the stomach.

A Gizzard or stomach furnished with thick and strong muscles is proper to
Birds, The Stomach or Gizzard, and its use.
but not common to all sorts of them, for Rapacious and some piscivorous Birds
have a membranous one. The use of the Gizzard seems to be for the grinding of
hard meat, for example, Wheat, Barley, Pease, and other sorts of Corn and
Pulse, which birds swallow whole; and so in granivorous birds to supply the
defect of teeth. Which that it may the more effectually perform, these birds do
now and then swallow small pebble stones and sand or gravel, which together
with their meat, they keep in Why Birds swallow stones
their stomachs (no such thing mean time being found in their crops) by the
help whereof the foresaid Muscles, as it were two millstones, bound fast
together by their two hinges, do grind and levigate the grosser and harder
meat, and so promote the digestion of it. That this is so (says De Generat.
Animal. Exercit. 7.
Dr. Harvey) appears in many sorts of birds: in whose Gizzards, if the small
stones or other hard and rough things remain long, by their continual attrition
they become so worn and smooth, that they are rendered unfit for the comminution
of their meat, and are therefore cast out of the stomach as useless. Hence
birds when they choose out stones, they try them with their tongues, and if they
find them not to be rough, they reject them. So have I found in the stomach of
an Ostrich, and also of a Cassoware Iron, Silver, and stones much worn and
almost consumed. Whereupon it is commonly reported and believed, that they
concoct Iron, and are nourished therewith. If you lay your ear close to the
bodies of Falcons, Eagles, and other Birds of prey, while their stomachs are
empty you may perceive the manifest noise of the stones thereinto swallowed,
striking one against another. For neither do Hawks for cooling their Bodies (as
is the common error of Falconers) swallow stones, but for the comminution of
their meat. In like manner other Birds, (especially such as have a fleshy
stomach or gizzard for the grinding of their food) do for the same purpose
swallow stones, gravel, or some such like thing, as we said before.

In terrestrial Birds of prey, and some piscivorous fowl, because they feed
upon Birds of prey have a membranous stomach.
flesh, which easily melts and dissolves in the stomach (being softer than
grain, and needing little grinding) at least is quickly macerated by its acid
ferment, the stomach is rather membranous than musculous. For Birds of prey
tear the flesh with their beaks, which disposes it to concoction. Whence also
carnivorous Quadrupeds have serrate teeth, for tearing the flesh of their prey
from the bones; neither do they chew their meat much, as do tame beasts, and
other herbivorous and granivorous Animals. It suffices them to tear it to small
pieces, and by a chop or two of their teeth strongly to pinch, crush, or bruise
it. For this kind of contusion disposes it to corruption, and perchance a more
quick and speedy one, than if it were ground small by a long mastication.

In many Birds the Gullet immediately above the stomach is dilated into a
certain The Echinus or Ante-stomach.
bag, as it were a liminary Ventricle, which they call Echinus, because in some
birds it has its inward Superficies rough with many excrescences; in others it
is only thick set, or as it were granulated with very many papillary glandules,
out of which a mucilaginous juice is easily pressed: This juice being by these
glandules excerned into the stomach, and there mingled with the meat, serves
for a Menstruum to macerate, dissolve, and change it into Chyle.

Most Birds have two blind guts or Appendices, as they call them: the
Heron-kind The Appendices or blind guts.
have but one; and the Woodpecker-kind none. Among such as have two, all
carnivorous fowl, and all that we call small birds, have very small and short
ones; clovenfooted Waterfowl, of a mean length; whole-footed Waterfowl, long
ones; and Poultry-kind, the longest of all. The Appendices in Birds have a
contrary site to the blind guts in Quadrupeds. For in Quadrupeds the blind gut
seems to be nothing esse but the The Colic gut.
Colon, continued or produced from the fundament upward, making acute Angles
with the gut called Ileum; but in Birds the Appendices descend from the stomach
downwards toward the Fundament, making acute Angles with the gut called Rectum.
What the use of these Appendices or blind guts in Birds and beasts may be, I
confess my self not clearly as yet to understand.

In most Birds we have about the middle of the guts observed a certain small
Appendix The single blind gut, called ductus intestinalis.
or blind gut, like a little Worm, which is nothing else but the remainder of
that passage by which the Yolk is conveyed into the guts of the young chicken.
In some birds this is very conspicuous, being of half an Inch, or almost an
Inches length: In others it is much shorter and smaller, and in some again it
is wholly obliterated and disappears. The use of this passage Mr. Nicolas Steno
did first find out, or at least first publish to the world the invention of. It
is true indeed it was known to us before we saw his Book, I think we had the
first notice of it from Dr. Walter Needham. However the glory of the Invention
is of right due to him, who first communicated it to the world. Aristotle,
Fabricius ab Aquapendente, Dr. Harvey, and others, have observed a great part
of the Yolk to remain in the Chickens belly after exclusion, yet did they The
Yolk how conveyed into the guts.
not know that it was by this passage as it were by a funnel conveyed into the
guts, but thought that by the mediation of capillary veins dispersed through
it, it was by degrees liquefied, and received immediately into the blood.

The outlet of the channel from the Gaul to the guts in most Birds is a great
way The passage of the Gaul to the guts The use of the Gaul.
distant from the stomach: because (say some) they do not make water, and so
there is more fluid matter mingled with their Excrements. For the use of the
Gaul is partly to attenuate and make fluid the Excrements, partly by its
acrimony to stimulate the guts, and provoke Excretion. But upon this account
there should rather be less need of Gaul, Birds therefore being now known to
have large reins, and to avoid Urine with their harder Excrements; their
Excrements also, excepting those of the carnivorous kind, being not very fluid,
considering the quantity of Urine mingled with them, perchance the Gaul-channel
may enter the gut at such distance from the stomach, for no other reason than
lest the Gaul should regurgitate into it. In very many Birds the passage from
the Gaul-bladder and the The pipe that carries the Gaul from the Liver to the
Guts.
Porus bilarius do not concur in one common channel, but penetrate the gut
severally at a good distance the one from the other.

All Birds though they want a bladder for Urine, yet have they largereins and
ureters by which the Urine is carried away. Birds (says Of the Generat. of
Animals. Exercit. 7.
Dr. Harvey) and Serpents, Birds have large Kidneys and Ureters.
which have spungy lungs, make but little store of water, because they drink
but little, and that by sipping; and some of them, as Eagles, not at all: and
therefore they have no need of a bladder; but their Urine distills down into the
common sewer or sink [Cloaca] designed also for receiving the Excrements of the
belly, and being therewith mingled, both are cast out together. This Urine of
Birds differs from that of other Animals: for whereas there are in Urine two
parts, one more serous and liquid, the other more thick and gross, which Two
parts in Urine.
is called the sediment [hypostasis] and subsides or settles to the bottom,
when the Urine is cool. Birds (contrary to viviparous Animals) have the
greatest quantity of this thick part, which is distinguished from the other by
its white or silver color, and found not only in the common sink (where it
abounds) and daubs or sinears over the exrements of the belly, but in the whole
channel of the Ureters, which may be distinguished from the coats of the
Kidneys by this whiteness. Neither is this grosser matter descending from the
reins to be seen in Birds alone, but also in Serpents, and other oviparous
Animals; especially those whose Egg is covered with a hard shell. They have
also greater plenty of this than of the more serous and thin part; which is of
a middle consistence between thick urine and dung; so that passing through the
Ureters it resembles milk curdled or lightly condensed; and being cast forth
easily congeales into a friable crust. See more of this matter in Harvey, De
Generat. Animal. Exercit. 11. The Ancients taking it for granted that Birds
make no Urine, assigned this reason thereof, That all the superfluous moisture
was spent in nourishing the feathers.

All Birds that I have hitherto dissected have a double Pancreas, which some
call the The Pancreas.
Sweetbread, in Quadrupeds.

The stones of Cock-birds are deeply withdrawn within the cavity of the body,
being The Testicles.
fastened to the back just beneath the Liver. In the Spring time when they are
full of Sperm they swell to twice or thrice the bigness they are of in the
Winter.

In some whole-footed broad-billed birds and Diverse the Windpipe ends in a kind
The vessel of the Windpipe, or Labyrinth.
of Vessel made up of bones and intermediate membranes, being in diverse birds
of a different figure; from which arise the two branches going to each side of
the Lungs. The bones give the figure and consistency to this Vessel, as do the
Ribs to the Breast, and the annulary Cartilages to the Windpipe. In some birds
this Vessel is made up wholly of bone, as in wild Ducks, without any void
spaces to be filled and closed up with membranes. This Vessel from the windings
of its internal Cavity we are wont to call a Labyrinth. What the use thereof
is, whether to increase the force of the Voice, or for a receptacle to contain
Air, which may serve them while they dive, to enable them to continue longer
under water, or to perform both these offices, or for neither of them, we do
not as yet certainly know. That it does not serve to intend the Voice, may be
gathered from that some Birds of this Tribe that want it, have a shrill and
vehement Voice. And that it does not conduce to diving, may be inferred from
that the Douckers (Colymbi) which of all birds dive most, and continue longest
under water, want it. Since the writing of this we have been assured by an Mr.
Dent, Apothecary in Cambridge.
ingenious observer of what we did indeed suspect before, but were not very
confident of, viz, That these Vessels are proper only to the Cocks in the
broad-billed or Duck-kind; but in the Diverse [Mergi] common to both sexes, at
least if we be not mistaken in our opinion of the difference of sex in those
Birds; what we take to differ only in sex, differing specifically.

CHAP. III. Of the Generation of Birds.
ALL Birds are oviparous, that is bring forth Eggs, and not live Young. This
The Eggs of Birds.
though it be common to Serpents, Fishes, and Insects; yet in Birds the figure
of the Eggs, and the brittleness of the Shell, and the distinction of White and
Yolk, and the manner of Incubation are peculiar. The Eggs of all Birds, if the
exterior bark be pilled off, are white.

It is most probable, that Hen-birds have within them from their first
formation all Hen-birds have from the beginning all the Eggs they afterward
lay.
the Eggs, they shall afterward lay throughout their whole life's time; so that
when their cluster of Eggs is wholly spent, they cease breeding, and become
effete: as Angelus Abbatius has observed of Vipers. For we our selves have
found in Birds that breed only once, or at most but twice in a year, a lump of
seed-eggs (as I may call them) enough to serve them for many years productions.
Seeing then it is certain that some birds do become Past bearing
effete with age, and that all of them have at all times of the year a
considerable mass of Eggs within their bodies, I think we do not without reason
thence infer, that all the Eggs they shall ever lay are connate with them. I am
not ignorant that De Generat. Animal. Exercit. 29.
Dr. Harvey does assert, that though a Hen has no seed-eggs within her, yet
after coition she will breed new ones. But I think that Great Naturalist did
not sufficiently consider or examine this matter, and therefore he does only
touch it obliquely, and by the by. For he together with Fabricius does confess
that there are in the Egg clusters or knots of Eggs.
Ovaria of Hens, and almost all other oviparous Animals an innumerable
multitude of Eggs of diverse growths from an almost invisible quantity to the
consummate magnitude. Now why should Nature prepare so great a stock of Yolks
(which as we said would suffice for many years births) if she had given to
females a faculty of generating new ones. Neither is it true only of Birds, but
also of all female Quadrupeds, yea, and of women themselves, that they have in
them from the beginning the Eggs or seeds of all the conceptions, they shall
afterward bring forth through their whole lives. For those two bodies in
Females that are wont to be called Testicles, are nothing else but two Clusters
or knots of Eggs.
Ovaria, as will manifestly appear to any one that Testes faemineos Ovaria esse.
will but take the pains to dissect them, made up of very many Eggs of
different magnitude, all which being either brought forth, or by any means
marred and corrupted, that female ceases to bear, neither does there remain to
her any further hope of generation.

The parts of an Egg are, 1. The Shell; which hardens in the very womb, before
the Egg be laid; contrary to what Aristotle, Pliny, and Fabricius ab
Aquapendente The parts of an Egg.
following them, have delivered. And this any one may with his fingers easily
try in 1. The Shell.
a Hen with egg ready to lay; or if he dare not trust his fingers, let him but
open the Hens belly, and his eyes will convince him of the truth of what we
say. But if any one wants either opportunity or will to make trial, let him
consult the eleventh Exercitation of Dr. Harveys Book of the Generation of
Animals, and he will there find it clearly demonstrated. 2. Four membranes, two
exterior, which begirt and embrace 2. Four Membranes.
the outer White, one interior which contains the Yolk, and a fourth
middlemost, which encompasses the inner White. 3. A twofold White, which Dr.
Harvey first observed 3. A double White.
in a Hens Egg, both involved in their proper membranes, the one thinner and
more liquid, the other thicker and more clammy, and a little more inclining to
whiteness; in staler Eggs after some days incubation growing yellowish. As this
second White covers the Yolk round, so that exterior liquor encompasses it.
That both these Whites are distinct is even from hence manifest: The outward
bark or shell being taken away, if you pierce both the subjacent membranes you
shall see the exterior liquid White forthwith flow out. Then turning back the
said membranes this way and that way into the Platter (in which the Egg is
supposed to lie) the interior and thicker White will still retain its place
and globose figure, viz. being terminated by its proper membrane, which is so
thin that it is altogether invisible to the eye. This if you cut, the second
White will straitway run out, and diffuse it self this way and that way, and
lose its round figure, just as any liquor runs out of a bladder containing it,
when it is cut. Then the proper membrane of the Yolk broken, the
Saffron-coloured liquor flows out, and the former globosity subsides [or
sinks.] 4. The Yolk, of which see Dr. Harveys Book of the Generation 4. The
Yolk.
of Animals, Exercit. 12. 5. Two Treddles, one in the acute, the other in the
obtuse Angle. The greater part of them is within the White, yet do they stick
5. Two Treddles.
fast to the Yolk, being hung upon its membrane. They are oblong bodies, more
concrete than the White, and also whiter, knotty, and not without some
brightness, wherein they resemble Hail, whence they took their name [Chalazae.]
For each Treddle consists as it were of many hailstones joined together by the
White. The one of these is greater, and stretched out further from the Yolk
toward the obtuse end of the Egg: The other is less, extended from the Yolk
downwards toward the acute part. The greater is made up of two or three knots,
as it were hailstones, standing at a moderate distance one from the other, the
lesser in order succeeding the greater. These Treddles are found in all the
Eggs of all birds, as well Wind-eggs.
subventaneous as fecund. Whence appears the common mistake of our Housewives,
who think that the Treddles [Grandines] are the Cocks Sperm, and that the
Chicken is formed of them. [This is a mistake not of old Women or common People
only, but also of great Physicians and Naturalists, as Hieronymus Fabricius ab
Aquapendente, in his book of the Formation of the Egg and Chicken, and Joannes
Faber in his excellent Expositions of some Pictures of Mexican Animals of
Recchus. His words are these: Which I long ago most diligently observed before
I heard of Aquapendentes work, to wit, that the Chicken has its first rise or
original from the Treddle, which the Italians call La Galladura; the Germans
most fitly Den vogel, that is, the bird, because the bird is bred or formed of
it. This part is situate between the Yolk and the White in the likeness of a
hailstone or pretty great oblong Pearl, and is of a substance somewhat
different from the White, viz. more hard and tough, which therefore our Cooks
and Housewives, when they mingle Eggs with Broths, Cawdles, or any other liquid
meat, are wont to separate and take carefully away, as which with much beating
can hardly be dissolved, unless you put Salt, or Sugar, or Vinegar to it.] The
use of these is to The use of the Treddles.
be as it were the Poles of this Little world.
Microcosm, and the connexions of all the membranes twisted and knit together,
by which the liquors are not only conserved each in its place, but do also
retain their due position one to another. 6. A very small 6. The Cicatricula or
eye of the Egg. The Cicatricula.
white circle, growing or sticking to the coat of the Yolk, as it were a little
scar: which therefore Fabricius named Cicatricula. This speck is very little,
scarce so big as a Lentil, resembling the pupil of a small bird, white, plain,
and circular: and (which is especially to be noted) is in all Eggs from their
first original in the The cluster of Yolks.
Vitellarium. This is the principal part of the whole Egg, for the sake whereof
all the rest are formed, and out of which the Chicken has its first original.
Thus far Harvey.

The stalks of Eggs, whereby they grow to the Ovarium, are not solid after the
manner The stalk of the Egg.
of the footstalks of fruits, but hollow and fistulous.

Eggs, if you press them between your hands longways, are very hardly and not
without much force broken.

Eggs violently shaken, till the Yolk and White be mingled, the containing
membranes being broken, may be set upright upon the blunt end, which otherwise
the Eggs how to set on end.
Yolk and White remaining entire can very hardly be so erected. For the Yolk
being suspended between the Treddles, hangs quavering, and by the least motion
or inclination vibrates to and fro within the Egg,, and changing the center of
gravity, hinders its erection.

Eggs being macerated in Vinegar their Shells will be dissolved, so that they
may be Egg-shels dissolved in Vinegar. The Chicken is formed of the White of
the Egg.
thrust into a narrow-mouthed Vessel, or drawn through a Ring.

Whereas there is in Eggs a double liquor, Yolk and White, the Chicken is
formed out of, and nourished by the White alone, till it be grown great. The
Yolk serves for the Chickens nourishment after it is well grown, and partly
also after it is hatched. For a good part of the Yolk remains after exclusion,
being received into the Chickens belly; and being there reserved as in a
storehouse, is by the formerly mentioned channel, as it were by a funnel,
conveyed into the guts, and serves instead of milk. For whereas viviparous
Animals are furnished with milk, wherewith to nourish their tender young, till
by degrees they are accustomed to and grow able The Yolk supplies the room of
milk;
to bear firmer and harder meat; in birds, which want Paps and milk, Nature,
Gods handmaid, has provided and laid up in the middle of the Egg the Yolk for
the nourishment of their newly hatched young. Dr. Harvey confirms this in
Exercitat. 53. of his book of the Generation of Animals. The White (says he)
is first spent, the Yolk comes not for food till late, and is to Chickens newly
hatched what milk is to viviparous Animals newly brought forth: that what kind
of nourishment Nature affords by the Paps in viviparous Animals, the like in
oviparous she may confer by the Yolk. Whence it comes to pass, that all the
White being consumed, the Yolk remains almost entire in the Egg, when the
Chicken is now perfect and consummate, and part of it a long time after its
exclusion: for even after six weeks we have seen somewhat of it remaining in
the belly of the Chicken, sticking to the guts.

Whereas we said the foetus is formed of the White, by White we do not mean any
The young is in the cicatricala before incubation.
part of the White indifferently, but the purer and more lucid part, contained
in the little bubble or bladder, called the Cicatricula, in which the Chick is
originally formed. Yea, the deservedly famous, and most sagacious searcher out
of the secrets of Nature, Tractatu de Ovo.
Marcellus Malpighius, has observed the first strokes or rude draught of the
Embryon in the Cicatricula, even before incubation, as the young plant in the
Seed, which is the Egg of the Plant. And which is yet more, he has observed
even in subventaneous Eggs something in the Cicatricula like to a Mola or false
Conception. Dr. Harvey seems not to be constant in his opinion about the
formation and nutrition of the Chicken in the Egg. For in some places he
asserts, that it is both originally formed of, and also nourished by both
liquors, I mean, the Yolk and White; as for example, in the 36. Exercitation,
where he has these words: Indeed from the course of the umbilical veins, and
the distribution of their branches, which without doubt serve for drawing in
nourishment, it does manifestly appear, that the constitutive matter and
nourishment of the Embryon-chicken is supplied as well from the Yolk as from
the White, and that liquor called by us the Colliquamentum seems to be made up
no less of the Yolk than the White: for something of both humors does melt or
dissolve into that liquor. Moreover, the speckout of which dilated the
Colliquamentum is first made, and which is called by us the eye of the Egg, is
impressed on, or sticks to the Tunicle of the Yolk. Elsewhere he affirms that
the Chicken is first nourished by the liquor of the Colliquamentum, than by
that of the thinner White, afterward that of the thicker, and last of all of
the Yolk. Exercit. 21. After the tenth day the greatest part of the White is
spent upon the Colliquamentum, and thence upon the The Embryon bird.
foetus, to wit, the whole thin White, and the greater part of the thicker. But
the Yolk appears larger than it was at first. Whence it is evident, that the
Yolk does not as yet serve for nutrition, but is afterward deputed to that
office. And as far as I could gather from the progress [ductu] and distribution
of the veins, the foetus from the very beginning is nourished by the
Colliquamentum, for that the veins are at first disseminated in that only, then
spread into the membrane of the thinner White, and afterward into the thicker
White and the Yolk.

All Animals come of Eggs, as well those called viviparous as oviparous: For
the females Viviparous Animals bred of Eggs.
of the viviparous have Eggs within them, though they do not bring them forth.
To wit, those two bodies, commonly called female testicles, are nothing else
(as we said before) but knots or masses of very small Eggs, as will manifestly
appear to The supposed Testicles of Females are masses of Eggs.
any one that shall dissect them; so that we cannot but wonder that a thing so
plain and evident should so long escape the observation of the curious and
inquisitive eyes of ancient and modern Anatomists. This difference there is
between the Eggs of oviparous and viviparous Animals (understand it of
terrestrial) that these seem to consist of one liquor, viz. the White only,
whereas those contain two or three several ones. Yea, if we consider the matter
more exactly, we shall I think find, that the Seeds or Eggs of viviparous
Creatures do indeed answer to the Cicatriculae of Eggs, in which from the
beginning the young [foetus] is included. For the Yolk (as we said) is given to
birds instead of milk: and the Egg of a viviparous Creature imbibes out of the
womb a liquor Analogous to the White of Eggs. For the Egg after coition being
made fecund, falls down into the womb, in like manner as the ripe fruit or Seed
falls from the tree or herb upon the earth, and there semblably imbibes the
humor, wherewith the enclosed foetus is nourished. Then after a certain space
of time it fastens it self to the womb, and after the manner of Seed fallen
upon the ground, does as it were strike root into it.

The Sitting upon Eggs.
Incubation of oviparous Creatures is equivalent to the Going with young.
Incubation answers to Gestation.
gestation of viviparous, for in both the Eggs are alike kept warm, in this
inwardly in the womb, in that outwardly under the wings, to the time of birth
or exclusion; when the young being now grown great, and desiring the free air,
breaks the involving Teguments, and comes forth into the light. Now an Egg is
not unfitly called an exposed womb, for that it does after the same manner
administer nourishment to the foetus in oviparous Animals, as the womb does in
viviparous.

As other Creatures, so it is not to be doubted but Birds also of diverse kinds
do Spurious Birds bred by anomalous mixtures.
sometimes couple together, and mingle their Seed, from whence proceeds a third
and spurious production, which partakes of both kinds; which yet I suppose does
not generate its like: For otherwise the number of Species in Birds would have
been ere now almost infinitely increased. So although in the Genus of
Quadrupeds a Mule be engendered by the coupling of an Ass and a Mare; yet for a
Mule to bring forth young was wont to be counted a Prodigy. This anomalous
coition is exercised between Birds like to one another, as being of the same
Tribe, especially between Hawks and other Birds of prey of different Species;
partly because these Species are very like one to another, partly because they
are all very salacious.

It is wonderful which we daily experience in Hens, viz. that they will breed
and Hens will breed and lay Eggs without being ever trodden by the Cock.
lay Eggs without ever being trodden by the Cock, which Eggs though they seem
to be every way perfect yet are they insoecund, called by the Greeks, (...),
and (...), and (...), that is, subventaneous or wind-eggs, or if the Hens were
impregnated therewith by the wind. Neither do Hens only, but other Birds also,
especially such as are salacious, in the Spring time when they are full of
lust, if they be gently stroked on the back, or their Genitals handled,
sometimes lay Eggs without the Cock. They are (says D. Harvey) sometimes so
libidinous, that if you do but lightly touch their backs with your hand, they
presently lie down, and denude the Orifice of the Womb, which if you gently
stroke with your finger, by an incondite murmur, and the gesticulation of their
wings, they express their grateful sense of the pleasure they take therein.
Moreover, that Hen-birds will thence conceive Eggs both Aristotle affirms, and
my self have experienced in a Thrush, a Blackbird, and other birds, and did a
great while since at first find out accidentally, and by my own loss.

My Wife did for a long time keep a notable Parrot that had learned to speak
very prettily, wherein she took great delight. This bird was so tame and
familiar, that it went freely up and down the house whither soever it listed;
it would search out its Mistress when she was absent, and when it had found
her, with a cheerful voice it would as it were salute her, and signify its
joy: When she called, it would answer her, and fly to her, and taking hold of
her Garment with its beak and feet alternately, it would climb up to the top of
her shoulder, and thence descending down her arm, it would at last settle it
self upon her hand. Bidden to speak or sing, though it were by night, or in the
dark, it would obey. Many times it would sportingly and wantonly come up into
her lap as she sat, and was much pleased to have its head rubbed, and its back
stroked; and by shaking its wings, and its flattering note, testified the great
pleasure it took in those caresses and touches. I interpreted all these things
to proceed from its wonted familiarity and obsequiousness: for by reason of the
excellency of its speaking and singing, I took it to be a Cock. For among birds
females seldom use to sing or speak much: but we have observed, that generally
the Cocks do by the Cock-birds sing and not Hens.
sweet modulation of their voice and harmonious accents endeavor to delight
the Hens, and allure them to submit to their embraces.

Not long after these grateful contrectations, the Parrot (which for many years
had lived healthfully) fell sick, and after many convulsions at last expired in
the Lap of its Mistress, in which it had so often sported. Cutting up its
Carcass (that I might search out the cause of its death) I found an Egg almost
perfect in the womb, but for want of a Cock, corrupted, as it happens often to
small birds shut up in Cages, which want the company of the Cock.

Many birds then by how much the more salacious they are, by so much the more
fruitful be they, and do sometimes without the Male (by reason of high-feeding,
or some other cause) conceive Eggs, but seldom without his concurrence either
perfect them, or bring them forth; but do rather thereupon fall into grievous
diseases, and at last die.

Perchance it may seem to some not less wonderful, that by once treading of the
Cock, all the Eggs which a Hen shall lay for a whole year after will be rendered
prolific. Hens by being once trodden will lay prolific Eggs for a year after.
Fabricius, as he is cited by De generat. Animal. Exer. 6
Dr. Harvey, says, That it is most true, that there proceeds from the Seed of
the Cock a virtue; which renders prolific not only all the Eggs, but also the
womb, appears from the ordinary practice of poor women, who keeping a Hen
without a Cock, do for a day or two put it to some of their neighbors Cocks:
For from that little time of companying with the Cock all the Eggs of that
whole year succeeding will be rendered prolific. And I (says Dr. Harvey) (that
I might defend Fabricius, and find out something certain concerning the time
and necessity of this prolific coition) did once in the Spring time keep two
Hens for three days shut up from the Cock, each of which did in the mean time
lay three Eggs, no less prolific than any others: And again another Hen, which
laid one Egg the tenth day after she was shut up, and another the twentieth,
and both fecund. So that it seems one or two Coits may make the whole cluster
of Eggs, at least as many as shall be laid for a whole year fruitful. What
follows I suppose he wrote upon presumption, and not from experience, viz. That
though a Hen has no Seed-eggs prepared in the Cluster of Yolks.
Vitellarium, yet being after coition made foecund, she will shortly breed and
lay new ones, and those also fruitful. For not only those Eggs which are as yet
Yolks and want Whites, or whose smallest seeds and rudiments are already in the
Knot or cluster of Eggs
Ovarium, but those also which are not yet begun but shall be conceived a long
time after, are by the same virtue made fecund. The same sense he repeats in
other words about the end of Exercit. 40. If from under a Hen once rendered
prolific and sitting upon Eggs (after she has laid all her Eggs, none
remaining in the Ovarium) you take away all her Eggs, she will anew breed and
lay more, and those also prolific. I suppose this great Naturalist was mistaken
in that he affirms, that a Hen after she has laid all her Eggs, and there be
none remaining in the Ovarium, will breed new ones. For I do not see how he
could make any experiment hereof: Seeing that if he had opened a sitting Hen,
and had found no Eggs within her, how could he certainly know that she would
have bred new ones had she lived? If he thought that all Clock-hens do lay all
their Eggs, and quite empty the Vitellarium, before they begin to clock and
betake themselves to sitting; he was therein surely mistaken. For I see no
reason why that should be true in Hens, which I have by experience found false
in other birds; especially seeing himself confesses, that there are in Hens as
well as other Birds an almost infinite number of Yolks in the Ovarium of diverse
growths, from an almost invisible quantity to the consummate magnitude.

To these we shall add that observation of Dr. Harvey in Exercit. 59. de
generat. Timid and short-lived Animals have numerous young, or else breed often,
or both.
Animal. Nature has for the most part given numerous young to those Animals,
which being of little strength or courage, can hardly defend themselves from
the injuries of others, and so compensates the brevity of their lives with a
plentiful offspring. Nature (says Pliny) has given this to the Bird-kind,
that those of them should be most fruitful, which are most cowardly or
fugacious. For whereas generation in all Creatures is instituted by Nature for
perpetuities sake, it is more frequent in those that are of shorter life and
obnoxious to external injuries, lest the Species should fail. And therefore
Birds that excel in strength and live by ravine, and so enjoy a longer and more
secure life do seldom lay more than two Eggs at once. It is true indeed that
Pigeons, Turtles, and Ring-doves do sit only upon two Eggs at once: but then
they compensate the defect of number by the frequency of laying; they breeding
ten times a year. Therefore they breed much, though not many at a time.

CHAP. IV. Of the Age of Birds.
OF all sanguineous and hot Animals Birds are the longest lived, for the
proportion Birds are longer lived than Quadrupeds.
of their bodies much more vivacious than Quadrupeds. Swans are said to attain
to the age even of three hundred years. We have been assured by a friend of
ours, a person of very good credit, that his Father kept a Goose known to A
Goose 80 years old.
be fourscore years of age, and as yet sound and lusty, and like enough to have
lived many years longer, had he not been forced to kill her for her
mischievousness, worrying and destroying the young Geese and Goslings.
Moreover, the Pelican that A Pelican of the same age.
was kept at Mechlin in Brabant, in the Emperor Maximilians time, was
certainly believed to be fourscore years old. What is reported of the age of
Eagles and Ravens, although it exceeds all belief, yet does it evince that
those birds are very longlived. Our people (says Albertus as he is quoted by
Ornithol. tom. 2. p. 370.
Aldrovandus) have found by experience, that a Pigeon lives twenty years. And
as for tame Pigeons (says Aldrovandus) a certain Person, worthy to be
believed, and not unskilful in Natural History, related to me, that he had been
told by his Father, who was much delighted in keeping and observing Pigeons and
other birds: That he had kept a Pigeon two and twenty years, and that it bred
all the while, except the last six months, in which leaving its Mate, it made
choice of a single life.

But to let pass great birds, even the very smallest birds live a great while.
We our selves knew a Linnet kept at least fourteen years in a Cage, which as
yet showed no A Linnet of 14 years.
signs of decay or old age. Gesner tells us, that a certain Kinsman of his
wrote to him concerning a Goldfinch to this purpose: The Goldfinch lives above
twenty years. For at Mentz when I was a child, I saw one more than twenty three
years old, whose Bill A Goldfinch of 23 years.
and Claws were cut every Week, that so it might take its meat and drink, and
stand in its place. And there is no doubt but birds that enjoy their liberty,
living at large in the open air, and using their natural and proper food, in
gathering of which they also exercise their bodies, live much longer than those
that are imprisoned in houses and Cages.

What Pliny observes of Animals, to wit, that those that live longest are born
How far it holds true, that those are longest lived which are longest in the
womb.
longest in the womb, is to be understood of Animals of the same kind. For if
Animals of different kinds be compared together, as for example Birds with
Beasts, those will sometimes be found to be most vivacious which are born the
least while in the womb. If it be objected, that Birds and Beasts cannot in
this respect be compared together, because Birds are not at all born in the
womb. We answer, that incubation in Birds is equivalent to gestation in
Quadrupeds: For in both the Eggs are cherished alike, in this inwardly in the
Womb, in that outwardly under the Wings, as we have formerly shown.

CHAP. V. Of some Proprieties and Accidents of Birds, viz. Shape, Bigness,
Color, natural Instincts, Manners, etc.
THE trunk of the body is shorter, broader, and thicker in Birds than in
Quadrupeds: The figure of the body in Birds.
the head for the proportion of the body much less. For whereas Birds pass
through the air, almost after the same manner that Ships swim upon the water,
the Trunk of their body answers to the Hull of the Ship, their head to the
Prow, (which also for its similitude is called in Latin Rostrum, [the beak] of
a Ship) their tail to the Rudder, their breast to the Keel, their wings to the
Sails and Oars: whence the Poet elegantly has it, Remigium alarm, [the rowing
of the wings.]

All winged Fowl in general are lesser than Quadrupeds, that is the greatest in
that Beasts in their kind greater than Birds. Description of the Bird Cuntur.
kind than the greatest in this. Whence I esteem what is reported of the bird
called Ruk, and also of the Cuntur to be false, viz. That its Wings spread
reach fifteen or sixteen feet; that its Bill is so hard and strong, that it
will pierce an Oxes Hide. [It is said to be covered with black and white
feathers mixed, to have an even Comb, or crest like a Rasor, not serrate like a
Cocks. Two of these birds (they say) are able to kill and eat up a Cow, neither
do they abstain from men. There are but few of them; were there many, they
would destroy all the Cattle in Peru. They report that there are four distinct
kinds hereof found in the Island Marignan. De Laet. Hist. Ind. Occident. lib.
16. cap. 13. and Lerius in Hist. Brasil.]

Birds of one and the same kind kept tame, by reason of the diversity of the
Climate Tame Birds of the same kind are of different colors, etc. wild
constant to the same.
or Country in which they live, the food which they use, and other accidents,
vary much in their colors, magnitude, taste of their flesh, and perchance also
figure of their bodies. Wild fowl for the most part are much what of the same
magnitude, and constant to their colors. For the most part, I say, this holds
true in wild Birds, yet some few there be of these that vary much in their
colors, as for example, Russes, of which it is reported there cannot be found
two alike, and the Scaupduck.

The nails, or claws, hair, horns, and the like (says Aristotle) in Beasts
spring out of the skin, whence it comes to pass that they change color
together with the skin, being white, or black, or party-colored, etc.
according to the color of the skin out of which they grow. But the matter is
far otherwise in Birds of all sorts: for of what color soever the feathers
are, the skin underneath out of which they grow is but of one color. Moreover,
one and the same feather is sometimes stained with diverse colors, and in a
wonderful order. Dr. Harvey.

Of Birds some are gregarious, that is, live and fly together in companies or
slocks, Birds some gregarious, some fly by pairs, etc.
as for example, Pigeons, Rooks, Stares, etc. Others in coupling and breeding
time fly by pairs, the Male and his Female: After they have hatched they company
with their brood, till their young be grown up and can shift for themselves,
and then they beat them away.

Some Birds live a Conjugal life, one Cock and one Hen pairing together, and
Birds pair together, imitating a Conjugal life.
both concurring and assisting each other in sitting and feeding their young.
Of this sort are Partridges, and other Birds of the Poultry kind. Pigeons, of
which the Cock takes his turn of sitting, building the nest, and feeding the
young. In those that pair, there are always more Males than Females bred; but
in such whereof one Male suffices for many Females, more Females than Males.

Most Birds while they sleep turn their head backward, and put it under their
wing; Birds sleep with their head under their wing, and standing on one foot,
Natural instincts in Birds.
and also stand upon one foot, the other being drawn up, to keep it warm, as I
suppose, among the feathers, or by the heat of the body.

That there are in Animals those they call natural instincts, the manner of
building their Nests in Birds is alone sufficient to evince. For whereas those
of the same Species in Countries most remote and distant from each other do
make their Nests always of the same materials, and constantly observe the same
shape or form of them, as if they made them by the same pattern, they must
necessarily either learn so to do by institution, or imitation of their
Parents, or else have the knowledge or ability so to do by natural instinct:
but neither by institution, for who ever saw the old or the young teaching or
learning of one another? Nor by imitation, for the young forsake the Nests so
soon as they are fledged; when as they are very simple and witless, and neither
regard nor heed almost any thing but their food: and themselves next Spring
building they could neither see their Parents making their Nests, nor any other
birds of their kind, whom they might imitate. It remains therefore that they
act by instinct.

And here we cannot but admire, with Harvey, some of these natural instincts in
Birds, Admirable instincts of Birds.
viz. that almost all Hen-birds should with such diligence and patience sit
upon their Nests night and day for a long time together, macerating and almost
starving themselves to death; that they should expose themselves to such
dangers in defense of their Eggs: and if, being constrained they sometimes
leave them a little while, with such earnestness hasten back again to them and
cover them? Ducks and Geese while they are absent for a little while diligently
The affection of Birds to their Eggs and Young.
cover up their Eggs with straw. With what courage and magnanimity do even the
most cowardly birds defend their Eggs, which sometimes are subventaneous and
addle, or not their own, or even artificial ones? Stupendous in truth is the
love of birds to a dull and liveless Egg, and which is not likely with the
least profit or pleasure to recompense so great pains and care. Who can but
admire that passionate affection or rather fury of a clocking Hen, which cannot
be extinguished unless she be drencht in cold water? During this impetus of
mind, she neglects all things, and as if she were in a frenzy, lets down her
Wings, and bristles up her Feathers, and walks up and down restless and
querulous, puts other Hens off their Nests, searching every where for Eggs to
sit upon; neither does she give over till she has either found Eggs to sit, or
Chickens to bring up: which she does with wonderful zeal and passion, call
together, cherish, feed, and defend. What a pretty ridiculous spectacle is it,
to see a Hen following a bastard brood of young Ducklings (which she has
hatched for her own) swimming in the water? How she often compasses the place,
sometimes venturing in, not without danger, as far as she can wade, and calls
upon them, using all her art and industry to allure them to her.

All Birds in coupling and breeding time are most loquacious and canorous.

Birds grow much faster, and sooner attain their just magnitude than
Quadrupeds. Birds come to their growth sooner than Quadrupeds.
Those that are fed by the old ones with meat put into their mouths, in a month
or six weeks space almost all of them, and some in much less time become fit to
fly, and attain to very near the measure of bigness due to their kind. All of
them in six months come to their full growth and perfection. Neither yet is
this in them, as in Quadrupeds, a sign of short life.

Many Birds are very ingenious and docile, as may appear from that they are so
easily Birds very ingenious.
taught to imitate man's voice, and speak articulately: which no Quadruped (for
ought I have heard or read) could ever be brought to; though their Organs seem
to be much fitter for that purpose, as being much more conformable to man's.

CHAP. VI. Containing some particulars which Mr. Willughby propounded to
himself to enquire out, observe, and experiment in Birds.
1. WHether Rapacious diurnal Birds only have the upper Chap of their Bills
covered as far as the nosthrils with a naked skin, which our Falconers call the
Sear?

2. Whether the Parrot only moves the upper Chap? as Aldrovandus affirms; and
whether the Cross-bill, which does in like manner make use of her Bill for
climbing, and some other birds, do not so too?

3. Whether any Birds change their Bills and Claws, as is reported of the Eagle?

Answ. What is reported of the Eagle in this kind I doubt not but it is false.
Neither do I think that any bird casts its Bill by age. Wherefore that
Translation of the fifth verse of Psalm 103. which in the common English meter
runs thus, Like as the Eagle casts her bill, whereby her age renews, ought to
be mended. For many of the more ignorant sort have hereby been imposed upon,
believing these to be the words or sense of the Scripture in this place;
whereas there is no such thing in the Text mentioned as the Eagles casting her
Bill; the words being only these, Thy youth shall be renewed like the Eagles.
But that the hook of the Bill may, and sometimes does, in Eagles and other
birds by extreme old age grow so immoderately, as to hinder their feeding, I
deny not. For the Goldsinch, we mentioned before, is hereof a sufficient
instance.

4. How many Birds have an angular Appendix, as it were a Tooth, on each side
the upper Chap of their Bills, as the Kestrel, the Hobby, the Butcher-bird, etc?

5. The Commisture of the legs or tines of the lower Mandible, in what birds it
is round, in what angular?

6. Whether the Eyes of all Birds of the same Species are always of the same
color?

Answ. The Irides of the Eyes in young and old birds do often differ; and
sometimes also in the Cocks and Hens. But whether in old birds of the same Sex
they differ or not remains to be enquired: I suppose they do not.

7. Whether in Birds that want the Crop, that defect be always supplied by the
largeness of the Gullet? Which (as we said) in many birds of this kind
immediately above the stomach is dilated into a kind of bag or ante-stomach.

8. Whereas the single blind gut, situate about the middle of the guts, is
nothing else but the passage deriving the Yolk into the guts contracted; it
were worthy enquiry, whether there be not some external passage terminated in
the blind guts commonly know and so called, as well in Beasts as in Birds; And
seeing that in many birds the i. e. The blind guts.
Appendices are very small, and seem to be of no use to the birds when grown
up, let it be enquired whether they are greater in Embryon-birds, and what use
they may be of to them?

9. Whether the single blind gut forementioned be always reflected toward the
tail? In what birds the ends of the * Appendices are reflected? in what birds
the * Appendices are striate? Whether below the * Appendices the gut be
proportionably larger than above, according to the bigness of the * Appendices?
Whether of the * Appendices the one is usually shorter than the other? And if
so, whether the right or the left?

10. Whether some Birds have a double cluster of Eggs, as viviparous Animals
have two Ovaria, usually called and mistaken for Testicles? or whether all have
only a single one?

11. Whether Birds when ready to lay can detain their Eggs, if their nests
happen not to be ready, or be by any accident destroyed? Or whether they
sometimes fall from them against their wills?

12. Whereas some Birds, for example Pigeons, lay only two Eggs at a time,
whether of the one of those is always bred a Cock, of the other a Hen-bird?

Answ. It does most commonly so fall out, yet sometimes two Males, sometimes
two Females are excluded together.

13. To make trial whether Eggs in England may be hatched by an artificial heat.

14. To observe what colors are most frequent in Birds, and in what parts; as
for example, the rumps of many birds are of the same color, viz. Larks,
Thrushes, Sparrows, etc.

15. What Birds wag their tails often, as Water-wagtails, Blackbirds, Morehens,
Tringae, etc. One of the two middle feathers of the tail when it is closed
covers the other, enquire whether the right or left feather lies oftnest
uppermost, or either of them indifferently, as it happens.

16. In what kind of Birds there are more Cocks usually bred, as in Ruffs; in
what more Hens, as in Poultry?

17. What Birds build upon the ground, as all of the Poultry kind, Lapwings,
and in general all such as run and feed themselves so soon as they are hatched,
being covered with a thick down? What build on trees and in hedges, as the
greatest part of Birds? What in the water, as Morehens? What Birds sit always
on the ground, never lighting upon trees? What perch upon trees?

18. What Birds hide themselves or change places, whether in Winter or in
Summer?

19. What would become of Nightingales, Cuckows, etc. in Winter; and of
Fieldfares, etc. in Summer, if they were kept in Cages, and carefully tended,
fed and cherished?

20. How comes it to pass that the most vehement cold in Wintertime, if they
have but food enough, does not congeal or mortify the tender bodies of small
birds?

21. Whether the age of Pheasants, Hawks, etc. may be known by the cross bars
in their tails?

22. How many Birds have white feathers under their tails? How many have
bristles under their chin, at the corners of their mouths, or about their
nosthrils?

23. What Birds, either terrestrial, or aquatic, have two cross lines in their
wings?

24. How many Birds have the exterior vanes of their flag-feathers broader than
the interior?

CHAP. VII. Of some remarkable Isles, Cliffs, and Rocks about England, where
Sea-fowl do yearly build and breed in great numbers.
MAny Water but especially Sea-fowl do yearly breed and bring forth young in
great companies, either in high Rocks, or Desert, and less inhabited Islands in
the Sea, or on high and steep Cliffs by the Seaside. The more noted and famous
places of this kind about England are,

1. The Basse Island in the great Bay called Edinburgh-Frith or Forth, not far
from The Easse.
the shore: which Dr. Harvey does not less truly than elegantly describe in
these words: There is a little Island, the Scots call it Basse, standing very
high, environed with steep and craggy Cliffs (one might more truly and properly
call it a huge Rock than an Island) not much more than a mile in compass. In
the months of May and June the surface of this Island is almost wholly covered
with Nests, Eggs, and young Birds; so that for the multitude of them one can
scarce any where freely set ones foot: and such a number of Birds there is
flying over ones head, that like Clouds they cover the Sky, and take away the
sight of the Sun: making such a noise and din with their cries that people
talking together near hand can searce hear one another. If from thence as from
a lofty Tower, or high Precipice you look down upon the Sea underneath, you
shall see it every way covered with an infinite number of Birds of diverse sorts
swimming up and down, intent upon their prey: In like manner as Pools of water
in some places in the Spring time are seen, overspread with Frogs: or the open
hills and steep mountains are beheld at a distance, thick set, and as it were
clothed with flocks of Sheep and Goats. If you list to sail about the Island,
and from below look up the Cliffs as it were over-hanging your head, you might
see on all the shelves and ledges of the Rocks and craggy Cliffs innumerable
rows of birds of all sorts and magnitudes, more in number than the Stars that
appear in a clear and Moonless night. If you look at them that are coming to
the Island, or flying away at a distance, you would take them to be huge swarms
of Bees. Thus far Dr. Harvey. But I suppose he was mistaken in that he writes
that the Lord of the Island makes some profit yearly of the relics of the
Nests useful for fuel. For these kinds of Birds do not make their Nests of
straws, sticks, or such like combustible matter, good for fuel; but either lay
their Eggs on the naked rocks, or spread under them very few straws, bents, or
such like inconsiderable stuff.

The Birds that chiefly frequent this Island that they may breed there are 1.
Soland Soland Geese.
Geese, which are proper to the Basse, not breeding elsewhere about Britain,
that we know of. When we were there near Mid -August, all the other Birds were
departed, only the Soland Geese remained upon the Island, their young being not
yet fully grown and fledged. The manner of getting them is by letting down a
man in a basket by a rope from the top of the Cliff, who gathers the young off
the ledges of the Rocks, as they let him down or draw him up. 2. The
Turtle-Dove, or Sea-Turtle, so called here (as I suppose) from some similitude
it has to the Turtle-dove. It is a whole-footed bird, and, I suspect, the same
that we have described under the title of the Greenland-dove. This also is a
bird peculiar to this Island. 3. The Scout, which is either the Lomwia, or the
Alka of Hoierus: though we believe that both these Species breed here. These
are found also in many other places about England. 4. The Scarf, which from the
agreement of the name with the Dutch Scharpff, I take to be the Cormorant. 5.
The Cattiwick, a sort of small Sea-gull, besides many other Species of Gulls.

2. The Farn Islands near a Village in the Coast of Northumberland called
Bambergh, famous for an ancient Castle built on a Rock, now almost ruined. The
Birds which chiefly frequent and build upon these Islands in Summer time are 1.
S. Cutberts Duck, called by Wormius, as I suppose, Eider. This is never seen
but in breeding time, and as soon as her young ones are hatched takes them to
Sea, and never looks at land till breeding time next. It is proper to these
Islands, and breeds no where else about England, that we know of. 2. Guillemots
or Sea-hens, i. e. Lomwiae Hoieri. 3. The Skout, i. e. Alka ejusdem. 4.
Counter-nebs or Coulter-nebs, hic dictae, i. e. Anates Arcticae Clus. 5.
Scarfs, i. e. Cormorants, or perhaps Shags. 6. Puffinets, which the name argues
to be Puffins: but the description here given us of them (for we saw not the
bird) agrees rather to the Basse-Turtle. 7. Several sorts of Gulls, viz. 1.
Mire-crows, all white-bodied, only having black heads, and somewhat bigger than
Pigeons; by which description we conclude them to be Pewits. 2. Annets, small
white Gulls, having only the tips of their Wings black; and the Bill yellow,
perhaps the black-footed Gull. 3. Pickmires, or Sea-Swallows. 5. Terns, the
least sort of Gull, having a forked tail. 8. Sea-Piots, i. e. Sea-pies,
Haematopus Bellonii.

3. The Sea-cliffs about Scarborough, from which were sent us, the Anates
Arcticae of Clusius, called here Mullets. 2. The Alkae of Hoierus, known here
by the same name of Auks. 3. The Lomwiae of the same Hoierus, named Skouts.
Besides doubtless there breed many Gulls among these fowl.

4. A noted Island not far from Lancaster, called the Pile of Foudres: which
great flocks of diverse sorts of Sea-fowl do yearly frequent, and breed there.

5. The Isle of Man with a little adjacent Islet, called the Calf of Man, in
which besides Mullets, Razor-bills, and Gailliams, English Puffins build in
great numbers, and no where else about England (that I know of) but in the
Silly Islands.

6. Prestholm, a small uninhabited Island near Beaumaris in the Isle of
Anglesey, belonging to my Lord Bulkley. On this Island build the Anates
Arcticae of Clusius (here called Puffins) Razor-bills, Guilliams, Cormorants,
and diverse sorts of Gulls.

7. Bardsey Island, situate at the utmost Angle or Promontory of Carnarvanshire
in Wales.

8. Lundy Island in the Severn-Sea.

9. The Cliffs by the Seaside near Tenby in Wales.

10. Godreve, an Island or rather a Rock, not far from St. Ives in Cornwall,
where Auks and Guillims, here called Murres and Kiddaws, breed.

11. The Silly Islands, in the main Sea, about thirty miles distant from the
Lands end in Cornwall to the West.

12. Caldey Island near Tenby in Pembroke shire, in one part whereof we saw
Gulls Nests lying so thick, that we could scarce take a step without setting
our feet upon one.

13. The Isle of Erm near Guernsey.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Division of Birds.
BIrds in general may be divided into Terrestrial and Aquatic, or Land and
Waterfowl.

Terrestrial are such as seldom frequent waters, but for the most part seek
Land fowl.
their food on dry land.

Aquatic are such as are much conversant in or about waters, and for the most
part Water fowl.
seek their food in watery places; of which we will treat Book III.

Terrestrial Birds are either such as have crooked Beak and Talons, called by
the Grecians Hook-bill'd birds. Streightbill'd birds.
(...), or such as have more straight Bills and Claws.

Those that have crooked Bills and Claws, called (...), are either Rapacious
and carnivorous, such as we call Birds of prey, or more gentle and frugivorous,
as Parrots.

Rapacious and carnivorous are either Diurnal, such as prey by daylight, or
Nocturnal, such as prey by night.

Rapacious diurnal Birds are usually divided according to their magnitude into
the greater and lesser kind.

The greater kind are either the more generous, which have their Beaks hooked
almost from the root, and are called Eagles, or the sluggish and less generous,
having their Beaks straight for a good space from the root, and hooked only
toward the point, called Vultures.

The lesser kind, called in Latin Accipitres, may be again subdivided into the
more generous, which are usually reclaimed and trained up for fowling, properly
called Hawks; and the more cowardly or less generous, such as are neglected by
Falconers, as being of no use for fowling; and therefore permitted to live at
large, which may be called wild Hawks.

Hawks properly so called are divided by Falconers into long-winged and
shortwinged.

Long-winged Hawks are such the tips of whose wings when closed reach almost to
the end of the train: Short-winged are such the tips of whose wings when shut
or withdrawn fall much short of the end of the train.

Birds that have more straight bills and claws are either the greater or the
lesser, which we call small birds. Under the title of greater we comprehend all
that do exceed or equal the common Thrush or Mavis in bigness. Yet to some
kinds of bigger Birds (as for example Woodpeckers) by reason of the agreement
of the characteristic notes we are forced to add one or two Birds lesser than
Thrushes. The greater are either such as have large, strong, straight, and long
Bills, or lesser and shorter ones. The first are either such as feed
promiscuously upon Flesh, Insects and fruit (or grain) or at least Insects and
fruit; or such as feed upon Insects only. Those in respect of color may be
divided into two kinds, viz. 1. The Crow-kind, whose body is for the most part
of one color and black: 2. The Pie-kind, whose body is covered with
party-colored feathers. Of these, [that feed only on Insects] there is but one
kind, v. g. Woodpeckers. Such as have lesser and shorter bills may be
distinguished by the color of their flesh, into such as have white flesh, and
such as have black flesh. Those that have white flesh are the Poultry kind,
Hens, Peacocks, Turkeys, etc. Those that have black flesh are either the
greater, that lay but two Eggs at a time, as Pigeons; or the lesser, which lay
more than two Eggs at once, as The Thrush kind. The lesser sort of Birds with
streighter bills, such as we usually call small birds, may be divided according
to their Bills, into such as have slender bills, and such as have thick and
short bills. Of both kinds there be many subalternate species; of which when we
come to treat of small Birds.

CHAP. IX. A Catalogue of English Birds, as well of such as abide here all the
year, and never change place, as of such, which at set times come and go, which
we call Birds of passage.
RAPACIOUS DIURNAL BIRDS.
THe EAGLE, which does not only come over hither to prey, but also many times
builds and breeds with us yearly (they say) upon the high rocks of Snowdon in
Carnarvanshire. In the year of our Lord 1668. in the Woodlands, near the River
Derwent in the Peak of Derbyshire was found an Eagles Nest, made of great
sticks, resting one end on the ledge of a Rock, the other on two Birchtrees,
upon which was a layer of Rushes, and over them a layer of Heath, and upon the
Heath Rushes again; upon which lay one young one and an addle Egg, and by them
a Lamb and a Hare, and three Heath-poults. The Nest was about two yards square,
and had no hollow in it. The young Eagle was as black as a Hobby, of the shape
of a Goshawk, of almost the weight of a Goose, rough-footed, or feathered down
to the foot, having a white ring about the tail. I suppose this was of the same
kind with those kept in the Tower of London, which we have described under the
title of The Golden Eagle with a white ring about its tail.

The SEA-EAGLE or Osprey, Haliaeetus sive Ossifraga, which preys often upon our
Rivers. There is an aerie of them in Whinfield-Park Westmerland, preserved
carefully by the Countess of Penbroke: but the report of their having one web'd
foot is fabulous. Mr. Johnson.

The FALCON, Falco, is found to build in Scotland. We have been told that there
is an Very of them near Holy-head in the Isle of Anglesey in Wales.

The Common BUZZARD, Buteo sive Triorches. This Bird is a great destroyer of
Conies.

The HONEY-BUZZARD, Buteo apivorus sive vespivorus. This is like the precedent,
differs in that it has an ash-colored ring or broad bar cross the train and
wings.

The BALD BUZZARD, Balbusardus Anglorum, Haliaeetus Aldrov. This is by some
called the Sea-Eagle, and preys upon fish.

The MOOR-BUZZARD, Milvus Aeruginosus, Aldrov. This is known by being all over
of a dark fulvous or Chestnut color, except the crown of the head, which is of
a pale clay color.

The KITE or Glead, Milvus. The Characteristic note whereof is its forked tail,
wherein it differs from all other rapacious Birds that we have seen.

The RING-TAIL, Pygargus Accipiter, Subbuteo Turneri, the Male whereof is
called the Hen-harrier, from preying upon Hens. He does (says Turner) on a
sudden strike at Birds in the fields, or Pullen in Towns, and missing of his
prey departs slily and silently, never making a second attempt; of all Birds of
prey flying nearest the ground. Gesner suspects this Fowl to be the Circus of
the Ancients.

The SPARROW HAWK, Accipiter Fringillarius Recentiorum Nisus and Sparverius.
The Male or Tarcel of this is called a Musket after the French name. This is a
great destroyer of Pigeons, too frequent with us.

The HOBBY, Subbuteo Bellonii and Aldrov. This from persecuting of Larks (which
are its chief and particular game) is not unfitly by Mr. Johnson entitled
Accipiter Alandarius.

The KESTREL, Stannel, or Stonegal, and in some places the Windhover, because
it does as it were fan the wind by the motion of its wings, hovering in the
same place: Hence the Germans also call it Wannenwacher, that is, the
Wind-fanner. Tinnunculus seuCenchris.

The greater BUTCHER-BIRD or Mattagesse, and in the Peak of Darbyshire after
the German name Wierangel, or Werangel, Lanius cinereus major. This our
Falconers sometimes reclaim, and train up for small Birds. She sits upon a high
bough, making an uncouth noise; the Birds thereby allured become her prey.

The WOOD-CHAT, Lanius minor cinereo-ruffus.

The lesser reddish BUTCHER-BIRD, Lanius minor rubescens. This Bird having no
particular English name, that we know of, we have imposed this upon it. These
Birds are called also in Latin Colluriones, and in English by Dr. Turner,
Shrikes. It is common to all these Butcher-Birds to have black bristles about
their bills.

The CUCKOO, Cuculus. Who because he preys only upon the Eggs of Birds, (and is
therefore pursued, not attended, as is said, by the Moor-titling) or their
young ones in the Nest, has small and weaker Beak and Talons, and therefore
disappears in Winter, when such food is not to be had. I have known one kept
with all imaginable care, but (whether through alteration of food, or some
other cause) before Winter, she grew torpid, broke out in scabs, and died. The
young one is curiously spotted. I have seen one in Harvest partly spotted,
partly cinereous. Mr. Johnson.

RAPACIOUS NOCTURNAL BIRDS.
The HORN-OWL, Otus sive Noctua aurita, called also by the Latins Asio
according to Pliny.

The Common WHITE OWL, or Barn-Owl; this Mr. Johnson calls the Church-Owl, by
which name the Low Dutch also call a sort of Owl.

The BROWN or IVY-OWL, and from its schreeking noise the SCREECH-OWL. Strix
Aldrov.

The GRAY OWL, asbig as the former. Dr. Charleton in his Onomasticon Zoicon
attributes the English name Gill-hooter to this Bird, which is, I suppose, a
general name of all Owls.

The FERN OWL, or Churn-Owl, or Goat-sucker. Caprimulgus. In the mountainous
woods in the Peak of Derbyshire, the West Riding of Yorkshire, in Shropshire,
and many other places, all over England.

THE CROW KIND.
The RAVEN, Corvus. This often destroys young Lambs, first picking out their
eyes; is of very quick sent, and by some trained up as a Hawk for fowling.

The Common or Carrion CROW. This is not much more than half so big as the
former, otherwise very like it. It feeds upon flesh and dead carcasses, in want
whereof it will eat corn.

The ROOK, Cornix frugilega. It is distinguished from the Crow, to which
otherwise it is very like, by its white beak and being gregarious, besides
other notes In the Chapter of the Rook.
afterward to be mentioned.

The ROYSTON CROW, Cornix cinerea frugilega. Common in Cambridgeshire, about
Newmarket and Royston. Mr. Johnson calls it the Sea-Crow and says it is
frequent about Stockton in the Bishopric of Duresm, near the mouth of the
River Tees.

The JACK-DAW, Monedula sive Lupus Aldrov. This also feeds promiscuously upon
flesh, corn, seeds, insects, etc. In the stomach of a young one taken out of
the nest, besides several sorts of insects, we found among diverse other seeds
many grains of Wheat, Rye, etc.

The CORNISH CHOUGH, Coracias, called also Pyrrhocorax, though Aldrovandus
would have these to be distinct Birds. It is found not only in Cornwall, but
also all along the West coast of Wales.

The PIE, Magpie, or Piannet, Pica varia seu caudata, called also simply Pica.

The JAY, Pica glandaria. This Bird is very greedy of Cherries, he feeds also
upon Mast, as the Latin name imports.

THE WOODPECKER-KIND.
The GREEN WOODPECKER, or Woodspite, Picus viridis. This Bird is by some called
a Heyhoe,, which name is, I suppose, corrupted from Hewhole, as Turner says it
was called in English in his time, and Mr. Johnson now. By others it is called
Rain-fowl, because its cry when more frequent and shrill than ordinary is
thought a Prognostic of riain.

The GREATER SPOTTED WOODPECKER, or Whitwall, Picus varius major.

The LESSER SPOTTED WOODPECKER, or Witwall, or Hickwall. Picus varius minor. I
suppose Witwall is a name common to both Species.

The WRYNECK, Jynx sive Torquilla. This agrees with the forementioned
Woodpeckers in the disposition of the toes and fabric of its tongue: It differs
from them 1. In having a slenderer and weaker bill: So that it hews not for it
self a hole in the solid Wood, but builds in rotten and hollow trees. 2. In
having its tail not so stiff.

The NUTHATCH, or Nut-jobber. Picus cinereus. She has not a long tongue as the
other, because she feeds not on Cossi as they do, but on other Insects, and
especially on Nut-kernels. It is a pretty sight to see her fetch a Nut out of
her hoard, place it in a chink, and then stand over it with her head downward,
strike it with all her might, and breaking the shell catch up the Kernel. The
feathers of her tail are not stiff and pointed, because her motion is rather
down than up trees: nor has she two hindtoes: but the inner toe is separated a
little from the middle, and falls somewhat across (as in the Owl-kind) whereby
she can support her self in any motion. Her voice is very shrill. Mr. Johnson.

The CREEPER, or Ox-eye-Creeper, Certhia. It has a long slender Bill, bending
like a Bow, more commodiously to reach into the chinks of the bark of trees.

The HOOP, or Hoopoe, Upupa, Epops. Why we subjoyn this Bird to the Woodpeckers
shall be said when we come particularly to treat of it. This is sufficiently
differenced from all other Birds by its crest all along the head; it is more
rare with us.

THE POULTRY KIND.
The HOUSE COCK, Roost-Cock, or Common Dunghill Cock and Hen, Gallus
Gallinaceus and Gallina domestica. Of these there are several species or
varieties, which we shall enumerate afterward.

The PEACOCK, Pavo, both the common, and the white.

The TURKEY, Gallopavo seu Avis Numidica and Meleagris. Neither Turkeys nor
Peacocks are native of England, but because they are tame fowl, and easily bear
our Winters, and it is now a long time that they have been brought over, we may
very well reckon them among English birds.

The COCK of the WOOD or Mountain, Urogallus seu Tetrao major. Aldrov. This is
not found in England, but in Ireland there be of them.

The BLACK COCK, his Hen the Gray hen; his Brood the Gray Game. This Bird is
called also the Heath-Cock, and Grous, Tetrao, sive Urogallus minor. In great
Heaths in many places of England.

The RED GAME, Lagopus altera Plinii, an Attagen Aldrov. In the North of
England it is called, The Gor-Cock and Moor-Cock, the Hen the More-hen, the
Brood Gorfowl. Heath-Cock is also a name common to this with the precedent.
Turners Morehen is the Female of the precedent or Black Cock. Gor in the North
of England signifies red, so the Gor-Cock is the red Cock, etc. For the
understanding and exact distinction of these names we are beholden to Mr.
Johnson of Brignal in Yorkshire.

The PHEASANT, Phasianus: a bird well known, and for the beauty of its colors
comparable to the Peacock.

The Common PARTRIDGE, Perdix cinerea. We have been informed that the Red-leg'd
Partridge, Perdix russa is found in the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey.

The QUAIL, Coturnix.

The RAIL or Daker-hen, Ortygometra, Aldrov. seu Rallus terrestris. This is
very common in Ireland, but more rare with us. Turner says he never saw nor
heard of it but in Northumberland.

THE PIGEON KIND.
The Common WILD PIGEON, or House-Dove, or Culver, Columba domestica seu
vulgaris.

The ROCK-PIGEON, Columba rupicola; ash-colored, with red legs, of small size,
observed by Mr. Johnson.

The RING-DOVE, or Queest, in the North of England Cushat, Palumbus torquatus.

The STOCK-DOVE, or Wood-Pigeon, Oenas sive Vinago.

The TURTLE-DOVE, Turtur, found in the Southern part of England, Kent, Sussex,
etc.

THE THRUSH KIND.
The MISSEL-BIRD, or Shrite, and in the North the Thrush simply without
addition, Turdus viscivorus major.

The THROSTLE, Mavis, or Song-Thrush, Turdus simpliciter dictus seu viscivorus
minor.

The REDWING, Swine-pipe, or Wind-Thrush, Turdus Iliacus, Illas seu Tylas. It
should rather be written and pronounced, The Wine-thrush.

The FIELDFARE or Feldefare, Turdus pilaris. These two last are birds of
passage, never build here, but come over in Winter time.

The Common BLACKBIRD or Ouzel, Merula vulgaris. This word Ouzel is undoubtedly
of the same original with the Italian Uccello, and the French Oiseau,
signifying in general a Bird; however it be with us appropriated to this kind.

The RING-OUZEL, Merula torquata.

The WATER-OUZEL, or Water-crake, Merula aquatica.

The STARE or Starling which says Mr. Johnson, I never saw eat Berries,
whereas all the rest of this tribe, except perhaps the Water-Ouzel, are
baccivorous.

SMALL BIRDS WITH SLENDER BILLS.
The Common Field LARK. Alauda Vulgaris. The Wood-LARK. Alauda Arborea. The
Tit-LARK. Alauda Pratorum. The Lesser crested LARK. Alauda Cristata minor.


This last we have not yet seen. Mr. Johnson found and described it in the
North of England.

SWALLOWS
The common house Swallow Hirundo Domestica. The Martin or Martlet Hirundo
Agrestis seu rustica, Plin. The Sand-Martin or Shore-bird Hirundo Riparia. The
black Martin or Swift. Hirundo Apus.
TITMISE,
The great Titmouse or Oxe-eye Parus Major seu Fringillago. The black-headed
Titmouse Parus Alter, Gesn. The Marsh Titmouse Parus Palustris. The blew
Titmouse or Nun Parus Caeruleus. The long-tail'd Titmouse Parus Caudatus.
WATER WAGTAILS,
The White, Motacilla alba. This comes every seed-time, and follows the
Plowman, and is therefore by him called the Seed Bird. Mr. Johnson. The Common
Yellow. Mot. flava. The other Yellow, Mot. flava altera. This was observed in
the North by Mr. Johnson, and the description thereof communicated to us.
The NIGHTINGALE, Luscinia seu Philomela.

The REDSTART, Ruticilla, Phoenicuros.

The ROBBIN-REDBREAST, or Ruddock, Rubecula sive Erithacus.

The BLACK CHAT, or Beccafigo, Atricapilla.

The STONE-SMICH, or Stone-chatter, Muscicapa tertia, Aldrov. This is (as I
suppose) the Rubetra of Bellonius, and the Moor-Titling of Turner.

The WHIN-CHAT, Oenanthe nostra secunda, seu Rubicola.

The COLDFINCH of the Germans: This, notwithstanding the name, is nothing akin
to the Finches. It was found in the Mountains of the Peak in Derbyshire.

The WHITE-THROAT, Spipola prima, Aldrov. forte.

The HEDGE-SPARROW, Curruca Eliotae.

PETTICHAPS, Ficedula septima, Aldrov.

A Bird like to the STOPAROLA of Aldrov. which we once took to be the
Moucherolle of Bellonius. We have not heard of any English name of this.

The GOLDEN-CROWN'D WREN, Regulus cristatus.

The Bird called by Aldrovand. Regulus non cristatus. An Asilus an Luteola,
Turneri. We know not any English name of this. It sings like a Grasshopper.

The WREN, Passer troglodites. This bird was formerly mistaken for the Regulus.

To these may be added the King-fisher, Ispida, which is of a peculiar kind by
himself, being a piscivorous Land-bird. See also among cloven-footed Waterfowl
with Bills of middle length.

SMALL BIRDS WITH THICK AND SHORT BILLS.
The GROSBEAK, or Hawfinch, Coccothraustes: it is but seldom seen in England,
and that only or chiefly in Winter.

The GREEN-FINCH, called in the Northern parts of England the Green Linnet,
Chloris.

The BULL-FINCH, Alp, or Nope, Rubicilla seu Pyrrhula.

The SHELL-APPLE, or Cross-bill, Loxia. This comes over sometimes in the
Autumn, but seldom abides the whole year with us.

The HOUSE-SPARROW, Passer Domesticus.

The CHAFFE-FINCH, Fringilla.

The BRAMBLE, or Brambling, Montisringilla. Of this Mr. Johnson has lately
observed two new species or varieties, the one about the size of the common
sort, the other somewhat bigger than a Lark. Both have Chestnut heads, and white
wings.

The GOLDFINCH, Carduelis, Acanthis.

The COMMON LINNET, Linaria Vulgaris. The GREATER RED-HEADED LINNET, Linaria
Rubra major. The LESSER RED-HEADED LINNET, Linaria Rubra minor.
The SISKIN, Spinus sive Ligurinus.

The BUNTING, Emberiza alba, Gesn.

The YELLOW-HAMMER, Emberiza flava.

WATER FOWL.
AND FIRST,
CLOVEN-FOOTED, such as live about waters, and frequent watery places.

THE GREATER KIND.
1. The CRANE, common in the Fens of Lincolnshire, and in Cambridgeshire, Grus.
2. The COMMON HERON, or Heron-shaw, Ardea cinerea major. It builds upon trees,
and is a great destroyer of fish. 3. The WHITE HERON, Ardea alba. 4. The
BITTOUR, or Bittern, called in the North of England the Mire-drum, whose
drumming note (says Mr. Johnson) I have in an Evening heard a mile off. Ardea
stellaris, sive Taurus. This, I suppose, is the Bird which the Vulgar call the
Night-Raven, and have a great dread of. It builds upon the ground, and lays
four or five Eggs.
THE MIDDLE AND LESSER KINDS.
1. With very long Bills. 1. The CURLEW, Arquata sive Numenius. 2. The
WHIMBRELL, or small Curlew. Arquata minor. 3. The WOODCOCK, Scolopax. A bird of
passage; yet some straglers abide and breed here. 4. The SNIPE, Gallinago
minor. 5. The GID, or Jack-Snipe, in the North, the Judcock, Gallinago minima.
6. The GODWIT, in the Isle of Ely and elsewhere the Yarwip or Yarwhelp. Fedoa,
Gesn. Barge forte Bellonii. 7. TOTANUS, Aldrov. I have not as yet heard of any
English name of this; I suppose our Countrymen confound these Species, calling
both by the same name, for their great likeness. 8. The STONE-PLOVER, Fedoa
nostra tertia. This Bird we saw in Cornwall. 9. The SEA-PIE, Haematopus,
Bellonii. Pica marina, Gesn.
2. With middle-sized Bills. 1. The RUFF, Avis pugnax; The female of this is
called the Reeve. These Birds differ wonderfully in colors, so that scarce can
there be found any two alike. 2. The REDSHANK, or Pool-Snipe, Totanus, Gesn.
and Gallinula Erythropus major ejusdem. 3. The KNOT, that is King Knout or
Knute [Canutus] his bird. Cinclus Bellonii, an Callidrys cinerea? 4. The
SANDERLING, or Curwillet, Arenaria nostra. It is of the bigness of the lesser
Tringa, and wants the back-toe. This Sir T. B. calls the Sea-Dottrel, 5. The
GREATER TRINGA. 6. The SANDPIPER, Tringa minor, the Oxe-eye in Sussex. 7. The
STINT, Alanda marina, about Chester called a Purre. 8. To these may be added
(though it has short legs, and wades not in water) the KINGFISHER, Ispida.
3. With short Bills. 1. The LAPWING, called in some places the Bastard-Plover,
in the North, in imitation of its note or voice, the Tewit. Capella sive
Vannellus. 2. The GREEN PLOVER, Pluvialis viridis, called also Pardalus,
because spotted almost like a Leopard. 3. The GRAY PLOVER, Pluvialis cinerea.
4. The STONE-CURLEW, Oedicnemus, Bellonii. 5. The DOTTREL, Morinellus. 6. The
SEA-LARK, Charadrius sive Hiaticula. These three last named Birds do all want
the back-toe. 7. The TURNSTONE, Cinclus, Turneri sort. This Bird we found on
the Seacoast of Cornwall, It is bigger than a Blackbird, and lesser than a
Plover.

WATER FOWL THAT SWIM.
I. CLOVEN-FOOTED, some of which may be called FIN-TOED, because they have
lateral appendant membranes on each side their toes. 1. The CRESTED DIVER,
Colymbus cristatus. 2. The ASH-COLORED DIVER, Colymbus cinereus major. 3. The
DIDAPPER, Dobchick, or Doucker, Colymbus minor. 4. The GREATEST DIVER, or Loon,
Colymbus maximus. This Bird is wholefooted, but for its perfect agreement with
the rest of the Colymbi we have subjoyned it to them. All these Birds are also
called Loons and Arsfeet, from the situation of their legs, just behind. 5. The
Common WATER-HEN, or Morehen. Gallinula Chloropus. This and the following Bird
run swiftly. 6. The WATER-RAIL, Rallus aquaticus. 7. The COOT, or Bell-Coot,
Fulica.
II. WHOLE-FOOTED BIRDS, and first, 1. Such as have but three toes. 1. The
COULTER-NEB, Pope, Mullet, and in some places the Puffin. Anas Arctica Clus.
Fratercula quorundam. 2. The RAZOR-BILL, Auk or Murre. Alca Hoieri. 3. The
GUILLIAM, or Guillemot, Sea-hen, or Kiddaw, Lomwia Hoieri. 4. The SEA-TURTLE,
Turtur marinus Bassanus. We suppose this Turtle Dove of the Basse Island wants
the back toe, but are not thereof very confident, having never seen it.
2. Such as have four toes all web'd together. 1. The SOLAND-GOOSE, Anser
Bassanus. 2. The CORMORANT, Corvus aquaticus sive Carbo. 3. The SHAG, and in
the North Country the Crane, Graculus palmipes.
These have all their toes web'd together for more swift and speedy swimming,
the claw of their middle toe serrate, for to hold fish. 3. Such as have four
toes, but the hind one separate; And first, 1. Such as have narrow and
sharp-pointed Bills. 1. The great BLACK AND WHITE GULL, Larus maximus ex albo
and nigro varius. This is almost as big as a Goose. I saw and described it at
Chester.

2. The HERRING-GULL, or greatest ash-colored Gull; called corruptly, the
White Gull; Larus cinereus maximus. It is as big as a Duck, with an
ash-colored back.

3. The Common SEA-MALL, Larus cinereus minor; as big as a Pigeon, with an
ash-colored back.

4. The GRAY GULL, perchance the Cornish Wagel, Larus griseus: called in
Holland the Burgomaster of Groenland.

5. The Cornish TARROCK, Larus cinereus Bellonii. It wants the back toe,
instead thereof having only a small protuberancy.

6. The PEWIT, or Black-cap, Cepphus, Turneri and Gesn.

7. The WINTER MEW, or Coddy-Moddy, Larus fuscus sive hybernus.

8. The SEA-SWALLOW, Hirundo marina.

9. The LESSER SEA-SWALLOW, Larus piscator, Gesn. and Aldrov.

10. The SCARECROW, Larus niger, Gesn.

11. The BLACK CLOVEN-FOOTED GULL, Larus niger fidipes noster.

12. The BROWN TERN, Larus Sterna fusca dictus.


Besides these Mr. Johnson showed me another small bird of this kind, which he
called Larus fidipes alter: which I then took to belong to the Water-hen-kind,
but by his description of it since sent me, I now rather incline to his
opinion, that it is a Larus, or small Gull.The GANNET, Catarractes noster, the
Skua of Hoierus, A Cornish bird. To these may be added the PUFFIN, or Curviere,
Puffinus Anglorum. On the Calf of Man, and the SILLY Islands. 2. Such as have
narrow, serrate, or toothed Bills. 1. The GOSSANDER, or Bergander, Merganser,
Aldrov. The female of this (mistaken for a distinct sort) is called the Dun
Diver, or Sparling-fowl. 2. The Lesser TOOTH-BILL'D DIVER, Mergus cinereus
fuscus. 3. The WHITE NUN, Albellus alter, Aldrov. The Female of this is also
mistaken for a different kind, and called Mergus Glacialis, which Mr. Johnson
Englishes the Lough Diver. The Male and Female in this and the precedent differ
so much in color that they have been even by the best Naturalists described
and figured for diverse Species. I had the Female of this latter lately sent me
from Cambridge, by the title of a Smew. I suppose the name is originally High
Dutch; for I find in Baltner our common Wigeon entitled Ein Schmey.

4. SUCH AS HAVE BROAD BILLS, and first, 1. The Goose-kind. 1. The SWAN,
Cygnus, Olor. 2. The ELK, Hooper, or Wild Swan. Cygnus ferus. 3. The TAME
GOOSE, Anser. 4. The WILD GOOSE, Anser ferus. 5. The SWAN-GOOSE, Anser Guineus:
notable for her listed neck, girdled breast, crested head, and knobbed
forehead. This was brought over from abroad, but is now grown common enough
with us; as the Turkey and Peacock also were, which we reckon among our
Domestics. 6. The BERNACLE, or Clakis, Bernicla sive Bernacla. 7. The
BRENT-GOOSE, Brenta sive Bernicla altera. 8. The RAT-GOOSE, or Road-Goose,
Brenthus, Aristotelis forte.
2. The Duck-kind. 1. The SHELDRAKE, or Borough-Duck: Tadorna Bellonii. It is
called Sheldrake from its being parti-colored, Sheld signifying dappled or
spotted with white; and Burrow-duck from building in Coney-burrows. 2. St.
CUTBERTS DUCK, Anas Farnensis, building with us only on the Farn Islands. I
take it to be the same with the Eider of Wormius. 3. The SCAUP-DUCK, Fuligula
forte Gesneri; It is called Scaup-duck from its feeding upon Scaup, i. e.
broken Shelfish: varies infinitely in color, especially in head and neck, so
that among a pack of forty or fifty you shall not find two exactly alike. Mr.
Johnson. 4. The BLACK DUCK, Anas niger, Aldrov. Seen with Mr. Johnson. 5. The
SCOTER, or lesser black Diver, Anas niger minor. 6. The TUFTED DUCK, Anas
cirratus. Querquedula cristata sive Colymbis Bellonii. 7. The GOLDEN-EYE,
Clangula, Gesn. This was sent us from Cambridge by the title of Shelden, I
suppose so denominated from its being parti-colored of black and white, that is
Sheld, so other pied birds are called Sheld-fowl. 8. The SHOVELER, Anas
Platyrrhynchos altera sive clypeata Germanica, Aldrov. 9. The LESSER RED-HEADED
DUCK, Anas fera fusca seu capite ruffo minor. 10. The POCHARD, or great
red-headed Duck. Penelops veterum, Aldrov. Anas fera fusca, Rothalss, Gesn. 11.
The Common WILD-DUCK, and Mallard, Boschas major.

12. The SEA-PHEASANT, Anas candacuta. 13. The Common WIGEON, or Whewer.
Penelope, Aldrov. I am informed by Mr. Dent Apothecary in Cambridge, that the
Males or Cocks are there called Wigeons and the Females Whewers. 14. The
GADWALL, or Gray. Anas Platyrrhynchos rostro nigro and plano, Aldrov. 15. The
Common TEAL, Querquedula. 16. The SUMMER TEAL, Anas Circia, Gesn. 17. The TAME
DUCK, Anas domestica. 18. The MUSCOVY DUCK, Anas moschata. 19. The HOOK-BILD
DUCK, Anas rostro adunco.



Among the whole-footed Waterfowl we omitted the Recurvirostra or Avosetta
Italorum, which in Wintertime often frequents our coasts, the Shear-water of
Sir Thomas Brown, and the Mergulus melanoleucos rostro acute brevi of the same.

Among the cloven-footed Waterfowl the Stork, which is sometimes seen upon our
Coasts, perhaps driven over by storm, or other Accident.

AN ADDITION To the FIRST BOOK of the ORNITHOLOGY OF FRANCIS WILLUGHBY Esquire
BEING An EPITOME of the ART of FOWLING, Collected out of Markham, Olina, and
others.
IN delivering the Art of Fowling, or taking of Birds, there are two methods
that might be observed.

The first proceeding according to the Engines and devices that are made use of
fortaking them.

The second according to the several sorts of Birds to be taken.

In the first method might be first an enumeration made of the several Engines
and Instruments, as Nets, Springes, and Snares, Traps and Pit-falls, Guns and
Cross-bows, Birdlime, Baits, and Animals, viz. Hawks, and Dogs. Then, going
particularly over each Instrument or Engine, might be showed, 1. The several
sorts and fashions of each. 2. The various ways of using each sort. 3. What
kind of birds are to be taken each way.

But I shall choose rather to use the second method, following therein Markham
in his Treatise on this Subject, entitled Hungers prevention, or the Art of
Fowling, to whom I must profess my self beholden for the greater part of this
Discourse, which I shall divide into two Sections; in the first treating
concerning the taking of Waterfowl, in the second concerning the taking of
Land-fowl: To which last I shall annex three Chapters: The first, concerning
the making of Birdlime; The second, concerning the election and training up of
a Setting-Dog; The third, containing an Abridgment of some Statutes relating to
the preservation of Fowl.

SECTION I. Of the taking of Waterfowl.
CHAP. I. How to take Waterfowl with Nets.
. I. How to take Cloven-footed Waterfowl with Nets.
MAke your Net of the strongest and best-twined Pack-thread, with large mashes,
at least two Inches from knot to knot: For the bigger the mash, so the birds
cannot creep through, the better. The Net must not be above two fathoms deep,
and six long at the most: A Net of that size being as great as a man is well
able to throw over. It must be verged with a strong cord on each side, and
extended stiff upon a long Pole at each end: Then having observed the Morning
and Evening-feeding of the Fowl (which is seldom in one and the same place) be
sure to come two hours before those feeding times (which are twilight in the
Morning, and after Sunset at Night) and upon these haunts spread your Nets
smooth and flat, staking down the two lower ends firm on the ground, so that
they may only come and go, and no more. The upper verge of the Net must stand
extended on the long Cord, the further end whereof must be staked down to the
earth, two or three fathoms from the Net, (the Stake standing in a right line
with the lower edge of the Net) the Fowler holding in his hand the other end
(which should be at least ten or twelve fathom long) at its distance: where he
shall make some artificial shelter of grass, sods, earth, or such like matter,
where he may lie out of sight of the Fowl. Be sure that the Net lie so tickle,
that upon the least twitch it will rise from the earth, and fly over. Strew
over the Net short dead fog and other grass to hide it as much as may be from
the view of the Fowl. It would be of advantage, close to your Net to stake down
a live Heron, or other Fowl you spread for, formerly taken, for a stale, making
her now and then flutter her wings. When you see a competent number of Fowl
within the danger of your Net, draw your Cord suddenly and cover them. This you
may do till the Sun be almost half an hour high, but no longer, for after that
time no more Fowl will come to feed; and at Evening from Sunset till the Stars
begin to appear. Thus you may take not only the greater Waterfowl, but Plover
and others.

. II. How to take whole-footed Waterfowl with Nets.
MAke your Nets of the smallest and strongest Pack-thread; the Mashes of less
compass than the forementioned; let them be 2 or 3 foot deep; for length
according to the Rivers and Waters they are to be pitched over. Let them be
lined on both sides with false Nets of strong Packthread, every Mash being 1
foot square, that as the Fowl strikes either through or against them, the
smaller Net may pass through the great Mashes, and so entangle them.

These Nets you shall pitch for the Evening-flight of Fowl before Sunset, and
stake them fast down on each side the River, the lower side of the Nets about
half a foot within the water, the upper side shoaling slantwise against the
water, yet not touching it by a foot and half at least. The strings that
support this upper side must be fastened to small yielding sticks pricked in the
bark, which as the Fowl strikes may give liberty to the Net to run and
entangle them: Yet one end ever made so fast that the Net may by no means be
carried away. You may thus place diverse of these Nets over the River about
twelve score one from another.

If there be any Fens, Plashes, or Pits at a good distance from the River, go
to them, and shooting off a piece twice or thrice, raise the Fowl from thence,
which will presently pack to the River, then plant your Nets of the middle size
upon the small Plashes and Pits, and the longest of all upon the Fens: In like
manner if there be any covert of Sedge, Reeds, Rushes, etc. in the water, pitch
Nets about them also.

In the Morning go first to the River about an hour or two before day, and see
what your Nets have taken, and unlade them: Then if you find there be many
Fowls upon the River, shoot off your Gun in one or two places, and that will
quickly send them to the Fens, Plashes, and blank waters, wither you may repair
about Sunrising, and see what your Nets have taken there.

CHAP. II
. I. How to take Waterfowl with limed strings.
AFter you have found and observed the haunts of the Fowl, provide a long line
made of small cord, knotted here and there, and well limed over; and a burden
of little sticks, sharp at the nether end, and with a little fork at the upper.
If it be for the Evening-flight, come to the place an hour before Sunset; if
for the Morning, at least two hours before day [observe the same times in going
to prick down Lime-rods,] and prick them down a little slanting, so as they may
be within a foot and half of the ground at the uttermost, in even rows all over
the place of haunt, one row distant from another a yard or two, and one stick
from the next in the same row four or five yards. Then lay the limed strings on
the forks some rows higher than others, like waves. Fasten the ends with a
slipping loop, so that upon any violent strain the limed string may loosen and
lap about any thing that touches it. And so you shall take a great number of
Plover of other Fowl that fly in a broad squadron, and swoop close by the
ground a good distance before they light.

In like manner you may take whole-footed Waterfowl, liming your strings with
strong and water-tried Lime, placing the strings over the Water as you did over
the Land, only making your forked sticks so much the longer, observing never to
lay them in the Moonshine, but either in dark nights, or shady places. They
may be placed either so near the water as almost to touch it, or higher, not
exceeding a foot and half. These birds, though many times they fly in single
files, yet when they come down, spread themselves so, as to alight all as it
were together upon the water: And so by this Artifice they may be taken many
together.

. II. How to take Waterfowl with Lime-twigs.
YOu must provide good store of rods; the best are small, long, straight twigs
of Willow, cut of even length, less for small fowl, and greater for greater,
yet all so light and slender, as to be apt to play and wind about any thing.
The length must be suited to the place where they are to be used. Smear above
half their upper ends with Birdlime, and holding them to the fire make the
Bird-lime melt and run upon them, that the Rod may not be discerned from the
Lime.

Then at the times before directed go to the haunts: And first in the very
middle of the place pin down for a stale a live-fowl of the same kind you lay
for, yet so that she may have liberty of wing to flutter up and down at
pleasure. Round the Stale every way, all the place over, prick down your
Lime-rods in rows, at about a foot distance from each other, aslope, with their
points bending to the wind, or crosswise, one to the wind, and one against it
alternately, their tops being a foot from the ground or better. This done,
place a Stale or two more aloof from the Limerods; and having found a sit place
for your self to lie concealed in; with a small, long string fastened to each
Stale, and running along the ground to you, when you see or hear any Fowl
coming, stir the Stales, and make them flutter: and upon sight of them the Fowl
will presently strike and swoop in among them, and so be entangled by the Rods.

You must have a well-taught Water-Spaniel to find and fetch such as flutter
away and hide themselves.

Whole-footed Waterfowl may in like manner be taken with rods smeared over
with strong Water-lime, which no moisture or frost can injure. Prick these Rods
in the water, the limed part being above water, [and amongst them stake down
here and there a Stale,] all over any Fen or wadeable River, and also upon the
dry banks and borders surrounding such Waters, so thick that a Fowl may not
creep between them, fixing also a Stale or two there.

You need not wait continually on your Rods; only come first early in the
Morning, secondly at Noon, thirdly, late at Night, always attended with your
Spaniel, and take what you find: If any of your Rods be missing, employ your
Spaniel for finding out the Fowl that carried them away, whether fluttered into
the River, or crept into any holes of the Bank, Rushes, Sedge, or other Covert.

When your sport begins to decay, and the Game leaves the haunt, immediately
find out a new haunt that is untroubled, and do as before directed; and after
about a months rest the first haunt will become as good as before.

For Wild-goose or Bernacle set of your greatest Rods upon green Winter corn,
either Wheat or Rye, but especially Wheat, on which this sort of Fowl feed most
earnestly. [The brownest Rods, and nearest the color of the earth are best]
Set your Rods especially about and in the middle of the water-furrows. These
are very shie Fowl, and therefore you must stand at a good distance upon some
knob or higher ground; and when by fluttering of the Fowl touched, and sudden
rising of the rest you perceive any are taken, make in and take them up; and if
any half limed be flitting away, let your Dog fetch them.

It will not be amiss, if when you have placed your Rods, you beat the Fowl off
from all other haunts, which will make them come the sooner to that where your
Rods are placed.

Out of the Epit. of Husbandry.
How to take Snipes with Water-Bird-lime.
Take two or three hundred Birch-twigs, and lime forty or fifty of them
together very well: Then finding out the haunt of Snipes, which you shall
perceive by their Dung, and in very hard weather where the water lies open they
will lie very thick. Then observing the place where they most feed, set two or
three hundred of your twigs at a yard distance, and sloping some one way, some
another. Retire two or three hundred paces from the place, and you shall find,
that there shall not one Snipe in ten miss your twigs, by reason they spread
their wings, and fetch a round close to the ground before they alight. When you
see any taken, stir not at first, for he will feed with the twigs under his
wings, and as others come over the place he will be a cause to entice them. But
when you see the coast clear, and but few that be not taken, go and take up
your Birds, and fasten one or two, that the other flying over may come to the
same place. If there be any other open places there by, put them off those
haunts. They will lie where it is open and a Spring very much; for they can
feed in no hard place by reason of their Bills. In a Snow you shall have them
extraordinary thick upon such a place.

CHAP. III. How to take Waterfowl with Springes and Snares.
HAving found the haunts where these fowl do usually feed, and noted well the
furrows and water-tracks where they commonly stalk and paddle to find worms,
flote-grass, roots and other such like things on which they feed, you shall
mark where many furrows meet in one, and break out as it were in one narrow
stream or passage, and so descending afterward divide into other parts and
branches, this middle part or core being the deepest, and as it were feeding
the rest; then noting how every furrow breaks and comes in this Center or
little Pit, you shall mark which is most padled with the Fowl: which found out
and noted; you shall across all the other passages make as it were a Fence of
small short sticks pricked down into the ground, at half an Inch distance,
standing about an handful or somewhat more above water. The Fowl (such is their
nature) will not pressover these Fences, but stray about till they find the
open way, wherein they will run up swiftly, padling up and down for their
victuals. This done, take a good stiff stick, cut flat on one side, and prick
both ends down into the water or earth on one side the track, the bow running
parallel to, and not crossing the track. Then you shall make a bow of small
Hazle or Willow in the fashion of a Pear, [rather narrower] the one end running
out as it were in a foot-stalk, longer or shorter, greater or smaller,
according to the bigness of the Fowl you set for, This is to answer the bridge
in a Mouse-trap, and therefore we will call it the Bridge. Then take a good
stiff young Plant of Hazel or Elm, rushy grown, and clean without knot, and
having made the bottom end sharp, at the top you shall fasten a very strong
Loop or Swickel of horse-hair. [This Loop is also to be made greater or lesser,
of more or fewer horse-hairs, according to the bigness of the birds you set
for] tied very fast together with strong Packthread, and made so smooth and
yare that it will slip and run at pleasure. Hard by this Loop or Swickel shall
there also be fastened, within an Inch and half of the end of the Plant a little
broad thin Tricker, such as they use to set up Mouse-traps with.

These things thus prepared, take your Loop of Hazel or Withy made Pear-wise,
and laying it cross the track, hang the bowed end of it on a little Peg or Hook
driven down into the ground on one side the track, the other end or stalk of it
must be put underneath the bout of the first-mentioned bowed stick, and near
the end of the stalk of it must be a nick cut in. Then having thrust down the
sharpened end of the Hazel-plant fast into the ground on the bank or side of the
track, bring the smaller end with the Loop and Tricker to the Bridge: Then put
one end of the Tricker under the bout of the first mentioned stick, and the
other end in the nick made in the stalk or end of the Bridge; this will keep
the Hazel-plant bent down. Then lay the Loop of horse-hair upon the Bridge so
conveniently wide, as that the Bird may tread in the middle of it upon the
Bridge, which she shall no sooner do, but up will fly the end of the
Hazel-plant, and the birds foot be caught in the noose or slipping Loop of
horse-hair. This is somewhat difficult so clearly to express in words as that
any man may readily understand and conceive it. Markham's description is so
imperfect and obscure, that I could make nothing of it.

How to catch Woodcocks in Snares.
This Bird being wont to walk straight forwards in any furrows or tracks, the
Fowlers make little pads or walks for them in the places where they haunt, of a
Palm broad, straight and equal, and in them set many Snares made of horse-hair
such as are designed Figure 2. This bird being sufficiently simple, once got
into one of these pads runs straight on from end to end without any
heed-taking, and so is caught by the neck in some of these snares.

We in England are wont to make great Glades through thick Woods, and hang Nets
across them: And so the Woodcocks shooting through these Glades, as their
nature is, strike against the Nets, and are entangled in them.

CHAP. IV. An approved way to take a Heron; out of the Epitome of the Art of
Husbandry.
A Heron being as great a devourer of Fish as any is, I will affirm ten times
as much as the Otter, and shall destroy a Pond more in one Week than an Otter
shall do in three Months: For I have seen a Heron that has been shot at a Pond
to have seventeen Carps at once in his belly, which he will digest in six or
seven hours, and to fishing again. I have seen a Carp taken out of a Herons
belly nine Inches and an half long: Several Gentlemen that have kept them tame,
have put fish in a Tub, and tried the Heron how many small Roches and Dace he
would eat in a day, and they have found him to eat above fifty a day, one day
with another. One Heron that haunts a Pond in a year shall destroy one thousand
store-carps; nay, one thousand five hundred in half a year. Now the best way to
take this great enemy of Fish is this: Having found his haunt, get three or
four small Roches or Daces and having a strong Hook with a Wire to it, draw the
Wire just withinside the skin of the fish, beginning without side of the Gills,
and running it to the tail, and then the fish will lie five or six days alive:
For if the fish be dead, the Heron will not touch him. Let not your Hook be too
rank. Then having a strong Line made of Silk and Wire, about two yards and half
long (if you twist not Wire with your Silk his sharp Bill will bite it in two
immediately) and tie a round stone of about a pound weight to the Line, and lay
three or four Hooks, and in two or three nights you shall not fail to have him
if he comes to your Ponds. Lay not your Hooks in the deep water, where the
Heron cannot wade to them; for if you do, they may lie long enough before you
see any effect of your pains. Color your Line of a dark green, for a Heron is
a very subtle bird.

CHAP. V. Of the Fowling-piece, and Stalking-horse.
THe best Fowling-pieces are the long-barrelled [of five and a half or six
foot] of an indifferent bore [somewhat under Harquebuse] for they hold the best
charges, and carry the furthest level; and such as have Firelocks.

The charge must be round hail-shot, of bigness according to the Game you shoot
at.

As near as you can shoot with the wind, and sideways of, or behind the Fowl:
And if possible under the shelter of some hedge, bank, or tree, etc. sometimes
(if need be) creeping on your hands and knees. Choose rather to shoot at a rank
or file than a single fowl; and then send your Dog for what you have stricken.
You must have your Dog in such true obedience as not to stir from your heels
till you bid him go.

Where you have no shelter use a Stalking-horse, which is any old Jade trained
up for that purpose; which being stripped naked, and having nothing but a string
about the nether Chap, of two or three yards long, will gently, and as you have
occasion to urge him, walk on the banks of Brooks and Rivers, or Meadows and
Moors, or up and down in the water, which way you please, flodding, and eating
on the grass and weeds that grow therein; and so hardy as not to take any
affright at the report of your Piece. You shall shelter your self and your
Piece behind his foreshoulder, bending your body down low by his side, and
keeping his body still full between you and the Fowl. Then having chosen your
mark, take your level from before the forepart of the Horse, shooting as it
were between the horses neck and the water, which is more safe than taking the
level under the horses belly, and much less to be perceived; the shoulder of
the horse covering the body of the man, and his legs also the man's legs. Whiles
you are stalking you may leave your Dog with your Bags, etc. where he may lie
close, and never stir till you have shot, and then upon the least call (but not
before) come to you, and fetch forth what you have killed.

For want of a live-horse you may make an artificial stalking-horse of Canvas,
either stuffed, or hollow, and stretched upon splints of wood or strong Wires,
with his head bending down, as if he grazed, of due shape, stature, and
bigness, painted of the color of a horse [the darker the less apt to be
discovered.] Let it be fixed in the middle to a staff with a pick of Iron, to
stick it in the ground while you shoot.

Instead of a horse you may make and use the shape of an Ox, Stag, or any
other horned beast, painted of the usual color of beasts in that Country, and
having the natural horn or head.

N. These Engines are to be employed in those places where the birds are used
to see, and be acquainted with the beasts they represent.

N. 2. These Engines are fitter for Water than Land, the water hiding their
imperfections.

When you have so much beaten the fowl with the Stalking horse that they begin
to find your deceit, and will not sit: Then you may otherwhiles use your
Oxe-engine, till the Horse be forgotten, and so by change of your Engines make
your sport last. The shape of a Stag may be useful in such places where Stags
commonly feed, and are familiar with the Fowl, but they are subject to quicker
discovery.

Some stalk with dead Engines, as an artificial Tree, Shrub, or Bush, or a dead
Hedge. But these are not so useful for the stalk as the stand: It being
unnatural for dead things to move, and the Fowl will not only apprehend, but
eschew it. Therefore if you use them, you must either not move them at all, or
so slowly as that their motion shall not be perceived.

SECTION II. Of the taking of Land-Fowl.
CHAP. I. Several ways of taking them by night.
. I. Of taking Birds with the Low-bell.
THis is of use chiefly in Champain Countries, and that from the end of October
till the end of March following.

About eight of the clock at night, the Air being mild, and the Moon not
shining, take your Low-bell, of such size as a man may well carry it in one
hand, having a deep, hollow, and sad sound; and with it a Net of small Mash, at
least twenty yards deep, and so broad as to cover five or six ordinary Lands,
or more, according as you have company to carry it: and go into a Stubble-field
[a Wheat stubble is the best.] He that carries the Bell must go foremost, and
toll it as he goes along as solemnly as may be, letting it but now and then
knock on both sides. Then shall follow the Net born up at each corner, and on
each side. Another must carry a pan of live coals, but not blazing. At these,
having pitched your Nets where you think any Game is, you must light bundles of
Hay, Straw, or Stubble, or else Links and Torches, and with noises and poles
beat up all the Birds under the Net, that they may rise, and entangle
themselves in it, and you take them at pleasure. Which done extinguish your
Lights, and proceeding to another place, do as before.

N. The sound of the Low-bell astonies the Birds, and makes them lie close; and
the blaze of light dazzling their eyes affrights them, and causes them to rise
and make to it.

N. 2. In this pastime all must be done with great silence, no noise being
heard but the Low-bell only, till the Nets be placed, and the Lights blazing,
and then you may use your pleasure: Which once extinguished, a general silence
must be again made.

. II. Of taking Birds with the Trammel.
THe Trammel is much like the Lowbelling Net, only it may be made somewhat
longer, but not much broader. This Net, when you come to a fit place, spread on
the ground, and let the hinder end thereof, being plummed with lead lie loose
on the ground, but the foremost end at the two corners be born up by the
strength of men, a full yard or more from the ground, and so trail the Net
along the ground. On each side the Net some must carry great blazing Lights of
fire, and by the Lights others must march with long Poles, to beat up the Birds
as you go, and as they rise so take them. In this sort you may go over a whole
field, or any other champain ground.

. III. How they take Birds in Italy by night with a Light and a Net called
Lanciotoia.
THis sport is most used in the Champain of Rome. The Net is of the Mash of an
ordinary Lark-net. It is fastened to two green sticks of pliant wood, twice so
big as ones greatest finger, and About a yard, or yard and half English.
two or three [Roman] yards long. These sticks must be fastened to the end of a
square baston of two yards and half long in two holes, a little distant the one
from the other, and covered with the same Net. [This Baston serves for a handle
to carry and manage the Net with, and may be as well round as square, and then
the whole Instrument will somewhat resemble a Racket, such as they play at
Tennis with.] These two sticks serve to extend the Net at top to about four
yards breadth. This Net the Fowler carries on his shoulder, holding the handle
of it in one hand, and a Lanthorn called Frugnuolo, with a Lamp burning in it
in the other; and when by the light he discovers any Bird within his reach, he
claps his Net upon it, and covers it. Besides the Lanthorn the Fowler carries a
Bell either at his Girdle, or his Knee, (like our Low-bell) the better to
secure the birds to himself. This exercise cannot be used at all times, but
only in Autumn or Winter, not beginning before one hour of the night. Whether
the weather be cloudy or clear it is all one, so the Moon shine not.

The Frugnuolo is a sort of Lanthorn made of Latten (commonly, but falsely,
called Tin) all close but the fore-side. Its Base about a Roman Palm and half
long, and at the aperture about a Palm broad, or a little more; likewise a Palm
high: The Cover (which goes shelving) two Palms long: In the midst thereof
above is a handle, and within side a thin plate of Iron three fingers distant
from the beginning of the Cover, to preserve the Tin from being burnt and
marred by the flame of the Lamp. Below is another empty handle to put in a
stick to hold it up on high. Within, in a Circle made on purpose in the bottom,
is put an earthen Lamp with a great Week, and Oil. With this kind of Lamp they
also search bushes, hedges, and low trees, where they think Thrushes and other
Birds perch, and having discovered them, strike them down with an Instrument
called Ramata, made like a Racket with a long handle, or if they be out of
reach of that, shoot them with a Cross-bow.

. IV. Of Bat-fowling.
BAt-fowling is a taking by night of great and small Birds, that rest not on
the ground, but perch on shrubs; bushes, trees, etc. and is proper to woody
and rough Countries.

First, one must carry a Vessel with fire (as in Low-belling) then others must
have Poles bound with dry Wisps of Hay, Straw, pieces of Links, pitched Hurds,
or any other combustible matter that will make a blaze. Others must bear long
Poles with rough and bushy tops. When you are come to the Birds haunts, kindle
some of your fires, and with your Poles beat the bushes and trees: Which done
the Birds (if any be) will rise, and fly to, and play about the Lights: It
being their nature not to depart from them, but almost scorch their Wings in
the same, so that they who have the bushy Poles may at their pleasure strike
them down and take them.

Others carry with them a great Lime-bush made of the head of a Birch or Willow
Tree, and pitching it down make their blazes close by it; and the birds will
come and light upon it, and so be entangled.

In this Sport you must observe the directions given in Low-belling as to the
choice of the night, and especially keeping silence, etc.

CHAP. II. Of taking Land-fowl with Nets.
. I. A general way of taking many sorts of Land-fowl by the Crow-net.
THE Crow-net is the same in all respects with that described Chap. I. This Net
may be placed near any Barn-door where Corn is winnowed, or in a Cornstubble,
or on the Greensword in the Morning and Evening haunts of any Birds where they
gather Worms. Wherever placed it must be carefully hid and concealed, as much
as may be, from the view of the Birds, as if near a Barn-door by casting Chaff
upon it, etc. Observe also, first to have some Covert to hide your person in,
where you may see, and not be seen. Secondly, not to be too hasty in striking,
but stay till you have a full number under the reach of your Net, and then pull
freely and quickly.

. II. Of taking Birds with Day-nets.
THE time of the Year for these Nets is from August till November: Of the Day a
little before Sunrise, so as your Nets may be laid, and all your Implements in
readiness to begin your work by peep of Sun. The milder the Air, and the
clearer and brighter the Morning, the fitter is the season for this exercise.
The best place is in Champain Countries, remote from any Town, Village, or
common concourse of people, on short Barley stubbles, smooth green Lays, or
level Meadows; if the place be not naturally even and plain where you pitch
your Nets, you must make it so: That both lying and falling over they may couch
so close to the ground that the shortest grass or stubble appearing through
them, they may as it were lie hid and unperceived by the Birds, and that being
covered they may not creep or flicker from under them.

Let your Nets be made of very fine Packthread, knit sure, the Mash not above
an Inch square. Let them be about three fathoms long, and not above one deep,
verged on each side with strong small Cords, the ends extended upon two small
Poles as long as the Net is broad, etc. in all things like the Net described.
I. save that that was to be but one single Net, but here you must have two
exactly of the same size and fashion, and placed at that distance, that when
they are drawn the sides may just meet and touch one another. Your Nets being
staked down with strong stakes, so that with any nimble twitch you may cast
them to and fro at pleasure; some twenty or thirty paces from the Nets place
your Giggs on the tops of long Poles, turned into the wind, so as they may play
and make a noise therein. These Giggs are made of long Goosefeathers in the
manner of Shuttle-cocks, and with little turnels of wood running in broad and
flat Swan-quills, made round like a small hoop, and so with longer strings
fastened to the Pole, will with any small wind twirl and flicker in the Air
after such a wanton manner that the Birds will come in great flocks to wonder
and play about the same. After the placing of your Giggs, you shall then place
your Stale, which is a small stake of wood to prick down fast in the earth,
having in it a Morteise hole, in which a long slender piece of wood, of about
two foot, is so fastened that it may move up and down at pleasure, and to this
longer stick you shall fasten a small Line, which running through a hole in the
stake aforesaid, and so coming up to the place where you sit, you may by
drawing the Line up and down to you (with your right hand) raise and mount the
longer stick from the ground, as often as you shall find occasion.

Now to this longer stick you shall fasten a live Lark, or Bunting, (for you
must be sure ever to preserve some alive for that purpose) or for want of such,
any other small Bird, which the Line making to flicker up and down by your
pulling, will entice the Larks to play about it, and swoop so near the ground,
that drawing your hand, you may cover them with your Nets at pleasure: Also it
will entice Hawks and any other Birds of prey to stoop and strike at the same,
so as you may with ease take them.

There is also another Stale, called the Looking-glass; and this is a round
stake of wood as big as a man's Arm, and made very sharp at the nether end, so
as you may thrust and fasten it into the earth at your pleasure. This Stake is
made very hollow in the upper part, above five fingers deep at the least; into
this hollowness is placed a three-square piece of wood, about twelve Inches
long, and each square two Inches broad, lying upon the top of the Stake, and
going with a foot into the hollowness, which foot must have a great knob at the
top, and another at the bottom, with a deep slenderness between them, to which
slenderness must be fastened a small Packthread, which running through a hole in
the side of the Stake, must come up to the seat where you sit. Now the
three-square piece of wood, which lies on the top of the Stake, must be made of
such a true poise and evenness, and the foot in the Socket so round and smooth,
that upon the least touch it will twirl and turn round like a Scoperil, winding
the Packthread so many times about it, which being suddenly drawn, and as
suddenly let go again, will keep the Engine in a perpetual round motion, like a
Child's Mill, made of a Nut, a stick, and an Apple. This done, you shall with
Glue or other strong Cement fasten upon the uppermost squares of the
three-square piece about twenty small pieces of Looking-glass, and paint all
the sparewood between them of a very bright red color, which in the continual
motion and turning about will give such a glorious reflection, that the wanton
Birds cannot forbear, but will play about it with admiration till they be taken.

Now both these Stales are to be placed in the very midst between the two Nets,
and about two or three foot distant one from another, so that in the falling of
the Nets the Cords may by no means touch or annoy them. Neither must they stand
one before or after another, but in a direct Line one over against another, the
glass being kept continually moving, and the Bird very often flickering. When you
have thus placed your nets, Giggs, and Stales, you shall then go to the further
end of your long drawing Lines, and Stale-lines, and having a little Hassock
made of Sedge, about a foot or better high, you shall place it within a yard or
little more of the end of the same: And then sitting down upon the Hassock lay
the main drawing Line (with a strong button of wood made fast in the same) upon
your thigh, and with your right hand continually draw the grass-Line, and with
your left the Stale-line, and when you shall perceive the Larks or other birds
to play near and about your Nets and Stales, swooping near and to the ground,
you shall then with both hands pull the Net over, and cover and take your prey.
If the weather be good be not too hasty to pluck at a single bird, but stay
till you see many playing about your Nets.

Behind the Seat you sit on lay your spare Instruments and Implements which you
are to use about the whole Work, as Spare-stakes, Poles, Lines, Packthread,
Knitting-pin and Needle, your Bag with Stales, a Mallet to knock in your Stakes
with, and a nimble little Hatchet to make new Stakes with, or sharpen them,

There may be other devices to move the Stales, besides these here described by
Markham, but these being as commodious as any, I shall forbear to trouble the
Reader with the mention of more. These Nets may be made use of as well upon
Hills and rising grounds as upon Plains, provided the Area on which they lie be
level and even: near waters also, and in high ways and walks of Gardens, etc.

Olina describes the manner how these Nets are to be employed for taking of
Starlings. Having observed (says he) where those birds haunt most, provide
your Nets six paces long, and eight Roman Palms deep, of a small Mash, having
their drawing Line of fifteen paces, Moreover, you must get a Cage of five
Palms high, with a middle floor; in the upper Story whereof you shall put about
one hundred live Stares, and in the lower others which are to serve for Stales.
Those in the upper room are to call the wild Stares; and they must have their
meat put all in one Vessel, and their water in one Cup, and that so strait,
that they can drink but one at a time; likewise the day before they are to be
used they should have no meat of two hours before night, that so being hungry,
and striving to get to the meat and drink, they may make the greater screaming
noise and cry. The live Stales (four in number) must be tied by the tails, each
with a string, and by that string fastened one by one to a couple of sticks
joined together across between the Nets, to which cross a Cord is fastened that
reaches to the Fowler, by the plucking whereof he may at pleasure move the
Stales. In this manner of fowling are also to be used about twenty or twenty
five Jackdaws, or such like birds-cases stuffed, and set out like live birds, and
these placed in order between the Nets for dead-stales, the four live-stales
being next the Fowlers Cabin. Let the dead stales be placed with their heads
to the wind, that it do not ruffle and discompose their feathers.

The same Author gives us also an account of the manner how they take Lapwings
with the Day-nets.

The Nets for this use are to be of ten paces length, of a large Mash, having a
drawing Line fifteen paces long. Between the Nets are to be placed fifteen or
twenty dead Stales, that is Lapwings dried, or the Cases of Lapwings stuffed, and
set out as if they were alive: And besides those two live-stales, which must be
used and set as the Starling-stales, and have meat given them to eat. Observe
in like manner to set the heads of your dead Stales against the wind. To entice
the Birds you must counterfeit their note or cry by a Lapwing-call.

. III. How to take Larks with Nets, called by the Italians Pantiere.
THese Nets are about four [Roman] yards deep, or a little more, of the same
Mash with the ordinary Day-nets, strung on the upper side on a Cord, upon which
they run with a row of little Rings, whereby they may be drawn out, or run up
together as one pleases. These Nets are supported by two or three Stakes, or
more, according to the wideness of the place where they are set. They are to be
put in order two hours before Sunset, for the Evening-driving; and for the
Morningdriving, before break of day; in stubble-fields. About Musket Shot from
the Nets two men on foot holding a rope of twenty or twenty five yards long,
one at one end, the other at the other, must begin and walk toward the Nets,
drawing the Rope over the stubble, and so raising the Larks that lie scattered
up and down the field: the which will not take wing, but run forward before the
rope, till at last they come within the Nets, which being not stretched out
straight, but easily running up, the more they struggle and fly about, the more
they are entangled.

. IV. How the Italians take small Birds with a Net called Ragna.
THe place for using these Nets is a Grove, (called from the Nets Ragnaia)
which ought to be remote from high ways, and defended from the Northwind; which
is very disagreeable and distasteful to the Birds, especially Thrushes and
Beccafigos, besides the danger of the Woods being wholly or in part blasted by
it. Wherefore it should be situate insome Valley, or on the side of a little
Hill exposed to the South. Through it, or beside it should run some River,
Brook, or other stream of water issuing from a quick Spring, that fails not in
Summer. If it be so situate as to be encompassed on all sides with cultivated
fields, in which grow some scattering Figtrees, it will be the better. This
Grove is wont to be made six, eight, ten, or twelve times so long as it is
broad, according as the place will permit: In it long-ways must be drawn three,
five, or seven walks, as it is broader or narrower. In case it has not a
natural fence or hedge you must make an artificial one, which must be tall and
thick to keep beasts out, and birds in, and even on the top.

The Grove within must be planted with Juniper, Bays, Mastic-tree, Lime-trees,
Oaks, Elms, and many other trees but especially Fig Trees. At the roots of such
trees as cast their leaves plant Vines. Many other instructions and directions
he has about the Plantation, which who so pleases may see in him.

The Nets are exactly like those described, Section I. Chap. I.. II. only the
Mash somewhat less, they being for small birds. The two outside Nets or false
Nets along their upper edge must have Iron or Horn-rings, and by them be put
upon a strong Cord. The middle or true Net must also be verged with a Cord.
These Nets, one, two, or more of them, must be placed in the middle of the
Grove, and crossing it; fastened by the top-cords to two great Poles or Pillars,
made with winding steps round to mount up them; and on their tops having little
rundles to draw the Lines nimbly, and stretch out the Nets. The bottom of the
Nets, or that side next the ground must have many strings hanging down from it,
two or three Palms distant one from another, which are to be tied down to
certain Pegs fastened in the earth. The middle Net, which must be the deeper,
will fall down sufficiently in a lump or furl between the two side-ones,
therefore with a Cane you must draw it gently through the Mashes of the false
Nets, especially about the middle of the Nets, making in each Mash a kind of
purse or pouch, that when any Bird strikes against it, it may more readily run
through the Mashes of the false net, and so catch the Bird as it were in a Bag.

The time for catching is either in the Morning early, before the Birds are
gone out to feed, or at Even when they come to roost. At each end of the Grove
in every walk one person must march forward toward the Net, making a noise as
he goes with a Cane or Saff, and throwing stones or clods of earth, if it be
for Beccafigos: But if it be for Thrushes, at first he must walk quietly and
leisurely, without making much noise; and as he comes nearer the Nets, so make
greater have and more noise. Whence it is wont to be said: For Thrushes a wise
man, and for Beccasigos, a fool or mad man.

To hinder the Birds from mounting and flying away, some are wont to turn off a
Sparhawk, or other little Hawk with Bells at her heels to soar aloft and hover
over the Grove. Others are wont to do the same only with a pair of wings, and a
Bell on the top of a Pole. When you see no more birds stirring, loosening the
top-cords let down and furl up your Nets, with the birds in them; and either
carry them home in the Net, or take them out at pleasure.

. V. Of the Sparrow-net.
THe Sparrow-net is made up of two cross-staves, a Purse-net, and two strings.
The form of this Net you may see expressed in which AFB represents the longer
cross-staff, whose direct piece must be of the bigness of a handsome Hawks Pole;
its transverse piece AB like the head of an ordinary hay-rake, but bigger and
longer: CED the shorter cross-staff, joined to the longer at E, so loosely as
to fall to and fro at pleasure, of such due height and length, that when the
cross pieces meet they may join even and just. CAEBD is a Pursenet, fastened to
both cross-staves all along, and having that liberty at top, that the
cross-staves may fall and part one from another at a pretty distance; its
bottom being fastened to the longer staff at E. CAE, DBE are two small cords
fastened to the two ends of the shorter cross-staff, and passing through two
holes in the ends of the longer cross-staff, tied together at E, at such
distance that the shorter staff may fall from the longer as far as you see
meet, or the wideness of the Net will give leave. To the knot of the two Cords
must be made fast a single Cord EG, which you must carry in your right hand,
that you may at pleasure draw the cross-staves close together, and let them
open as need shall require.

This Net is to be used late in the Evening, or early in the Morning, by
setting it against the Eves of thatcht Houses, Stacks, Hovels, Barns, Stables,
Dove-coats, etc. and being so set knocking and thrusting the cross-staves close
against the same, making such a noise as may enforce the Birds to fly out of
their holes or haunts into the Net; and then presently drawing the Line EG, and
so shutting up the cross-staves enclose them, and letting down your Net, open
it, and take them out.

The chief benefit of taking Birds in this manner is for the mewing of Hawks,
or getting into lust and strength sick and weak Hawks: Because with this Engine
you may take Evening and Morning so many birds as you please, and give them
warm to your Hawk, which is the greatest nourishment that can be, raising a
Hawk soon, and making her mew fast.

CHAP. III. How to take several sorts of small Birds and other Land-fowl with
Bird-lime.
. I. Of taking small Birds with the Lime-bush, and Lime-twigs.
YOur Lime-bush must be a main bough of any bushy tree, as Birch or Willow, or
for want of them, Sallow, Poplar, or Aspen; whose twigs are long, smooth, and
straight, without pricks, knots, or any other roughness or crookedness; having
picked and trimmed it (yet not taking away any of the little budknots) lime every
twig and branch from the top down within four fingers or thereabout of the
bottom. The body and main branches must not be touched with any Lime at all.
Dabble not on your Lime too thick, nor yet let any part be left bare, or want
its proportion, that ought to be limed.

Your Bush thus prepared, carry it forth into the fields where the haunts of
the small birds are, and place it as near as you can to any of these haunts, if
it be a hedge or tree close to them, etc. provided that wherever you pitch it
down, you may very near it have some close Covert to lie concealed in, and
there chirp like a Sparrow, or call with a note like the Linnet or Bull-finch
[as the Cocks use to do when they miss the Hens, or the Hens the Cocks]
altering your note according to your fancy, but continually calling in one note
or other. This Art and Ability is gotten by diligent observing the Birds notes
abroad, and by practice. But if you cannot frame your mouth to these sounds,
get you a Bird-call; and having learnt how to use it Artificially, you shall
sit in your Covert, and call the Birds to you: And when you see any of them
light upon your Bush let them alone, and move not till you see them safely
entangled, which their own skipping up and down, and struggling when they find
themselves snared, will do better than any affright from you whatsoever:
Neither shall you stir for a single Bird or two, but stay till many be
entangled: For the first that are taken will with their striving and fluttering
in the bush be as good as Stales; and make a world of others repair to them,
which you may then take: And this exercise you may continue from before
Sunrise till ten of of the Clock in the Forenoon, and from one in the
Afternoon till almost Sunset in the Evening.

If you want a Call you may make use of a Stale; as of a Bat or two, placed
next to your Lime-bush in such apparent manner that no bird thereabouts but may
behold them; which will no sooner be perceived, but every bird will come to
gaze and wonder at them: Then having no other convenient lighting place but the
Lime-bush, they will flock as thick into the same as may be, and so you may
take them at pleasure. So the Owl may in like manner be employed, which by
reason she is more melancholy and less stirring than the Bat, and also of
greater bulk, and sooner perceived, is a better Stale than the Bat. For want of
a live Owl or Bat the skin of either stuffed, or an artificial Owl made of wood
and painted may serve the turn.

Others take these small birds with Lime-twigs only, by rising early in the
Morning before break of day, and going to the haunts, and there watching when
the Birds go forth to seek their food (which is ever at the spring of the day)
and then finding that they have forsaken the hedges, they place their
Lime-twigs all along those hedges, some upright, some slope-wise, and some
across; and withal so thick, that the Birds can come no way into the hedge, but
of force they must be entangled. This done they go into the Cornfieldsd,
Meadows, or Grounds adjoining, where the Birds feed, and there beating them up
and scaring them, make them retire to the hedges in great flocks, where they
are presently entangled among the Lime-twigs, and taken in abundance. But this
manner of taking is only for the Spring and Fall of the Leaf; and only for one
certain time of the day, viz. an hour before and after Sunrise.

. II. An excellent way of taking small Birds with Birdlime; out of the Epitome
of Husbandry.
THis is best done in a Snow. When you see the Birds flock together about your
house or fields; choose out one hundred large Wheat-ears; cut the straw about a
foot long besides the ears; From the bottom of the Ears to the middle lime the
straw for about six or seven Inches; let your Lime be warm, that so it may run
thin upon the straw, and be less discernable to the Birds. Go then to the
place, and carry a little bag of Chaff and threshed Ears, and scatter these
fourteen or fifteen yards wide. Then take the limed Ears, and stick them up and
down in the Snow, with the Ears leaning, or with the end touching the ground.
Then retire from the place, and drive the Birds from any other haunt, and you
will see presently great flocks repair thither, and begin to peck the Ears of
Corn, and fly away with them, which as soon as any of them shall do, the straw
that is limed laps under his Wing, and down he falls, not perceiving himself to
be entangled: For I have seen many eat their Ears when they have been fast
limed under the Wing. In the field you will take most Larks. For Sparrows stick
your Ears upon the house-tops, though you never get the Birds. Every dozen of
Sparrows you take in Winter shall save you a quarter of Wheat before Harvest.

Take away all your limed Ears, and in the Afternoon bait the place with a bag
or two more of Ears and Chaff, and let them rest till Morning, that the birds
may feed boldly, and not be affrighted; then take some fresh Ears, and stick
them up as you did before.

. III. How to take Fieldfares with Birdlime: out of the same.
WHen time is, that is about or after Michaelmas, shoot a Fieldfare or two, and
set them in such order that they may seem to sit alive on a tree. Then having
prepared the Lime-twigs about two or three hundred, take a Birchen bough, and
cut off all the small twigs, make little holes and clefts all about the bough,
and there place your Lime-rods: Then set the Fieldfare upon the top bough,
making him fast, that he may seem alive. Let this bough be set near where they
come in a morning to feed, (for they keep a constant place till their food is
gone) that so flying near they may espy the top-bird: which as soon as they do,
they will fall down in whole flocks to him.

. IV. How to take Pigeons with Lime-twigs: out of the same.
GEt a couple of Pigeons dead or alive; if dead, yet order them so as to stand
stiff as if they were living and feeding. Then at Sunrising take your twigs,
what quantity you pelase: Let them be very small [Wheat-straws are as good or
better] and place them on the ground which the Pigeons frequent, where your two
Pigeons are set; and you shall find you will quickly be rid of them. Two or
three dozen is nothing to take in a Morning if there come good flights.

. V. How to take Crows, Pies, Gleads, etc. with Lime-twigs: out of the same.
STick up Lime-twigs on the Carcass of a dead Horse newly stripped, or any other
Carrion, so soon as these birds have found it. Let them be very small, and not
too thick set; lest they perceive them, and take distaste.

. VI. How to take Crows and Rooks when they pull up Corn by the roots: out of
the same.
TAke some thick brown Paper, and divide a sheet into eight parts, and make
them up like Sugar-loaves: Then lime the inside of the Paper a very little [Let
them be limed three or four days before you set them.] Then put some Corn in
them, and lay fifty or sixty of them up and down the ground, as much as you can
under some cold of earth, and early in the Morning before they come to feed.
Then stand at a good distance, and you will see excellent sport. For as soon as
Rook, Crow, or Pigeon comes to pick out any of the Corn, it will hang upon his
head, and he will immediately fly bolt upright so high that he shall seem like
a small bird, and when he is spent, come tumbling down, as if he were shot in
the Air.

. VII. How to take Stares with a limed string: out of Olina's Uccelliera.
TAke a small string of a yard or thereabout long, bind it fast to the Tail of
a Stare, having first carefully limed it all over, excepting one Palm next the
bird. Having found a flock of Starlings, come as near to them as possible,
holding your Stare by the wings as near as you can, and let her go to her
fellows, which as soon as you show your self to them, will presently take wing:
Your tail-tied Stare endeavoring to secure her self of her liberty, thrusting
her self into the middle of her fellows, will entangle many of them, and so not
being able to fly, they will afford a pleasant spectacle in tumbling down to
the ground: where you must be ready with a Brush or Besom to strike them down.

Many other devices there are to take several sorts of birds with Lime-rods,
etc. which I think needless to set down; it being not difficult for an
ingenious Fowler to invent as good or better, when he shall have opportunity of
taking those kinds of Birds.

CHAP. IV. Of taking Birds with Baits.
THis way is not for taking birds to eat, but for destroying noisome and
ravenous Fowl, as Crows, Ravens, Kites, Buzzards, etc.

For the effecting whereof, 1. Observe their haunts. 2. Remember the hours or
times of day when they are most sharp-set and greedy, as early in the Morning,
so soon as they unpearch themselves; and again at Even a little before Sunset,
especially at that time of the year when they have young ones; for then they
will with greediness seize any bait, as fast as you cast it out. 3. Take a
pretty quantity of Nux Vomica, and dissolve it in Wine Vinegar, or Wine-Lees,
[those of sweet Wine are the best.] Then take the garbage of any Fowl, and
all-besmear them over with your Solution of Nux Vomica, and cast them forth
where such noisome birds haunt: and watching the birds in a convenient place,
you shall see that after swallowing a bit or two, any such Fowl will presently
grow dizzy, reeling and tumbling up and down, till at last it fall into a dead
swoon.

Others take pretty big gobbets of raw lean flesh, as Beef, Mutton, etc. and
making therein secret little holes, put in them small pieces of Nux Vomica, and
close them up again.

You may also instead of either make use of Carrion, and either smear it with
your Confection, or stop into the fleshy part of it small pieces of Nux Vomica.

It is best to let these baits lie loose, and not fasten them to the ground, as
some practice.

To take granivorous birds of the greater kind, as Doves, Rooks, etc. boil good
store of Nux Vomica together with Wheat, Barley, Pease, or any other Pulse very
well in ordinary running water, till the Grain be ready to burst, then take it
from the fire, and cover it till it be thoroughly cold. The Grain thus boiled
and steept scatter thick where these Fowl frequent, and it will have the like
effect upon them, as the Garbage or Carrion had upon the carnivorous.

For small birds boil your Nux Vomica with such seeds as they most delight in,
viz. Hemp Seed, Rape-seed, Lin-seed, and above all Mustard Seed; and they will
be in like manner entoxicated.

Some instead of Nux Vomica take only the Lees of Wine (which the sharper they
are, the better) and in them boil and steep, or only steep (which is as
availeable if continued a sufficient while) their Grain or Seeds, and scatter
them as above directed.

Others take the juice of Hemlock, and steep in it their Grain or Seeds, mixing
therewith a pretty sprinkling of Henbane and Poppy seeds, letting all stand in
steep two or three days at least, and then drain it, and scatter it, etc. which
will have the like effect with the Nux Vomica.

To recover any Fowl of these baits, take a little quantity of Sallet-oyl
(according to the strength and bigness of the Fowl) and drop it down its
throat; then chafe the head well with Vinegar, and the Fowl will presently
recover again, and be as healthful and able as ever it was.

CHAP. V. Several ways of taking Partridges.
. 4. How to take Partridges and other Birds with a Setting-dog.
A Setting-dog should be a lusty Land-Spaniel, that will range well, and yet at
such absolute command, that when he is in his full career one hem of his Master
shall make him stand still, gaze about him, and look in his Masters face, as it
were expecting directions from him, whether to proceed, stand still, or retire:
but the main thing he is to be taught is, when he sees and is near his Prey of
a sudden to stand still, or fall down flat on his belly, without making any
noise or motion till his Master come to him.

For taking Partridge with him; when you come into the fields where Partridges
frequent, cast off your Dog, and let him range or hunt, taking care that he
range not too far from you, but beat his ground justly and even, without
casting about and flying now here and now there, and skipping many places
(which the mettle of many even good dogs will make them apt to do.) If he do
so, call him in with a hem, and threaten him with a stern countenance; and when
he does well encourage him. When you see him make a sudden stop or stand still,
be sure he has set the Fowl; therefore presently make in to him, and bid him
go nearer; if he refuses, but either lies still or stands shaking of his tail,
and withal now and then looks back upon you, he is near enough: Then begin your
range or circumference about both the Dog and Partridge, not ceasing, but
walking about with a good round pace, looking still before the Dogs nose, to
see how the Covey lies, whether close together in a heap, or scattering. Then
charging the Dog to lie still, draw forth your Net, and opening of it, take you
one end of the top-cord, and your Companion the other, and holding it stretched,
run with the Net against the Dog, and clap it down over the Birds, covering Dog
and all with it: then make a noise to spring the Partridge, that they may rise,
and be entangled in the Net: Some observe to run with their Net against the
wind, to keep it fully extended. One man may make a shift to do all: But then
he must peg down one end of his Net to the ground, and taking the other end
spread it over the Birds.

The Italians (as Olina tells us) are wont to purge their Dog before they go a
Setting with him: giving him a morsel made up of half an ounce of Agarick, and
two drachms of Sal gemmae, mingled with honey of Roses, covered over with
Butter, or some other unctuous matter, that he may the more readily swallow it:
And the day following a broth made of a Weathers head, boild so, as with the
flesh of it, bread, and a little Brimston pounded, to make a sup. He bids you
also observe, 1. Not to hunt your Dog (especially after he has been new
purged) till the Sun has dried up the dew; because else he will be apt to lose
the sent, and also hurt his feet. 2. To begin to set on your Dog under the
wind, that he may take the sent the better. The Net (he says) ought to be a
little longer than it is broad or deep; viz. between seven and eight yards
over, and between eight and nine deep.

In this manner may be taken, not only Partridges, but Pheasants, Moor-pouts
and Quails.

. I. Of the haunts of Partridges, and how to find Partridges.
THe haunts wherein Partridges most delight, and most constantly abide, are
Cornfieldsd, especially during the time the Corn is standing, under the Covert
whereof they meet and breed. After the Corn is cut down they still remain in
the Stubbles, especially Wheat-Stubbles, both because they love to feed on that
grain before all others, and also for the height of the Stubble, which affords
them safer covert. When the Wheat-stubble is either too scanty, or too much
soyled and trodden with Men and Cattle, they leave it and go to the
Barley-stubbles, which though inferior in both respects, yet being fresh, and
not so usually trodden and beaten, they take great delight therein. In Winter
when these stubbles are either plowed up, or over-soyled with Cattle, manure,
or the like, then they resort to the enclosed grounds, or upland-Meadows, and
lodge in the dead grass or fog, under hedges, among Molehills, and under banks,
or at the roots of trees. You may also find haunts of Partridges in small
Coppices or Underwoods, in Bushy Closes, or where there grows Broom, Brakes,
Furze, or Ling, or any other Covert: Provided always, that there be some
Cornfieldsd adjoining, else they will rather avoid such places. In Harvesttime
when they can have no quiet lodging in the Cornfieldsd, you may find them in
the daytime in the Fallows adjoining, where they will lie lurking among the
great clods and weeds; and only early in the Morning, and late at Evening fetch
their food from the corn-sheaves next adjoining.

Now for finding them, some will do it by the eye, like hare-finders, viz. In
taking their ranges over the stubble fields, or other haunts, casting their
eyes on each hand, they will espy them out though never so close couched; which
ability partly depends upon the goodness of the eye, partly is acquired by
practice and exercise, by diligently observing the true color of the
Partridge, how it differs from the ground, and also the manner of their
lying. This is the easier done, because when you have once (as you think)
apprehended them with your eye, you may walk nearer and nearer till you are
absolutely sure you see them, provided you be ever moving, and stand not still
or gaze at them (for that they will not abide) else they are soslothful and
unwilling to take wing, that till you be ready to set your foot upon them, they
will not stir.

Others find them by the haunts and places where they last coucht: which they
know partly by their dung there left, which if new will be soft, and the white
part of it color their fingers; and partly by their padlings or treadings,
which if new will be soft and dirty, and the earth new broken of a darker
color than the mould about it; and being very new indeed, the place where they
sat will be warm, and the ground smooth and flat with some small feathers or
down scattered upon it. If you find such a haunt, you may be confident the
birds are not far off. Therefore look carefully about you, especially down the
Lands, walking leisurely; and in a short time you will espy them: which as soon
as you do, you shall presently wind off from them, and by no means look toward
them, and so fetch a large circumference round about them, keeping an ordinary
round march, making your compass less and less, till you have discovered the
whole Covey.

Others find them by going early in the Morning, or at the close of the Even,
(which are called Juking times) into their haunts, and there listening for the
calling of the Cock-Partridge, which will be very loud and earnest, to which
after some few calls the Hen will make answer; which as soon as they hear they
listen till they meet, which they shall very well perceive by their chattering
and rejoicing one with another. Then they take their range about them, drawing
nearer and nearer as before, till they discover the whole Covey.

But the best, safest, easiest, and most pleasant way of finding them is by the
Partridge-call. Having learnt the true and natural notes of the Partridge, and
being able to tune every note in its proper key, and knowing the due times and
seasons for every note, so as fitly to accommodate them, go forth either
Morning or Evening to their haunts, and having conveyed your self into some
close place, so as to see and not be seen, listen a while if you can hear the
Partridge call. If you do, answer them again in the same note, and ever as they
change, or double, or treble their note, so shall you likewise, plying still
your Call till you find them draw near to you. For this calling is so natural
and delightful to them that they will pursue it as far as they can hear it.
Having drawn them within your view, cast your self flat upon your back, and lie
without moving as if you were dead, and you shall then see them running and
pecking about you without any fear, so as you may take a full view of them, and
if you please count their number.

. II. How to take Partridge with Nets.
THese Nets may be made in all points like the Sea Chap. 6.. 3.
Phesant-nets, only the Mash somewhat smaller; but they would be much better
were they something longer and broader. Having found the Covey, draw forth your
Nets, and taking a large Circumference about them, walk a good round pace with
a careless eye, rather from than toward the Partridge, till you have fitted
your Nets, and then draw in your Circumference less and less, till you come
within the length of your Net, where, as you walk about, (for no stop or stay
must be made) prick down a stick of about three foot long, and to it fasten one
end of the Line of your Net: Then letting the Net slip out of your hand, spread
it as you go, and so carry it and lay it all over the Partridges. If they lie
straggling, that one Net will not cover them, draw out another, and do in like
manner; and alike with a third, if needs be. Then rush in upon them, and with
an affrighting voice force them to spring up, and presently they will be
entangled in the Nets.

. III. 3. How to take Partridges with Lime.
TAke of the largest and strongest Wheat-straws, or for want thereof
Rie-straws, and cutting them off between knot and knot, [the lowest joints are
the strongest and best] Lime them well over, and coming to the
Partridge-haunts, after have called a little, and find that you are answered,
prick down your straws round about you in rows, as above directed for
Lime-twigs, not only cross the Land, but the Furrows also, taking in at least
two or three Lands; and that not very near, but at a pretty distance from you,
yet so as to discern when any thing touches them. Then lie close, and call
again, not ceasing till you have drawn them toward you, whither they cannot
come but they must pass through the limed straws, which they shall no sooner
touch but they will be entangled; and by reason they come flocking together
like so many Chickens, they will be so besmear and dawb one another, that if
there be twenty, hardly one will escape.

This way of taking Partridge can only be used in Stubble-fields, and that from
August to Christmas: If you would take them in Woods, Pastures, or Meadows with
Lime, you must use the ordinary Lime-rods before described, and prick them
down, and order them in all points like as is directed for your Lime-straws.

. IV. How to drive Partridges and Quails, and take them in tunnelling Nets.
FIrst provide you a stalking Horse, or an Engine made like a Horse or Ox,
such as we have described Sect. 1. Chap. 4. Then go with your Nets to the
Partridges haunts, and having found the Covey, pitch your Net in the secretest
and likeliest place, so as to drive them down the wind. Lay not your Net flat
on the ground, but set it slopewise, and so over-shadow it with boughs, shrubs,
weeds, or some other thing that grows naturally on the ground it stands on,
that nothing may perceive it, till it be entangled. Then having covered your
face with some hood of green or dark blew stuff, stalk with your Horse or
Engine toward the Birds by gentle and slow steps, and so raise them, and drive
them before you (for it is their nature to run before a Horse or Beast out of
fear lest it tread on them.) If they chance to run any byway, or contrary to
what you would have them, then presently cross them with your stalking Horse,
and they will soon recoil, and run into any track that you would have them, and
at last into your Net.

The Net they use in Italy for this purpose is called Butrio or Cuculo, and
made with two wings and a tunnel stretched with hoops, See Figure The Fowler
stalks with a Bell in his hand, which he now and then rings.

With the same Net they also take Quails, pitching just before the tunnel of
the Net two Poles, with five Cages hanging upon each, having live Quails in
them, which serve to call and entice the wild ones. Before the Nets they cast
Millet or Panic seed to invite them in. The drive them forward a man walks on
each side the Net with a jingling Instrument [Sonagliera] in his hand first
one, then the other sounding from hand to hand. The Net is to be pitched three
or four hours before day, and the Birds driven early in the Morning: If the
Moon shines you may drive at any time of the night.

CHAP. VI. Several ways of taking Pheasants, as
. I. With Nets.
PHeasants delight most in thick, young, well-grown Coppice Woods, unfrequented
and free from the footsteps and tracings of Men and Cattle: not in tall high
woods of timber trees.

Having found their haunts and breeding places, you may find their Eye or brood
several ways: as first, by the eye, searching up and down the haunts, and
bushes, etc. Secondly, By coming early in the Morning, or late in the Evening,
and observing the old Cock and Hens calling, and the young birds answering
them, and by that sound guiding your self, till you come as near as you can to
the place where they meet, lying down there so close that you may not be
discerned, and yet may exactly observe where they lodge, and accordingly where
and in what manner to pitch your Nets. Thirdly, Which is the most sure and
easy way, by an exact and natural Pheasantcall: wherewith you must learn to
imitate all the Pheasants several notes and tunes, applying each to the right
time and purpose, when and for which she uses it, whether it be to cluck the
young ones together to brood them, to call them to meat when she has found it,
to chide them for straggling, to call them together to rejoice and wanton about
her, for all which she has a several note. The most convenient hours for the
use of the Call are before or about Sunrising, and somewhat before Sunset, at
which times they straggle abroad to seek their food, and then your note is to
call them to their food, or give them liberty to range. But if you will call
them after Sunrise or before Sunset, your notes must be to cluck them
together to brood, as also to chide them for straggling, and put them in fear of
danger. The notes of rejoicing or playing are rather for finding the old
Couples when they are separated.

Being come to the haunts you shall lodge your self in the most likely place
for your purpose, as close as possible, and then begin to call, first in a very
low note, (lest the Pheasants be lodged near you, and then a sudden loud note
may affright them) but if nothing reply, raise your note by degrees to the
highest pitch, yet by no means overstraining it, or making it speak untunably;
and if there be a Pheasant in the Wood within hearing of it she will presently
answer, and that in your own note and key. If this call back be but from one
single bird, and come from far, then you shall as secretly as you can creep
nearer to it, still plying your call; and you shall find that the Pheasant that
answers will also come nearer to you. The nearer you come, the lower observe
to make your Call speak, as the Pheasant her self will do, and her in all
points you must imitate as near as you can; and in the end you will get a sight
of her, either on the ground, or on the boughs of some low tree, as it were
prying to find you: Then ceasing your Call a while, spread your Net as secretly
and speedily as may be, in the convenientest place between you and the
Pheasant, upon the lowest shrubs and bushes, making one end fast to the ground,
and holding the other end by a long Line in your hand, by which when any thing
straineth it you may draw the Net close together, or at least into a hollow
compass. Which done, you shall call again; and then as soon as you shall
perceive the Pheasant to come just under your Net, you shall rise and show your
self, that by giving him an affright, he may offer to mount, and so be
entangled in your Net.

If many answer your Call from several quarters of the Wood, stir not at all,
but ply your Call, and as they come nearer to you, spread your Nets in the most
convenient places round about you; and when they are come under the Nets,
boldly discover your self, to give the affright, and make them mount.

. II. Of the driving of Pheasants.
IT is only Pheasant-Pouts that can be thus taken. Having found the eye of
Pheasants by any the forementioned means, you must then (taking the wind with
you, for they will naturally run down the wind.) In the little pads and ways,
which you see they have made, (for they will make little tracks almost like
sheeps tracks) and as near as you can to some special haunt of theirs, (which
you shall know by the barrenness of the ground, mutings, and loose feathers you
shall find there) place your Nets hollow, loose and circular wise, their nether
part being fastened to the ground, and upper lying hollow, loose, and bending,
so that when any thing rusheth to it, it may fall and entangle it. Which done,
you must go where before you found the haunt, and there with your Call, if the
Eye be scattered, call them together; then taking your Instrument called a
Driver, made of good strong white Wands or Osiers, set fast in a handle, and in
two or three places bound with cross Wands; of the shape of those Wand-dressers
(which Cloth-workers use in dressing of Cloth) therewith make a gentle noise
upon the boughs and bushes, which the Pouts hearing will presently run on a
heap together from it a little way, and then stand still and listen. Give then
another rack or two, at which they will run again as before, and thus by
racking and striking you may drive them like so many sheep which way you
please, (crossing them, and racking as it were in their faces, if they chance
to go a wrong way) till you have brought them all into your Nets.

In this driving be sure, 1. To conceal your self from the sight of the
Pheasants, For if they perceive you, they will instantly scatter and run one
from another, and hide themselves in holes, and bottoms of bushes, and not stir
from thence upon any occasion as long as any day endures. And therefore it
were not amiss to wear over your face a green hood, and a Wreath of green
leaves about your head, and trim your Garments with branches and leaves of
trees. 2. To take time and leisure, and not do any thing rashly. For any thing
done suddenly or rashly to these fearful Creatures breeds offense and
amazement: And a scare being taken, though but by one bird, their fear will not
suffer them to argue or dispute the object, or stay till everyone have beheld
the thing suddenly affrighting them; but away they all fly at the very first
apprehension, in an instant. And therefore if you find any staggering or dismay
among them, presently cease and lie still as though you were dead, till the
fear be over, and they gaze no more about them, but gathering themselves
together do begin to peep and cluck one to another, and rejoice among
themselves, and then you may fall to your work again.

. III. Of taking Pheasants with the Lime-bush, or Lime-rods.
YOur Rods must be twelve, or at least ten Inches long, well limed down to the
middle, and no further. Your Lime-bush must contain not above eight twigs at
most, being the top-branch of some young Willow; with a handle about a
shaftment long, sharpened so as either you may stick it gently into the ground,
or prick it into any shrub or bush, where-through the Peasants usually trace,
or on any small tree where they use to perch, [Place two or three of these
bushes there.] Then make use of your Call, and you will quickly have all the
Pheasants within hearing about you; and it is a chance but some of them will be
touched, and if but one be limed she will go near to lime all her fellows; for
what by her struggling amongst them, and they coming to gaze, some will be
smeared by her, and some will light on other bushes: And if some one or two
escape by mounting, and get to the Perch, and there (as is the natural quality
of them) sit prying to see what becomes of their fellows, it is ten to one but
they will be taken by the Lime-bushes placed on the Perch. Old Pheasants when
you call, oftentimes will not come on the ground, especially in Winter, but
mount and come flying from Perch to Perch, till they come to that next you,
ever prying and peeping to find him out that calls, where they will probably
be taken.

It very requisite to keep an exact account of all your Lime-bushes and Rods,
and when you have gathered up your Pheasants, see what bushes or rods you have
missing; for if you miss but one of them, you may be assured that there are
some limed which you have not found: And therefore never be without a Spaniel
that will lie close at your foot, and that will fetch and carry, and neither
break nor bruise flesh nor feather, to hunt out and bring you all the birds
that shall so lie hid.

The Lime-rods may be placed not only upon bushes and shrubs by Pheasants
tracks, but also upon the ground in open places between thicks in such order as
is directed above, neither too thick and apparent so as to breed affright, nor
so thin as to let any escape, leaving about the length of a Rod or less between
Lime-rod and Lime-rod.

The Season for using of Lime is from the beginning of November till the
beginning of May, for during that time the twigs of trees (on which Birds
perch) are void of leaves, and like to Lime-twigs. The time for the use of
Nets is from the beginning of May till the latter end of October: during which
time the trees are covered with leaves.

The Pheasant-net would be made of the best twined double Housewives thread,
died green or blue, the Mash almost an Inch between knot and knot: It would be
in length at least three fathoms, in breadth seven foot or better, verged on
each side with a strong small Cord, and as it were surfled thereon; the Net
being placed not straight, but thick and large, that at any time when it is
extended it may lie compasswise and hollow: The two ends likewise should be
verged with small Cord, yet that more for strength than any particular use. The
great Nets (which some use) are cumbersom and hardly manageable, and therefore
if occasion be, it is better take and use a couple of ordinary size.

CHAP. VII.
. I. How to make the best Birdlime according to G. Markham.
TAke at Midsummer of the Bark of Holly so much as to fill a reasonable big
Vessel, and boil it in running water till the gray and white bark rise from the
green; which will take up a whole day or better, Then take it from the fire,
and after the water is very well drained, separate from it the barks: Take all
the green, and lay it on the ground in a close place, and on a moist floor, as
in some low Vault or Cellar, and cover it allover a good thickness with Docks,
Hemlock, Thistles, and the like green weeds, [or else make it up in a heap with
Fern S S S, that is, first a layer or bed of Fern, then a layer of Bark, then a
layer of Fern again, and so on interchangeably] and so let it lie for the space
of ten or twelve days; in which time it will rot, and turn to a slimy matter:
Then pound it in a large Mortar, till it come to be one uniform substance or
paste, that may be wrought with the hand like dough, without discerning any
part of the Bark or other substance. Which done, take it out of the Mortar, and
carry it to a swift running stream, and there wash it exceedingly, not leaving
any mote or filth in it, Then put it up in a close earthen pot, and let it
stand and purge for diverse days together, (three or four at least) not omitting
to skum it as any foulness arises, and when no more will rise, put it into a
clean Vessel, and cover it close, and keep it for use.

Now when you have occasion to use it, take thereof what quantity you shall
think sit, and putting it into an earthen Pipkin with a third part of Hogs
grease, or (which is better) Capons grease, or Goose grease, set it on a very
gentle fire, and there let them melt together, and stir them continually till
they be both incorporated together, and become one entire substance: Then take
it from the fire and cool it, stirring it till it be cold.

When it is well cooled, take your Rods, and warming them a little over the
fire, wind about the tops of them some of it so prepared, then draw the Rods
one from another, closing them again, do this several times, continually plying
and working them together, till by smearing one upon another, you have bestowed
upon every Rod a like quantity of Lime, keeping the full breadth of your hand
at least free and without any Lime at all, ever and anon warming the Rods
before the fire, to make the Lime spread on them the better, and to make it lie
smoother and plainer, that the Fowl may not perceive it, and take affright at
it.

As for the liming of straws, it must be done when the Lime is very hot, and in
such manner as the Rods are done, before the fire, only you must not do a few,
but a great heap together, as big as you can well gripe in your hands, for so
they are the stronger, and not so apt to bruise or break in pieces, and
therefore in this opening and working of them, you shall not do it with a few
together, but as many as you can well gripe, tossing, and turning, and working
them before the fire, till they be all besmeared equally.

Now to preserve your Lime from freezing even in the sharpest weather, take a
quarter so much of the Oil called Petroleum as you do of Capons grease, and
mixing them together well, work it upon the Rods, and it will ever keep your
Lime gentle, supple, and tough, so that no frost, how violent soever, can hurt
it.

. II. How to make Birdlime according to Olina, which was the way of the
Ancients.
TAke of the Berries of Misselto, as great a quantity as you can get; the more
the better: Put them in a moist place to putrefie or macerate, and when they
are well macerated, take the stuff and beat it soundly with a round Cudgel
[Baston] till it shows clear, without any filth, for that is a sign that it is
done enough. Put it up in a Pot, and keep it in a moist place well covered with
Parchment.

When you would make use of it, put it in a Pan, and to every pound of Lime add
an ounce of Oil Olive, mingling and incorporating of them well at the fire, and
when you see that they are well mixed and united, and become like an Ointment,
take it from the fire, and put thereto half an ounce of Turpentine, and
incorporate them well together: and so you may employ it to take what you
please. It serves also for the water. The same Author mentions other sorts of
Birdlime brought out of Foreign Countries, with which I think it needless to
trouble the Reader. In a cold and frosty season he advises instead of common
Oil to mingle and incorporate your Birdlime with Oil of Nuts, which resists the
cold better than common Oil.

. III. How to make the best water-Birdlime, out of a late English Writer.
BUy a pound of the strongest Birdlime, and having washed it nine times in
clear Spring Water, till you find it very pliable, and the hardness quite gone,
beat out the water thoroughly till you cannot perceive a drop to appear: Then
having dried it well, put it into an earthen Pot, and add thereto, 1. As much
of the best Capons grease, without Salt, as will make it run. 2. Two spoonfuls
of strong Vinegar. 3. A spoonful of Sallet-oyl. 4. A small quantity of Venice
Turpentine, and boil them all gently upon a soft fire, continually stirring it:
And then take it from the fire, and let it cool; when you use it, warm it, and
so anoint your twigs or straws.

CHAP. VIII. Of the election and training up of a Setting Dog.
ALthough the Water-Spaniel, Mungrel, shallow-flew'd Hound, Tumbler, Lurcher,
or small bastard Mastiff may be brought to Set; yet none of them is comparable
to the true-bred Land-Spaniel, being of a size rather small than gross, a
strong and nimble ranger, of a courageous fiery mettle, a quick sent,
delighting in toil, and indefatigable, yet fearful of, and loving to his
Master. Of what color he be it matters not much.

Having gotten you a Whelp of such a Breed, begin to handle and instruct him at
four or six months old at the furthest.

1. You must make him very loving to, and familiar with you, and fond of you,
so as to follow you up and down without taking notice of any man else, by
suffering no man to feed or cherish him but yourself. You must also make him
stand in aw of, and fear you as well as love you, and that rather by a stern
countenance and sharp words than blows.

2. Then you must teach him to couch and lie down close to the ground, first by
laying him down on the ground, and saying to him, Lie close, or the like,
terrifying him with rough language when he does any thing against your command,
and cherishing him, and giving him food when he does as you bid him. And thus
by continual use and practicing the same thing, in a few days you shall bring
him readily and presently to lie close on the ground, when ever you shall but
say, Couch, down, lie close, or the like.

3. Next you shall teach him, being couched, to come creeping to you with his
head and belly close to the ground so far, or so little way as you shall think
good, by saying, Come nearer, or the like: First, till he understand your
meaning by showing him a piece of bread, or some other food to entice him. And
if when he offers to come he either raise from the ground his fore or hinder
parts, or so much as lift up his head, then you shall not only with your hand
thrust down his body in such sort as you would have him keep it, but also chide
and rate him so as to make him strive to perform your pleasure: And if that
will not quicken him sufficiently, to the terror of your voice add a sharp
jerk or two with a Whip-cord lash. When he does your will either fully or in
part according to his apprehension cheerfully, then you must be sure to cherish
him, and to feed him: And then renew his lesson again till he be perfect in it.
In like manner you must make him stop and pause when you bid him.

4. Then you shall teach him to lead in a string, and follow you at your heels
without straining his Collar, which you may easily do by practice, not striving
too roughly with him.

5. When he is thus far taught, you may out into the field with him, and suffer
him to range and hunt, yet at such command, that upon the first hem or warning
of your voice he stop and look back upon you, and upon the second, that he
forthwith either forbear to hunt further,, or else come in to your foot, and
walk by you. If in ranging you find he opens, you shall first chide him
therefore, and if that prevail not, either bite him hard at the roots of his
ears, or lash him with a sharp Whip-cord lash, till you have made him so
staunch, that he will hunt close and warily without once opening, either
through wantonness, or the rising up of any small birds before him.

When you find that he is come upon the haunt of any Partridge, (which you
shall know by his eagerness in hunting, and by a kind of whimpering and
whining, as being greatly desirous to open, but for fear not daring) you shall
then warn him to take heed by saying, be wise, or the like. But if
notwithstanding he either rush in and so spring them, or else open or use any
means by which the Partridge escapes, you shall then correct him soundly, and
cast him off again in another place where you are sure a Covey lies, and then
as before give him warning. And if you see that through fear he stands still
and waveth his tail, looking forward as if he pointed at somewhat, be sure the
Partridge is before him: Then make him lie close, and taking a large ring about
him, look for the Partridge. When you have found them, if you see he has set
them too far off, you shall make him creep on his belly nearer, else let him
lie close without stirring, and then drawing your Net take the Partridge.
Encourage your Dog by giving him the heads, necks, and pinions of the
Partridge, and also bread or other food. But if he chance by any rudeness or
want of taking heed to spring them again, you shall correct him as before, and
lead him home in your string, and tie him up that night, giving him nothing but
a bit of bread and water, and the next day take him out, and do as before, but
with somewhat more terror and harshness, and doubtless the Dog will do
according to your will: Which if he does, you must by no means forget to bestow
upon him all the cherishings of voice, hand, and foot.

It is a fault in a Dog to stand upright as it were looking over the Partridge
when he sets them, and therefore you must chide him for it, not giving over
till you make him lie close.

It is also a fault for him when you go in to the Covey, to spring up the
Partridge into your Nets, to rush hastily after you, or spring them before you,
for which you must correct him; and your self proceeding leisurely the next
time, ever as you go speak to the Dog to lie close.

CHAP. IX. An Abridgment of some Statutes relating to the preservation of Fowl.
NOw lest any one, either not legally qualified or licensed, or by taking Fowl
at prohibited times, or by prohibited Engines, or by destroying of their Eggs,
should through ignorance incur the danger of the Law, I have thought fit to
subjoyn an Abridgement of such Statutes as relate to the preservation of Fowl,
collected and sent me by my worthy Friend Mr. Walter Ashmore.

None to destroy or take away the Eggs of any Wild Fowl on pain of one years 25
H. 8. c. 11. confirmed 3 and 4 Ed. 6. c. 7.
imprisonment; and to forfeit for every Egg of a Crane or Bustard so taken and
destroyed 20 d. Of a Bittern, Heron, or Shoveler 8 d. Of a Mallard, Teal, or
other Wild-fowl 1 d. to be divided between the King and the Prosecutor. And
herein Justices of peace have power to hear, enquire, and determine offenses of
this kind, as they use to do in cases of trespass. Yet this act not to extend
to such as kill Crows, Choughs, Ravens, and Buzzards.

A Hawk taken up shall be delivered to the Sheriff, who after Proclamation made
34 Ed. 3. 22.
in several Towns, (if challenged) shall deliver her to the right Owner. And if
the Hawk were taken up by a mean man, and be not challenged in four months, the
Sheriff to have her, satisfying the Party for taking her: But if by a man of
estate, who may conveniently keep a Hawk, the Sheriff shall restore her to him
again, he paying for the charge of keeping.

If any take away or conceal a Hawk he shall answer the value thereof to the
Owner, and suffer two years imprisonment, and in case he be not able to answer
the value, he shall remain in prison a longer time.

He that steals and carries away a Hawk, not observing the Ordinance of 34 Ed.
3. 22. 37 Ed. 3. 19.
shall be deemed a Felon.

None shall take Pheasants or Partridges with Engines in another ground
without 11 H. 7. 17.
license, in pain of ten pound to be divided between the Owner of the ground
and the Prosecutor.

None shall take out of the Nest any Eggs of Falcon, Goshawk, Lanner, or Swan,
in pain of a year and a days imprisonment, and to incur a Fine at the Kings
pleasure, to be divided between the King and the Owner of the ground where the
Eggs shall be so taken.

None shall bear any Hawk of English breed called a Nyesse, (Goshawk, Tarcel,
Lanner, Lanneret, or Falcon) in pain to forfeit the same to the King.

He that brings a Nyesse Hawk from beyond the Seas shall have a Certificate
under the Customers Seal where he lands, or if out of Scotland, then under the
Seal of the Lord Warden or his Lieutenant, testifying she is a Foreign Hawk,
upon the like pain of forfeiting the Hawk.

None shall take, kill, or fearaway any of the said Hawks from their Coverts
where they use to breed, in pain of ten pounds.

Every Freeman my have Eyries of Hawks within their own Woods which be 9. H. 3.
13.
within a Forest.

None shall kill or take Pheasants or Partridges by night, in pain of 20 s. a
Pheasant, 23 Eliz. 10.
and 10 s. a Partridge, or one months imprisonment, and bond with Sureties not
to offend again in the like kind.

Directions to recover the Forfeitures, vid. Statute.

None to hawk or hunt with Spaniels in standing Grain in pain of 40 s.

No person shall kill or take any Pheasant, Partridge, Pigeon, Duck, Heron,
Hare, 1 Jac. 27.
or other Game, or take or destroy the Eggs of Pheasants, Partridges, or Swans,
in pain of 20 s. or imprisonment for every Fowl, Hare, or Egg, and to find
Sureties in 20 l. not to offend in the like kind.

No person shall keep Dog or Net to take or kill any of the last mentioned
Game, unless qualified as in the Act, in pain of 30 s.

No Person to buy or sell any Partridge or Pheasant upon pain to forfeit 20 s.
for every Pheasant, and 10 s. for every Partridge.

No Person to betwice punished for one offense.

Persons are to be licensed in Sessions to kill Hawks meat, and to become bound
in 20 l. not to kill any of the said Games, nor to shoot within 600 paces of a
Heronry, within 100 paces of a Pigeon House, or in a Park, Forest, or Chase,
whereof his Master is not Owner or Keeper.

Every person having hawked at, or destroyed any Pheasant or Partridge between
7 Jac. 11.
the first of July and last of August shall forfeit 40 s. for every time so
Hawking, and 20 s. for every Pheasant or Partridge so destroyed or taken.

This offense to be prosecuted within six months after it is committed.

Lords of Manors and their Servants may take Pheasants or Partridges in their
own grounds or Precincts in the day time between Michaelmas and Christmas.

Every person of a mean condition having killed or taken any Pheasant or
Partridge shall forfeit 20 s. for each one so killed, and shall become bound in
20 l. not to offend so again.

Constables and Headboroughs upon warrant to search houses, and seize Dogs or
Nets, and destroy them at pleasure.

Lords of Manors to appoint Game-keepers, who by a Warrant from a Justice 22
and 23 Car. 2. c. 25.
may in the daytime take and seize all Guns, Bows, Greyhounds, Setting-dogs,
Lurchers, or other Dogs to kill Hares or Conies, Ferrets, Trammels, Low-bells,
Hays, or other Nets, Hare-pipes, Snares, and other Engines for the taking and
killing of Conics, Hares, Pheasants, Partridges, and other Game within the
Precincts of such Manor, as shall be used by any Person prohibited by that Act
to keep or use the same.

Persons under the value of 100 l. per annum; or for term of life, or not
having Leases for ninety nine years, or for a longer term of the value of 150
l. other than the Son and Heir apparent of an Esquire or other person of higher
degree, and the Owners and Keepers of Forests, Parks, Chases, or Warrens, are
not to have or keep for themselves or others any Guns, Bows, Greyhounds,
Setting-dogs, Lurchers, Hays, Nets, Lowbells, Hare-pipes, Snares, or other
Engine.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ORNITHOLOGY OF FRANCIS WILLUGHBY Esquire Of Land-Fowl.
THE FIRST PART. Of such as have hooked Beaks and Talons.
THE FIRST SECTION. Of Rapacious Diurnal Birds.
CHAP. I. Of Birds of prey in general, especially Diurnal ones.
THE Characteristic notes of Rapacious Birds in general are these: To have a
great head; a short neck; hooked, strong and sharp-pointed Beak and Talons,
fitted for ravine and tearing of flesh: Strong and brawny thighs, for striking
down their prey: a broad, thick, fleshy tongue, like a man's; twelve feathers in
their train: four and twenty flag feathers [remiges pennae] in each wing; [The
number of these feathers can hardly be counted exactly, and does (I believe)
vary in these Birds, the greater kinds having more, the lesser fewer.] The two
Appendices or blind guts very short, so that they seem to be of no use to them,
at least when grown up: A membranous stomach, not a musculous one, or Gizzard,
like granivorous Birds: To be very sharp-sighted, for spying out their prey at
a distance, to be solitary, not gregarious, by a singular providence of nature:
For should they, coming in flocks, jointly set upon Cattle, the flocks and
herds of sheep and beasts would scarce be secure from their violence and
injuries. This note is not common to all Rapacious birds in general, though
Aristotle has delivered for an universal observation, (...), i. e. No Birds of
prey are gregarious. For Vultures, (as Bellonius has observed) fly in company
fifty or sixty together: To be deep-feathered. The feathers investing their
bodies if they be not thicker set, are at least taller or longer than in other
birds, so that their bodies seem to be much greater than indeed they are. This
note is common to all Rapacious birds, but not proper to them alone. To be
long-lived, and as is commonly thought, more than other birds, whereof being
not yet fully satisfied, I will not rashly affirm any thing, but leave the
matter to be determined by experience and diligent observation. But certain it
is, (as we have before demonstrated) that all Birds in general, account being
had of their bigness, are very longlived. To endure hunger (or abide without
food) a long time, which considering their food and manner of living is almost
necessary; seeing their prey is not always ready for them. The Females are of
greater size, more beautiful and lovely for shape and colors, stronger, more
fierce and generous than the Males. For this cause some will have the Males
called Tarcels, that is, Thirds, because they are lesser by one third part than
the Females. The reason of this inequality and excess of magnitude in the
Females some do assign, because it lies upon the Females to prey not only for
themselves, but for their Young, therefore it is requisite they be more strong
and generous. Moreover (that we may note that by the by) among the Females
themselves the tokens of goodness are taken from their greatness; for by how
much a Hawk is bigger and more weighty, so much better is it accounted. So that
(as Tardivus witnesses) in Syria Birds employed for Fowling are all bought by
weight; and so much the dearer by how much they weigh more. Howbeit the Astures
[Goshawks] (if we may believe the Italian Proverb) [Astore piccolo and Terzuolo
grande] by how much the less they are, by so much the more are they esteemed.
Here again Vultures are to be excepted, of which the Males are said to equal or
exceed the Females in bigness. The Basis of the Beak is covered with a naked
skin or membrane, which our Falconers call the Sear. This note is proper to
Rapacious Birds that prey by day; for the night-birds have no such Membrane.
The outmost toe is connected with the middlemost by an intervening Membrane, as
far as the first joint. This note is common to all Rapacious Diurnal Birds, but
not proper to them alone, agreeing to many other birds besides. The breast in
most Rapacious birds is party-colored or spotted: In most I say, not in all;
for, the Vultur Boeticus, Milvus Aeruginosus, and some few others are to be
excepted. Some others also of the forementioned notes are not proper and
peculiar to this kind, as for example, To have twelve feathers in the tail, and
to have very short Appendices or blind guts, which are common also to the
Crow-kind, and most small birds.

Add to these, that in Birds of prey the Hook of the upper chap is produced by
Age to that length sometimes, that it hinders their feeding: That the Claw of
the outmost Toe is the least: That the flesh of carnivorous birds does sooner
corrupt and putrefie than of any other: That the interior sides of their Claws
are sharp-edged: That their Excrements are for the most part fluid like milk:
That the interior Vanes of the prime feathers of their Wings and Tails have
white or pale-coloured cross bars: That the color of the back and upper part
is for the most part brown.

CHAP. II. Of the Eagle in general.
THe Eagle in general may be thus defined, Adiurnal Rapacious Bird of the
biggest sort, the most generous of all, having its Beak hooked almost from the
very root. By its bigness it is distinguished from the Hawk, by its courage and
spirit and by the kookedness of its Bill from the Vulture.

There are many things delivered by the Ancients and Moderns concerning the
nature and conditions of the Eagle in general; which are partly false or
uncertain, partly common to other Birds of prey.

Of the first sort I take the following to be.

1. That its feet are not equal, but the right bigger than the left.

2. That its feathers being mixed with the feathers of other birds, especially
Geese and Pigeons, do waste and consume them.

3. That whereas she excels in quick-sightedness, in trying her Young whether
they be genuine or spurious, she makes use of an argument taken from the sight.
For hanging them up by the Claw, she exposes them to the Sunbeams, and those
that she sees look steadfastly on the Sun, she keeps and brings up as
right-bred, and her genuine Offspring, but such as turn away their eyes, as not
being able to behold it, she casts away as degenerous.

4. That the Eagle as long as she lives changes not her Nest or Haunt, but
returns yearly to the same.

5. That after Noon she flies abroad and preys, but all the Forenoon before
dinner she sits idle.

6. That she touches not Carrion or dead Carcasses; feeding only upon the flesh
of such Animals as she kills her self.

7. That whereas for the most part she hatches two young ones, she brings up
but one, casting out the other, to ease her self of the toil of nursing and
feeding it.

8. That she would not at all hatch her Young, did she not bring the Eagles
stone [Aetites] into her Nest, which is of wonderful virtue in promoting
exclusion.

9. That when the Young are sick, and cannot concoct more solid food, by reason
of the weakness of their stomachs, the old ones suck the blood out of their
prey, and feed them therewith.

10. That in extreme old age, when their Beaks by reason of their dryness are
grown so crooked that they cannot feed, they sustain themselves for some time
by drinking.

11. That the old ones when they see their young fledged and ready to fly, do
carry them up a height, and then let them go, admonishing them as it were by
their own peril to make use of their Wings, and by flying through the Air to
save themselves from falling. If after they have let them go they fall down to
the ground, up they take them again, often repeating this kind of exercise.

12. That she has an extraordinary care of her Talons, lest by any means they
should be blunted. Hereupon in walking she always draws them up, and turns them
inwards, refuses to walk in stony places, lest perchance she should wear their
points. And if she happens to sit or walk upon Rocks, she spreads under her
feet the skins of such Animals as she has killed, lest her Talons should be
hurt. Yea so careful is she of them, that where ever she sits, unless she eyes
the Sun or her prey, she is always looking at them; fearing lest they should
grow too crooked. And if by chance they be blunted, she sharpens them with her
Bill, or whets them upon stones, to render them fitter for preying.

13. That when she is enfeebled with old age, she flies as high as ever she can
above the Clouds, till the dimness of her eyesight be consumed by the heat of
the Sun; then presently descending with all her force, while she is yet in the
extremity of heat, she drenches her self three times in the coldest water she
can find, and rising up thence streightway betakes her self to her Nest, where
among her young now fit for preying, falling into a kind of Fever, with a sweat
she casts her feathers; and is by them carefully nursed up and fed, till she
recover her plumage again.

14. Whereas the greatest part of Birds either of fear or wonder, fly after the
Owl, she not thinking such carriage to become a Kingly bird, is nothing moved
with that spectacle.

Of the latter kind are these.

1. That she does so excel in quick-sightedness, that soaring so high in the
air, that she can very hardly be discerned by us in all that light, yet she can
espy a Hare lying under a bush, or a little Fish swimming in the water. Though
I grant that both the Eagle and other Rapacious birds are very sharp-sighted,
yet do I not think that, their eyes can reach objects at such distances.

2. That she is indocile and incapable of Discipline, and not to be tamed by
any humane endeavor: But is only carried on headlong by her natural
inclination and impetus. This is not universally true. For we have heard of
Eagles that have been reclaimed and trained up for fowling. Though it he rarely
done.

3. That her breath smells very ill, so that by reason of the pestiferous
stench thereof, the bodies that are blown upon by her do easily putrefic and
corrupt.

4. That she is very greedy and almost unsatiable: and therefore if at any time
she endures hunger, (of which she is most patient) she recompenses her long
fasting by abundant eating and gorging her self. And if her prey be so great
and copious that any thing remains when she is satiated, she leaves that to the
other birds, which use to follow her in expectation thereof.

5. That almost all Birds of prey live without ever drinking; yet is their
belly always loose, and their Excrements fluid. For the blood of the Animals
they kill affords them liquor enough for the concoction and digestion of their
meat.

6. That it is very venereous. For the Female being trodden thirteen times a
day, yet if the Male does but call, runs to him again. Now whereas all
salacious creatures are thought to be short-lived, one may justly wonder, that
the Eagle should be the most lustful, and yet withal the most vivacious of
Birds.

7. When their young ones are grown up, and come to that age and strength, that
that they can without the help of their Parents get themselves meat, they drive
them far away from their Nests; nay, they will not suffer them to abide so much
as in the same Country.

8. Nature has given the Eagle very thick, hard, and almost solid bones, and
in which there is but very little marrow.

All these things we have transcribed out of Aldrovandus his Ornithology, where
occur more such like, which are common to other Rapacious Birds. For besides
its eminent Magnitude we do not acknowledge any Characteristic note whereby
Eagles may be distinguished from Hawks. How they are differenced from Vultures
shall be shown when we come to treat of Vultures.

As for the names of the Eagles, it is called Grecians (...) and (...) from the
Verb (...), signifying to rush on or be carried forwards violently with great
force and swiftness, because of the swiftness of its flight: By the Latins it
is named Aquila, either ab acumine visus from the sharpness of its sight, or
from the color called [Aquilus] that is, blackish or dusky, so denominated
from water [Aqua.]

CHAP. III. Of the several kinds of Eagles.
. I. * THE GOLDEN EAGLE; CHYSAETOS Aldrovandi Ornithologiae, lib. 2. cap. 2.
Aquila fulva sen aurea.
BEing put in the balance [statera] we found it to weigh twelve pounds. From
Its Weight. Its Length. Breadth. The Beak.
point of Beak to tip of Tail it was full three feet and nine Inches long. The
length from the Bill to the Talons was four spans and an half. The breadth from
tip to tip of the Wings extended eight spans. The Beak was one Palm
[handbreadth] and one inch long. For the hooked part alone hung down beyond the
lower Chap a full Inch. The breadth of the Bill, especially about the middle
was more than two Inches. The hooked part or point was blacker; the rest of the
Bill of a horn-colour, inclining to a pale blue, and spotted with dusky. The
wideness of the Mouth gaping [rictus] was one Palm and an Inch. The Tongue was
like a The Mouth. The Tongue.
Man's, broad, round, and blunt at the tip, toward the root on both sides armed
with two hooked, horny Appendices, tied down in the middle to the lower
mandible by a thin Membrane. The Palate perforate in the middle. The lower Chap
of the The Palate.
Bill channelled, the edges whereof standing up on both sides are received in
the upper. The Membrane which arising from the Forehead is extended beyond the
Nosthrils, The Sear.
and likewise the borders of the bridle or corners of the mouth are yellow. The
feathers The neckfeathers.
of the neck are rigid and Of a rasty color.
ferrugineous. A certain thick Tunicle stretched forth from below upwards
covered the eye in nictation. This Membrane is called in Latin
Periophthalmium. Two Eyelids, one above, the other beneath, covered the The
Eyelids.
Eye, although the lower alone extended upward was sufficient to cover the
whole Eye. The region of the Eyebrows was very eminent, like that prominent
part of The Eyebrows.
the roofs of houses called the Eaves; under which the Eyes lay hid, as it were
sunk in a deep cavity. The Eyes were of the color called Charopus, of a fiery
splendour, The Eyes.
shining forth in a pale blew. The Pupil was of a deep black. It is very
admirable to observe what care Nature has taken, and what provision she has
made for the conservation of the Eyes, than which there is no part in this
Animal more excellent. For not being content with one Tegument, as is usual in
other Animals, she seems to have framed four several lids or covers for them.
The Periophthalmium, or Membrane for Nictation, is the same thing, and affords
the same use to them that the Eyelids do to a man. Besides which Nature has
superadded two other Eyelids, and of these the lower so large, that they alone
suffice to cover and preserve the Eyes. The color of the Wings and Tail is
dusky, and so much the darker by how much the feathers The Wings. The Train.
The color of the whole body. The Flag-Feathers. The Legs.
are bigger. The color of the rest of the small feathers of the whole body is
a dark ferrugineous or Chestnut, sprinkled with white spots, fewer on the back,
more on the belly, the bottoms of all being white. Six of the prime feathers on
each side were twenty two Inches long apiece, having very firm and hard quills,
but shorter than those of Geese, and very good to make Writing Pens. The Legs
were feathered down to the feet, of a ferrugineous color. Hence it may
evidently appear to any man, how much Lib. 2. cap 4. ^^ Avibus.
Petrus Bellonius is mistaken in that he writes, that Eagles are
distinguishable from Vultures by one only sign, viz. having their Legs naked or
destitute of feathers, contrary to what we see in Vultures. The feet were
yellowish: The backclaw of the left foot six Inches in circumference; that of
the right foot but four; The Feet. The Talons.
so great was the difference between them; which I suppose not to have been
natural, but induced by force, for this seemed to be maimed. The Talon of the
foremost of the fore-toes of the left foot was five Inches in length, that of
the middle three and an half, the least two. The Talons of the fore toes of the
right foot were bigger, in proportion to the back-claw, than those of the left.
Four Semicircular Tables covered each toe near the Talons, excepting the
greatest of the fore toes, which had only three Rings or annular Scales
annuli. The rest of the feet was covered with Scales about the bigness of
millet grains, or somewhat less.

If any one desires an Anatomy and description of the inward parts, let him
consult Aldrovandus in this place: See also here the arguments whereby he
proves this bird by him described to be the Chrysaetos of the Ancients; and the
notes whereby he distinguishes it from other Eagles.

I suspect this to be the same bird with that hereafter described by us under
the title of Pygargus. The chief difference is, that half the Tail in that is
white, whereas in this the whole is of one [dusky] color.

This with great fierceness flew upon any thing that came in its way: and would
The fierceness of the Golden Eagle.
with its Beak and Talons assault and strike at Dogs, Cata, etc. and even man
himself, if they did, before they were aware, approach too near the Cage in
which it was shut up. So far Aldrovandus: to whom this Bird was sent by the
Great Duke of Tuscany.

The Golden Eagle with a white ring about its tail.
We saw three Birds of this sort in the Royal Theriotrophium near the Tower of
London, and a fourth in St. James Park near Westminster. For bigness they
approached The Bigness. The Beak.
to Turkeys. The Beak near the head was straight, toward the end hooked, of a
horncolour; the Sear or skin covering the Basis of the beak of an ash color or
bluish white; the space from the Nosthrils to the eyes bare of feathers: The
mouth very wide when gaping: The Tail of a mean length, with a transverse bar
or ring of The Tail.
white. The upper Chap of the Beak had on each side a small obtuse Angle or
Tooth, as that of the Kestrel and other Hawks. The inside of the mouth was of a
flesh-colors. The Feathers covering the head and neck not smooth and even, but
rigid, narrow, The feathers.
and lying at a distance one from another: The Talons black; the Legs feathered
down below the knees. Our Countrymen call this bird simply and absolutely the
Eagle, without any Epithet of distinction, as if indeed this were (...), the
Eagle of Eagles. I take it to be specifically the same with the precedent.

. II. * The SEA-EAGLE or OSPREY; Haliaeetus seu Aquila marina; Nisus Veterum.
ALdrovandus confesses that himself never saw this Bird: But the description he
The bald Buzzard described for the Sea-Eagle.
gives of it, sent by a certain eminent Physician, agrees exactly to the
ENGLISH BALD BUZZARD. Moreover Leonard Baltner, a Fisherman of Strasburgh, who
himself described and caused to be painted by the life all Waterfowl that
frequent the River Rhine thereabouts, sets forth the Bald Buzzard under the
title of Fisch-Adler, i. e. the Fish-Eagle. But seeing that our Bald Buzzard is
a lesser Bird than that it may merit the name of an Eagle, and is also very
like to, and not much bigger than the Common Buzzard, we will treat thereof in
a more commodious place, among its fellows, viz. the lesser sort of wild birds
of prey. And in this place for the Haliaeetus or Sea-Eagle we will present the
Reader with the Ossifrage of Aldrovandus, seeing That the Ossifrage of
Aldrovandus is the Sea-Eagle.
that for its bigness may justly challenge a place among Eagles and is also a
fierce and generous Bird, preying upon Fish, and frequenting not only Pools and
Rivers, but also the Sea. I am not ignorant that Aldrovandus will by no means
admit this Bird to be the Sea-Eagle: 1. Because it answers not to the
description of the Sea-Eagle left us by the Ancients, which makes it to be not
much bigger than the Kite, whereas this Bird for bigness falls not much short
of the Chrysaetos it self. 2. Because all the notes of the Ossifrage agree to
it, viz. A whitish ash color, clouded Eyes, a beard under the chin, and
finally Aquiline magnitude. But yet these Arguments are not of so great force
with me to evince this Bird to be the Ossifrage, as the manner of living alone
to be the Sea-Eagle: unless perchance the Sea-Eagle and Ossifrage be Synonymous
words and names of one and the same Bird. Neither do I much matter the
descriptions of the Ancients, who in delivering the notes of Animals are wont
to be less curious and exact. But whatever the Ancients called the Sea-Eagle,
certain it is that the title of Sea-Eagle may be very fitly attributed to this
Bird. For if we admit the Bald Buzzard for the Sea-Eagle, (which, to speak the
truth, agrees better to the descriptions of the Ancients) we take away all note
of distinction between Eagles and Hawks, which (as we said before) consists
only in difference of magnitude.

The Ossifrage then or Sea-Eagle is thus described by Aldrovandus. From the
point The description of the Ossifrage.
of the Beak to the end of the train or Talons, (for the ends of both when
extended were coincident) it was three feet and four Inches long: From tip to
tip of the Wings stretched out nine spans broad. It weighed eleven pound. The
Bill was Its length. Breadth. Weight. Beak.
very hooked, so that the hooked part alone was an Inch long; the whole two
Inches broad, and an hand-breadth long; of a blackish or dusky horn color,
somewhat approaching to a dark blue. The Tongue was very like to a man's, with a
broad top, and Tongue.
hooked, hard, and horny Appendices on both sides, tied down to the lower
mandible by a thin Membrane, where it regards the chin a horny Membrane
compasses the end or tip of it. The lower mandible was hollowed like a channel,
[I suppose he means the sides of it] the edges or borders of which channel
enter the Palate on both sides, and are enclosed within its edges. In the
middle of the Palate is a chink by which a The Palate.
pituitous humor distills from the head. The head and all the neck are clothed
with The head and neck.
long, narrow, and rigid feathers. From the Chin hang down small feathers like
hairs imitating a beard; whence perchance by Pliny and also Bellonius it is
denominated the bearded Eagle: And I from that note chiefly suppose it to be
called Harp by Oppian, The Beard.
The feathers of the whole body singly are parti-colored, and that with three
The color of the Feathers. The Flags. The Train.
colors, whitish, duskish, and ferrugineous. The flag-feathers of the Wings
are almost wholly black, something tending to Chestnut. The twelve feathers of
the Train have little or nothing of red, but are only spotted with black and
white, viz. whitish on the outside, dusky on the inner. The two middlemost,
being besprinkled promiscuously with white spots; are for the most part dusky.
The ends or tips of all are black. The feathers growing on the rump, which
immediately cover these, are almost wholly white, sprinkled with a little
black, save that their tips are black. Their Legs The Legs.
are almost wholly covered with dusky feathers, somewhat inclining to fulvous;
so that there is only two inches to the feet remaining bare. Besides the
feathers the whole body underneath is covered with a white and soft down, as it
were a delicate The body covered with Down.
fleece, after the same manner as the skin of a Swan. The lower part of the
Legs, which as we said for the space of two Inches is destitute of feathers,
and the feet are of a deep yellow. The toes extended are a full span; the
length of the middlemost The Toes. The Talon.
is equal to a Palm. The Talons were very black in so much that they shone
again; and so hooked that they did exactly represent a Semicircle. They
observed this proportion one to another; the hindmost being the biggest was two
Inches long; the first of the fore ones lesser than it, but bigger than the
middlemost, and the last the least of all. The substance of the Talons was
inwardly white and bony, covered over outwardly with a dusky bark. The leg and
foot were for the most part covered with round scales of unequal bigness; but
the forepart of the Leg, and upper part of the toes had Semicircular Tables
like the Golden Eagle. Clusius takes this for the Sea-Eagle.
Chrysaetos.

Clusius sent to Aldrovandus the Picture of this Bird drawn in colors to the
life, by the title of the Sea-Eagle, writing thereof in this manner, This
Haliaeetus, which our Countrymen living in the Seacoast call Zee Aren, that
is, Sea-Eagle, was shot the last Winter, etc. That this Eagle feeds only on
Fish I my self can witness, for in the stomach thereof dissected we found
nothing but Fish, some remaining yet entire, some half consumed, etc.

That this Bird is the same which our Seamen and Fowlers call the Osprey, and
affirm This is the English Osprey.
to have one flat or webbed foot to swim withal, after the manner of a Goose or
other Waterfowl, the other being divided after the manner of other Birds of
prey, I do not at all doubt. But what is reported concerning the feet is most
certainly false and fabulous: although by some affirming it with great
confidence, even the best Naturalists That it has not one foot webbed, the
other cloven.
have been deceived; among the rest Aldrovandus himself, not daring rashly to
contradict, Albertus Magnus English men and Burgundians eyewitnesses. For
(says he) the Natives of each Country are most likely best to know what things
are peculiar to their own Country either by Land or Sea, Well, I my self am an
English man, yet have I never yet met with any credible person who would affirm
himself to be an Eyewitness of this matter, although the Vulgar be so
confidently persuaded of it, that scarce any body doubts its truth, What gave
the first occasion and rise to this Error was (I suppose) a presumption of the
necessity of such a structure of the feet. For whereas the Mariners and
Fishermen did see and observe this Bird much to frequent the Sea and great
Lakes of water, and to prey upon Fish; yea, sometimes to fly forth very far
from Land, so that it has been often seen out at Sea, a hundred Leagues
distant from shore, flying up and down over the water, and intent upon fishing;
they imagined it altogether necessary that it should be furnished with one flat
foot for swimming, and another cloven for striking, catching, and carrying away
of Fish. It being, one would think, impossible, that a bird should abide upon
the Wing so long without rest. But that even small birds, short-winged, and
less fit by far for flight than Eagles will venture to fly over wide Seas is
evident in those we call birds of passage. And who knows but where those Fowl
are usually seen, there may be some Rocks in the Sea not far off, on which they
may rest themselves. But for the same reason this conceit was first started, it
was readily entertained, and without examination greedily believed.

Not less fabulous is that which is reported of the oil or fat which this bird
has in The Oil of Osprey.
her rump, and which hanging in the air, she lets fall drop by drop into the
water; by the force whereof the Fishes being stupefied, and as it were
Planet-strucken, become destitute of all motion, and so suffer themselves
without difficulty to be taken; though some are so vain as to put Oil of Osprey
into their receipts or prescriptions for taking Fishes, by the smell whereof
the Fishes being allured, rather than stupefied by its narcotic virtue, yield
themselves to be handled and taken out of the water by such as have their hands
anointed with it. Doubtless he that can get the Oil of such an Osprey as they
talk of may work wonders with it.

. III. Of the BLACK EAGLE, called Melanaetus, or Aquila Valeria.
WE saw a Bird of this kind kept shut up in a Cage in the The Town Hall. Its
Bigness, Color.
Stadt-house of Middleburgh in Zealand. It was double the bigness of a Raven,
but lesser than the Pygarg. The Jaws and Eyelids were bare of feathers, and
somewhat reddish: The head, neck, and breast black. In the middle of the back
between the shoulders was a large triangular white spot dashed with red. The
rump red. The lesser orders or rows of feathers in the Wings were of a Buzzard
color; then followed a black stroke or bar cross the prime feathers, after
that a white one, the remaining part of the feathers to the tips being of a
dark ash color.

The Beak was less than that of the Pygarg, black at the end, then yellow as
far as The Beak,
the Sear or skin covering its Base, which was red. The Eyes [understand the
Irides] Eyes,
were of a hazel color. The Legs were feathered down but a little below the
knees; Legs.
the naked part being red. The Talons very long.

Those Birds which Aldrovandus has set forth for Melanaeti or Black Eagles;
although The Black Eagles of Aldrov. the same with ours.
they differ in some marks from this here described, as for example, in the
bluish horny color of the Beak; in the dark ferrugineous color of the crown
of the head and neck, and that their Legs are almost wholly covered with
feathers, scarce an inch remaining bare, and that yellow, yet I doubt not but
they are of the same species; there being in the Rapacious kind a great
difference for the most part between Cock and Hen in point of magnitude and
color; the colors also in the same Sex varying very much by age and other
accidents.

Of the place of this Bird, its food and manner of living, building its Nest,
Eggs, conditions, etc. we have nothing certain.

It is called in Greek (...), from its black color. (...), or Leporaria, from
killing of Hares: And in Latin Aquila Valeria, from its strength and valor.

. IV. Of the PYGARG or white-tail'd Eagle, called Pygargus, and Albicilla, and
by some Hinnularia.
IT is called Pygargus from the whiteness of its rump or train, which word Gaza
rendered in Latin Albicilla. Its Name,


The Male (which we described) was for bigness not much inferior to a Turkey.
Bigness,


It weighed eight pounds and an half, [it is like, the Female in this, as in
other Birds of Weight,
prey, may be bigger and more weighty.] Its length from the tip of the Beak to
the Length,
end of the train was two feet and nine Inches, to the end of the Talons two
feet and five inches. The distance from tip to tip of the Wings stretched out
seven feet wanting Breadth.
but one inch, or two yards and eleven Inches: From the tip of the Beak to the
Nosethrils was near two inches, to the corners of the mouth three, to the Eyes
almost so The Beak.
much. The breadth of the Beak an inch and a quarter; the hooked part of the
upper Mandible over-hanging the lower three quarters of an Inch. The Nosthrils
The Nares.
oblique and half an Inch long. The second or middle bone of the Leg was six
inches and an half long, the third or lowermost no more than three and an half.
The color Color of the Beak.
of the Beak was yellow, and also of the Sear or skin covering its Basis as far
as the Nosthrils. In the Palate it had a Cavity equal to the Tongue. The Tongue
broad, The Palate, Tongue. Eyes.
fleshly, black at the tip. The sides or edges of the Beak sharp. The Eyes
great, withdrawn or sunk in the head, overhung and defended by Eyebrows,
prominent like the Eves of a house: The Irides of a pale Hazel color [in one
Bird which we saw of this sort they were red; in another yellow.] The feet were
yellow, in the The Feet,
soles were callous rough knobs, or fleshy protuberances, as in others of this
kind: The Talons large, sharp, and crooked, that of the back-toe (as generally
in most Talons.
Birds) being greatest: That of the middle toe an inch long, the toe it self
being two Inches.

The Head was pale or whitish, the feathers being sharp-pointed, and their
shafts Color of the Head, Neck, Rump, Body.
black. The neck covered with narrow feathers; the upper part thereof something
red; the Rump blackish; else the whole body round of a dark ferrugineous
color. The number of prime feathers in each Wing was about twenty six or
twenty seven, whereof the third and fourth were the longest; the second shorter
by half an inch The prime wing-feathers,
than the third, and the first by three inches and an half than the second. The
Wings The Wings.
when closed reached not to the end of the train. Of the Pinion feathers and
the rest of the flags they make Quils for Virginals, and very good Writing
Pens. All the prime feathers of the Wings were black; the lesser rows of the
Wing-feathers had their edges of an ash color. The tail was eleven inches and
an half long, made up The Train.
of twelve feathers; the upper or extreme part for above half way being white,
the lower black. The extreme or outmost feathers were shortest, the rest
gradually longer to the middlemost.

It had a large Gall, long Testicles, small Guts, having many revolutions, and
being The Entrails, and Guts.
by measure one hundred thirty two Inches, or eleven foot long, a small
stomach, above which the Gullet was dilated into a kind of bag, granulated on
the inside with many small protuberancies, which I take to be glandules, and
which being squeezed a little, yielded a kind of pap or slime, serving, it is
like, as a menstruum to help macerate the meat in the stomach. It had a vast
Craw; small short Appendices or blind guts, viz. not more than three quarters
of an inch long.

This Bird, shot dead by a certain Fowler, we bought and described at Venice in
the year 1664. and from the white ring about the tail denominated it Pygargus.
It differs from that we have entitled the Golden Eagle with a white ring about
its tail, chiefly in the color of the Head and Beak: So that I suspect it may
be the same: as also with the Golden Eagle of Aldrovandus, notwithstanding the
white color of the train, which perchance may alter with age, [yet it differs
also from it in other accidents, as for example, in the yellow color of the
Beak.] If these three birds be not the same, yet are they very like and near of
kin to one another: Perchance the only difference may be in Age or Sex.

The Pygargus of Lib. 2. Cap. 4. Ornithol. Its bigness, Beak,
Aldrovandus seems to be a different kind, which he describes in The Pygarg of
Aldrovand.
these words,

It is of a mean magnitude as big as a large Dunghil-Cock. The Bill all over
yellow, hooked, and bending by little and little from the very root to the
utmost tip or point of the hook, somewhat longer than in other Eagles in
proportion to the bigness of the Bird. The Pupil of the eye very black, the
Iris yellow. The crown of the Pupil. Color of the Head and Neck, Back, Belly.
The Train.
head and all the neck of a pale Chestnut, inclining to an Ash Color, the tips
of the feathers being more black. The back and upper part of the Wings are
covered with dark ferrugineous and blackish feathers, as also are the Belly and
Thighs for the most part. The Tail from the Rump to the end is wholly white;
whence the name of Albicilla was not undeservedly by Gaza imposed upon it,
Howbeit two of the smaller feathers [I suppose he means the two middlemost]
which lie upon and cover the other greater and principal ones have black tips.
The Legs are almost wholly bare of The Legs and Talons.
feathers, and both Legs and Feet intensely yellow, both being all over covered
with square Table-like Scales. The Talons very sharp.

The former Pygargus of Bellonius seems to be nothing else but the male of the
Ringtail called in English the Henharrier.

. V. * Of the Eagle called Morphnos or Clanga and Anataria.
THat Bird which by Gesner, and out of him by Aldrovandus is figured and
described under this title, being again nothing else but our Bald Buzzard (as
Turner himself acknowledges, who sent the description to Gesner under the title
of Morphnos) I shall omit it here, referring it to its proper place among the
wild Hawks; it being (as I said before) of a lesser size than to deserve to be
ranked with Eagles.

In stead of the true Morphnos, which Aldrovandus professes himself not to
know, I shall here give you the description of that Bird which he calls Morphno
Congener.

It is (says he) of about the height and bigness of a large Dunghil-Cock: From
Its Bigness and length. Its Beak.
the tip of the Beak to the end of the Train three spans and an half long. The
Beak was pretty long, hooked, and tending almost directly downward, joined to
the head by a yellow Membrane [I suppose he means the Sear.] The color of
almost Color.
the whole Plumage was ferrugineous, saving that at the ends of the Wings
toward the belly it was beautified with many oval spots, scattered up and
down, and moreover, that the utmost tips of the beam-feathers were white, as
also the beginning of the Tail, and the extremities of all its feathers, and
the lower part of the Rump. The Legs were all over feathered down to the
beginning of the toes, and besprinkled The Legs.
also with whitish Ash-colored spots. The Feet were yellow; the Toes above
toward Feet, Toes.
the Leg covered with Scales, toward the Talons with annulary Tables. The
bottoms of all the feathers white. The Pupil of the Eye black, encompassed with
a cinereous circle: It would very greedily devour flaid Mice. Its Food.


Bellonius for the Morphnos of the Ancients gives us the Jer-falcon; whose
opinion Aldrovandus disallows.

This Bird took the name Morphnos from the spots of the feathers whence also it
The Etymology of the names.
may in Latin not unfitly be called Naevia. Others will have this name to be
derived from (...), the Preterperfect Tense of (...) being changed into (...)
short and the letter (...) interposed, and so to signify rapacious. It is
called Clanga both by the Greeks and Latins from the sound of its voice.

. VI. * The crested Eagle of Brasil: Urutaurana Brasiliensium, Marggrav.
THis Bird is of the bigness of an Eagle: It has a black Bill (the upper Chap
Its Bill,
whereof is hooked) yellow near its rise or Base: The Eyes of a lovely
Goldcolour, with black Pupils, which it can cover with an ash-colored skin
[Periophthalmium] Eyes,
though it shut not the Eyelids. It has an Eagle-like head, but compressed or
The head.
plain above [flat-crowned] in the top whereof it has two black feathers about
two Crest.
inches long, with two small ones on each side: These it can when it lists
setup an end, and again let down flat. The Wings reach but little beyond the
bottom or rise of The Wings,
the Tail. It has a broad Tail like an Eagle. The Head above is covered with
dusky Tail. Color.
feathers having yellowish edges: The uppor part and sides of the neck with
brown ones [rather cinereous or terreous] like a Partridges. The whole throat
and lower part of the neck is white, yet so that the white is variegated at the
sides with black feathers. The whole breast and lower belly, the upper and
lower legs down to the very feet are covered with white feathers, wherewith
black ones are mingled scalewise. The Wings and Tail are of a dusky color,
shaded, having the utmost borders or edges white. The feet have four Toes,
yellow of color, with dusky The Feet.
crooked Talons. Its cry is Geb, Geb, like to that of a Chicken which has lost
its Dam, Its Voice,
[we express that voice by Yelp, yelp] If you cast a bird to it, whether alive
or dead. it catches it in its Talons, and with its Bill handsomely plumes it,
and then tearing it Food.
in pieces swallows down both flesh and bones. I kept one of these alive a long
time in the Fort Mauritius by the River of St. Frances.

. VII. * The Brasilian Urubitinga of Marggrave, very like our Pygarg or
White-tail'd Eagle.
THis Bird is like an Eagle, of the bigness of a Goose of six months old. It
has a thick hooked black Beak; a yellowish skin about the Nosthrils: Great
sparkling Aquiline Eyes: A great Head: Yellow Legs and Feet: Four Toes in each
foot, disposed after the usual manner; crooked, long, black Talons: Large
Wings: A broad Tail. It is all over covered with dusky and blackish feathers;
yet the Wings are waved with ash color. The Tail is nine Inches long, white
for six, the end for three Inches being black; howbeit in the very tip there is
again a little white. This is a stately Bird of tall stature [Egregiae
staturae.] It does in many things approach to that described by us under the
title of Pygargus, save that the upper part of the tail-feathers in that of
ours was white, the lower black, whereas in this, on the contrary the upper is
black, and the lower white. Mr. Willughby mentions another variety or
difference of the Pygargus, in which the Tail-feathers from the middle
downwards were white, the upper half being black, which seems to be altogether
the same with that here described by Marggrave.

. VIII. * Of the Vulturine Eagle of Aldrovandus, called Percnopteros, Gypaetos,
and also Ovipelargus.
THough Aldrovandus makes this Bird a sort of Eagle, entitling it Perknopteros;
yet he confesses it to have nothing Aquiline beside the name, being ignoble,
sluggish, and deformed, and therefore deserving to be set behind not only
Eagles, but also Vultures. We take it to belong to the family of Vultures, as
will appear from its description compared with the general notes of Vultures.

Of this sort of Birds Aldrovandus gives us three figures, and three
descriptions, besides that of Bellonius, which, whatever it be, seems to be a
Bird of another kind. The first, was of a Vulturine Eagle brought out of Spain,
in these words:

It was of eminent Magnitude, yea, not much less than the Chrysaetos, but of
Its bigness. Beak,
an unusual and ridiculous shape; the Beak, not as in other Eagles, bending
from the root to the tip by a continual declivity, but straight almost to the
middle, toward the point bowed into a remarkable hook, after the same manner as
in Vultures, white toward the Head, the rest of it being black; the lower Chap
wholly white. The mouth within-side [Oris rictus] of a Chesnut-colour. Mouth,
Eyes, Head.
The Irides of the Eyes not, as in other Eagles, of a fiery color, but
whitish; the Pupil black. The whole Head whitish, inclining to dusky [fuscum.]
The upper part of the Neck, about half way down, almost bald, beset with very
few, and those The Neck bare of feathers. Staring hairlike feathers.
small feathers, of a white color. At the end of this bald part, almost in the
middle of the Neck, grew small feathers like certain rough curled hairs,
standing up above the rest of the Plumage, as it were very fine slender, long
bristles; the like whereto it had in the beginning of the back and breast, in
places just opposite to one another, and also on the Rump below. On the Back
was as it were a kind of hood, reaching to The back,
the middle thereof, ending in a sharp peak, and resembling a Triangle. The
color Color of the body, Tail, Feet.
of the whole body was a dark Chestnut inclining to black. The Tail long; the
Feet and Legs white; the Claws dusky.

The second was of one taken by Country men on the Alpish Mountains of the Town
Giulia, as follows. From the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail it was by
Its length. The Bill.
measure three spans long. The Bill was long, but for the most part covered
with a skin or membrane, so that about an inch only of the tip remained bare;
the hooked end small and slender. The Head was bald or destitute of feathers to
the hind-part, so The Head.
that the feathers standing up behind the crown, resembled a Monks hood, put
back, and leaning on his neck, when he goes with his head uncovered. The color
of almost The Color.
all the feathers of the whole body was dusky, inclining to a dark Chestnut:
Only interrupted by a continued Series of whitish feathers on the lower part of
the neck, making an acute Angle, the point running down the middle of the back,
which was as it were the acuminated part of the Monks hood, hanging from the
shoulders down the middle of the back. It is hard to understand clearly the
Authors meaning in these words. The Tail, Feet, Talons.
Also another series not unlike this of whitish feathers, terminating in an
acute Angle about the middle of the back, covered all the lower part of the
back toward the complications of the Wings, somewhat resembling a Clock. The
Tail was broad, and of a mean size. The Feet dusky, and all over covered with
Scales. The Beak and Talons were of one and the same dusky horn-colour. The
feathers on the thighs reached not lower than the knees. It would without
difficulty suffer it self to be touched or handled, whence you may note its
sluggishness and cowardice. Being angered it cried like a Kite.

The third is Gesners. This Eagle (says Gesner) whose figure we here present
you with, if it be not the Gypaetos, i. e. The Vulturine Eagle, or Oripelargus,
i. e. the Mountain Vulture, yet seems to be bred at least of one Parent of this
kind. For in Beak it Its Beak. Color.
resembles a Vulture, in color a Stork, being ignoble and sluggish. It was
unknown to our Fowlers, being never, that I know of, taken with us. But in the
year of our Lord, 1551. on September. 29. there falling an extraordinary Snow, a
Bird of this kind, her Wings being wet and heavy, fell down into a narrow place
in the open Air adjoining to one of our Citizens houses. It did for shape and
color wholly resemble a Stork. It was Carnivorous, yet would not touch Fish;
impatient of cold: The Its Food.
body intensely hot, so that the cold hands of them that touched it were
presently Temperature.
warmed thereby. It would sit stark still in the same place for four or five
hours; and Nature and qualities.
sometimes look upon the Sun when it shone out. Hens and other birds scorned,
despised, and neglected it as harmless and innoxious. I kept it at my house
above a month, and gave it meat with my hand, the smaller gobbets whereof it
would swallow, the greater pieces it tore asunder with its Claws. Though it
drank not, yet from its Beak drops of water distilled.

In the Year 1664. we saw at Venice in the Palace of a certain Nobleman of the
City standing upon the Grand Channel, a bird of this kind, which we thus
described.

For bigness it equalled or exceeded any Eagle we have seen. The Head and Neck
Its bigness, Head and Neck bare, of feathers.
were destitute of feathers, only covered with a white down. From the Bill to
the Eyes the skin was bare, and of a blue color. Almost all the feathers of
the body were of a pale ferrugineous color. On the lower part of the Neck
below the Down there was as it were a kind of Collar or Ruff of long white
feathers. The prime feathers Color.
of the Wings and Tail were black. The Bill was large, more like a Gulls than
an Beak.
Eagles, the tip of it white. The Nosthrils were covered with a black membrane:
The Irides of the Eyes of a reddish hazel color. The Nosthrils turned directly
Eyes, Its nose dropped.
downward, and from them constantly dropped a liquid humor or water. It was
feathered down a little below the knee. The Feet were of a Lead color, the
Claws black, lesser, and not so crooked as an Eagles. The middle Toe much
longer than Its Feet and Claws.
the rest: The outmost joined to the middle by a membrane as far as the first
joint, or further: The inside of the Legs white. The Craw hung down from the
body before like a bag. It stood almost always with the Wings stretched out like
the figure of the The Craw.
Vultur Leporarius of Gesner. Manner of standing.


These three descriptions I suspect to be of one and the same Bird, differing
only in Age or Sex. For the first of Aldrovandus in most notes agrees with
ours; excepting the Triangular spot in the back, which either was not in ours,
or not observed by us, (which yet I scarcely believe) and that he makes no
mention of any humor dropping from the nose of his, perchance because it was
seen and described after it was dead. Aldrovandus confesses his second to be in
many things not unlike to Gesners: But that Gesners and ours are the same Bird,
that one note of the water distilling from the Nosthrils is sufficient to
evince, notwithstanding the difference of color. I judge the first of
Aldrovandus and ours described at Venice, to be of the same Sex; likewise the
second of Aldrovandus, and that seen and described by Gesner to be of the same
Sex, but different from that of the other two. But herein I dare not be very
positive and confident.

CHAP. IV. Of VULTURES in general.
THe Characteristic notes of Vultures are, 1. That for bigness they are equal
to, or exceed Eagles. 2. That their Beaks are not presently from their first
rise from the Forehead crooked and bending, but after about two Inches
continued streightness; which Gesner says, he himself has observed in many
sorts of Vultures. 3. That they have an excellent sagacity of smelling above
all other Birds, so that they can perceive the savor of dead Carcasses from
far, [many miles off they say.] 4. The Ancients have delivered, that they are
content only with dead Carcasses, abstaining from the ravine and slaughter of
living Animals. But Bellonius, Gesner, and others of the Moderns affirm, that
they pursue live Birds, and prey upon living Fawns, Hares, Kids, Lambs, etc. 5.
That they have the neck for the most part bare of feathers. 6. Bellonius
asserts, that among all Rapacious and hook-bill'd birds Vultures only assemble
and fly together in flocks; and that himself saw great flights of them, of not
fewer than fifty in each, when he traveled from Cairo to Mount Sinai. Hence
that observation of Aristotle, (...), is proved not to hold generally true in
all Rapacious Birds. 7. That their Legs are feathered down to the Feet: By
which note Bellonius thinks they are to be distinguished from other Birds of
prey. But neither is this note common to all Vultures, Bellonius himself
representing some with naked legs; nor proper to the Vulturine kind; but also
common to some Eagles, as appears by their figures and descriptions. 8. That
under their throats they have a space of about an hand-breadth, clothed rather
with hairs, like to those of a Calf, than with feathers. Which note we found to
be true in the Vulture kept in the Royal Aviary in St. James's Park London. 9.
That the Craw hangs down like a bag before the stomach or breast, which we
observed in the Venetian Vulture or Gypaetos, described in the precedent
Chapter. 10. That the Female, contrary to the manner of other Birds of prey,
does not exceed the Male in bigness. 11. That all the inside of the Wings is
covered with a soft fleece of Down; which is peculiar to the Vulture alone
among Rapacious Birds. What is delivered of the generation of Vultures, viz.
That there are no Males found among them: That the Females are impregnated by
the Wind; that they bring not forth Eggs, but live Young, etc. is altogether
false and frivolous, scarce worth the mentioning, much less the refuting. Among
the marks hitherto reckoned up, the most proper Characteristic of a Vulture
seems to me to be that of having its neck bare of destitute of feathers, and
only covered with a Down. Those two, I am sure, which alone we have happened to
see, had not only their necks, but their heads also bare, covered only with a
short white Down.

CHAP. V.
. 1. * Of several of VULTURES.
ALdrovandus out of Bellonius and Gesner sets forth six several sorts of
Vultures:

1. The cinereous or ash-colored Vulture. The cinereous Vulture. The blac
Vulture.


2. The black Vulture. Of which he says, he wonders, why Bellonius (who boasts
that he had so great opportunity and facility of seeing and getting diverse
sorts) should give no perfect description, neither of the one, nor the other,
but only set forth a figure: which yet does not agree to what he writes of
Vultures in general, viz. That they all have rough legs, wholly feathered down
to the foot, and do by this mark differ from Eagles, it being represented with
naked legs.

3. The Chesnut-coloured Vulture [Boeticus] which Bellonius thus describes: It
is The Boetic or Chestnut colored Vulture described.
somewhat less than an Eagle, has the feathers of its Neck, Back, Belly, and
whole body of a Chesnut-colour, wherein it differs from the black Vulture. The
greater feathers of the Wings and Train are of the same color with those of
the Black. Both [this and the black] have short tails in respect of their very
long Wings. These do not, as in other Rapacious Fowl, follow the nature and
constitution of the Wings, but rather, as in Woodpeckers, are found for the
most part with their points broken and shattered: Which is a sign they wear and
break them by rubbing against the Rocks, where they harbor and build their
Nests. The Chestnut or white Vultures are more rare to be seen than the black;
and have this peculiar to them, that the feathers of the Crowns of their heads
are very short if compared to Eagles: Which is the reason why some have thought
them bald. They have short legs, covered all over with feathers down to the
beginning of the toes. Which note is peculiar to them, not agreeing to any
other Rapacious hook-bill'd Bird, besides the Nocturnal ones. The feathers of
the Neck in these Baetic Vultures are very narrow and long (like those that
hang down about the necks of Dunghil-Cocks and Stares) if compared with the
rest, which cover the back, wings, and sides, which are small and broad like
Scales. But those which cover the back, stomach, belly, and bottom of the rump
in the Baetic Vulture are red, in the black one black, but in both pretty broad.

4. The Hare-Vulture, [Leporarium] so called from preying upon Hares; of which
The Hare-Vulture.
Gesner writes after this manner. It has not so A deep Golden or Lion-colour.
fulvous a breast as our Golden Vulture, and is inferior to it in magnitude.
George Fabricius, the ornament of Germany, sent me its figure, with this
description added. The Vulture, which the Germans call Ein Hasengyr, has a
hooked, black Bill; foul Eyes; a firm, great Body; broad Wings; a long,
straight Train; a dark red Color; and yellow Feet. Standing or sitting it
rears up a Crest upon its head, as if it were horned, which appears not in
flying. The Wings extended exceeded the measure of a fathom [Orgyiae.] In
walking it steps or paces two Palms [hand-breadths.] It pursues all sorts of
Birds; of Beasts it catches and preys upon Hares, Conies, Foxes, Fawns; it also
lies in wait for Fishes, It will not be made tame. It pursues its prey not only
by flying, but also by running. It flies with a great force and noise. It
builds in thick and desert Woods upon the highest trees, It feeds upon the
flesh and entrails of Animals, not abstaining from dead Carcasses. It can
endure hunger, or abide without meat fourteen days, although it be most
voracious.

5. The Golden Vulture, of which Gesner thus: Viewing the skin of the Golden
The Golden Vulture described.
Vulture, sent me once out of the Alpine Country of the Grisons, [Rhaetia,] the
beak and legs yet sticking to it, I thus described it. This Vulture has many
things common with that kind of Alpine Eagle, (whose figure and description we
placed first in the History of the Eagle) but is every way, or in all parts
greater. From the Bill to the end of the Tail it was somewhat more than four
feet and an half long, to the end of the Claws three feet and nine Inches, or
somewhat less. The length of the upper Chap of the Bill, as far as the opening
of the mouth, was almost seven Inches. The length of the Tail was about two
feet and three inches. All the lower part, that is to say, the lower part of
the neck, the breast, the belly and the feet were of a red color, more dilute
toward the tail, more intense toward the head. The Toes of a dusky or horn
color. The longest feather of the Wings was almost a yard long: They are all
blackish or dusky, of near one and the same color: Yet the small feathers,
that are highest toward the ridge of the wing are blacker, and some of them
marked with transverse reddish spots cross the middle, others with whitish ones
about the bottom. So much the blacker are they by how much nearer to the back,
where they shine again for blackness. The feathers on the middle of the back
are black and shining, their shafts in the middle are white, especially of
those which are about the middle of the back, and in half the neck; for the
remaining part of the neck has pale red [ruffas ex albido] feathers. The tail
feathers are of the same color with those of the wings, viz. dusky.

6. The white Vulture, which he makes the same with the cinereous Vulture of
The white Vulture.
Bellonius.

7. That Vulture which we saw in the Royal Aviary in St. James's Park, did in
many Our fulvous Vulture, like Bellonius his Chestnut one.
things agree with the third sort or Chestnut [Baetious] Vulture of Bellonius.
Its back and wings were fulvous: Its tail short in respect of the wings: The
Beak black, hooked at the end. The head and neck as far as the breast, and the
middle part of the breast void of feathers, covered over with a short, soft,
thick white Down. The Eyes were fierce-looked, with Saffron-coloured, or
deep-yellow Irides. In the lower part of the neck was as it were a Ruff of
thick-set, narrow feathers much longer than the rest, as in the Peronopteros of
Aldrovandus.

. II. * The Brasil Vulture called Urubu, by the Dutch Even Menscheneter.
Marggrav. By the Mexicans Tzopilotl. F. Ximen. By Nieremberg and others Aura.
IT is a rapacious Bird of the bigness of a Kite according to Marggravius; of a
middle-sized Eagle or Raven according to Ximenes: Having whitish feet like a
Hens, a long tail, and wings longer than it. The feathers of the whole body are
black, with a little Ravi.
tauny color here and there mingled. It has a small head, almost of the shape
of a Turkeys, covered with a somewhat rugged or wrinkled skin. In the top of
the head the skin is as it were divided long-ways, and on the left side of the
head beneath the Eye is of a Saffron color, above the Eye of a blew, also in
the top; elsewhere of a reddish brown. In the right side of the head about the
Eye above and beneath it is of a Saffron color, as also in the top: Elsewhere
of a delayed yellow, or whitish. It has a pretty long Bill, hooked at the end,
sharp, and covered over from the head half way with a skin from Saffron-colour
tending to blue. In the middle of the Bill above is I suppose he means one
common hole for both Nosthrils: or a hole through the Bill from side to side.
one hole of the Nosthrils, large, and situate transversly. The end of the
Bill, that is bare and wants the skin, is white. It has elegant Eyes almost of
the color of a Ruby, with a round black Pupil: The Eyelids of a
Saffron-colour. The Tongue carinated, and indented round with sharp teeth. Its
flesh stinks like Carrion. For they feed upon dead Carcasses; and in the
Capitania [Chieftainship] of Sirigippo, and River of St. Francis, when any one
kills a beast, they come flying presently in great numbers. It is an ill-looked
bird, always lean, and never satisfied, Ximenes makes it to be a kind of Raven,
but the Sear or skin covering the Basis of the Bill, argues it to belong to the
Rapacious kind, the bare head, and tip of the Bill only hooked, determine it to
the family of Vultures. It feeds (says Ximenes) upon dead flesh and man's dung.
They perch at night on Trees and Rocks, in the Morning they resort to the
Cities, sit viewing and watching the streets on high places, and when they spy
any silth, garbidge, or dead thing, they catch it up, and devour it. Where they
build or hatch their Young is hitherto unknown; although they be most frequent
in almost every corner of New Spain. Yet Acosta says, that their young ones
are white, and that growing up they change and come to be as black as Ravens.
They fly always very high, and cast a horrible stink from them like Ravens.
They fly constantly in flocks, and sit upon trees, and feed jointly in company
upon dead Carcasses without any strife, or quarrelling, and when the rest see
any one not able to move or help her self, they help her as much as they can,
and bring her to the water: For being washed they recover strength to fly. If
any one pursues them they empty themselves presently, that they may be the more
light to fly away; with like haste casting up what ever they had swallowed. The
ashes of their feathers burnt take away hairs, so that they come not again;
which faculty is also attributed to the dung of Pismires, and the blood of
Bats. Their skin half-burnt heals wounds if it be applied, and the flesh withal
eaten; which is wont also to help those that are sick of the French Pox. The
heart dried in the Sun smells like Musks The Dung dried, and taken in any
convenient Vehicle to the weight of a Dram is profitable to melancholy
persons. The Barbarous people say, that where they lay their Eggs, they compass
their Nests with certain Pebble-stones, which promote transpiration: But the
more probable opinion is, that they exclude their Young under ground, and take
them out when they feed them, and again cover them in the earth.

CHAP. VI. Of the lesser sort of Rapacious Birds that prey by day, called Hawks.
IT follows now that we treat of the lesser sort of Rapacious Birds that prey
by day, called Hawks. These we have before distinguished into the more
generous, which are wont to be reclaimed and trained up for Hawking, And the
more sluggish and cowardly, which because they are either indocile, or unfit
for Hawking, are neglected by men.

The former called Hawks are wont to be divided by Falconers into Long-winged
and Short-winged. Those they call Long-winged whose Wings when closed reach
almost to the end of the tail: Those they call Short-winged whose Wings when
closed fall much short of the end of the tail; of which sort we have seen two
greater, viz. the Goshawk and Sparrowhawk; and three lesser, viz. the three
sorts of Butcher-birds.

But because that distinction of Hawks into tame and wild is arbitrarious and
depends upon institution; but the other into Long-winged and Short-winged has
its foundation in nature, and may be accommodated to all Hawks in general; we
will prefer it before that, first treating of the Long-winged Hawks.

Hawks in respect of their age are divided by Falconers into 1. Nyas or
Eiasse-Hawks, which being taken out of the Nest, or brought away in the Nest
before they can fly, are brought up by hand. 2. Ramage-Hawks or Branchers,
which are taken when they are fledged and got out of the Nest, but depart not
far from it, flying only from bough to bough, and following their Dams, not
being able yet to prey for themselves: from Ramus signifying a bough. However
they be taken, after they have preyed for themselves the first year, while they
retain their Chicken-feathers, they are called Sore-hawks, from the French word
Soret, signifying a dusky color. The second year, when they have changed their
feathers, they are called Entermewers, from the word muto to change. The third
year they are called White Hawks, for what reason I know not. The fourth year,
when they are come to their full growth and perfection, they are called Hawks
of the first coat; the fifth year, Hawks of the second coat; the sixth year,
Hawks of the third coat; and so on as long as they live. Some of them, if they
be well tended and favored while they are young, will hold out twenty years.
The feathers of all by age gradually grow whiter, as men's hairs grow gray, so
that by how much the older they are, by so much the whiter are they. The
outmost feather of the Wing is by our Falconers called the Sarcel, by the
number of the dents whereof they pretend to know the age of the Hawk, as by the
number of cross bars in the tail, the age of a Pheasaant.

But of the manner of feeding, training up, reclaiming, and curing the diseases
of Hawks, those that have written of Falconry are to be consulted.

CHAP. VII. Of Long-winged Hawks.
LOng-winged Hawks may be divided into the more sluggish and indocile, which we
call wild Hawks, and the more generous, such as use to be trained up for
Fowling. Those we call wild Hawks are the Bald Buzzard, the Common Buzzard, the
Honey-Buzzard, the Ring-tail, the Kite or Glead, and the Moor-Buzzard. Of which
in order.

CHAP. VIII. Of the several sorts of wild long-winged Hawks, and first,
. I. Of the Bald Buzzard.
THis Bird is by Aldrovandus twice put among Eagles. 1. Under the title of
Haliaeetus, Lib. 2. Cap. 3. 2. Under the title of Morphnos, in the seventh
Chapter of the same book.

The Bird we described weighed fifty six ounces and an half. [If herein Mr.
Willughby Its Weight,
be not mistaken, I see not but this Bird might well enough pass for an Eagle:
But I suspect an error in the weight.] Its breadth, or the distance between the
extremities Breadth,
of the wings extended was sixty Inches. The Beak from the point to the Beak,
Angles of the mouth an inch and half long, black, hooked, covered from the
Base as far as the Nosthrils with a bluish skin or Sear, bunching out between
the Nosthrils and the hooked part. The Nosthrils themselves are oblong and
oblique. Nares,
The Angle of the lower Chap [i. e. which the legs thereof make] round. The
Tongue broad, soft, and like a man's. The Irides of the Eyes yellow; the Pupils
Eyes.
great. It has both an upper and lower Eyelid, but the lower much greater.
The Eyes are not so sunk in the head, or withdrawn under prominent brows, as in
the Common Buzzard, but more extant.

The Bird itself seems to be much stronger and more valiant than the Buzzard,
with which it agrees in the color of the upper part being black and
ferrugineous. The Color of the upper side,
feathers on the crown of the head are white, whence it took the name of Bald
Buzzard: The throat, breast and belly white, but above the Crop the feathers
are ferrugineous. Lower side.
The Legs are clothed with white and soft feathers. The prime or flag-feathers
The Flag-Feathers.
in each Wing are about twenty eight; from the seventeenth they end in sharper
points: The greater are the blacker. The four outmost have the lower half of
their interior Vanes twice as broad as the upper: The interior Vanes of all
are variegated with white and black alternately, indented like the teeth of a
Saw. The feathers under the shoulders are white, marked with black spots toward
the tips. The third and fourth row of those that cover the roots of the
flag-feathers underneath The covert feathers.
are elegantly marked toward the tips with dusky spots, having their edges
ferrugineous. The lesser feathers above these are white, the greater beneath
them dusky or brown. The Train is made up of twelve feathers of equal length,
having their borders partycoloured The Train.
of white and ferrugineous, indented as in the Wings.

The Legs are long: The Feet thick and strong, of a pale blue or Verdigrease
color. The Feet, Toes, and Talons.
The middle Toe the biggest; the outermost somewhat bigger than the inner; the
back-toe, as in all, the least; all armed with great, semicircular, black,
round Talons. The feet scaly and uneven. The sole of the foot rough, that it
may more easily hold its prey, when it has once caught it. The Toes are so
disposed, that the outmost of the fore-toes may bend or turn backwards, as in
Owls, Parrots, etc. Site of the outmost foretoe. The entrails and bowels.


The Liver, Heart, and Gall are large: The Spleen round, and of a black or
sordid color. In the Stomach and Craw opened we found many fish-bones and
scales. The Surface of the Echinus or ante-stomach, was full of many carneous
Globules. The Guts were long, slender, or small, having many revolutions.

It haunts Rivers, Lakes, and great Pools of water, as also the Sea-shores. At
Pensans Its Food.
in Cornwall we saw one that was shot, having a Mullet in its Claw: For it preys
upon fish; which seems very strange and wonderful, since it is neither
whole-footed, nor provided with long legs or neck.

It builds upon the ground among Reeds, and lays three or four large white
Eggs, of Its Nest.
a figure exactly Elliptical: lesser yet than Hens Eggs.

It casts an ill strong sent, and is much infested with Lice.

It differs from the Sea-Eagle of Aristotle, in that the neck is not thick and
big, but for the bulk of the body slender and small.

What Aldrovandus has delivered of Eagles, viz. that the right foot is bigger
than the left, does not agree to this, for its feet are equal.

It is distinguished from the common Buzzard. 1. By its weight and bigness,
wherein How it differs from the common Buzzard.
it exceeds that. 2. That its Wings are longer. 3. By this most sure mark, that
the outmost of the fore-toes in this may be turned backward, but not in the
common Buzzard. 4. By the angular processes of the upper Chap of the Beak. 5.
By the blue color of the legs and feet.

. II. Of the common Buzzard or Puttock, called in Latin Buteo.
IT is about the bigness of a Pheasant or young Pullet. Its weight was thirty
two Its Bigness, weight and measures. Its Head, Beak,
ounces. Its length from the tip of the Beak to the end of the tail twenty one
inches: Its breadth, the Wings being stretched out, fifty two inches. The Head
great: The Crown broad and flat: The Beak short, hooked, and of a dark blue. A
yellow skin covers the upper Chap from the root beyond the Nosthrils. The
Bridle of the mouth, or the skin of the corners, is also yellow. The Nosthrils
are round, Sear, Nares,
[yet in one Bird of this kind we observed them long and bending.] It gaped
wide. Its Tongue was thick, fleshy, blunt, as in the rest of this kind. Being
angry it opened Tongue,
its mouth, and held its Tongue stretched out as far as the end of its Bill.
The roof of the mouth has in it a hollow equal to the Tongue. The Angle of the
lower Chap is Palate,
circular. The Eyes are great, the Irides, or circles encompassing the Pupil,
white, Eyes.
with a dash sometimes of yellow, sometimes of red; sometimes they are of a
whitish color without mixture of any other. The lower Eyelid downy. The
Membrane for Nictation blue.

The color of all the upper part a dark fulvous approaching to black, or a
ferrugineous The Color of the upper side.
black. In some birds of this kind we observed many white spots in the covert
feathers of the Wings; which in the Wings spread made a kind of white line: The
like white spots it had in the long feathers springing from the shoulders,
which cover the whole back. The edges of these feathers were of a dirty yellow.
The lower side of the body was of a dilute yellow, or yellowish white; the
breast stained Color of the lower side.
with oblong ferrugineous spots, not transversely placed, but tending
downwards, in each feather drawn according to the length of the shaft. The Chin
is of a ferrugineous color, the shafts of the feathers being black. Between
the Eyes and Nosthrils grow long black bristles. On the middle of the back grow
no feathers, but only down; for the scapular feathers cover the whole back.

The flag-feathers in each Wing are about twenty four in number: The outmost
The Flag-Feathers of the Wings.
of which is shortest, the third and fourth (counting from it) longest. The
tips of the four outmost are blacker and narrower than those of the rest: For
the tips of the rest are white. The interior webs of all are variegated with
broad, transverse, dusky, and whitish strakes or bars, after the manner of
those of a Woodpecker or Woodcock. The under-side of the Wings, excepting the
tips of all the flags, and the third part of the five outmost feathers, is
white varied with transverse parallel lines. The Wings closed reach almost to
the end of the Train. The Train is nine or ten inches long, made up of twelve
feathers, not forked, but when spread term inating The Tail.
in a circular circumference. The utmost tips of its feathers are of an
ash color; then follows a transverse black line of an inch breadth, the
remaining part being vary gated with black and cinereous transverse spaces or
bars, only the bottoms of the feathers white.

The Thighs are long, strong, and fleshy: The Legs short, thick, and strong,
feathered The Legs, Feet,
down a little below the Knees. The Legs and Feet yellow, and covered with
Scales. The outmost toe joined below to the middlemost by a membrane for some
Toes, and Claws.
space. The Talons strong, long, and black; that of the outmost fore-toe the
least, that of the back-toe the biggest.

The Liver is divided into two lobes, having a large Gall: The Spleen of an
Oval The entrails.
figure. It has but two Testicles. The stomach is large, not musculous but
membranous, that is not fleshy, like the Gizzard of a Hen or Turkey, etc. but
skinny like those of beasts.

It feeds not only upon Mice and Moles, but also upon Birds: For out of the
stomach Its Food.
of one that we opened we took a small Bird entire, and out of the stomach of
another even a Thrush. It is a great destroyer of Conies: Yet for want of
better food it will feed upon Beetles, Earthworms, and other Insects.

The heads of these Birds are said to grow Ash-colored. The difference in
color.
cinereous with age, and the feathers of their backs white. But whether it come
to pass by reason of Sex, or Age, or other accident, certain it is they differ
very much one from another in this respect: For whereas some have no white
feathers neither in head, back, nor wings; others have very many.

Buzzards Eggs are white, stained with a few great reddish spots, yet sometimes
all Their Eggs.
over white without spots.

That sort of Hawk (as Pliny witnesses) which the Romans named Buteo was by
the Grecians called Triorches, from the number of its stones. Aldrovandus also
says Reason of the name Triorches.
that in a Buzzard dissected he had observed three stones. The third stone
appeared not to us, though we diligently sought it. Aldrovandus also himself
says, that he would not very much contend with him that shall obstinately deny
that third glandulous body (which besides the two stones he had noted,
adjoining to them) to be a true Testicle.

. III. The Honey-Buzzard.
FOr bigness it equals or exceeds the common Buzzard, is also like it in figure
or The Bigness, Weight, Dimensions.
shape of body, unless perchance it be somewhat longer. It weighed thirty one
ounces. The length from Bill-point to Tail-end was twenty three Inches, to the
points of the Talons not more than nineteen. Its breadth or the distance
between the ends of the Wings spread fifty two Inches. Its beak from the tip to
the Angles of the The Beak.
mouth was an inch and half long, black, and very hooked, bunching out between
the nosthrils and the head: The Basis of the upper Chap covered with a thick,
rugged, black skin beyond the Nosthrils, which are not exactly round, but long
and bending. The mouth, when gaping, very wide and yellow. The Angle of the
lower The Mouth. The Eyes.
Chap, as in other Hawks, semicircular. The Irides of the Eyes of a lovely
bright yellow or Saffron color.

The head is ash-colored: The Crown flat, broad, narrow toward the Beak. The
The Head.
bottoms of the Plumage in the head and back white, which is worthy the noting,
because Colou.
it is common with this to many other Hawks. The back is of a ferrugineous
color [or rather a Mouse-dun.] The tips of the flag-feathers, as also those of
the second The Remiges.
and third rows in the wings white. The Wings when closed reach not to the end
of the tail. The number of flags in each Wing twenty four. The Tail consists of
The Tail.
twelve feathers, near a foot long, variegated with transverse obscure and
lucid, or blackish and whitish spaces, rings, or bars. The very tips of the
feathers are white, below the white is a cross black line; under that a broad
dun or ash-colored space or bed (the like whereto also crosses the wings,
which differ not much from the tail in color.)

As for the lower side of the body, the feathers under the chin and tail are
white; The color of the lower part.
the breast and belly also white, spotted with black spots, drawn downward from
the head toward the tail.

The Legs are feathered down somewhat below the knee, short, strong, yellow, as
The Feet and Talons.
are also the feet. The Talons, long, strong, sharp, and black.

The Guts and Stomach.
The Guts shorter than in the former: The Blind Guts.
Appendices thick and short. In the stomach and guts of that we dissected we
found a huge number of green Caterpillars of that sort called Geometrae, many
also of the common green Caterpillars and others.

It builds its Nest of small twigs, laying upon them wool, and upon the wool
its The Nest.
Eggs. We saw one that made use of an old Kites Nest to breed in, and that fed
its Young with the Wasp-Maggots or Grubs. Its food. The Young.
Nymphae of Wasps: For in the Nest we found the Combs of Wasps Nests, and in
the stomachs of the Young the limbs and fragments of Wasp-Maggots. There were
in the Nest only two young ones, covered with a white Down, spotted with black.
Their Feet were of a pale yellow, their Bills between the Nosthrils and the
head white. Their Craws large, in which were Lizards, Frogs, etc. In the Crop
of one of them we found two Lizards entire, with their heads lying toward the
Food.
birds mouth, as if they sought to creep out.

This Bird runs very swiftly like a Hen. The Female as in the rest of the
Rapacious kind is in all dimensions greater than the Male.

It differs from the common Buzzard, 1. In having a longer tail. 2. An
ash-colored How it differs from the Buzzard.
head. 3. The Irides of the Eyes yellow. 4. Thicker and shorter feet. 5. In the
broad transverse dun beds or strokes in the wings and tail; which are about
three inches broad.

The Eggs of this Fowl are cinereous marked with darker spots.

It has not as yet (that we know of) been described by any Writer, though it
be frequent enough with us.

. IV. Of the Ring-tail, the Male whereof is called the Henharrier.
THe Female, though lean, weighed sixteen ounces. From the point of the Beak
Its Weight,
to the end of the tail, it was by measure twenty inches long: From tip to tip
of the wings extended was forty five inches. The Bill from the tip to the
corners of Length, Beak.
the Mouth an inch and half long. Above the Nosthrils and at the corners of the
Jaw grow black bristles reflected forward.

From the hind part of the Head round the Ears to the Chin a ring or wreath of
A Coronet.
feathers standing up, having their middle dusky, and their edges of a reddish
white, encompasses the head as it were a Crown. From this wreath hangs down a
naked skin covering the ears. The back is of a dark ferrugineous color, the
edges of the neck Color of the feathers.
feathers reddish: In the crown of the head less red. The bottoms of the
feathers in the hind-part of the head white. Under the Eyes is a white spot.
The belly and breast of a dilute reddish color [or white with a Tincture of
red] marked with long dusky spots, tending downward along the shaft of the
feather. The middle of the throat of a dusky or dark ferrugineous color, the
edges of the feathers being red. The Rump has some white feathers, marked in
the middle along their shafts with oblong ferrugineous spots.

The number of flag-feathers in each wing was twenty four, the exterior webs
The Remges, or prime Wing-feathers.
whereof were of the same color with the back, the interior being variegated
with transverse black and white strokes alternately situate. In the exterior
and greater feathers the white strokes are bigger and broader; in the interior
and lesser the black: In the inmost the whole web is dusky, the white by
degrees growing darker and darker, till at last it comes to be wholly brown or
dusky. The tips of the exterior feathers in the second row are white, of the
interior red; the rest of them being of the same color with the back.

The Tail is ten Inches long, made up of twelve feathers: The tips whereof are
of a reddish ash-clour; to which succeed alternately red and black bars, the
black being The Train.
much the broader. In the two middle feathers the red does altogether
disappear, the feathers being wholly black.

A yellow skin covers the upper Chap, reaching from the root of the Bill beyond
The Sea. The Beak.
the Nosthrils: Else the Bill is black, hooked, and prominent. The lower
Mandible straight. The Mouth wide when gaping. In the Palate is a Cavity equal
to the Palate,
Tongue. The Tongue broad, fleshy, and undivided: Both Tongue and Palate Tongue.
black. The Angle of the lower Chap, as in others of this kind, round. The
border of the Eyelids round the Eyes yellow.

The Feet yellow, the Talons black. The outmost Toe for some space from the The
Feet, Toes and Talons.
divarication is joined to the middlemost by an intervening membrane. The
middle Toe longest, the inmost shortest, but the Claw of the outmost least. The
Legs long.

It has a great Craw: Small, round, tumid, blind Guts: A large Gorge, in that
The entrails.
we opened full of feathers and bones of birds: A Gall joined to the Liver. Its
Eggs were as it were besmeared over with red, the white here and there
appearing from Eggs.
underneath it.

The Male or Tarcel of this kind differs very much from the described, not only
in The description of the Tarcel called the Henharrier.
magnitude, but also in color. It is called in English the Henharrow or
Henharrier. The head, neck, and back are of an Ash Color, like that of a
Ring-dove. The long feathers growing on the shoulders are somewhat dusky. The
Rump not so white as in the Female. The Breast white, with some transverse
dusky spots. The two middle feathers of the Tail cinereous, from the middle to
the outmost the color is more languid and dilute, inclining to white; all but
the middle ones marked with transverse blackish bars. The exterior
flag-feathers of the Wings are black, the tips being ash-colored, and the
bottoms white. The outside of the rest is cinereous, only their inner limbs or
borders white. The covert feathers of the upper side of the Wings cinereous, of
the nether side white; the shafts of the interior being black. The first row
of the covert feathers of the inside of the Wing have transverse dusky spots.
The Legs are long and very slender, beyond the proportion of other Hawks. In
other points it agrees for the most part with the Female. We suppose this Bird
may be the Pygargus of Bellonius. I suspect that Aldrovandus makes of this Hawk
differing in Age or Sex two or three Species. The description of that
carnivorous Bird he calls Palumbo similis agrees exactly to this: The
description also of Lanarius in the Fifth Book, eleventh Chapter of his
Ornithology answers in most particulars: And therefore we have taken the figure
thereof for it.

. V. The Kite or Glead: Milvus cauda forcipata.
IT weighed forty four ounces. Its length from the point of the Beak to the end
of Its Weight and measures.
the Tail was twenty eight inches. The Wings extended were equal in breadth to
sixty four Inches. The Beak from the tip to the corners of the mouth was two
inches long. The upper Chap hung down half an Inch.

The Head and Chin are of a pale ash color, varied with black lines along the
The color of the upper part.
shafts of the feathers. The Neck red, the middle part of the feathers being
black. The Back dusky or brown like a Buzzards. The feathers next the Tail of
the same color with it, having their middle parts or shafts black. The lesser
rows of Wingfeathers are party-colored of red, black and white; the middle
part of each feather along the shaft being black. The long Scapular feathers
covering the Back have black lines like the flags. The feathers covering the
inside of the Wing are red, with black spots in their middles. The Plumage of
the lower side has the edges ash-colored, The color of the nether side.
then follows red, the middle part being black: The black part is by degrees
less and less from the Chin to the Tail; so that under the Tail only the shafts
of the feathers are black: The red color is also more dilute toward the Tail.

The flag-feathers of the Wings are in number twenty four, of which the five
outmost The first row of Wing-feathers.
are black, the next six are of a dark cinereous color; all the rest to the
last are again black; the last are parti-colored of red, white, and brown. All
but the five or six exterior feathers have in their outward webs black
transverse lines, the spaces between the lines being whitish, especially from
the sixth to the eleventh. The foremost of the second row of Wing-feathers are
black; as also the bastard Wing. The Wings closed are longer than the middle
feathers of the Tail shorter than the outmost.

The Tail is forked, the middle feathers being eleven Inches long, the outmost
fourteen. The Tail.
The color red [ruffus.] The extreme feathers blackish: All but the two
middlemost have black, cross lines, the middle spaces or distances being
whitish. The tips of all are white.

The Bill is black, having scarce any tooth-like Appendices: The Tongue broad
and The Beak, Tongue.
thick, as in other carnivorous Birds. In the Palate there is a Cavity equal to
the Tongue. The Sear or skin about the Nosthrils is yellow. In the roof of the
mouth Sear.
is a double cranny or hole. The Eyes are great: The Irides of a pale, but
lovely Eyes.
yellow.

The Legs and Feet yellow: The outmost foretoe joined to the middle one by a
The Feet, Toes and Talons.
Membrane, reaching almost half way. The Talons black; that of the back-toe
being the greatest. The Talon of the middle toe has a sharp edge on the inside.

It has a great Gall; a large Craw. The straight gut below the Appendices is
much The Entrails.
dilated, as in other of this kind.

Spreading its Wings it so balances it self in the Air, that it can rest as it
were immovable Manner of flying.
a long time in the same place; yea, without at all, or but rarely moving its
Wings, it glides through the Air from place to place; whence perchance it took
its English name Glead.

By the figure of its Tail alone it is sufficiently distinguished from all
other Birds of prey we have hitherto seen.

This sort of Birds (says Pliny) seems to have taught men the Art of steering
a Ship by Her Tail serves her for a Rudder, to direct her flight.
the turning of their Tails; Nature showing in the Air what was needful to be
done in the Deep. For hence (as Aldrovandus goes on) it is probable that men
learned to apply a Rudder; viz. When they saw the Kite, by turning her Tail
sometimes this way, sometimes that way, to direct or vary her course, and turn
about her body at pleasure; they also attempting somewhat like, added the Helm
to the Ship, by winding and turning whereof to and fro they could direct and
impel it whither they pleased, which otherwise would be driven uncertainly and
at random by the Winds and Tides.

Kites they say are Birds of passage, shifting places according to the seasons
of the Kites said to be Birds of passage.
year. When I was once (says Bellonius) on the shore of the Euxine Sea, on
Thraceside, about the latter end of April, on a certain very high Hill, near to
that Pillar which is at the mouth of the Bosphorus, where a Fowler had spread
Nets for catching of Sparrow-Hawks, which came flying from the right side of
the Sea; we observed Kites coming thither in flocks, and that in so great
numbers, that it was a miracle to us. For being as it were astonished at the
strangeness of the spectacle, we could not conceive where such a multitude of
Kites could get themselves food. For should they for but fifteen days space fly
continually that way in such numerous squadrons, I dare confidently affirm,
they would exceed the number of men living upon the Earth. Howbeit, with us in
England they are seen all the year, neither do they fear or fly our Winters.

Pliny writes, that Kites feed upon no other meat but flesh: But Bellonius
affirms, That Their food. and preying.
in Cayro a City of Egypt he has seen them light upon Palm Trees, and eat the
Dates, But no question they do so only being compelled by hunger, and for want
of their natural and familiar food. They are very noisome to tame birds,
especially Chickens, Ducklings, and Goslings; among which espying one far from
shelter, or that is carelessly separated a good distance from the rest, or by
any other means lies fit and exposed to rapine, they single it out, and fly
round, round for a while, marking it; then of a sudden dart down as swift as
Lightning, and catch it up before it is aware, the Dam in vain crying out, and
men with hooting and stones scaring them away. Yea, so bold are they, that they
affect to prey in Cities and places frequented by men; so that the very
Gardens, and Courts, or Yards of houses are not secure from their ravine. For
which cause our good Housewives are very angry with them, and of all birds hate
and curse them most.

The Grecians call it, (...), and (...), but more commonly (...).

. VI. The More-Buzzard: Milvus Aeruginosus Aldrov. an Circus Bellonii?
IT is lesser than the Buzzard, of about the bigness of a Crow. The Head is not
so great, nor the Crown so flat and broad as in a Buzzard. Its length from the
point Its Bignest, and measures.
of the Bill to the end of the Tail is more than twenty Inches. The distance
between the tips of the Wings spread fifty Inches. The Beak about an Inch and
half long, hooked, covered at bottom with a yellowish green skin or Sear; else
black. The Beak.
Nosthrils not round but long, of the figure of a Guiny Bean or Kidney. The
Mouth Nares. Mouth. Tongue. Eyes.
withinside partly black, partly bluish. The Tongue broad, fleshy, soft, as in
other birds of prey. The hole or cleft in the Palate wide and open. The Eyes of
a mean size, having yellow Irides [in the bird that I described at Rome: But
Mr. Willughby writes, that they are between an Ash and Hazel color.]

The Crown of the head is of a kind of clay color, [of a pale fulvous, or
between Its color.
yellow and A S^ndy red.
ruffus] variegated with black lines, viz. the shaft of each feather being
black. The color of the whole body, as well lower as upper side is a dark
ferrugineous, only at the middle joint of both Wings there is a spot of the
same reddish clay-colour [ex sulvo albicans] with the head, and the feathers at
the root or rise of the tail are fulvous.

The Wings closed reach almost to the end of the Tail. The number of
flag-feathers The Wings and their prime feathers.
in each Wing is twenty four. These are blacker than the rest of the feathers:
The outmost is above a hand-breadth shorter than that next to it. The
covert-feathers of the underside of the Wing are parti-colored, brown and
fulvous. The Tail is The Train.
about nine Inches long, made up of twelve feathers of equal length when it is
spread, terminated in a circular Circumference, being parti-colored of a dark
and light fulvous or bay. The Legs are about an hand-breadth long, feathered
down a little below The Legs,
the knee, longer and slenderer for the bigness of the bird than in others of
this kind. The Legs and Feet yellow; the Talons black. The outer Toe in joined
to Toes and Talons.
the middle by an intermediate Membrane, reaching from the divarication up
almost half way. The Talon of the middle Toe is thinned on the inner side into
an edge. The Gall is large: The blind Guts short and small: The Stomach
membranous; in The entrails.
that we dissected full of the limbs of Birds and other flesh.

The Bird here described we suppose to be that called in England the
More-buzzard, The More-Buzzard described.
common to be seen in Heaths and Wastes; sitting upon small trees and shrubs:
With long slender yellow Legs: The whole Body of a dark color, the interior
Remiges being paler or whitish; and which is said to build in Fenny places.

I take this Bird to be the same with that Bellonius describes under the title
of Circus, as will appear to any one that shall compare the descriptions;
although Aldrovandus makes them to be distinct Species, treating of them in
several Chapters.

This Bird is sufficiently characterized by its uniform brown-bay or
ferrugineous color all the body over.

. VII. * The Brasilian Kite called Caracara, and by the Portuguese Gaviaon.
Marggrav.
IT is a kind of Sparrowhawk.
Nisus of the bigness of a Kite; has a Tail nine Inches long. The length of
the Wings is fourteen Inches; which yet do not reach to the end of the Tail.
The color of the whole Plumage is tawny with white and yellow specks. The Tail
is parti-colored of white and brown. It has a Hawks Head, a hooked Bill of a
moderate bigness, and black color. It has yellow Legs; Hawks Feet;
semicircular, long, sharp, black Talons. It is very noisome to Hens.

I had (says he) another of the same magnitude and color with the precedent,
save that the breast and belly were white. The Eyes of a gold color, and the
skin about them yellow. The Legs yellow.

For the bigness, color, and preying upon Poultry, we have subjoyned this to
the Kites notwithstanding Marggravius makes it a kind of Nisus or Sparrowhawk.

CHAP. IX. Of long-winged Hawks, used to be reclaimed for fowling.
. I. Family or kind.
Of the Peregrine Falcon.
MR. Willughby having left no description of a Falcon, and it having not been
our hap since his decease to see any Hawk of that kind, lest the Ornithology we
set out should be defective and imperfect in this particular, we have borrowed
of Aldrovandus the descriptions of the several sorts of Falcons without
omitting any. We are not a little troubled that we cannot give any light to
this Family or kind.
Genus: For we vehemently suspect, that Species are here multiplied without
necessity.

Aldrovandus assigns the first place to the Peregrine Falcon for its courage
and generosity. It took its name either from passing out of one Country into
another, or because it is not known where it builds, its Nest having not been
any where found. Of Its Name.
this kind Belisarius makes two Species, Carcanui four, the difference being
taken from the color.

A Peregrine Falcon every way complete must have these marks, Broad and thick
shoulders; long Wings reaching to the end of the Train; the Train long,
narrower Its Shoulders, Wings, Train.
by little and little, and sharper toward the end, like a Sparrow-hawks, made
up of large, thick, round feathers, the tip not altogether white; the shafts
running along the middle of the feathers of a lovely red; the Feet of the same
color with those The Feet,
of a Bittour, viz. of a pale green, or between a yellow and lead-colour; the
Toes Toes, Talons,
slender; the Talons large, black, and very sharp; the color of the Feet and
Beak the same; the Thighs long, but the Legs short; the Beak thick; the Mouth
wide; Thighs, Beak, Nares, Eyes, Head.
the Nares large and open; the Eyebrows high and great; the Eyes great, and
deep sunk; the Head arched, the Crown being gently elevated and round. As soon
as it can fly it should show certain little bristly feathers, standing out as
it were a beard. Let the Neck be long, the Breast broad, and about the
Shoulder-blades where it Its Neck, Breast,
joins to the Neck somewhat round. Sitting upon the Fist it must bend its body
a little backward, being brisk, mordacious and greedy. Let its Eyebrows and
Cheeks Brows,
be white with a little mixture or dash of red: The Eyes black, encompassed
with a Eyes. Head,
Circle or Iris that is sometimes blue; the Head ash-colored, like that of a
Sacre: The Back of somewhat a livid color, almost like that of a Goose;
covered with Back.
round and broad feathers. The marks of the Wings agree to the second Peregrine
Falcon of Belisarius, which he makes to be of a Copper [Aeneo] color. For the
first kind, which he says is blacker, has neither an ash-colored Crown, nor
a yellow; and has its throat spotted with long, direct, black lines; and its
Thighs marked with transverse ones: Its Legs also are of a Saffron color, but
more dilute.

Aldrovandus describes a Bird of this kind, taken in the Mountains of the
Territory The black Peregrin Falcon of Aldrovand. Its Length, Head, Beak,
of Bononia, in these words. From the top of the Head to the end of the Tail it
was seventeen Inches long. The Crown of the head flat and compressed: The Beak
an Inch thick, of a lovely sky-colour, bending downward with a sharp hook,
short, strong, joined to the head with a yellow Membrane of a deep color,
which compasses the Nosthrils; the Eye blue, the edges of the Eyelids round
yellow. The Eyes,
Head, Neck, Back, Wings of a dark brown, almost black, sprinkled with black
Color,
spots in almost every feather, the great feathers being crossed with
transverse ones.

The Throat was of a yellowish white, the lower part thereof being stained with
The Throat,
black spots, as it were drops drawn out in length from the corners of the
Mouth on each side a black line was drawn downwards almost to the middle of the
Throat or Gullet. The Breast, Belly, and Thighs white, crossed with broad,
transverse, black lines. The tips of the Wings, when closed, reached almost to
the end of the Train. The Train Wings. Tail,
less dusky, marked also with black cross bars. The Legs and Feet yellow; the
Thighs long, the Shanks short; the Toes slender, long, covered with scales, as
are also Legs, and Feet,
the Legs; the Talons black, and very sharp. Talons.


Aldrovandus thinks this black Peregrine Falcon not to differ at all from the
black Falcon simply so called, or the Falconarius of the Germans, but to be the
very same with it.

What Aldrovandus has concerning the place, flight, conditions, manner of
catching this Hawk, etc. See in his * Ornithology. It flies and preys upon
Geese, Ducks, and other Waterfowl.

. II. * The Sacre, Falco Sacer.
ALdrovandus brings several descriptions of the Sacre out of Albertus Magnus,
Belisarius, the Emperor Frederick, Carcanus and Bellonius. The Emperor
Fredericks Fredericks description of the Sacre.
description (which to me seems better than that of Albertus) is as follows.

Sacres for bigness of body approach to Jer-Falcons; being greater than other
Falcons, but lesser than Jer-Falcons. They have a great round head: A shorter
Beak, a slenderer and longer body in proportion, longer Wings, and also a
longer Train, a Breast less fleshy and full in respect of their body than
Jer-Falcons: And also shorter Toes.

Bellonius thus briefly describes it. The Sacre has fouler feathers to look
upon than Bellonius his description.
any other Bird of prey. For they are of a color between red and Sooty.
fuliginous, very like to Kites. It has short Legs and blue Toes.

Carcanus the Vicentine gives a fuller description of it in these words. The
Falcons Carcanus his description. Their bigness,
called Sacres are bigger than even the larger Peregrines. Their head is very
gray; their Crown flat, and like to that of a fork-tail'd Kite. Their Eyes
black and great: Head, Eyes, Beak, Nares, Figure, Color, Train, Wings, Legs.
How the Sores differ from those that are mewed.
Their Beak blue; their Nares for the most part small: The figure of the body
oblong: The spots of the Breast brown, as is also the back and upper side of
the Wings: The inside of the Thighs white; the Train long and varied with
semicircular spots, resembling the figure of Guiny Beans or Kidneys: The Wings
also large and long. The Legs and Feet are almost wholly blue: Compared with
the rest of the body not very great. Those of one year commonly called Sores
differ a little from those that have mewed their feathers. For these have the
spots of their Breasts a little blacker and rounder than the Sores. Their Feet
also are somewhat white, and in some spotted with a little yellow. Almost all
of them have their Backs reddish, inclining to cinereous, as in Turtles. Yet in
some, as well of the Sores as of those that have mewed their feathers, the Back
and upper side of the Wings is black.

Which of these descriptions agrees best to the Sacre let them judge who have
opportunity of seeing this Bird, and will, and leisure to compare them with it.

So great is the strength, force, and courage of this Hawk, that (as Albertus
reports) there is no Bird so great which she does not presently strike down:
And not only one at a time, but as many as come in her way. She catches also
Fawns, Kids, etc. She is supposed to be called Sacre, either from her bigness,
or because all other birds fear her, and fly from her.

. III. * The Jer-Falcon, whose Male or Tarcel is called the Jerkin.
IT seem to take its name from the High Dutch word Gyrfalc, i. e. a ravenous
Falcon, The name.
or Vulturine Falcon: for Gyr in High Dutch signifies a Vulture.

This, however Aldrovandus contradicts it, exceeds all other Falcons, even that
Its Bigness,
called the Sacre in magnitude. Of that which Aldrovandus described this was
the shape: The Crown was plainand depressed, of an ash color. The Beak thick,
strong, Crown, Beak.
short, blue; bowed downward with a mean-sized hook, but very sharp, strong,
and bluish. The Pupil of the Eyes very black, the Iris or Circle encompassing
the Eyes,
Pupil blue. The Back, Wings, Belly, and Train were white: But the feathers of
Color of the feathers.
the Back and Wings were almost every one marked with a black spot, imitating
in some measure the figure of a heart, like the Eyes in a Peacocks tail. The
flag-feathers of the Wings near their tips beautified with a bigger and longer
black mark, which is yet enclosed with a white margin or border. The Wings very
long, so that they The Wings. Color of the Breast. The Train.
wanted but little of reaching to the end of the Tail. The Throat, Breast, and
Belly purely white, without any spots at all. The Tail not very long, yea, in
respect of its body and those of other Falcons rather short, marked with
transverse black bars. The Legs and Feet of a delayed blue. The Legs thick and
strong. The Toes long, Legs and Feet.
strong, broad-spread, covered all over with a continued Series of board-like
Scales.

Of Gyrfalcons, according to Carcanus, there be diverse kinds, distinguished by
the colors of their feathers.

Frederick the Emperor does thus describe the shape of a good Jer-Falcon. The
The shape of a good Jerfalcon. Its Head, Forehead, Eyes, Nares, Beak, Neck,
Body, Wings.
upper part of the Head must not be raised upward into a bunch, but every where
equal: The forepart of the Head large and broad; that part also above the Eyes
large: The Eyebrows high or standing out [eminentia.] The Eyes hollow: The
Nosthrils great and open: The Beak thick, crooked, and hard: The Neck toward
the Head slender, toward the shoulders thick. The Body must grow uniformly
narrower and sharp all along to the very Tail, observing that form which
Geometricians call Pyramidal. It must have Wings elevated toward the back, not
hanging down, but when gathered up, near the Tail so lying one upon the other,
that they intersect one another in form of a Cross. The beam-feathers of the
Wings, as well those that Wing-feathers.
cover, as those that are covered, that is, as well the upper as the under ones
must be broad and hard. The covering feathers by how much the more they cover
the others, by so much the more commendable are they. The Tail-feathers when it
does not fly Train feathers.
are gathered up in a lump under the two uppermost [that is, the middlemost]
which are called the coverers. The Gullet [Gula, I suppose he means the Craw]
must be Craw.
large and deep, and after much meat taken in, swell a little, and be round
when full of meat: The Breast prominent outward, fleshy, and thick. The Thighs
great: The Breast.
Legs short and thick: The soles of the Feet also thick and large; the Toes
long, lean, Legs, Feet, Talons.
rough, scaly, and well spread: The Talons slender, crooked, and sharp.

It is a courageous, fierce, and very bold Bird, catching all sorts of Fowl how
great Its Nature and Game.
soever, and is terrible to other Falcons and Goshawks. It chief Game are
Cranes and Herons.

. IV. * The Mountain Falcon.
THe greatest part of these Falcons are of a mean stature: Few found very big:
Many of a small body, and that in some round, in some long. Albertus attributes
to a Mountain Falcon almost the same bigness as to a Goshawk [Asturi] only
makes it shorter bodied: Gives it a round Breast, and when it stands on its
feet a Its figure,
Pyramidal figure, resembling a Pyramid somewhat compressed on that side the
back makes. Almost all of them have a round Head, a taper [fastigiatum] Crown,
and Head,
black, encompassed with a kind of ash-colored Coronet: In the Forehead, not
far from the Beak, stand up certain very fine and slender feathers, as it were
hairs, among the black or brown ones, which yet are but few, and in some Birds
none at all. They have a thick, short, black Bill; narrow Nosthrils; small Eyes
and Eyelids. The Beak, Nares, Eyes,
Throat as far as the breast bone is somewhat whitish, besprinkled with good
great The Throat, Breast,
spots. The rest of the Breast is beautified with certain marks, which are
sometimes ferrugineous, sometimes red, sometimes blackish, and besides these
with other smaller specks. In some the Throat and Breast are clothed with
black feathers; the inside Its Color,
of the Thighs black: The Back and Loins covered for the most part with small
brown feathers: Some of which below the middle of the back have certain whitish
or reddish lines tending downwards. Others have their Backs purely
ash-colored, or of the color of that sort of Wild Goose, which the Vicentines
call Baletta: The Wings not long like a Peregrines: The Tail also shorter than
theirs, and for the greater Wings. Tail.
part variegated like that of a Kestrel. There are some whose Tail is like that
of a Sacre, but they are very rare. They have for the most part their Legs and
Feet of a Legs, and Feet,
Saffron color; but some of a straw color; and covered with very thick-set
Scales. Their Feet are lesser than the Peregrines: Their Toes great and fleshy:
Their Talons black. It is easier to know them after they are mewed. Their Head
is black like a Its colors when mewed.
Crows, their Nosthrils covered with a Saffron-coloured skin; the Eyes also
encompassed with a Circle of like color: Their Neck and Shoulders black; the
lower part of the Back toward the Rump blue. The Throat as far as the
Breast Bone white; but in some it shows an obscure red; in others it is
blackish, in all marked with round spots. The Train short and black: The
feathers investing the Thighs brown. The Legs strong. It is to be observed,
that by how much the oftener they have mewed their feathers, by so much is their
Throat [Gula] whiter, and its spots smaller, and the feathers covering their
Back and Loins of a deeper blue.

Tardivus writes, that it preys only upon great birds, neglecting the smaller;
that it is very ravenous, mordacious, and of an indocile nature. Aldrovandus
describes Its conditions, and Game, Aldrovands gray Falcon. Its Head, Beak,
a bird of this sort that was brought to him, in these words. It was eighteen
Inches long: The Head great, the Crown gently towering up round: The Beak thick,
short, black, strong; of an Inch thickness, the point of the hooked part not
very sharp, but it strong; so that I doubt whether any other Falcon has a
stronger, thicker, and more strongly made and compacted Beak than this. The
Nares are compassed with a Nares, Eyes.
yellow membrane, The Iris of the Eye of a deep black. The edges of the Eyelids
encircling the Eyes yellow. The whole body in general is of one color, viz. a
Color,
cinereous tending to blue, lighter or darker, according to the different
exposing of the parts to the light. The Neck, Breast, Belly, and Back, and
consequently the whole Figure of the body.
body is very gross, thick, round, and plump. The Breast very round and great:
The beginning of the Wings above broad, and less sharp than in other Falcons;
their tips reaching to about the middle of their Trains, or a little further.
The Train of a middle size, between long and short. Their Legs and Feet in
respect of their bodies not very large or thick, covered with Saffron-coloured
board-like Scales. Their Talons deep-black.

. V. * The Falcon Gentle.
WHereas I find that some doubt, whether the Or Falcon Gentle.
Gentile Falcon be a distinct kind from the Peregrine or no: And whereas the
Emperor Frederick distinguishes Gentile Falcons into those absolutely and
simply so called, and Peregrines; omitting that prolix description of a Gentile
Falcon, which Aldrovandus brings out of Frederick; I shall only propound the
marks whereby this is said to differ from the Peregrine.

Gentile Falcons are less than Peregrines, have a rounder and lesser Head; a
shorter How the Falcon Gentle differs from the Peregrine.
Beak; and Feet also for the proportion of the body smaller. Besides, the
color is less bright, lively, and fair in these than in those. When they have
mewed their first feathers, they become very like the Peregrines, but more
spotted in their Trains and Backs.

Belisarius makes the only difference between the Gentile and Peregrine Falcon
to be in their manner or gesture in flying: For the frequent agitation of the
Wings in flying shows the Hawk to be a Gentile Falcon: The motion of the
Peregrines Wings being like that of the Oars of Galleys. Moreover, they differ
from Peregrines in this, that they are not so swift. The description of the
German Falcon,


Aldrovandus thinks, that the Falcon which Carcanus calls the Dutch or German
Falcon is the same with this: The which he thus describes. The Dutch Falcons
are almost all great-bodied. The greater part of them of an oblong figure, and
some moderately round: Very like to the Peregrine for Shape, Head, Beak, and
Feet. The Thighs on the inside covered with white feathers. The Wings great:
The Train long. Almost all the feathers are of a brown color. For the greatest
part of their bodies they are like a brown Peregrine, excepting the Head and
Shoulder-blades, which in the Dutch are a little blacker. A white Coronet
encompasses their Head near the Neck. The spots of the breast in most are brown
and great, in some ferrugineous and oblong. But in such as are mewed, that is,
have cast their first feathers, the Head, Neck and Shoulders are brown; the
Back of an Azure-colour, distinguished with transverse brown marks: The Throat
white, spotted with great lines. The Breast darker than in the Peregrine: But
the Feet like that of the Peregrine. The Males or The German Falcon differs
little or nothing from the Peregrine.
Tarcels of these Dutch Falcons can by no means be distinguished from the Males
of the Peregrines, they are in all things so like the one to the other.
Besides, they do so resemble the Peregrines, not only in the external shape of
their bodies, but also in their nature and conditions; that none but a very
quick-sighted, cuming, and well practiced Falconer is able to distinguish them.

. VI. * The Haggard Falcon; Falco gibbosus.
IT is so called because by reason of the shortness of the Neck, the Head
scarce appears above the points of the shoulders, or Wings withdrawn and
clapped to the sides of the Back; so that it seems to have a bunch on its back.
The Germans call it Ein Hagerfalck, or rather Hogerfalck, whence the Latin
name Gibbosus: For the Germans call a bunch Hoger. Our English Writers of
Falconry, as far as I understand them, call the Peregrine Falcon the Haggard
Falcon, using those names promiscuously: Wherefore we shall not enlarge further
concerning this Hawk; especially seeing what Aldrovandus has of it, is all
taken out of Albertus Magnus; on whose credit we do not much rely.

. VII. * The white Falcon. Falco Albus.
OMitting again what Aldrovandus has borrowed out of Albertus concerning the
White Falcon: we will only transcribe out of him, the description of the Falcon
sent him by his Nephew Julianus Griffonius, which he received from Angelus
Gallus of Urbin, a Knight of Malta.

Its whole body was milk-white, only spotted with yellow spots, the which
themselves Its Color, Wings,
also appeared white, unless one heedfully and intently beheld it. The Wings
were like those of other the most beautiful Hawks, but purely white, and
without spots. The Tail had twelve feathers alike white, and spotted with
yellow; the sight Train,
whereof the uppermost feather (which was wholly white, and covered the rest,
hiding them as it were in a sheath) took away. The Beak also was rather white
than Beak,
blue. The Feet, after the manner of other Hawks, yellow. The Eyes yellow and
Feet, Eyes.
black: And that yellow nothing deeper than in a Hawk not yet mewed, which we
commonly call a Sore; although I cannot believe that this was a Sore. For it
might so come to pass, that it might retain that yellowness from a certain
temper of body peculiar to this kind: Otherwise it would, after it was mewed,
necessarily incline to whiteness. It was of a tall stature, a great and stately
bird: It eat not but with its Eyes usually shut, and that with great
greediness. It killed Pullets.

. VIII. * The Stone-Falcon, and Tree-Falcon. Falco Lapidarius and Arborarius.
OF the figure of the Stone-Falcon these few things occur in Albertus Magnus.
It was of a middle quantity and strength between the Peregrine and Gibbose or
Haggard Falcon.

A full description of the Tree-Falcon we have in Gesner, which (as Mr.
Willughby thinks) agrees well to the Hobby. The Tree-Falcon (says he) is a
gallant and generous bird, not unlike to a Sparrow-Hawk. From the Bill to the
end of the Tail it was four Palms, or sixteen Inches long. The Feet were of a
pale color, mixed as it were Its Length The Feet. The Color.
of yellowish and green. The Back black: But the tips of the feathers of the
Head and Back (especially the lower part of it) were compassed with reddish
Semicircles. The feathers of the Wings were blacker: And the inside of the
Wings [that which is toward the body] spotted with great pale-red spots. The
Breast varied with whitish and brown spots. Certain yellowish white feathers
made up spots behind the Ears, and in the Neck. The Eyes were black; the color
of the Bill blue. The Tail-feathers, The Eyes and Bill.
all but the two middlemost, marked with spots.

. IX. * The Tunis or Barbary Falcon.
THis Bellonius describes thus: This Barbary Falcon is large, approaching to
the shape and likeness of a Lanner. For it has like feathers, and not unlike
Feet; but it is lesser-bodied. Besides it flies more, and keeps longer on the
Wing. It has a thick and round Head. It is good for Brook-hawking, and stoutly
soars on high in the Air: But for the Field it is not so fit as the Lanner.

The Falcon which our Falconers call the Barbary is lesser than the rest of
this kind, viz. The Peregrine, Mountain and Gentile: If those do specifically
differ, which we do not think.

. X. * The Red Falcon.
IT is called red, not because it is all over red, but because those spots
(which in the rest are white) in this kind are red and black, but not so
disposed as in others, neither in the Back, nor in the outward part of the
Wing. But it does not appear to be red, but only when it stretches out its
Wings: For then the dark red shows it self in them. It is said to be lesser
than a Peregrine Falcon. But this, and whatever else Albertus and others have
delivered concerning the red Falcon, are of that nature, that they leave us
altogether uncertain, whether there be any such Falcon or no, specifically
distinct from the rest of this kind.

. XI. * The red Indian Falcons of Aldrovandus.
THe first of these (which we suppose to be the Female) has a greater head
than Its Head,
the latter, a broad and almost flat Crown, without any rising in the hinder
part of the head, as is seen in some. The head is of an ash color tending to
brown, as is also the Neck, the whole Back, and the outside of the Wings. The
Beak very thick; next the Head both above and below all yellow; having a
moderate ash-colored Beak,
hook; of which color is also all that forepart which is bare, beyond the
Sear or investing Membrane. The Pupil of the Eye is of a deep black; the Iris
brown, or of a dark Chesnut-colour. The edges of the Eyelids round about
yellow. Eyes.
From the exterior and lesser corner of the Eyes on both sides is drawn a long
stroke of the same color with the Breast. The whole Breast, and also the upper
part Breast.
of the inside of the Wings, the Belly moreover and the Rump, the Hips and
Thighs are all fulvous or red, of a pale Vermilion color. But the Chin in this
red color Chin.
is marked with a long cinereous spot, produced downwards. The Breast also
before is besprinkled with small scattering specks of the same color. The
sides, that are covered with the middle part of the Wings closed, are tinctured
with the same dark cinereous color. The Wings are very long, their tips
reaching much further Wings:
than the middle of the Tail; crossing one another about the lower end of the
Back. The Train is long, each feather whereof is varied with alternate spaces
of black Train.
(which are the narrower, of a Semicircular figure) and of ash color, which
are the broader. The Legs and Feet are yellow, pretty thick and strong: The
Talons The Feet, and Talons,
black and very sharp.

The other (which we believe to be the Male) is less by near a third part; for
variety The other red Falcon described. Its Color.
of colors almost the same with the former; and those in the same parts, save
that (as we hinted also before) the red color in this is deeper and more
evident: Likewise the same colored Membrane as in the former [I suppose he
means that about the Eyes.] Those parts also which in the former are colored
with a dark cinereous, in this are altogether black; viz. the upper side of the
Wings, the Head, Back, and Tail. Yet may we take notice of some marks peculiar
to this, wherein it differs Its proper marks. Beak. Chin.
from the other. For the Bill in this is wholly blue, excepting a small yellow
membrane covering the Nosthrils, having uneven borders, as it were serrate. The
Chin or beginning of the Throat in this is of a little paler red, something
inclining to cinereous, but not marked with any spot as in the former. The
interior flag-feathers of the Wings are white, only crossed at due intervals
with many transverse brown marks: Wings.
The rest of the upper side of the Wings is of a very deep fulvous color, like
red Oker. The upper side of the Tail is also adorned with a double variety of
transverse Train.
spots, to wit, white and ash-colored inclining to blue, alternately disposed.
The Feet and Legs are of a more dilute, yellow, or Wax color. Feet.


Both came out of the East Indies.

What is delivered by Albertus and others concerning the blue-footed Falcon and
bastard Falcon I omit, as being only general and uncertain; referring the
curious, and those that desire to know such things, to the Authors themselves,
or to Aldrovandus, for satisfaction.

We have a sort of bastard Hawk common enough among us, called the Boccarel,
and its Tarcel the Boccaret.

. XII. The Crested Indian Falcon.
THis Bird brought out of the East Indies we saw in the Royal Aviary in St.
James Its bigness, Head. Crest. Neck.
Park near Westminster, and thus described it. For bigness it was not much
inferior to a Goshawk: The Head flat, black, copped, the Crest hanging down
backward from the hind part of the head, like a Lapwings, but forked. The Neck
red. The Breast and Belly were parti-colored of black and white, the alternate
cross Breast. Beak.
lines being very bright and fair. The Irides of the Eyes yellow. The Beak of a
deep or dark blue, almost black, especially toward the point; for the Base was
covered with a yellow Membrane. The Legs feathered down to the Feet: The Feet
Legs and Feet. Wings. Train.
yellow; the Talons of a dark black. The lesser rows of Wing-feathers had
whitish edges. The Train was varied with transverse spaces or beds of black and
cinereous alternately. The rest of the feathers were black.

. XIII. * The Lanner, whose Tarcel is called the Lanneret.
Bellonius his description of it.

THe Lanner is less than the Gentile Falcon, adorned with fair feathers, and in
that The description of the French Lanner. The color of the Beak, and Feet,
Breast,
respect more beautiful than the Sacre. The most sure and undoubted notes
whereby one may distinguish a Lanner from other Hawks are these; That it have
blue Beak, Legs, and Feet: The anteriour or Breast-feathers parti-colored of
black and white, the black marks [or lines] not crossing the feathers, but
drawn long-ways down the middle of them, contrary to what they are in Falcons.
The feathers of the back are not much variegated, as neither those of the Wings
or Tail, in the upper or Back, Wings, Train.
external part. And if perchance there be any spots seen in these, they are
small, round, and whitish. But to one that shall view the lower or under side
of the Wings extended there will appear marks of a different figure from those
of other Rapacious Birds: For they are round, and like little pieces of money,
dispersed through the Superficies: Although, as we said, the feathers of the
Breast, and forepart of the body are varied with spots drawn downwards in
length, and situate on their edges. It has a thick and short Neck, and a like
Bill. The Male or Lanneret is of a lesser body, but almost the same color of
the feathers. Both Male and Female have shorter The Male.
Legs than the rest of the Falcons.

Carcanus his description differs in some things from this of Bellonius, which
we shall therefore subjoyn. The Head of all Lanners is wholly yellow, with a
flat The Head, Crown, Eyes, Nosthrils, Beak, Breast, Back, Wings, Legs and
Feet. The description of those that are mewed.
Crown. The Eyes black and great: The Nosthrils for the most part small: The
Beak short and thick, lesser than that of a Peregrine Falcon, and also than
that of a Mountain; of a blue color; The Breast yellow, spotted with a few
thin-set ferrugineous spots: The Back like a Peregrine Falcons: The ends of the
Wings spotted as it were with round white Eyes. The Wings and Train long: The
Legs short. The Feet much lesser than a Peregrines, and blue of color. In
those that are mewed the whole head is tinctured with yellow as far as the
shoulders, but inclining to red, and varied with certain slender lines. The
Back is blue, crossed with black lines and some golden: The Breast of a deep
yellow and without any spots. But the feathers of the Thighs are varied with a
few cross lines. The feet in these, which were blue, are changed into yellow.
The Sores of this kind are very hardly distinguished from those that are mewed.

It seems to be called Lanarius a laniando, i. e. from tearing. It is of a
gentle nature, Why called Lanarius. Its Nature and Game.
of a docile and tractable disposition (as Bellonius writes) very fit for all
sorts of Game, as well Waterfowl, as Land: For it catches not only Pies,
Quails, Partridge, Crows, Pheasants, etc. but also Ducks, yea, and Cranes too,
being trained up thereto by humane industry. All this is to be understood of
the French Lanner, for the Italian described by Carcanus is of no worth or use.
Carcanus writes, that he could never so train them up, as to make them good for
ought.

The Lanner abides all the year in France, being seen there as well in Winter
as in Its place.
Summer, contrary to the manner of other Rapacious Birds.

. XIV. The Hobby, Subbuteo, Aldrov.
THe Bird we described was a Female, and weighed nine ounces. The length Its
Weight, Length,
from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail was thirteen Inches. The
breadth or distance between the tips of the Wings extended two feet and eight
Breadth,
Inches. From the tip of the Beak to the Nosthrils was something more than half
an Inch. The Beak like that of a Kestrel: The upper Mandible prominent, hooked,
Beak,
semicircular; the Base covered with a yellow skin or Sear, the part next the
skin white; the rest of a dark blue. It has also a tooth or Angle on each side
at the beginning of the hooked part, which is received in a hollow dent or nick
in the lower Chap. The Tongue broad and a little cleft or divided. The Palate
withinside The Tongue.
black, and having a Cavity impressed to receive the Tongue. The Nosthrils
round: Nosthrils. Eyes.
The Irides of the Eyes of a Hazel color: The Eyelids yellow.

As for the color of the Plumage; above each Eye passed a line of a
clay-colour, The color of the feathers.
[ex ruffo albicans.] The feathers on the top of the head had their shafts or
middle part black, their borders of a deep Chestnut: Those on the middle of the
Neck again were of a clay-colour, the back and Wings of a dark brown, or
cinereous black; those on the Rump and the lesser Pinion feathers being
lighter, the greater Pinion feathers, and those on the middle of the back
darker. The Chin and upper part of the Throat were white, with a dash of
yellow. This white on the sides of the head is a Characteristic note of this
bird.
To this white were drawn from the head on each side two lines; one from the
aperture of the mouth, the other from the hinder part or noddle.

The lower part of the Belly was reddish, the rest of the Belly and Breast
clothed with feathers, spotted with black in the middle, and having their edges
white. The Thighs red, spotted with black, but the spots less than those on the
Breast. The number The prime Wing-feathers.
of prime feathers in each Wing twenty four, whereof the second the longest.
The extreme or outmost had their tips black; all of them their interior webs
varied with transverse clay-coloured spots. The covert-feathers of the
underside of the Wings were black, curiously painted with round spots of white
diluted with red.

The Tail, as in all of this kind, consisted of twelve feathers, the middlemost
The Train.
whereof were the longest, and the rest in order shorter to the two outermost,
which were the shortest. The length of the middlemost was about five Inches and
an half, these were on both sides their shafts of one and the same color; the
rest had their interior Vanes marked with transverse reddish spots; the utmost
tips being whitish.

The Legs and Feet were yellow: The middle and outmost Toes connected as in The
Feet and Talons.
others of this kind to the first joint: The Talons as black as Jet.

It had a great Gall: The length of the Guts was two foot lacking an inch: The
The Entrails.
Appendices or blind Guts short; besides which it had another single Appendix
or process, which was (we suppose) the remainder of the Ductus intestinalis
shrunk up.

The Hobby is a bird of passage, yet breeds with us in England. Its Game is
chiefly Its principal Game.
Larks, for the catching of which Birds our Fowlers make use of it thus. The
Spaniels range the field, to find the birds: The Hobby they let off, and
accustom to soar aloft in the Air over them. The Larks espying their capital
enemy, dare by no means make use of their Wings, but lie as close and flat upon
the ground as they can; and so are easily taken in the Nets they draw over
them. This kind of sport is called, Daring Daring of Larks.
of Larks.

To catch these Hawks, the Fowlers take a Lark, and having blinded her, and
fastened To catch Hobbies.
Lime-twigs to her Legs, let her fly where they see the Hobby is, which
striking at the Lark is entangled with the Lime-twigs.

The Bird is called in Greek (...), that is, the lesser (...) or Buteo; An
account of the names.
which Pliny renders in Latin, Subbuteo. It is called in English, Hobby, after
the French name.

. XV. The Kestrel, Stannel, or Stonegall, in Latin Tinnunculus or Cenchris.
THe Female is about the bigness of a Pigeon. That we described weighed nine
Its bigness, Weight, Length, Breadth,
ounces. Its length from the point of the Beak to the end of the Train was
fourteen inches and a quarter: Its breadth, or the distance between the tips of
the Wings extended two foot and an half. The Beak short, prominent, hooked, and
Beak,
sharp-pointed: The Base of the upper Chap covered with a skin or membrane, in
which are the Nosthrils. The middle part of the Beak next the Sear is white,
the rest of a dark blue: Where it begins to bend it has a Tooth or Angle,
which is received in a dent or cavity in the lower Chap. The Nosthrils round:
The Tongue cleft: Nosthrils. Tongue. Eyes. Mouth.
The Eyelids yellow; the Eyes defended by prominent brows. It has a wide
mouth, and the Palate blue.

The Head is great; the Crown broad and flat, inclining to an ash color, and
Head.
marked with narrow black lines along the shaft of each feather. The back,
shoulders, and covert-feathers of the upper side of the Wings ferrugineous,
marked with black Color of the back.
spots, viz. each feather being reddish has a black spot toward the tip. The
Rump is cinereous, having the like transverse black spots. The lower or nether
side of the Color of the nether side.
body, that is the Breast and Belly, was of a paler red or ferrugineous, varied
with black lines drawn downwards along the shafts of the feathers. The Chin and
lower belly without spots.

The flag-feathers of the Wing are in number twenty four: The exterior of
which Prime Wing-feathers.
are of a brown or dusky color, but their interior Vanes are partly of a
reddish white, indented with the brown like the teeth of a Saw. The six or
seven next to the body are red, having their interior Vanes marked with
transverse brown strokes. The inner or under side of the Wing is white, with
black spots.

The Train made up of twelve feathers was above seven inches long. The outmost
Its Train.
feathers shortest, the rest in order gradually longer to the middlemost. The
utmost tips of the feathers were of a rusty white. Then succeeds a black bar or
ring of an inch broad; the rest of the feather being of a rusty ash color,
marked with transverse black spots.

The Legs and Feet are of a lovely yellow, and the Talons black. The Legs, and
Talons. The Inwards.


It had a Gall. In the stomach we found Beetles and fur of Mice. The length of
the Guts was twenty eight Inches. The single blind gut [Appendix intestinalis]
was twice as long as the lower Appendices or blind Guts. The Male or Tarcel
differs How the Male differs from the Female.
from the Female chiefly in being less, and having the head and back of an
ash color.

Kestrels are wont commonly with us in England to be reclaimed and trained up
for fowling, after the manner of other Rapacious birds. They catch not only
small birds, Their Game.
but also young Partridge.

They build in hollow Oaks and other trees; and that not after the manner of
Nest and Generation.
Crows, upon the boughs, but after the manner of Jackdaws, always in holes, as
Turner says he himself observed. Aristotle makes the Kestrel the most fruitful
or best breeder among Birds of prey; yet neither does she (says he) lay more
Eggs than four at once. Her Eggs are whitish, all over stained very thick with
red spots, whence Aristotle and Pliny write, that they are red like Vermilion:
Indeed, they deserve rather to be called red than white.

It is called (...) from (...), signifying Millet, as if one should say the
Milletbird, The Names.
for the same reason as Gesner thinks, that a kind of Tetter [the Swine-pox] is
called Herpes miliaris, because it is marked or motled with specks like Millet
seed.

This Bird is by some called the Wind-hover, of which name we have elsewhere
given an account.

. XVI. The Merlin, called in Latin Aesalon.
BEllonius has recorded that the Merlin is the least of all those birds our
Falconers Its Bigness.
use for hawking; and truly, if we except only the Matagesse or great
Butcherbird (which is sometimes reclaimed for small birds) so it is. It is not
much bigger than a Black bird. The length from the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Tail in that we Length and Breadth.
described was fourteen Inches, to the end of the Toes twelve and an half. The
Beak was blue, and had an angular Appendix or tooth on each side: The Irides of
the Beak. Eyes. The color of the upper part, and Wings. The Train.
Eyes of a hazel color: The back and upper part were parti-colored of a dark
blue and a ferrugineous: The shaft and middle part of the feathers of the Head
and Wings were black, the edges blue: The flag-feathers of the Wings black with
ferrugineous spots. The Train sive inches long, of a dark brown or blackish,
with transverse Pale-red or clay colored. Color of the lower side. The Legs
and Talons,
white bars: Of these black and white spaces were fourteen in all in the
Female; in the Male or Tarcel but ten. The Breast and Belly were of a rusty
white, with brown spots, not transverse, but tending downwards from the Head
toward the Tail. The Legs were long, slender, and yellow: The Talons black.
Below the Head it had a ring of yellowish white, encircling the Head like a
Coronet. In the older Birds the back grows bluer as in other Falcons.

In the Males the feathers on the Rump next the Tail are bluer. By which note
and How the Male or Tarcel differs from the Female.
their bigness Falconers discern the Sex. For the Female in this, as in other
birds of prey, is greater than the Male, being for color less red, with a
certain mixture of blue. In the Train of the Male we described were only five
cross pale-red bars (as we said before) the intermediate black spaces being
broader. The Train was five Inches long, the whole bird thirteen.

The Merlin, though the least of Hawks, yet for spirit and mettle (as Albertus
The Merlin a mettled bird.
truly writes) gives place to none. It strikes Partridge on the Neck, with a
fatal stroke, killing them in an instant. No Hawk kills her prey so soon. They
fly also Heath-pouts with it.

CHAP. X. Of short-winged Hawks.
. I. The Goshawk, Accipiter Palumbarius.
IT is bigger than the common Buzzard: Of a dark brown or Buzzard color on Its
Bigness,
the head, neck, back, and upperside of the Wings. The whole Breast and Belly
white with transverse black lines standing very thick. The Thighs are covered
Color.
over with reddish feathers, having a black line in the middle down the shaft.
The Legs and Feet are yellow; the Talons black. The Beak blue, and the Sear of
a yellowish The Feet, Talons, and Beak.
green.

The Wings, when closed, fall much short of the end of the Train, by which note
The Wings, Train.
alone and its bigness it is sufficiently distinguished from all other Hawks.
The Train is long, of a cinereous or dun color, with four or five cross
blackish bars, standing at a great distance each from other. In each feather of
the Breast there is a black circular line near the top, running parallel to the
edges of the feather, and in some also the shaft and middle part of the feather
is black.

It takes not only Partridge and Pheasant, but also greater Fowl, as Geese and
Cranes: Its Game.
Sometimes also it catches Conies. Our English Authors who have written of
Falconry make this the same with the French Autour or Astur, although
Aldrovandus would have the Astur, which he takes to be the Asterias of
Aristotle, to be a different bird. But I suppose the Goshawk was not well known
to Aldrovandus.

. II. The Sparrow-hawk, Accipiter Fringillarius seu Nisus Recentiorum.
IT is almost as big as a Pigeon. Its length from Bill-point to Tail end about
fourteen Its bigness, length, and breadth.
inches: The distance between the tips of the Wings extended twenty six Inches.

Its Beak is short, hooked, blue, black toward the tip: The Basis of the upper
Beak,
Chap covered with a yellowish green skin, (which they call the Sear or rather
Cere from the Latin word Cera, signifying wax, because it is for the most part
of a Waxcolour,) having an angular Appendix or tooth on each side under the
Nosthril. The Nosthrils are oblong; the Palate blue; the Tongue thick, black,
and a little cleft: Nares, Tongue, Eyes, Crown.
The Eyes of mean size, with yellow Irides, over-hung by brows, prominent like
the Eaves of a house. The Crown of the head is of a dark brown: Above the Eyes,
and in the hinder part of the head sometimes are white feathers. [The bottoms
of the feathers in Head or Neck are white.] The rest of the upper side, Back,
Shoulders, Color of the upper side,
Wings, Neck, are of the same dark brown, excepting some feathers of the Wings
which are spotted with white. [In another bird the Head and Wings were of a
dark ash color or blue,] The color of the underside, viz. the Neck, Breast,
Belly, Sides, Underside.
and Wings various, of white and blackish, or russet: Russet waved lines
thick-set crossing the whole Breast and Belly, and indeed, each single feather;
the white intermediate spaces are broader than the russet lines. The feathers
under the Chin and by the Legs of the lower Mandible are white, only their
middle parts about the shaft, especially toward the tip, brown or russet.

The Wings when closed scarce reach to the middle of the Tail. The
flag-feathers The Wings,
are twenty four, in whose under sides appear, on the interior webs of each,
dark transverse marks or spots.

The Tail is almost two Palms long, consisting of twelve feathers, having five
or six Train,
cross black bars. The tips of the feathers are white. The Thighs are strong
and fleshy, as in all birds of prey; the Legs long, slender, yellow; the Toes
also long; the outmost, Legs and Toes,
as in other Hawks, being joined to the middlemost by a Membrane below. The
Talons black. It lays about five white Eggs, spotted near the blunt end with a
Circle, Number of Eggs.
as it were a Coronet, of bloud-red speaks.

It feeds only upon Birds (as our Fowlers affirm) never touching Beetles or
other Its Food.
Insects.

For its bigness it is a very bold and courageous Bird, and is frequently
trained up Its Mettle.
and made for hawking.

Bellonius acquaints us with a common and familiar way of taking this kind of
The manner of catching Sparrowhawks near Constantinople.
Hawks about the Straight of Propontis, in these words. Not far distant (says
he) from the outlet of the Euxine Sea, at the entrance of the Straight leading
to the Propontis, having climbed up a very high Hill that is there, by chance
we found a Fowler on the top intent upon the catching of Sparrow-hawks. Whereas
it was now past mid-April, at which time all sorts of birds are wont to be very
busy in breeding or building their Nests, it seemed to us wonderful strange
and unusual, to see such a multitude of Kites and Hawks coming flying from the
right side of the Sea. This Fowler did with such industry and dexterity lay
wait for them, that not so much as one escaped him. He took at least twelve
Hawks every hour, The manner thus: He himself lay hid behind a little bushet,
before which he had levelled a square plat or floor, about two paces long and
broad, being two or three paces distant from the bushet. In the borders of this
floor he had pitched down [or thrust into the ground] six stakes, at due
distances, of about the thickness of ones thumb [the word is Pollicis, and may
possibly signify an inch-thick] of a man's height, two on each side: On the top
of each, on that side which respected the floor was a nick cut in, upon which
was hung a Net made of fine green thread. In the middle of the floor stood a
Stake a Cubit high, to the top of which a Cord was bound, which reached as fas
as the Fowler, who lay behind the bushet. To this same Line, lying loose, were
many little Birds fastened, which picked up grains of Corn on the floor. Now,
when the Fowler saw a Hawk coming afar off from the Seacoast, shaking the
Line, he made these birds to flicker up and down. Which the Sparrow-hawks (as
they are notably sharp-sighted) espying at least half a League off, came flying
full speed, and rushed upon the Nets with that force, to strike at the birds,
that being entangled therein they were taken. The Hawks being allured into the
Nets, and caught by this Artifice, the Fowler thrust their whole wings up to
the shoulders into certain linen clothes, sown up for that purpose, which our
Falconers call, mayling or trussing of Hawks. Thus mayld or trust up he left
them upon the ground, so unable to help themselves, that they could not stir,
nor struggle, much less disengage or deliver themselves. No man could easily
imagine, whence such a multitude of Sparrow-hawks should come. For in two hours
time that we were spectators of that sport, we saw more than thirty taken by
this deceit, whence one may conjecture, that one Fowler in the space of one day
might take more than an hundred. These Hawks do not usually stay so long in one
place as Falcons, but are often changing place, whence it is more difficult to
take them with a Net. For they will not readily give a Fowler time to spread a
Net over them; unless they be deceived in that manner Bellonius has set down.

CHAP. XI. Of Butcher-Birds or Shrikes called in Latin Lanii or Colluriones.
THe new name of Lanius or Butcher was by Gesner imposed on this bird, because
he thought it agreed to no description of the Ancients; and because it is wont
to prey on other Birds. Bellonius would have it to be the Collurio of
Aristotle. Of the Europaean Rapacious birds it is the least; having a straight
Bill, only a little hooked at the point; a Tail like that of a Mag-pie, viz.
with the outmost feathers shortest, the rest in order longer to the middlemost;
whence the French do, not without reason, call it the Gray Pie. Turner suspects
it to be the Tyrannus of Aristotle. In English it is called a Shrike.

. I. The greater Butcher-bird or Mattagess. Lanius cinereus major.
THis Bird in the North of England is called Wierangle, a name, it seems,
common The names,
to us with the Germans, who (as Gesner witnesses) about Strasburgh,
Franckfort, and elsewhere call it Werkengel, or Warkangel, perchance (says he)
as it were Wurchangel, which literally rendered signifies a suffocating Angel.
In other parts of Germany it is called Neghen-doer, that is, Nine-killer,
[Enneactonos] because it kills nine birds before it ceases, or every day nine.
Our Falconers call it the Mattagess, a name borrowed from the Savoyards, which
is by Aldrovandus interpreted a murdering Pie.

It is for bigness equal to the common Blackbird, or the Song-Thrush. It
weighs three Its weight and measures,
ounces. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail is more
than ten inches: Its Breadth fourteen inches. Its Bill from the tip to the
Angles of the mouth Bill.
is above an inch long, black, hooked at the end, and furnished with an Angle
or Tooth on each side, like that of the Kestrel, Sparrow-hawk, and lesser birds
of this kind. [Aldrovandus affirms, that his greater Italian Lanius, which
they commonly call Regestola, wants these angular Appendices of the Bill,
wherein it differs from ours.] The Tongue is slit or forked at the end, and
rough, [In that described by Tongue.
Aldrovandus, the tip of the Tongue is multifidous or jagged, ending in many
sharp Fibers, as it were hairs, which perchance (says he) is so framed by
Nature for the striking of Insects.] In the Palate is a sissure or cleft, and
about the cleft a hollow Cavity equal to the Tongue. The Nosthrils are round,
above which grow stiff black hairs or bristles. From the corner of the Mouth on
each side through the Eyes to the hind part of the head is drawn a black
stroke. The Head, Back, and Rump are The color.
ash-colored: The Chin and Belly white: The Breast and lower part of the
Throat varied with dark transverse lines.

It has in each Wing eighteen prime feathers; the tips of all which, excepting
the The flag-feathers of the Wings.
four outmost, are white: The second and third have also their exterior edges
white. Moreover, the first or outmost feather begins to be white at the bottom:
In the rest in order as far as to the tenth the white part increases, so that
more than the lower half of the tenth feather is white. From the tenth in the
following feathers the white diminishes again, yet in their interior edges it
runs up to the top: in the last, that is, those next to the body, it fails
quite: Else both the Beam-feathers and the first row of covert-feathers are
black.

The Tail is made up of twelve feathers, of which the middlemost are the
longest, The Tail.
by measure four inches and a quarter; the rest in order shorter to the
outmost, which are but three inches and an half. The outmost feathers are all
over white, the two middlemost have only their tips white, the rest of the
feather being black; in the intermediate feathers the black part gradually
diminishes to the outmost: Whence (says Aldrovandus) when it flies the white
part of the Tail shows like a Crescent. [In the greater Lanius of Aldrovandus
the four middle-feathers of the Tail are wholly black, and not two only.]

The Legs and Feet are black: The outmost Toe at the bottom joined to the
middlemost. The Legs and Feet.


The Testicles are round and little, That we dissected had in the stomach
Caterpillars, Its Food.
Beetles, and Grasshoppers.

In Germany between Heidelberg and Strasburgh, about a Village called Linkenom,
Its Place.
we killed this bird: It is also common elsewhere in Germany. Moreover, we are
told, that it is found in the mountainous parts of the North of England, as for
instance in the Peak of Derbyshire, where, (as we said) it is called Wierangel.

Gesner reports, that the Lanii of Switzerland do for the most part haunt and
abide among thorny shrubs, sitting upon the highest twigs of dwarf-trees and
bushes, setting up their tails as they sit. In them also they build, making
their Nests of Moss, Wool, and certain downy herbs: But the bottoms thereof of
Heath, upon which they lay withinside the soft and tender stalks of hay,
Doggs-tooth, and other like herbs. In this Nest in summer time are to be found
six Young, so unlike to the old ones, that they scarce resemble them in one
mark, their Bills, Legs, and Feet only excepted; yea, rather on the contrary
the bottoms of all their downy feathers, (which are as yet nothing else but
certain rudiments of their future Plumage) incline somewhat to green.

Although it does most commonly feed upon Insects, yet does it often set upon
and kill not only small birds, as Finches, Wrens, etc. but (which Turner
affirms himself to have seen) even Thrushes themselves: Whence it is wont by
our Falconers to be reclaimed and made for to fly small birds, as we have
before noted.

Gesner, besides this we have described, sets forth another sort of great
Butcher-bird, The greatest Butcher-bird of Gesner.
like to this, but twice as big, so that it is double the magnitude of a
Blackbird. It is of the same nature, shape of body, and color, except that
the Wings are red.

. II. The lesser Butcher-Bird, called in Yorkshire, Flusher, Lanius tertius
Aldrov.
IT is of the bigness of a Lark, and has a great head. The Cock weighed two
Its measures,
ounces and an half: From the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail it was
seven Inches and an half long, to the end of the Claws but six inches and an
half: from tip to tip of the Wings spread twelve inches and an half broad.

The Bill was an inch long, black, and strong. The tip of the upper Chap
hooked; near the hooked part furnished with two angular Appendices,
over-hanging the lower Bill,
Chap when the mouth is shut, it having no dents or cavities to receive these
Appendices: Wherein the Bill of this bird differs from that of a Hobby or
Kestrel. The Mouth within yellow: The cleft of the Palate rough. The Tongue
divided into many Filaments: The Nosthrils round: About the Nosthrils and
corners of the Mouth, Tongue,
mouth grew stiff, black hairs or bristles. The middle of the Back, and lesser
rows of Bristles,
feathers covering the upper side of the Wing reddish or ferrugineous [rusty]
the Head Color.
and Rump cinereous. From the corners of the Mouth through the Eyes a black
stroke is produced beyond the Ears: This black line is terminated and divided
from the ash color by another whitish one. The lower belly is white: The
Throat and Breast white, dashed with red.

There are in each Wing eighteen beam-feathers; the first or outmost very short
Quils of the Wing.
and little, the third longest of all. The Wings shut much shorter than the
Tail. The greater Wing-feathers dusky, the exterior Vanes of those next the
body being red, the edges of the middlemost white. The Tail is three inches
long, composed of The Tail.
twelve feathers, of which the outmost are the shortest, the rest on each side
in order longer to the middlemost, which are the longest; and almost wholly
black; of the next to these the bottoms or lower parts are white, especially
the interior Web; of the four next on each side the lower half is white, as
also the tips; of the outmost the exterior webs are wholly white.

The Feet are black, or of a dark blue color. The outmost Toe joined at bottom
The Feet.
to the middlemost.

The Testicles white and round; the Gall large; the Guts eleven inches long;
the The Entrails. and Food.
blind Guts short and little: in the stomach dissected we found Flies and
Beetles.

The Bird here described had built her Nest in a Holly-bush, of grass, bents,
and The Nest and Eggs.
feathers; in which were six oblong, pretty great Eggs, toward the sharper end
almost wholly white, toward the blunter encompassed with a circle of brown or
dark red, as it were a Coronet.

At Florence I described a Lanius, which the Fowlers there called Vellia, very
like to this; only the bottoms or lower part of the eight outmost beam-feathers
of the Wings were white, and that so far that some part of the white appeared
above the covert feathers. Of which note I wonder that neither Aldrovandus nor
Mr. Willughby have made any mention in their descriptions of this bird.

. III. A Hen Butcher-bird like to the second Lanius of Aldrovandus.
IT is somewhat less than the precedent in all dimensions. It differs from the
second of Aldrovandus in that its Bill is not red but black; nor the feet
cinereous, but like those of the Cock; and also that it wants the white spot on
the Wing. The Head is of an ash color inclining to red, as in Thrushes. The
Back reddish, varied with semicircular black lines near the tip of each
feather. The feathers next incumbent on the Tail are long, of a deeper red, and
adorned with semicircular lines. The Throat and Breast elegantly variegated
with the like black semicircles, almost after the manner of the Wryneck. The
Belly is white. The prime feathers of the Wings dusky; but those next the body,
and the lesser rows of covert-feathers of the Wings have red edges. The Tail
black, with a tincture of red. The outmost feathers have all their exterior
webs white; the four next on each side have their tips white; the two
middlemost are of a dark red. The lower Chap of the Bill from the middle almost
half way is white.

. IV. Another sort of Butcher-Bird, perhaps the Lanius minor primus, Aldrov.
THis had a white spot on each shoulder: The bottoms of the nine outmost
beamfeathers were white: Above the Bill was a cross black line: The Head of a
pale red or russet: The Back first red, then ash-colored: Under the Throat
were transverse dusky lines, else the whole underside was of a dirty white. I
also [J. R.] at Florence in Italy saw and described a Lanius like to this,
differing only in that the Head and Neck were of a deeper red. Mr. Willughby
also described another killed near the River Rhene in Germany, whose Head was
of a lovely red: A line or white space of the figure of a Parabola encompassed
the Tail, the interior space or Area therein contained being black. The eleven
exterior Quils were white from the bottom almost to the middle. The Feet and
Claws black.

In all the birds of this kind that I have seen and described the bottom of the
nine outmost beam-feathers of the Wings were white.

The birds of this kind differ very much in color, so that I am in some doubt,
whether the above described differ in Species, or in Age and Sex only. I
suspect they differ specifically.

The lesser Butcher-birds therefore may be divided into those that have a black
line The Species of lesser Butcher-birds.
in both cheeks passing through the Eye, and those that want it. Those which
have this line may be subdivided into those which have a white mark upon the
shoulders and those that have it not. The first sort may be called, the Lesser
Butcher-bird variegated with black and white semicircular lines: The second,
The lesser red Butcher-bird: The third, the lesser ash-colored Butcher-bird.

CHAP. XII. Of the Bird of Paradise, or Manucodiata, in general.
THat Birds of Paradise want feet is not only a popular persuasion, but a thing
not long since believed by learned men and great Naturalists, and among the
rest by Aldrovandus himself, deceived by the birds dried or their cases,
brought over into Europe out of the East Indies, dismembered, and bereaved of
their Feet. Yea, Aldrovandus and others do not stick to charge Antonius
Pigafeta, (who gave the first notice of this Bird to the Europaeans) with
falsehood and lying, because he delivered the contrary. This error once
admitted, the other fictions of idle brains, which seemed thence to follow, did
without difficulty obtain belief; viz. that they lived upon the celestial dew;
that they flew perpetually without any intermission, and took no rest but on
high in the Air, their Wings being spread; that they were never taken alive,
but only when they fell down dead upon the ground: That there is in the back of
the Male a certain cavity, in which the Female, whose belly is also hollow,
lays her Eggs, and so by the help of both cavities they are sitten upon and
hatched. All which things are now sufficiently refuted, and proved to be false
and fabulous, both by eyewitnesses, and by the birds themselves brought over
entire. I my self (says In his notes upon Marggr. lib. 5. cap. ult.
Joannes de Laet) have two Birds of Paradise of different kinds, and have seen
many others, all which had feet, and those truly for the bulk of their bodies
sufficiently great, and very strong Legs. The same is confirmed by *
Marggravius, Clusius in his Exotics, Wormius in his Museum, page 295. and
especially Bontius in the fifth Book and twelfth Chapter of his natural and
medic History of the East Indies, where we have to this purpose; It is so far
from being true that these birds of Paradise are nourished by the Air, or want
Feet, that with their crooked and very sharp Claws they catch small birds, as
Green Linnets, Chaffinches, and the like, and presently tear and devour them
like other birds of prey: No less untrue is it, that they are not found but
only dead, whereas they sit upon trees, and are shot with Arrows by the
Tarnacenses; whence also, and from their swift To and fro, or backward and
forward.
reciprocal flying, they are by the Indians called Tarnacensian Swallows. We
truly, before we had read these things in Bontius, had subjoyned these birds to
the Rapacious kind, because they did seem to us in their Bill and crooked Claws
very nearly to resemble them, and consequently in all likelihood to prey upon
littlebirds. Hence also it appears how rashly some have believed, that they
took their rest hanging by those two Shafts of feathers.
cirri, which run out, as it were two long strings, beyond the rest of the
feathers, twined about the boughs of trees: For those Cirri are nothing else
but the naked shafts of feathers, having neither the structure nor use of
Muscles. It were to be wished, that those who travel to those parts of the East
Indies, where these Birds are found, would diligently enquire of the
Inhabitants, where and how they build: And what those long feathers serve for,
which springing in great numbers from both sides of the breast do both run out
in length beyond the Tail, and also are spread out far in breadth; and
especially what may be the use of these two long naked shafts of feathers
before mentioned, which (to say the truth) is to us as yet unknown.

These most beautiful birds (as Aldrovandus reports) are called by the
inhabitants of the Molucca Islands Manucodiatae, that is, Gods birds, and had
in great esteem and veneration. They are called Birds of Paradise, both for the
excellent shape and beauty of their bodies, and also because where they are
bred, whence they come, and whither they betake themselves is altogether
unknown, since they are found only dead upon the earth, so that the Vulgar
imagine them to drop out of Heaven or Paradise. But this mistake we have before
out of Bontius rectified.

CHAP. XIII. Of the several sorts of Birds of Paradise.
. I. * Aldrovandus his first Bird of Paradise.
FOr bigness and shape of body, beheld singly, it comes near to a Swallow. The
Its bigness, Color, Head.
feathers investing it are of several colors, very beautiful and lovely to
behold. The Head like that of a Swallow, and great for the smalness of the
body; the feathers covering its upper part from the first Vertebre of the Neck
to the beginning of the Bill were short, thick, hard, close-set, of a bright,
glistering, yellow color, shining like burnished Gold, or the Sunbeams: The
rest which covered the Chin were of an admirable bluish green, such as we see
in the heads of Mallards, when exposed to the Sunshine. The Bill was longer
than that of a Swallow: The Its Bill, Wings:
Wing-feathers for shape like those of Herons, only slenderer and longer, of a
shining dusky color between black and red: which together with the Tail being
spread round represent the likeness of a Wheel: For they are absolutely
immovable, sticking in the skin like so many darts. Besides which there are
also other small feathers, and those verily not a few, which spring up just by
the originals of the greater feathers that make up the Wings, and cover the
lower parts of them. These are half red or Scarlet-colored, half of a shining,
Saffron, or Gold color; and by reason of that remarkable and singular
disparity of colors contribute much to the beauty and elegancy of this bird.
All the rest of the body was covered with Of the color of gold. Color of the
rest of the body.
fulvous feathers inclining to red [ruffum,] yet so, that still one might
observe some difference between them. For those on the Breast and Belly, which
stood thicker, and were likewise broader (being of two or three inches breadth)
were of a fulvous or rather liver color, and that very bright and resplendent.
Those on the Back stood thinner, and were fewer, gaping moreover with large
divisions, after the manner exactly of those growing on the backs of Herons. [I
suppose he means the several threads or filaments which compose the web of the
feather stood thinner or at greater distances, as in those of a Peacocks Tail.]
Neither do they attain that eminent breadth, or match them in that excellent
liver-colour; but are rather of a purple, resembling flesh or somewhat more
obscure. Those two filaments which spring out of the back are in a manner black.

. II. * Aldrovandus his second Bird of Paradise.
THis differed from the rest, especially in that it had in its Rump two very
long feathers, exceeding the rest about two palms length: The Head was almost
Color of the Head,
white, besprinkled with yellow and golden spots: The eyes likewise yellow, the
hairs of the Eyelids red: The Bill of a middle color between yellow and
green, two inches long; the upper part a little crooked: The Tongue red, long,
sharp, not unlike Bill,
that of Woodpeckers, very fit to strike Insects. The Breast was somewhat red:
Tongue,
The Belly, Back and Wings were white: Yet were their upper sides all over, and
Breast, Wings,
their ends ferrugineous. The Back at first seemed to incline somewhat to
yellow, Back.
but about the Rump it changed to a red or ferrugineous. In the length of the
Wings, which equalled five Palms, it exceeded the first species. The Tail
feathers at their The Tail;
insertion into the back were white, else ferrugineous, longer than in the
first Species.

This Bird wanted those two threads, which (as I said before) grow out of the
backs of all this kind. Wherefore it is to be thought that either by reason of
the length of the journey, or continuance of time, they fell away and were
lost; not that it is therefore to be called a Female, as the Vulgar have been
hitherto falsely persuaded. The use of the two forementioned long feathers may
perchance be for swifter flight.

. III. * Aldrovandus his third Bird of Paradise.
THis for the length of its body we thought good to call The great Bird of
Paradise.
Hippomanncodiata: As being from the point of the Bill to the end of the Tail
and Wings twenty seven inches long, and two Palms broad when the Wings are
closed. The Bill was well hooked, especially the upper part; three inches long;
the lower part a little shorter. The whole bird was white, except the Neck and
Belly, which were of a Chesnut-colour. The upper part of the Head was
ferrugineous; to which succeeded a yellow, and to the yellow a green color.
Near the Back the feathers were very prominent, viz. the length of two or three
inches, This Bird had only one string, and that rough and very flexible:
Wherefore we think that the other was by some accident lost.

. IV. * Aldrovandus his fourth or crested Bird of Paradise.
FRom the beginning of the Bill to the end of the Wings it was by measure full
eighteen inches. The Bill for the smalness of the body was very long, black,
and somewhat hooked. The feathers of the Head, Neck, and Wings were black, yet
at the joining of the Bill yellow. It had a crest or cop near the Neck almost
three Inches high, rigid, of a yellow color, and which seemed to consist
rather of bristles than feathers: And in that chiefly did it differ from the
following bird.

. V. * Aldrovandus his fifth or common Bird of Paradise.
THis Gesner also has figured, but not described, only he says, it is very
like that which was formerly graven, and published by it self, at Nurenbergh in
Germany: To the Icon whereof he says these words were added. The Bird of
Paradise or Indian Footless.
Apos is of the bigness of a Song-Thrush, wonderful light, and very
long-winged, the feathers being rare, tender, and pervious to the light; having
besides two long, slender, black, horny feathers, if they may be called
feathers and not rather bristles, for they are bare of filaments. It has no
feet; flies perpetually, nor does it ever rest but hanging in some tree, by
those long strings or bristles twined about a bough. No Ship sails so swiftly,
nor so far from the Continent, which it does not fly round about. This Cut is
very like to our last described: But they differ much in the bigness of the
Bill and Head. Gesners figure shows the Bill to be little, and the lower Chap
crooked; whereas on the contrary (as I said) in ours the Bill was very long,
and the upper Chap crooked. Besides, this has no Crest, which is a manifest
argument of diversity.

. VI. * The King of Birds of Paradise, Marggrav.
IT shows to be as big as a Pigeon, but was indeed not greater than a Swallow.
It had a small Head, little Eyes, a straight, indifferently thick and sharp
Bill, an Inch and half long. The Neck was an inch long: The length of the Body
from the Head to the rise of the Tail scarce three inches and an half. The
Wings were above seven inches long: The Tail broad, and six inches long. It had
two Legs, the lower part of each two inches long: Four Toes in the Feet, three
standing forwards, and one backward, after the usnal manner; the middle Foretoe
was a little longer than the rest: The back-toe was also of a good length; all
armed with strong, crooked, Hawklike Claws. Both Legs and Feet are thick and
strong, made for rapine and preying. The Wings and Tail have broad and strong
feathers, an inch wide. The whole back, tbe lower Belly, the Wings and Tail are
of an elegant brown color [Brunni.] Above next the Bill it has feathers
resembling Velvet, mingled of green and dusky: Beneath next the Bill it has
like feathers of a black color. The Neck above is of a yellow or gold color;
beneath of a green, with a gold-colour as it were shining through it. The
Breast is of a deep brown. Under the Wings, in the sides between the Wings and
the Legs grow many feathers, a foot long more or less, of a curious structure,
which run forth a great way upon the Tail: Toward their rise they are of a
deep yellow or gold color, else of a whitish yellow, shadowed or dashed with
brown. Among these feathers are extended two as it were threads or strings,
each more than two feet long, near their rise of a yellow or gold color,
crooked toward their ends, and of a dark brown. Their Legs are dusky, their
Talons being whiter. The Bill is of a color mixed of green and blue, yet
whitish toward the point.

VII. * Marggravius his other Bird of Paradise.
IN bigness it exceeded a Swallow. It has a small Head, a little compressed or
flat above, two thirds of an inch long, in thickness or compass two inches:
very lit-Eyes, about the bigness of a grain of Millet or Mustard Seed. The Bill
strong, above an inch long, straight, (yet upwards toward its Base somewhat
rising) sharp, of a color mingled of blue and green, with an oblong white spot
in the upper Chap toward the point: wide, open Nosthrils. The Neck a little
more than two thirds of an inch long, straight, and of equal thickness with the
head. The body from the end of the Neck to the beginning of the Tail was scarce
four inches long, the thickness almost three; but it was covered with many
feathers, which I do not here consider. The length of the Wings was five
inches. Above on the head, at the rise of the Bill, it was adorned with very
black, small, downy feathers, exactly resembling Velvet; and in like manner
near the rise of the lower Bill, the black here being broader than above. In
the whole throat or lower side of the Neck, and as far as the Cheeks and also
to the Eyes, it was covered with silken feathers, a little harder to the touch
than those black ones, of a most elegant golden green, such as is wont to be
seen in the necks of Peacocks and Mallards. The whole upper part of the Head as
far as that silken clothing, was also covered with silken feathers, but hard to
the touch, of a dark yellow color. The whole Neck encompassed with short
feathers resembling Plush, of a shining yellow color like Gold. The back was
all covered with feathers of the like shining golden yellow, to the touch
resembling hairs, lying many one upon another, which below were of a pale brown
color. The Wingfeathers are all one longer than another. The Tail consists of
a few the like brown feathers, extended a little beyond the ends of the Wings,
and is above three inches and an half long. At the very rise of the Wings, and
without the Wings in each side grow many very elegant feathers, supported by
small white ones: Some of these are six inches long, some a foot; but the
middlemost and longest are a foot and half long, and white. All these feathers
are most elegant, of a fine, thin, rare, or subtle texture. The number of
feathers springing out of both sides amounts to about fifty in each; among
which there are forty, a foot and half long apiece. Clusius and others, who
take these long feathers to belong to the Wings, are mistaken; for they are not
the Wing-feathers, but, as Marggravius truly has delivered, spring out of each
side under the Wings.

These two descriptions seem to be either of one and the same sort of bird, or
of two very like; and agree in most things with the first Species of
Aldrovandus.

. VIII. * Of Birds of Paradise out of Clusius.
I See that he [Aldrovandus he means] and all the rest who have treated of this
bird, agree in this, that they judge it to want feet, because they had seen
none but such as were bereaved of their feet. Hereupon they did not stick to
charge Antonius Pigafeta (who accompanying Magellane in the Ship Victoria,
first sailed round the World) with falsehood and lying, because after his return
from that long Voyage, giving the first notice of this Bird to the Europaeans
in the Diary of his travel, he attributes to it slender Legs a An handbreadth.
Palm long. For my part, though hitherto, I confess, I have been in the same
erroneous opinion with them, in thinking these birds to be footless (contrary
to the sentence and judgment of Aristotle, who affirms that no bird wants feet)
because those which I happened to see, both in my Spanish Voyage, stopping two
months at Lisbon, and also in the Low Countries, in the Cabinets of sundry
persons delighted in such exotic things, were all without feet, and
exenterated; yet at that time, to say the truth, I was not at all curious in
observing, whether there were any difference between them. But the last Voyages
of the Hollanders into India have made me without difficulty to change my
opinion; it being certain that there have been some brought over entire, and
retaining still their legs and feet: And by those who saw them I understood,
that their Legs were very like those of a Magpie, but weaker, and not so thick,
differing also in color, as not being black, but tending to a Chestnut.
Notwithstanding I had a great desire my self to see them, and if I could have
got but one, presently to have taken a draught thereof, that I might expose it
to the view of the Reader, and confirm the truth and faithfulness of Pigafeta.
But they having been for their rarity presently bought up, and carried away to
Francfurt on the Main, and one of them thence to the Emperor Rudolphus the
second of that name (his Majesty being, as I hear, greatly delighted in these
kind of strange foreign things, and in the knowledge of all the wonders of
nature) I was frustrated of my hope. But if it happens that there be any entire
ones brought over, and that I get seasonable notice of it, I will do my
endeavor to procure one, at least to borrow it, that I may set forth its
figure, to confute and extirpate the commonly received opinion or conceit, that
these birds want feet. Howbeit the Mariners that brought these Birds, though
they went not to those Islands where the birds themselves breed and live, yet
were informed (as I was assured) by those of whom they bought them, that they
were all furnished with Feet, and did both walk and fly like other Birds: But
that the Inhabitants so soon as they take them, do exenterate them, and cut off
and cast away their Legs, and then expose them to the Sun, that they may dry
the more readily, and so dried, either keep them to sell, or fasten them to
their Helmets instead of Plumes of feathers. They added moreover, that those
birds lived in Woods, and were wont to fly thirty or forty together in flocks,
accompanied with their King or Captain, who always flies high above the rest;
and (which seems to be fabulous) if they be thirsty, use to send out one of
their company first to the water, to make trial of it, which if it receives no
harm from drinking it, then the whole flock fly thither and drink: But if it
returns sick or indisposed, the rest avoid that water, and fly away to seek out
some other. They further added, that the Islanders were wont to taint and
infect this water, for to catch these Birds, after this manner. When they espy
a flock of Birds, they mark diligently whither they betake themselves, and as
soon as they see the bird that was sent out, after it has drank flown back
again, they presently cast poison into that water, which the whole flock coming
to drink of, is infected, and becomes their prey. Besides, that these Birds
were wont sometimes to be shot with Arrows: And if their King happens to be
killed and fall down, the rest that are in that flock fall together with him,
and yield themselves to be taken, as refusing to live after they have lost
their King.

Furthermore, they made two kinds of those Birds: The one of the Greater, which
were more beautiful, and the other of the Lesser, which wereless beautiful:
Affirming that both kinds have their peculiar King, and different in color.
That the birds of the greater kind (whose King is of an elegant and beautiful
color) were found only in the Isle Aru or Arou (for so that Vowel u is to be
pronounced:) But that the Isles called Papuas, nigh to the Island Gilolo, did
produce the birds of the lesser kind; and that their King was less handsome,
covered with black feathers, for bigness equal to a Starling, and having some
feathers like horse-hairs. Perchance this black King may be the fourth Species
set forth by Aldrovandus. Those that sold these Birds, being asked by the
Mariners how they were called by the Inhabitants, answered Boeres, that is,
Birds: For so they called all Birds, neither did they know how to distinguish
them by peculiar names.

Now having seen a very elegant Bird of the greater sort, and bigger also than
the rest of this kind, in the house of the famous Peter Paroias, Doctor of
Physic, and primary Professor in the University of Leyden, I took care to get
the figure thereof cut, that I might set it forth, subjoyning a short History,
as faithfully taken as I could; which should by right have taken up the first
place in the fifth Book of Exotics: But seeing the six first Books are already
printed off, I thought fit to insert it, with some other things I afterward
got, into this Auctarium.

. IX. * A Bird of Paradise of the greater sort. Clus.
THe bulk of the body of this bird came near for bigness to that of a Swallow.
From the top of the Head to the Rump it scarce exceeded five inches length. The
Crown from the Bill to the Eyes and Neck was covered with very thick-set,
short, little feathers, resembling filaments or thrums of Silk; their upper
parts or ends being of a yellow color, the lower, where they are inserted into
the skin, dusky. The under-part of the Head, next to the lower Chap of the
Bill, was very thick-set with thrums rather than feathers, being very short,
and like to Velvet, of a deep black, from the Eyes as far as the Throat. The
Throat as low down as the Breast was adorned with the like feathers or rather
silken thrums, and those of a deep green, so beautiful and shining, that there
cannot more elegant ones be seen in the Neck of the wild Drake or Mallard. The
feathers covering the Breast were also exceeding fine and small, but longer,
and very soft, of a black color inclining to red, so that they seemed to be
nothing but ends of Silk. The Bill was but small and sharp-pointed, an inch and
half long, black in the part next the Head, the top being somewhat whitish. In
the Head also near the Bill appeared very small footsteps of Eyes. The Back,
Belly, and Tail-feathers were of a ferrugineous or dusky red color. The Tail
it self consisted of ten pretty broad feathers, and was six inches and an half
long; above which were two long and round feathers, somewhat like to
Bow-string, or Shoo-makers threads, but stiff, and dusky, of two feet and three
or four inches length, proceeding from the same original [or root or ground,
viz. the Rump] with the feathers of the Tail, viz. being Close together.
jointly inserted into the Rump. These were pretty thick at their rise, about
their Quills or hollow part, from which they were set with frequent
[thick-standing] hairy or downy thrums [stamina] such as other feathers are
compounded of; for the space of four inches or a little more on the one side,
and on the other for their third parts: Thence they grew slenderer by degrees
to their very ends; and though they were destitute of those hairs, yet were
they rough, as if they had been cut off. The feathers in the Wings were of
various length: For some (to wit, the lowest which stood very thick) exceeded
not the length of six inches, yea, some were shorter than so: Others were eight
or nine inches long; others twelve; but the longest a foot and half: There is
also in them great variety of colors; for some are of a shining golden color,
some, especially the narrower in the sides of the Wings, were of a dusky red,
as it were a black sanguine, but shining: But those that covered the rest were
of a pale ash color, and their sides thinner-set with villose or downy
threads: In short, they were all very beautiful, which if I might I would
willingly have got cut and set forth in a Table, but because they grew so
thick, it could not conveniently be done without marring the shape of the whole
Bird.

Another of the same kind I afterward saw in the hands of that noble and
learned Person Joseph Scaliger, somewhat lesser in bulk of body, as being but
four inches and an half long from Head to Rump, but yet the feathers of the
Tail were of the same length with those of that next above described; yet those
round and long feathers like to Nerves, jointly springing out of the Rump, did
not exceed the length of one foot and nine Inches, else about their Quils set
with the like hairs and downy thrums, on the one side to the length of three
inches from the Quill, on the other to almost five; and thence they grew
smaller to the very ends, and were something rough, especially about the ends,
but not so as those of the precedent. The feathers in the Wings were likewise
of a different length, as in the former: Neither was the bird very unlike to
that, nor the variety of colors diverse from it; so that it seemed to differ
only in age. The Bill was an inch and half long, in part dusky, the rest being
white.

Besides I saw at his house another, somewhat lesser in bulk of body, and not
so flat, having a very little Head, the Bill being of almost equal bigness with
the precedents, but narrower, and of a bluish dusky color, having two holes
for respiration in the upper part next the Head, like the precedent. The Crown
of the head was clothed with very short feathers, or rather hairs, like thrums
of silk, but not of so elegant a color as in the precedent, but of a kind of
sooty yellow. Besides, the border of feathers compassing the Bill on the upper
side was not of that breadth as in those, yet in like manner of a black color:
The Plumage also wherewith the Throat was covered was of a green shining color
as in the precedent, but not exceeding the breadth of ones little finger. The
Back from the Neck to the Rump was indeed clothed with the like fine slender
feathers; but of a different color, viz. a yellowish ash color: But the
Breast-feathers were of like color with those of the precedent: The Plumage
also of that part next the Rump agreed with theirs. Of what color the
Tail-feathers were I cannot tell, for that it wanted a Rump: For which cause I
know not whether it had or wanted those long, round Nerves, with which as many
Birds of this sort as I have yet seen were furnished. The Wing-feathers were of
different length as in the former: Nor were they much unlike to them in color;
but those that were the longest had their sides thinner-set with downy
filaments, and were of a much whiter color than the feathers of the above
described, being a foot and half long. Now whether that color of the feathers
covering the Back differing from the foregoing, makes or signifies diversity of
Sex, as some think, I cannot say; but John de Weely told me, that this was of
the second kind, viz. of those that are bred in the Islands Papuae, and that
such do indeed want those Nerves, but not the Tail, and for that cause I
suppose he means those two long Nerves or naked shafts of feathers.
they cannot make the difference of Sex, as the Vulgar think.

A certain Citizen of Leyden had a bird altogether like to this last of
Scaliger, wanting the Rump and Tail, and also those two long Nerves; which note
whether it did distinguish all Birds of that kind from others, was to me
unknown (because I had only observed these two, that had this note, as far as I
remember: Or if I did before happen to see the like, they slipped out of my
memory, because at that time I was not so diligent and curious in taking exact
notice of the forms of these and the like birds) but (as I said a little
before) John de Weely satisfied me and removed all doubt as to that point.

Further when I had proceeded thus far in treating of this Bird, the same John
de Weely a Citizen and Merchant of Amsterdam, a very courteous and obliging
person, who had sold the like Bird entire, with its Feet still remaining to it,
to the Emperor, informed me this June, Anno 1605. (for I had enquired of him
the May foregoing) that that Bird of Paradise was of the greater kind, which
have those two Nerves growing out of their Rump, and that they have a flatter
body, and not so round as those that are brought out of the Papuae Islands:
That its Feet were like a Hawks or a Pullets, very foul and unhandsom, clapped
close to the body of the bird, so that the Toes only appeared: And that he was
of opinion, that all Birds of Paradise had the like feet; but that the
Inhabitants for their ugliness and deformity did together with their Legs cut
them off and cast them away. The same thing about the end of June he confirmed
to me being present by word of mouth.

. X. * The supposed King of the greater Birds of Paradise.
THat little Bird which I understood to be called the King of the greater sort
of Birds of Paradise, was a very rare one. For though (as I said before) I had
often seen Birds of Paradise both at Lisbon and other places, and the Holland
Pilots and Ship-masters, who are now wont to sail yearly into the East Indies,
coming back from their Voyages, do almost always bring home some of these
Birds, yet was it never my hap to see a King, till the year 1603. viz. at
Amsterdam, in the hands of a certain Merchant, who was wont to buy up such like
exotic things among the Mariners returned home, that he might make a great
profit by selling them again to others. But in the beginning of the following
year Emmanuel Swerts, a very honest man, and Citizen of the same City, gave me
notice that he had the like: Whereupon I prevailed with him to lend me the Bird
for a few days, that I might describe it, and get its figure cut in a table.
And seeing I have mentioned it a little before, and no man hitherto (as far as
I know) has set forth the like, I thought my self obliged in this place to
propose its description, annexing its figure.

This Bird was less than other Birds of Paradise, and of different feathers:
For from the Head to the Tail it scarce exceeded two inches length. Its head
was very small, which together with its Bill was but an Inch and half long, of
which length also the Tail was. But the Wings were much larger than the whole
body of the bird, as being four Inches and an half long, and reaching two
inches beyond the end of the Tail. The color of the Bill was white, the upper
parts being an inch long, was covered half way with elegant, short feathers or
hairs, of a red color, like silken thrums, as also the whole forepart of the
head: The lower part of the Bill was likewise an inch long, yet a thought
shorter than the upper. The middle part of the Head about the Eyes on each side
had little black spots impressed. The Neck and Breast were covered with fine
slender feathers of a deep red or sanguine color, so that they seemed to be no
more than certain silken thrums or filaments. All the covert-feathers of the
Back, Wings, and Tail were almost of one and the same color. Each Wing
consisted of thirteen prime feathers, which were on the upper side of a dusky
red, on the under side of a dusky yellow. The Tail contained seven or eight
dusky or brown feathers. The lower or under side of the body under the Breast
was adorned with a kind of ring of the breadth almost of ones little finger,
consisting of black feathers as it were silken thrums. The feathers on the
Belly were white, but those next the Wings black; and of those there were four
or five in each side a little longer than the rest; viz. equal to two inches,
and which ended in a broad top of a curious shining green, not unlike that of a
Mallards Neck. Out of the Rump among the feathers of the Tail proceeded two
strings as it were horse-hairs, slender, but stiff, seven or eight inches long,
altogether black, only their ends for an inches length were reflected round,
and on one side set with very fine hairs or downy threads, which were on the
upper side of a deep shining green, beautiful to behold, almost like the
feathers on a wild Drake or Mallards Neck, adding a great grace to the whole
body of the Bird; but the underside of these feathers was of a dusky color I
understood also that there were some Birds, which had those bristly strings,
crossing one another toward their ends.

CHAP. XIV. The Cuckoo. Cuculus.
OUr Bolognese Fowlers (says Aldrovandus) do unanimously affirm, that there
are found a greater and a lesser sort of Cuckows; and besides, that the greater
are of two kinds, which are distinguished one from the other by the only
difference of color: But that the lesser differ from the greater in nothing
else but magnitude. We shall give figures of both the greater; the lesser we
have not yet seen. So far Aldrovandus.

That which is common with us in England differs from the first of Aldrovandus,
in that its Bill is liker a Thrushes or Blackbirds than a Ringdoves. Its length
from the tip Its length, Bill,
of the Bill to the end of the Tail is twelve inches. The upper Chap of the
Bill somewhat hooked, and longer than the lower, for the most part of a dark or
blackish color; the nether of a pale or whitish yellow. The inside of the
Mouth and the Tongue are of a deep yellow or Saffron color: The Tongue not
divided, the tip of it hard and pellucid. The Irides of the Eyes not yellow, as
in Aldrovandus his second Tongue, Eyes,
sort, but of a Hazel color: The Nosthrils round, wide, extant above the
surface of Nosthrils.
the Bill; wherein it differs from all other birds I have yet seen. The lower
eyelid is the greater; the edges of the Eyelids yellow.

The Throat, Breast, and Belly are white, with transverse dark lines, which are
Color of the underside,
entire and not interrupted; wherein it agrees with Aldrovandus his second
Cuckoo. The black lines are thicker upon the throat, and have less white
between them. The feathers of the Head are of a dark brown with white edges,
[Aldrovandus says, of a Of the upper side,
cinereous tending to a Chestnut color) that we described had on the Head one
or two white spots. The feathers on the middle of the Neck and Back, and also
the long scapular feathers are brown with a tincture of red, having their edges
whitish. The Rump ash-colored.

The beam-feathers of the Wings are nineteen in number, the greater whereof are
Of the Wingfeathers.
the blacker. All from the second have their exterior Vanes spotted with red:
The interior Vanes of the outmost have long, transverse, white spots; the tips
of all are white. The covert-feathers of the Wings are of the same color with
those on the Back, only the outmost darker.

The Tail in that described by Aldrovandus in the second place (for Mr.
Willughby The Tail,
omitted that in his Description) was made up of ten feathers, distinguished on
both sides the shaft with white marks, somewhat resembling the figure of a
heart, about an inch distant from each other, in a decent and lovely order,
pleasant to behold. But the edges of the inner sides of all but the two
middlemost, and the tops of all were adorned with white spots.

The Feet and Claws are yellow. It has two back-toes; of which the interior
is The Feet, Toes, and Claws.
the least of all the Toes, and next to that the interior of the fore-toes.
The Claws are something hollowed on the inside, especially the greatest: The
two fore-toes are connected from the divarication to the first joint.

In the stomach dissected we found Caterpillars and other Insects. The
Hedge-Sparrow Its Food. Its manner of breeding.
[Curruca] is the Cuckows Nurse, but not the Hedge-Sparrow only, (if Curruca be
so rightly rendered) but also Ring-Doves, Larks, Finches. I my self with many
others have seen a Wagtail feeding a young Cuckoo. The Cockow her self builds
no Nest; but having found the Nest of some little bird, she either devours or
destroys the Eggs she there finds, and in the room thereof lays one of her own,
and so forsakes it. The silly bird returning, sits on this Egg. hatches it, and
with a great deal of care and toil broods, feeds, and cherishes the young
Cuckoo for her own, until it be grown up and able to fly and shift for it self.
Which thing seems so strange, monstrous, and absurd, that for my part I cannot
sufficiently wonder there should be such an example in nature; nor could I have
ever been induced to believe that such a thing had been done by Natures
instinct, had I not with my own eyes seen it. For Nature in other things is
wont constantly to observe one and the same Law and Order agreeable to the
highest reason and prudence: Which in this case is, that the Dams make Nests
for themselves, if need be, sit upon their own Eggs, and bring up their Young
after they are hatched.

What becomes of the Cuckoo in the Wintertime, whether hiding her self in
hollow What becomes of the Cuckoo in Winter.
Trees, or other holes and Caverns, she lies torpid, and at the return of the
Spring revives again; or rather at the approach of Winter, being impatient of
cold, shifts place and departs into hot Countries, is not as yet to me certainly
known. Aldrovandus writes, that it is by long observation found, that she does
in the Winter enter into the hollows of trees, or the Caverns of Rocks and the
earth, and there lie hid all that season. Some (says he) tell a story of a
certain Countryman of Zurich in Switzerland, who having laid a Log on the fire
in Winter, heard a Cuckoo cry in it. For being of a very tender nature, and
impatient of cold (as Aristotle witnesses) no wonder, if to avoid the
Winter-cold, it hide it self in holes, especially seeing at that time it moults
its feathers. We also have heard of the like stories in England, and have known
some who have affirmed themselves in the middle of Winter, in a more than
usually mild and warm season, to have heard the voice of the Cuckoo. But seeing
it is most certain, that many sorts of Birds do at certain Seasons of the year
shift places, and depart into other Countries, as for example Quails, Woodcocks,
Fieldfares, Storks, etc. Why may not Cuckows also do the same? For my part I
never yet met with any credible person that dared affirm, that himself had
found or seen a Cuckoo in Wintertime taken out of a hollow tree, or any other
lurking-place.

Since the writing of this, reading Jo. Faber his Expositions of the Pictures
of some Mexican Animals of Nardi Antonio Recchi, I find alleged the testimony
of a credible person and an eyewitness, one Theophilus Molitor, a Friend of
Fabers, for this lurking of Cuckows in hollow trees. Molitor affirmed this to
have happened at his Fathers house. His Grandfathers Servants having stocked up
in a certain Meadow some old, dry, rotten Willows, and brought them home, and
cast the heads of two of them into the Furnace to heat the Stove, heard as they
were in the Stove a Cuckoo singing three times. Wondering at this cry of the
Cuckoo in the Wintertime, out they go, and drawing the heads of the Willows
out of the Furnace, in the one of them they observed something move; wherefore
taking an Axe they opened the hole, and thrusting in their hands, first they
plucked out nothing but mere feathers: Afterward they got hold of a living
Animal, that was the very Cuckoo, and drew it out. It was indeed brisk and
lively, but wholly naked and bare of feathers, and without any Winter-provision
of food, which Cuckoo the Boys kept two whole years in the Stove.

* Aldrovandus his first sort of Cuckoo.
This differs in many respects from the precedent, as first, in that the
transverse lines on the Breast are not continued, but interrupted. Secondly, In
that the covert-feathers of the Neck, Back, and Wings are almost all
parti-colored of black and ferrugineous. Thirdly, The Remiges elsewhere black,
in the middle and round the edges white. Fourthly, The Tail variegated with
three colors, black, white, and ferrugineous. The black in each feather
consists of two lines, concurring in the middle of the feather in an acute
angle, and standing at equal distances in a certain Series or order to the end
of the Tail: The ferrugineous takes up the outsides of the intermediate spaces,
and the white the middle.

LIB. I. PART I. SECT. II. Of Nocturnal Rapacious Birds.
RApacious Nocturnal Birds are of two kinds, viz. Eared or horned, and such as
want Ears. To these we shall subjoyn the Goat-sucker, which yet we believe not
to be Rapacious, but to have it self so to Owls as the Cuckoo to Hawks.

Of Rapacious Nocturnal Birds we have in England four sorts besides the
Goatsucker. 1. The Horn-Owl, in Latin Otus or Asio, so called from certain
small feathers sticking out on the sides of the head, in forms of Horns or
Ears. 2. The White-Owl, called also the Church-Owl or Barn-Owl; by Aldrovandus
Aluco minor. 3. The Brown Owl, Screech-Owl, or Ivy-Owl: Strix Aldrovandi. 4.
The Gray Owl: Strix cinerea.

CHAP. I. Of Rapacious Nocturnal Birds Horned or Eared.
. I. * The great Horn-Owl or Eagle-Owl. Bubo.
OF this Bird Aldrovandus gives us three figures, and three descriptions, which
I suspect to be all of one and the same sort: The first is taken out of Gesner,
the two last were composed by himself, of his own observation. The first (they
are Gesners words) was as big or bigger than a Goose; had great Wings, two
Feet, and three inches long, when extended in a right line from their beginning
to the end of the longest feather, from the top of the uppermost bone of the
Wing, to the lowest end was in a right line thirteen inches. The Head both for
shape and bigness was like a Cats, for which reason the French do not
improperly call it Chat huant [q. felis gemebunda.] Above each Ear stuck out
black feathers, three inches high. The Eyes were great: The feathers about the
Rump thick and very soft, of more than a fingers length, or an handful high, if
my memory fail me not. From the point of the Bill to the end of the Feet or of
the Tail (for they were both equally extended) it was two foot and seven inches
long. The Irides of the Eyes were of a deep shining yellow or Saffron-colour.
The Bill short, black, and hooked. The feathers being put aside the Ear-holes
came into sight, which were great and open. On both sides by the Nosthrils grew
hair-like feathers, as it were beards [barbulae.] The color of the feathers
all over the body was various, of whitish, black, and reddish spots. The length
of the Leg was thirteen inches: The part above the knee thick and brawny: The
Claws black, hooked, and very sharp: The Foot hairy or feathered down to the
very Claws, the feathers being of a pale red.

2. The second (says Aldrovandus) for bigness agreed exactly with this, but
differed in many other particulars. For though its Feet were indeed hairy down
to the Claws, as in that, yet shorter and slenderer, neither so brawny above
the knees, nor so thick and strong-shanked. The color of the whole body was
fulvous [or of a rusty ash-colour] especially of the Breast, where it was
marked with blackish spots drawn long-ways, promiscuously here and there in no
order. The Back and Wings are of a darker brown or ferrugineous dusky color.
But the main difference is that that of Gesner has all the particular feathers
of its whole body more variegated with certain transverse narrow lines like the
feathers of some kinds of Ducks, Partridges, and Hawks. Besides, it differs in
that the whole body, but especially the Back and Head are marked with certain
black strakes, irregularly drawn, and as it were figured; whereas mine (says
he) was not so painted, but in the great feathers of the Wings and Tail
distinguished with broad, transverse, blackish lines or bars; which lines are
so formed, especially in the Tail, that each of the broader are terminated
above and below by other narrower ones, like borders or fringes, disposed in a
triple order, and at certain intervals distant from each other, as in Hawks.
This had great and very sharp Talons, not black, as in that, but of a
horn-colour. The Tail in both was very short.

3. The third was in all things like the second, save that the Legs were not
hairy, and both Legs and Feet weak.

Of this kind of Owl we saw one in France at the Kings Palace of Bois de
Vincennes: And two in his Majesty's Park of St. James near Westminster. They
were as big as Eagles: Their Legs and Feet hairy down to the Claws. They had
three fore-toes in each foot; but the outmost of them was so framed that it
could be turned backward, and made stand like a hind-toe. So that in that
respect there is no difference between this and other sorts of Owls, but this
may as well be said to have two back toes as they; whatever Aldrovandus has
delivered to the contrary. Their color was much like to that of a Bittour, the
feathers being marked with long black strokes in the middle, the outsides of a
light bay. About the Belly some of the feathers were beautified with transverse
lines. The Irides of the Eyes were of a reddish yellow or flame color, [rather
of a golden.]

That Owl which Marggravius describes under the name of Jacurutu of the
Brasilians, seems to be altogether the same with this. It is (says he) for
bigness equal to a Goose: Has a round Head like a Cat; a hooked black Bill,
the upper Chap being longer: Great, rising, round Eyes, shining like Crystal,
compassed toward the outside with a Circle of yellow. The Circumference of the
Eye something greater than a Misnian A piece of money so called, of the bigness
of a twopence or threepence.
gross. Near the Ear-holes it has feathers two inches long, which stick up,
and end in a sharp point like Ears. The Tail is broad; the Wings reach not to
the end of it. The Legs are feathered down to the Feet, in which are four Toes,
three standing forward, and one backward, and in each a crooked black Talon,
above an inch long, and very sharp. The feathers of the whole body are
elegantly variegated with yellow, white, and black.

It is said to build on high and inaccessible Rocks: It preys not only on small
birds, but also Conies and Hares like the Eagle. Yea, (says Aldrovandus) there
is no Animal gathers so much prey by night as this Owl, especially when she
brings up her Young. For she not only provides sufficient for her self and
hers, but is very advantageous to them that find her Nest. For while she flies
out a pourveying for more, they privily steal away that she had before laid up,
only leaving so much as may suffice for nourishing the Young.

. II. The Horn-Owl, Otus sive Asio.
THat we described was a Female: It weighed ten ounces: Its length from the
point of the Bill to the end of the Tail was fourteen Inches and an half: Its
Its weight, length, and breadth.
breadth, measuring from tip to tip of the Wings extended, three foot and four
inches. The Bill was black, from the point to the Angles of the Mouth one inch
and half quarter: The Tongue fleshy, and a little divided. The Irides of the
Eyes of a lovely Its Beak, Tongue, Eyes, Hood of feathers.
yellow: The covers of the Ears large. The ring of feathers, compassing the
face like a woman's hood, consists of a double row, the exterior variegated
with small white, black, and red lines; the interior under the Eyes red; where
they are contiguous both black. The forehead or ends of the two wreaths at the
Bill more cinereous.

The feathers which cover the lower Belly and Legs are reddish; in the Throat
and Breast the middle parts of the feathers are black, the outer parts partly
white, and Color of the feathers.
partly yellow: Those under the Wings are red. At the bottoms of the foremost
beam-feathers is a great transverse black spot: Higher in the very bending, and
under the bastard-wing a broad bed or border of black: The rest of the
covert-feathers of the Wings are parti-colored, of a dark cinereous and
yellow. The Back was of the same color with the Wings; the middle of each
feather being for the most part black. The Horns were above an Inch long,
consisting of six feathers, the middle The Horns or Ears.
parts of which were black, the exterior edges being red, the interior white,
sprinked with dusky specks.

The Tail was made up of twelve feathers, six inches long; the exterior being
The Tail,
shortest, and the rest in order longer to the middlemost, so that when spread
it was terminated in a circular Circumference; crossed with six or seven black
bars, but narrower than in other birds of this kind: The intermediate spaces
above were of an ash color, below of a yellow.

The flag-feathers of the Wings, were in each twenty four, of the same color
The prime Wing-fea^^^^
with those of the Tail, but in the outmost, especially the third, fourth, and
fifth, there is a broad struck or bed of red toward the bottom, and in the
greater feathers the black bars are much broader than in the less.

The Legs and Feet are feathered down to the very Claws, which are black; that
The Feet and Claws.
of the middle toe on the inside flatted into an edge. The outmost of the
fore-toes may be turned backwards, as in other Owls.

It had a large Gall. The Guts were twenty inches long, the Appendices or
blind-guts The Guts.
two inches and a quarter, longer and more tumid than in other carnivorous
birds. In the stomach we found bones and fur of Mice.

About Bologna, and elsewhere in Italy, it is frequent: Found in England also,
but The place*
more rarely. Francis Jessop Esquire sent it to us out of Yorkshire.

This Bird is in all things exactly like the great Eagle-Owl or Bubo, save in
bigness; whence also the French call it by the same name with the only addition
of less. Aldrovandus writes, that it agrees with the Bubo in the structure or
rather situation of its Toes, both these having three fore-toes, and one back
one, whereas all the rest of this kind have two fore-toes, and two hind ones:
But in those we have observed both great and less Horn-Owls [Otis and
Bubonibus] the Toes were disposed in like manner as in other Owls. For the
outmost fore-toe may be turned to stand backward, and so imitate a hind-toe,
and perform the same office.

Aldrovandus describes two sorts of Asio, or the lesser Horn-Owl. The
description of the former does in most particulars agree to the Bird we have
described: See and compare both descriptions. Bellonius his Otus is without
doubt the same with ours.

These do for the most part frequent and abide in mountainous places, whereas
on the contrary, our Church-Owl and brown Owl, etc. delight in lower and plain
Countries.

. III. * The little Horn-Owl, Scops Aldrovandi.
THe Bird which the Italians, especially about Bononia call Chiuuino is the
least save one of all Rapacious Nocturnal Birds, bigger than a Thrush, and
somewhat lesser than a Pigeon, full nine inches long. It differs from the Bubo
only in magnitude, and something in color. Its Head is round like a Ball,
covered with small soft feathers, all over of a lead-colour. The Bill short,
hooked, and black. The Ears or feathers standing up in fashion of Ears, scarce
appear in a dead bird, but are more manifest in a living, and consist only of
one feather apiece. The chief color of the whole body, as far as appears to
sight, is cinereous, having here and there something of plumbeous mingled with
it, curiously speckled with many white spots, more elegantly than any other
Nocturnal Rapacious bird. In the greater feathers of the Wings and Tail it is
marked with transverse white spots: All the other feathers besides these
transverse marks are distinguished long-ways with a black line running through
their middles. It is also besprinkled all over with a lovely tincture of red,
especially about the Neck and the beginning of the Wings. The feathers on the
Belly are whiter than elsewhere, the bottom or lower part of them, as also of
all the rest, being black: particularly, these are red about the middle, else
white, powdered with very small black specks. The Eyes like most other
night-birds of a fiery shining Saffron color: The Legs feathered, and of a
reddish ash color: The Feet small, naked, scaly, approaching to a dark
lead-colour, divided into two fore, and two back-toes, armed with dusky Claws.
This is common in Italy.

Of this sort Aldrovandus mentions another found in Germany, whiter, and having
a longer Tail, and longer Ears or Horns than the Italian Chiuuino, in other
respects like.

CHAP. II. Of Nocturnal Rapacious Birds without Ears or Horns.
. I. The common brown or Ivy-Owl, Strix. Aldrov.
THe Bird we described was a Cock; It was about the bigness of a Pigeon, but
rounder-bodied, and seeming bigger than it was. It weighed twelve ounces and an
half. Its length from the tip of the beak to the end of the Tail was fourteen
inches: Its breadth, or the distance between the extremities of the Wings
spread, two feet and nine inches.

The Bill from the point to the angles of the mouth was an inch long or more,
of a horn-colour, or rather a light blue. The mouth was wider, but the Bill
shorter than in the Barn-Owl. The Tongue not very fleshy, nor broad, a little
divided at the tip. The Tongue, Eyes,
In the Palate was a cavity equal to the Tongue. It has huge Eyes, at least
twice so big as those of the Barn or white Owl, and protuberant. It had
Membranes for Nictation, drawn from above downwards, having black edges. The
borders of the Eyelids were broader than ordinary, and their edges red. The
Ear-holes were Ears,
three times as great as in the white Owl, and covered with Valves. A circle of
feathers encompasses the Eyes and Chin, like a woman's hood, as in the Barn-Owl,
but Circle of feathers about the face.
not standing up so high as in that. This circle or hood consists of a double
row of feathers, the exterior more rigid, variegated with white, black, and
red; the interior consisting of soft feathers, of a white mingled with a
flame-colour. The middle part of the head without the hood is of a dark brown.
The exterior circle of the hood compasses the ears; the greatest part of the
interior feathers of it, where it passes the ears, grows out of the covers of
the Ears. The Eyes in this Bird are nearer to the Ears than in any other Animal
I know. Beyond the Nosthrils and below the Eyes grew bristly feathers having
black shafts. The back and upper side of the Color of the upper side,
body was parti-colored of ferrugineous and dark brown, the black taking up the
middle part of each feather, and the ferrugineous the outsides. If one
curiously view and observe each single feather, one shall find them waved with
transverse lines, cinereous and brown alternately succeeding each other. The
belly and lower side of Underside.
the body is of the same color with the back, but more dilute with a mixture
of white. The bottoms of all the feathers are black. In this and other Owls the
feathers investing the whole body are longer or taller than in most other
birds, so that the bird seems to be much bigger than indeed it is. The feet are
covered almost down to the Claws with a thick dirty-white Plumage, sprinkled
with small dark specks, [rather waved with dark lines] only two or three of the
annulary scales bare.

The number of flag-feathers in each Wing was twenty four. The exterior
[pinnulae] The Wing-feathers.
webs of the outmost whereof were terminated in slender points like bristles,
separate from each other, and standing like the teeth of a fine Comb. The Wing
and Tail-feathers were marked with six or seven cross bars of a dirty white,
tincted in some with ferrugineous, and in some with brown. The Wings
complicated fall very much short of the end of the Tail. The covert feathers of
the Wings, chiefly those about the middle, and those long ones springing from
the shoulders were spotted with white, especially their interior Vanes.

The Tail was six inches and an half long, made up of twelve feathers, the
middlemost The Tail.
being the longest, the rest in order shorter to the outmost: All ending in
sharp points, whereas in those of the Barn-Owl the tops were blunt.

The soal of the foot was callous, of a horny or blackish color. That of the
middle-toe The Feet, Toes, and Claws.
had not the inner edge serrate, as in the white Owl. All the toes were
separate to the very divarication. The outmost of the fore-toes is made to turn
also backward, and supply the room of a back-toe, as in the rest of this kind.

The Guts were thirty inches long, and had many revolutions. The blind Guts The
Guts and Entrails.
were five inches and an half long, toward their ends tumid and full of
excrement: The Liver divided into two Lobes. It had a large Gall; great black
Testicles. The stomach seemed to be more fleshy than in other carnivorous
birds: and above it a granulated Echinus or ante-stomach. In the stomach we
found the fur of Mice.

It differs remarkably from the white Owl in that the extreme feather of the
Wing How it differs from the white Owl.
is little, and at least a hand-breadth shorter than the third and fourth; the
second above an inch shorter than the third, and the fourth and fifth the
longest of all; whereas in that the second and third feathers are the longest,
and the extreme or Sarcel wants not half an inch of them.

Aldrovandus writes, that the Country People about Bononia told him, that his
Strix or Screech-Owl used to suck their Goats: which ours (as far as I have
heard) was never complained of for doing.

. II. The Gray Owl, Strix cinerea.
ANother Bird of this sort we described, which we found first at Vienna in
Austria, Its weight, length, and breadth.
and afterward in England also. It weighed eleven ounces and an hlaf. The
length from the Bill to end of the Tail or Feet (for they were equally
extended) was fourteen inches and an half: The breadth between the tips of the
Wings spread out two foot and eleven inches. The Bill was an inch and quarter
long: The Tongue Its Bill, Tongue, Nosthrils,
a little divided, not so fleshy as in Hawks. In the Palate it had a broad open
fissure or cleft. The Nosthrils were oblong. The Sear or skin covering the Base
of the Beak in diurnal Rapacious birds, was wanting in this, as in all other
Owls. It had huge, round Eyes; the Irides being of a dark Hazel color. Both
upper and lower Eyelid Eyes,
terminate in a membrane having black edges. The Ear-holes were great and
furnished Ears.
with Valves.

This Bird was for the apparent magnitude very light and full of feathers. A
wreath or hood of stiffer feathers parti-colored of white and black, beginning
from the Bill The hood about the face.
above, and reaching beyond the Ears, encompasses the Face and Eyes; the ends
meeting under the Chin like a woman's hood. Within this greater hood another
circle of feathers of an ash color, consisting of thinner and shorter hairs
encompasses the Eyes. The body is all over variegated with cinereous and brown.
The shafts of the feathers in the middle of the back are black. The interior
Vanes of the long scapular feathers are white almost to the shafts. The lower
belly is white. On the Breast are long black spots.

The first row of Wing-feathers had cross bars of black and reddish ash color.
In The Wing-feathers.
In the third row of the covert-feathers of the Wings were one or two white
spots.

The Tail had twelve feathers, seven inches and a quarter long, the middlemost
feathers The Tail.
being longest, and the rest in order to the outmost somewhat shorter.

The Feet were feathered almost down to the Claws, only two or three annulary
The Feet.
scales naked. The sole of the foot callous, and of a yellowish color, as it
were granulated with little knobs. The Toes, as in other Night-birds, two
standing forward, Toes,
and two backward. The inner side of the Claw of the outer fore-toe is flatted
Claws,
into an edge.

The length of the Guts was twenty two inches, of the blind Guts three and an
Guts.
half.

The name Strix some think is taken from the Verb stringere, because it
strangles Reason of the name.
people when they are asleep. Ovid will have it so called a stridore, from the
screeching noise it makes:

Est illis Strigibus nomen, sed nominis hujus
Causa, quod horrenda stridere nocte solent.
This is like the precedent, and of equal bigness, from which yet it is
distinguished How it differs from the precedent.
by manifest notes, and which argue a specifical difference. The chief of those
are: 1. That this is gray, that brown. 2. That this has long spots on the
Breast, which that wants. 3. That the interior hood in this is parti-colored
only of dusky and white.

. III. The common Barn-Owl, or White-Owl, or Church-Owl. Aluco minor, Aldrov.
THe Cock (which we described) was about the bigness of a Pigeon; weighed Its
bigness and measures.
eleven ounces and an half. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end of
the Tail was fourteen inches. The distance between the extremities of the Wings
spread out three foot and one inch and half. The Bill white, hooked at the end,
The Bill,
more than an inch and half long: The Tongue a little divided at the tip; the
Nosethrils Tongue,
oblong. A circle or wreath of white, soft, downy feathers encompassed with
Hood,
yellow ones, beginning from the Nosthrils on each side, passed round the Eyes
and under the Chin, somewhat resembling a black hood, such as women use to
wear: So that the Eyes were sunk in the middle of these feathers, as it were in
the bottom of a Pit or Valley. At the interior angle of each Eye the lower
parts of these feathers were of a tawny color. The Ears were covered with a
Valve, which arises near Ear-valve.
the Eye, and falls backwards. The interior circle we mentioned of white,
downy feathers passed just over this Valve, so that part of them grew out of it.

The Breast, Belly, and covert-feathers of the inside of the Wings were white,
Color of the feathers of the body.
marked with a few quadrangular dark spots. The Head, Neck, and Back, as far as
the prime feathers of the Wings, variously and of all Night-birds most
elegantly colored. The feathers toward the tips were waved with small whitish
and blackish lines, resembling a gray color; but about the shaft of each
feather there was as it were a bed or row of black and white spots, situate
long-ways, made up in some of two white and two black spots, in some of three
of each color, in some of but one. Else the whole Plumage was of a dilute
tawny or orange color; which same color was also the field or ground in the
Wings and Tail.

The master-feathers in each Wing were in number twenty four; whereof the The
Wingfeathers.
greater have four transverse blackish bars. [In these bars in the exterior
Vane of the feather there is also white mingled with the black, which makes an
appearance of a gray spot.] The intermediate spaces are fulvous, and powdered
with small black specks; the tips of these feathers incline more to an
ash color. The Wings when shut up extend full as far or further than the end
of the Tail. In the exterior Vanes of the first or outmost feather of each
Wing the ends of the Hair-like bodies compounding the web of the feather. The
Tail.
Pinnulae are not contiguous one to another, but stand at distance, like the
teeth of a fine Comb.

The Tail is made up of twelve feathers, of the same color with the Wings,
having four transverse black bars: four inches and half long. The interior
margins of the feathers both of Wings and Tail are white.

The Legs are covered with a thick Down to the Feet, but the Toes are only
hairy, The legs, feet, and toes.
the hairs also thin-set The Claw of the middle Toe is serrate on the inside as
in Herons, but not so manifestly. It has but one Toe that stands backward; but
the outmost fore-toe may be turned so as to stand a little backward.

The Guts were eighteen inches long; the blind Guts but two. It had a large
Gall: The Guts.
Its Eggs were white.

Aldrovandus his description agrees exactly with ours.

The Eye in this Bird, and I suppose in all the rest of this kind, is of a
strange and singular structure. That part which appears outwardly, though
great, is only the The strange figure of the Eyes.
Iris. For the whole bulb or ball of the Eye when taken out somewhat resembles
a hat or Helmet, the Iris being the Crown, the part not appearing and extending
it self good way further, the brims. The interior edges of the Eyelids round
about are yellow. The Eyes are altogether fixed and immovable.

The Bird is described by Marggravius under the title of Tuidara of Brasil; so
that it seems it is common with us to the New World.

. IV. * Aldrovandus his former Aluco.
THis is bigger than the precedent, but (says my Author) lesser than the Otus
or Horn-Owl. This is peculiar to them all, that they cover the Eye only by
drawing the upper lid over it downward. It has a circle, as it were a Crown,
made up of feathers, which encompass the whole face, passing above the Eyes
like tall Eyebrows, descending on both sides by the Temples, and meeting under
the Chin, somewhat like a woman's black hood. The Eyes are great, wholly black,
without any diversity of color, sunk, as it were, in a deep cavity, made by
this circle of erected feathers. The prone side, viz. the Breast and Belly
spotted with indifferently great black spots. The Bill white, very much hooked,
as also the Claws. The Legs covered with white feathers, but the Feet only with
hairs. The Back is of a Lead-colour variegated with whitish specks. The whole
body covered with a deep and thick-set Plumage; which makes it appear to be of
the bulk of a Capon, whereas when plucked it is scarce so big as a chicken. The
Wings are large, and reach beyond the end of the Tail. This out of Aldrovandus.

. V. * Aldrovandus his gray Owl. Ulula Aldrov. as also Gesners, Ulula Gesn.
THe Bird signified by the name Ulula in Latin, Owl or Howlet in English,
Hulot in French, Ul or Eul in Dutch was doubtless so denominated from the
howling noise that it makes: Howl in English and Dutch signifying the same that
Ululo or ejulo in Latin. Wherefore the Bird which Aldrovandus exhibits under
this title, since it makes a noise like a Chicken, he will not confidently aver
to be the Ulula, but if it may be referred to any of the Species of Night-birds
mentioned by the Ancients, he knows not whither more commodiously than to this.

From the Bill to the end of the Tail it was eighteen inches long. The Head,
Back, Its length, Color,
Wings, and Tail were of an ash color, speckled with whitish and black spots.
Under the Belly it was white, variegated with blackish spots. The Head was very
Head,
great, enormously thick, round, full of feathers: The Eyes being wholly black,
and Eyes,
encompassed round with white, soft feathers; within the ring or Ambit whereof
at the borders of the Eyelids was seen as it were a red circle. In winking the
Eye was covered only with the upper Eyelid. The Bill was hooked and greenish:
The Bill,
Nosthrils great and patent: The Wings very large, eighteen inches long,
reaching to Wings,
the very end of the Tail. The Legs were hairy down to the Claws, which were
ash-colored, Legs and Claws.
hooked, and exceeding sharp. It had four Toes, two standing forward, and two
backward.

Aldrovandus kept this bird three months at his house.

This seems to be the same with our Gray Owl before described by the title of
Strix cinerea.

Gesner describes his Ulula in these words. It was as big as a Hen or bigger;
the Gesners Ulula.
color red, sprinkled with black: The Bill white, short, as in other
Night-birds, hooked, so that the upper Chap is much longer than the nether: The
Eyes great, black, the Pupil being of an obscure red. The edges of the Eyelids
were red. Moreover, the Eyes were covered with a nictating Membrane. Between
the Eyes and Back it was thick-feathered, of an ash color. The Neck was very
agile, so that she could turn her head much backward. The Legs were whitish,
sprinkled with livid specks, rough down to the Feet. The Toes stood two
forward, two backward.

It has not been our hap as yet to see a Bird of this kind, if it be distinct
from our Strix cinerea before described.
Gray Owl. For that bird which by us in England is called Owl, and Howlet, and
Madge-howlet is the Aluco of Gesner and Aldrovandus. Although Owl be with us a
general name attributed to all Night-birds.

. VI. The little Owl. Noctua.
THe Bird we described of this kind we bought in the Market at Vienna in
Austria, where they called it Schaffilt.

It was a Cock, scarce so big as a Blackbird. Its length from the Bill to the
end of the Its bigness and measures,
tail was almost seven inches: Its breadth, the Wings being extended, more than
fourteen inches. The Bill was white, and like to that of other Owls. The Tongue
a Beak, Tongue, Palate,
little divided, as in the rest of this Tribe: The Palate below black, having a
wide or gaping cleft, and below it a round hole: The Nosthrils oblong: The Ears
great: The Nosthrils, Ears, Eyes.
Eyes lesser and handsomer than in other Owls.

The wreath or circle of feathers encompassing the face, beyond the Ears
lesser, Hood,
and less easily discernable. The upper part of the body was of a dark brown,
with Color of the upper side.
a mixture of red, having transverse whitish spots.

The Tail was 2 inches long, compounded of twelve feathers exactly equal,
having Its Tail.
five or six transverse white bars.

The feathers about the Ears were more variegated with black and white. The
Color of the under side.
Chin and lower part of the belly white; The Breast marked with long dusky
spots.

The number of beam-feathers in each Wing was twenty four; their interior webs
Wing-feathers,
were spotted with round white spots.

It was feathered almost down to the Claws, excepting two or three annulary
scales. Legs, Feet, and Talons.
The Feet were of a pale yellow. It had two back-toes, and as many foreones.
The soals of the Feet were yellow; the Claws black: The inner side of the
middle Claw is thinned into an edge.

It had a great Gall; the length of the Guts was ten Inches; of the blind Guts
Gall and Guts.
one inch and a quarter.

It is found in the Woods of Austria, but rarely; resembles much Gesners figure
of Its place.
Noctua, which therefore we have taken for it. Afterward we saw it exposed to
sale at Rome. They use it for catching of small birds: See the manner in Olina.
Use.


Aldrovandus says that it was told him, that the Germans do sometimes take in
their Country a sort of little Owl, which when come to its full growth is no
bigger than a Lark, which they call by a diminutive name Keutzlin: but however
Aldrovandus happened not to see it, the same bird is doubtless also found in
Italy; for we observed them at Rome standing on Pearches to be sold; and we can
hardly believe, they brought them so far as out of Germany.

. VII. * Aldrovandus his Noctua.
THat which Aldrovandus has described and figured for the Noctua is about the
bigness of a Dove, nine inches long, has a great Head, flat above; large, gray
Eyes. The feathers of the whole body are partly of a pale Chestnut color,
partly distinguished with white. Through the extreme parts of the Wings,
especially the prime feathers, it has broad transverse lines or bars of a
Chestnut color. On the Belly it has lines or spots of the same color drawn
longways, but inverted; the rest of the space or ground (the Heralds call it
the field) being white. The Wings when withdrawn and closed reach as far as the
end of the Tail. The Legs are feathered and rough down to the Feet, of a color
compounded of cinereous and Chestnut. The Toes are of a dark cinereous, bare of
feathers, two standing each way. The Claws black, sharp, and crooked.

* The Stone-Owl, another sort of Noctua, or perchance the same with the
precedent.
This (says he) which the Germans call Steinkutz, that is, Stone-Owl, is also
about the bigness of a Dove; has the Legs and Toes rough, with white feathers,
but the lower sides of the Toes are bare, the Claws black and hooked. The
color all over the prone or nether side of the body was a dark brown, with a
slight mixture of red, dapled with whitish spots. The Head in respect of the
body very great: The Eyes large: The Bill short, and like an Eagles. In the
dead bird the upper Chap of the Bill was red, which seemed not to be so before,
while it was living. Between the Eyes and the Bill grew certain stiff, slender
feathers, like bristles or beards. It had more white on the Belly than the
other parts. I suppose it lives and frequents chiefly in Mountainous and Rocky
places, and therefore to defend the cold has its Feet and Toes feathered like
the Lagopus and Grygallus. For the other Noctuae have not their Feet rough,
neither are they of a reddish color. They seem to be less brisk and lively
than our Italian Noctuae, and almost blind in the day time.

. VIII. * The Brasilian Noctua called Cabure by Marggrav.
It Is about the bigness of a Throstle: has a round Head, a short, hooked,
yellowish Bill; two Nosthrils; fair, great, round, yellow Eyes, with a black
Pupil. Under the Eyes, and on each side the Bill it has many long, dusky
hairs. The Legs are short, wholly clothed with feathers, yellow, as are also
the Feet, which are cloven into four Toes, standing after the usual manner,
armed with semicircular, crooked, sharp Talons: The Tail broad, nigh the rise
whereof the Wings end. In the Head, Back, Wings, and Tail it is of a dilute
Umber color, and variegated in the Head and Neck with very small, in the Wings
with greater white spots. The Tail is waved with white. The Breast and lower
Belly are white, and variegated with spots of a dilute Umber color. It is
easily made tame. It can so turn about its Neck, that the tip of the Beak shall
exactly point at the middle of the Back. It plays with men like an Ape, making
many mowes and antic mimical faces, and snapping with its Bill. Besides, it can
set up feathers on the sides of its head, that represent Horns or Ears. It
lives upon raw flesh.

CHAP. III.
. I. The Fern-Owl, or Churn-Owl, or Goat-sucker, Caprimulgus.
ITs length from the Bill to the end of the Tail was between ten and eleven
inches: Its Length, Head. Bill, Mouth.
Its Head great, but much lesser than in the Owl-kind: Its Bill in proportion
to its body the least of all birds, and a little crooked. It has a huge wide
mouth and swallow. In palato appendices nullae, sed primum longa fissura, fundo
tenui ossiculo seu septo per medium diviso: insra eam fissuram alia latior and
brevior, and ad hujus fundum linea appendicum transversa. These words I do not
well understand, and therefore have not put them into English. On the sides of
the upper Chap of the Bill, as also under the Chin it had stiff black hairs
like bristles.

The under side of the body was painted with black and pale-red lines,
transverse, The color.
but not continued: The hinder part of the Head of an ash color, the middle of
each feather being black; which colors also reach lower down the Back.

The Wings are parti-colored of black and red: The covert-feathers of the Wings
The Wings,
are some of them powdered with cinereous. The Tail near five inches long, made
up of ten feathers, the outmost whereof are something shorter than the rest;
the middlemost Tail,
ash-colored, with very narrow, transverse, black bars; in the rest the cross
bars are broader, and the intermediate spaces of an ash color, powdered with
black, and a little tinctured with red.

The Legs were very small in proportion, feathered on the fore-side half way,
but Legs, Feet, and Claws.
the feathers hung down almost to the Toes. The Toes were blackish, and the
Claws black and little; the middlemost Toe the longest, the inner and outer
shorter, but equal to one another, and joined to the middlemost by a Membrane
from the divarication to the first joint. The interior edge of the middle Claw
is serrate, as in Herons. The back-Toe (if it may be so called, standing like
one of the fore-toes) is scarce a quarter of an inch long.

In the stomach it had some Seeds and Beetles. The Eggs were long, and white,
but a little clouded and spotted with black. Its food and Eggs.


It is a very beautiful bird for color, more like to a Cuckoo than an Owl; and
it is easily distinguished from all other birds by the structure of its Bill
and Feet.

In another bird of this kind, perchance differing only in Age or Sex, the
three first or outmost great Wing-feathers had a large white spot in their
interior Vanes, which in the third feather reached also to the exterior: The
tips also of the two outmost feathers of the Tail were spotted with white.
There was some show of these spots of a pale yellowish color in the first
described.

It is found in the Mountainous Woods, especially in many places of England, as
in Yorkshire, Derby-shire, Shrop-shire, etc.

. II. * The American Goat-sucker, called Ibijau by the Brasilians, Noitibo by
the Portugues. Marggrav.
THis is a small bird, of the bigness of a Swallow: Has a broad flat Head:
Great, lovely, black Eyes, with a black, shining Pupil, of an elliptical
figure: Outwardly a circle or ring of yellowish white compasses the Eyes. It
has a very little Bill, not exceeding the thickness of the tooth of a The word
in Latin in Arantus.
Shrew-mouse, and not so long: yet has it patent Nosthrils in the Bill: An
exceeding wide Mouth, which when shut cannot be seen; but when she opens her
Bill, appears slit up to the Eyes, so that it is almost an inch wide. It has a
very little Tongue: White Legs, and small for the bigness of the body, scarce
half an inch long: Four Toes in the Feet, three standing forward, and one
backward, armed with black, crooked Claws. Along the Claw of the middle Toe of
each foot on the inside it has as it were a fin, much jagged or toothed, so
that the Claw seems feathered in a manner on the inside: But there are no
feathers on it but a certain skinny rough matter. It has a handsome Tail, two
inches long, which it can spread wide; to the end whereof the Wings reach. In
all the lower part of the body the feathers are mixed white and black, as in a
Sparrow-Hawk: In the Head, Back, Wings, and Tail they are black, white being
interspersed with a grateful variety; and something also of yellow mingled with
the white: In a word, it is black, and speckled here and there with white.

There is also found another Species of this, of the same color and make with
this, but as big as an Owl. The mouth opened will easily admit a man's fist.

. III. * Marggravius his Brasilian Guira querea, approaching to the
Goat-sucker, or Swift.
IT is of the bigness of a Lark, but because it has long Wings and a Tail much
longer, it seems greater. It has a broad, flat, and pretty great Head; great
black Eyes: A small, triangular, compressed Bill, the upper Chap being hooked:
A wide Mouth, much wider than the Bill, and which being opened represents a
Triangle. At each end of the upper Mandible on both sides, for the length of an
inch in either, it has about ten or twelve thick bristles like Swines,
stretched forth both forward and sideways. Its body is not long, but almost
round. Each foot has four Toes standing after the usual manner, the middle
whereof is longer than the rest; and furnished with a Claw finely serrate, or
toothed like a Comb. All the Claws are black. It has long Wings, viz. half a
foot: The Tail eight inches long, having in the outsides two feathers longer
than the rest. The whole Bird is of a dusky ash color, with dark yellow or
whitish spots intermingled after the manner of a Sparrow-Hawk. Round the Neck,
behind the Head, it has a ring of a dark golden color. The Legs are cinereous
or dusky. The Toes connected by a little skin, not so broad as in Ducks; for it
is no waterfowl.

This latter Bird does more resemble a Swallow than a Goat-sucker: The former
also is not unlike the Hirundo apus or Swift. Indeed the Goat-sucker and Swift
agree in many particulars, as the smalness of the Bill, the wideness of the
Mouth, the shortness of the Legs, and situation of the Toes.

BOOK I. PART I. SECT. III. Of Frugivorous Hook-bill'd Birds or Parrots.
CHAP. I. Of Parrots in general.
THe Parrot has a great Head, a hard Beak and Skull. But why Nature gave it a
hooked Bill, whereas it is rather a Frugivorous than a Carnivorous or Rapacious
Bird, Aldrovandus gives this reason: Because for the weakness of the Feet,
descending or climbing up boughs or grates, it could not commodiously sustain
the weight of its body, were not the Bill of that crooked semicircular figure,
that it can as it were with a hook or grapple catch hold of whatever is near.
For the Parrot in climbing Walls or Trees first catches hold with her Bill, as
it were with a Hook, then draws up her body, then fastens her Feet; then
reaching up higher claps on her Beak again, and so puts forward her body and
feet alternately.

The Parrot alone with the Crocodile moves the upper Jaw, as all other Animals
do the lower. The Tongue is broad, which is common to it with other Rapacious
birds, of the figure of a Gourd-seed, as Scaliger notes. Hence it is called in
Greek (...), both because its Tongue resembles a man's, and also because it
imitates humane speech. The Feet are of a singular fashion, for they have not
three Toes standing forward and one backward, but two each way, like
Woodpeckers. Jo. Faber, in his Expositions of Nardi Antonio Recchi his Animals
found in New Spain, has noted and observed concerning the Toes of Parrots
something not mentioned by any Author, viz. That when they walk, climb up, or
descend down the sides of their Cages, they stretch two of their Toes forward,
and two backward; but when they take their meat, and bring it to their mouths,
they make use of three Toes to hold it till they have eaten it up. Yea, (which
may seem wonderful) they do so dexterously and nimbly turn the greater hind-toe
forward and backward, that on sight of it you would confess your self not to
know, whether it were given them by Nature to be used as a fore-toe in feeding,
or a back-toe in walking. So that it seems in this respect they resemble Owls.
It has crooked Claws, wherewith it holds its meat like Rapacious birds, and
brings it to its mouth, after the manner of men. For taking it in its Toes it
lifts it up to its mouth, not turning the foot inward, but outward, after a
fashion not only usual and ridiculous, but one would think also incommodious.
It does not only first of all with its Bill as it were with Teeth break or
divide entire Almonds, but rolling them up and down within the Cavity of its
Bill, does as it were champ and chew them, softning them before it swallows
them. Parrots while they are yet wild and at liberty do eat all sorts of grain
and pulse. And this is peculiarly observed of them above other creatures, that
as Swallows feed upon Hellebore, and Starlings upon Hemlock, so do they upon
the seed of Cuicus or Carthamus.
Bastard Saffron (which to man is a purgative) not only without receiving harm
thereby, but growing fat with it. Moreover, they eat all sorts of fruits, as
well such as are covered with a soft rind, as those with a hard shell, viz.
Nuts, etc. and are greatly delighted in them.

They do not only imitate man's voice, but in wit excel all other birds, as
Aldrovandus proves by many Histories and examples. I shall not think much to
set down one very pleasant story, which Gesner says was told him by a certain
friend, of a Parrot, which fell out of King Henry VIII. his Palace at
Westminster into the River of Thames that runs by, and then very seasonably
remembering the words it had often heard some whether in danger or in jest use,
cried out amain, A Boat, a Boat, for twenty pound. A certain experienced
Boatman made thither presently, took up the Bird, and restored it to the King,
to whom he knew it belonged, hoping for as great a reward as the Bird had
promised. The King agreed with the Boatman that he should have as the Bird
being asked anew should say: And the Bird answers, Give the Knave a Groat.

They are very frequent in both Indies, as well East as West. They breed not in
cold Countries; for they are impatient of cold, so that they can hardly bear
our Winters, unless they be kept in Stoves or hot places: And whereas in their
own Country, to wit, the Indies, they are much upon the Wing, with us by reason
of the inclemency and sharpness of the Air they grow torpid and unactive, and
less fit for flight. They are said to be very long-lived.

They breed in hollow trees (witness Marggravius, Lerius, and Piso) where they
make a round hole outwardly, and lay two or three Eggs, like to Pigeons,
without any made Nest, as Marggravius says: Lerius affirms, that they do build
Nests sufficiently firm and hard, of a round orbicular figure. Whence it is
manifest that they do not hang their Nests upon the slender twigs of Trees, as
Cadamustus and others have delivered. For that bird which hangs its Nest on
this fashion, called by the Brasilians Guira tangeima, as Marggravius writes,
is much different from the Parrot. Though you touch her Eggs yet will not the
Parrot forsake them, but hatch them notwithstanding. Parrots are made of
several colors by the A people of Brasil.
Tapuyae, by plucking them when they are young, and then staining their skins
with diverse colors. These the Portugues call counterfeit Parrots. Which thing
if it be true (for to me indeed it seems not probable) it is to no purpose to
distinguish Parrots by the diversity of color, since therein they may vary
infinitely.

In all Parrots that I have hitherto observed the Nosthrils were round, situate
in the upper part of the upper Chap, close by the feathers, and very near one
to another.

Parrots in respect of bigness may be divided into three kinds, viz. the
greatest, meansized, and least.

The greatest are equal in bigness to our common Raven: or (as Aldrovandus
says) to a well-fed Capon; and have long Tails: In English they are called
Macaos and Cockatoons. The middle or meansized and most common Parrots are as
big or bigger than a Pigeon, have short Tails, and are called in English,
Parrots and Poppinjayes. The least are of the bulk of a Blackbird or a Lark,
have very long Tails, and are called in English Parakeetos.

CHAP. II. Of the greatest sort of Parrots called Maccaws and Cockatoons.
. I. * Aldrovandus his greatest blue and yellow Maccaw.
THe body of this equals a well-fed Capons. From the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Tail it was two Cubits long. The Bill hooked, and in that measure that
it made an exact semicircle, being outwardly conformed into the perfect
roundness of half a ring, a full Palm long; and where it begins as thick within
half an inch, if you measure both Mandibles. The upper Mandible is almost two
inches longer than the nether, which on the lower side downward is unequal and
round. The whole Bill is black. The Eyes white and black. Three black lines
drawn from the Bill to the beginning of the Neck, representing the figure of
the letter S lying, compass the eyes underneath. The Crown of the Head is flat,
and of a green color. The Throat adorned with a kind of black ring. The
Breast, Belly, Thighs, Rump, and Tail underneath all of a Saffron color. The
Neck above, Back, Wings, and upper side of the Tail of a very pleasant blue or
azure. The Tail eighteen inches long more or less. The Legs very short, thick,
and of a dusky or dark color, as are also the Feet, the Toes long, armed with
great, crooked black Talons.

. II. * The other Maccaw or Macao, of Aldrovandus.
THis is nothing less than the foregoing, of the same length, but seemed not to
be so thick-bodied. Its Bill is shorter than the precedents, being not drawn
out into so long a hook, yet almost three inches long; and as many broad, where
it is joined to the head; the upper Chap being white, the nether black. The
region of the Eyes and the Temples are white. The crown of the Head more than a
Palm long and flat. The Back, beginning of the Wings, Throat, Breast, Belly,
Thighs, and finally the whole Tail above, are beautified with a most lovely The
Latin word is Puniceo signifying a light crimson or blush color.
Scarlet or red color, as is also the inner side of the flag-feathers of the
Wings. The second row of the covert Wing-feathers are yellow with scarlet
edges, each adorned with a kind of eye of blue near the tip. The outer surface
of the flag-feathers and the Rump [I suppose he means the Tail] underneath
tinctured with a deep blue. The Legs are short, the Feet divided into long
Toes, armed with crooked Claws: Both of a duskish or dark ash color.

. III. A Maccaw described at London, the same I suppose with the precedent,
called by Marggrav. Araracanga.
AT London we observed and described a certain Macao, either the same with the
precedent (I mean in kind) or very like it. It was of the same bigness, had a
huge Bill, the upper Mandible being almost wholly white, the lower black. The
skin about the Eyes was bare of feathers, and rough or rugged. The whole head,
Breast, and Belly red [like minium:] The Wings and Tail parti-colored of red,
yellow, and blue. The Tail of a great length, especially the two middlemost
feathers, which do much exceed the rest, and are of a blue color.

I take that which Marggravius describes Book 5. Chap. 9. to be the same with
this. Let the Reader compare the descriptions: His runs thus. It is bigger than
our common Marggravius his Araracanga.
Raven: Has a great Head, broad and flat above; fair * gray Eyes [* Coesius]
with a black Pupil. A white Membrane encompasses the Eyes, as also the Jaws and
lower Bill: [I suppose he means, that the skin thereabouts is white and bare of
feathers:] This under the Eyes is produced in a semilunar form: The Bill is
great, hooked, white above, black underneath. It has a Tongue like a Parrot,
and eats after the same manner. It learns also to pronounce some words. The
upper Chap of the Bill is about three inches long, broad or deep. It has black
Legs and Feet like a Parrot. The whole Head, Neck, Breast, Belly, Thighs, and
Tail underneath, as also the beginning of the Wings above are clothed with
most lovely and elegant red feathers: The middle part of the Wings is adorned
with green, and the lower half of them from the middle to the end with blue.
The Rump or lower part of the Back, and the Tail are blue, some brown feathers
being also intermingled. The Tail is about ten inches long, running out much
beyond the ends of the Wings.

. IV. * The Macao called Ararauna by the Brasilians, Marggrav. the same with
Aldrov. his first.
IT is in shape like the precedent, but of a different color. Its Bill black;
Eyes gray, Pupil black. The skin about the Eyes white, variegated with black,
as if it were wrought with a Needle. The Legs and Feet dusky [fusca.] The
forepart of the Head above the Bill has a copple or tuft of green feathers.
Under the lower Bill black feathers compass the Throat. The sides of the Neck,
the whole Breast and lower Belly are covered with yellow feathers: The hinder
or extreme part of the Head, the backside of the Neck, the whole Back and
outsides of the Wings with blue. The ends of the Wings have yellow feathers
mingled with the blue. The Tail consists of long blue feathers, wherewith some
yellow ones are mingled. The inner or underside of all the blue feathers in
general is black: These feathers do also cast a show of blackness from their
sides.

Upon comparing the descriptions I find, that this is the very same bird with
Aldrovandus his first Macao.

. V. * The former Brasilian Maracana of Marggrav.
IT is a Bird altogether like a Parrot (of which also it is a Species) but
bigger. All its feathers of a bluish gray. It cries like a Parrot. It loves
fruit, especially Murucuja.

. VI. * The other Maracana of Marggrav.
THis is also a sort of Arara [he means by this word a Maccaw, for so it seems
the Brasilians call Maccaws] but lesser, about the bigness of a Parrot, It is
of the shape of a Maccaw, [Arara] has such a long Tail, a like Bill and skin
about the Eyes. The Bill is black; the skin about the Eyes white and speckled
with black feathers: The Eyes yellowish, the Pupil black. The whole Head, Neck,
and Wings are of a deep green as in Amurucurica: The top of the Head is more
dilute, and in a manner inclining to blue. The Tail consists of feathers above
green, underneath of a deep red, having their ends blue. The Wings likewise are
read on the inside, green on the outside, having their ends blue. At the rise
of each Wing it has a red spot. At the rise of the Bill above it has a dusky
spot. The Legs and Feet are dusky. It cries Oe, Oe, Oe.

CHAP. III. Of middle-sized Parrots, properly called Parrots and Poppinjayes.
. I. * The white cresled Parrot of Aldrovandus.
IT was about thirteen inches long, as big as an ordinary young Pullet, or the
greatest sort of tame Pigeon. N. B. I here measure the length from the tip of
the Bill to the end of the Wings, for measuring to the end of the Tail it is
about eighteen inches. Its Tail contrary to the manner of other Parrots, is not
stretched out directly backwards in length, but erected after the fashion of
the common Dunghill-Cock and Hens. It has an ash-colored Bill, inclining to
black, having wide open Nosthrils near the Head, and rising up, with a round
ridge or bunch between them. The Tongue is broad and red: The Irides of the
Eyes yellow, the Pupil black. The whole body clothed with white feathers. The
crown of the Head is adorned with fair feathers, a handful and half high,
bending somewhat backward, ending in sharp points again reflected forwards, ten
in number, as it were a crest. The Tail in like manner is erected on high,
consisting of a great many white feathers, nine inches long, such as are seen
in the Tails of Dunghil-Cocks. The Legs and Feet are yellowish: The Claws
small, scarce hooked and black.

. II. The most common green Parrot having the ridge of the Wing red. Aldrov.
THis is nothing less, if not bigger, than the white crested Parrot, almost
fifteen inches long, of the bulk of the greatest tame Pigion or a Pullet of the
first year. [With us they are not ordinarily so big.] The upper Chap of the
Bill is black at the point, then bluish, the remainder being red; the lower
Chap white: The Iris of the Eye of a Saffron color, or rather red, the Pupil
black: The crown of the Head yellow: All the rest of the body is green, the
under side more dilute and yellowish; the Back and Wings darker, and the
greatest and outmost Pinion feather inclining somewhat to blue. Only the
uppermost ridge of the Wings is red; as also the Tail, which is but short: In
the lower part on each side it is marked with a long, red spot, but above it is
yellow. The Legs and Feet are ash-colored: The Claws black, and not much
hooked.

This kind is the most common of all with us. In those I described at London
there was a white circle about the Eyes: and the upper Chap of the Bill had on
each side a tooth-like process or Appendix, to which answered a dent or nick in
the lower.

. III. * Aldrovandus his Parrot with a parti-colored Bill.
FRom the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail it was eighteen inches long.
The upper Chap in the upper part was of a bluish green, of a yellow Oker color
in the sides; the tip-crossed with a white spot: The lower Chap of the Bill of
a lead-colour round about, and yellow in the middle, the crown of the Head
adorned with yellow or golden feathers. The rest of the body was for the most
part green, the Back darker, the Belly and Breast lighter, with a gloss of
yellow, the roots or bottoms of the feathers being every where cinereous. The
flag-feathers on their outer webs toward the belly were first green, then by
little and little growing blue, terminate in a purplish color, being elsewhere
black. The second row of Wing-feathers were wholly yellow. Those which grew
about the middle of the Wings, at their beginning, on the outer web, which
respects the belly, were first green, then of a dark red, then green again, and
lastly at their tips partly of a violet color, partly black, with so great
variety. The Tail is composed of twelve feathers, of which four on each side at
their rise or beginning are first green on the exterior web, yellow on the
interior, then of a red or Scarlet color, thirdly green again, and lastly
yellow. The four remaining middle feathers are wholly or all over green, only
at their very ends show something of yellow. The Feet are of a lead-colour,
having four toes, two standing forward, and two backwards, as in Woodpeckers;
the interior being much shorter than the exterior. The Claws crooked as in
Rapacious birds. The Legs not above an inch long, but pretty thick.

. IV. * The black-billed green Parrot of Aldrovandus.
THis is thirteen inches long, has a great, thick Bill, like the rest, but
wholly black. At the beginning of the Bill, on the Crown, and under the Throat
it is of a blue color, tending to green. The Iris of the Eye is of a dark
Saffron, the Pupil black: The rest of the Head and the Breast yellow: The Belly
of a middle color between yellow and green; as also the upper side of the
Tail. The Neck and all the Back with the Wings are of a deep green: So that it
would be almost wholly green, but that the very extreme ridge of the Wing,
where it is joined to the body, is of a Scarlet red; and then follows a black
feather in the outside or extremity of the Wings which respect the belly, and
lastly the tips of the flag-feathers are red. Besides these also the lower part
of the Rump is tinctured with a Scarlet red. The Feet are dusky: The Talons
black, and somewhat crooked. The Tail is about a Palm long more or less.

. V. * The white-headed Parrot of Aldrovandus.
IT is ten inches long: The Bill white, and two inches thick: That part of the
Head next to the Bill is also white: The Pupil of the Eye black, the Iris
ferrugineous. The forehead and crown of the head are white, variegated with
black spots. The hinder part of the Head, Neck, Back, Wings, and Rump above are
tinctured with a dark green: The Throat and uppermost ridge of the Wings with a
Vermilion red. The Breast and Thighs again are green. The part of the Belly
lying between the Thighs and the Breast is of a dusky color obscurely red, or
of that the Painters call Umber [terrae Umbriae.] Some of the covert-feathers
of the Wings, viz. the outmost, are blue, but with some mixture of white. The
lower part of the belly next the Rump yellow. The Tail is red in the middle;
the sides being variegated with red, yellow, and blue. Almost all the feathers
have their utmost tips black, but else are green: The Legs and Feet cinereous.
This Bird from the great variety of its colors might well be called the
parti-colored or many-coloured [(...)] Parrot; it being of no less than seven
several colors, of which yet the chief is green.

Mr. Willughby does thus briefly describe either this same Parrot, or one very
like it. It is of a green color, lesser than a Pigeon: The Irides of the Eyes
of a Hazel color. The Bill is white: From the Bill to the middle of the crown
it is also white. Under the Eyes and the under Chap it is of a Vermilion
color. The middle of the Breast and Belly between the Legs is reddish. The
outer webs of the Tail-feathers to the shaft are of a flame-colour. Toward the
crown of the Head the edges of all the feathers are dark or blackish. The
outmost flag-feathers are bluish. The exterior border of the Tail-end is
bluish. A dark spot covers the Ears. The lower part of the Belly is of a
yellowish green.

. VI. * The red and blue Parrot of Aldrovandus.
THis bird is nine inches long, sufficiently corpulent. The Bill not so great
as in the precedent, blackish: The Head, Neck, and Breast are blue: The top of
the crown remarkable for a yellow spot. The region of the Eyes white; the Pupil
black; the Iris dusky. The sides of the Belly under the tips of the Wings
yellow: The Belly green. The Thighs white, with a shadow of green. The Rump
yellow. The top of the back of a pale blue. The covert feathers of the Wings
parti-colored of green, yellow, and rosy. The end of the back or region of the
loins yellowish. The Legs and Feet are ash-colored, the rest of the body is of
a rose-colour or bluish.

. VII. Aldrovandus his ash-colored or bluish Parrot.
THis according to Aldrovandus is ten inches long: Of the bigness of a tame
Pigeon, or the common green Parrot. The Bill is black: The Nosthrils near to
one another, in the upper part of the Bill next to the Head; which part is
covered with a naked white skin [we afterward observed the same figure and
situation of the Nosthrils in all other Parrots.] The whole body is of an
uniform color, viz. a dark cinereous: Yet the lower part of the Back and Belly
and the Rump are paler than the rest of the body, and almost white. The Tail is
red of a Vermilion color, very short, and scarce reaching further than the
ends of the Wings. The region of the Eyes [sides of the head round the Eyes] is
white and bare of feathers. The feathers of the Head and Neck are shorter than
the others. They say that all of this kind are brought from Mina, an Indian
City of St. Georges. We have seen many of them at London.

. VIII. * The red and white Parrot of Aldrovandus.
IT is equal to an indifferent great Capon, seventeen inches long. The Head and
Neck thick. The whole body white, but moderately shaded with dusky, so that it
seems to be ash-colored. Its Bill is black, the hooked part being longer than
in others. The hinder part of the Back, the Rump, the whole Tail, and prime
feathers of the Wings are of a Scarlet color [Miniaceo color.] The Feet, as
in others, blackish. In bigness of body it gives not place to that greatest
sort which are less vocal, called Maccaws: In this only it is inferior to
them, that it has a shorter Tail: For which cause, notwithstanding its
magnitude, we have placed it in this Classis or rank.

. IX. * Marggravius his middle-sized Parrots.
THe first Species called AJURUCURAU is a very elegant bird. Above the Bill on
the head it has a tuft or cop of a lovely blue. The throat, sides, and upper
part of the Head are clothed with feathers of a delicate yellow: The whole
body of pleasant green. In brief, it is elegantly variegated. The Tail is
green, but when it spreads it appears edged or fringed with black, red, and
blue. The Legs and Feet of an ash-coloour: The Bill more dusky: The Eyes black,
with a golden circle about the Pupil. The Tongue of all is broad and thick.

The second Species is like to the former, a little differing in the
variegation of the colors, viz. On the top of the Head it has a yellow cop,
wherewith white is mingled. Above the Eyes, and under the Throat it is of a
clear or bright yellow. About the upper Bill is a Seagreen spot.

The third Species called AJURUCURUCA has a tuft on its Head of a color
mingled of blue and a little black; and in the middle of the tuft a yellow
spot. Below the Eyes is a yellow, and on the Throat a blue spot. The Breast is
green, as are also the Wings and Back, but somewhat deeper or darker, the ends
of the Wings and the Tail again being more dilute: the tips of the
Wing-feathers are yellow and red, mingled with blue. The Tail underneath is
parti-colored of green and yellow, above of a pale green. The Legs of a bluish
ash color. The Bill above cinereous, in the extremities black. The Claws black.

PARAGUA is a black Parrot of the bigness of Ajurucariu: The Breast, Back, and
anteriour half of the belly remarkably red: The Eyes black, encompassed with a
red circle or Iris: The Bill dusky, or of a dark ash color.

The TARABE of the Brasilians is a green Parrot bigger than a Paragua, with a
red Head and Breast, of which color is also the beginning of the Wings. The
Beak and Feet are of a dark ash color.

AJURUCATINGA of the Brasilians is a Parrot of the bigness of a handsome Pullet:
All green, with red Eyes, and the skin about the Eyes white: The Bill and Legs
white. It has a long green Tail. This in color and length of the tail agrees
with the Parakeet, but differs from it in bigness.

AJURUPARA agrees in all respects with the precedent, only it is less.

CHAP. IV. Of the lesser sort of Parrots, called Parrakeets.
. I. * The Ring-Parrakeet or Psittacus of the Ancients, Aldrov.
THis was the first of all the Parrots brought out of India into Europe; and
the only one known to the Ancients for a long time, to wit, from the time of
Alexander the Great to the Age of Nero, by whose searchers (as Pliny
witnesses) Parrots were discovered elsewhere, viz. in Gagaude an Island of
Aethiopia. It is fourteen inches long; has a thick Bill, all over red: A
yellow Iris or circle encompasses the Pupil of the Eye, which is, as in most
birds, black. The head and all the body besides is green; but the neck, breast,
and whole underside more dilute or pale: the upper side deeper-coloured. From
the lower Chap of the Bill under the Chin a black line is drawn downward as far
as the beginning of the Breast, which then divides, and goes away to each side
of the neck, till it meet with that red circle or ring, which compasses the
backside of the Neck. This ring is behind of the breadth of ones little finger,
but grows narrower by degrees toward the sides. The belly is of so faint a
green, that it seems almost to be yellow. The outmost feathers of the Wings
next the belly are of a dark dusky green about the middle, in the upper part
distinguished with a red mark. The Tail, which is about two Palms long, is also
of a yellowish green: The Legs and Feet ash-colored. Whence Solinus does not
rightly affirm, that it has no difference of color but only the ring of red
about the Neck: Nor Apuleius, that the outsides of the feet are red, [extimas
palmulas rubere] they being cinereous: Unless we can think they described
another bird of this sort.

. II. * The wholly green Parrakeet of Aldrovandus.
THis is of equal length with the former, but less-bodied; being not bigger
than a Throstle or Mavis. The Bill is red, especially the upper part; for the
Perchance he means the point.
edges [acies] and lower part are blackish: the Pupil of the Eyes black, the
Irides of a red and Saffron color. The rest of the body is of a pleasant
grass-green, yet the belly more pale, the master-feathers of the Wings of a
deeper color. The Tail narrow, ending almost in a point, near nine inches
long. The Feet and Legs of a different color from all other Parrots, viz. a
red or Flesh-colors.
carneous. This is peculiarly by a distinct name called Scincialo in Hispaniola
an Island of America, where it is found. The Italians for its small stature and
bulk call it Parochino, and the Frenchmen (as Bellonius says) Perroquet.

The red and yellow or pale green Parrakeet of Aldrovandus described by the
Picture thereof sent with many others out of Japan to Pope

I suspect to be fictitious, at least in many particulars, as are doubtless the
rest of those Pictures, therefore I have omitted it, referring the Reader, who
desires further knowledge of it, to Aldrovandus.

. III. * The crested red and green Parrot of Aldrovandus.
THe Wings, Tail, and Crest of this bird were red, the rest of the body green.
Its Crest resembled that of the crested Parrot above described. It had very
fair Eyes, with a black Pupil and red Iris. The Crest consisted of six
feathers, three greater, and as many less.

. IV. * Marggravius his Parrakeets, called by the Brasilians Tui.
THe first Species is of the bigness of a Swallow: all over green: Having a
very long long Tail, and a black hooked bill. This may be the second sort.

The second Species, called TUIAPUTEJUBA, is also all over green; the Wings
darker, the rest of the body paler, save the belly, which is yellowish: The
Tail is very long. The Bird is of the same bigness with the former: Has great,
blackish Eyes: A circle of yellow feathers about the Eyes, and above the Bill,
which is black and hooked. On the head it has a great spot of orange-coloured
feathers.

The third, called TUITIRICA, is somewhat bigger than those of Guiny, of a
green color all over, which for the most part is deeper in the Back and Wings,
paler in the other parts: The Bill crooked, of a Carnation color: The Eyes
black, the Feet bluish. The Tail reaches a little beyond the ends of the Wings.
These become very tame, so that they will take meat out of ones mouth, and
permit one to stroke and handle them. They learn also to talk like Parrots.

The fourth is of the bigness of a Stare, of the same color with the second
Species, but having a shorter Tail.

The fifth, called JENDAYA, is of the bigness of a Blackbird or Throstle, has
a black Bill and Legs; black Eyes, with a golden Iris or circle encompassing
the Pupil, outwardly white. The Back, Wings, and Tail, as also the lower belly
are covered with green feathers, with which a Sea-colour is mingled. The I
cannot say whether he means the end, or outside.
extremity of the Wings is in a manner black. The whole Head, Neck and Breast
are of a yellow color, partly deeper, and partly paler.

The sixth, called TUIETE, is of the bigness of a Lark: The whole body of a
light green: But the beginning of the Wings of a bright blue. The borders also
of all the feathers of the Wings are blue, so that when they are closed, these
borders altogether make an appearance of a long green stroke near the outsides
of the Wings. In the back also at the rise of the Tail there is a blue spot.
The Tail is short: the Bill hooked, of a Carnation color. The Legs and Feet
cinereous.

The seventh, called TUIPARA by the Tupinambi, is also of the bigness of a
Lark, and all over of a pale green. The Tail shorter, so that it ends with the
Wings [being equally extended.] The Bill of a Carnation color, the Legs gray
or grisled. Near the rise of the Bill, in the forehead it has a Scarlet spot
of a semilunar figure, as it were a Crown. [The following words corrupted, I
suppose, by the error of the Transcribers or Printers, not understanding, I
have omitted.] They build in Ant-heaps left by the Ants, which are found in
trees.

ANACA of the Brasilians, is again of the bigness of a Lark. Its Bill dusky and
hooked. The feathers on the top of the head are of a Liver-colour: On the sides
of the Head about the Eyes of a brown. The Throat is ash-colored: the Neck
above and the sides green. The Belly has reddish brown feathers. The back is
green, and has a spot of a light brown. The Tail is also of a dilute brown. In
the beginning of the Wings is a crimson spot or border: The rest of the Wings
green; the ends only of a Seawater color. The Legs above covered with green
feathers, below bare, and of an ash color, having black Claws. In fine it is a
very elegant bird.

QUIJUBATUI is all yellow, of the bigness of Tuiapara: with a hooked gray Bill,
and black Eyes. The end of the Wings is of a dark green: The Tail long and
yellow. It easily becomes very tame.

. V. The Scarlet Parakeeto with green and black Wings.
IT is bigger than a Blackbird: The whole body of a Scarlet color: The covert
feathers of the Wings green; the prime feathers black; having their exterior
webs green above, and of a Crimson color underneath. The ridges of the Wings
yellow. The Tail a Palm long, consisting of twelve feathers, whose lower halves
are red, the upper being green or yellow. The Bill yellow, very much hooked,
hanging down half an inch. The Irides of the Eyes yellow: The skin of the sides
of the Head round the Eyes is bare, and of an ash color. The Legs very short
and black. A ring of green feathers compasses the legs above the knees. We saw
this at London in the shop of a certain tradesman, who told us that it was
brought out of the East Indies.

CHAP. V. * Clusius his Discourse and Account of Parrots.
THe Noble Philip Marnixius of St. Aldegond had a Parrot, whom I have often heard
laugh like a man, when he was by the bystanders bidden so to do in the French
Tongue, in these words: Riez, Perroquet, riez; that is, Laugh, Parrot, laugh.
Yea, which was more wonderful, it would presently add in the French Tongue, as
if it had been endued with reason, but doubtless so taught, O le grand sot, qui
me faict rire; that is, O great fool, who makes me laugh: And was wont to
repeat those words twice or thrice. But among others I saw one of those great
ones in the house of the illustrious Lady, Mary of Bremeu, Duchess of Croy and
Areschot, of happy memory, before she went out of Holland, the like whereto for
variety and elegancy of colors, I do not remember to have ever seen. For
though almost all the feathers covering the body were red, yet the feathers of
the Tail (which were very long) were partly red, and partly blue; but those on
the Back and Wings parti-colored of yellow, red, and green, with a mixture also
of blue. Its Head about the Eyes was white and varied with waved black lines,
like the Head of the Canida. I do not remember the like Parrot described in any
Author. Moreover, this Bird was so in love with Anna the Dutchesses Niece, now
Countess of Meghen, and The Latin word is Domina, Lady.
Baroness of Grosbeke, that where ever she walked about the Room it would
follow her, and if it saw any one touch her clothes, would strike at him with
its Bill; so that it seemed to be possessed with a spirit of jealousy. That
Parrot of the greater kind, called by the Brasilians Arat, as Lerius writes,
must needs also be a very handsome one. For he says, that the prime feathers of
the Wings and Tail (which are a foot and half long) are half Scarlet-colored,
half of an elegant blue; the shaft or Nerve which cuts the feather through the
middle long-ways distinguishing those colors [that is, each feather being on
one side the shaft blue, on the other side red] but that the rest of the
feathers of the whole body are altogether blue. He adds, that both those sorts
of greater Parrots, viz. Arat and Canide, were in great esteem among the
Brasilians, because they plucked their feathers three or four times a year, to
make Clothes, Caps, Bucklers, and Curtains: And though they are not kept tame,
yet are they wont more to frequent and abide in great trees in the middle of
the Villages than in Woods. Besides, those two huge ones, the same Lerius
reports, that there are found three or four sorts of Parrots among the
Brasilians. The first, of those great and thick-bodied ones, which the
Tououpinamboutii, a people of Brasil, call Aicurous, having its head adorned
with feathers parti-colored of yellow, red, and violet, the ends of the Wings
of a lovely red, and the feathers of the Tail long and yellow; the rest of the
body being wholly green: That this kind is seldom transported into foreign
Countries; and yet there is none that may more easily and perfectly be taught
to speak. He adds further, that a certain Brasilian woman, living in a Village
two miles distant from the Island, in which he with other Frenchmen dwelt, had
a Parrot of this kind, which she made much of; which seemed to be endued with
that understanding and reason, that it could discern and comprehend whatever
she said who brought it up. For, says he, walking forth sometimes to refresh
our selves as far as that Village, when we passed by that woman's house, she was
wont to call upon us in these words, Will you give me a Comb, or a
Looking-glass, and I will presently make my Parrot sing and dance before you?
If we agreed to her request, as soon as she had pronounced some words to the
Bird, it began not only to leap upon the Perch on which it stood, but also to
talk and whistle, and imitate the shoutings and exclamations of the Brasilians,
when they prepare themselves for the battle. In brief when it came into its
Dames mind to bid it sing, it sang, to bid it leap, it leapt: But if taking it
ill, that she had not obtained what she asked, she said to the bird Auge, that
is, be still or silent: It stood still, and held its peace; neither could we by
any means provoke it to move either foot or tongue. The second kind is called
by the Brasilians Marganas, and is like those Parrots that are wont to be
brought into Europe; of no great account among them, by reason of their
multitude or abundance, they being not less frequent there, than Pigeons with
us. The third sort of Parrots, called by them Tovis, are not greater than a
Starling, and have their whole body covered with feathers of a deep green: But
the feathers of the Tail (which are very long) have a mixture of yellow. He
added further, that he had observed, that the Parrots of that Country did not
build Nests hanging down on the boughs or twigs of trees, as some by their
Topographical Tables would persuade us; but in the hollows of trees, of an
orbicular figure, sufficiently hard and firm. Then Clusius tells us that he saw
Parrots brought from Fernambuco of the Brasilians, not exceeding the bigness of
a Stare, covered with feathers wholly of a green color, but all having a short
Tail, and white Bill: and they who brought them over reported, that this kind
was very noxious to fruit: That they fed them by the way with grains of Maiz,
that is, Indian Wheat. In the second Voyage the Hollanders made into the East
Indies, in Java and certain neighboring Islands, they observed Parrots far
more elegant than those they were wont to bring out of Brasil, and they
understood that they were called Noyras by the Portugues that frequented Java
and the Moluccas: That they were not very big-bodied, but of so elegant a
color, that they thought more beautiful could not be painted by the hand of
Man. For the Breast and Belly were covered with feathers of a florid, shining
red color; the Back with golden-coloured Plumes; the Wings adorned with
feathers parti-colored of green and blue: Underneath the Wings the feathers
were of a lovely shining red. But that the price of those birds there was very
great; so that they were not rated at less than eight or ten German Dollars.
Linscotius writes, that the Portugues had often made trial to bring over of
them to Lisbon, but could never effect it, because they were too tender and
delicate. But the Hollanders with a great deal of care and industry brought one
alive as far as Amsterdam, which though it were not of the choicest, yet might
have been sold for one hundred and seventy Florens or Gilders of that Province,
that is somewhat more than seventy Dollars, as I find recorded in the Diary of
that Voyage. That bird by the way had learned to pronounce many Holland words,
which it had heard of the Mariners, and its Master had made it so tame, that it
would put its Bill into his Mouth and Ears without doing him any harm, and
would put in order the hairs of his beard if discomposed: And if any one else
offered to touch him, it would presently snap or peck at him, as if it had been
some Dog. Furthermore (says he) in the year of Christ 1605. Jacob Plateau sent
me the figure of a certain Parrot, drawn to the life in colors, the like
whereto seeing I have not as yet seen, nor remember to have met with any where
described, I thought fit to subjoyn the figure of it Printed, in this Auctarium
to my History of Exotics. He wrote that he had kept it above two years, that it
was of the bigness of a Pigeon: That it had a Head almost like a Hawks, to wit,
covered with such colored feathers: Sparkling Eyes. The Neck and Breast were
beset with parti-colored feathers; which when it was angry, or any one molested
it, by bringing any Animal near to the Cage in which it was shut up, it would
set an end, so that it seemed to be in a manner crested. Those feathers were of
a reddish color, and in the outward part, [I suppose he means round the
borders or edges] of a most elegant blue. The feathers of the Belly were almost
of like color, yet moreover clouded with dusky. The feathers of the Back were
green, and the master-feathers of the Wings bluish. The Tail was composed of
many green feathers, but not long. I could not neglect to propose to the
Readers view a small sort of Parrot, brought these last years from Aethiopia
and the places bordering on Manicongo, by the Holland Skippers, with the figure
of the Male, (but the Female is much more elegant, for there was one brought of
both Sexes.) The bulk of the body was equal in bigness to a Chaffinch: That is,
was two inches and an half long from the bottom of the Neck to the Rump. All
the feathers covering the body were of a green color; among which yet there
appeared a manifest difference: For those on the Back were deeper colored;
those on the Belly paler. The flag-feathers of the Wings were three inches
long; and though on the upper side; on that side the shaft which has the
shorter Villi, as far as they cover one another, they were tinctured with a
deep green; yet on the other side which has longer Villi, and on all the
under-side they were dusky or brown. The feathers of the Tail were most
elegant, well nigh two inches long, little less than half an inch broad, on
that part next the Rump of a green color mingled with yellow, next of an
elegant red, then of a black, and last of all of a green. And these three last
colors were distinct from one another, as is to be seen in the Tail-feathers
of some green Parrots, of the great kind [called Maccaws,] But these feathers
are scarcely seen unless when she spreads her Tail, because they are covered
with others of the same length, which are wholly green. The Neck is short and
thick: The feathers covering the Head very short and green; except those on the
crown above the Bill, and on the whole throat, for they are of a lovely florid
red color. I speak of the Male, for the feathers of the Female were of a paler
red, and did not take up so large a space as in the Male. The Eyes were very
black, the Bill thick and strong; the upper Chap hooked and sharp-pointed, as
in other sorts of Parrots: Its color reddish. The Legs short, scarce attaining
the length of half an inch, covered with ash-colored scales, as the feet of
other common Parrots, and those divided into four Toes; of which two stood
forward, and were of unequal length, two backward, and they also unequal: The
shorter, which were the inner, having two joints, the longer; which were the
outer, three. The Claws were white, and of a good length. I observed it to have
a very small voice, and only to peep like a Chicken. It delights in company.
When it eats, it does not hold its meat in one foot, like other Parrots, but
picks up its meat with its Bill by jobbing: But its meat for the most part is
Canary seed; for I observed it to feed more willingly upon that than any other
kind of Seed. I saw some that were so taught that they would pick up crumbs of
bread dipped or moistened with water. Its drink is water. I observed further in
this bird, that the Females, when they grew old, would scarce eat any meat, but
what had been picked up by the Male, and kept a while in his Crop, and there
mollified or macerated; the which they received with their Bills, as young
Pigeons are wont to be fed and nourished by the old ones.

. VII. * Bontius his small Parrakeet.
IT is of the bigness of a Lark, has a hooked Bill, gray of color, as is also
the throat; black Eyes, encompassed with a silver circle [I suppose he means
the Iris.] The Tongue is like a Parrots with solid ligaments. It can set up
specious feathers on the crown of its Head like a Crest. Its Legs and Feet are
of an ash color. It has a very long Tail, reaching about ten inches beyond
the ends of the Wings. Both the Belly underneath, and also the Head, Neck, and
Tail above are of a beautiful red color: But the Breast and lower feathers of
the Tail are of a pale rose-colour, which [Tail-feathers] end in a lovely blue,
or color mingled of white and green. The Wings are chiefly green, but
interwoven with red feathers, the one half whereof is so variegated on each
side with yellow and rose color, that exposed to the Sun it represents a
thousand varieties of shining colors, and can hardly be expressed by a
Painter: So that this bird deserves to be highly prized by great persons.

These Parrots are found chiefly in the midland Countries: They roost and build
on the highest trees. They fly in companies, and with a great noise, as does
the whole tribe of Parrots. They are also garrulous, and learn to pronounce
some words if they be kept tame.

. VIII. * Marggravius his Brasilian Any of kin to the Parrots.
THis Bird is of the bigness of a Throstle or Mavis, wholly black, Wings, Bill,
Eyes, and Feet. It has a long, erect Tail, of six inches length. Its Bill is
high, broad, an inch long or something more; the lower part almost straight,
the upper high, broad, of a semilunar figure and compressed, so that above it
is almost edged. The Legs and Feet slender. It has four Toes, two standing
forwards, two backwards, after the manner or Parrots. It cries with a loud
voice, in one tone yiiiiy, in the middle more elevated. They are frequent in
all Woods, but not good to eat.

THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST BOOK. Of Birds with streighter or less hooked
Bills.
THE FIRST SECTION. OF GREATER BIRDS.
CHAP. I. Birds with thick, straight, and large Bills.
THese either feed indifferently upon Insects and Fruit, some of them also are
carnivorous and rapacious, being very greedy of dead Carcasses and Carrion; or
upon Insects only. The first may be divided into such whose body is for the
most part of one color, and that black, which we call the Crow-kind: Or such
whose body is parti-colored, and who chatter much, viz. the Pie-kind. Of those
which feed upon Insects only there is but one family, to wit, Wood-peckers. Yet
the Reader is to take notice, that when we affirm Woodpeckers to feed only upon
Insects, we understand Woodpeckers properly and strictly so called: For there
are some birds which we have referred to this Genus of Woodpeckers largely
taken, which feed also upon fruit, as for example, the Nuthatch, Wall-creeper,
etc.

CHAP. II. Birds of the Crow-kind.
. I. The Raven, called in Latin Corvus, in Greek (...).
THe Bird we described weighed two pounds and two ounces: Its length from Its
weight, length and breadth,
the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail was two feet and one inch. The
distance between the extremities of the Wings extended was four feet and half
an inch. The Bill long, thick, sharp, and very black: The upper Chap something
The Bill, Tongue,
hooked, but not so as in Hawks, the lower straight: The Tongue broad, cleft at
the tip, rough, and black underneath. The Iris of the Eye or ring encircling
the Eye.
Pupil consists as it were of a double circle, the exterior being of a light
cinereous or ash color, the interior of a dark cinereous. Black hairs or
bristles bending from the Head downwards cover the Nosthrils. The Plumage is
black all over the body, Nosthrils, Color of the feathers.
having a blue splendor or gloss; which is seen especially in the Tail and
Wings. The Belly is something paler, inclining to brown. On the middle of the
Back grow only downy feathers: For the Back is covered with those long feathers
that spring from the shoulders, as in many other birds. The number of prime
feathers in each Wing The Prime Wing-feathers or quils.
is twenty, of which the first is shorter than the second, the second than the
third, and that than the fourth, which is the longest of all. In all from the
sixth to the eighteenth the shaft extends further than the Vanes, and ends in a
sharp point.

The Tail is about nine inches long, made up of twelve feathers, the exterior
being The Tail.
gradually somewhat shorter than the interior.

It has large crooked Claws, especially those of the back-toes. The outmost
foretoe The Claws and Toes,
is joined to the middlemost from the divarication to the first joint.

The Liver is divided into two Lobes. It has a large Gall sticking to the
Guts. Entrails.
The length of the Guts is forty three inches; of the blind-guts one inch.

The Gullet below the Bill is dilated into a kind of bag, wherein she brings
meat to feed her Young. The stomach within is wrinkled. The Raven feeds not
only upon Its Food.
Fruits and Insects, but also upon the Carcasses of beasts, birds, and fishes;
moreover, it sets upon, kills, and devours living birds, after the manner of
Hawks.

We have seen one or two milk-white Ravens: Aldrovandus mentions diverse; and
White Ravens.
says that they are often found in England: But without doubt he was mistaken
or misinformed; for they are seldom seen among us; insomuch that they are
carried up and down to be shown for money. I rather think, that they are found
in those Mountainous or Northern Countries, which are for the greatest part of
the year covered with snow: Where also many other Animals change their native
colors, and become white, as Bears, Foxes, Hares, Blackbirds, etc. whether it
proceeds from the force of the imagination heightened by the constant intuition
of Snow, or from the cold of the Climate, occasioning such a languishing of
color; as we see in old Age, when the natural heat decays, the hair grows
gray, and at last white.

They say that a Raven may be reclaimed and trained up for fowling, after the
manner Ravens reclaimed for fowling. The place.
of a Hawk.

Ravens are found not only in one part or Region of the World, but abound in
all Countries: Do easily bear all changes of weather, fearing neither heat nor
cold, enduring well to abide and live wherever there is plenty of meat for
them. And though they are said to love solitude; yet do they very often live
and build in the midst of the most populous Cities, as Aldrovandus delivers,
and experience confirms. They build in high Trees, or old Towers, in the
beginning of March with us in England, and sometimes sooner. They lay four or
five, and sometimes six Eggs before they begin to sit. Their Eggs are of a pale
greenish blue, full of black spots and lines.

What is reported by Hesiod and others of the Ancients, of the long lives of
Ravens Their longevity.
is without doubt fabulous. But that all Birds in general compared with
Quadrupeds are long-lived we have already proved by diverse examples in several
kinds: And that Ravens are in the number of the longest lived we will not deny.

. II. The common or carrion Crow, Cornix.
THe Cock, which we described, weighed twenty two ounces [another but Its
weight, length, and breadth.
twenty.] Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Feet was
eighteen inches and an half, to the end of the Tail about an inch more: Its
breadth between the extremities of the Wings spread two feet and two inches.
The Bill strong, Bill,
thick, straight, from the tip to the Angles of the Mouth two inches and almost
an half long; the lower Mandible being somewhat the shorter: The Tongue cleft,
and Tongue,
as it were jagged or torn. The Eyes great, having Irides of a Hazel color.
The Eyes,
Nosthrils round, covered with black bristles reflected toward the end of the
Bill. Nosthrils,
The Plumage of the whole body is black, only the ground or bottom of the
feathers Color.
of a Lead or dark ash color.

The beam-feathers are in number twenty in each Wing; whereof the first is
shorter The Wing-feathers or Quils.
than the second, the second than the third, that than the fourth, which is the
longest of all, being by measure ten inches three quarters: The inner of these
feathers end in sharp points.

The Tail was seven inches and an half long, composed of twelve feathers of
equal Tail,
length.

The Legs and Feet black: The Claws black and strong: The outmost fore-toe is
Feet and Claws.
joined to the middle one from the bottom as far as the first joint.

The Liver divided into two Lobes; of which the right is the greater. It has a
Bowels and entrails.
large Gall, which empties it self by a double channel into the Guts. The
Muscles of the stomach are but small. The Guts have many revolutions: The
blind's no more than half an inch long. Scarce any foot-step to be found of the
* Ductus intestinalis. [channel conveying the Yolk to the Guts.]

This Bird delights to feed upon Carrion, that is the Carcasses of dead Animals
Its Food.
when they begin to putrefie. Neither does it feed only upon Carrion, but also
set upon, kill, and devour living birds, in like manner as the Raven: Moreover,
it eats Grain and all sorts of Insects in England at least. For beyond Seas
they say it meddles with no kind of Grain.

This kind of Bird abounds with us in Britain, as Cardan and Turner truly
observe, Its place.
because here is plenty of food for them. They build upon high trees, and lay
four or Where it builds.
five Eggs at a time, like Ravens, but less. They are very noisome to Lambs
newyeaned if they be weak and feeble, first picking out their eyes. They are
said to have a very sagacious sent, so that it is difficult to shoot them, they
smelling the Gunpowder at a great distance.

Ravens, Crows, etc. roost (as they say) upon trees with their Bills directed
toward the Sunrising.

That the Crow it self (says Aldrovandus) is capable of humane speech, and
has Crows taught to speak.
been taught to pronounce several words, both we our selves do certainly know,
and Pliny, a Witness beyond exception, testifies, writing thus: There was also
in the City of Rome, whilst I was recording these things, a Crow belonging to
a Roman Gentleman, brought out of Baetica, first admirable for its color,
which was exceeding black, then pronouncing many words in connection, and still
learning more and more. As for its pace, it is reckoned among those birds which
neither run, nor leap, but walk. Aldrovandus.

The Females only sit, and that diligently, the Males in the mean time bring
them Their manner of incubation. They feed not their young newly hatched.
food, as Aristotle says. In most other birds which pair together, the Male
and Female sit by turns. They do not (says Aldrovandus) as I hear, feed their
Young till they begin to be feathered; the same also is reported of Ravens, and
many other birds that are much on the Wing. You will say, wherewithal are they
nourished in the mean time, and how do they grow? I answer, with the Yolk of
the Egg remaining in the Belly after exclusion. For we have elsewhere shown,
that a good part of the Yolk is received into the cavity of the belly in birds
newly hatched, which being by degrees conveyed into the Guts by a certain
passage called by us ductus intestinalis, serves to nourish the Young newly
excluded.

. III. Cornix frugivora seu frugilega: The Rook.
IT weighed nineteen ounces: Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end of
the Its weight and measures.
Tail was twenty inches, to the end of the Claws eighteen. The breadth or
distance between the tips of the Wings extended thirty eight inches. It has no
Craw, but instead thereof the Gullet below the Bill is dilated into a kind of
bag, wherein it brings meat to feed its Young.

In the old ones of this sort the feathers about the root of the Bill as far as
the Eyes The Bill.
are worn off, by often thrusting the Bill into the ground, to fetch out
Earthworms, etc. So that the flesh thereabouts is bare, and appears of a
whitish color: By which note this bird may be distinguished from the common
Crow. Howbeit the Bill it self is not white, as Bellonius writes, and others
believe. It differs also from the How it differs from the Crow.
Crow, 2. In that it is somewhat bigger: 3. In the purple splendor or gloss of
its feathers: 4. In that it is gregarious, both flying and breeding in company.

The number of beam-feathers in each Wing is twenty, of which the fourth is the
The Wing-feathers or Quils. The Tail,
longest, being by measure ten inches and a quarter. The shafts of the middle
Wing-feathers end in bristles or spines. The Tail is seven inches and an half
long, made up of twelve feathers; the exterior whereof are a little shorter
than the middle ones.

The Bill from the tip to the Angles of the mouth is two inches and an half
long. Bill, Nosthrils, Tongue, Toes.
The Nostrils round: The Tongue black, horny, and cloven at the end. The
hind-toe has a large strong Claw. The outmost fore-toe is joined to the
middlemost, as in the Crow.

It has a large Gall; short blind-guts like the Crow, of about half an inch.
The stomach The Guts and Entrails. Its Food.
is great and musculous as in granivorous birds: The Guts wide and variously
reflected. They are most greedy of Corn, yet feed also upon Earthworms and
other Insects, refraining from garbage and carrion.

They build many together upon high trees about Gentlemen's houses, who are
Manner of breeding.
much delighted with the noise they make in breeding time. Both Cock and Hen
sit by turns. Their Eggs are like Crows, but lesser, spotted with greater
spots, especially Eggs.
about the blunt end.

I have been told by a worthy Gentleman of Sussex, who himself observed it,
that when Rooks build, one of the Pair always sits by to watch the Nest, till
it be finished, whilst the other goes about to fetch materials. Else if both
go, and leave the Nest unfinished, (as sometimes they venture to do) their
fellow-Rooks ere they return again, will have robbed and carried away to their
several Nests all their sticks, and whatever else they had got together. Hence
perhaps the word Rooking with us is used for cheating or abusing.

These Birds are noisome to Corn and Grain: So that the Husbandmen are forced
How to fright them away.
to employ Children with hooting, and Crackers, and Rattles of Metal, and
finally, with throwing of stones to scare them away. Such as have no Servants
or Children to spare for such a purpose, make use of other devices; either of
Mills made with Sails, to be turned by the Wind, making a continual snapping as
they turn, wherewith they fright the birds, or of Bugbears, or (as we call
them) Scare-Crows placed up and down the fields, and dressed up in a Country
habit, which the birds taking for Country men dare not come near the grounds
where they stand.

I was also told by the forementioned Gentleman, that if Rooks infest your
Corn, they will be more terrified by taking a Rook and plucking it limb from
limb in their sight, and then casting the several limbs about your field, than
if you hang up half a dozen dead Rooks in it.

. IV. The Royston Crow. Cornix cinerea frugilega.
THat we described weighed about twenty two ounces. Its measures were from Its
weight and measures.
the point of the Bill to the end of the Tail twenty two inches; to the Angles
of the mouth two inches and an half: Between the Wings extended, three feet and
three inches.

The Bill long, strong, smooth, black, but having the tip whitish; the upper
Chap Its Bill, Nostrils,
somewhat longer than the lower, and a little bowed or crooked. The Nosthrils
round, covered with bristly hairs. The Tongue broad, black, a little cloven,
and rough on Tongue,
the sides. The Irides of the Eyes of a cinereous Hazel color. Eyes.


The Head, Wings, and Throat, as far as the Breast Bone black, with a certain
The color of its feathers.
bluo gloss: The Breast, Belly, Back, and Neck cinereous or gray, the shafts of
the feathers being blackish. The feathers on the Throat where the black and
cinereous meet have their exterior sides cinereous, and their interior black.
The Back is of somewhat a darker ash color than the Belly.

It has in each Wing twenty master-feathers, of which the first is the
shortest, the The quils or prime Wingfeathers. The Tail.
third, fourth, and fifth equal. From the sixth the shafts being produced above
the feathers, end in sharp points. The Tail consists of twelve feathers, the
exterior whereof were gradually something shorter than the interior to the
middlemost, which were seven inches and an half long.

The back-toe and Claw are large: The exterior and interior fore-toes equal,
The Toes and Claws.
and their Claws reach as far as the root of the Claw of the middle Toe. The
outmost and middle Toe are joined at the bottom asin the Crow.

The Liver is divided into two Lobes: The Stomach or Gizzard large, and in that
Its Entrails, Food,
we dissected was full of Wheat, Barley, and other Grain. It is infested with
Lice and Ticks.

In Summer time (says Aldrovandus) it lives in high Mountains, where it also
builds: In the Winter (compelled as is likely by the cold) it descends into the
Plains. Place.
On the Heaths about Newmarket, Royston, and elsewhere in Cambridge-shire, it
is frequently seen in Winter time.

. V. The Jack-daw, Monedula.
IT weighed nine ounces and an half; being in length from the tip of the Bill
to the Its weight, length, and breadth. The Bill.
end of the Tail thirteen inches and an half, in breadth between the tips of
the Wings spread two feet four inches and an half. The Bill is strong, from the
point to the Angles of the mouth an inch and a quarter long. The Nosthrils
round. Little Nosthrils, Tongue, Eyes.
hairy feathers cover the Nosthrils, and half the Bill: The Tongue cloven; the
Irides of the Eyes whitish; the Ears large.

The hinder part of the Head as far as the middle of the Neck inclines to an
ashcolour, Color of the feathers.
as also the Breast and Belly, but less; else the whole Plumage is black with a
kind of blue gloss: the forepart of the Head is of a deeper black.

The number of prime feathers in each Wing is twenty: Of which the first is
shorter. Prime Wing-feathers or quils.
by half than the second, the third and fourth the longest of all. From the
eleventh, the six following have the tops of their Vanes so running forth on
each side above their shafts, that these feathers seem to be Notched.
crenate in their tops; and from the Angle of that notch the shaft of the
feather is continued in form of a bristle. The number of Tail-feathers is
twelve, whereof the exterior are somewhat shorter. The The Tail.
length of the Tail five inches and an half.

The back-toe and Claw greater than in other birds is usual. The outmost
fore-toe The Toes and Claws.
joined to the middlemost at the bottom, as in the rest of this kind.

It has no Craw: The stomach is musculous: The length of the Guts was twenty
Its Entrails, Food.
four inches. It feeds upon Nuts, Fruits, Seeds, and Insects. The Appendices or
blind Guts small, and scarce an inch long.

The Head of this Bird, in respect of its body, is great; which argues him to
be ingenious Jackdaws ingenious.
and crafty; which is found true by experience.

Jackdaws usually frequent and build in ancient Castles, Towers, Houses, and
Stonewalls, Where it haunts and breeds.
especially if they be desolate and ruinous, in great numbers. They build also
sometimes in Trees, as we can testify upon our own experience, though
Aldrovandus be unwilling to believe it. They lay five or six Eggs, lesser,
paler, and having fewer Eggs.
spots than those of Crows.

Aldrovandus makes the Latin Graculus, which answers to the Greek (...), a The
names.
common or general name, containing under it four Species, viz. the Coracias or
Chough, the Lupus or Jackdaw, the Scurra or and the Graculus palmipes or Shag.
But the words (...) and Graculus are sometimes appropriated to the Jackdaw, as
he acknowledges.

Besides the common Jackdaw we have now described, Aldrovandus sets forth a
figure The Ring-Jackdaw
of another, difiering from this, only in that it has a white ring about its
neck. Gesncr also writes from the report of others, that about Zug in
Switzerland there is found a Jackdaw distinguished from the common by a ring of
white encompassing his neck. As for that Species of Daw [Graculus] in Rhaetia
known by the name of Tulla, which Gesner also mentions, having a blue head; he
giving us no other notes of it, I cannot tell what to determine concerning it.
The Vulgar and ignorant Fowlers love to tell wonders, and amplify things, and
therefore their relations are not much to be confided in. What Gesner delivers
of his own sight or knowledge, I readily believe and accept for true, he being
an Author of great judgment, and no less fidelity and integrity: But what he
has from the relation of others I do often suspect. Besides it is to be
observed, that short, rude, imperfect, and general descriptions, made by such
as were not practiced and skilful in describing and observing the certain and
characteristic notes of each Species, have occasioned great confusion, and
multiplication of more kinds of birds and other Creatures than Nature has
produced.

. VI. The Cornish Chough, Coracias seu Pyrrhocorax.
THe Female weighed twelve ounces and an half, the Male thirteen. The length
Its weight and measures.
from the point of the Bill to the end of the Feet sixteen inches and an half,
to the end of the Tail seventeen. The Wings spread were thirty three inches and
an half wide.

It is like a Jackdaw, but bigger, and almost equal to a Crow. It differs
chiefly from How it differs from the Jackdaw. Its Bill, Nosthrils, Tongue,
Palate.
the Jackdaw in the Bill, which is longer, red, sharp, a little bowed or
crooked: The upper Mandible being something longer than the lower. The
Nosthrils round: The Tongue broad, thin, and a little cloven, shorter than the
Bill. The sides of the fissures of the Palate and Windpipe and of the root of
the Tongue are rough, and as it were hairy. Feathers reflected downwards cover
the Nosthrils. The Feet and The Feet. The color of the feathers.
Legs are like those of a Jackdaw, but red of color. The Plumage of the whole
body all over is black.

The number of prime feathers in each Wing is twenty: Of which the first is
shorter The prime Wing-feathers.
than the second, that than the third, the third than the fourth, which is the
longest of all, being by measure ten inches and an half. The Wings complicated
extend as far as the end of the Tail. The Tail-feathers are in number twelve,
all equal, or The Tail.
if any difference be, the middle a little the longer, as in the rest of this
kind, being by measure 5 inches.

The Liver was divided into two Lobes, of which the left was the less: The
Spleen The Entrails.
long, soft, and round: The Stomach fleshy, and full of Insects.

It frequents Rocks, old Castles, and Churches by the Seaside. It is found not
only Its place.
in Cornwall, but also in Wales and all along the Western Coast of England,
about the Cliffs and Rocks near the Sea. Its Voice is like that of the common
Jackdaw, but more hoarse.

Aldrovandus will needs have the Pyrrhocorax to be a different bird from the
Coracias, Pyrrhocorax and Coracias the same.
following therein Aristotle. Bellonius makes these names Synonyma of the same
bird; we must needs confess, that if there be such a bird as Aldrovandus
describes v. g. less than a Crow, equal to a Jackdaw having yellow Bill and
Feet, it is distinct from our Chough. But I am sure the Bird frequent on our
Western Shores, and commonly known by the name of the Cornish Chough, is that
which Bellonius and Turner make to be the Pyrrhocorax, and has red Legs and
Feet. Wherefore I take the Coracias and Pyrrhocorax of Gesner and Aldrovandus
to be one and the same bird, notwithstanding the Bill and Legs in this are said
to be yellow; which perchance may be so in the Coracias or Chough when young.

. VII. Bontius his Indian Raven.
THere is a strange kind of Raven in the Molucca Islands, and especially in
Banda, which resembles our Country Raven in the Bill; but in the Temples is
colored like those Birds of the Turkey kind.
Meleagrides which the Low Dutch call Kalcoutse hanen. It has a great thick
Bill, a little pointed, and made for Rapine; wide Nosthrils; great, black,
illfavoured Eyes: The Head and Neck long, decently covered or adorned with
blackish feathers. Its Feet and Toes strong, armed with long, crooked, and very
hard or solid Claws. It walks after the manner of our Raven: But differs from
it in nature and disposition; in that it feeds not upon Carrion or dead
Carcasses, but chiefly upon Nutmegs, of which it is very greedy, making great
destruction of that fruit, to the no small detriment of the Owners. Its flesh
is very delicate, and being roasted has a plain aromatical relish, contracted
from its food.

. VIII. Corvus Indicus cornutus seu Rhinocerot avis Bontii, Aldrov.
The horned Indian Raven or Topau, called the Rhinocerot Bird.
THis horned Bird as it casts a strong smell, so it has a foul look, much
exceeding the European Raven in bigness. It has a thick Head and Neck, great
Eyes; the Bill but moderate in respect of the body: The longer and more
acuminate part bending downward argues the Bill to be made and designed for
rapine: But the upper part, which is shorter, thicker, and bending upward does
resemble a true Horn, both to the sight and touch: The one moity whereof, viz.
that toward the Head, is Rather continuous.
contiguous to the Bill, so that both together after the same manner grow to
[or rather spring out of] the end of the Head: The other moity is separate from
the Bill, bending the contrary way, viz. upwards, so that The bill and horn
together.
they seem to be like the forked tail of a Fish. It lives upon Carrion and
Garbage, i. e. the carcasses and Entrails of Animal.

Aldrovandus describes the Bill thus: It is almost twenty eight inches long,
crooked, not after the manner of rapacious birds, but like a Bow. All the lower
part is of a pale or whitish yellow, the upper part toward the Head of a red or
Vermilion, else of the same color with the lower. The upper Mandible only
within is serrate or dented after the manner of the The Brasilian Pie.
Toucan. The horn springs out of the forehead, and grows to the upper part of
the Bill, being of a great bulk, so that near the forehead it is a Palm broad;
not unlike the Rhinocerots horn, but crooked at the tip: The color both in the
upper and lower part is Vermilion, in the middle yellow. If the rest of the
parts of the body are answerable to the Head; I am of Cardans and Plinies
opinion, that this Bird is bigger than an Eagle.

Of this sort of Bill we have seen three varieties, all which we have caused to
be engraven and exhibited to the Readers view.

CHAP. III. Of the Pie-kind.
. I. The Magpie or Pianet. Pica varia caudata.
IT weighs eight or nine ounces. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the
Claws Its weight and measures. Its Bill,
is twelve inches and an half, to the end of the Tail eighteen. The Bill about
an inch and half long, black, thick, and strong, the upper Chap being somewhat
crooked and sharp-pointed; the Tongue cloven at the end, and blackish, like to
that Tongue,
of a Jay. The sides of the fissure of the Palate rough with hair-like
excrescencies. The Nosthrils round, and beset with reflected bristly hairs.
Excepting the whiteness Nosthrils.
of the Breast and Wings, and the length of the Tail, this Bird is very like
the Jackdaw. It is like the Jackdaw.
The Irides of the Eyes are of a pale Hazel color. In the nictating membranes
is seen a yellow spot.

The Head, Neck, Throat, Back, Rump, and lower Belly are of a black color; The
color of its feathers.
the lower part of the Back near the Rump is more dilute, and inclining to
cinereous. The Breast and sides are white, as also the first joint of the Wing.
The Wings are smaller than the bigness of the body would seem to require. The
Tail and prime feathers of the Wings glister with very beautiful colors (but
obscure) of green, purple and blue mingled, only in the exterior Vanes. The
number of beam feathers The Wing-feathers.
is twenty; of which the outmost is shorter by half than the second; the second
also shorter than the third, and that than the fourth, but not by an equal
defect; the fourth and fifth are the longest of all. The eleven foremost about
their middle part, on the inside of the shaft are white, the white part from
the extreme feather gradually decreasing, till in the tenth it be contracted
into a great spot only.

The Tail is made up of twelve feathers, of which the two middlemost are the
The Tail.
longest, being by measure eight and an half or nine inches; the next to them
above an inch shorter, and of the rest the exterior than the interior in like
proportion. The greatest and longest, that is the middle feathers of the Tail,
have their bottoms green, their middles blue, and their tops purple.

The Feet and Claws are black: The lowest bone of the outmost fore-Toe is
joined Its Feet.
to that of the middle.

The length of the Guts was twenty four inches, of the blind Guts half an inch.
It Entrails.
has a Gallbladder, and a long Spleen: The Stomach not very fleshy, and
having its Echinus.

There are sometimes found of this kind all over white, but rarely. In the
King's It varies sometimes in color.
Aviary in St. James's Park we saw brown or reddish ones.

This Bird is easily taught to speak, and that very plainly. We our selves have
known many, which had learned to imitate man's voice, and speak articulately
with They may be taught to speak.
that exactness, that they would pronounce whole Sentences together so like to
humane Speech, that had you not seen the Birds you would have sworn it had been
man that spoke.

They build their Nests in Trees with that Art and cunning as is admirable,
fencing them round on the outside both above and below with sharp thorns,
leaving only one Its Nest.
hole, and that a very narrow one, for themselves to pass in and out. He that
desires an exact description of the Nest let him consult Aldrovandus: With us
in England they are so common every where, that we thought it not needful to
insist longer on the describing of them. It lays five or six, and sometimes
seven Eggs at once, seldom Its Eggs.
more; greater and paler than Crows Eggs, and very thick spotted with black.

Its Food is the same with that of the Jackdaw. Its sets upon, kills, and
devours Sparrows, and other small birds: Yea, we have sometimes seen a Magpie
strike at a Blackbird.

. II. The Brasilian Pie of Aldrovandus, lib. 12. cap. 19. The Toucan of
Marggrav. and others, The Xochitenacatl of the Mexicans, Nieremb.
IT is of a middle size between a Pie and a Blackbird. Thevetus reports, that
the Its bigness. Bill,
Bill is thicker and longer than almost the whole body besides. The Bill is
near two Palms long, and one broad, being measured from the beginning of the
lower Chap to the end of the upper. The lower Chap where it is thickest, viz.
near the Eyes, is twice as little as the upper, and near the end, where it is
crooked, thrice. It is of a very thin substance like Parchment, but bony,
shining, very light, hollow, and inwardly capable of a great deal of Air: For
which reason I think, contrary to the manner of other Birds, its wants
Nosthrils: The Bill being so thin that the Air It want; Nosthrils.
can easily penetrate it. And if Nature had made any aperture in it, it would
have rendered it obnoxious to fracture. Hence also perchance it is, that she
has furnished it with certain teeth, so disposed that the Bill cannot be shut
exactly close, but easily admits the ingress of the Air. The Bill, I say, is
serrate, and as it were composed of certain little scales, which may easily by
the fingers be plucked off, [or asunder.] The color of the Bill is yellowish,
more in the lower than the upper part [inwardly it is of a pleasant red] toward
the end (says Nierembergius) of a Scarlet color. The Head in proportion to
the body is great and thick, as is suitable and requisite to sustain Its Head.
a Bill of that length and bigness; black; yet the Crown, whole Back, and Wings
show something of whiteness. The Eyes are great, placed in the middle of the
Head: Eyes.
The Pupil very black, encompassed with a white circle, and that again with a
yellow. The Neck, Back, and Wings are black. The Breast shines with a most
bright and Color.
lovely Gold or Saffron color, with a certain redness near the beginning; the
Belly and Thighs with a most beautiful Vermilion. The Tail again is black, but
in the end of a notable red.

It is made so tame, as to sit and hatch its Young in Houses. Thevetus reports,
that this bird feeds upon Pepper, which it most greedily devours, gorging it
self therewith, Its food Pepper.
so that it voids it again crude and unconcocted; and that the Natives make use
especially of that Pepper, preferring it before that which is fresh gathered
from the This story Faber discredits because none of his American friends spoke
a word of it.
Plant, because they persuade themselves that the strength and heat of the
Pepper is qualified and allayed by the Bird, so that afterward it is less
noxious. All this out of Aldrovandus. Faber suspects the story of the Pepper,
because his American friends, whom he consulted about this Bird, made no
mention of any such thing. I suspect that the Toes in this Bird are disposed
after the manner of the Woodpeckers, viz. two forwards, and two backwards. For
such is the conformation of the Feet of the Aracari of Marggrave, a bird near
of kin, and very like to this. And Thevetus in his figure expresses only two
foretoes.

Since the writing of this, happening to read in John Faber his Expositions of
some Pictures of New-Spain Animals of Recchas, I found there mentioned a bird
of this sort seen and described by Carlo Antonio dal Pozzo at Fontain-bleau in
France, with its Toes so disposed as I imagined, viz. two forwards two
backwards, as in Woodpeckers, to the genus whereof the Toucan, as Faber in this
place proves, does undoubtedly belong. For it not only has a like situation of
Toes, but also in like manner hews holes in trees to build its Nest in, as
Friar Peter Alvaysa, and other Indians and Spaniards, who had long lived in
America, told Faber for a certain truth; and Oviedus, in the forty third
Chapter of his Summary of the History of the West Indies published in Italian,
writes; adding, that he thinks there is no bird secures her young ones better
from the Monkeys, which are very noisome to the Young of most Birds. For when
she perceives the approach of those Enemies, she so settles her self in her
Nest as to put her Bill out at the hole, and gives the Monkeys such a welcome
therewith, that they presently pack away, and glad they escape so. From this
quality of boring trees this Bird is by the Spaniards called Carpintero, and by
the Brasilians Tacataca, in imitation I suppose of the sound it makes.

Because the Bird exactly described by Dal Pozzo, seems to be specifically
different from that of Aldrovandus, I shall here add his description.

It was (says he) a little bigger than the common Magpie. [Lerius makes it of
the bigness of a Dove; Oviedo, not bigger, or but little bigger than a Quail.]
Its Bill, which is very broad, had its upper part [or Chap] whereit grew to the
Head, tinctured with green, a line of green being also thence produced to the
point; but its lower Chap at its setting on to the Head a blue color. All the
rest of the Bill was of a dark red, like Serpentine wood, with many
intercurrent black spots and lines. N. B. Its Bill was empty and hollow, and
upon that account very light [Oviedo makes it very heavy, and to weigh more
than the whole body besides, which is certainly a mistake] so that it had
little strength in it, neither could the bird peck or strike smartly with it.
Its inside was of a Saffron-colour, but blue toward the tip.

It had a very flat thin Tongue, not much unlike those long feathers on the
Neck of a Dunghil-Cock: This it moved up and down, and stretched out to the
length of the Bill. It was of a true flesh-colors, and which you would wonder
at, fringed, as it were, on each side with very small filaments, which made it
show like a true feather. [This Oviedus also confirms.]

Its feathers on the Neck down to the middle of the Breast were whitish,
terminating in a sooty color; on the Head and Back blackish. Round the Eyes
was a space bare of feathers, but curled with hair, of a Violet-colour, as is
seen also in Parrots. The rest of the body was covered with feathers of a
Weasel-colour [mustelini coloris.] It had no Tail, [having been, I suppose,
plucked off] but one ready to come; the beginning whereof consisted of feathers
of a dark white, parti-colored with black, weasel, and Vermilion color. It
also frequently flirted up that rudiment of a Tail, as Wrens and Wagtails are
wont to do.

Each foot was divided into two Toes standing forward, and two backward; above
of a Violet-colour, underneath of an ash or gray.

It often hopped and leapt up and down, and cried with a voice not unlike the
chattering of a Magpie.

It fed upon almost all the same things that Parrots do, but was most greedy of
Grapes, which being plucked off one by one, and tossed to it, it would most
dexterously catch in the Air before they fell to the ground. The flesh of the
whole body was of a deep Violet color.

Faber does not undeservedly enquire how, seeing the Bill is so light and thin,
the Bird can pierce trees with it? Which difficulty he thus satisfies; that
though it be thin and light, yet is it of a bony substance, and therefore it is
not to be wondered at that, dexterously used by the living Animal, it should
therewith by many repeated strokes pierce a tree, having perchance the instinct
to choose a rotten one, as we see drops of rain wear holes in Flints, nay, the
very feet of Pismires walking often over them, as Pliny observes, make
impressions on them. Chap 10. of his Voyage into Brasil.
Lerius writes, that this Bird is of the color of a Raven except the Breast,
which is of a Saffron-colour, compassed beneath with a line of Vermilion; the
skin of which part plucked off the Indians dry, and use for an ornament of their
Cheeks, gluing it on with Wax.

This same Bird is described by Americae descript. lib. 15. cap. 7.
John de Laet, out of a Portugues Author, and out of the same by Hist. rerum
naetur. Brasiliae, lib. 5. c. 15.
Marggrave. It is of the bigness (says he) of a Pie or Dove, has a Crop under
the Breast three or four inches broad, of a Saffron-colour, and compassed about
the borders with Vermilion feathers. The Breast is yellow, the rest of the body
black. One would wonder how so little a bird could carry so great a Bill, but
it is exceeding light, and very tender.

We have seen in several Cabinets the Bill of this Bird, and our selves have
also one of them.

. III. The Jay. Pica glandaria.
IT weighed seven ounces. Its length from the point of the Bill to the end of
the Its weight and measures.
Tail was fourteen inches; to the end of the Feet but twelve and an half: The
distance between the extremities of the Wings spread twenty one and an half.
The Bill black, strong, from the tip to the Angles of the mouth about or near
an inch and Bill,
half long: The Tongue black, thin, pellucid, and cloven at the tip: The Irides
of Tongue, Eyes, Feathers, Color.
the Eyes white. The feathers of the Head and Body in this bird are taller,
slenderer, and stand more staring or erect than ordinary. Near the lower Chap
of the Bill are two black spots, on each side one: The Chin and lower part of
the Belly whitish: Else the Breast and Belly are of a color mixed of cinereous
and red. The Rump above is white: The Back red, with a certain mixture of blue:
The feathers on the crown of the Head variegated with black and white.

The Sails of the Wings are in number twenty: Of which the first is shorter by
half Wing-feathers.
than the second: The fourth the longest, being by measure six inches and a
quarter. As for their colors, the first or outmost is black, the bottom or
lower part being white, which is proper to it alone: The six next-following
have their exterior Vanes of an ash color; the three next likewise, but more
obscure and mingled with blue, being also marked toward their bottoms with
transverse black and white strokes. The five succeeding have their exterior
Vanes half white, half black, viz. the lower half white, the upper black, but
so that each extremity of the white is terminated with blue. The sixteenth in
place of the white of the four precedent has transverse blue, black, and white
spots: The seventeenth is black, having one or two blue spots: The eighteenth
is black, with some little red: The nineteenth red, with the tip black. The
undersides of all the feathers of the Wing are of a dark or dusky color. The
covert-feathers of the fifteen exterior Sails are very beautiful, being
variegated or chequered with black, white, and lovely shining blue lines: The
rest of the covert-feathers being black.

The Tail is six inches and a quarter long, consisting of twelve feathers,
wholly Its Tail.
black, except toward their roots: Under the Rump there is something of blue
mingled with cinereous.

The Feet and Toes are of a ferrugineous, dusky color. The middle Toe is the
Feet and Toes.
longest, the outmost is equal to the back-toe. The lower internodium of the
outmost Toe is joined to the middlemost. The back Claw is greatest.

The Eggs are cinereous, with darker spots scarce appearing. The Guts twenty
Eggs, Guts.
four inches long; the blind Guts but half an inch. It has a Gall, and a long
Spleen: The Stomach or Gizzard not very fleshy, and having its Echinus: Wherein
we found Gizzard.
Acorns, etc. Yet it feeds not only on Acorns, (whence it got the name of Pica
glandaria) Its Food.
but also upon Cherries (of which it is very greedy) Goose-berries, Rasps, and
other fruit.

It differs from that described by Aldrovandus, in that it has no transverse
spots in How it differs from Aldrovands Jay.
the Tail.

The Female differs little or nothing from the Male either in bigness or
color, so that it is very difficult to know them asunder.

It learns to imitate man's voice, and speak articulately as well as a Jackdaw.
It learns to speak.


. IV. The Roller, Garrulus Argentoratensis.
THe bird we described was a Cock, and weighed six ounces. Its length from Its
weight and measures,
the tip of the Bill to the Claws eleven inches and an half, to the end of the
Tail thirteen and an half: The breadth or distance between the tips of the
Wings spread twenty six inches.

The Bill was black, sharp, something hooked, otherwise like to that of a Jay,
from Bill, Eyes.
the point to the Angles of the mouth 1 inches long. The Irides of the Eyes
were of a pale hazel-colour. Near the Eyes, toward the hinder part of the Head,
were Bare Wartlike bunches. Tongue, Palate.
two bunches, as it were Warts, void of feathers. The Tongue black as in Jays,
jagged or torn, but not cloven: The roof of the mouth green, and having a
double cleft or fissure. The bottom of the Palate is rugged or rough with
little bunches. At the Base of the Tongue there is only a little forked
excrescency on each side. The circumference of the Eyes is bare or void of
feathers. Skin about the Eyes bare. Its Colors.


The Rump and lesser rows of covert feathers of the Wings are of a lovely blue
or ultramarine color (as the Painters call it.) The middle of the Back between
the shoulders red: The Head of a sordid green, mingled with blue; of which
color is also the Throat, with white lines in the middle of each feather. The
Breast and Belly are of a pale blue, like those of a Pigeon.

The number of Sails in each Wing is twenty, of which the first, second, and
third Wing-feathers.
are equal, and from the tenth all the rest. Almost all of them have their
lower half blue, and the upper black. The foremost are black almost down to the
bottom, only in their exterior Webs they have a mixture of blue. The covert
feathers of the Wings are of a pale blue, of which color also, but paler are
those that invest the underside of the Wing.

The Tail consists of twelve feathers, of which the ten intermediate are equal,
each Tail.
being four inches three quarters long: The two extreme longer than the rest by
three quarters of an inch. The two middlemost are of a dark ash color, the
next to them have their tips of a bluish white, which color gradually
increases in the rest, till in the outmost it takes up half the feather. Below
the white the interior webs of the feathers are black, and the exterior blue:
The tips of the outmost feathers are black. The tail-feathers and sails of the
Wings where ever they are blackish above, are blue underneath. The outmost
feather of the Bastard-Wing.
Ala notha is black, the rest blue.

The Feet are short, and like those of a Dove, of a dirty yellow color: The
Feet, Toes, and Claws.
middle Toe the longest, next to that the outmost fore-toe. The Claw of the
middle Toe in the inner side is edged. The Claws are black; and the Toes
divided to the bottom.

The Stomach within was of a Saffron color, and therein we found a large
Grasshopper: Gizzard and Guts.
The Guts thirteen inches and an half long; the blind Guts two and an half.

We found of these Birds not only in Germany, but also in the Isles of Sicily
and Its place,
Malta, to be sold in the Markets, and in the Poulterers shops.

There are many singular and characteristic marks in this bird; as 1. The knobs
or wart-like bunches under the eyes. 2. The figure of the Tail, the outmost
feather on each side being longer than the rest. 3. The Toes divided down to
the bottom. 4. The Tongue having only two forked Appendices.

* Gesners blue Crow; the same I suspect with the precedent.
The blue Crow, whose figure Jo. Kentmannus, sent to Gesner, but the History
thereof George Fabricius out of Misnia; is a wild bird, and not easy to be
tamed; called by the Misnians, That is, a wild Wood Crow.
Ein wild Holtzkrae, of others, Galgen-regell, or Halck-regel. It is found
beyond the River Elb, in the Luchovian Forest, and in the neighboring Woods:
It haunts and abides in desert and unfrequented places. Some from the color
call it Ein Tentschen Pappagey, that is, The German Parrot. It is transported
into Foreign Countries for no other commendation but the color. So far George
Fabricius. The Bill (as the Picture shows) is black: The Legs dusky, and for
the proportion of the body small. It is here and there all over the body, viz.
on the Head, Wings, Tail, about the Rump, and all the underside of a shining
blue color, in some places more sincere, in some mixed with green. The color
of the Back and upper side of the Neck is dusky: The greater feathers of the
Wings black. I am verily persuaded, that this bird is no other than the
Strasburgh Roller.

. V. * The Sea-Pie. Pica Marina.
ALdrovandus in the twelfth Book and fifteenth Chapter of his Ornithology does
thus briefly describe this bird. The whole Bird, excepting the Head, Neck,
Feet, and also part of the Wings, is of a greenish color. The Bill is strong,
a little longer than a Pies, very sharp. The top of the Head, and down as low
as a third part of the Neck, is of a delayed Chestnut color. The lower part of
the Head to the Temples and Eyes yellow. The Eyes black, with yellow Irides,
encompassed again with a black circle. The Feet dusky; the Toes long; the Nails
very crooked and black: The rest of the body green, except the second row of
Wing-feathers, which are of a dilute Chestnut, having their ends blue.

Whether he himself saw this Bird, or described it from a picture, he tells us
not: But in that he affirms, that the Strasburg Roller never lives in maritime
places, and so without reason challenges the name of the Sea-pie, which the
Bolognese (as Gesner witnesses) attribute to it, he is without doubt deceived:
Since we our selves (as we said before) saw at Messina in Sicily, and in the
Isle of Malta several of them.

. VI. * The Persian Pie. Aldrovandus.
THe bird which Aldrovandus calls by this name, and describes from a Picture,
sent him from Venice, has a strong, thick, short, whitish Bill: Also white
Eyes with a black Pupil. The second row of Wing-feathers, the Rump, and
foremost feathers in the Tail are yellow. The Feet are bluish with black
tabulary scales: The Claws small, but crooked and black: Else it is all over of
a dusky color. Besides these Dr. Charleton in his Onomasticon Zoicon, p. 68.
mentions another sort of Pie, viz. Mimus sive Picus Garrulus Iudicus.
The Indian Mock-bird, not much unlike the Jay, but somewhat smaller. We have
not as yet had the hap to see this bird: Nor is there any thing written of it
by others, that we know of.

. VII. Caryocatactes, Gesn. and Turn.
IT weighed five ounces three quarters. Its length from the Bill to the end of
the Toes was thirteen inches and an half, to the end of the Tail the same. The
breadth between the tips of the Wings spread twenty two inches and an half.

The Bill from the tip to the corners of the mouth is almost two inches long,
black, strong, and like that of a Pie, save that it is not sharp pointed, but
blunt at the end, and the upper Mandible a little prominent. The Tongue is
short, scarce reaching beyond the Angle of the lower Mandible, cloven with a
deeper incision than in any other Bird I have observed. In the lower Chap from
the Angle is a wrinkle exactly equal to the fissure or cleft of the Tongue; so
that the Tongue seems never to extend further, the wrinkle filling up the
fissure. The bottom of the Palate and sides of the fissure therein are rough.
The Irides of the Eyes are of a hazel color: The Nosthrils round, and covered
with whitish, bristly, reflected feathers.

The whole body, as well lower as upper side, is of a dusky red; all over,
except the Head, beautified with triangular white spots in the tops of the
feathers; these spots on the Breast are greater than elsewhere. The Head is not
spotted at all. The upper side of the body partakes more of red. Between the
Eyes and Bill it is white. The feathers under the Tail, beyond the vent are
milk-white.

The sails in each Wing are about twenty, of a black or dark color, the
Tail-feathers twelve, all of equal length, being by measure four inches three
quarters, except the outmost on each side, which are a little shorter. And for
their colors, the outmost on each side are three quarters white, and from them
the white part is gradually less and less in the succeeding feathers to the
middlemost, in which it does wholly disappear: The rest of the Tail-feathers is
of a shining black.

The Feet and Claws are black: The outmost Toe, as in the rest of this kind, is
joined to the middlemost at the bottom.

It has a Gall; its Guts were eighteen inches long: The blind Guts half an
inch: The Testicles small. It feeds on Nuts, etc. It has a note or voice
something like a Magpie.

We found this Bird in the Mountainous part of Austria, near the way leading
from Vienna to Venice, not far from a great Village called Schadwyen, where
there is a very steep, difficult, and craggy ascent up the neighboring
Mountains whereupon there stand always ready there certain Yokes of Oxen, to
draw the Coaches or Wagons of such as travel that way up the craggy Cliffs and
Rocks, which Horses could not at all, or with great difficulty climb and
struggle through, drawing a Coach after them.

. VII. * The Bohemian Chatterer. Garrulus Bohemicus, Lib. 12. cap. 17.
Aldrov. eidem Ampelis.
IT is almost as big as a Blackbird, but bigger than the Coccothranstes.
Hawfinch. Its length from Billpoint to Tail-end nine inches: Its breadth, viz.
the Wings being spread, four Palms. Whence it is manifest, that Gesner is
mistaken, in that he writes that for shape, and size of body, and colors it
approaches to the common Garrulus. Its Bill is of a deep black, of the bigness
of a House-Sparrows. Gesners figure represents it too long, and too crooked.
The Nosthrils are encompassed with hairs of the same color, which make, as it
were, a transverse black spot: In which are included the Eyes, that are round,
and of a most beautiful color, to wit, Vermilion; resembling that of the
Chalcedonian Carbuncle, commonly called the Granate: Which perchance gave
occasion to some to believe that they shine in the Night. Its Head is after a
sort compressed, being by Gesner represented too round; of a Chestnut or
ferrugineous color, adorned with a crest or tuft, bending backward, after the
manner of the crested Lark. The color of the Crest toward the Bill is a
delayed Chestnut, but backward cinereous, inclining to dusky, not unlike to the
color of A kind of earth called Terra Umbria, used by Painters.
Umber. The Neck is short, black in the fore and hind part, red on the sides,
near the Bill white. The Breast is of a chestnut or ferrugineous color, but
dilute and inclining to rosy. The whole Belly is ash-colored, except toward
the vent, where are some white feathers, whose roots or lower parts, v. g. from
the middle to the flesh, are black, and softer than their upper parts. The Back
inclines to a chestnut or bay, but toward the Rump it is cinereous or dun. The
outer feathers of the Wings are black, the inner ash-colored, but declining to
black. The outer Wing-feathers are marked with spots very pleasant to behold:
Some of these feathers, viz. the first, seven in number, are white, their
Appendices being red like to Cinnabar or Vermilion. Gesner was told by a
certain person, I know not who, but untruly, that these feathers were horny [I
suppose he meant their shafts] Yet are they pretty hard and solid, long, and
after a sort Cartilagineous. To these succeed other feathers adorned in like
manner with spots, but of a pale yellow, resembling in some measure the figure
of the Letter L: Which are so disposed, that in some feathers appear seven, in
some six, and in some but five only. Again, the last feathers have white spots,
which by how much they are situate nearer the outside, by so much do they
become less conspicuous; so that of the last feathers of all sometimes three,
sometimes two, and sometimes only one is so spotted. The covert feathers are
also tipped with white. Concerning the yellow spots it is to be noted, that in
the Females they are white, and that over against them are to be found other
white spots. I have learned by inspection, that the Tail of the Cock consists
of ten feathers only, the Tail of the Hen of twelve; which near their roots are
of a dark cinereous or Mouse dun, but above are black. The end of the whole
Tail is yellow, but more resplendent in the Male than in the Female. Near the
vent are some other feathers of a Chesnut-colour, making as it were another
Tail, but far less. The color of the Legs is dusky, inclining to blue. The
shape and bigness of the Feet answer to those of a Coccothranstles.
Hawfinch: The color differs, being black in the Garrulus, flesh or
rose-coloured in the Hawfinch, It has black and crooked Claws.

See the description of the Entrails and Bowels in Aldrovandus. This Bird is
said to be peculiar to Bohemia. It feeds upon Fruit, especially Grapes, of
which it is very greedy. Wherefore it seems to me, not without reason, to be
called by that name [Ampelis.] It is a Bird of a very hot temperament, and
exceedingly voracious: flies in companies, and is easily tamed. What else
Aldrovandus has of its disposition and manners, food, flight, use, etc. See in
his Ornithology. It is wonderful, and to me scarce credible, what he says he
learned by (...).
ocular experience, to wit, that the Tail of the Cock is made up of ten
feathers, the Tail of the Hen of twelve.

CHAP. IV. Of Woodpeckers in general.
TO Woodpeckers, if under this name we comprehend the Nuthatch, the
Wallcreeper, the great Reed-Sparrow, and the Ox-eye creeper, there are very few
notes common, viz. to climb or run up trees, sticking to their bodies or
boughs; and for that purpose to have strong and musculous thighs. But if we
exexclude the foresaid Birds, and restrain the name to Woodspites, properly so
called, there are many and remarkable notes whereby they may be distinguished
from all other kinds of birds: As for example, 1. To have a straight, hard,
strong, angular, and sharp Bill, very fit and proper to pierce and bore holes
in trees. 2. A Tongue of a very great length, round, ending in a sharp, stiff,
bony thorn, dented on each side, to strike Ants, Cossi, and other Insects
withal. This Tongue they can at pleasure put forth to a great length, thrusting
it deep into the crannies, holes, and clefts of trees, to stab and draw out
Insects lurking there. 3. Short Legs, but very strong. 4. Toes standing two
forwards, and two backwards: Which is common to these and Parrots. Such a
disposition of Toes (as Aldrovandus rightly notes) Nature, or rather the Wisdom
of the Creator, has granted to Woodpeckers, because it is very convenient for
the climbing of trees. Their Toes also are close joined together; that they may
more strongly and firmly lay hold on the tree they climb upon. 5. All of them,
unless perchance you except the Wryneck, have a hard, stiff Tail, bending also
downwards, and its feathers ends often broken, and their shafts almost bare; on
which they lean, and so bear up themselves in climbing. Their Tail consists of
but ten feathers. 6. To feed only upon Insects. 7. To want the blind Guts,
which is peculiar to this kind, agreeing to no other bird or beast beside, that
we know. 8. To lay white Eggs.

Whether all these marks agree to those American Birds which we have ranked
under this head we know not. We have referred them to this kind, for the like
disposition of their Toes, two forward, two backward; especially seeing they
belong neither to Parrots nor Owls.

Albertus writes that all Woodspites build in the hollows of trees, which
before him Pliny also has recorded. They themselves are said to hew out for
themselves a place to build in; making such an artificial hole, so exactly
round, that the most skilful and experienced Geometrician could not with his
Compass make a rounder. They hatch and bring up six or seven Young at once. The
Eggs of all kinds of them that we have hitherto seen are white. The Woodspite
is called by the Greeks (...), from striking or piercing of trees. The Latin
name Picus some think to be derived from the French and Italian word Becco,
signifying a Bill or beak of a bird. Aldrovandus thinks that it was rather
deduced from the Flemmish word Picken, signifying to strike or knock with the
Bill. The word Pick with us is variously applied, but originally seems to have
the same signification as in Flemmish, viz. either to strike with the Bill, or
gather up with the Bill. Hence in the North of England these Birds are called
Pickatrees, a word exactly of the same signification with the Greek (...).

That Woodpeckers will learn to speak I can hardly be persuaded, though
Albertus Magnus and Scaliger affirm it.

The Woodpecker was not only by the ancient Latins, called Pluviae avis, the
Rainsowl, but is so also by our Country men now adays, because by its voice
more loud and frequent than usual it is thought to presage rain.

CHAP. V. Of several sorts of Woodpeckers.
. I. The greatest black Woodpecker.
THe Cock, which we described, weighed ten ounces and an half: being in length
from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail eighteen inches and an half; in
breadth between the tips of the Wings spread twenty nine inches and an half.

Its Bill from the point to the Angles of the mouth was two inches and an half
long, strong, hard, triangular, as in the rest of this kind. Above the
Nosthrils a hard wrinkle is produced beyond the middle of the Bill. That part
of the Bill which is below the wrinkle is white, the rest black. The Tongue,
when extended, is of a very great length. It can shoot it out and draw it back
at pleasure, which is common to it with the rest of this kind. Its Nosthrils
are round, covered with reflected hairs: Its Head very great. The Irides of the
Eyes are of a pale yellow.

The color of the whole body is black, excepting the crown of the head, which
down to the Nosthrils is of a lovely red or Vermilion color.

The number of flag-feathers in each Wing is nineteen, of which the fifth and
sixth are the longest; the Sarcel or pinion feather is very short, and not
greater than those of the second row.

The Tail is made up of ten feathers, of which the outmost are the shortest,
the rest on both sides gradually longer to the two middlemost, which are the
longest of all. All but the outmost (which as we said are the least and
shortest) are stiff, sharppointed, bending inward, about seven inches long,
upon which in climbing trees they lean and support their bodies.

The Legs on the forepart are feathered down half way, behind no longer than
the knees. The Feet are of a lead color, It has two back toes, as the rest of
its kind: The Claws strong and great, except that of the lesser back-toe, which
is very small.

The Gall of a dark green: The Testicles yellowish: The Guts seventeen inches
long, great and lax: The stomach also lax and membranaceous, full of Hexapods
and Ants. It altogether wants the Appendices or blind Guts, as the rest of this
Tribe.

This Bird we found in the Market at Ratisbone in Germany to be sold, killed
not far from that City. It is not found in England that we know of.

. II. The green Woodpecker, or Woodspite, called also the Rain-fowl, High-hoe,
and Hew-hole.
THe Cock weighed six ounces three quarters. Its length from the Bill to the
Toes was eleven inches, to the end of the Tail thirteen and an half. The Wings
extended were equal to twenty one inches and an half. The Bill from the point
to the Angles of the mouth was almost two inches long, black, hard, strong,
triangular, ending in a blunt point. A reddish dusky circle immediately
encompasses the Pupil of the Eye; the rest of the Iris being white. The Tongue
when stretched out is of a very great length, ending in a sharp, bony
substance, rough underneath, wherewith, as with a Dart, it strikes Insects. The
top of the Head is of a Crimson or Vermilion color, spotted with black. The
Eyes are encompassed with black, under the black on each side is another
Vermilion spot. The Throat, Breast and Belly are of a pale green: The Back,
Neck, and lesser rows of covert feathers of the Wings green: The Rump of a pale
yellow or straw-colour, as Aldrovandus rightly expresses it. The feathers under
the Tail are crossed with transverse dusky lines.

In each Wing are nineteen prime feathers, beside the outmost (which is very
short) of a dusky color, and marked with semicircular white spots. But more
particularly, the outer Webs of the Those next the body.
interior flags are green, the inner Webs dusky, with semicircular white
spots: The outer Webs of the exterior flags dusky, and painted with white
spots, the inner Webs of the same color with the precedent. The feathers
covering the roots of the flags underneath are of a pale green, with transverse
dusky lines. The Tail consists of ten feathers, stiff, and bending inwards,
which by reason the shaft reaches not to the end of the Webs, seem to be
forked. The two middlemost feathers are the longest, by measure four inches and
an half, have their tips black, else they are marked with cross bars, above of
a dark green, and underneath whitish, the three next on each side differ not
from these. Of the two outmost (which are blunter than the rest) the greater
are all over varied with transverse bars of black and dark green alternately
placed, the lesser or outmost have their tops green, and bottoms black.

The Feet and Toes are of a pale green, and sometimes of a lead color: The
Claws dusky. The Toes placed as in the rest of this kind, two forward, two
backward. The lowest bones of the fore toes are joined together.

It has a large Gall, an Inch and half long: The right Testicle round, the
left oblong, and bent almost into a circle, which lest any one should think
accidental, I observed in three several birds. It has no blind Guts, but in
their stead the straight Gut is dilated in that place. Its Crop was full of
Ants and Ants Eggs. It feeds also upon Caterpillars and Cossi. It sits more
upon the ground than other Woodpeckers, and seeks its food there.

Its Tongue is round, ending in a stiff, sharp, bony tip, dented on both sides.
This Tongue the Bird can dart out to a great length, viz. some three or four
inches, and draw up again, by the help of two small round Cartilages, fastened
into the forementioned bony tip, and running along the length of the Tongue:
These Cartilages from the root of the Tongue take a circuit beyond the Ears,
and being reflected backwards to the crown of the Head, (where they both meet
again, and are kept down down by a Ligament going over them) make a large bow.
Below the Ligament they run down the Sagittal Suture, and then declining a
little to the right side, pass just above the orbit of the right Eye, and along
the right side of the Bill into a hole excavated there, whence they have their
rise or original. The musculous spongy flesh of the Tongue encloses these
Cartilages like a sheath, and is so made that it may be extended or contracted
like a Worm. That part also of these Cartilages, reaching from the hind part of
the Head to the end of the Bill, is covered with the like musculous flesh that
may be contracted or extended like the Tongue, only both Cartilages are not
enclosed in one muscle, but have each its several distinct musculous sheath,
like two small strings or worms. On the ends of these Cartilages (for I could
without much force draw them out of their socket in the Bill) there was a white
glutinous or mucous matter. On the inside the flexure of these Cartilages
reaching from the root of the Tongue to the top of the Head, was a broad thin
muscle, which served to move the Cartilages to and fro. For by contracting it
self it streightens the bow of the Cartilages (almost after the manner as the
Tunica Uvea dilates the Pupil) and so necessarily forces the Cartilages forward
through the Tongue, and thrusts out the Tongue: But we leave these things to be
more curiously weighed and examined by others.

The tips of the shafts of the Tail-feathers in this and other Woodpeckers seem
to be broken or worn off by their resting upon them in climbing.

This kind lays five or six Eggs at once. I have seen six young ones together
in a Nest.

* Bellonius his greatest green Woodpecker.
Bellonius makes this Bird (which he would have to be Aristotle's third kind of
Woodpecker) far greater than the common green Woodspite now described. He gives
him a crooked Bill, contrary to the manner of the rest of this Tribe: Feet
after the fashion of others: Diverse spots in the Wings, such as are seen in the
Wings of the rest, but different in color.

. III. The greater spotted Woodpecker or Witwall, Picus varius major; (...)
Arist.
IT is as big or bigger than a Blackbird. The Female weighed two ounces three
quarters. Its length from the Bill to the Claws was eight inches, to the end of
the Tail nine and an half: the distance between the tips of the Wings extended
sixteen inches.

The Bill in the Cock was an inch and a quarter long, measuring from the tip to
the corner of the slit of the mouth, straight, black, thicker at the head, and
slenderer by degrees, ending in a sharp point, being of a triangular Pyramidal
figure, and channel'd with a furrow or two. The Nosthrils round and covered
with black bristles. The Irides of the Eyes red. The Tongue made like that of
the green Woodpecker.

On the hind part of the Head is a line of Crimson or Vermilion red, reaching
from white to white in each cheek; [in the Cock, not in the Hen.] In the Hen
the Throat and Breast were of a dirty yellowish white: The lower Belly under
the Tail of a Phoenic^o color. Crimson color.
lovely red or Crimson color. Hence the Italians call it Cul rosso, the Welsh
by a name signifying Fire-tail. the feathers encompassing the Base of the upper
Chap, and those about the Eyes and Ears are white. The Head is black, with a
dash of shining green, the Back also black. At the insertion of the Wings on
each side is a great white spot. From the corners of the mouth a broad, black
stroke reaches own to the Back: just below the Head another black stroke
crosses this.

The flag-feathers of the Wing are in number twenty (of which the first or
outmost is the shortest) black, and marked with semicircular white spots. The
interior covert feathers of the Wings are white, and make up part of those
white spots we mentioned on the shoulders; the middlemost are wholly black, the
exterior have one or two white spots. The ridge or Base of the Wing is white.

The Tail is three inches and an half long, made up of ten feathers; of which
the two middlemost are the longest, being strong, stiff, sharp-pointed, and
bending inwards: The shaft, as in others, is not produced to the utmost tip
(perchance worn or broken off with climbing) by reason whereof the feathers
appear forked. The outmost Tail-feather on each side is small, black, and
having a white spot in the exterior Web. In the two next the lower part is
black, and the rest white, with two transverse black spots or strokes, of which
the upper cuts both Webs of the feather, the lower only the interior. In the
third the black reaches higher, and the white part has only one transverse
black stroke. The fourth pair are all black, having only a semicircular spot of
white toward the top, the very tip being of a reddish white: The two middlemost
are wholly black.

Annot. I think it is not needful so scrupulously to describe every particular
spot in each feather: for that nature takes a latitude, sporting her self, as
they call it, in these lesser things, not observing always the same number,
figure, and situation of spots. In the Bird I described, the flag-feathers of
the Wings were spotted on both sides the shaft with white spots, which when the
Wing was extended stood in rows crossing the feathers: The four middle feathers
of the Tail wholly black, the rest variegated with white and black transverse
spots. The feathers stand so that the Tail, when shut, seems a little forked.

The Feet are of a lead color. It has the Toes so situate as the others of
this kind, viz. two forward, two backward: The two fore-toes likewise connected
from the divarication place to the first joint.

It has a small Liver with a Gall annexed. The Breast Bone is very long,
produced almost to the vent: A small Gizzard or stomach, in that we dissected
full of A great Insect with six feet, resembling a Caterpillar found in rotten
wood.
Cossi, Spondyli, and Beetles. The Guts lie deep within the body, that they be
not hurt when the Bird turns her head downward, and strikes trees with her
Bill. It is common to this, with the rest of its kind, to want the blind Guts.

. IV. The lesser spotted Woodpecker or Hickwall, Picus varius minor.
THis is for shape and color like to the last described, but much less,
weighing scarce an ounce; being in length from Bill to Tail not more than six
inches; though the Wings extended were no less than eleven inches broad from
tip to tip.

The Tail consisted of ten feathers, from the exterior to the middlemost
gradually longer each than other, the two middlemost being the longest. Of
these the four middlemost are wholly black, strong, sharp, and bending inward,
as in the rest of this kind, so made to sustain the body when she climbs trees:
The three exterior are less sharp, of which the outmost and least has the
bottom black, and the upper part white, with two transverse black spots. In the
next the black part is extended in the inner Web as far as the second
transverse black spot; in the outer the white reaches lower, yet has it only
one transverse black spot toward the top. The third is black, having only the
tip white.

The Throat, Breast, and Belly are of a sordid white, above the Nosthrils it is
of a dusky color, and on the head it has a white spot. The hinder part of the
head is black. From the Eyes to the middle of the Neck two broad lines of white
feathers terminated on both sides with black are produced, concurring about the
middle of the Neck [only the feathers that cover the Ears are of the same
color with the Breast.] The upper part of the Back, and upper covert feathers
of the Wings are black. The prime feathers and rest of the covert feathers are
elegantly spotted with white semicircular spots. The middle part of the Back is
white with cross lines of black. The Bill, Tongue, Irides, Feet and Toes like
those of the last described. The Legs feathered, but not down to the Toes: The
Claws black and crooked. The same number of prime feathers in Wings and Tail.
The Stomach dissected was full of Insects.

It wants the Appendices or blind Guts, like the rest of this kind.

The Cock differs from the Hen in that instead of a white spot on the head is
has one of a lovely red or Crimson.

Aldrovandus writes, that this kind wants those red spots on the Head and Rump;
which is true of the Female, but not of the Male, for his Head, as we said, is
marked with a red spot.

. V. * The Brasilian parti-colored Woodpecker, called Ipecu, Marggrave.
THis Bird is about the bigness of a Dove. The length of the Neck was two
inches, of the body four, of the Tail also four, of the Legs almost an inch and
half. It has four Toes in its Feet, two standing forwards, and two backwards,
as in Parrots. The Head is covered with feathers of a Vermilion color, on
which also it has a Crest like a Dove. The Neck underneath is black to the
very Bill, as also above: But in both sides there is a broad white line
produced toward the Back [divisim.] The Wings are outwardly all over black,
inwardly white: The Tail black. In the Belly and upper part of the Legs the
feathers are black and white. Its Bill is straight, sharp-pointed, an inch and
half long, wherewith it pierces the barks of trees, as the Woodpecker.

. VI. The Wryneck: Iynx sive Torquilla.
THis Bird is of the bigness of the common Lark, or somewhat less: It weighs
more than an ounce. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail
seven inches and an half: The breadth of the Wings spread eleven inches. The
Bill is short, smaller, and less triangular than in the rest of this kind, of a
lead-colour. The Tongue round, ending in a sharp bony thorn, which it can dart
out to a great length, and withdraw again, like the rest of this kind. The
Irides of the Eyes of a yellow hazel color. The Feet and Legs short, of a pale
lead color [or, as I described them of a flesh color.]

It could ruffle up the feathers of its Head, so as to make them appear like a
Crest, as does the Jay. The Plumage is so elegantly and curiously colored,
that it is very difficult in words to describe it; the upper part of the body
being variegated with white, black, reddish, dusky, and gray or ash color.
From the crown of the Head all along the middle of the Back runs a list of
black. The Head is cinereous, with transverse white, black, and red lines: The
Throat and lower Belly yellow with transverse black lines; the middle of the
Breast is whiter, with fewer lines. The feathers covering the bottom of the
prime Wing-feathers are yellow, with transverse black lines. The Rump is more
ash-colored than the Head, with white spots and transverse black lines.

The prime Wing-feathers are in number nineteen, the first or outmost being
something shorter than the second, black, but spotted with great red spots;
which spots, especially in the feathers next the body, are powdered with small,
black specks. The tips of the second row of Wing-feathers are white. The
Tail-feathers are ten, not sharp-pointed, nor stiff, nor bending inwards, as in
the above described Woodpeckers; two inches and an half long, of a cinereous
color, crossed at large intervals with bars of black: To speak exactly, the
part next the cross bars is of a dark ash color, the rest of the intermediate
spaces of a paler cinereous, sprinkled, and as it were bedewed with black
specks.

The Toes are so disposed as in the rest of this kind, two forward, two
backward: The outmost Toes in each Foot are equal, and twice so long as the
inmost.

It wants the blind Guts like the rest of this kind. The length of the Guts was
nine inches.

It strangely and ridiculously turns its head back to its shoulders, whence it
is by Gaza called Torquilla. It feeds upon Ants, which darting out its Tongue
it stabs through with great celerity, with the thorny point we mentioned (as
Children are wont to catch Frogs with an Iron Dart, shot out of a Bow, and
drawn back again) and so swallows them, never touching them with its Bill, as
other birds are wont to do their meat: Witness Gesner, who tells us, that
himself kept one five days in a Cage, and affirms upon his own experience that
it feeds upon no other food but Ants.

The Hen is paler and more cinereous than the Cock. Aldrovandus observed a long
black spot behind the Eyes in the Cock.

Annot.] I described this Bird thus. The Quils or prime feathers in each Wing
were eighteen, of a dusky color, marked in their exterior Webs with red
spots, in their interior with pale ones: so situate as in the pied Woodpecker.
The Throat and upper part of the Breast were yellow, and the Belly white, from
Bill to Tail variegated with thick-set, cross black lines. At each corner of
the mouth grew white feathers, varied with the like transverse lines.

. VII. * The Brasilian Jacamaciri of Marggrave.
FOr the conformity of its Feet we have subjoyned it to the Woodpeckers. It is
of the bigness of a Lark. It has a straight, sharp-pointed, black Bill, almost
two inches long: A short Tongue, [wherein it differs from Woodpeckers] blue
Eyes; short Wings; which end a little beneath the rise of the Tail. The Tail is
almost three inches and an half long, straight, composed of seven or eight
feathers. The upper Legs are feathered, the lower bare, the skin being of a
color mingled of yellow and green; of which color are also the Feet. In each
foot it has four Toes, two standing forwards, and two backwards; both the
inner Toes in each Foot, as well the fore as the back one, are but half so long
as the outer. The Claws are black. The whole Head, upper part of the Neck,
Back, Wings, and Tail above are of a green color mingled with golden or
igneous, so that they shine wonderfully. A ring of the same color does also
encompass the Neck. Under the Throat, on the Breast, the lower Belly, and under
the Tail it is of a dark yellow color, like yellow Way.

. VIII. * The Brasilian Curucui of Marggrave.
IT is a very elegant and beautiful bird, almost of the bigness of a Pie: Has
a short broadish Bill, of a brimston color: A wide mouth, and, when open, or a
triangular figure: Fair blue eyes with a golden circle [I suppose he means
encompassing the Pupil] and under each Eye a spot of white skin, like a Hen: In
the Eyelids above and beneath black, stiff hairs: The Neck not long: The Legs
short and feathered almost to the Feet, with black feathers. It has a Tail
five inches and an half long, of a good breadth. Under the lower Bill, in the
middle, and at both sides, is as it were a beard, made up of black bristles,
yet shining with a gloss of blue as in the Necks of Mallards. Under the Throat
the feathers are only black. The whole Breast and lower Belly are of an
excellent Vermilion color: The whole Back and upper side of the Tail are of a
shining green, with a gloss of blue, and golden, or igneous color, The end of
the Tail has a black border. Underneath the Tail it has white feathers
elegantly straked with cross black lines. The beginning of the Wings is of that
shining green we mentioned: The middle part is hoary, the black feathers being
poudered with very little gray specks, as Mallards use to be: The utmost part,
that is, the longest feathers, are of a dark dusky or blackish color. The
Legs, as I said, are almost wholly clothed with black feathers: What is bare,
together with the Feet, is of a dusky ash color. The Toes are so disposed as
the Parrots. The feathers under the Wings are gray.

. IX. * Guira acangatara of the Brasilians, Marggrav.
THis Bird is about the bigness of a Magpie. It has a Bill an inch long, the
upper Chap whereof is a little hooked, the whole of a dark yellow: The Eyes
Crystalline, with a dusky circle: The Neck two inches long, the body three. The
Tail very long, viz. eight inches, consisting of eight straight feathers. The
upper Legs are an inch and half long, as also the lower. The Toes in each foot
four, standing as in Parrots, the two inward in each foot being shorter, the
two outward longer. The whole Head is clothed with feathers, which in their
middles longways near the shaft are dusky, in their sides yellow, as is the
Crest. The Neck and Wings (on the other side) have their feathers yellow in the
middle, and dusky in the sides. The ends of the Wings are almost wholly dusky.
The whole Belly, Back, excepting the Wings, upper Legs, and rise or base of the
Wings to three inches and an half length, are covered with feathers of a pale
yellow. The end of the Tail has white feathers, the rest of the Tail is dusky.
The lower Legs and Feet are of a Seagreen we call it.
Sea-water-colour. On the Head are long feathers erected like a Crest. It makes
a great cry in the Woods.

. X. * The Brasilian Aracari of Marggrav. the other Xochitenacatl of Nieremberg.
IT is of the bigness of a Woodpecker [I suppose he means the common green one]
has a Bill four inches long, an inch and half broad or deep, three inches and
an half thick where thickest, [I suppose he means so much by measure round] a
little bending downward like a Turkish Scymitar, and sharp-pointed like a
Parrots; the upper Chap being a little longer than the lower: Both upper and
lower are for above half way reckoning from the end, serrate or toothed. The
upper part of the Bill is greater than the lower. The Bill is hollow, very
light, [lighter than a Sponge:] The upper Chap white, distinguished by a black
line running along the middle or ridge from head to point, the lower Chap
wholly black. The whole Bill is inserted into the Head triangle-wise, and where
the insertion is, compassed about with a triangular white line. It has a
Tongue four inches long, very light, and plainly resembling a feather to see
to: Or else is feathered and black, (if the Tongue may be said to have a
feather.) It has a Head not very big, broad, and compressed; great Eyes, with
a black Pupil, yellow Irides, and the Reliquas extremitates.
rest of the outsides of the Eyes black. The Neck is not longer than a Parrots.
The body from the rise of the Neck to the Tail is about five inches long. The
Tail is broad like a Woodpeckers, and six inches long, or somewhat more. The
Legs and Feet are of a dark green or black, like to those of Parrots, having
two fore-toes, whereof the one longer than the other, and two back-toes
likewise of unequal length. The Claws crooked, and dusky or black. The length
of the upper Legs is two inches, of the lower one and an half. The whole Head
and Neck as far as the beginning of the Breast are covered with black feathers,
which where they end are terminated in a circle. The Breast, and all the lower
Belly elegantly clothed with yellow feathers mingled with pavonine. Cross the
Breast from the one side to the other is a broad line drawn, of a sanguine
color. The whole Back, Wings, Tail, and upper Legs are covered with dark green
feathers, [or black with a gloss of green] like the color usual in our
Magpies. The end of the Back above the beginning of the Tail is of a sanguine
color to more than the Circumference of a Crown piece. The Wings end at the
rise of the Tail, and within side are of a dark ash color. The Bill is black
within. This Bird does, as it were, pronounce its own name, crying with a sharp
voice, but not very shril, Aracari.

This Bird is very like the Toucan or Brasilian Pie. The conformation of its
Feet argues it to belong to the Woodpecker-kind. We saw the Bill of this Bird
in the Repository of the Royal Society, London, our selves also have one of
them: It is much less than the Toucans Bill, not so compressed side-ways, but
rounder. The upper Chap wholly white, without any line of black in the top,
(wherein it differs from the Aracari's Bill described by Marggrave) the lower
black.

. XI. * The yellow blue-footed Persian Woodpecker of Aldrovandus.
THis Bird communicated to me by Tartaglinus the Venetian, (who showed me many
exotic Animals painted) at first sight, from the constitution of the Bill and
Feet I judged to be of the Woodpecker-kind. In bigness it differs little or
nothing from the green Woodspite; only it has a thicker Head and Neck, and a
longer Bill. The feathers from the middle of the Crown to the end of the Tail
have something of ferrugineous: But the Bill is altogether ferrugineous. The
Feet are of a pale blue. The Claws are black: The rest of the body is yellow,
save that all the Wing-feathers ends or tips incline somewhat to ferrugineous;
and that a spot of the same color encompasses the Eyes. He said it was an
exotic Bird, and bred in Persia.

. XII. * The American Hang-nest, called by the Brasilians Guira tangeima.
Marggr.
IT is a Bird somewhat bigger than a Lark, equal to the spotted Woodpecker. Its
body is about three inches long; Its Neck an inch and half: The Head is small,
the Bill straight, sharp-pointed, an inch long. Its Legs and Feet are like
those of other birds, its Tail straight, four inches long. The color of its
Bill is black, except the lower part, where it is inserted, which has
something of dusky: The Head and Neck, as low as the beginning of the Breast,
very black. The upper part of the Neck from the Head almost to the beginning of
the Back is of a Uranici coloris.
Sky-colour. Through the beginning of the Back it has a transverse black spot,
reaching as far as the Wings: But the Wings themselves are of a deep black,
only in the middle they have a white spot situate longways the feathers, of an
inch and half long. The Tail also is wholly black: The rest of the body is of a
Sky-colour. The Legs are bluish: The Pupil of the Eyes black, with a yellowish
white Iris. These Birds build admirable Nests of a Cylindrical figure, and hand
them in great numbers on the ends of the boughs and twigs of trees. These Nests
are made of the small Fibers of roots and twigs of trees and herbs, curiously
platted and interwoven.

. XIII. The Brasilian Jupujuba or Japu of Marggrave.
THis is of the same figure with the precedent, and builds after the same
manner, in the same tree [one of these is a Male, the other a Female] but has
somewhat a shorter Tail. The whole body is invested with very black feathers.
In the middle of each Wing it has a yellow spot, an inch long: In the end of
the Back, and near the vent it is all yellow. [I have seen also that were
wholly black, with their Backs of a sanguine color.] The Tail below from its
rise half way is yellow, the other half being black; above it is wholly black,
only it has on both sides a feather half yellow. The Legs and Feet are black:
The Bill of a Brimstonecolour. The Eyes of a Sapphire color, with a black
Pupil. It has a blue Tongue, cleft or doubled at the top. Near the house of
the Owner of the Engine Tapucurai is planted the tree Uti, in which hang more
thau four hundred Nests of these Birds; of which there are there a very great
number, which hatch and bring up three broods of young in a year. Each Nest is
made of dry grass and horse-hair, or hogs bristles mingled, of a dusky color,
of the figure of a narrow Cucurbite with its Alembick, long, in the whole about
a foot and half, and from the bottom for one foot upwards hollow like a Purse,
the remaining or upper part of it for half a foot being solid, and hanging by
its tip on the tip of a little branch of the tree. All these Nests hang down on
this fashion from the tips of the twigs of trees.

We have often seen the Nest of this Bird artificially built kept among other
rarities in the Cabinets of the curious. I persuade my self that this was the
very Bird, which the Ancients understood by the name of Picus nidum suspendens,
i. e. the Hang-nest-Woodpecker. I am sure there is a great deal more reason why
this should be so called, than the Oriolus, which Aldrovandus takes to be the
Picus nidum suspendens, Antonius Pigafeta writes, that Parrots do on this
fashion hang their Nests on the extremities of the branches of trees; falsely
imagining that the Nests which he saw hanging on the twigs of trees were
Parrots Nests.

CHAP. VI. Of Woodpeckers less properly so called.
. I. The Nuthatch or Nutjobber, Sitta seu Picus cinereus.
IT is somewhat less than a Chaffinch. The Cock weighed almost an ounce. Its
length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail was five inches three
quarters, to the end of the Toes six inches.

The Bill was straight, triangular, black above, underneath toward the Throat
white, almost an inch long, measuring from the tip to the Angles of the slit of
the mouth. The Tongue broad, not longer than the mouth, horny at the end and
jagged: The Nosthrils round, and covered with small bristles. The Head, Neck,
and Back of an ash color: The sides under the Wings red: The Throat and Breast
of a pale yellow [or rather Chesnut-red.] The lower Belly under the Tail has
some red feathers with white tips. From the Bill through the Eyes to the Neck
is extended a long black stroke: The Chin is white.

The number of flag-feathers is nineteen, of the which the first is very short
and little. The interior, or those next the body, have their Webs cinereous;
the exterior dusky: The shafts of all are black. The Wings underneath are
marked with a double spot, the one white at the roots of the exterior quils,
the other black and larger, beginning at the insertion of the bastard-wing.

The Tail is short, scarce two inches, made up of twelve feathers, all of equal
length, unless the outmost be somewhat the shorter, not sharp-pointed, nor
stiff as in Woodpeckers, but flexile and limber: The two middlemost cinereous;
the two next to them black with cinereous tips; the two succeeding have the
inside of their tips white, the outside cinereous. The outmost have their tips
of a dark ash color, and under that a transverse whitespot, the rest of the
feathers being black.

The Legs are short; both Legs and Feet of a dark flesh-colors. It has but one
back-toe, equal to the middle of the fore-toes. The Claws are great, crooked,
and of a dusky color; that of the back-toe the biggest. The outmost fore-toe
the least: Both outmost and inmost joined to the middle toe at the bottom.

It had a musculous Stomach or Gizzard, in which we found Beetles; short blind
Guts. The length of the Guts was six inches and an half.

It builds in the holes of trees, and if the entrance be too big, it does
artificially stop up part of it with clay, leaving only a small hole for it
self to pass in and out by.

It feeds not only upon Insects, but also upon Nut-kernels. It is a pretty
spectacle to see her fetch a Nut out of her hoard, place it fast in a chink,
and then standing above it, with its head downwards, striking it with all its
force, breaks the shell, and catches up the Kernel.

This bird is by Aristotle called (...), who makes two kinds of it, a greater,
and a lesser. Gaza retains the same name, calling it in Latin, Sitta, Later
Writers style it Picus cinereus, i. e. the ash-colored Woodpecker; because
like them it climbs and runs up the bodies and boughs of trees. It is called by
some (...), and (...), because it moves and flirts up the Tail.

. II. * The Wall-creeper, or Spider-catcher. Picus murarius, Aldrov. l. 12. c.
37.
IT is somewhat bigger than a House-Sparrow, almost as large as a Stare. The
color of the whole body is best seen when the Wings are spread. It has a
long, slender, black Bill. The Head, Neck, and Back cinereous: The Breast
white: The Wings partly cinereous, partly red, viz. toward the Belly: The Tail
short: The long feathers of the Wings, the lower part of the Back, the Belly,
and Legs, (which, after the manner of Woodpeckers, are short) black: The Toes
long, three standing forward, and one backward, though Bellonius attributes to
it two fore-toes, and so many back ones: Wherefore it is to be suspected, that
either he knew not the Wall-creeper, or else set forth one different from ours,
which I do not believe, because the rest of the description he gives of it,
agrees exactly to our Bird. Thus far Aldrovandus; who writes, that this Bird is
frequent and obvious enough in the Territory of Bologna; in flying like to the
Hoopoe, almost always shaking its Wings like that, never resting in one place.
By later Writers it is called Picus murarius, because as Woodpeckers cling to
trees, and hang on them, so this sticks to all Walls, especially those of
Towers, and seeks Insects in their chinks: Whence in Wintertime it is often
seen in Cities. It is a brisk and cheerful bird, and has a pleasant note. It
flies alone, and sometimes two in company. It builds its Nest in the holes of
trees. They say it is found in England; but we have not as yet had the hap to
meet with it.

. III. The greater Reed-Sparrow, Junco Aldrov. Cinclus Turneri.
THe Cock, which we described, was for bigness not much inferior to a Thrush.
The Bill was great, somewhat crooked; from the tip of the Angles of the mouth,
more than an inch long. The upper Chap of a dusky color, the lower whitish.
The Tongue cloven, and divided into many filaments. The inside of the mouth of
a deep yellow or Saffron color. The Nosthrils are round and great: The Irides
of the Eyes of a red hazel color. Not far from the Angles of the mouth in the
upper Mandible grow four or five black hairs. The Throat, Belly, and Breast are
white, with a kind of yellowish tincture, more yellow about the vent: The
supine or upper side of the body of a dusky yellowish color. Above each Eye is
a whitish line.

The number of prime feathers in each Wing is eighteen. The Plumage covering
the roots of these feathers underneath is yellow. The Tail is three inches and
a quarter long: I mean the middle feathers, for the extreme are but two and
three quarters; They have a strong shaft, and are stiff like those of a
Woodpecker.

The Legs and Feet are great, strong and musculous, which is especially
remarkable in this bird. It has but one back-toe, which toward the root or
rise of it is broad and torose. The outer fore-toe is joined to the middlemost
at the bottom.

It had a yellow Gall, large Testicles, a shorter Breast Bone than Woodspites;
short blind Guts: Reed-Beetles in the stomach.

It is always conversant among Reeds, and sings sweetly. It sticks to, and
climbs up Reeds, as Woodpeckers do up trees.

The Alcedo vocalis of Bellonius seems to be the same either with this or the
lesser Species; the description whereof see in Aldrovandus, lib. 20. cap. 62.

. IV. The lesser Reed-Sparrow. An Cannevarola Aldrovandus? An Ficedula
cannabina Olinae?
IT is equal to, or somewhat less than a Redstart. It creeps and sings among
Reeds. From the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail was five inches three
quarters: From tip to tip of the Wings extended eight inches. The Bill,
measuring from the point to the Angles of the mouth, was three quarters of an
inch long: The lower Chap almost white, the upper blackish, the Mouth, within
yellow: The Tongue cloven, and divided into filaments, the Irides of a hazel
color. The Back toward the Rump is of a dark olive or dusky green, toward the
Head more cinereous. The middle of the Breast is white; the Throat and lower
Belly have a mixture of yellow. The sides are of a dirty, greenish color.

The prime feathers of the Wings are in number eighteen, of which the second is
the longest. They are of a dark brown or dusky color, as in the Redstart, and
other small birds. The Tail is 2 inches long, and composed of twelve feathers.
The soles of the Feet are of a greenish yellow. The outmost Toe adheres to the
middlemost below, as in others. The Bill and Feet in this Bird are greater than
the proportion of the rest of the body seems to require. The Female differs
little or nothing from the Male.

Annot. This Bird I bought in the Market at Florence, where they call it
Beccasigo: which name they give to many small birds that feed fat. I suppose it
is that described and figured in Olina by the title of Beccasigo Cannabino. My
description differs something from this of Mr. Willughby, but not considerably,
viz. The Back was of a pale green inclining to yellow, which just above the
Tail was more yellow. The feathers of the Wings and Tail were of a Mouse-dun,
having their edges of the same color with the Back. The Tail, when spread,
terminated in a circular Circumference. The Breast, Belly, and Throat were
white, dashed with yellow. The Bill long, straight, flat, or depressed; The
lower Chap of a horn-colour, the upper more dusky, but not black: The Legs
long, and of a light blue, with a little dash of yellow. The Mouth within
yellow: The soles of the feet yellow.

It is common in the Low Countries among the Reeds.

Another Bird of this name, but different in kind, we shall describe afterward.

. V. The Creeper. Certhia.
IT is a very small bird, scarce bigger than the copped Wren. It has a long,
slender, sharp Bill, bending downwards like a Bow. The upper Chap of a dark
color, the nether white at the base, and black at the tip. The Tongue not
longer than the Bill, wherein it differs from the Woodspites, yet hard and
stiff at the point, and sharp like a Goad. The Irides of the Eyes of a dark
hazel color.

The Throat, Breast, and Belly white: The Head, Back, and Wings inclining to a
Fox-colour; the middle parts of the feathers being whitish. Above the Eyes on
each side is a white spot. The beam-feathers of the Wings are eighteen, the
first of which is very short, the fourth the longest, and by measure two
inches: The three outmost are dusky, the rest have white tips, and a broad
white line through their middle, something inclining to fulvous. The edges of
those next the body are likewise fulvous, and have white only on the exterior
side of their shafts. The covert-feathers of the Wings are more black, the
middlemost have their middle part fulvous; all their tips white. The Tail
consists of ten feathers only, as in Woodspites, is very long for the bigness
of the bird, viz. two inches and an half, sharp-pointed, stiff, of a dusky red,
or reddish dun color.

The Feet are of a light brown: The Legs short: The Feet have long Toes, all
armed with very long, sharp, white Claws, especially the back-toe, which has
it extraordinarily long like a Lark.

It is sufficiently characterized and distinguished from all other birds by its
littleness and bow-bill.

Aldrovandus attributes to his Certhia a short Tail, wherein it differs from
ours.

It runs up the bodies and boughs of trees, having its Feet and Tail, fitly
disposed and formed for such a purpose.

It is frequent in England; and as Aldrovandus reports, builds in the hollows
of trees after the manner of Woodpeckers; It lays a great number of Eggs,
sometimes, they say, not fewer than twenty.

. VI. The Hoop or Hoopoe, Upupa Latinis, (...) Graecis.
IT weighs three ounces. Its length from the point of the Bill to the end of
the Tail was twelve inches and an half: Its breadth, the Wings being stretched
out, nineteen inches.

Its Bill is two inches and an half long, black, sharp, and something bending.
The Tongue small, as Aldrovandus rightly has it, deep withdrawn in the mouth,
triangular, being broad at bottom, and sharp at top, like a perfect equilateral
triangle. The shape of the body approaches to that of a Plover. The Head is
adorned with a most beautiful Crest, two inches high, consisting of a double
row of feathers, reaching from the Bill to the nape of the Neck, all along the
top of the Head: Which it can at pleasure set up, and let fall. It is made up
of twenty four or twenty six feathers, some of which are longer than others;
the tips of them are black; under the black they are white, the remaining part
under the white being of a Chestnut, inclining to yellow. The Neck is of a pale
red: The Breast white, variegated with black strokes tending downward. The
older birds had no black strokes in their Breasts, but only in their sides. The
Tail is four inches and an half long: [Aldrovandus says six] made up of ten
feathers only, black, with a cross mark or bed of white of the figure of a
Crescent or Parabola, the middle being toward the Rump, the horns toward the
ends of the feathers. The Tail is extended further than the Wings complicated.

There are in each Wing eighteen quils or master-feathers, of which the ten
foremost are black, having a white cross bar, which in the second, third,
fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh is more than half an inch broad. The seven
following feathers have four or five white cross bars. The limbs or borders of
the last are something red: The Rump is white. The long feathers springing out
of the shoulders and covering the back are varied with white and black cross
lines or bars, after the same manner as the Wings.

The Irides of the Eyes are of a hazel color: The lower Eyelid bigger than
the upper: The Legs short: The outmost toe at bottom fastened to the middle,
without any intervening membrane. The Windpipe (as Aldrovandus describes it) at
the beginning of the divarication or division into two branches which go to the
Lungs, has two little bones outwardly supplying the use of the Head of the
Windpipe.
Larynx, between which is spread a very thin skin: The annulary-Cartilages
beyond the divarication in each branch in our observation were only
semicircular, as in Herons.

In the Stomach dissected we found Beetles; whence it is manifest that it feeds
upon Insects, but whether also upon Grapes and other Berries, as some of the
Ancients have delivered, we know not. I hear (says Aldrovandus) that among
other things it feeds upon Ants. It has no blind Guts.

In the number of Tail-feathers, want of the blind Guts, cross lines of the
Wings, and partly also in its food it agrees with Woodpeckers, to which
therefore we have subjoyned it.

About Collen and elsewhere in High Germany it is very frequent, where they
call it Widehuppe. It sits for the most part on the ground, sometimes on
Willows. Turner says, that it is found no where in Britany: But he is
deceived; for we are assured by credible persons, that it is sometimes, though
more rarely, seen in Northumberland, and also in Surrey.

Aristotle witnesses that it makes its Nest of dung, especially man's dung,
daubing it therewith instead of Clay.

It took its name in both Languages [Greek and Latine] from the sound of its
voice. The most of our English Grammarians ((says Turner) call that bird
Upupa, which those that speak barbarously from the noise it makes with its
Wings are wont to call Vannellus, and they in their own Language a Lapwing.
This inveterate error our Grammar Schools do still retain.

They say the Hen is always greater than the Cock.

CHAP. VII. Of Land Birds that feed upon Fish.
. I. The Kingfisher. Ispida an Veterum Alcyon?
IT weighed an ounce and a quarter: In length from the tip of the Bill to the
end of the Tail exceeded seven inches. The ends of the Wings extended were
eleven inches distant.

The Bill was almost two inches long, thick, strong, straight, sharp-pointed,
black, yet whitish at the Angle [of the lower Mandible.] The upper Chap is for
the most part longer than the lower, yet in some birds the lower is longer than
the upper. The Tongue is short, broad, sharp-pointed, and undivided: The Mouth
within of a Saffron-colour, the Nosthrils oblong. The Chin is white with a
certain mixture of red; the middle also of the Breast or Belly is of the like
color. The lower Belly under the Tail is of a deep red, as are also the sides
and feathers under the Wings. The Breast is red, the outmost borders of the
feathers being of a dirty bluish green. From the Neck through the middle of the
Back to the Tail it is of a most lovely bright, but pale blue, which by its
splendor is said to hurt their Eyes that look long and intently upon it. If
you heed this color attentively you may observe the blue crossed with obscure
or dark-colored lines. Between the Nosthrils and the Eyes is a red spot, and
another beyond the Eyes: to which succeeds a white mark, tinctured with red.
The crown of the Head is of a black green, with cross blue lines.

In each Wing are twenty three Quils, of which the third is the longest; both
quil-feathers, and those next to them have their exterior Webs blue, their
interior dusky. The lesser rows of Wing-feathers, all excepting those covering
the base of the Wing, have blue tips. The long-feathers springing from the
shoulders, and covering the Back, are of a bluish green. The Tail is short,
about an inch and an half in length, made up of twelve feathers, of a dark
blue, with somewhat of black.

The Legs and Feet are very short and little, black before, red behind, as are
also the soals of the feet and the back-toes. The structure of the Feet in this
Bird is singular and different from all others, for the three lower joints of
the outmost toe are joined to the middlemost; of the inmost only one: This
inner toe is the least, and shorter by half than the middlemost, the outer
almost equal to the middlemost: The back-toe is somewhat bigger than the inner
foretoe. The third or lowest bone of the Leg is greater than is usual in other
birds. The toes seem as it were joynted with many cross lines. The bones of the
Tongue are lesser and shorter than in other birds.

The Stomach is great and lax, as in carnivorous birds; in that we dissected
was full of the bones and scales of fishes. The Guts are slenderer toward the
vent. Gesner affirms, that the fat of this bird is red; which we found to be
true. The same Author tells us, that in one Nest are often found nine young
ones: In a Nest in a hole about half a yard deep in the bank of a River we
observed but five young ones.

It is a Vulgar persuasion, that this bird, being hung up on an untwisted
thread by the Bill in any room, will turn its Breast to that quarter of the
Heaven whence the wind blows: They that doubt of it may try it.

Dr. Charleton, in his Onomasticon, makes mention of another Kingfisher brought
out of India, which scarce exceeds a Wren in bigness. We have not as yet happened
to see this Bird, neither do we remember to have elsewhere read any thing of it.

. II. The Brasilian Jaguacati guacu, Marggrav. akin to the Kingfisher.
IT is by the Portugues called Papa peixe, because it lives upon fish. It is
equal in bigness to a Throstle or Mavis: For the figure of its body like to the
greater Woodspite. It has a black, straight, and sharp-pointed Bill, almost
three inches long: Black Eyes, and very short black Legs: The upper Legs are in
part bare of feathers. The Feet have four toes (one standing backward) of
unequal length: For the two outer are short and contiguous, but the third or
inner is much the shorter, and more remote. The Claws are black. The Tail is
two inches long, reaching further than the ends of the Wings. The superior
feathers of the whole body, viz. the Head, Neck, Wings, and Tail, are of a
rusty, but shining, color. About the Neck it has a ring of pure white
feathers. The Throat, underside of the Neck, Breast, and Belly are also
clothed with white feathers. Near both the Eyes it has also a spot of white.
In the Tail some of the feathers are sprinkled with white spots, which yet are
scarce seen, unless when they spread their Wings and fly.

. VII. The Bee-eater, Merops sive Apiaster.
FOr the shape of the body it is like the Kingfisher, for bigness equal to a
Blackbird: From the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail eleven inches and an
half long; the Wings, being spread, eighteen inches broad.

The Bill is great, from the tip to the Angles of the Mouth almost two inches
long, black, and for the proportion of the body very like that of a Kingfisher,
save only that it is a little more arcuate or bending downward: The Tongue
slender, deeply cut in or torn at the tip: The Circles encompassing the Pupils.
Irides of the Eyes of a lovely red, and in some of a hazel color.

The Head is great and oblong. The color of the feathers at the Base of the
upper Chap is a greenish blue, but in the middle between the Nosthrils white.
The crown of the Head red, but in some birds having something of green mixed.
From the corners of the mouth through the Eyes on each side is extended a black
stroke; contiguous whereto under the Chin are bright, but pale yellow feathers.
The Neck and Shoulders are green, with a certain mixture of red. The whole
Belly and Breast, as far as the Chin, are blue, this color is deeper near the
Chin, fainter on the Breast and Belly. In some the color of the underside
inclines more to green: Perchance these are Cocks.

The number of beam-feathers in each Wing is about twenty one or twenty two;
decreasing by degrees to the tenth. All to the twentieth have black tips. The
first or outmost ten beneath the black are of a bluish green: The next nine
beneath the black are of a lovely Orange color, as are also the lesser rows
next to them: Those above near the ridge of the Wing are blue. The long
feathers springing from the shoulders are of a pale yellow.

The Tail is near an hand-breadth long, made up of twelve feathers, of a blue
color, the exterior Webs having something of green intermixed: The underside
of the Tail was of a dun color. The two middle feathers run out in length
beyond the rest, and end in sharp points.

The Legs are very short, but thick for the length: Both Legs and Feet exactly
like those of the King-fisher. For the fore-toes, as in that, are all joined
together to the first joint, as if they were but one toe, the outmost and
middle to the second or third. The Claws are black, the Feet and Toes of a
dusky red.

The Liver was of a pale yellow: The Stomach rather membranous than musculous,
in that we dissected filled with Beetles and other Insects. The colors of the
Wings varied in several birds, in some was more blue, in some more green, in
some more red, and in some less.

It is strange that Aldrovandus should not take any notice of, or not mention
at least the connection of the Toes in this Bird.

It is not unfrequent in the Campagn of Rome: For that we saw it there to be
sold in the Market more than once. It is not found in England that we know of
Bellonius writes, that it is so common in Candy, that it is seen every where in
that Island.

Aristotle tells us, that it feeds upon Bees, whom all other Writers of the
History of Animals do therein follow. But it feeds not only upon Bees, but also
upon Cicadae, Beetles, and other Insects. Yea, as Bellonius relates, upon the
Seeds of Nipplewort, Bastard Parsley, Turnep, etc. not abstaining from Wheat
and other grain. From its exact agreement in the shape and make of its Body,
Bill, and Feet with the Kingfisher, we suspect that it likewise preys upon fish.

Bellonius, in the first Book of his Observations, writes thus concerning the
Merops. Flying in the air it catches and preys upon Bees, as Swallows do upon
flies. It flies not singly, but in flocks, and especially by the sides of those
Mountains where the true Thyme grows. Its Voice is heard afar off, almost like
to the whistling of a man. Its singular elegancy invites the Candy Boys to hunt
for it with Cicadae, as they do also for those greater Swallows called Swifts,
after this manner: bending a Pin like a hook, and tying it by the Head to the
end of a thread, they thrust it through a Cicada, (as Boys bait a hook with a
fly) holding the other end of the thread in their hand. The Cicada so fastened
flies nevertheless in the Air, which the Morops spying, flies after it with all
her force, and catching it, swallows Pin and all, wherewith she is caught.

. IV. * The other Bee-eater of Aldrovandus. Merops alter, seu Meropi congener
Aldrov.
THe Germans call this Bird the Sea-Swallow, both because at first sight it
seems to resemble a Swallow, partly in the shortness of its Legs, and partly in
its flying, and also because like the Swallow it catches Insects as it flies. I
should rather make it congenerous to the Bee-eater than the Swallow, because it
differs widely from the Sea-Swallow [so much as to have little common with it.]

This Bird is a little longer than the precedent, and (as its picture shows) a
little grosser or thicker-bodied: Its Bill is black, long, sharp-pointed, and
approaching somewhat more to the figure of a Sith than in that. The Head,
Neck, Breast, and almost the whole Belly yellow. From the bill it has a great
black spot, which is carried on backwards through the Eyes to the beginning of
the Neck. The Back is of a Chestnut color, but mingled with green and yellow.
The Wing-feathers are painted with diverse colors: For the first [the
uppermost] are blue, the second mixed of blue and yellow, the third altogether
yellow; the fourth, viz. the prime or beam-feathers black, with red tips. The
upper part of the Tail is of a bright green, the lower of a very fair yellow,
so that it seems to be half green, half yellow. It has yellow Feet and black
Claws.

. V. * The Brasilian Guira guainumbi of Marggrave, of kin to the Merops.
IT is a Bird to see to of the bigness of a Pigeon, because it is thick and
deep-feathered, but the bulk of the body, the feathers plucked off, is indeed no
bigger than that of a Thrush. It has a head somewhat bigger than a Throstle; a
black Bill about two inches long, the upper Chap whereof is a little longer
than the nether: Both upper and nether Chap are on both sides toothed like a
Saw. It has short Legs, not much exceeding an inch in length, for color
black: Four Toes in each Foot, one situate backward, three forwards, as is
ordinary: But the first or inmost foretoe is shorter, the middlemost longest,
and the third again short, but not of equal rise with the rest: For the rise of
the first is from the middle of the foot, and also of the second; but the rise
or beginning of the third is near the third joint of the middlemost: The first
has three joints, the second four, the third again three, the back-toe but
two. The Claws are black, and bending downwards. The Tail is very long,
straight, consisting of a few straight feathers, about an inch broad, but ten
inches long: Indeed only two feathers make up the end of the Tail, which for
two inches have naked shafts, and again have their ends web'd for two inches.
The whole body is about six inches long. The feathers very beautiful: viz. on
their Head they have as it were a Mitre or Crown of Sapphire-coloured feathers,
which near the rise of the Bill resemble the color of the Turcois stone: In
the middle of this Mitre is seen a black spot of the bigness of a Gross of
Misnia. Beneath the Eyes (which are yellow with a black Pupil) it has also
black feathers mingled with Sapphire-coloured. The Throat, and the whole Breast
and Belly are of a dark yellow. The upper part of the Neck, the whole Back,
Wings, and Tail are of a green or grass color, but wherewith a Seagreen is
mixed, as in the Necks of Mallards and Peacocks. From the Knees to the Belly the
upper Legs are covered with green feathers. In the middle of the Neck
underneath it bears as it were a badge of three or four black feathers, and
about them Sapphirine ones, which make a kind of spot or mark.

This Bird for the like constitution of its Feet, and some agreement in color,
we have subjoyned to the Merops.

. VI. The Water-Ouzel or Water-Crake: Merula aquatica.
THis Bird is well nigh as big as the common Blackbird: Weighs two ounces and
an half; is in length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail eight
inches and an half, to the end of the Claws nine: In breadth between the tips
of the Wings stretched out twelve inches and an half.

It has a shorter body than the Blackbird, and a thicker Neck. Its Bill is
straight, sharp-pointed, slenderer than a Blackbirds, measuring from the point
to the Angles of the mouth about an inch long, or somewhatless, black-coloured.

The Head and upper side of the Neck are of a dark, dusky color, or black with
an eye of red. All the Back, and both prime and covert-feathers of the Wings
are parti-colored of cinereous and black, the middle parts of the feathers
being black, the edges blue. The underside of the Neck and forepart of the
Breast are milk white: The feathers contiguous to the white are reddish: The
lower Belly toward the Tail black. The Eyelids white round about.

It has in each Wing eighteen quills. The Tail is shorter than in the rest of
this kind [that is, Merula] scarce two inches and an half long, composed of
twelve feathers of equal length. The Legs, Feet, and Claws are black: The
outmost foretoe at bottom joined to the middlemost. The Tongue is black,
slender, and a little cloven at the tip. The circles encompassing the Pupils of
the Eyes great, broad, and of a fair hazel color. The Eyes are furnished with
nictating membranes. The Nosthrils are long. The Plumage covering the wholebody
thick-set, as in water-birds.

It frequents stony Rivers and Watercourse in the Mountainous parts of Wales,
Northumberland, Westmoreland, Yorkshire, etc. That I [J. R.] described was shot
beside the River Rivelin near Sheffield in Yorkshire: That Mr. Willughby
described near Pentambath in Denbighshire, in North Wales. It is common in the
Alps in Switzerland; where they call it Wasser-Amzel.

It feeds upon fish, yet refuses not Insects. Sitting on the banks of Rivers
it now and then flirts up its Tail. Although it be not Web-footed, yet will it
sometimes dive or dart it self quite underwater. It is a solitary Bird,
companying only with its Mate in coupling and breeding time.

CHAP. VIII. The greatest Land-birds, of a peculiar kind by themselves, which
by reason of the bulk of their bodies, and smalness of their Wings cannot fly,
but only walk.
. I. The Ostrich: Struthiocamelus.
WHat occurs in Ancient and Modern Writers concerning this Bird see in Gesner
and Aldrovandus.

It is the greatest of all birds, except perchance the Emen, which though it be
not so tall, yet in bulk of body is well nigh equal to it. Mr. Willughby says,
it is either equal or bigger, but I think that, if either have advantage of
other in magnitude, it is the Ostrich. When it holds up its Head it approaches
to the height of two Yards. Pliny writes, that it exceeds the height of a
horseman sitting on horseback: Which is to be understood when it stretches its
Neck forth, and reaches upwards as high as it can. The Head is small, depressed
or flat-crown'd, and (as Aldrovandus truly) like a Gooses: The Bill also is
compressed, and compared with the body very small, of a triangular figure, and
horn color, the tip being black. The skin at the Nosthrils ends in a
semicircle. The slit of the mouth is large, reaching so far that its extremes
or Angles lie directly under the Eyes. The Eyes are great, with hazel-coloured
Irides. Of all great birds this alone has both Eyelids [upper and lower] as
Pliny witnesses. Which whether it be true or not we leave to be examined by
others that have opportunity of seeing the bird. The Head and Neck, almost as
far as the Breast, are bare of feathers, as are also the Thighs. The Head and
Neck are covered with a certain Down, or thin-set hairs instead of feathers.
The sides under the Wings, and the Thighs are absolutely bare. The lower part
of the Neck where the feathers begin is white. The Wings are small, and
altogether unuseful for flying, designed by Nature only to assist the bird in
running, being spread and moved. The feathers of the Back in the Cock are
cole-black, in the Hen only dusky, so soft that they resemble a kind of Wool.
The Wing-feathers are of the same color [with the Back] beneath, but above in
their upper part purely white. The Tail is thick, bushy, and round, not as in
other Birds, to be spread out in breadth, the component feathers in the Cock
being whitish, in the Hen duskish, with white tops; which feathers are in great
request for Soldiers Hats, Helmets, etc.

Its Neck and Legs are very long: It has but two toes, wanting the back-toe
and inmost foretoe. The outer toe in that we described was five inches and an
half long, the other eight: The length of the whole Foot from the end of the
heel eleven Inches. The longer Toe was covered with twenty four great,
disjoined, annulary scales. This Toe is armed with a great, strong, black Claw;
the other or outer Toe had no Claw in the Bird we described. The Toes are
connected with a thick, strong membrane as far as the first joint.

It swallows Iron, Leather, Grass, Bread, Hair, and whatever else you offer it,
promiscuously: Howbeit it does not concoct Iron and other hard things, but
avoids them entire by siege. That we saw at Bruxels was usually fed with bread
mixed with hair. Africa produces this bird; in the Deserts whereof are sometimes
seen such multitudes of them in company, that to them that behold them afar off
they seem to be Troops or Armies of horsemen. They are also found abundantly in
Arabia; and not less plentifully in America, but of a different kind; as will
appear by and by.

They lay very great Eggs, viz. sometimes as big as a young Child's head, and of
fifteen pound weight, covered with a very hard and stony shell, which being
buried in the sand, are cherished only by the heat of the Sun till the Young be
excluded. For the Writers of Natural History do generally agree, that the old
birds after they have laid and covered their Eggs in the sand forsake them,
and take no more care of them.

That Ostrich-feathers were much used by the Ancients for the adorning of Caps,
Helmets, etc. is manifest by the testimony of Pliny: And that still they retain
their esteem, being also used now adays for the same purposes every body knows.
They were also formerly wont to be employed, not only in Italy, but in England,
for to make Fans for Gentlewomen, to cool themselves withal in the Summer time.

. II. * The American Ostrich, called Nhanduguacu by the Brasilians, Marggrav.
THis sort is somewhat less than the African: Their Legs are long, the lower
about a foot and half, the upper a foot. They have three Toes in each foot,
armed with thick, black, but not sharp Claws. One Toe standing backward, which
is round and gross; so that they can hardly walk on a smooth or boarded floor,
but easily slip and fall. They carry their Necks bending like a Swan or Stork,
being about two foot in length. Their Heads are like those of Geese. They have
fair black Eyes: A compressed or flat Bill, not very broad, two inches and an
half long. They have little Wings, unfit for flight, one of which they spread
and set up like a sail, to assist them in running, which they do with that
speed and swiftness, that a good Greyhound can hardly overtake them. Their
whole body is covered with gray feathers, which are longer and more beautiful
on the Back. The body with the feathers appears almost round. They have not
such a Tail made up of crested feathers, as is represented commonly in the
Pictures of Ostriches; but the feathers are stretched forth along the Back even
to the vent. It swallows bits of Iron, Brass-mony, Dice, or any the like things
you offer it, but concocts them not, casting them out again by siege. It feeds
on fruits and flesh. It is frequent in the fields of the Captainship.
Capitania of Serigippo, and the Capitania of Rio grande. In Fernambuco it is
not found. Its flesh is good to eat.

. III. The Cassowary or Emeu of Aldrovandus, Clusius, Nierembergius, Bontius
and Wormius
WE have seen four birds of this kind at London; three Males, and one Female:
viz. one Male among his Majesty's birds kept in St. James's Park near
Westminster; two Males and a Female at Mr. Maydstons, an East India Merchant in
Newgate-Market, brought out of the East Indies. It has a horny Crown on the
top of the Head. The Head and Neck are bare of feathers, only thin-set with a
hairy down. The skin is of a purplish blue color, excepting the lower part of
the backside of the Neck, which is red, [or of a Vermilion color.] In the
lower part of the Neck hand down two Wattles or Lobes of flesh as low as the
Breast. It has a very wide mouth. The Bill is near four inches long, of a
moderate thickness, and straight. The Legs are thick, and strong. It has three
Toes in each foot, all standing forward, for it wants the back-toe. The Claw of
the outmost Toe is much longer than the rest. It has some rudiments of Wings
rather than Wings, consisting of only five naked shafts of feathers, somewhat
like Porcupines quils, having either no Webs and feathery parts, or which were
in the Bird we described broken and worn off. It has no Tail; a great body
invested with blackish or dusky feathers, of a rare texture, which to one that
beholds the Bird at a distance seem rather to be hairs than feathers. It is a
gentle-natured bird, and easily made tame. We shall give the Reader a more full
and accurate description of all its parts out of Clusius his Exotics. This Bird
(says he) as it walked, holding up its head, exceeded the height of four foot
by some inches: For the Neck from the top of the Head to the beginning of the
Back was almost thirteen inches long; the body two foot over; the Thighs with
the Legs to the bending of the Feet seventeen inches long. The length of the
body it self from the Breast to the Rump was almost three foot. The feathers
covering the whole body, with those on the lower part of the Neck next to the
Breast and Belly, and the Thighs were all double, two coming out of the same
small short pipe or hose, and lying the one upon the other; the upper being
somewhat the thicker or grosser, the nether the more fine and delicate: They
are also of a different length, as I observed in the case of the like Bird. For
those on the lower part of the Neck were shorter; those on the middle of the
body and sides longer (viz. of six or seven inches:) But those on the extreme
or hind-part of the body about the Rump (for it wanted the Tail) nine inches
long, and harder than the rest. Although they are all hard or stiff, yet are
they not broad but narrow, with thin-set filaments opposite one to another on
each side; of a black color, but about the Thighs tending to cinereous, the
shaft only remaining black, as in the rest. These feathers had that form and
situation, that to those that behold the Bird afar off, its skin might well be
thought to be covered not with feathers, but only with hairs, seeming like to a
Bears; and to want Wings; though indeed it had Wings, lying hid under the
feathers covering the sides, furnished with We observed five shafts of feathers
in each Wing.
four greater feathers of a black color, as I observed in the case, though
they were so broken at the tops, that I could determine nothing certainly
concerning their length. But their broken shafts were pretty thick, hard and
solid, and ran deep down into the outmost part of the Wing. The upper part of
the Wing next the body had its covert feathers like those on the Breast. For it
is to be thought, that this kind of Wings are given to this Bird to assist her
and promote her speed in running: For I believe she cannot fly, nor raise her
self from the earth: [He might have been more positive in this, for it is most
certain.] The Legs in compass exceeded five inches, and were covered with many
as it were barks or broad scales, especially above the bending of the foot. It
had thick, hard Feet, divided into three thick Toes, on the upper part covered
with scales, underneath altogether callous: The middle (which was longer than
the rest) consisted of three joints, the interior of one, the exterior of
two. The Claws of all were very great, almost two inches long, thick, hard, and
horny. The Head was small for the bigness of the bird, and almost bald or
smooth, of a dark Purple color, together with the upper part of the Neck, in
which appeared thin-set, black hairs. The Eyes a little above the slit of the
Bill, great, and fiery, almost like to those of Lions, compassed with black
hairs, as are also those small, open Ear-holes which it had behind the Eyes.
The upper Chap of the Bill was as it were arched or bent like a Bow, a little
above the point perforate with two holes, serving for Nosthrils; from the
middle whereof, reaching to the top of the Head, arises a kind of towering
Diadem or Crown, of a horny substance, near three inches high, of a dusky
yellow color; which, as I understood, falls off at moulting time, and grows up
again with the new feathers. The nether Chap of the Bill from the I suppose he
means from the corners of the slit of the mouth.
slit to the utmost point was five inches long. The forepart of the Neck,
almost four inches below the Bill, had as it were two membranous Wattles
hanging down like a beard, two inches long, of a red Vermilion color. The
back-part of the Neck was likewise destitute of feathers, from the Head all
along, being also of a red Vermilion color: The lower part was covered with
some few red feathers, wherewith black ones were intermingled.

This Bird, although it seem to have some marks common with the Ostrich, as a
small Head, almost bald; and that without choice it swallows whatever you offer
it; yet has it not feet divided into two Toes like them, but into three,
wanting the backtoe, after the manner of the Bustards: And therefore so firm
and strong, that I have seen a tree of the bigness of a man's thigh wholly
crushed, and its bark taken away (as its Master told me) by the Feet and Claws
of this bird. For it was not wont to assault those with whom it fought, with
its Bill, running forward; but turning it self obliquely or sideways, to strike
backward with its Feet.

But although it devoured indifferently whatever was offered, as Oranges
entire, and the like, yet its ordinary food was white bread, which it swallowed
divided into great lumps or morsels. But I was informed, that it was especially
delighted with new-laid Hens Eggs, which it swallowed whole together with the
shell. But if it were not in perfect health, it avoided them again entire, and
then swallowing them anew the second time, it retained and concocted them.
Moreover they affirmed to me, that this bird was a Cock, and that it was
sometimes seen to put forth a penis from behind like a Camel. An Egg of this
bird, the greatest and fairest among many that I saw, being measured longways
was fifteen inches in circuit, cross-ways but twelve, or a little more: So that
for its bigness it might be employed and used for a vessel, as well as an
Ostriches, which, (as Pliny testifies) the Ancients did sometimes use, and our
Age also still does for that purpose. For I remember that I have more than once
seen Ostriches Eggs, tipped with, and set in Silver, made use of for drinking
Cups. Howbeit the Shell of this Birds Egg was not very thick nor white, like
the Shells of Ostriches Eggs, but in the outside of a greenish ash color,
adorned with continuous, at least very thick-set small protuberances of a deep
green. Of the rest which I saw one was almost of the same bigness, form, and
color with that described; but some were more round, others lesser; the color
also of some was more dilute, and less elegant. Moreover, it was told me, that
this sort of Bird is not peculiar to the Molucca Islands, but found also in
Sumatra or Taprobane, and the neighboring Continent to those Islands. Thus far
Clusius.

The Hen is much less than the Cock, of a dark Olive or dusky color. It seems
to be a miracle in nature (says Aldrovandus, who borrowed his description out
of the Journal of a Holland Voyage) that this bird wants a Tongue. Whatever it
eats it swallows. This is not so very wonderful; for we know other Birds
besides this which want the Tongue, as for example, The Pelican, etc. Whatever
other Authors have concerning the Emeu, as far as I have read, is all
transcribed out of Clusius: Excepting Dr. Harvey, who does briefly describe
this Bird from ocular inspection; adding, that it swallows even live coals: And
I have observed a Cut of it in the Tables of birds set out by Visscher, with
this Inscription, Avis ignem devorans; i. e. The bird that eats or devours fire.

. IV. The Dodo, called by Clusius Gallus gallinaceus peregrinus, by Nieremberg
Cygnus cucullatus, by Bontius Dronte.
THis Exotic Bird, found by the Hollanders in the Island called That is the
Swan Island.
Cygnaea or Cerne by the Portugues, Mauritius Island by the Low Dutch, of
thirty miles compass, famous especially for black Ebony, did equal or exceed a
Swan in bigness, but was of a far different shape: For its Head was great,
covered as it were with a certain membrane resembling a hood: Beside, its Bill
was not flat and broad, but thick and long; of a yellowish color next the
Head, the point being black: The upper Chap was hooked; in the nether had a
bluish spot in the middle between the yellow and black part. They reported that
it is covered with thin and short feathers, and wants Wings, instead whereof it
has only four or five long, black feathers; that the hinder part of the body
is yery fat and fleshy, wherein for the Tail were four or five small curled
feathers, twirled up together, of an ash color. Its Legs are thick rather than
long, whose upper part, as far as the knee, is covered with black feathers; the
lower part, together with the Feet, of a yellowish color: Its Feet divided
into four toes, three (and those the longer) standing forward, the fourth and
shortest backward; all furnished with black Claws. After I had composed and
writ down the History of this Bird with as much diligence and faithfulness as I
could, I happened to see in the house of Peter Pawius, primary Professor of
Physic in the University of Leyden, a Leg thereof cut off at the knee, lately
brought over out of Mauritius his Island. It was not very long, from the knee
to the bending of the foot being but little more than four inches; but of a
great thickness, so that it was almost four inches in compass, and covered with
thick-set scales, on the upper side broader, and of a yellowish color, on the
under [or backside of the Leg] lesser and dusky. The upper side of the Toes was
also covered with broad scales, the under side wholly callous. The Toes were
short for so thick a Leg: For the length of the greatest or middlemost Toe to
the nail did not much exceed two inches, that of the other Toe next to it
scarce came up to two inches: The back-toe fell something short of an inch and
half: But the Claws of all were thick, hard, black, less than an inch long; but
that of the back-toe longer than the rest, exceeding an inch. The Mariners in
their dialect gave this bird the name of Walghvogel, that is, a nauseous, or
yellowish bird: Partly because after long boiling its fleshbecame not tender,
but continued hard, and of a difficult concoction; excepting the Breast and
Gizzard, which they found to be of no bad relish; partly because they could
easily get many Turtle-Doves, which were much more delicate and pleasant to the
Palate. Wherefore it was no wonder that in comparison of those they despised
this, and said they could well be content to be without it. Moreover they said,
that they found certain stones in its Gizzard: And no wonder, for all other
birds as well as these swallow stones, to assist them in grinding their meat.
Thus far Clusius.

Hist. Nature. and Medic. Indiae Oriental. lib. 5. cap. 17.
Bontius writes, that this Bird is for bigness of mean size, between an Ostrich
and a Turkey, from which it partly differs in shape, and partly agrees with
them, especially with the African Ostriches, if you consider the Rump, quils,
and feathers: So that it shows like a Pigmy among them, if you regard the
shortness of its Legs. It has a great, ill-favored Head, covered with a kind
of membrane resembling a hood: Great, black Eyes, a bending, prominent, fat
Neck: An extraordinary long, strong, bluish white Bill, only the ends of each
Mandible are of a different color, that of the upper black, that of the nether
yellowish, both sharp-pointed and crooked. It gapes huge wide, as being
naturally very voracious. Its body is fat, round, covered with soft, gray
feathers, after the manner of an Ostriches: In each side instead of hard
Wing-feathers or quils, it is furnished with small soft-feathered Wings, of a
yellowish ash color; and behind the Rump, instead of a Tail, is adorned with
five small curled feathers of the same color. It has yellow Legs, thick, but
very short; four Toes in each foot, solid, long, as it were scaly, armed with
strong, black Claws. It is a slow-paced and stupid bird, and which easily
becomes a prey to the Fowlers. The flesh, especially of the Breast, is fat,
esculent, and so copious, that three or four Dodos will sometimes suffice to
fill an hundred Seamens bellies. If they be old, or not well boiled, they are
of difficult concoction, and are salted and stored up for provision of victual.
There are found in their stomachs stones of an ash color of diverse figures and
magnitudes; yet not bred there as the common people and Seamen fancy, but
swallowed by the Bird; as though by this mark also Nature would manifest, that
these Fowl are of the Ostrich kind in that they swallow any hard things, though
they do not digest them. Thus Bontius.

We have seen this Bird dried, or its skin stuffed in Tradescants Cabinet.

CHAP. IX. Of the Poultry kind.
THe characteristic notes of the Poultry kind are: 1. To have a short, strong,
and somewhat crooked Bill, very fit to pick up grains of Corn, Pulse, and other
Seeds, on which this kind chiefly feeds: 2. A thick and fleshy body: 3. Short,
hollow Wings; whence this sort of birds flies not high, and makes but short
flights for the most part: 4. A Stomach furnished with thick muscles, whose use
is to grind the grains of Corn, and other hard meat swallowed whole, which they
perform by the help of little stones which the birds now and then swallow; and
so supply the defect of Teeth: 5. Very long blind guts: 6. White flesh,
especially that of the muscles of the Breast, which color after boiling
discovers it self more manifestly. This note is peculiar to this kind, not
agreeing to any other bird that I know. This is a sign that their flesh is of
all other most wholesome, and affords best nourishments: So that it is not
undeservedly had in highest esteem, and sold dearest of any other. 7. To breed
many young at a time. 8. To build their Nests upon the ground; the reason
whereof is because 9. The young ones newly hatched are not fed by their Dams
with meat put into their mouths, but are covered with a thick Down, forsake
their Nests, and running up and down follow the old ones, and feed themselves,
picking up their meat with their Bills. 10. Because they are (as we said)
corpulent, and cannot fly long, they seek their food walking up and down upon
the earth, and for that reason have broad Toes, that they may stand firmer and
surer, and are for the most part good runners. 11. The most, if not all birds
of this kind, dust themselves. 12. The Poultry kind only, but not all the
several Species of this kind, are armed with Spurs.

We shall distinguish the birds of this kind into tame and wild: the wild we
shall subdivide into those that have the back-toe and those that want it: Those
again that have the back toe, into granivorous and phytivorous, or by a more
evident mark, such as have scarlet red Eyebrows.

Birds of the Poultry kind are either Tame and domestic, as the Peacock,
Turkey, Dunghill Cock, etc. Wild which either Have the back toe being
Granivorous, as the Pheasant, Partridge, Quail, etc. Phytivorous, with red
Eyebrows, as Cock of the Wood, etc.
Want the back-toe, as the Bustard, etc.



CHAP. X. Of tame Poultry.
. I. The Dunghill Cock and Hen. Gallus gallinaceus and Gallina domestica.
THis Bird called by the Grecians (...), and of old by a general name (...), is
and has been so well known in all Ages and places, that it would be but lost
labor to bestow many words on the describing of it. By its erect Tail having
the component feathers so situate as to make an Angle or ridge; its fleshy,
naked, serrate Comb, and Gills or Wattles hanging down under its Chin, and
lastly, by its long Spurs, it is abundantly distinguished from all other birds
of its kind, and easily known at first sight. The Dunghill Cock alone of all
diurnal Birds (excepting the Nightingale) sings or crows by night, viz. after
Midnight two or three times at intervals before break of day. The number of
quill-feathers in each Wing, computing all to the very least, is twenty seven.
The Tail consists of fourteen, which as far as I know, is peculiar to this
Species: For the rest of the Poultry kind have eighteen, or at least sixteen
feathers apiece in their Tails. Of these the two middlemost are in Cocks the
longest, and elegantly reflected or arcuate; Sickle feathers the Vulgar call
them.

The Cock being a most salacious bird does suddenly grow old, and becomes less
fit for generation. For his spirits being spent, and the radical moisture, as
they call it, consumed, by the immoderate use of Venery, his body must
necessarily wax dry, and his heat of lust be extinguished. Aldrovandus writes,
that himself has found by experience, that Cocks when they are above three
years old do indeed impregnate Hens, but that they become more impotent and
insufficient for such exercises. Hens also, since they do for the greatest part
of the year daily lay Eggs, cannot long suffice for so many births, but for the
most part after three or four years become barren and effete. For when they
have spent all the Seed-Eggs which from the beginning were in their bodies,
they must needs cease to lay, there being no new ones generated within.

How long these Birds would live, were they let alone, I cannot certainly
determine, though Aldrov. limits their age to ten years. For they being kept
only for profit, and within a few years (as we said before) becoming unfit for
generation, who is there that without all hope of gain will keep them only to
make experiment how long they will live? But that they are in their kind
short-lived we may rightly infer from their salaciousness and intemperate lust,
which infeebles the body, wastes the spirits, and hastens the end.

Cocks, being very courageous and high spirited birds, that will rather die
than yield, are wont by our Countrymen to be with great care and exact diet fed
and trained up for the combat. For in Cities and great Towns there are frequent
Cockfightings, yet not upon set days, but appointed by the Cock-masters at
their pleasure, or when they agree among themselves. Yea, in many places there
are Theaters built, (Cock-pits they call them) where such shows are exhibited,
to which there is commonly a great concourse of people. There are matches made,
and great Wagers laid, besides bettings on either side of great sums of money,
which they carry away whose Cocks get the victory. Right and well bred Cocks of
the Game, will sooner die upon the spot, than yield and give over the fight, or
turn tail and run away.

No better flesh in the world (in my opinion) than that of a year-old Pullet
well fed, or a fat Capon; nothing inferior to, not to say better than that of
a Pheasant or Partridge, Some there are that think, and we also incline to
their opinion, that the flesh of those Hens is most sweet and delicate, which
are fed at the Barn-door, running about, and exercising themselves in getting
their food, by scraping with their feet: And that the flesh of those is less
pleasant and wholesome, that are shut up in Coops and crammed. Some are so curious
that they think those limbs most wholesome which are most exercised, and
therefore in Wild-Fowl they prefer the Wings, in Tame the Legs.

A particular Anatomical description of the Cvarium, or Egg-cluster, the womb
and other parts of generation in a Hen may be seen in Aldrovandus his
Ornithology, tom. 2. p. 199, etc. but a more exact in Dr. Harvey's
Exercitations De Generatione. Of the Coition of Cock and Hen, laying of Eggs,
sitting, and hatching of Chickens the same Authors may be consulted; as also
that great Anatomist and Naturalist Marcellus Malpighius, in his little
Tractate de Ovo, who of all others does most exactly describe the process of
generation, or of the formation, and growth of the Chicken in the Egg, during
the whole time of incubation, and has also illustrated his descriptions with
Figures. Of the use of the flesh, Eggs, and all other parts of Pullen both in
Food and Physic, Gesner and Aldrovandus have writ sufficiently; to whose works
we refer those who desire to know all those particulars.

That the Lion is afraid of a Cock, cannot endure the sight of him, yea, is
terrified by his very crowing, has been delivered and received by Ancients and
Moderns with unanimous consent and approbation, and diverse reasons sought and
assigned for this antipathy: When as the thing it self is by experience found
to be false.

We have beheld more than once, not without pleasure and admiration, a Capon
bringing up a brood of Chickens like a Hen, clocking of them, feeding of them,
and brooding them under his Wings, with as much care and tenderness as their
Dams are wont to do. And we were told, that he was trained and induced to
perform this office, almost after the same manner that Jo. Baptista Porta
prescribes, lib. 4. Magiae Not. cap. 26. First, they make him very tame, so as
to take meat out of ones hand, then about Evening-time pluck the feathers off
his breast, and rub the bare skin with Nettles, and then put the Chickens to
him, which presently run under his breast and belly, and (it is likely) rubbing
his breast gently with their heads allay the stinging and it ching of the
Nettles; and this they do for two or three nights, till he begin to love and
delight in the Chickens. Perchance also the querulous voice of the Chickens may
be pleasant to him in misery, and invite him to succor the miserable. A Capon
once accustomed to this service will not give it over, but when one brood is
grown up, you may take them away, and put another to him of newly hatched
Chickens, and he shall be as kind to them, and take as much care of them as of
the former, and so others, till all being grown up or removed, he has been for
some time idle and disused the employment.

I might be infinite should I prosecute at large all that might be said of this
bird, or write a full, exact, and particular History of it. If any Reader
desires to know more of it, let him consult Aldrovandus whose design was, to
omit nothing in his History which was either known to himself, or had been
before published by others.

This same Author in his Ornithology gives us many kinds, or rather rarities,
of Hens. 1. A common Hen, but white and copped, lib. 14. cap. 2. 2. A dwarf
Hen, or shortleg'd Hen: Which variety is also found in England, kept by the
curious, and called Grigs. 3. A Padua Cock and Hen: Which ought rather to be
called a Pulverara Cock and Hen; from Pulverara a Village some miles distant
from Padua, where they are found. These are larger and fairer Fowl than the
common sort, else differ in no particular: Whence also if they be removed into
other Countries, they do by degrees degenerate, and in a short time [in some
few generations] come to be of the size and and shape of the Natives of such
places. 4. A rough-footed Cock and Hen, lib. 14. cap. 5. 5. A Turkish Cock and
Hen, different from ours especially in the variety and beauty of their colors,
cap. 6. 6. A Persian Cock and Hen, whose characteristic is the wanting of a
Rump or Tail. This kind is also kept by some among us, and called Rumkins. The
first five varieties, in my opinion, differ not specifically. For these Birds
by reason of the difference of Climate, soil, food, and other accidents, vary
infinitely in colors, differ also in bigness, and in having or wanting tufts
on their heads, etc. Those birds which he describes and gives figures of in the
tenth and eleventh Chapters, under the titles of Another Indian Cock and Hen,
and in the twelfth Chapter under the title of two other Indian Hens, are the
same with the Mitu and Mituporanga of Marggravius, of which we shall give an
account. IV.

The Wool-bearing Hen I take to be altogether fabulous, and its figure in
Aldrov. lib. 14. cap. 14. taken out of a certain Map, fictitious. Perchance it
was no other than the frisled or Frisland Hen, which Odoricus de Foro Julii and
Sir John Mandevil call the Wool-bearing Hen. The birds which M. Panlus Venetus
makes mention of in these words, In the City Quelinfu, in the Kingdom of Mangi
are found Hens, which instead of feathers have hairs like Cats, of ablack
color, and lay very good Eggs, seem to be Cassowaries.

Besides those set forth by Aldrovandus, we have often seen, and our selves
also have now at Middleton another kind or variety of Hen, called in English
the Frisland Hen, not (as I suppose) because it was first brought to us out of
Frisland, but because the feathers of the body are curled or frisled: By which
Epithete I believe this Bird was at first called, the word being afterward by
the mistake of the Vulgar corrupted into Frisland, of like sound. For knowing
this to be an outlandish Hen, they thought it could not be more fitly
denominated than from its Country, and thereupon imagined it to be called a
Frisland Hen, instead of a frisled Hen. Nor did they want a probable argument
to induce them to think it to be of a Frisland breed or original, viz. the
curling of the feathers, which one would be apt to attribute to the horror of
cold. I suppose this to be the same bird which Aldrovandus has put in the
Chapter of monstrous Hens, in the last place, whose figure he says was sent
him by Pompilius Tagliaserrus of Parma, with this description. I would have you
to understand, that there are two things especially found in this Cock worthy
of admiration. The first and chief is, that the feathers of its Wings have a
contrary situation to those of other birds, for that side which in others is
naturally under most or inmost, in this is turned outward, so that the whole
Wing seems to be inverted: The other is, that the feathers of the Neck are
reflected toward the head like a crest or ruff, which way the whole Tail also
turns up.

A Hen cut asunder in the middle (in this case they prefer a black one) and
applied The Physical uses of a Hen and its parts.
hot to the head, in the frenzy, headache, etc. usually helps, and gives ease:
They say also, that used in like manner, it heals the bitings of venomous
beasts. Laid upon Carbuncles it draws out the venom; nor must we omit, that it
stanches the bleeding of green wounds. A live Hen [or Cock] plucked about the
Fundament, and so applied to Pestilential swellings called Bubones, draws out
the venom.

1. The Jelly of an old Hen, made of a Hen cut with Calves feet, and Sheeps
feet, or Beef, boiled six or seven hours in a close vessel, to which you may
add Spices, or Cordial waters, is a great strengthener and nourisher.

2. Cock-Ale is made of Hensflesh, boiled till the flesh falls from the bones,
then it is beaten with the bones, and strained for Wine or Ale with Spices.
Note. The flesh of Hens is better than that of Cocks, except Capons. The flesh
of a black Hen, that has not laid, is accounted better and lighter.

3. Cock-broth is thus made: Tire and old Cock till he fall with weariness,
then kill and pluck him, and gut him, and stuff him with proper Physic, and
boil him till all the flesh falls off, then strain it. This broth mollifies,
and by means of the nitrous parts wherewith that decrepite Animal is endued,
and which are exalted by that tiring of him, cuts and cleanses, and moves the
belly, the rather if you boil therein purging Medicines. It is famous for
easing the pains of the Colic (boiled with purgers and discutients) good
against a Cough and Tartar of the Lungs (boiled with breast herbs.)

4. The Brain thickens and stops fluxes, as that of the belly (taken in Wine,)
Women anoint therewith the gums of Children, to make them breed teeth.

5. The inward tunicle of the stomach, dried in the Sun, and powdered binds and
strengthens the stomach, stops vomiting and fluxes, and breaks the stone.

6. The Stones are said wonderfully to restore strength after sickness, and to
yield prolific seed, to provoke and increase lust (taken fresh) and to cure
Fevers.

7. The Gall takes off spots from the skin, and is good for the Eyes.

8. The Grease of Hen or Capon is hot, moist, and softning, between the Goose
and Hogs grease, and obtunds A crimony, cures chapt lips, pains in the Ears and
pustles in the Eyes.

9. The Weasand of a Cock, burt and not consumed, given before Supper, cures
pissing of bed. Solenand. s. 4. Cons. 11.

10. The Dung does all the same that the Pigeons, but weaker: and besides,
cures the Colic and pain of the Womb. Moreover, it is good especially against
the Jaundise, Stone, and suppression of Urine.

Note. The white part of the Dung is esteemed the best.

Give half a dram Morning and Evening for four or five days. Quercet.
Pharmac. Rest. c. 21.

Outwardly it dries running heads, and other scabs (the ashes sprinkled on.)

The yellow dung cures the Ulcers of the Bladder, fried in fresh Butter or Oil
olive, and cast into cold water, to let the filth settle, that the Oil may
swim, which The Oil thus impregnate.
is to be cast into the Yard.

11. The Eggs are used, the Shells, Membranes, Whites, Yolks.

The Shells break the Stone, and cut tartareous mucilage.

The membranes are diuretic, given inwardly, or outwardly applied, (and are
laid on the prepuce of infants.)

The White cools, binds, and conglutinates. It is of frequent use in the
redness of the Eyes, and for healing of wounds (with bole) and fractures, etc.

Note. Hippocrates gives three or four Whites in Fevers to cool and cleanse.

The Yolk is Anodyne, ripens, digests, loosens, and is very much used in
Clysters. Moreover, mingled with a little Salt it is wont to be laid on
Childrens Navels (in a Walnut shell) to give a stool.

There is an Oil made of it, which is of frequent use in consolidating and
closing up wounds, and chaps, and the ripening of tumors.

. II. A Peacock, Pavo, (...).
THis Bird is so well known every where, and so sufficiently characterized by
the length and glorious eye-like spots of his Tail alone, that it may perchance
seem superfluous to bestow many words on describing of it. I shall therefore
only present the Reader with Aldrovandus his description.

In the Cock (says he) the Head, Neck, and beginning of the Breast are of a
deep blue. The Head in proportion to the body little, and (as Albertus notes)
in a manner Serpentine, adorned with two oblong white spots, the one above the
Eyes, the other, (which is the lesser, but much the thicker) under them, which
is also succeeded by a black one; else, as I said, blue. It has a tuft on the
top of its head, not entire, as in some other birds, but consisting of a kind
of naked, but very tender, green stalks or shafts of feathers, bearing on their
tops as it were Lily-flowers of the same color. Of which most beautiful tuft
or crest thus Pliny, Pavonis apicem crinitae arbusculae constituunt: And indeed
they seem not to be feathers, but the tender shoots of Plants newly put forth.
The Bill is whitish and The slit of the mouth he means.
slit wide, being a little crooked at the tip, as it is in almost all
granivorous birds, and in it wide Nosthrils: The Neck long, and for the bigness
of the Fowl very slender. The Back of a pale ash color, besprinkled with many
transverse black spots. The Wings closed (for spread I cannot see them, who
describe it painted by the life) above toward the Back are black, lower
toward the Belly and withinside red. The Tail is so disposed, that it is as it
were divided into two. For when he spreads it round, certain lesser feathers
making as it were an entire Tail by themselves, and being of another, to wit, a
dusky color, do not stand up like those long ones, but are seen extended as in
other birds: So that without doubt the longer must needs be inserted into
another muscle, by help whereof they are so erected and spread. These long
feathers, (as Bellonius writes) spring out of the upper part of the Back near
the vent, that is, out of the Rump: And those other lesser ones are made by
Nature to support the longer. The Rump is of a deep green, which together with
the Tail it erects; the feathers whereof are short, and so disposed, that they
do as it were imitate the scales of an Ethiopian Dragon, and cover and take
away the sight of part of the long feathers of the Tail. The longer feathers
are all of a Chestnut color, beautified with most elegant gold lines tending
upward, but ending in tips of a very deep green, and those forked like Swallows
Tails. The circular spots, or (as Pliny calls them) the eyes of the feathers,
are parti-colored of a deep green, shining like a Chrysolite, a Gold and
Sapphire color. For those Eyes consist of four circles of different colors,
the first a golden, the second a chestnut, the third a green: The fourth or
middle place is taken up by a blue or Sapphire colored spot, almost of the
figure and bigness of a Kidney-bean. The Hips, Legs and Feet are of an
ash color besprinkled with black spots, and armed with spurs after the manner
of Dunghil-Cocks. The Belly near the Stomach is of a bluish green, near the
vent it is black, or at least of a dusky color.

In the Peahen there is little variety of colors. The whole Wings, Back,
Belly, Thighs and Legs are of a dusky color, inclining to cinereous. The Crown
of the Head and Crest are of the same color; yet in the top of the Head are
some small spots, as it were points of green dispersed. Those white spots we
noted in the Cock are in the Hen far greater. The circle encompassing the Pupil
of the Eye in the Cock is yellow, in this of a lead-colour. The Chin is wholly
white. The feathers of the Neck are waved and green; near the Breast they have
their extremities white.

Their Food is the same with that of the common Cock and Hen: But they do
especially delight in Barley. Albertus says, that Peacocks eat Serpents,
whence it is no wonder that Serpents should be terrified with their voice. That
they were originally exotic birds, and of old time brought out of India into
Europe is most probable, though now adays they are every where very frequent.

It is proper to this Bird only, the Turkey excepted, to erect his Tail, and
spread it round, as if it delighted and took pride to have the glistering Eyes
thereof beheld: But that he does it upon being commended, and that so soon as
he casts down his Eyes and sees the deformity of his Feet, out of shame he
presently lets fall and contracts his Tail, as if he were not altogether devoid
of reason, is without doubt false and fabulous.

Its flesh is esteemed harder, colder, drier, and of more difficult concoction
than that of Hens. That being boiled or roast it will not putrefie, but keep a
year or more incorrupt, is commonly believed, and proved by an experiment made
by St. Augustine, who in his 21. Book of the City of God, Chap. 2. writes thus:
Who but God the Creator of all things gave to Peacocks flesh a faculty of not
putrefying: Which thing at first hearing seeming to me incredible, it happened
that at Carthage there was set before us a roasted Peacock; of the brawn of
whose breast we caused to be kept so much as we thought convenient: Which being
produced after so many days space as any other roasted flesh would corrupt in,
did not at all offend our Nose. Being laid up again, after more than thirty
days it was found the same as before, and likewise the same after a year, save
that it was somewhat drier, and a little contracted or shrunk. To us it seems
not so wonderful that the flesh of a Peacock, which is of it self sufficiently
hard and solid, being rendered harder and drier by roasting should continue a
long time uncorrupted in a hot Country, such as Africa is, especially if care
be taken, that in moist and rainy weather it take no wet, but be kept always
dry; and I doubt not but the same would happen to Turkeys flesh, or even to
Pullets flesh boiled or roasted. Let them abstain (says Aldrov.) from eating
Peacocks flesh who live a sedentary or idle life, using no exercise: For it is
more agreeable, or at least less hurtful to those that exercise much, [I mean
the flesh of young Peacocks only, as being more tender] but to those that are
liver-grown, or troubled with the Spleen, or with the Piles very noxious. But
in my opinion, and to my Palate the flesh of young Peacocks is very tender,
delicate, and well tasted, purely white, and deservedly had by the Romans of
old in high esteem, and price, nothing inferior to that of Hens or Partridge.

Aristotle writes, that Peacocks lay twelve Eggs, but with us they seldom lay
more than five or six before they sit.

They are pestilent things in Gardens, doing a world of mischief: They also
throw down the Tiles, and pluck off the Thatch of houses. The Peacock (says
Aldrovandus) though he be a most beautiful bird to behold, yet that pleasure of
the Eyes is compensated with many an ungrateful stroke upon the Ears, which are
often afflicted with the odious noise of his horrid, or, as he calls it,
Tartareous voice.
hellish cry. Whence by the common people in Italy it is said to have the
feathers of an Angel, but the voice of a Devil, and the guts of a Thief. It is
said (and I can easily believe it) to produce its life to an hundred years. The
Peacock, says Columella, is no less salacious than the Dunghil-Cock, and
therefore requires five Hens: Yea, if there be no other Female for him to
couple withal he will run upon and tread the sitting Hen, and break her Eggs,
whereof she being conscious, endeavors as much as she can to hide her Nest
from him. This bird is said to love cleanliness. It sometimes varies in color,
being found white, especially in Northern Countries.

. III. The Turkey. Gallopavo, sive Meleagris and Numidica avis.
THe Turkey being now so well known, and become so common every where in
Europe, needs no very minute and operose description, wherefore we shall
content our selves with that of Peter Gyllius, sufficiently exact of it self,
and made up and perfected by Aldrovandus, by the addition of whatsoever worthy
the observation was by him omitted; which runs thus:

It is as tall as a Peacock. Its Neck together with its Head is altogether bare
of feathers, and only covered with a purplish-coloured skin; so very thick,
that when it cries, or prides it self, it so stretches, and as it were blows up
the skin, that before hung loose and flaggy, that it approaches to the bigness
of a man's arm. The Crown of the Head is parti-colored of white, blue, and
purple. It has no Crest or Comb like a Cock, but a certain red, Worm-like
Caruncle.
fleshy Appendix, arising above the upper Chap of the Bill, which is sometimes
extended to that length, that it not only reaches all along the declivity of
the upper Chap, but hangs down below the tip of the Bill at least an inch, so
that the Bill is covered with it, that it cannot be seen but sideways. This
Appendix when it walks or feeds it contracts to that shortness, that whereas
before it hung down an inch lower than the Bill, now being shrunk up it falls
short of the length of the Bill it self. The feathers of this bird do somewhat
resemble a Hawks, and have their ends white. It has very long Legs. Its Toes
and Claws have the same distinction and figure with the Dunghil-Cock. The body
of that I saw was round, and taller than a Peacocks. Round about the Eyes it
was of a florid blue and purple color. The Eyes themselves were endued with a
very quick and sharp sight, like those of Hawks. The Cock when any one came
near the Hen, bristled up his feathers, and by his superb gate, strutting up
toward him, endeavored to drive him away. The Hen was white, and resembled a
Peacock when he has cast the feathers of his Tail. Thus far Gyllius: In which
description, says Aldrovandus, are two notes of no small moment wanting: viz.
That its Legs In our observation they want not spurs, though they have indeed
but short and blunt ones.
want Spurs, and that the Cock is differenced from the Hen, when they are come
to their full growth and maturity, by a bristly bush or beard before his
Throat, or in the upper part of his Breast: Add hereto, that the worm-like
Caruncle on the Head is in the Hen very small. What he says of their feathers
being like Hawks, is to be understood by reason of their many spots, wherein
the likeness consists.

To this we may further add, that the Tail of a Turkey is made up of eighteen
feathers; that each Wing has twenty eight prime feathers or quils: That the
Legs have small Spurs, or rather certain rudiments of Spurs, and those very
conspicuous and plain to be seen, however Aldrovandus writes that they do
altogether want Spurs. Their Eggs are white, but thick-speckled with sordid
yellowish red spots, much like to the freckles of the face of a man.

This stately Fowl at first sight from the shape of its body, and also from its
conditions, one would take to be rather of the Hen than the Peacock kind, says
Aldrovandus: To me it seems to be more like the Peacock than the common Cock,
in its bigness and stature or tallness, in the manner of carrying its Tail, but
especially of setting it up and spreading it, as if both it self admired it,
and took pride in showing it to others.

That these birds were the Meleagrides of the Ancients, as also their Gallinae
Africanae and Numidicae guttatae, Aldrovandus takes much pains to prove. In
English they are called Turkeys, because they are thought to have been first
brought to us out of Turkey.

Turkeys love hot Countries: yet they can bear cold ones well enough, after
they are grown up and have been used to them: But their young Chickens are very
nesh and tender, and not to be reared without great care and attendance.

Their flesh is very white and delicate, a dish becoming a Princes feast, says
Aldrovandus, if it be well concocted yielding a plentiful and firm nourishment;
of the same taste and quality with that of a Peacock, and as difficult to
concoct, unless its hardness be before by some means corrected. This is to be
understood of old and well grown Turkeys, for Turkey-pouts and young Turkeys
are tender enough, and of easy concoction.

The antipathy this Fowl has against a red color, so as to be much moved and
provoked at the sight thereof, is very strange and admirable.

. IV. The Brasilian Mitu or Mutu of Marggrave.
THis Bird, says Marggrave, is of the Pheasant kind; the Spaniards also (as
Nierembergius tells us) call it a Pheasant. But we, partly for its bigness,
partly for its color, partly also for its gentle nature, easily becoming tame,
but chiefly for that it spreads its Tail in like manner If I understand
Marggrave aright.
circularly, think that it ought rather to be ranked with the Peacock and
Turkey, to which we have therefore subjoyned it. It is bigger than the common
Cock or Hen. The length of its body from the Neck to the rise of the Tail is
ten inches: The length of the Neck six inches. It is all over covered with
black feathers, except on the Belly and under the Tail, whereit is of a brown
color, almost like that of a Partridge. The feathers on the Head, Neck, and
Breast are finer than the rest, and for softness and beauty comparable to black
Velvet. On the top of the Head it has black feathers complicated into a very
low and flat cop, which one that carelessly beheld the Bird would scarce take
notice of, but when it is angry, or on other occasions it can erect them into a
conspicuous crest. It has a remarkable Bill, not thick, crooked, about an inch
and half long: The lower Chap is small, the upper almost four times bigger. The
Bill is of a very bright carnation color, but toward the tip white. Its Under
this word he comprehends also the thighs.
Legs are like a Hens, ten inches long, to wit, four from the Feet to the
Knees, and six above them, where they are covered with black feathers. It has
also four Toes, like a Hens, which from their rise to the first joint are
connected by an intervenient skin, as in some other birds. It has a Tail a
foot long, like a Turkeys, which it always moves in breadth; crying Kit Kit
like them: A well-shaped Head like a Gooses; a Neck about six inches long, as
was before said: Brave, great black Eyes; and behind the Ears a white naked
spot like a Hen. It is easily made tame; it roosts willingly on high upon trees
like Turkeys. Finally, it has very good and savoury flesh.

The Pauxi of Nieremberg, the Indian Hen of Aldrovandus, lib. 4. cap. 12. a
variety of the Mitu.
It was (says Nieremberg out of Fr. Hernandus) of the bigness of a
Dunghil-Cock, or something bigger: Its feathers were of a black color, but
shining, and almost like a Peacocks: Its Bill red, crooked, and like a Parrots,
etc. What was most remarkable in, and peculiar to this Bird was a certain
tumor fastened to the root of its Bill, where it was more slender, of the
shape of a Pear, of the hardness of a stone, and of a blue color, like that of
the stone called Cyaneus or the Turcois.

Aldrovandus describes his Ornithol. lib. 14. cap. 12.
Indian Hen, from a Picture, as I suppose, in this wise. From the Bill to the
end of the Tail (which was white, and striped with black lines) it was black,
which blackness yet did every where incline to blue. The vent and beginning of
the Tail underneath were white. Its Bill was strong, crooked, and red. Its Legs
were almost of the same color, but much paler, and in their hind part
inclining to blue. The Claws were black. It carried on its forehead a great
protuberance, of the shape of a Fig, and of a bluish color. The Tail was long,
not erect, as in our common Cocks and Hens, but extended in length, as in a Pie.

These birds differ not from the Mitu in any thing almost but that protuberance
or excrescence at the beginning of the Bill. Nierembergius also makes mention
of this variety in his tenth Book, Chap. 75. The Pauxi, says he, (for so he
there calls this Bird) has a great head, which in some is plain or smooth, in
others crested; in others instead of a crest of feathers arises a stone or
globular body (a stone they call it though it be not over-hard) like an Egg, or
bigger, of the color of Soder. I wonder that Marggrave should make no mention
of this bunch: Surely it was wanting in all the birds he saw. Whether this Bird
be a Species distinct from the Mitu, or only accidentally different, we refer
to further inquisition.

. V. The other Indian Cock of Aldrovandus, Mituporanga of Marggravius,
Tepetototl of Nierembergius.
THere is also found (says Marggrave) another kind of The Mitu.
this Bird, which the Brasilians call Mituporanga, differing only in the Bill
and feathers of the Head. This kind has no long Bill, but an indifferently
thick one, yet not so Or perchance deep, altum the word is.
high as the Mitu, nor so crooked: The tip of both Chaps is black, all the rest
of the Bill covered with a Saffron-coloured skin; the like whereto it has also
about the Eyes. It has goodly, black Eyes. The Head and Neck covered with
feathers of a deep black, like Velvet. On the top of the Head it has curled
feathers, twisted or turning up spirally, as far as the beginning of the Neck;
which it can erect in the manner of a curled or frisled crest. All the rest of
the Bird is black, wherewith is here and there mingled a gloss of green. About
the vent it has white feathers. The Legs are cinereous, and of the figure of
the Mitu's. The Tail black, but the extremities of its feathers white. This
Bird also easily becomes very tame and familiar.

Of this Bird Nierembergius Lib. 10. cap. 68.
writes thus. The fawning and familiarity of Dogs does not exceed the
officiousness of the Tepetototl or Mountain Bird, which others call,
Tecuecholi, and the Spaniards Natives of America a Pheasant, which is very tame
and domestic: It is a bird of the bigness of a Goose, of a black shining
color; yet having some feathers white underneath, about the Tail, at the ends
of the Wings; ash-colored Legs and Feet; a crooked Bill, partly cinereous, and
partly yellow, and about its root as it were swelling out; a folded or curled
crest; black Eyes, but a pale Iris. It is fed with Corn, made up into a mass or
loaves, and baked, and with such like meat. Its flesh is fat, and good to eat,
and not unlike that of wellfed Turkeys. It is a very gentle Creature, and
loving to man, and begs its food, when an hungry, by catching hold of the
cloths of those that it lives in the house with: And when it has occasion to
go into any Room, if the door be shut, it knocks at it with its Bill. If it
can, and be permitted, it follows its Master; and when he comes home, receives
him with great expression of joy and clapping its Wings.

Aldrovandus Lib. 14. cap. 10.
describes and sets forth the figure of this Bird under the title of Another
Indian Cock. The whole body (says he) of this Bird was of a deep black: It
wanted both Spurs and Tail, as also the Comb: Instead of which it had on its
Head curled feathers. Its Bill was of two colors, partly yellow, to wit,
toward the Head, partly black. The upper Chap of its Bill hooked. Where in
other Cocks the holes of the Nosthrils are, there this Bird had a certain
yellow protuberance, of the bigness of a Cherry. The Legs and Feet were covered
with whitish Tabellae he calls them.
annulary scales. Also some small feathers near the vent were white.

If this Bird be rightly described by Aldrovandus, it seems so to differ from
the Mituporanga of Marggrave, as his Indian Hen above described does from the
Mitu, viz. by the Cherry-like protuberance on its Bill. Moreover, it differs
also in that it wants a Tail, whereas the Mituporanga has a sufficient long
one. But Aldrovandus saw not the bird it self, but only its Picture, which
whether or no it were exact, and not taken when the bird had lost its Tail,
there is some reason to doubt.

. VI. The Guiny Hen.
IT is for bigness equal to a common Hen: But its Neck longer and slenderer.
The figure of its body almost like a Partridges. It is of an ash color, all
over chequered with white spots. A black ring compasses the Neck: The Head is
reddish. On the Crown or top of the Head grows a hard horny cap, [a horn Mr.
Willughby calls it] of a dusky red color. The Cheeks beneath the Eyes are
blue, and bare of feathers, under which is a red Gill. They say, that these
Birds are gregarious, and feed their Chickens in common. So far Mr. Willughby.
But because this description is very short and succinct, (though sufficient for
the knowledge of the bird) I shall present the Reader with a full and exact one
out of Gesner. The So Dr. Key called it, who sent him this description.
Mauritanian Cock is a very beautiful bird, in bigness and shape of body, Bill,
and Foot like a Pheasant. [Those that we have seen, as also those described by
Bellonius and Marggrave were as big as ordinary Hens,] armed with a horny
Crown, rising up into a point, on the backside Very steep behind, and much
inclining before.
perpendicularly, on the foreside with a gentle ascent or declivity. Nature
seems to have intended to fasten and bind it down to the lower part by three as
it were Laciniae.
Labels or slips proceeding from it; between the Eye and the Ear on both sides
one; and in the middle of the forehead one, all of the same color with the
Crown; so that it sits on the head after the same manner as the Ducal Cap does
upon the head of the Duke of Venice, if that side which now stands foremost
were turned backward. This Crown below is wrinkled round about: Where it rises
upright in the top of the Neck, at the hinder part of the head grow certain
erect hairs (not feathers) turned the contrary way. The Eyes are wholly black,
as also the Eyelids round about, and the Eyebrows, excepting a spot in the
upper and hinder part of each Eye-brow. The bottom of the Head on both sides
all along is taken up by a kind of callous flesh of a sanguine color, which
that it might not hang down like Gills or Wattles, Nature has taken care to
turn backward and fold up, so that it ends in two acute processes. From this
flesh arise up on both sides certain Caruncles, wherewith the Nosthrils are
invested round, and the Head in the forepart separated from the Bill, which is
pale-coloured; of these also at the Bill the lower edges are lightly reflected
back under both Nosthrils. What is between the Crown and this flesh on the
right and left side is marked with a double scaly incisure, but behind with
none.

Its color under the Jaws or Throat is exactly purple, in the Neck a dark
purple: In the rest of the body such as would arise from black and white fine
powder, sprinkled or sifted thin upon a dusky color, but not mingled
therewith: In this color are dispersed and thick-set all over the body oval or
round white spots, above lesser, below greater, comprehended in the intervals
of lines obliquely intersecting one another, as is seen in the natural position
of the feathers; in the upper part of the body only, not in the lower. [I
suppose he means, if we should fancy lines to be drawn in the manner of Network
all over the back, the spots would stand in the middle of the Meishes of that
Network.] This you may find to be so, not only from viewing the whole body, but
even single feathers plucked off. For the upper feathers, in oblique lines
intersecting one another, or if you please, certain circumferences, made (as I
said) of black and white powder, and having their extremities joined together
as in Honey-combs or Nets, do comprehend oval or round spots in dusky spaces;
but so do not the lower. Or the position of both observes a like rule.
Yet both are placed in a like manner. For in some feathers they are so joined
together in order, that they do almost make acute triangles, in others so as to
represent an oval figure. Of this kind there are three or four rows in each
single feather, so that the lesser are contained within the greater. In the end
of the Wings and in the Tail the spots stand in equidistant right lines, long
ways of the feather. Between the Cock and Hen you can scarce discern, the
similitude is so great; save that the Head of the Hen is all black. Its voice
is a divided or interrupted whistle, not louder, nor greater than that of a
Quail, but liker to that of a Partridge, except that it is Sublimior.
higher, and not so clear. This description was sent to Gesner by our Dr. Key
[Cajus.]

Marggravius saw others brought out of Sierra Lyona like to the above
described, whose Neck was bound or lapped about with, as it were, a membranous
cloth of a blue ash color. A round many-double tuft or crest consisting of
elegant black feathers covers the Head. The white points or spots round the
whole body are variegated as it were with a shade.

. VII. Macucagua of the Brasilians, a bird of the Hen-kind. Marggrave.
IT is of the bigness of our Country Hen, or bigger; has a black Bill, more
than an inch and half long, forward a little crooked, like a Partridges: In the
middle of the Bill are two large holes for Nosthrils. The Eyes are black; and
behind them at a little distance are the Ears, as in Hens: The body thick and
great, wherewith the Wings end, for it has no Tail. The lower Legs are bare,
two inches and an half long. It has in its Feet three Toes standing forward,
thick, with short and blunt Claws; a round heel like an Ostrich, and a little
above that a short Toe toward the inside of the Leg, with a blunt Talon. The
whole Head and Neck is speckled with a dark yellow and black: Under the Throat
it is white. The Breast, Belly, and Back are of a dark ash color. The Wings
are all over of an Umber-colour waved with black, except the prime feathers,
which are wholly black. The upper Legs are clothed with feathers of the same
color with the Belly; the lower, together with the Feet, are blue: The Claws
gray. It is a very fleshy bird, and has so much flesh as scarce two ordinary
Hens have, and that also well tasted. Under the outer skin, which is thick and
fat, it has another membrane wherewith the flesh is covered. It lives upon
diverse fruits that fall from wild trees. I found in its stomach wild Beans, the
Seeds of Araticu, etc. It runs upon the ground; for its Feet are unfit to climb
trees. It lays Eggs a little bigger than Hens Eggs, of a bluish green color.
This might have been put in the next Chapter among the wild birds.

CHAP. XI. Wild Birds of the Poultry-kind, and first of all, the Granivorous.
. I. The Pheasant. Phasianus.
THis Bird is supposed to be so called from Phasis a River in Colchis, from
whence it was first brought ito Europe. Aldrovandus, not improbably, takes this
word to be rather derived from the Hebrew (...), of the same sound, and (as he
supposes) signification. They differ much in weight, according as they are
fatter or leaner. One Cock we made trial in weighed fifty ounces, another but
forty five; a Hen thirty three. Its length from the point of the Bill to the
end of the Tail was thirty six inches, to the end of the Claws twenty four. The
distance between the tips of the Wings extended thirty three inches. The Bill
like to that of other granivorous birds, from the tip to the angles of the
mouth an inch three quarters long, in old birds whitish: It has on both sides
a fleshy and tuberous membrane, by which it is above joined to the Head, under
which the Nosthrils are as it were hid. The Irides of the Eyes are yellow. A
red or Scarlet color [according to Aldrovandus powdered with black specks]
compasses the Eye round for a good breadth. In the forepart of the Head, at the
Basis of the upper Chap of the Bill, the feathers are black with a kind of
purple gloss. The Crown of the Head and upper part of the Neck are tinctured
with a dark green, shining like silk, which color yet is more dilute on the
Crown of the Head. [Aldrovandus writes, that the Crown commonly is of a very
elegant, shining ash color, at the sides and near the Bill being green, and
either in Sun or shade very changeable: Which most beautiful color does also
take up the All the upper end of the Neck.
whole Neck above. Mr. Willughby makes the Crown of the Head to be of a shining
blue, with a certain mixture of red, and as well the Head as the upper part of
the Neck to appear sometimes blue, sometimes green.] It has moreover on both
sides the Head about the Ears feathers sticking out, which Pliny calls horns.
There grow also to the Ears in their lower angle black feathers longer than the
rest. The sides of the Neck and the Throat are of a shining purple color,
Note, that as well the green as the purple color inheres only in the exterior
part or borders of the feathers, the rest, i. e. the middle and lower part, of
the feather being on the top of the Head dusky, on the Neck black. The feathers
under the Chin, and at the angles of the Mouth are black, with green edges or
borders.

Below the green the rest of the Neck, the Breast, Shoulders, middle of the
Back, and sides under the Wings are clothed with most beautiful feathers,
having their bottoms black, their edges tincted with a most beautiful color,
which, as it is diversely objected to the light, appears either black or purple:
Next to the purple in each feather is a cross line or bed of a most splendid
gold color: Below the gold a fulvous, which reaches as low as the black bottom
we mentioned. Howbeit the gold color is not immediately contiguous to the
fulvous, but divided by an intermediate narrow line of a shining purplish. On
the underside of the Neck the extremities [tops] of the feathers are painted
with a black spot of the figure of a Parabola. The shafts of all are fulvous.
The feathers themselves about the shaft in the lower part of the under side of
the Neck are marked with an Oval white spot in the black bottom we spoke of.
The feathers on the shoulders and middle of the Back are variegated with these
colors: First, their edges are fulvous, next succeeds a narrow purplish line,
then a pretty broad black line running parallel to the edges of the feathers,
wherein is included another broad white line: This Aldrovandus calls an Oval
line. The space comprehended within this line, and the rest of the feather, to
the very bottom, are black. Yet in the middle of the Back the space
comprehended is various, of dusky and black. The shafts of the feathers are
fulvous or yellow. The lower feathers of the Back are almost wholly
ferrugineous, inclining to a Fox color, want that white spot, are longer than
others, and end as it were in small filaments. Yet they have this common with
the forementioned, that in the light, about their middles they seem to Cast
forth some show.
have an appearance of that green color, which else is not seen in them; that
their shafts approach to a gold color, and that their bottoms or lower parts
are all dusky. The Tail (if you measure the middle feathers, which are much
longer than the rest) is full twenty six inches long, almost of the figure of
an Organ; for as in that the Pipes on each side are gradually longer and
longer, or bigger and bigger, the biggest being the middlemost, so is it in
this Tail: Those two middlemost feathers (which, as we said, are the longest of
all) have on each side them eight, all of different magnitude, the exterior
shorter and lesser than the interior in order to the outmost. They are of an
ash color, on the sides ferrugineous, near the shafts adorned with black
spots, in the longest feathers in both Webs, opposite one to another, in the
lesser in one Web only, or if there be any mark in the interior Web it is more
obscure, and scarce observable. The Wings closed are nine inches long, spread
Here is some mistake for the breadth is double of eighteen inches.
eighteen inches broad. The Wing-feathers that are next the body are variegated
with the same colors as those on the middle of the Back: The subsequent are
liker those on the lower part of the Back: Yet the ridges of the Wings resemble
those of the common Partridge, whose color the prime feathers or quils of the
Wings do almost exactly represent, viz. being of a dusky ash color, and all
over spotted with whitish spots. The Breast and Belly whereabout the Gizzard
lies, and that part thereof which the Wings cover glister with the same colors
wherewith the Neck is beautified, but more obscure, and the feathers here are
much bigger. Near the vent and on the Thighs it is of a dark ferrugineous. The
Legs, Feet, Toes, and Claws are of a horn color; yet the Toes and Claws are
darker than the Legs. A thick membrane, and perchance not unfit for swimming,
connects the Toes: The like whereto (that I know of) is not found in any other
pulveratricious bird. The Legs are armed with Spurs, shorter than in a Cock,
but sharp, and of a black color. The Hen is nothing so beautiful as the Cock,
almost of the color of a Quail.

It lives in the Woods; and feeds upon Acorns, Berries, Grain, and Seeds of
Plants. It frequents rather Coppice Woods, than where there are only
Timber Trees.

The Books of all Writers of Animals, Ancient and Modern, celebrate the
Pheasant, for the goodness of its flesh, assigning to it the first place among
birds at Table. Physicians make it the standard wherewith they compare, and
accordingly judge of the temperament and goodness of other meats, says
Longolins, as he is cited by Aldrov. Aldrovandus by many arguments proves, that
Pheasants are better meat than Pullen; which who desires to know, may consult
him in the Thirteenth Book, and Fifth Chapter of his Ornithology: At last he
thus concludes, Pheasants therefore, as well because they are rare, as because
they are of a most delicate taste, and yield so excellent a nourishment, as we
have proved, seem to be born only for great men's Tables, and have been always
had in highest esteem of all Birds.

Pheasants, Partridges, Quails, and some other Birds, are taken in great
numbers with a Net they call commonly I know no particular English name for
this Net.
Expegatorium, by the help of a Setting-dog, trained up for this sport, who
finds out the birds, and when he sees them, either stands still, or lies down
on his belly, not going very near them, least he should spring them; but
looking back on the Fowler his Master, wags his Tail, by which the Fowler knows
that the Birds are near the Dog; and so he and his Companion run with the Net,
and cover both Birds and Dog.

That all Birds, but particularly Pheasants, Partridge, and Quails, are far
more savoury and delicate, when killed by a Hawk than if they be caught in
snares, or by any other fraud, many have written, and most think. And indeed,
there is no doubt but by this means their flesh becomes more short and tender:
For that violent motion of the blood occasioned by their flight, and its
fervent heat consequent thereupon, macerates the flesh, and disposes it to
corruption, but that it thence becomes more savoury and delicate, all men
now-adays are not agreed. But the old rule forbids me to dispute about tastes.
Boterus reports, that Ireland wants Pheasants and Partridges.

. II. The Brasilian Jacupema of Marggrave.
IT is a sort of Pheasant, something less than a Pullet. Its Head is not great,
like a Hens, as is also the Bill. The Eyes are black; the Neck about seven
inches long: The length of the body from the bottom of the Neck to the rise of
the Tail about nine inches: Of the Tail (which is broad) a whole foot. The Legs
are long [which he divides into upper and lower,] the upper five inches long,
the lower three, or a little more. In each Foot four Toes like those of Hens,
of which the middle of the three foremost is two inches long. The whole bird is
clothed with black feathers, with which something of brown is mixed. The
feathers of its Head it can erect in form of a Crest, and those black feathers
[I suppose he means those on the Head which make the Tuft or Crest] are
encompassed with other white ones. The Throat under the Head, and for an inch
and half down the Neck is bare of feathers, and covered with a red skin. The
whole Neck below is variegated with white feathers dispersed among the black
ones; as also all the lower Belly, and the hindmost half of the Wings. The
upper Legs and the Tail are wholly black, without the admixture of any brown.
The lower Legs and Feet are of an elegant red color. They are made tame; and
their flesh is good. This bird took its name from its voice, for it cries,
Jacu, Jacu, Jacu. This might as well have been ranked among the Domestic birds.

. III. The common Partridge. Perdix cinerea.
THe Cock weighed fourteen ounces and a quarter; the Hen thirteen and an half.
The length [of the Cock] from the Bill to the Claws was fourteen inches and a
quarter, to the end of the Tail twelve and three quarters. The Bill from the
tip to the corners of the aperture of slit of the mouth three quarters of an
Inch, to the Eyes an inch. The breadth was twenty inches.

The Bill in young Partridges is of a dusky color, but in old ones it grows
white. The Irides of the Eyes are a little yellowish. Under the Eyes are
certain red excrescencies. The Chin and sides of the Head are of a deep yellow
or Saffron-colour. The Cock has on his Breast a red mark of a semicircular
figure, resembling a Horseshooe. The Hen has not so much red on her Breast.
Below the Chin, as far as the Horse-shooe mark, it is of a blue cinereous,
adorned with transverse black lines: Beneath the mark the color fades into
dirty or yellowish cinereous. The longer feathers on the sides of the Breast
and Belly have each of them a great transverse red spot, their shafts being
white. The upper side of the body is parti-colored of red, cinereous and black.
This Naturalists call a testaceous or potsheard color.

The Prime feathers in each Wing are about twenty three in number, of which the
foremost are dusky, with transverse yellowish white spots. The longest feather
is five inches and a quarter. The interior covert-feathers of the Wings, and
the long feathers springing from the shoulders have their shafts of a yellowish
white.

The Tail is composed of no less than eighteen feathers, and is in length three
inches and an half: The four middle feathers are of the same color with the
rest of the body; the other seven on each side of a sordid yellow, with
cinereous tips.

The Legs below the Knees are bare; they have no footstep or appearance of any
Spur. Both Legs and Feet are in young ones of a greenish color, but in old
ones they grow white. The Toes are joined together with a membrane as in
Heathcocks.

It has a great Craw, a musculous Stomach or Gizzard, and a gallbladder. For
the taste and wholsomness of its flesh it is deservedly preferred before all
other birds. It feeds upon Ants and Ants Eggs, upon the grains of Corn, and
also upon the green leaves. But in Wintertime, when it feeds upon green Corn,
its flesh is less commendable, than in Summer and Autumn when it feeds upon the
Kernel or grain.

The Common Partridge is a multiparous bird, laying sixteen or eighteen Eggs
ere it sits. With us in England it is most frequent. The Italians call it
Starna, as much to say as externa, or outlandish; and in some places also
Pernice. It is more rare with them. and sells dearer than the red-leg'd
Partridge.

The Partridge (understand it of all the several sorts) by reason of the
heaviness of its body, and shortness of its Wings, can neither fly high, nor
long continue its flight, howbeit for those short flights it makes it flies
very swift and strongly.

In Wintertime they fly in company: For they are of that nature, that they
breed and bring up fifteen or sixteen young together, which company all Winter
with the old ones. But in the Spring time, when they pair together, they fly by
two and two; for then the old ones beat away the Young from them. This out of
Bellonius: Which is true, not only of birds of this kind, but also of
Pheasants, Heathcocks, etc.

Bellonius says, that the singing of Partridges is a certain sign of day
approaching. We have often heard them crying and calling one another after
Sunset.

Partridges (says Aristotle) when any one comes near their Nest, cast
themselves down before his feet that looks for it, running and flying as if
they were lame, by that means drawing him away from their Nests, and enticing
him to follow them; which when they have done, themselves fly away, and
afterward call together their Brood, which so soon as they hear the voice of
their Dams presently run to them.

. IV. The Brasilian Partridge called Jambu by Piso.
OF these in the Woods by the Seashore are found two kinds, greater and
lesser, These are lesser than our Europaean Partridge, those both for figure
and bulk of body and goodness of flesh are equal and like to ours. The feathers
of both all over the body are of a dark fulvous color, but mingled and spotted
with dusky.

. V. The Damascus Partridge of Aldrov.
IN the shortness, thickness, and roundness, and whole shape of its body it
approaches to our Partridges. The color is so like to the lesser Partridges,
that at first you can hardly distinguish them: But the Feet in this are in a
manner yellow: The Bill is also longer, though else the Bird be much less.

. VI. The Red-leg'd Partridge, Perdix ruffa Aldrov. called in Italy Coturnice
and Coturno.
THe Cock weighed more than thirteen ounces: His length from the tip of the
Bill to the end of the Claws was eighteen inches: His breadth between the tips
of the Wings extended twenty two. The Irides of the Eyes were red: The Bill
almost an inch long, and red: The Legs and Feet also red: The Claws dusky: The
Toes as far as to the first joint connected by a membrane intervening. It had
small Spurs [others had none, perhaps these were young ones.] The soles of the
Feet were of a dirty yellow.

The Head, Neck, Back, and Rump were ash-colored, as also the outer part of
the Thighs. The lower part of the Neck tinctured with a vinaceous color. The
Cheeks under the Eyes, and the Chin to the middle of the Throat white: Yet in
the very angle of the nether Chap was a small black spot. A black border
beginning from the Nosthrils, and produced above the Eyes encompasses this
white space. The Craw below the black line is cinereous: The Breast of a dilute
red, inclining to yellow. The feathers on the sides are painted with very
beautiful colors. For the tips of some of them are black; and next the black
they have a transverse line, the shorter and nearer to the Head of a whitish
color, the longer and more remote of a yellow: Below this a black line again.
Of others the tips are red, the colors we have mentioned in order succeeding.
The bottoms of all are cinereous.

The beam-feathers in each Wing are in number twenty five, the exterior
whereof are dusky, the interior of a dark cinereous: But yet the outer edges
of the third, and succeeding to the fifteenth, are of a white, tinctured with
red. The Tail is four inches long, the two middle feathers being cinereous, the
exterior five on each side having their upper half red, their lower cinereous.

It has a large Craw, a musculous Stomach, or Gizzard, in which dissected we
found Caterpillars and Snails.

The Back of the Hen is not all out so cinereous, but rather inclines to red,
the middle parts of the feathers being black. The line running above the Eyes
is somewhat red. The Cheeks are of the same color with the Back: Else it does
not much differ from the Cock. This kind is a stranger to England: Howbeit they
say it is found in the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey, which are subject to our
King. It is of a more gentle nature than our common Partridge, and easily made
and kept tame: Whereas the common Partridge can hardly be induced to put off
his wild nature, and to go out and return home again like tame fowl: Yet I have
been told by persons of good credit, that a certain Sussex man had by his
industry and application made a Covey of Partridges so tame, that he drove them
before him upon a wager out of that Country to London, though they were
absolutely free, and had their Wings grown, so that they might if they would
have made use of them to fly away.

That this Bird feeds upon Snails Aristotle has delivered, and our experience
confirms: Yet not on Snails only, but also on Caterpillars, Seeds of Wheat and
other Grain.

Partridges, to speak of them in general, are very salacious birds, infamous
for masculine Venery, and other abominable and unnatural conjunctions. The
Ancients have left many fabulous things concerning them, viz. That the Cocks,
if they can find them, break the Eggs, lest the Hens being detained by sitting
upon them should not be ready or willing to yield themselves to be trodden; for
which cause the Hens lay privately, concealing their Nests, as much as they
can, from the Cocks. That the Cocks when they want the Hens, to wit, when they
have withdrawn themselves to sit, do not only manifest their petulancy and
salacity, by their voices and fighting, but also defile one another
promiscuously by that nefarious coition, interdicted mankind by no less than a
capital punishment. Which things Pliny after his manner has wittily and
elegantly comprised in a few words. Illae [i. e. foeminae] quidem and maritos
suos fallunt, quoniam intemperantia libidinis srangunt earum ova, ne incubando
detineantur. Tunc inter se dimicant mares desiderio foeminarum. Victum aiunt
venerem pati. That they make two Nests, wherein they lay their Eggs, half in
one, and half in the other; in one whereof the Female sits, and in the other
the Male: and that both do hatch and bring up their part of Young. That the
Hens without being ever trodden by the Cocks, if they do only stand opposite to
them, and the wind blow from thence upon them, will conceive Eggs, and those
prolific: Of which thing some Modern Writers have indiscreetly endeavored to
give an account, before they had any assurance of the truth of the matter of
fact. That the Hens are so intemperately lustful, that contrary to the manner
of other birds, they cannot abstain from the use of Venery so much as while
they are sitting: Which particulars also Pliny briefly and ingeniously thus
words: Neque in ullo animali par opus libidinis. Si contra mares steterint
foeminae, aura ab his flante praegnantes fiunt. Hiantes a. exerta lingua per id
tempus aestuant, concipiuntque supervolantium afflatu, saepe voce tantum audita
masculi: Adeoque vincit libido etiam foetus charitatem, ut illa furtim and in
occulto incubans, cum sensit foeminam aucupis accedentem ad marem, recanat,
revocetque, and ultro se praebeat libidini. That the Cock being overcome in
fight dares never so much as come in sight of his Mistress or Mate. That the
Partridge when her own Eggs are broken, or any ways marred, or lost, steals
another Partridges Eggs, sits upon them, hatches them, broods and brings up the
Young, which yet when they are a little grown, hearing their Dams voice, [that
is, the voice of that Partridge that laid the Eggs,] do by instinct presently
know it, and leaving their Foster Mothers, betake themselves to their own Dams.
That she often turns her upon her back, and so, lying with her belly upward,
covers her self with clods and straws, and by that means deceives and escapes
the Fowlers. But it is not worth the while to insist long upon rehearsing or
refuting these particulars.

These Birds (says Aldrovandus) in the Feasts and Entertainments of Princes
hold the principal place, without which such Feasts are esteemed ignoble,
vulgar, and of no account. Indeed, the Frenchmen do so highly value, and are so
fond of Partridge, that if they be wanting they utterly slight and despise the
best spread Tables, and most plentiful and delicate Treatments; as if there
could be no Feast without this dish. As the flesh of Partridge (says
Bellonius) is very delicate and grateful to the Palate, so in like manner is it
greatly commended, for that it nourishes much, is easily digested, and breeds
good blood in the body. The flesh of the greater kind is more solid and hard,
(though hard only comparatively) of the lesser more tender, and consequently
yields a finer, more dissipable and spirituous nourishment, is also of easier
concoction, but yet is not so white as that of the greater. Palate-men, and
such as have skill in eating, do chiefly commend the Partridges Wing,
preferring it much before the Leg, as indeed it is much better. Hence that
English Proverbial Rhythm:

If the Partridge had the Woodcocks thigh,
'Twould be the best bird that e're did fly.
He that desires yet further information concerning the quality and temperament
of Partridges flesh, let him consult Aldrovand.

. VII. Bellonius his Greek Partridge, or great red Partridge, the same with the
precedent.
THe great Partridge which the Grecians, following the Italians, commonly call
Coturno, seems to us to be different from the Partridges both of France and
Gothia.
Gothland: For it is twice as big as our Country Partridge, has red Bill and
Legs, is spotted on the Breast and sides in like manner as ours, of the bigness
of a Or indifferent, meansized.
handsome Hen. This kind of Partridge is so frequent in the Rocks of Colme, the
Cyclades Islands, and the Seacoast of Candy, that there is not such plenty of
any other bird. Their cry is different from that of our Partridge, being great
and sonorous, especially in breeding and coupling time, when they express and
often repeat the sound of this word [Cacabis] whence it should seem that the
Latins were taught by the Greeks to express the note of a Partridge by the
word Cacabare. We also borrowed the name Cacabis, whereby we in some places
call a Partridge from their voice or cry. They follow one another on the Rocks.
Of this kind, in my judgment, Aristotle is to be understood when he says, If
Hens couple with Partridges they generate a different kind. They build in an
open place without cover or shelter in May-time, among certain herbs, what time
they come down from the Rocks, seeking convenient places to build and bring up
their Young. They lay their Eggs upon the ground, under some great stone,
sometimes eighteen, sometimes sixteen, more or less, like Hens Eggs, but less,
white, and speckled thick with small red spots, very good to eat as Hens Eggs,
but their Yolks congeal not. After they have hatched their Young, they lead them
out into the Champain or open fields to seek their food. Wherefore we think
this kind of Partridge to be altogether different from ours: for in some places
of Italy both kinds are found, and called by diverse names, viz. This by the
name of Coturno the other by the name of Perdice or Pernice. Thus far Bellonius.

Aldrovandus thinks that this bird differs from the greater red Partridge or
Coturnice of the Italians only in bigness: and truly I am now wholly come over
to his opinion; since Bellonius himself makes them all one. What Partridges
Bellonius means by the Partridges of Gothia I know not.

. VIII. The Quail, Coturnix.
IT is the least bird in this kind; of a flatter or broader body, and not so
narrow or compressed sideways as the Land-Rail or Daker-Hen. Its length from
the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail is seven inches and an half: Its
breadth between the extremities of the Wings spread fourteen inches.

Its Bill from the tip to the corners of the mouth half an inch long: its
figure more depressed and plain than in the rest of this kind: The lower Chap
black, the upper of a pale dusky. The Irides of the Eyes are of a hazel color:
The Eyes have a nictating membrane.

The Breast and Belly are of a dirty pale yellow: The Throat has a little
mixture of red [ruffi.] Under the lower Chap of the Bill is a long and broad
stroke of black tending downward. Above the Eyes, and along the middle of the
Head are whitish lines. The head is black, only the edges of the feathers
reddish or cinereous. The middle part of each covert-feather of the Back and
lower part of the Neck is marked with a yellowish white stroke, the rest of the
feather being parti-colored of black and reddish ash color. Under the Wings is
a bed of white terminated on each side with a border of red mingled with black.

The beam or quill-feathers of the Wings are dusky, crossed with pale red
lines: The lesser rows of hard feathers in the Wings are almost wholly of one
and the same reddish color. The Tail is short, not above an inch and half
long, consisting of twelve feathers, of a blackish color interrupted with
pale-red transverse lines.

The Feet are pale-coloured, covered with a skin divided rather into scales
than entire rings: The soals of the Feet yellow. The outer Toes, as far as the
first joint, are connected with the middlemost by an intervening membrane.

It has a Gallbladder. The Cock had great Testicles for the bigness of its
body, whence we may infer that it is a salacious bird. It has a musculous
Stomach or Gizzard; and just above the Stomach the Gullet is dilated into the
bag, which we call the Ante-stomach, the interior Superficies whereof is
granulated with papillary Glandules.

For catching of Quails they use this Art: The Fowler betimes in the Morning
having spread his Net hides himself under it among the Corn: then calls with
his Quailpipe, The Cock Quail, thinking it to be the note of the Hen that he
hears, comes in a trice with all speed to the place whence the noise comes.
When the Bird is got under the Net, up rises the Fowler and shows himself to
him, he presently attempting to fly away, is entangled in the Net and taken.

The Quail is a bird no less salacious than the Partridge, infamous also for
obscene and unnatural lust. The Cocks are of high spirit and courage; and
therefore by some are wont to be trained up and prepared for the combat, after
the manner of Cocks: And Aelian tells us, that of old time at Athens
Quail-fightings were wont to be exhibited as shows; and so grateful and
delightful they were to the people, that there was as great flocking to them as
to a spectacle of Gladiators. In some Cities of Italy, especially Naples, they
do also now adays keep fighting Quails, as Aldrovandus reports. The manner how
they induce and provoke them to fight see in him.

Quails are birds of passage: for being impatient of cold, when Winter comes
they depart out of Northern and cold Countries into hotter and more Southerly;
flying even over Seas; which one would admire, considering the weight of their
bodies and shortness of their Wings. When we sailed from Rhodes to Alexandria
of Egypt (says Bellonius) many Quails flying from the North toward the South
were taken in our Ship, whence I am verily persuaded that they shift places:
For formerly also when I sailed out of the Isle of Zant to Morea or Negropont,
in the Spring time I had observed Quails flying the contrary way from South to
North, that they might abide there all Summer: At which time also there were a
great many taken in our Ship.

Among the Ancient Greeks and Latins Quails were condemned and banished Tables
as an unwholsom dish; for being reported to feed upon Hellebore, and to be
obnoxious to the falling sickness, they were thought to produce the like
disease in those that eat their flesh: But undeservedly, for now adays they are
eaten without any danger, and esteemed a choice dish: And being somewhat rare
with us in England are sold very dear: Indeed their flesh both for delicacy of
taste, and wholsomness of nourishment is nothing inferior to that of Partridge
or Pheasant. Poulterers, and such as feed them in Coops do not permit them a
high place to be in, because leaping up they hurt their heads against the top:
nay, though their Coops be so low that they can hardly stand upright in them,
yet by striking their heads against the top, they will rub off all the
feathers; as we have observed.

. IX. The Rail or Daker-hen, Ortygometra Aldrov. lib. 13. cap. 33. Crex
Aristotelis.
THe weight of that we described was five inches and an half: Its length from
the point of the Bill to the end of the Claws was fifteen inches, to the end of
the Tail eleven and an half; its breadth between the extremes of the Wings
stretched out nineteen inches: Its Bill 1 inch long, measuring from the point
to the end of the slit. The body of this bird is narrow or compressed
side-ways, and like to that of Water-hens, The lower part of the Breast and the
Belly are white; the Chin also is white, else the Throat is of a more sordid or
dirty color. On the Head are two broad black lines: Also a white line from the
shoulders as in the Morehen. The middle parts of the covert feathers of the
Back are black, the outsides of a reddish ash color. The Thighs are variegated
with transverse white lines. In each Wing are twenty three quil-feathers. The
lesser rows of Wing-feathers both above and below are of a deep yellow, as also
the borders of the prime feathers. The Tail is almost two inches long, made up
of twelve feathers. The Bill is like the Water-hens, the upper Mandible being
whitish, the nether dusky. The Legs bare above the Knees: the Feet whitish. In
the Stomach dissected we found Snails.

It is called Rallus or Grallus perchance from its stalking [a gradu
grallatorio] or perchance from Royale, because it is a Royal or Princely dish.

Aldrovandus describes his Rail thus, Its Bill is less than a Water-fowls, but
much bigger than a Quails: Its Tail also is very little, and next to none: Its
Legs and Feet in proportion to its body long, of a middle color between
Saffron and green. The color of almost the whole Head, the Neck, Back, and
also the greater part of the Wings respecting the Back of a Testa signifies a
Potsheard, so a testaceous color is a reddish brown.
testaceous color, in brief very like to that of a Hen-Quail, wherefore it is
by the Italians rightly called the King of Quails [Il re delle Qualie] which is
as much to say as a great Quail. The Wings where they are contiguous to the
Belly are red. The forepart of the Neck and the beginning of the Breast are
wholly testaceous: The Belly and Hips like the Goshawks [Accipitris stellarii.]
The Female is all over of a paler color.

Bellonius describes this Bird by the title of the other Rail that lives in
Broom fields. [Ortygometrae alterius in genistis degentis.]

It is said to be the Quails Leader or Guide when they go from one place to
another. In the whole shape of its body it resembles the Waterfowl, especially
the Morehen. Its Legs are long, its Body slender, its Belly white, its Tail
short, its Bill pretty long; all which are marks of Waterfowl: Wherefore, in
my judgment, it more properly belongs to that Tribe, and ought thither to be
referred.

This, if I much mistake not, is the Bird which Dr. Turner takes to be the Crex
of Aristotle. There is (says he) a certain Bird in England with long Legs,
else like to a Quail, save that it is bigger, which among Corn and Flax in the
Spring and beginning of the Summer has no other cry than Crex, Crex; but this
it often iterates: Which I think to be the Crex of Aristotle: The English call
it a Daker-hen, the Germans Ein Schryck. I never saw or heard it any where in
England save in Northumberland. But seeing (as Gesner rightly) it is manifest
by the testimony of the most ancient Writer Herodotus, that the Crex is as big
as the black Ibis, the English Daker-hen cannot be the Crex. Although this Bird
be more rare in England, yet is it found every where in Ireland in great plenty.

. X. The Indian Quail of Bontius.
THis Bird feeds by Coveys, like Partridges, in the Woods of Java, although it
be also made and kept tame, and its Female, accompanied with her Brood, walks
up and down the Yards of houses like the common Hen; the Cocks also are no less
stout, and given to fighting among themselves till they kill one another, than
the Dunghil-Cocks. In the color of their feathers they very nearly resemble
the true Quail: But their Bill is a little longer: They also make such an
interrupted noise or cry by intervals as Quails are wont to do; but of a far
different sound from that of Quails, more like to that horrid drumming noise
which Bittours make among Reeds in fenny places, which in Low Dutch we call
Pittoor. The longer these Birds continue or draw out that cry, the more
generous are they thought to be. They are of so cold a nature, that when shut
up in Cages or Coops, if you do not expose them to the Sunbeams, and strew
Sand under them, they presently languish, and run a hazard of dying: And
therefore by night after Sunset, they shrink up on a heap, as the Cuckoo does
with us in hollow trees in Wintertime, and in the trunks of trees cover
themselves with their feathers. But when the Sun rises they presently sing, and
that sound is heard many paces off, that you would wonder so little a bird (for
they do not exceed a common Pigeon or Turtle in bigness) should have so deep
and loud a cry. I have sometimes kept of them in Cages, which would give me
notice of the approach of Morning or break of day, if I had any serious
business to do. For if any business be to be done, it is most commodiously
dispatched either in the Morning or Evening. For the day time, while the Sun
roasts all things with his scorching heat, is unfit for action, and very
unhealthful to stir much in.

CHAP. XII. Wild Birds of the Poultry-kind that feed on Leaves and Berries,
etc. having Scarlet Eyebrows.
. I. The Cock of the Mountain or Wood, Urogallus five Tetrao major, Aldrov.
called by the Germans Orhun, by the Venetians Gallo di montagna.
FOr bigness and figure it comes near to a Turkey. The Cock we measured from
the point of the Bill to the end of the Tail was thirty two inches long: The
Hen but twenty six. The ends of the Wings extended were in the Cock forty six
inches distant, in the Hen no more than forty one.

It had such a Bill as the rest of this kind, an inch and half long, measuring
from the tip to the angles of the mouth; its sides sharp and strong. Its Tongue
is sharp, and not cloven. In the Palate is a Cavity impressed equal to the
Tongue. The Irides of the Eyes are of a hazel color. Above the Eyes is a naked
skin of a scarlet color, in the place and of the figure of the Eyebrows, as in
the rest of this kind. The Legs on the forepart are feathered down to the foot,
or rise of the Toes, but bare behind. The Toes are joined together by a
membrane as far as the first joint, then they have on each side a border of
skin all along, standing out a little way, and serrate.

The Breast is of a pale red, with transverse black lines, the tips of the
feathers being whitish. The bottom of the Throat is of a deeper red: The Belly
cinereous. The upper side of the body is parti-colored of black, red, and
cinereous, the tips of the feathers being powdered with specks, excepting in
the Head, where the black color has a purple gloss if beheld in some
positions. The Chin in the Cock is black, in the Hen red. The Tail is of a
deeper red than the other feathers, and crossed with black bars; the tips of
the feathers being white. The Tail of the Cock is black, the tips of the
feathers being white, and their borders as it were powdered with reddish
ash-colored specks. The middle feathers especially, and those next to them are
marked with white spots. The feathers covering the bottom of the Tail have
white tips, else are variegated with alternate black and reddish ash-colored
transverse lines. After the same manner the whole Back is also painted with
black and white cross lines, but finer, and slenderer. The feathers under the
Tail are black, but their tips and exterior edges white. The Head [in the Hen]
is of the same color with the back. The tips of the Breast-feathers are black.

Each Wing has twenty six quill-feathers, the greater whereof are of a more
dusky and dark color: The rest have their exterior Vanes variegated with red
and black. The tips of all beside the ten outmost are white. The longer
feathers springing from the shoulders are adorned with angular beds of black,
wherewith a little red is mingled below. The lesser rows of hard feathers of
the Wings are variegated with dusky, red and white, their tips being white. In
the Cock the shoulders and lesser rows of hard feathers above are variegated
with red and black lines, underneath are white, except those under the first
internodium, which are black. The longer feathers under the shoulders are
white, which when the Wings are closed make a large white spot. The Wings under
the second internodium are black, with transverse lines of white. In the Cock
the Neck is of a shining blue. The Thighs, Sides, Neck, Rump, and Belly are in
like manner variegated with white and black lines. The Head is blacker: About
the vent it is of an ash color.

It has very long blind Guts, straked with six white lines. The Stomach
musculous, as in the rest of this kind, full of little stones. The Craw was
stuffed with the Leaves, Tops, and Buds of the Fir Tree. The skin of the stomach
sticking to the muscles is soft and hairy like Velvet.

But for the knowledge of this Bird, and distinguishing it from all others,
there is no need of so prolix and particular a description of colors, which
vary much by age, and perchance also place, and other accidents, when as the
bigness alone is sufficient for that purpose.

This Bird is found on high Mountains beyond Seas, and as we are told in
Ireland, (where they call it, Cock of the Wood) but no where in England. At
Venice and Padua we saw many to be sold in the Poulterers Shops, brought
thither from the neighboring Alps.

I take the Grygallus major of Gesner and Aldrovandus (who also calls it the
Tetrax of Nemesianus) to be the Female of this Bird. For the Females in this
kind of Birds in variety and beauty of colors excel the Males. Whereas Gesner
taking it for granted, that the Females do in no kind of creature excel the
Males in variety of colors, being deceived by this presumption, took and
described for different Species the different Sexes in both these kinds, viz.
the Cock of the Mountain, and the black game: And so of two Species made four;
to wit, 1. Urogallus major. 2. Grygallus major. 3. Urogallus minor. 4.
Grygallus minor. The second and fourth being the Females of the first and
third. Moreover, being himself mistaken, he thought Turner to be so: Who makes
the Male Morehen, that is the lesser Tetrao, or lesser Urogallus of Gesner, to
be black; the Female all variously spotted, so that if it were not bigger and
redder than a Partridge, it could hardly be distinguished from it. Aldrovandus
follows Gesner, making the Grygallus major of Gesner (that is, the Female of
the Urogallus major) the Tetrax of Nemesianus; without cause reprehending
Longolius, who indeed was of the same opinion; whereas he himself erroneously
makes the Male and Female of the Cock of the Mountain [Urogallus major] diverse
or distinct kinds. So then the case stands thus:

1. Cock of the Mountain the Male -- 1. The greater Urogallus, Gesn. Aldrov.
Cock of the Mountain the Female -- 2. The greater Grygallus, Eorund.
2. Black game or Grous the Male -- 3. The lesser Urogallus, Eorund. Black game
the Female -- 4. The lesser Grygallus, Eorund.

The flesh of this bird is of a delicate taste and wholesome nourishment, so that
being so stately a bird, and withal so rare, it seems to be born only for
Princes and great men's Tables.

. II. The Heathcock or Black game or Grous, called by Turner the Morehen.
Tetrao, seu Urogallus minor.
THe Cock weighed forty eight ounces: was in length from the point of the Bill
to the end of the Tail twenty three inches, [The Hen was but nineteen inches
long.] Its breadth thirty four inches [the Hens thirty one.]

The Cock is all over black, but the edges of the feathers, especially in the
Neck and Back, do shine with a kind of blue gloss. His Legs are gray. The
Female is of the color almost of a Woodcock or Partridge, red with black
transverse lines. The Breast and Belly are hoary, The Wings underneath and the
long feathers are white, as in the Cock. The middle of the Back is of a deeper
red. The Rump and edges of the feathers on the Throat are hoary. The feathers
under the Tail white.

In each Wing are about twnety six beam-feathers: In the Cock the bottom of the
fifth of these is white, of the eighth and succeeding to the twenty sixth the
whole lower half. Of the eleventh and following feathers to the two and
twentieth the tips are also white. The long feathers under the shoulders are
purely white. In the Hen the ten outmost feathers are dusky, the rest of the
same color with the body, saving their tips, which are whitish. The bottoms of
all but the first six are white. Moreover, those great quil-feathers, which, as
we said, are dusky, have something of white in the outer borders. The Wings
underneath, and those longer feathers in both Sexes are white, which when the
Wings are closed appear outwardly on the Back in the form of a white spot.

The Tail consists of sixteen feathers, and is in the Cock near seven inches
long; [Understand this of the exterior feathers, for the interior do not
exceed four inches.] In the Cock the three exterior feathers on each side are
longer than the rest, and stand bending outward, the fourth on each side
shorter, and less reflected. In the Female the outmost feathers are indeed
longer than the rest, but not reflected. The Tail is of the same color with
the body, only the tips of the feathers of a hoary white.

The Bill is black and crooked; the upper Chap somewhat prominent and gibbous.
Under the Tongue is a kind of glandulous substance: In the Palate a Cavity
impressed equal to the Tongue. The Tongue is undivided, soft, and somewhat
rough. The Eyebrows bare and red. The Ears great both in Male and Female. The
Legs rough with feathers growing on their forepart: The Toes naked, and
connected by a membrane as far as the first joint. On each side the Toes are
the like borders of skin as in the precedent Fowl, standing out from the Toe,
and pectinated. The Claw of the middle Toe is on the inside thinned into an
edge. It has no spurs.

Its Guts are Understand it of the bird we described.
fifty one inches long: Its blind Guts (which is strange) twenty four, striate
with six lines. The Craw large. They feed upon the tops of Heath, Acorns, etc.
The Pouts do a long time accompany their Dams even after they be come to their
full growth, as do young Partridges. They are infested with Lice and Ticks.

This kind is frequent in the sides of high Mountains; sometimes it descends
into the plains, not rarely occurring in the lower Heath-grounds. The Male
differs so strangely from the Female, that to one unacquainted with them they
might well seem to be of different kinds; yea, to Gesner himself they seemed
so, as we showed in the foregoing Chapter.

This is Turners Morehen, which he thinks to be so named from the color of the
Cock, which is black, as in Moors, though he is mistaken in that he writes,
that it has on its Head a red fleshy Crest, and about the Cheeks two as it
were red fleshy Lobes, or Gills, for it has no other red flesh about the Head
but the Eyebrows, which all the rest of this Genus have. See Aldrovand. lib.
14. cap. 15. Gesner calls it Gallus Scoticus Sylvestris, that is, The wild
Scotch Cock. I suspect also that the Gallus Palustris Scoticus of the same
Gesner is no other than this Bird. The Histories of these Birds you have in
Aldrovands Ornithology, lib. 14. cap. 15, 16.

. III. * The Attagen of Aldrovandus, called by the Italians Francolino.
IN bigness and the whole habit and fashion of its body it approaches to a
Pheasant. It has a short, black Bill, crooked at the end. The color is
various almost the whole body over. The Head especially has a very beautiful
aspect, a yellowish Crest variegated with black and white spots, being erected
in the middle of its Crown. The Pupil of the Eyes is black, the Iris yellow. It
has Eyebrows, like the Heathcock, of naked scarlet-colored skin. Under the
Bill and in the beginning of the Throat hangs down as it were a beard of very
fine feathers. Its Neck is of the longest, and in comparison with the bulk and
make of its body slender, of an ashcolour, besprinkled with black and white
spots; which in this respect differ, that here the white, in the Head the black
are the deeper. The spots of the Breast are of the same color, wherewith are
other ferrugineous ones mingled. The Belly, Tail, Hips, and Legs [which are
covered with feathers] are of a lead color, and also besprinkled with black
spots. The fore-toes of the Feet are long, the back-toe short, all armed with
crooked Claws.

They are by the Italians called Francolini as it were Franci, that is, Free
Fowl, because the common people are forbidden to take them, and Princes grant
them freedom of living.

Olina describes this Francolino a little otherwise. In the figure (says he)
and proportion of its body it resembles a common Partridge, but in bigness
something exceeds it. The Breast and all the Belly are spotted with black and
white. The ends of the Wings and Tail are black. The Head, Neck, and Rump are
fulvous, inclining to red, with a little and black intermixed. But neither his
figure represents, nor description mentions any Crest. The Legs also in Olina's
figure are naked.

This Bird is either the same with our other Lagopus, called the Red-game, or
very like it; but differs from it, in that it has a Crest upon its Head. But
the Attagen of Bellonius (as may be seen by its Picture) is destitute of a
Crest. Indeed I should think it to be the same, did not the place forbid it.
For our red Game lives upon the tops of the highest Mountains in Northern
Countries, whereas the Attagen of Aldrovandus is found plentifully in the
Mountains of Sicily, which is a very hot Country. Yet I make no question, but
the Bird, which Bellonius and Scaliger understand by this * name, that lives in
the Pyrenaean Mountains, and the Mountains of Auvergne, and which, Bellonius
says, comes not down into plain Countries, is the very same with our Red Game:
And perchance also the Attagen of Aldrovandus is no other, since Francolinus is
a name common to both Aldrovandus and Bellonius his Bird: And Aldrovandus
writes, that his Attagen is a Mountain Bird. Neither is it a sufficient
argument to prove the contrary, that Sicily where it is found is a hot Country:
for Mount Aetna in Sicily is so cold, that the top of it for the greatest part
of the year is covered with Snow. I am sure when we went up it in the year
1664, in the beginning of June the Snow was not melted. But if the Legs thereof
be bare, (for Aldrovandus does not affirm it in his description, though his
figure represents them bare) and the Head always crested, it cannot be our Red
Game.

The flesh of this Bird is most excellent, of easy digestion, and yielding
plentiful and very good nourishment: And therefore among the Ancients was
preferred before all other, and placed in the highest degree of dignity.

. IV. The Hazel-hen, Gallina corylorum, Attagen, Gesh.
THe Bird we described was a Cock, This Bird was exenterated, for it was bigger
than a Partridge, and equal to a handsome Pullet, and would else have weighed
more.
weighed but a pound, being from Bill point to Tail end fifteen inches long;
and twenty two broad.

The Bill, as in Hens, is blackish, from the tip to the angles of the slit of
the mouth almost an inch long: The upper Chap a little prominent and crooked.
In the Palate is a Cavity equal to the Tongue. Above the Eyes a naked red skin
takes up the place of Eyebrows, as in the Heathcock, and others of this kind.
The Eyebrows of the Female are not so red, but paler. The Legs before are
feathered half way down, behind bare as high as the knees. The fore-toes are
joined together by a membrane from the divarication to the first joint: And
have besides such like serrate borders, or welts, standing out on each side, as
were observed in the precedent Birds. The inside of the Claw of the middle Toe
is thinned into an edge.

The whole Belly is white. The Breast white, spotted with black spots in the
middle of the feathers: The several feathers having some one spot, some two or
three cross lines: The lower part of the Throat red, but the Chin of a deep
black, encompassed with a white line. The Hen wants this black spot under the
Chin. From the Eyes to the hind-part of the Head a white Line is produced. The
Head is of a reddish ash color: The Back and Rump are yet more cinereous, of a
color like that of a Partridge. The lower part of the Throat or Gullet is
variegated with transverse black lines. The sides under the Wings are red or
fulvous, the tips of the feathers being white. The long feathers springing from
the shoulders, that cover the Back, are all white.

The Wings are concave as in Partridges and the rest of the Poultry kind: The
beam-feathers in each Wing are twenty four in number, the foremost or outmost
whereof on the outside the shaft were parti-colored of dusky and white, on the
inside dusky. The greater rows of covert Wing-feathers were variegated with
red, white, and black.

The Tail was made up of sixteen feathers all equal, of about five inches long.
The seven exterior on each side had their tips of a dirty white; next the
white a bar or bed of black an inch broad; the rest of the feather to the very
bottom parti-colored of black and white. The two middlemost of the Tail are of
the same color with the body, having cross bars of white powdered with dusky
specks. The tips of the long feathers under the Tail are white, the middle part
black, the lower red.

The Stomach is musculous: The Guts thirty six inches long: The blind Guts
fifteen, which in this Bird also are striate. The flesh boiled or roast, as in
the rest of this kind, is white, very tender also and delicate.

Most learned men (says Aldrovandus) are of opinion, that this is the Bird
which by the Ancient Greeks and Latins was called Attagen; from whom yet he
dissents. It is wont (says Georg. Agricola as he is quoted by Aldrovandus) to
live in thick and shady woods. The same also writes that it is found
plentifully in the Mountainous Woods about the foot of the Alps, especially
where hazels and briers abound. We saw them in the Market at Nurenberg to be
sold: Whence we gather that they are found in the great Woods near that City,
though they be not mountainous: What they live chiefly upon we cannot certainly
say, but we verily believe that their food is the same with the other Birds of
this kind, viz. Bill-berries, Crow-berries, Black-berries, etc. and in the
Wintertime the tops of Heath, Fir, and other ever-green shrubs: But whether
they do eat the Catkins of Hazel (as Albertus affirms, and from whence they
seem to take their name) we know not.

. V. The white Game, erroneously called the white Partridge, Lagopus avis,
Aldrov.
FOr figure and bigness it comes near to a tame Pigeon, save that it is
something bigger; weighs fourteen ounces: From the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Tail or Feet (for they are equally extended) is about sixteen inches
long; between the extremities of the Wings spread twenty four inches broad. The
Bill short, black, like a Hens, but less: The upper Chap longer and more
prominent. The Nosthrils are covered with feathers, springing out of a skin on
the lower side the holes. Above the Eyes, in the place of the Eyebrows is a
naked skin of a scarlet color, and of the figure of a Crescent.

In the Cock-birds a black line drawn from the upper Chap of the Bill reaches
further than the Eyes toward the Ears; which in the Hens is wanting: All the
rest of the body, excepting the Tail, is as white as Snow.

Each Wing has twenty four prime feathers, of which the first or outmost is
shorter than the second, the second than the third. The shafts of the six
outmost are black. The Tail is more than a Palm long, compounded of sixteen
feathers, the two middlemost whereof are white; the outmost on each side
without the shaft also white, all the rest black. [Those that I (J. R.)
described in Rhoetia had the two middle feathers of their Tails only white, all
the rest black.] The feathers next the Tail, incumbent on it, are of equal
length with the Tail it self; so that they do wholly cover it. The Legs, Feet,
and Toes, to the very Claws, are covered with soft feathers, thick-set, like
Hares feet, whence it took the Lagopus signifies a Hares foot.
name. The Claws are very long, not unlike the nails of some Quadrupeds, as for
example Hares; of a dark horn or lead color. Its back-toe or heel is small,
but its Claw great and crooked. The fore-toes are joined together by an
intervening membrane, as in the other fowl of this kind. The Claw of the middle
Toe is something hollow all along the middle, the edges of this furrow or
channel being sharp. Under the Toes grow long hairs very thick.

The Craw is great, and in that we dissected full of the tops and leaves of
Fir, Heath, Bill-berry, etc. The Stomach or Gizzard musculous: The Guts forty
inches long: The blind Guts long, great, and striate.

In the Alps of Rhoetia, and in other high Mountains, which are for a great
part of the year covered with Snow, it is frequently found. Wherefore Nature,
or the Wisdom of the Creator, has fenced its Feet against the sharpness of the
cold with a thick covering of feathers and down.

These Birds, for the excellency of their flesh, are commonly called White
Partridges, and thought to be so by the Vulgar; whereas indeed the Partridge
and Lagopus are far different Birds. Yet the Savoyards, and other Alpine
people, who are not ignorant of their difference, call them so still; at first
perchance by mistake from their agreement in figure and magnitude they began to
be so called, and now they continue the old name.

. VI. * The other or parti-colored Lagopus of Gesner.
THere is another sort of Lagopus found on the Mountains of Switzerland. The
Bird we described of this kind was a Male. Its Belly white, its Wings also milk
white: Yet on the hinder part were some feathers partly dusky, partly spotted.
The Head, Neck, and Back parti-colored, with dusky and spotted feathers. The
Neck underneath had a great deal of white, and but a little black; above was
covered partly with pied, partly with white feathers. Above each Eye was a
semicircular skin of a red color. Its Bill was very short, and black, the
upper Chap whereof was crooked, and received [within its edges] the nether,
which was channelled. The Tail was five inches long, consisting of twelve black
feathers, and two white ones in the middle, and three or four parti-colored
ones. The Legs and Feet, down to the very Claws, were covered with white
feathers growing very thick and close together, so that nothing at all appeared
bare but the black Claws. Only the soal of the Foot and inner part of the Toes
were without feathers: Yet might the Toes be wholly covered with the hair-like
feathers meeting underneath. It was as big as a Pigeon, or something bigger:
The length of the whole about five Palms. I suppose this Bird is called in
Italian about Trent Otorno; about the Lake called by the Ancients Verbanus, now
Maggiore, [or the greater,] Colmestre: Our Countrymen [the Switzers] Stein-hun
[or Stone-hen;] as some do also the precedent. Others for distinction sake add
the bigness. I guess this second kind to be a little the bigger. As for the
former kind I doubt not but it is the first Lagopus of Pliny, white, etc. But
this second, although perchance it may be doubted, whether it be the second
Lagopus of Pliny, which, as he writes, differs from Quails only in bigness, yet
ought by all means to be referred to the same Genus with the first. Thus far
Gesner. I am of opinion that this Bird is not only generically, but even
specifically, the same with the former or first Lagopus of Pliny: For, except
some marks and spots on the upper side of the body, it agrees perfectly
therewith: But those are not sufficient to infer a difference of kind: Seeing
that the first Species also is said to change color in Summer, and become
dusky: Yea, those which ascend not up the Mountains are reported not to be
white, no not in Winter. But I dare not pronounce any thing rashly; referring
the matter to the determination of the learned and curious, that live in those
Countries, or have opportunity of traveling and sojourning there.

. VII. The Red Game, called in some places the Gorcock and More-cock, Lagopus
altera Plinii.
IT is near half as big again as a Partridge, for the figure of its body not
unlike: Somewhat [yea, considerably] bigger than the Lagopus: Its Feet and
Claws exactly like his. Its Bill is short and blackish: Its Nosthrils elegantly
covered with feathers, as in the Lagopus. But especially remarkable are the
scarlet-colored naked skins above each Eye, of the figure of a Crescent, in
place of Eyebrows, which in the Cock are much broader, and have in their upper
Circumference a border of loose flesh snipt, as it were a fringe or Crest. In
the Cock the Plumage about the basis of the Bill is powdered with white specks;
and at the basis of the lower Chap, on each side is a pretty great white spot;
but not so in the Female. Moreover, the Male differs from the Female, in that
it is much redder than she: So that in the Throat and upper part of the Breast
it has no mixture at all of any other color. All the upper side of the Body,
Head, Neck, Back, and covert-feathers of the Wings are parti-colored of red and
black, each single feather being painted with red and black transverse wayed
lines. Howbeit in the Cock the red exceeds the black; yet has he in the middle
of the Back and on the Shoulders great black spots, which the Female has not.

In each Wing are twenty four quil-feathers, all dusky, except the exterior
edges of those next the body, which are red. The outmost feather of the Wing is
shorter than the second, the third the longest of all. The interior bastard
Wing is made up of white feathers. The feathers also on the under side of the
Wings next to the flags are white. The Breast and Belly are almost of the same
color with the Back in both Sexes: Yet in the middle of the Breast and Belly
are some pretty great white spots. The Legs and Feet are clothed with a long
thick Plumage or Down to the utmost ends of the Toes. The Tail is more than a
handful long, not forked, consisting of sixteen feathers, all black except the
two middlemost, which are varied with red. The flesh is very tender, especially
in the younger ones, not so white as a Hens.

It is frequent in the high Mountains of Derbyshire, Yorkshire, Westmorland,
and Wales. It lays five, six, seven, or eight Eggs, seldom more, one inch three
quarters long, sharper at one end, all speckled with dark red specks or points,
only toward the sharper end are one or two beds void of sports. The younger
are infested with belly-worms, which sometimes as they fly hang down a foot
length from behind. We take this Fowl to be the Lagopus altera of Pliny, lib.
10. cap. 48.

It delights to abide in the highest tops of the highest Mountains, and with us
never comes down into the Plains, yea, seldom into the sides of the Mountains.

This is the Bird which Bellonius call the Attagen, as we said before in the
Chapter of the Attagen of Aldrovandus, and takes that Bird which the Savoyards
call, the white Partridge, and Pliny, Lagopus, to be a variety of this; for it
is all over white, and has the Legs covered with feathers (though finer) like
the Attagen: The Italians also call both kinds Francolino. And indeed the
color and bigness excepted, the Red Game differs little from the Lagopus. The
figure of the Bill and whole body is the same in both: The Feet alike feathered
to the very Claws: So that Mr. Willughby also, together with Bellonius, did
sometimes suspect that they differed rather accidentally than specifically. But
to me so great difference of color and bigness do necessarily infer a
diversity of kind. The flesh of these, and the rest of this Tribe, does
suddenly corrupt, and therefore the Fowlers, so soon as ever they take them,
presently exenterate them, and stuff the Cavity of the Belly with green Ling.

. VIII. * Bellonius his Damascus Partridge, which Aldrovand supposes to be the
other Lagopus of Pliny.
THere are (says he) no wild Birds at Damascus more notable than the
Partridges of that Country. They are less than the red or ash-colored. In the
color of the Back and Neck they resemble a Woodcock: But their Wings are of a
different color. For where they are joined to the body they are covered with
white, dusky, and fulvous feathers: Ten of the prime feathers are cinereous.
The inner side of the Wings and the Belly are white. It has a collar-like mark
on its Breast, like the The Ring Ouzel.
Merula torquata, consisting of red, fulvous, and yellow colors: Else in the
color of the lower part of the Head and Neck, in the Bill and Eyes it is like
a Partridge, and has a short Tail. We had ranked it with the Water Rail, or
Woodcock or Plover, but that its Legs were feathered, like the Savoyard white
Partridges (which is the Lagopus) or a rough-footed Doves. This, if rightly
described, is a kind of Lagopus or Heath Cock, which we have not yet seen; and
the least of that kind that we have yet seen or heard of.

CHAP. XIII. Birds of the Poultry-kind that want the back-toe.
. 1. The Bustard, Otis seu Tarda avis.
IT is for bigness nothing inferior to a Turkey. Its length measuring from the
beginning of the Bill to the end of the Tail was sixty inches. Its breadth, or
distance between the tips of the Wings spread two yards and an half. Its Bill
like a Hens, the upper Chap being something crooked. The Head and Neck are
ash-colored; the Belly white: The Back variegated with red and black
transverse lines. It wants the back-toe, which is especially remarkable: For by
this note alone and its bigness, it is sufficiently distinguished from all
other Birds of this kind. It feeds upon Corn, Seeds of Herbs, Colewort,
Dandelion leaves, etc. In the Stomach of one diffected we found a great
quantity of Hemlock Seed, with three or four grains of Barley, and that in
Harvest time. On New Market and Royston Heaths in Cambridgeshire and Suffolk,
and elsewhere in Wastes and Plains they are found with us.

They are of slow flight, and when they are lighted can hardly raise themselves
from the earth, by reason of the bulk and weight of their bodies, from whence
without doubt they got the Latin name Tarda. They are called by the Scots
Gustardae, as Hector Boethius witnesses in these words: In March, a Province
of Scotland, are Birds bred, called in the Vulgar Dialect Gustardes, the color
of whose feathers and their flesh is not unlike the Partridges, but the bulk of
their body exceeds the Swans.

Some say, one may catch them with ones hands before they can compose
themselves to fly; but this is a mistake, for though (as we said before) it be
long ere they can raise themselves from the earth, yet are they very timorous
and circumspect, and will not suffer a man to come within a Furlong of them,
before they take Wing and fly away. Yet our Fowlers report that they may be run
down with Greyhounds.

Italy (says Aldrovandus) has none of these Birds, unless they be brought
over accidentally by the force of tempestuous winds. But we when we traveled
in Italy did see in the Market at Modena a Bustard to be sold, whence we
suspect that there are of them in that Country.

Though some discommend their flesh, yet with us it is esteemed both delicate
and wholesome. Hence, but chiefly for its rarity, the Bustard sells very dear,
serving only to furnish Princes and great men's Tables at Feasts and public
entertainments.

. II. The French Canne-petiere, Anas campestris or Tetrax of Bellonius.
THe Field-Duck seems to us to be a Bird peculiar to France, where there is not
a Country man but knows it, at least by name. It is so called, not because it
is a Water-bird, but because it sits on the ground like the Water-Duck. But it
has no similitude or agreement with Waterfowl, being a Land-bird. It is of
the bigness of a Pheasant; the Head, saving the bigness, resembling a Quails,
the Bill a Pullets. It is more known by its name, than by its shape: For we
have a Country-Proverb against suspicious persons, wherein we say, that they
play the Land Duck. It is taken in Plains and open fields, as they take
Partridges, in snares, with Nets and a la for me, and also with Hawks. But it
is very crafty in defending and shifting for it self: flying near the ground,
and that Impetuously.
with great force and swiftness, for two hundred or three hundred paces, and
when it alights or falls on the ground running so swiftly, that scarce any man
can overtake it. It has only three Toes in each foot, like the Bustard or
Plover. The roots of all the feathers are red, and as it were of a sanguine
color, so joined to the skin as in the Bustard, whence also we take it to be a
kind of Bustard: For both, but especially this, is white under the Belly: But
the Back is variegated with three or four colors, to wit, a yellow tending to
red, with somewhat of cinereous and red intermixed. Four Wing-feathers in the
upper part have black tips. Under the Bill, down as far as the Breast, it is
white. A white Collar near the Crop compasses the Breast, as in the Savoy
Merulae, or Water-Ouzels. [But this Collar appears not in Bellonius his
figure.] The color of the Head and upper part of the Neck is the same with
that of the Back and Wings. The Bill is black, less than in the Ionic Attagen.
The Legs incline to cinereous. He that desires an exact description of this
Bird, let him imagine a Quail of the bigness of a Pheasant, but very much
spotted; for just such is this Field-Duck. All the interior parts it has
common with other granivorous birds. It is reckoned among delicate Birds, and
esteemed as good meat as a Pheasant. It feeds indifferently upon all sorts of
Grain, as also upon Ants, Beetles, and Flies, and likewise upon the leaves of
green corn. And although the color of the Neck and Head be not always the
same, (and herein consists the difference between the Male and the Female) yet
the Back and Wings never change color. This Bird seems not to have been
mentioned by the Ancients.

CHAP. XIV. Of Doves or Pigeons in general.
THe Marks common to all sorts of Pigeons, whereby they may be distinguished
from all other kinds of Birds, are not very many, viz. a peculiar figure of
body, resembling that of a Cuckoo; short Legs; long Wings; swift flight; a
mournful voice; to lay only two Eggs at one sitting, but to breed often in a
year. Aldrovandus says, it is proper to all Pigeons to wink with both
Eyelids. They do not all agree in the figure of the Bill: For some have
slender and indifferently long Bills, others thick and short ones. The Feet of
all, at least so many as we have yet seen, are red or sanguine. In the
Pigeon-kind the Male and Female divide between them the labor of incubation,
sitting by turns. The Male also assists the Female in feeding and rearing the
Young. And for an internal note, it is common to them to have no Gallbladder.

CHAP. XV. Of the several kinds of Pigeons.
. I. The common wild Dove or Pigeon. Columba vulgaris.
A Female, which we described, weighed thirteen ounces: Was in length from Bill
to Tail thirteen inches; in breadth twenty six.

Its Bill was slender, sharp-pointed, and indifferently long, like to that of a
Lapwing or Plover, above the Nosthrils soft, and white by the aspersion of a
kind of furfuraceous substance, else dusky. The Tongue neither hard, nor
cloven, but sharp and soft. The Irides of the Eyes of a yellowish red. The Legs
on the forepart feathered almost to the Toes: The Feet and Toes red; the Talons
black.

The Head was of a pale blue; the Neck as it was diversely objected to the light
did exhibit to the Beholder various and shining colors. The Crop was reddish,
the rest of the Breast and Belly ash-colored. The Back beneath, a little above
the Rump, was white, (which is a note common to most wild Pigeons) about the
shoulders cinereous, else black, yet with some mixture of cinereous.

The number of prime feathers in each Wing was about twenty three or twenty
four. Of these the outmost were dusky, of the rest as much as was exposed to
sight black, what was covered with the incumbent feathers cinereous. The
covert-feathers of the ten first Remiges were of a dark cinereous: Of the rest
of the covert-feathers (almost to the body) the tips and interior Webs, as far
as the shafts were cinereous, the exterior black. The covert-feathers of the
underside of the Wings purely white.

The Tail is made up of twelve feathers, four inches and an half long, the
middle being somewhat longer than the extremes. The tips of all were black: The
two outmost below the black on the outside the shaft were white; all the rest
wholly cinereous, the lower part being the darker. The feathers incumbent on
the Tail were cinereous.

It had a great Craw, full of Gromil seed. The blind Guts were very short,
scarce exceeding a quarter of an inch. It has (as we said of Pigeons in
general) no Gallbladder, and lays but two Eggs at a time.

This kind varies mumch in color; there are found of them ordinarily
milk-white.

Aldrovandus describes and figures many sorts of tame Pigeons, which he thus
distinguishes:

Tame or house Doves are either Of our Country, which have their Feet either
Naked The greater called Tronfi, and in English Runts, whose description and
figure you have, t. 2. page 462. The lesser or most common, t. 2. page 463.
Rough The greater, t. 2. page 466 The lesser Crested, t. 2. page 469.
Smooth-crown'd, t. 2. page 467.


Outlandish, to wit, Frisled Pigeons, t. 2. page 470. Cyprus Pigeons Hooded,
with their Feet Rough, t. 2. page 471. Bare, of which there are several kinds
set forth, p. 472, 473, 474
Smooth-crowned, called Indian Pigeons, t. 2. page 477.
Candy Pigeons, having in the Bill, above where it is joined to the Head a
white Tubercle or Wattle, p. 478. Persian or Turkey Pigeons of a dark color,
p. 481. Varro's Stone or Rock Pigeon.



Under the title of Domestic, which I have Englished tame or house Doves, he
comprehends the common wild Pigeon kept in Dove-cotes, which is of a middle
nature between tame and wild.

. II. Diverse sorts of tame Pigeons.
1. THe greater tame Pigeon, called in Italian, Tronfo and Asturnellato; in
English, a Runts.
Runt; a name (as I suppose) corrupted from the Italian Tronfo: Though to say
the truth, what this Italian word Tronfo signifies, and consequently why this
kind of Pigeon is so called, I am altogether ignorant. Some call them Columbae
Russicae, Russia-Pigeons, whether because they are brought to us out of Russia,
or from some agreement of the names Runt and Russia, I know not. These seem to
be the Campania Pigeons of Pliny. They vary much in color, as most other
Domestic Birds: Wherefore it is to no purpose to describe them by their
colors. In respect of magnitude they are divided into the biggest and the
lesser kind. The greater are more sluggish birds, and of slower flight; the
same perchance with those Gesner says he observed at Venice, which were almost
as big as Hens. The lesser are better breeders, more nimble, and of swifter
flight. Perchance these may be the same with those, which Ornithol. t. 2. page
360.
Aldrovandus tells us are called by his Country men Colombe sotto banche, that
is, Pigeons under Forms or Benches, from their place; of various colors, and
bigger than the common wild Pigeons inhabiting Dove-cotes.

2. Croppers, so called because they can, and usually do, by attracting the
Air, blow up their Crops to that strange bigness that they exceed the bulk of
the whole body beside. A certain Belga, it also signifies any Low Country man.
Hollander informed Aldrovandus, that these Kroppers Duve, as they call them,
are twice as big as the common Domestic Pigeons, which as they fly, and while
they make that murmuring noise, swell their throats to a great bigness, and the
bigger, the better and more generous they are esteemed. Those that I saw at Mr.
Copes, a Citizen of London, living in Jewin Street, seemed to me nothing
bigger, but rather less than Runts, and somewhat more slender and long-bodied.
These differ no less one from another in color than the precedent.

3. Broad-tail'd Shakers, called Shakers because they do almost constantly
shake or wag their Heads and Necks up and down: Broad-tail'd, from the great
number of feathers they have in their Tails; they say, not fewer than twenty
six. When they walk up and down they do for the most part hold their Tails
erect like a Hen or Turkey-Cock. These also vary much in color.

4. Narrow-tail'd Shakers. These agree with the precedent in shaking, but
differ in the narrowness of their Tails, as the name imports. They are said
also to vary in color. This kind we have not as yet seen, nor have we more to
say of it.

5. Carriers. These are of equal bigness with common Pigeons, or somewhat less,
of a dark blue or blackish color. They are easily distinguished from all
others, 1. By their color. 2. In that their Eyes are compassed about with a
broad circle of naked, tuberous, white, furfuraceous skin. 3. That the upper
Chap of the Bill is covered above half way from the Head with a double crust of
the like naked fungous skin. The Bill is not short, but of a moderate length.
They make use of these birds to convey Letters to and fro, chiefly in the
Turkish Empire. Perchance these may be the Persian and Turkish Pigeons of
Aldrovand, all over of a dusky or dark brown color, excepting the Eyes which
are scarlet, the Feet which are of a pale red, and the Bill, which (as he
says) is yellow; wherein they differ from ours, whose Bills are black. The
nature of these birds is such, that though carried far away they will return
speedily thither, where either themselves were bred or brought up, or where
they had hatched and brought up Young. Of this kind we saw in the Kings Aviary
in St. James's Park, and at Mr. Copes, an Embroiderer in Jewin Street, London.
Moreover, we read that the Ancients sometimes made use of Pigeons in sending
Letters, as for example, Hirtius and Brutus in the Siege of Modena, Hirtius
sending a Dove to Brutus, and Brutus back again to Hirtius, having, by meat
laid in some high places, instructed these Pigeons, before shut up in a dark
place, and kept very hungry, to fly from one to another.

6. Jacobines, called by the Low Dutch, Cappers, because in the hinder part of
the Head or Nape of the Neck certain feathers reflected upward encompass the
Head behind, almost after the fashion of a Monks Hood, when he puts it back to
uncover his Head. These are called Cyprus Pigeons by Aldrovand, and there are
of them roughfooted. Aldrovandus has set forth three or four either Species or
accidental varieties of this kind. Their Bill is short: The Irides of their
Eyes of a Pearl-colour, and the Head (as Mr. Cope told us) in all white.

7. Turbits, of the meaning and original of which name I must confess myself to
be ignorant. They have a very short thick Bill like a Bullfinch: The crown of
their Head is flat and depressed: The feathers on the Breast reflected both
ways. They are about the bigness of the Jacobines, or a little bigger. I take
these to be the Candy or Indian Doves of Aldrovand, tom. 2. page 477. 478. the
Low Dutch Cortbeke.

8. Barbary-Pigeons, perchance the Candy-Dove of Aldrovand. The Bill is like
that of the precedent. A broad circle of naked, tuberous, white flesh compasses
the Eyes, as in the Carriers. The Irides of the Eyes are white. My worthy
Friend Mr. Philip Skippon, in a Letter to me concerning tame Pigeons, writes,
that the Eyes of this kind are red. Perchance the color may vary in several
birds.

9. Smiters. I take these to be those, which the forementioned Hollander told
Aldrovandus, that his Countrymen called Draiiers. These do not only shake
their Wings as they fly: But also flying round about in a ring, especially over
their Females, clap them so strongly, that they make a greater sound than two
Battledores or other boards struck one against another. Whence it comes to pass
that their quilfeathers are almost always broken and shattered; and sometimes
so bad, that they cannot fly. Our Countrymen distinguish between Tumblers and
Smiters.

10. Tumblers, these are small, and of diverse colors. They have strange
motions, turning themselves backward over their Heads, and show like footbals
in the Air.

11. Helmets. In these the Head, Tail, and quil-feathers of the Wings are
always of one color, sometimes white, sometimes black, red, yellow, or blue;
the rest of the body of another, different from that, whatever it be. These are
also called Helm by the Low Dutch, as Aldrovandus writes from the relation of
the forementioned Dutchman.

12. Light-horsemen. This is a bastard kind, of one Parent a Cropper, the other
a Carrier, and so they partake of both, as appears by the Wattles of their
Bill, and their swollen throats. They are the best breeders of all, and will
not lightly forsake any house to which they have been accustomed.

13. Bastard-bills. Which name why it is imposed upon them I know not, unless
perchance because their Bills are neither long nor short, so that it is not
certain to what Species they ought to be referred. They are bigger than
Barbaries, have a short Bill and red Eyes; but are not all of the same color.

14. Turners, having a tuft hanging down backward from their Head, parted like
a horses Main.

15. Finikins, like the precedent, but less.

16. Mawmets, called (as I take it) from Mahomet; perchance because brought out
of Turkey, notable for their great black Eyes, else like to the Barbaries.

17. Spots, because they have each in their forehead, above their Bill a spot:
Their Tail is of the same color with the spot, the rest of the body being
white.

The Younger Pigeons never tread the Females, but they Exesculentur. i. e. kiss
them.
bill them first, and that as often as they tread them. The elder Doves bill
only the first time, the second they couple without billing. Aldrov. Ornithol.
tom. 2. page 363.

The Sex, especially of the tame Pigeons, is easily known by their note or
murmur, which in the Hens is very small, in the Males much deeper.

Aristotle, and out of him Pliny and Athenaeus write that it is proper or
peculiar to Pigeons not to hold up their heads as they drink, like other birds,
but to drink like Kine or Horses by sucking without intermission.

Albertus sets the twentieth year for the term of a Pigeons life. As for tame
Pigeons (says Aldrovandus) a certain man of good credit told me, that he had
heard from his The life of Pigeons.
Father, who was much delighted in Pigeons, and other Birds, that he had kept a
Pigeon two and twenty years, and that all that time it constantly bred,
excepting the last six months, which time, having left its Mate, it had chosen
a single life. Aristotle assigns forty years to the life of a Pigeon. Aldrov.
Ornithol. tom. 2. page 370.

Pigeons are far harder to concoct than Chickens, and yield a melancholy juice.
They say that the eating of Doves flesh is of force against the Plague;
insomuch that they who make it their constant or ordinary food are seldom
seized by Pestilential diseases. Others commend it against the Palsy and
trembling: Others write, that it is of great use and advantage to them that are
Or have weak Fyes.
dim-sighted. The flesh of young Pigeons is restorative, and useful to recruit
the strength of such as are getting up, or newly recovered from some great
sickness: To us it seems to be most savoury, and if we may stand to the verdict
of our Palate, comparable to the most esteemed.

A live Pigeon cut asunder along the backbone, and clapped hot upon the Head,
mitigates fierce humors and discusses melancholy sadness. Hence it is a most
proper medicine in the frenzy, headache, melancholy, and gout, Schrod. Some
add also in the Apoplexy. Our Physicians use to apply Pigeons thus dissected to
the soals of the Feet, in acute diseases, in any great defect of spirits or
decay of strength, to support and refresh the patient, that he may be able to
grapple with, and master the disease. For the vital spirits of the Pigeon still
remaining in the hot flesh and blood, do through the pores of the skin
insinuate themselves into the blood of the sick person now dis-spirited and
ready to stagnate, and induing it with new life and vigor, enable it to
perform its solemn and necessary circuits.

The hot blood dropped into the Eyes allays pain, and cures blear eyes, and
discusseth suffusions and bloud-shot, and cures green wounds. It properly stops
blood that flows from the membranes of the brain; and mitigates the pains of
the gout.

Note 1. The blood of the Cock-Pigeon is best, and that taken from under the
right Wing, (because it is of a hotter nature.)

Note 2. The bloody juice from the feathers of the Wings may be used for the
other blood, and it is best from the young Pigeon.

The coat of the stomach dried and powdered is good against Dysenteries.

The Dung is very hot from the nitrous faculty (wherewith it is endued) and
therefore burns, discusses, and makes the skin red by attracting the blood.

Hence it is of common use in Cataplasms and Plasters that rubifie. Beaten, and
sifted, and laid on with Water-cress Seeds, it is good against old diseases:
Such as are the Gout, Megrim, Or dizziness, Vertige.
Turn-sick, old Headache, and pains in the Sides, Colics, Apoplexies, Lethargy,
etc. It discusseth Strumaes, and other Tumors (laid on with Barley-flour and
Vinegar) and cures the falling of the hair (anointed) and Colic (in Clysters)
and discusseth defluxions on the knees (applied with salt and oil.)

Inwardly, it breaks the Stone, and expels Urine. Give from a scruple to two
scruples. Schrod. out of Galen and Fernelius.

Doves dung (as Crescentiensis says) is best of all others for Plants and
Seeds, and may be scattered when any thing is sown together with the Seed, or
at any time afterward: One Basket-ful thereof is worth a Cart-load of Sheeps
dung. Our Countrymen also are wont to sow Doves dung together with their grain.

. III. * A wild Pigeon of St. Thomas his Island, Marggrav.
IT is of the bigness and figure of our Country Pigeon, but its upper Bill
hooked, the foremost half being of a blue color mixed with a little white and
yellow; the hindmost of a sanguine. The Eyes are black, with a circle of blue.
The whole body is covered with green feathers like a Parrot. The prime feathers
of the Wings are duskish, as is also the end of the Tail. Under the vent it
has yellow feathers. The Legs and Feet are of an elegant Saffron-colour, but
the Claws dusky.

. IV. A Turtle-dove. Turtur.
THe Male, which we described from Bill-point to Tail-end was twelve inches
long: from tip to tip of the Wings extended twenty one broad: Its Bill slender,
from the tip to the angles of the mouth almost an inch long, of a dusky blue
color without, and red within: Its Tongue small and not divided: The Irides of
its Eyes between red and yellow. A circle of naked red flesh encompasseth the
Eyes as in many others of this kind.

Its Feet were red; its Claws black; its Toes divided to the very bottom. The
inner side of the middle Claw thinned into an edge.

Its Head and the middle of its Back were blue or cinereous, of the color of a
common Pigeon. The Shoulders and the Rump were of a sordid red: The Breast and
Belly white: The Throat tinctured with a lovely vinaceous color. Each side of
the Neck was adorned with a spot of beautiful feathers, of a black color, with
white tips. The exterior quil-feathers of the Wings were dusky, the middle
cinereous; the interior had their edges red. The second row of Wing-feathers
was ash-colored, the lesser rows black. The Tail was composed of twelve
feathers; of which the outmost had both their tips and exterior Webs white. In
the succeeding the white part by degrees grew less and less, so that the
middlemost had no white at all. The length of the Tail was four inches and an
half.

Its Testicles were great, an inch long: Its Guts by measure twenty six inches:
Its blind Guts very short. Its Crop great, in which we found Hemp Seed: Its
Stomach or Gizzard fleshy. Above the stomach the Gullet is dilated into a kind
of bag, set with papillary Glandules.

. V. * The Indian Turtle of Aldrov. lib. 15. cap. 9.
THe Hen, excepting the Feet, which are red, and the Bill, which is black, as
in the Cock, is all over white. But the Cock has his Head, Neck, Breast, Wings
as far as the quill-feathers, and Back down to the Rump reddish, but of a much
fainter color than in our common Turtle, and not at all spotted. Its bigness
is almost the same, its note the same: Its Bill also like, but black. In its
Eye is a most manifest difference: For in this the Iris is of a most lovely
shining Saffron, or rather scarlet color, which in the common Turtle is only
yellow. [In that we described, the Irides of the Eyes were between red and
yellow.]

The ring also is of a different color; for in the Indian Turtles it is
slender, and black, and compasses the Neck round, whereas in the common ones it
is more than an inch broad, parti-colored, and compasses not the Neck. The
longer feathers of the Wings, the Rump, and whole Tail are of a dusky color,
having their shafts black, and edges white. The Belly, especially near the
vent, is yellow. The Feet red, adorned with whitish I suppose he means the
incisures dividing the scales
tables. The Claws are dusky, inclining to yellow. They feed upon Millet. Thus
far Aldrovandus. Of this sort of Bird we have seen many kept by the curious in
Aviaries and Cages.

. VI. * The Indian Turtle or Cocotzin of Nieremberg, the Picuipinima of
Marggrave: Our least Barbados Turtle.
IT is a little bigger than a Lark, Nieremberg says, than a Sparrow; has a
small dusky [black] Bill, like a Pigeons; black Eyes, with a golden Circle. The
whole Head, the upper part of the Neck, the Sides, Back, and Wings are covered
with dark ash-colored, or black and blue feathers, having black, semilunar
borders. But the long feathers of its Wings, which are seen as it flies, are of
a red color, and black on one side, and in their tips. The Tail is of a good
length, consisting of dusky ash-colored feathers, yet some of them are black,
and have their exterior half white. The feathers of the Belly are white,
having their borders black, of the figure of a Crescent. The Legs and Feet like
those of other Doves, but whitish. These Pigeons are good meat, and grow very
fat. Nieremberg adds, that the Head is little, the Bill little and black, the
Neck short, the Legs red [wherein it differs from Marggraves bird,] the Claws
dusky and little. The Mexicans gave it its name from the color of its Wings,
and the noise it makes in flying; the Spaniards (who call it a Turtle) from its
murmuring voice, and the taste and quality of its flesh, although it be much
less than our common Turtle. It cries hu, hu, affords good nourishment, though
somewhat hard of concoction. It is found in Mountainous places, and also near
Towns. It is native of the Country of Mexico, and very common there. They say,
that it will cure a woman of jealousy, if you give it her boiled to eat, so
that she knows not what she eats. There is also another sort of this Bird,
every way like it, save only that the body is fulvous and black, and the Head
ash-colored: Whence some call it Tlapalcocotli.

This Bird is either the same with, or very like to our least Barbados Turtle,
which is of the bigness of a Lark, being exactly equal to the figure we give of
it, taken from the live bird.

. VII. The Ring-Dove, Palumbus torquatus.
THat we described weighed twenty ounces and an half. Its length from the tip
of the Bill to the end of the Tail was eighteen inches: Its breadth thirty.

Its Bill yellowish, covered for some space from the Head with a red or
purplish skin, wherein are the Nosthrils. Above the Nosthrils is as it were a
white Dandroof. The Tongue is sharp-pointed, not cloven, but channel'd. The
circle about the Pupil of the Eye of a pale yellow.

The Feet were bare, of a red color, as in other Pigeons. The outmost Toe by a
membrane joined to the middlemost as far as the first joint. The Legs feathered
almost down to the foot.

The upper part of the Neck is adorned with a semicircular line of white, which
they call a ring, and from whence the Bird took its name [Ring-Dove.] Both
above and beneath this ring the Neck, as it is variously objected to the light,
appears of various colors. The Head and Back are of a dark ash color. The
lower part of the Neck, and upper part of the Breast are purplish, or red, with
a certain mixture of cinereous. The Belly of a light ash color, inclining to
white. In the Cock these colors are deeper than in the Hen.

The quill-feathers in each Wing about twenty four, of which the second is the
longest: The ten foremost or outmost were black: The second, and succeeding as
far as the seventh, had their utmost edges white: The rest of the hard feathers
were of a dusky ash color. At the bottom or rise of the bastard Wing a white
spot tending downwards covered the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth
quill-feathers. The Tail was seven inches long, and made up of twelve feathers,
the top or end, for two inches and an half, being black, the remaining part
cinereous.

The Liver was divided into two Lobes: It had no Gallbladder, but a large
Gall-channel to convey the Gall into the Guts.

These Birds in Wintertime company together, and fly in flocks: They build in
trees, making their Nests of a few sticks and straws. They feed upon Acorns,
and also upon Corn, and Ivy and Holly berries.

. VIII. The Stock-Dove or Wood-Pigeon, Oenas, sive Vinago.
IT is as big or bigger than a common Pigeon. The Cock weighed fourteen ounces
and an half, was from Bill to Tail fourteen inches long, and between the tips
of the Wings extended twenty six broad. The color and shape of the body almost
the same with that of a common Pigeon: The Bill also like, and of equal length,
of a pale red color. The Nosthrils were great and prominent. The top of the
Head cinereous. The Neck covered with changeable feathers, which as they are
variously objected to the light, appear of a purple or shining green; no Silk
like them. The forepart of the Breast, the Shoulders and Wings are dashed with
a purplish or redwine color, whence it took the name [Oenas.] The Wings,
Shoulders, and middle of the Back are of a dark ash color, the rest of the
Back to the Tail of a paler. All the quil-feathers (except the four or five
outmost, which are all over black, with their edges white) have their lower
part cinereous, and their upper black. The Tail is five inches long, made up of
twelve feathers, having their lower parts cinereous, their upper for one third
of their length black. The nether side of the body, excepting the upper part of
the Breast, is all cinereous. The Wings closed reach not to the end of the
Tail. In both Wings are two black spots, the one upon two or three
quil-feathers next the body, the other upon two or three of the covert feathers
incumbent upon those quils: Both spots are on the outside the shafts, and not
far from the tips of the feathers. The two outmost feathers of the Tail have
the lower half of their exterior Vanes white.

The Feet are red, the Claws black: the Legs feathered down a little below the
Knees. The blind Guts very short. It had no Gallbladder that we could find; a
large Craw, full of Gromil seeds, etc. It had a musculous Stomach, long
Testicles; and a long Breast Bone.

. IX. * The Rock-Pigeon.
THis (as Mr. Johnson described it to us) has a small body, ash-colored, and
red Legs. But these two last notes are common to most Pigeons. Perchance this
may be the Columba Saxatilis of Aldrovand, called by the Bolognese, Sassarolo.
It is (says he) bigger than the Stone-Pigeons of Varro, of a livid color,
having a red Bill, and is altogether wild. It is sometimes taken in the
Territory of Bologna.

. X. * The Dove called Livia by Gesner.
IT is in shape very like a House-Dove, but a little less, having red Feet, a
whitish Bill, with something of Purple about the Nosthrils. The feathers
investing the body are all over cinereous: But the extreme feathers of the Tail
are black, the middle have something of red. The Neck above, and on the sides
is covered with feathers partly purple, partly green, as they are diversely
exposed to the light, shining with this or that color. The lower part of the
Neck is of a color compounded of cinereous and purple. The four longer
feathers of the Wings are black, with somewhat of red; the least Wing-feathers
are cinereous; the middle partly cinereous, partly black [in their ends] the
last of them toward the Back are reddish. The length of this Bird from the
Bill to the end of the Tail was almost fourteen inches. It differs from the
Ring-Dove in that it is much less, and has no white spots about the Neck and
in the Wings like that.

This Bird, if it be different from the next above described is to us unknown,
as also to Aldrovandus, who borrows the figure and description of it of Gesner.

CHAP. XVI. Of Thrushes in general.
UNder this title we comprehend also Blackbirds and Starlings. The marks common
to all are, A mean bigness between Pigeons and Larks: A Bill of a moderate
length and thickness, a little bending downwards: The Mouth yellow within-side;
a long Tail: Promiscuous feeding upon Berries and Insects. Most of the Birds of
this sort are canorous, and may be taught to imitate man's voice, or speak
articulately.

This Genus comprehends under it three Species, 1. Thrushes strictly and
properly so called, having an ash-colored Back, and a spotted Breast. 2.
Blackbirds, so called from their color. 3. Starlings, whose characteristic is
a broader and flatter or more depressed bill than that of Thrushes or
Blackbirds.

That Latin Proverb, The Thrush dungs its own destruction or mischief.
Turdus malum sibi ipse cacat, spoken of those who are the cause of their own
destruction, took its original from that ancient conceit, that the parasitical
Plant, called Misselto, of the Berries whereof in old time Birdlime was wont to
be made, sprang from the Seed voided by the Thrush. Misselto (says Pliny) sow
it how you will, springs not unless cast forth in the Excrements of Birds,
especially the Ring-Dove, and Thrush. Such is its nature, that unless ripened
in the belly of Birds it will not grow. But that Misselto comes not at all of
seed may be proved by many arguments, of which the principal is, that sometimes
it grows on upright boughs, and on the underside or that respecting the earth.
He that desires further information concerning this matter may consult Tom. 2.
p. 585.
Aldrovandus and Scaliger.

There are four kinds of Thrushes common and well known in England: Two abide
all the year, and build with us, viz. 1. The Missel-bird or Shrite. 2. The
Mavis or Song-Thrush: Two are Birds of passage, coming in the Autumn,
continuing here all Winter, and going away next Spring, never breeding with us,
to wit, 1. The Feldefare: 2. The Redwing. Of Blackbirds or Ouzels England
breeds and feeds three kinds, 1. The common Blackbird; 2. The Ring-Ouzels; 3.
The Water-Ouzel; of which we treat in another place, among the Piscivorous
Land-birds. The Rock-Ouzel of Darbyshire is, if I mistake not, the Female of
the Ring-Ouzel, although it has not the least shadow or appearance of a ring.
We know but one sort of Stare. The Stone-Ouzel or greater Redstart, as also the
Solitary Sparrow, and Witwal, which we have seen beyond Seas, are strangers and
unknown to England. To this Tribe we have subjoyned some exotic Birds out of
Marggravius, for their agreement in bigness or color, etc.

CHAP. XVII. Thrushes properly so called, having a spotted Breast.
. I. The Missel-bird or Shrite; Turdus viscivorus major.
THis Bird is the biggest of this kind, weighing four ounces and an half. Its
length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail was eleven inches. Its
breadth eighteen.

Its Bill is straight, like a Blackbirds, or for the bigness, a little shorter:
The upper Chap dusky, somewhat longer than the lower: The Tongue hard,
channel'd and slit at the tip, horny, and pellucid: The inside of the Mouth is
yellow: The Nosthrils great, almost of an Oval figure: The Irides of the Eyes
hazel-coloured. The Legs and Feet yellowish; the Claws black. The outer
fore-toe sticks to the middlemost as far as the first joint, no membrane
intervening. The Head is of a dusky cinereous, or lead-colour, the middle part
of each feather being blacker. The Back, Tail, and Rump have some mixture of
yellow. In Summer it changes color, and becomes more cinereous. [The color of
the Head, Back, Wings, and Tail, in a word of the whole upper side seemed to me
to approach to that of Spanish Olives pickled while yet immature, such as are
usually brought over to us.] The underside of the body from the Bill to the
Tail is speckled with pretty great blackish spots. The upper part of the
Breast, the Sides, and feathers under the Tail are yellow, the middle of the
Belly white.

The number of quill-feathers in each Wing is eighteen, whereof the second,
being the longest, is by measure five inches. The tips of the feathers next
incumbent on the quills are white. The Tail is four inches and an half long,
and made up of twelve equal feathers.

It has no Craw: The Gizzard is not very thick or fleshy; therein we found
Maggots, Caterpillars, etc. though the Bird was killed in January. The Guts
were great, but short: The blind Guts very little and short. It had a
pale-coloured Liver, and a Gall bladder.

Sitting upon the tops of high trees, as Oaks, Elms, etc. in the Spring time it
sings rarely well. It abides the year round with us in England, and breeds
here. It is a solitary Bird, accompanying and flying only with its Mate. It is
the worst meat of all its kind.

In Winter time it feeds much upon Holly-berries. And (which is strange) the
birds of this kind are observed each to take possession of his tree, and to be
always near it, and not to permit other birds to feed on it, but to beat and
drive them away: Which quality of theirs is the occasion that they are easily
taken.

A late English Writer says, that this bird makes as large a Nest as a Jay,
and lays as big an Egg: Builds commonly with rotten twigs the outside of his
Nest, the inside with dead Grass, Hay, or Moss, that he pulls from trees. It
seldom lays above five Eggs, but four most commonly, breeds but twice a year,
and has three young ones, never above four, that I could find; She feeds all
her young ones with Misselto berries, and nothing else as I could perceive,
having diligently watched them for two or three hours together. This I can
hardly believe, for that the old ones feed upon other berries too, and also
Insects. For Convulsions or the Falling sickness, kill this bird, dry him to a
powder, and take the quantity of a penny weight every morning in six spoonfuls
of black Cherry water, or the distilled water of Miselto-berries. The reason of
this conceit is, because this bird feeds upon Misselto, which is an approved
remedy for the Epilepsie.

. II. The Mavis, Throstle, or Song-thrush. Turdus simpliciter dictus seu
viscivorus minor.
IT is called viscivorous, not because its feeds upon Misselto-berries, but
because it is like the Missel-bird. It is lesser than the Fieldfare, scarce
bigger than the Redwing, of three ounces weight; from the point of the Bill to
the end of the Tail or the Feet, (for all is one) nine inches long. The Bill is
an inch long, of a dusky color. The Tongue, viewing it attentively, appears to
be a little cloven: The Mouth withinside is yellow: The Irides of the Eyes
hazel-coloured.

In the color and spots of the Breast and Belly it agrees with the
Missel-bird: For the spots are dusky; the Breast yellowish; the Belly white.
The upper surface of the body is all over dusky, with a mixture of yellow in
the Wings. [I should rather call this an Olive-colour, from its likeness to
that of unripe pickled Olives, such as are brought over to us out of Spain.]

This Bird for its outward shape and color is so like the Redwing that they
are hard to be distinguished: Only this has more and greater spots on the
Breast and Belly. Aldrovandus tells us, that it is proper to this kind to be
spotted about the Eyes. The lesser feathers, covering the Wings underneath, are
of a yellowish red color: The lower covert-feathers have yellow tips. The
quill-feathers in each Wing are in number eighteen. The Tail is three inches
and an half long, and made up of twelve feathers.

The Legs and Feet are of a light brown or dusky: The soals of the Feet yellow;
The exterior toe grows to the middle one as far as the first joint. It has a
Gallbladder; the Stomach or Gizzard not so thick and fleshy as in other birds
of this Tribe. Its feeding is rather upon Insects than berries: It eats also
shell-snails, which are by most Naturalists reckoned among Insects. The Sex
cannot be known by the color. It abides all the year, and breeds with us in
England. It builds its Nest outwardly of earth, moss, and straws, and within
dawbs it with clay, laying its Eggs and Young upon the bare clay; it lays at
one sitting five or six Eggs of a bluish green color, speckled with a few
small black spots, thin-set. In the Spring time it sits upon trees and sings
most sweetly. It is a solitary bird like the Shrite. But it builds rather in
hedges than high trees. Moreover, it is a silly bird, and easily taken.

For the delicate taste of its flesh it is by all highly and deservedly
commended. If we stand to Martials judgment, the Thrush is the best meat of all
birds:

Inter aves Turdus, siquid me judice verum est,
Inter quadrupedes gloria prima lepus.
This (says a late English Writer) is a rare Song-bird, as well for the great
variety of his notes, as his long continuance in song [at least nine months in
the year.] They breed commonly thrice a year, in April, May, and June, but the
first birds prove usually the best. They may be taken in the Nest at fourteen
days old or sooner, must be kept warm and neat, not suffering them to sit upon
their dung if it happen to fall into the Nest. When they are young you must
feed them with raw meat, and some bread mixed and chopped together, with some
bruised Hemp, wet their bread and mix it with their meat. When they are well
feathered, put them in a large Cage, with two or three Perches in it, and dry
Moss at the bottom; and by degrees you may give them no flesh at all, but only
bread and hemp seed. Give them fresh water twice a Week, to bathe themselves,
otherwise they will not thrive. If he be not clean kept he is subject to the
Cramp, like other singing birds.

. III. The Fieldfare, Turdus pilaris.
IT weighs well nigh four ounces. Its length from the point of the Bill to the
end of the Tail, or utmost Claws (for they are equally extended) is ten inches
and an half: Its breadth, the Wings being spread, seventeen. The Bill is an
inch long, like a Blackbirds, yellow save the tip, which is black: The Bills of
the Hens or young birds are darker and less yellow, as in Blackbirds; the
Tongue is rough, horny, channel'd in the middle. The edges of the Eyelids
being yellow make a yellow circle round the Eye. The Nosthrils are great. In
the lower part of the nictating membrane is a black spot. The Ears are large:
The Feet black, but the Claws more: The outer Toe is joined immediately to the
middle one as far as the first joint.

It seems to be somewhat bigger than a Blackbird, and the second in bigness of
this kind, or next to the Missel-bird.

The Head, Neck, and Rump are ash-colored, [in some of a deep blue.] The crown
of the Head sprinkled with black spots [which yet in some birds are wanting.]
The Back, Shoulders, and covert feathers of the Wings are of a dark red or
Chesnut-colour; the middle parts of the feathers being black. The Throat and
upper part of the Breast are yellow, spotted with black, the black spots taking
up the middle parts of the feathers. The bottom of the Breast and Belly are
white, and less spotted. The covert-feathers of the sides under the ends of the
Wings are white: Thence a red or yellow line separates the white from the
black. On each Cheek it has a black stroke reaching from the Bill to the Eyes.
It has also on both sides, at the bottom of the Neck, just by the setting on
of the Wings, a black spot. The number of quil-feathers, as in the rest, is
eighteen, the outmost of which are black, with white edges; the inner have
something of red, The covert-feathers of the inside of the Wings are white. The
Tail is four inches and an half long, composed of twelve feathers, of a dark
blue or blackish color: Only the tips of the outmost feathers are white, and
the edges of the middlemost ash-colored.

The Liver is divided into two Lobes, and furnished with its Gallbladder: The
Muscles of the Gizzard are not very thick. I found no footstep of the passage
for conveying the Gall into the Guts.

These Birds fly in flocks together with Stares and Redwings. They shift places
according to the seasons of the year. About the beginning of Autumn come over
incredible flights of them into England, which stay with us all Winter, and in
the Spring fly all back again, not one bird remaining; insomuch that (as far as
ever I could hear) there was never seen young Fieldfare or Redwing, or so much
as a Nest of those birds with us in England. Whither they betake themselves, or
where they breed is not to us perfectly known: It is by some reported, that
they breed in Bohemia; others tell us with much confidence, in Sweden. They
have a hoarse chattering note, not much unlike a Magpie; by reason the sides of
the fissure in the Palate are rough; as we conjecture.

This kind of Thrush (says Gesner) loves to feed upon Berries of all sorts,
especially those of Juniper. With us in England they are very greedy of
Holly-berries. This bird is accounted very good meat, and preferred far before
the Missel-bird. In open weather they feed upon Worms, and other Insects, lying
much upon Meadows and Pasture-grounds.

. IV. The Redwing, Swinepipe, or Wind-thrush, Turdus Iliacus sive Illas aut
Tylas.
IT is rather less than the Mavis; not exceeding two ounces and an half in
weight. Its length from Bill-point to Tail-end is eight inches and an half: Its
Bill an inch long; the upper Mandible dusky, the lower partly dusky, partly
yellow. Its Tongue hard and rough, the tip being divided into many Filaments.
The Mouth withinside is yellow: The Irides of the Eyes of a dark hazel color.
The Legs and Feet pale: The outer Toe joined to the middle below, as in the
rest of this kind.

The upper side of the body is of the same color with that of the Mavis: The
Breast not so much spotted. The covert-feathers of the underside of the Wings,
and of the sides of the body under the Wings, which in the Mavis are yellow, in
this kind are of a red Orange-colour, by which mark it is chiefly distinguished
from it. The belly is white, as in the Fieldfare: The Throat and Breast
yellowish, spotted with dusky spots, which take up the middle parts of the
feathers. The sides of the Breast and Belly are in like manner spotted. The
spots are less, but thicker set than in the Mavis. Above the Eyes is a long
spot or line of a clay color, reaching from the Eyes to the hinder part of the
Head.

The number of quill-feathers in each Wing, as in the rest of this kind, and
almost all small birds, is eighteen: These are more red or chesnut-coloured
than the rest of the feathers: They differ also in diverse birds; for in some
the edges of the outmost feathers are white, which are not so in others. The
tips of the two inmost quill-feathers, as also of the second row of feathers,
beginning from the tenth, are white. The Tail is three inches and an half long,
consisting of twelve feathers.

The Gizzard like those of the precedent: The blind Guts in like manner very
short. We found in this some remainder of the channel conveying the Yolk into
the Guts. The Liver is large for the bulk of the body, and has its
Gallbladder appendant. In the Stomach dissected we found diverse sorts of
Insects, Snails, etc. It comes to us from beyond Seas, as the Fieldfare, with
which it flies in company, observing the same times of coming and returning.
Whither it goes, and where it breeds is not to us certainly known: Perchance in
the Mountainous parts of Bohemia or Hungaria, as Gesner says he had heard. Its
flesh by reason of its bitterness is less esteemed.

Dr. Charleton thinks they are called in English, Wind-Thrushes, because about
the beginning of Winter, when strong Winds blow, by which perchance they are
assisted in their passage, they come flying over to us from beyond Seas. I
rather think, we borrowed that name from the Germans, who call this bird
Wyntrostel, that is, Vineyard Thrushes, because, as Bellonius reports, they
feed upon Grapes, and are very noisome to the Vineyards: So that they are by
mistake called Wind-Thrushes, their true name being Wine-Thrushes.

. V. * The Brasilian Tamatia of Marggrave.
THis Bird is of the bigness of a Lark or small Woodpecker, all spotted like a
Throstle or Mavis: On the Belly it has white feathers, with dusky spots. It is
yellow under the Throat, as also about the Neck. It has a long, red Bill, a
little dusky above, the upper Chap somewhat longer than the nether. Above the
Nosthrils stand up certain slender feathers like hairs or bristles. It has
four Toes in each foot, and crooked Claws. Its Head is bigger than the
proportion of the body requires, as also its Bill. Not knowing better whither
to refer this bird, for its agreement with Thrushes in bigness and color, I
have placed it here.

CHAP. XVIII. Birds of the Thrush-kind, that are black of color.
. I. The common Blackbird, Merula vulgaris.
IT is little, or nothing less than a Fieldfare; of four ounces weight; nine
inches and an half long from the tip of the Bill to the Claws, to the end of
the Tail ten and an half, and the Cock eleven.

The Bill is an inch long, in the Cock of a deep yellow; in the Hen the tip and
upper part is black. The Mouth in both Sexes is yellow within. The Bill in
young Cockbirds is black, and turns not perfectly yellow till they be near a
year old. The circumference of the Eyelids is also yellow. The Cock, after he
has mewed his chicken feathers, becomes cole-black; the Hen and young
Cock-birds are rather brown, or of a dark russet than black: Their Breasts have
something of reddish, and their Bellies of ash color. The Cocks while young
cannot be distinguished from the Hens by their color.

The number of quill-feathers in each Wing is eighteen, of which the fourth is
the longest. The Tail is four inches and an half long, made up of twelve
feathers of equal length save the two outmost, which are somewhat shorter than
the rest.

The Feet are black: The outmost fore-toe and the back-toe are equal: And the
outmost Toe joined to the middlemost at bottom, as in the rest of this kind.

The Liver is divided into two Lobes, and has its Gallbladder annexed. The
Gizzard not very fleshy nor thick, as in the rest. It feeds promiscuously upon
Berries and Insects. I could not find any remainder of the Yolk-channel in the
Guts.

The Cocks in this kind are very canorous, whistling and singing very
pleasantly all the Spring and Summertime, only their note is too loud and
shrill near hand.

The Hen lays four or five Eggs, seldom more at once, of a bluish green color,
full of dusky spots and lines.

On the Alps, the Appennine, and other high Mountains are sometime found birds
of this kind all over white. We our selves saw one in a Poulterers Shop at Rome
parti-colored of black and white. But this we look upon as accidental: Either
the coldness of the Region, or the constant intuition of Snow effecting this
alteration of color, as in Crows, Ravens, etc. So that we do not think a white
Blackbird (pardon the seeming contradiction in adjecto) to differ specifically
from a black one.

The Blackbird builds her Nest very artificially withoutside of Moss, slender
twigs, bents, and fibers of roots, cemented and joined together with Clay
instead of Glue, dawbing it also all over withinside with Clay: Yet does she
not lay her Eggs upon the bare Clay, like the Mavis, but lines it with a
covering of small straws, bents, hair, or other soft matter, upon which she
lays her Eggs, both that they might be more secure, and in less danger of
breaking, and also that her Young might lie softer and warmer.

The Blackbird loves to wash it self, and prune its feathers with its Bill. It
flies also singly for the most part: Whence it took the name Merula in Latin,
being (as Festus and Varro tell us) so called because it flies and feeds Mera,
that is, solitary or singly.

The flesh of Blackbirds is accounted good meat, yea, some prefer it before
that of the Thrush. But Palate-men, and such as are critical in discerning of
tastes, are of another opinion.

. II. The solitary Sparrow.
MEeting with a Female of this kind at Florence in Italy, I thus described it.
It is of the bigness of a Blackbird, and for shape of body very like it, nor
much different in color.

The Head and Neck were thicker than to answer the proportion of the body. The
top of the Head was of a dark ash color. The Back was of a deep blue, almost
black, only the extreme edges of the feathers were whitish. The Shoulders and
covert-feathers of the Wings were of the same color. Each Wing had eighteen
quill-feathers, besides a little short one outmost, all dusky, but some had
white tips. The second row of Wing-feathers had also white tips. The Tail was
about four inches long, and composed of twelve black feathers. The underside of
the Body Breast, Belly, and Thighs, was all variegated with black, cinereous,
and whitish transverse waved lines, so that in color it resembled a Cuckoo.
Under the Throat, and in the upper part of the Breast no ash color appeared,
and the white lines had something of red mingled with them. The Bill was
straight, blackish, rather longer than a Thrushes Bill, as also a little
thicker and stronger. The Legs short and black: The Feet and Claws black. The
Legs, Feet, and Claws in this sort seemed to me lesser than in the rest of the
Thrush-kind. The Mouth within was yellow, the stomach filled with Grapes.

The Cocks are much more beautiful, all over of a shining blue, or bluish
purple color, as Aldrovandus witnesses, and as we also observed in a Cock we
saw at Rome, whose Back especially was of a most lovely glistering dark purple
color.

It is wont to sit alone on the tops of ancient Edifices and Roofs of Churches,
singing most sweetly, especially in the Morning, whence it took its name, being
supposed to be the bird spoken of, Psalm 102. 7. It builds also in the like
places, for which Olina is my Author. For the excellency of its singing it is
highly prized in Italy, specially, at Genua and Milan. It has a whistling note
like a Pipe, and may easily be taught to imitate man's voice.

. III. * The Blue-bird of Bellonius, Passeri solitario congener, Ornithol. l.
16. c. 8.
Aldrov.
THere is also (says Gesner) another bird akin to the solitary Sparrow, of the
Blackbird kind, frequenting rocky places, whence by the Grecians it is called,
Petrocossyphus, [that is, the Rock-Ouzel or Blackbird] by our Countrymen
Steinrotele, esteemed in like manner for its singing. In another place he thus
discourses concerning the same bird: This (viz. which Cap. de Caeruleo.
Bellonius, whose words he had cited, calls Merula torquata, i. e. Ring-Ouzel)
seems to be the very same with that bird of which Raphael Seillerius of
Augsburg lately wrote to me in these words. The bird which from its blue color
the Germans call Blauvogel is of the bigness of a Stare, has his Breast,
Loins, and Neck of a lovely blue, yet darker than the Kingfisher. The Back and
Wings are somewhat black, yet showing something of blue. The Bill is an inch
and half long, under the Nosthrils dusky, the upper Chap being hooked, and
covering the nether, for the most part. The Feet are divided, as in other
birds. It lives in the highest parts of the Alps, neither is it contented to
abide in the tops of the Mountains, but chooses the most rocky and craggy
places, and such as are covered with Snow, neither do we know certainly that it
is found in any other place than the Mountains about the River Athesis,
especially near the City of Inspruck. For this cause it is had in great account
even by the Inhabitants themselves of those places, and is fed with such meat
as men usually eat, and such as is usually given to Blackbirds and Thrushes
designed for fowling. It speaks with an articulate voice very pleasant and
various; and is it self so docile, and observes things so diligently, that it
will express most things by some articulate sound. Being awakened at Midnight,
and called upon by a by-stander, as if it were bidden, it will sing with a
clear and loud note. Like other birds, it aims at men's Eyes, because seeing in
them, as in a Looking-glass, its own image, it is affected with a desire of its
like, and thinks to join it self in company with it. Before the Autumn, at what
time other birds sit, and are busy in bringing up their Young, together with
its color it changes also its voice. Its color about the beginning of Winter
of blue becomes black, which about the beginning of next Spring it changes
again into its own natural blue. Being fully fledged, and once got out of the
Nest, and a little accustomed to flying, it cannot any more (as all the Fowlers
affirm) by any allurement or deceit be enticed and taken, so naturally crafty
it is. It makes its Nest in deep holes in very high and unaccessible solitudes,
having found a secure place, to which it may safely commit it self and its
Young. And by its cunning does not only remove it from the access of men by
placing it on the highest ridges of the Mountains, but also hide it in deep
Caverns from the Chamois, and other wild beasts, and there it feeds three or
four Young with worms, till it brings them out of the Nest, and turns them
loose to shift for themselves. Now the Fowlers having either by chance, or by
lying in wait, found out the place, taking with them a long, round, smooth
stilt or stake, made of a singular piece of wood, hard to be found (such as the
climbers of Rocks and hunters of Chamois are wont to make use of to assist them
in getting up the crags and cliffs of Rocks) mount up there where you would not
think it possible for them to find room to set one foot. And to omit nonothing,
they wrap their heads with cloth, covering their faces so far that they may see
side-ways, to avoid dizziness; and this they do partly to fence them against
the old birds, partly, and chiefly (this being the true cause of their so
doing) to hinder their prospect any ways but just forward, to see where they
are to pitch their stake, or clap on their hands. So at length, not without
extreme toil and danger, they arrive at the Nest, which with that long pole or
stake I mentioned they draw up out of the deep hole where it was placed, and
carry away with them, cherishing, and bringing the Young up at their own
houses: And afterward either sell them dear, or present them to Gentlemen and
great persons of their knowledge. Thus far Seillerius. I suspect that this very
bird, which Gesner calls Blauvogel, is the same which about Chur in the Grisons
Country and elsewhere is called Steirotele, or near akin to it.

Lib. 1. Observe. cap. 11.
Bellonius, who thinks this bird to be the Cyanus or (as Gaza translates it)
the Caeruleus of Aristotle, writes thereof in this manner. That bird which
Aristotle calls Cyanus, Pliny, Caeruleus, because it haunts among the Rocks of
the high Mountains, and is like a Blackbird, is now by the Grecians commonly
called Petrocoslypho, that is, the Rock-Ouzel. It is lesser than a Blackbird,
and blue all over, kept in Cages, and highly esteemed for its singing. Its
voice is the same with the Blackbirds. It has no French name, because it is
not found in France, nor yet in Italy, unless brought thither in Cages. It is
sometimes taken out of the Nest to be taught so speak articulately. Lib. 6. de
Avibus, cap. 26
In another place, where he also treats professedly of this bird, adding a
figure of it; although (says he) we call the bird by Aristotle entitled
Cyanus, by Gaza rendered Caeruleus, In French Merle bleu, yet we do not this as
if it were known to France; but because of the Countrymen of Epidaurus, who use
diverse Idioms, some who speak Italian call it, The blue Ouzel.
Merlo biavo, others who speak Greek, Petrocossypho, others who speak Dalmatic
call it simply, Merle. Kept in a Cage it sings more sweetly even than a
Blackbird. For which reason the Countrymen of Illyricum, who live among the
Rocks, take them out of the Nests, and carry them to the Cities to sell. It is
not found in France, unless brought in from abroad. It builds in the tops of
Mountains, as we observed in Candy, Citharaea, Corcyra, Zacynthus, and Euboea,
now commonly called Negroponte. Aristotle also in the fore-quoted place making
mention of it, says it was commonly seen among the Rocks in Scyros. Aristotle
composing his History of Animals at Athens, sent abroad men through diverse
Countries to search out all kinds of living Creatures: In Scyros the Mountains
are cragged, with many Rocks. But to make a brief, compendious description of
this bird, we need but imagine a small Blackbird of a blue color; for just
such a one is this bird. It is full of tongue, and seldom descends into the
plain Country. It breeds for the most part five Young, and never more. It
affords as good and better nourishment than a Blackbird, flies swifter, and
uses the same food. All this out of Bellonius; whom Aldrovandus pronounces
mistaken, in that he thought this bird to be the Cyanus of Aristotle. Himself,
with Gesner, deeming the Cyanus of Aristotle to be of the Woodpecker kind:
Which how he proves see in this place.

Turner conjectures the Caeruleus of Aristotle to be that bird which is called
in English, a Clot-bird, a Smatch, an Arling, a Stonecheck, and in High Dutch,
Ein Brechvogel. This he says in England breeds in Coney-burrows, and under
stones, and appears not in Winter. The English names and place of building
argue Turner to have meant the common Oenanthe or White-tail; which is a far
different bird from the Caeruleus of Bellonius.

For my part, to speak freely what I think, I judge the Blauvogel of Gesner to
be the very same bird with the solitary Sparrow; but the Caeruleus of Bellonius
to be a bird specifically different, and which I have not yet seen alive,
though I have often seen its picture.

. IV. The Indian Mockbird, Caeruleus Indicus.
WE saw this Bird dried in Tradescants Cabinet. It is of the bigness of a
common Lark, has a straight sharp Bill, a long Tail: And is all over of a blue
color. Upon second thoughts, however Tradescant might put the Epithete of
Indian upon this bird, I judge it to be no other than the Caeruleus or Blue
Ouzel of Bellonius, described in the precedent Article.

. V. * Aldrovandus his Brasilian Merula, Book 16. Chap. 16.
BEllonius figures this bird among the Merulae, induced only by this reason,
that those who bring it out of Brasil into Europe call it, the Brasilian
Blackbird. Wherefore seeing he speaks nothing concerning the nature of the
Bird, and it is alike unknown to me, I also adjoyn it to the Merulae, although
in the shortness, or rather crookedness, of its Bill it differs much from them.
Those (says Bellonius) who trade in Countries newly discovered, bring back
thence such strange rarities as they think will sell dear with us here: But
because they cannot bring the birds themselves alive in Cages, therefore they
flay off the skins of such as are more beautiful than the rest, as this is, and
bringing them over make a great gain of the sale of them; especially of this
which they call, the Brasilian Blackbird; though in bigness it differs from a
Blackbird. The color of the whole body, except the Tail and Wings, which are
black; is so deep [perchance by the word intense he may mean bright] a red,
that it exceeds all other rednesses. The Tail is long; the Feet and Legs black;
The Bill short, as in a Sparrow. The feathers are red to the very bottom. That
which Aldrovandus describes, perchance from a picture, was in some things
different from Bellonius his bird. For, says he, the Wings are not all over
black, but all the upper feathers by the shoulders of a deep red. Next to them
are some black ones, then red ones again; the subsequent, viz. all the great
feathers, being black, as is also the Tail. The Bill also is not so short as in
Sparrows, yet thick, and remarkably crooked, without of a dusky color, within
yellow, as I conjecture from the color of the corners of the mouth [rictus.]
Moreover, the Feet are not black, but of an ash color, only a little dusky,
being great for the proportion of the Legs: The Claws short, but crooked, of
the same color.

We have seen in Tradescants Cabinet a red Indian bird dried, of the bigness
almost of a Mavis, having a long Tail, which perchance is the same with the
bird in this Article described.

. VI. * The Rose or Carnation-coloured Ouzel of Aldrov. lib. 16. cap. 15.
THis bird our Fowlers call, the Sea-Starling. It is seen sometimes in our
fields, and is much among dung-heaps. To me it seems rather to be a kind of
Ouzel [Merula] than Starling. For a Starling is spotted, which this is not. It
is somewhat less than a Blackbird, has its Back, Breast, and Wings above of a
Rose or Carnation color, its Head tufted, its Wings and Tail black, the prime
feathers being near a Chestnut color: The Bill next the Head black, else of a
flesh color: The Feet of a deep yellow or Saffron-colour. The Cock in this
kind is of a more lively and lovely color. The head of the Hen is in color
like to the Cocks, but the Neck, Wings, and Tail not so black as his. They
become very fat, and are accounted good meat.

We have not as yet seen this bird, neither do we remember to have elsewhere
read or heard any thing of it.

. VII. The red-breasted Indian Blackbird, perchance the Jacapu of Marggrave.
WE saw the Case of this bird in Tradescants Cabinet. It was of the bigness and
shape of a Blackbird, as far as I could judge by the dried skin. The color of
the whole upper side was black; only the edges of the feathers about the Rump
were ash-colored. The Breast was of a scarlet color: The Bill like a
Blackbirds: The Tail also long, and like a Blackbirds.

I take this to be the same bird, which Marggrave describes under the title of
Jacapu of the Brasilians, though he attribute to it only the bigness of a Lark.
It has (says he) a long Tail, shorter Wings, short and black Legs, with sharp
Claws on the four toes: A Bill a little crooked and black, half an inch long.
The whole body is covered with shining black feathers; yet under the Throat
spots of a Vermilion color are mingled with the black. This bird differs from
ours in its smalness, and the shortness of its Bill.

. VIII. The Ring-Ouzel, Merula torquata.
IT is like, and equal to, or somewhat bigger than the common Blackbird: From
Bill to Tail eleven inches long, to the end of the Feet ten and a quarter; the
Wings extended were by measure seventeen inches. The Bill more than an inch
long, of a dark dusky or blackish color. The mouth yellow withinside: The
Tongue rough. The Irides of the Eyes are of a dark hazel color: The Legs and
Feet dusky. The outer Toe is joined to the middle as far as to the first joint.
The color of the upper side of the body is a dark brown, or russet, inclining
to black. The feathers covering the Breast and Belly are marked with a long
whitish spot down the shaft, having also white edges. The Ring or Collar is
below the Throat, just above the Breast, of a white color, an inch broad, of
the form of a Crescent, the horns ending at the sides of the Neck.

It has eighteen quil-feathers in each Wing; twelve in the Tail, the outmost
being a little shorter than the rest; four inches long. The exterior feathers
of the Tail are blacker than the middlemost. The small feathers under the Wings
whitish.

[In a bird that I described at Rome the edges of the prime feathers of the
Wings, as also of the covert-feathers of the Head and Wings were cinereous. The
ring also was not white, but ash-colored. I suppose this was either a young
bird, or a Hen.]

It has a large Gall, and a round Spleen: In the Stomach we found Insects, and
Berries like to Currants. These Birds are common in the Alps in Rhoetia and
Switzerland: They are also found in the mountainous parts of Derbyshire,
Yorkshire, and elsewhere in the North of England.

They say that the Female of this kind has no ring: Whence I persuade my self
that the bird which I sometimes described for the Merula Saxatilis or Montana,
that is, the Rock-Ouzel of Gesner, p. 584. was no other than a Hen Ring-Ouzel.

It nearly resembles the common Blackbird in bigness, figure, and color; yet
is in some things manifestly different; viz. it is a thought bigger, has a
longer body, and not so dark a color. Its length from the tip of the Bill to
the end of the Tail was ten inches and an half, to the end of the Claws nine
and an half: Its breadth one foot and five inches: Its weight three ounces and
two drachms. The top of the Head, the Shoulders, Back, Wings, and Tail, in a
word, the whole upper side was of a dark brown or dusky color, The number of
quill-feathers in each Wing eighteen. The Tail was four inches and an half
long, not forked, black, made up of twelve feathers. The underside, viz. the
Breast, Belly, Sides, Thighs, and under-coverts of the Wings, parti-colored of
brown and white, or rather cinereous; the middle part of each feather being
brown, and the borders round about cinereous.

Its Bill is every way like the common Blackbirds, excepting the color which
in this is of a dark brown, or blackish. The inside of the mouth, as in that,
yellow. The Legs are of a moderate length, and dusky color, as also the Feet
and Claws.

The Guts indifferent large, but not very long, and consequently not having
many revolutions: The blind Guts small, white, and very short, as in the rest
of this kind. The Stomach or Gizzard was of a moderate bigness, filled partly
with Insects, partly with the purple juice of Bill-berries, which had also
tinctured all the excrements of the Guts.

It is usually conversant about the Rocks and steep Cliffs of high mountains.
This we described was shot by Fr. Jessop Esquire on a Cliff or Scar, called
Rive-edge, where they dig Millstones, not far from a Village called
Hathers-edge in the Mountains of the Peak of Derbyshire, where the Inhabitants
call it Rock-Ouzel.

. IX. * The Rock Ouzel, or Mountain Ouzel of Gesner, called in High Dutch,
Berg-Amzel, Merula Saxatilis seu Montana.
IT differs from the Ring-Ouzel, 1. In that it wants a Ring. 2. In that the
Throat is Ruffa, it may be rendered russet.
red, with black spots, the Belly is cinereous, with black spots. 3. That the
extreme edges of the great Wing-feathers are whitish, and the lesser rows have
sometimes white spots in their middle about their shafts. But these differences
are not to me so considerable, as to induce me to believe that this bird is a
Species different from the Ring-Ouzel; at least if it be true, that the Hen in
that kind wants a ring, and differs other ways in color from the Cock, as we
have been informed. Yet will we not be very confident or positive, but refer it
to further inquiry and observation.

To these may be added Aldrovandus his 1. Ouzel of two colors.
MERULA BICOLOR, described lib. 16. cap. 12. varied with two colors
especially, viz. dusky or blackish, and reddish yellow. 2. Of kin to the Ouzel.
MERULAE CONGENER, Aldrov. lib. 16. cap. 13. having a red line near the Bill.
3. Another bird of kin to the Ouzel.
MERULAE CONGENER ALIA, in Chap. 14. of the same Book, like to the ash-colored
Butcher-bird. Which, because we have not seen, nor read of elsewhere, we omit:
Whosoever pleases may look out their figures and descriptions in the places
cited. The second of these Aldrovandus saw only painted, neither did he see the
first alive.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Starling, and Birds akin to it.
. I. A Stare or Starling, Sturnus.
THe Cock weighed three ounces and an half, the Hen three. From Bill to Claws
it was nine inches long, to Tail end eight and three quarters. Its breadth was
sixteen inches. It is of the bigness and shape of a common Blackbird. Its Bill
from the tip to the angles of the mouth an inch and a quarter long, in the Cock
of a pale yellow, in the Hen dusky, broader and more depressed than in Thrushes
or Blackbirds, by which This we make the characteristic note of this kind.
mark especially it differs from them. The upper Mandible is equal to the
nether: The Tongue is hard, horny, and cloven: The Irides of the Eyes of a
hazel color, whiter on the upper part. It has the nictating membrane, which I
believe few birds want. The Legs and Feet are yellowish, [rather of a flesh
color:] The Claws blackish. The outer and inner fore-toe are equal to each
other; and the outer joined to the middle toe as far as the first articulation.
The Legs feathered down to the Knees.

The tips of the feathers on the Neck and Back are yellow: The feathers under
the Tail cinereous, else they are black all the body over, with a certain blue
or purple gloss, varying as it is variously exposed to the light. In the Hen
the tips of the feathers on the Breast and Belly, to the very Throat, are
white. In the Cock the Back participates more of purple, the Rump of green;
only the lower Belly is more spotted.

All the quil-feathers are dusky; but the edges of the third, and subsequent to
the tenth, and from the fifteenth again to the last are more dark, The
covert-feathers of the Wings glister, and the tips of the lesser coverts are
yellow. The feathers covering the underside of the Wings are dusky, having
pale-yellow edges.

The Tail is three inches long, made up of twelve dusky feathers with pale
yellow edges: It lays four or five Eggs lightly tinctured with a greenish blue.

The blind Cuts as in the rest of this kind are very short and small, nearer to
the Fundament than in others. The muscle of the Gizzard not very thick: The
Guts thirteen inches long. It feeds upon Beetles, Worms, and other Insects. It
has a Gallbladder.

Stares are gregarious birds, living and flying together in great flocks. They
company also with Redwings and Fieldfares; yet do they not fly away with them,
but abide with us all Summer, breeding in the holes of Towers, Houses, Trees,
etc.

This kind sometimes varies in color. For we have seen in Wales two white
Starlings; one with a black Head, and all the rest of the body white at
Aberdaren, a little Village in Carnarvanshire. Stares are not eaten in England
by reason of the bitterness of their flesh: The Italians, and other Outlandish
people are not so squeamish, but they can away with them, and make a dish of
them for all that. It is a notable bird at imitating man's voice, and speaking
articulately.

. II. * Bontius his Indian Stare.
IT resembles our Country Stare, in the Seagreen and dark blue feathers,
spotted with cinereous spots; but it has a yellow Crest on the Neck, and its
Head is set with black soft feathers, that feeling of it you would think you
touched Velvet. It imitates man's voice much more accurately than a Parrot, so
that oftentimes it is troublesome with its prattling.

. III. The greater Redstart of Olina, called by Aldrovand, i. e. The Rock Ouzel.
Merula Saxatilis, at Florence, i. e. The Sea-Thrush.
Tordo Marino, at Vienna, Stein-Reitling.
IT is equal in bigness, and like in shape to a Starling. Its length from the
tip of the Bill to the Claws nine inches and an half. The measure of the Wings
extended fourteen. The Bill is morethan an inch long, broad and flat, as in
Stares, not round, and rising up in a ridge, as in Blackbirds, black of color:
The upper Chap longer, sharp-pointed, and somewhat crooked. The mouth within
yellow. The Tongue a little elest at the end. The Legs and Feet of a lead
color; the Claws black; the soal of the foot yellow. The outer Toe grows or is
fastened immediately to the middle one as far as the first joint; the inner toe
is a little shorter than the outer. The Chin underneath is whitish: The tips of
the feathers on the Breast cinereous. Beneath the Breast is a transverse black
line; below which the Plumage is of a red or deep Orange-tawney color. The
Head and Back brown, the tips of the feathers being cinereous. The
quil-feathers of the Wings of a black brown, with reddish tips. The Tail
consists of twelve feathers, of a red tawney or Orange color, whence it took
the name of the greater Redstart. The lesser feathers under the Wings are of
the like color.

Its Stomach was fleshy, and stuffed with the stones of certain berries, we
knew not what. Its Guts were eleven inches long. It imitates man's voice,
learning to speak articulately, like the Stare.

The Hens are paler-coloured; above being of a Mouse-dun, spotted with white
spots; underneath rather hoary. Those parts which in the Males are fulvous, in
the Females are of a pale yellow.

Lighting upon three or four of these birds at Florence, comparing them
together, I [J. R.] described them as exactly as I could in these words.

It is equal in bigness, and like in shape to a Throstle. Its color is
various, on the top of the Head and Neck mingled of a dirty white or ash color
and brown, so that it appears gray or hoary. Viewing each single feather, the
bottom or lower part is blue; the middle part about the shaft black, which
black line near the tip of the feather is crossed by another, which together
represent the figure of the letter T in each feather. The very tips of all are
white. The color that fills up the angles of the T-like mark is dusky. These
colors in the Neck, Shoulders, upper part of the Back, and covert-feathers of
the Wings are more bright and conspicuous. The feathers on the middle of the
Back in the Cock-birds are marked about their middles with a large white spot,
above which is a cross line of blue, then one of black, and lastly, their tips
are red. The bottom of the Back about the Rump is more cinereous or blue. The
feathers incumbent on the Tail are red, with white tips. The great feathers of
the Wings have their tips and exterior edges white, else they are black: The
greater covert-feathers are also of the same color. The feathers covering the
underside of the Wings are of a pale red or yellow color.

The Tail is short, scarce exceeding three inches, made up of twelve feathers
of equal length, all red or fulvous, excepting the two middle, that are dusky,
which yet in some birds are also above half red. It is here to be observed,
that all the Tail-feathers have their outer edges toward the top, of the same
color with the middle feathers.

The nether side of the body, viz. the Throat, Breast, Belly, Thighs, are
parti-colored of white or gray, black and yellow. [In some Cock-birds the whole
Belly was of a fulvous color, speckled with many white spots, and a few black
ones.] The Throat and upper part of the Breast are darker than the Belly, for
that the forementioned colors are there more mingled and confounded, whereas
in the belly they are more distinct, and make greater spots. If you heed each
feather, you shall find the bottom to be blue, in the middle a yellow spot,
encompassed with a black line, and the top white. The Wings are long, reaching
almost to the end of the Tail. The description of the Bill and Legs we have
already given in Mr. Willughby's words, and have nothing further to add
concerning them.

It is said to abide and build in mountainous places. It is kept in Cages for
its singing. I suspect that Bellonius his solitary Sparrow is the same with
this bird, though the description answers not exactly in all things.

. IV. * The Brasilian Pitanga guacu, called by the Portugnese, Bemtere,
Marggrav.
IN bigness it is equal to a Stare; has a thick, broad, Pyramidal Bill, a
little more than an inch long, Exterius acuminatum, I confess I do not well
understand what our Author means by these words.
outwardly sharp: A broad, compressed Head: A short Neck, which sitting it
contracts or draws up: A body near two inches and an half long: The Legs and
Feet dusky: Four Toes disposed in the usual manner. The Head, upper side of the
Neck, the whole Back, Wings, and Tail of a dark brown or black, mingled with a
little green. The under side of the Neck, the Breast, and lower Belly have
yellow feathers. But above, by the Head it has a Crown [like that of a Monk]
of a white color. It has a loud shrill cry. Some of these birds have on the
top of their Heads a yellow spot, and some have it partly of a clay color;
else in all things like. This kind is called by the Brasilians, Cuiriri.

CHAP. XX. Atinga guacu mucu of Marggrave.
IT is about the bigness of a Throstle: Has a great Head, a Neck of a moderate
length, a body three inches long: The Bill a little hooked, of a color mingled
of green and yellow, sanguine Eyes, with a black Pupil. The Legs are
ash-colored, of a moderate length, above [the Knees I suppose he means]
covered with feathers: In the Feet four Toes disposed after the usual manner:
an exceeding long Tail, viz. of about nine inches, consisting of about ten
feathers; of which some of the lower are shorter than the upper. The whole
Head, Neck, Back, Wings, and Tail have brown or Of the color of Soot.
fuligineous feathers, which in the Tail are darker-coloured than the rest. The
end of each feather of the Tail, for about half an inch, is white, and between
the white and red [part] shaded with black. The Throat, Breast, lower Belly,
and Thighs are covered with ash-colored feathers. On the Head it has long
feathers, which it can set up like two horns. It is a bird remarkable for the
length of its Tail. For its agreement in bigness, its Bill, and some other
accidents, we have subjoyned it to the Thrush-kind.

CHAP. XXI. The Witwall, as it is by some called, Galbula seu Picus nidum
suspendens, Aldrov. Oriolus Alberti; Chloreus Aristotelis, and Icterus Plinii,
in Aldrovandus his judgment.
THis bird from the beginning of the Bill to the end of the Tail was by measure
ten inches long: Equal in magnitude to, or somewhat bigger than a Thrush: Its
Bill more than an inch long, red, like a Thrushes, but bigger, and longer: Its
Tongue cloven and rough: The Irides of its Eyes red: Its Legs, Feet, and Toes
of a Lead-colour. The hind-Toe near the rise of it was broad and callous. The
outer Toe joined to the middle, as in the rest of this kind, up to the first
joint.

The quil-feathers of the Wings were black: But the tips of the fifth, sixth,
and seventh, also of the tenth, and four subsequent white, and the utmost edges
of the third and fourth. The foremost feathers of the second row were almost
half way of a pale yellow: Else the upper surface of the whole Wing black. The
twelve feathers of the Tail were of equal length, viz. about three inches and
an half: The two middlemost black, the rest had their upper halfs yellow, their
lower black. All the body beside was of a bright yellow, very beautiful to
behold: So that for the luster and elegancy of its colors it scarce gives
place to any of the American birds. Between the Eyes and Nosthrils on each side
it had a black spot.

In the Female the colors are not so fair and lively, the yellow being mingled
with black and brown, the Breast shaded with dusky lines: The lesser rows of
Wing-feathers, and the two middle feathers of the Tail green. The young ones
also are greener, and have their Breasts spotted.

The Guts are sixteen inches long, great and lax: the blind Guts very small and
short: The Testicles round. In the Belly we found Caterpillars.

We shot this bird near Frankeford in Germany. Afterward we saw many of them
at Naples in the Poulterers Shops: Whence we guess that they are frequent in
the neighboring Country.

The structure of the Nest, and how artificially it hangs it, see in Aldrovand.
The Low Dutch call this bird by a very fit name, Goutmerle, that is, the golden
Ouzel: For it agrees with Thrushes or Blackbirds, in the shape of the Bill and
the whole body; in the bigness, also food, and manner of living. It is called
Galbula or Galgulus, from its yellow color.

It is a bird of passage. Gesner writes, that it comes into his Country for the
most part in May, but sometimes also in April: After whose coming they have
certain hope that there will be no more frosts. Whence it appears, that it
delights in hot places and seasons. It feeds wonderfully fat, has very
delicate flesh, and yields wholesome nourishment; and no wonder, since it is akin
to the Thrushes, and uses the same food, viz. Insects and Berries.

CHAP. XXII. * Matuitui of Marggravius.
IT is of the bigness of a Stare: Has a short Neck, a strong Breast, short
Legs, a Tail two inches and an half long. It has a straight, strong Bill, the
upper Chap whereof is a little prominent, the point inclining downwards, of a
Vermilion color. The whole Head, upper side of the Neck, Back, Wings, and Tail
are brown, spotted with a pale yellow, partly speckled like a Sparrow-Hawk.
Under the Throat it has yellow feathers. The Breast and Belly are white,
speckled with brown. The Legs of a dark ash color.

CHAP. XXIII. * Guirapunga of Marggrave.
THe cry of this Bird may be heard a great way off. It is bigger than the
Misselbird, almost equal to a Pigeon: Has a Bill an inch long, and pretty
broad Anterius acutum.
sharp-pointed; the upper part a little prominent above the lower, and bending
downward, black, having wide or open Nosthrils. Its Mouth is large, the slit
reaching as far as the Eyes; so that the aperture of the Mouth with the Bill
forms a triangle. It has a short Tongue; Eyes between black and blue. Under
the Throat, (which is broad) and in the lower part of the Neck it has many
black fleshy Wattles an inch long, hanging down before, of the figure of the
point of a Spear. The Head is covered with dark brown feathers: The whole Neck,
Breast, Belly, Back, and Thighs with ash-colored, wherewith (especially in the
Back) are some black ones mixed, and toward the Tail also green ones. It has a
Tail three inches long, consisting of ash-colored and black feathers mingled
with a little green. The Wings (which end not far below the rise of the Tail)
are first black, then brown, some dark green feathers being intermingled. The
lower Legs are black, and above an inch long. It has four Toes in each foot
like other birds, with black Claws. The Breast is as it were divided into two,
having a valley or furrow all along the middle. The Windpipe is large, whence
also it has a loud and strong cry.

It has a double note, which it uses promiscuously; one like that of a Hammer
striking a Wedge in the Woods, (cick, cock:) The other, as if one should strike
a cracked Bell, [Kur, kur, kur, etc.] It cries only in the middle of Summer, in
December and the beginning of January for five or six Weeks, in other Months it
is not heard, whence by the Portugues it is called Ave de verano.

The Hen Guirapunga is of the bigness and figure of our Throstle, and alike
fleshy: Has a broad Head; a Bill also broad, and not very long: A wide mouth
when it gapes: A black Bill: Pretty great Eyes: A Tail some three inches long,
or something more; neither do the Wings reach to the end thereof. The whole
bird is clothed with blackish feathers, with which some brown and pale green
ones are mingled; yet the color in the Back is browner, in the Throat, Breast,
and Belly a more delayed green, and mingled like that of a Throstle. It is a
fat and well-fleshed bird. The Legs and Feet are black, in other particulars
not different from the common rule.

BOOK I. PART II. SECT. II. Of small Birds.
Of small Birds in general.
SMall Birds in general may be divided into slender-bill'd, which are for the
most part Insectivorous; and such as have short and thick Bills, which are for
the most part Phytivorous, living upon the fruits and seeds of Plants. The
first kind are commonly called soft-beak'd, the second hard-beak'd birds.

Of both kinds there are many subalternate Species, viz. of slender-bill'd,
Larks, whose characteristic notes are a very long By heel is meant the claw of
the back-toe.
heel; earthy colored feathers, mounting up in the air, and singing as they
fly; Swallows, whose marks are a short Bill, a wide Mouth, long Wings, a forked
Tail, short and small Legs and Feet; swift, and almost continual flight: The
Hedge-Sparrow, Redstart, Robin-red-breast, and many others, which we divide
into two Classes or ranks. The first is of such whose Tail is only of one
color; the second of those whose Tails are parti-colored; either all the
feathers, or the outmost on each side being in part white.

Of thick-bill'd Birds the kinds are, the Sparrow, whose marks are an earthy or
testaceous color, a Bill a little crooked, feeding upon Corn, the Hawfinch,
the Greenfinch, the Shel-apple or Sheld-dapple, the Linnet, the Chaff-finch,
the Gold-finch, the Siskin, etc. whose characteristics we will give when we
come to treat of them.

An Addition concerning singing birds in general.
AMerica (as Marggravius observes) breeds more fair-coloured birds, but fewer
singing birds than Europe.

As we have distinguished small birds in general into soft and hard beak'd, so
may we also distinguish singing birds. The soft-beak'd are, The Mavis or
Song-Thrush; the Blackbird; the solitary Sparrow, which is a stranger to
England; the Nightingale, esteemed the Prince of all singing birds, of the
rearing and ordering of which we shall treat at large when we come to his
History; the Skie-Lark; the Wood-Lark; the Tit-Lark; the Robin-red-breast; the
Wren; the Black-cap; the Beccafigo; the Redstart; and the Hedge-Sparrow.

The hard-beak'd are, The Canary bird; the Linnet; the Chaffinch; the
Goldfinch; the Greenfinch; the Bulfinch; the Brambling; the Hortulane; the
Siskin; the Citril, the Hirngril; the Yellow-hammer.

In all singing birds in general observe to keep them very neat and cleanly;
and therefore often to shift the straw, moss, gravel, or whatever else you put
in the bottoms of their Cages; and to give them fresh water, and meat often;
for nothing offends them more than the stench of their own dung, or putrid meat
and water. Besides, if their Cages be foul, they will be apt to clog their Feet
with their dung, which often rots off their toes, at least causes the Cramp,
Gout, and other infirmities. Aldrovandus advises to put in their Cages a piece
of Pumice stone, or old rubbish, to cleanse and whet their Bills upon, which
otherwise will be apt to grow blunt.

All Birds (says he) are wont to swallow something out of the earth to cleanse
their bodies; I rather think they use only to swallow some grit or gravel, to
assist them in grinding their meat in their Gizzards; and therefore it is
needful to put fine gravel in their Cages.

In the rearing of young ones from the Nest observe, 1. To feed them often, but
to give them but little at a time, as the old ones do, for fear of
over-charging their stomachs, and causing them to cast up their meat. 2. After
they begin to feed themselves, give not over feeding them presently, lest they
neglect and starve themselves.

Hard-beak'd birds are to be fed with seeds, and of all seeds Aldrovandus
commends Canary-seed, as the most savoury, pleasant, and wholesome of all other,
which makes them sing with greater alacrity, and also live long: For want of
which you may (says he) give them Millet, Panic, Spelt, Off-corn-wheat,
Hemp Seed, and Limeseed; he might have added Rape-seed, Cole-seed, and many
others.

Soft-beak'd birds are to be fed with heart of Veal or Weather, Worms, Flies,
and such kind of Insects, as also that sort of paste the receipt whereof we
shall give you in the History of the Nightingale.

In preparing their meat have a care to free it from all skin, fat, and Sinews,
or strings, which will be apt to stick in their Throats, or twine about their
Tongues, and cause them to fall off their meat, etc.

Aldrovands method to make birds sing in Autumn or Winter.
ABout the beginning of May purge them with Beet, first mingling the juice of
it with their water; then giving them no water at all, but only hanging up
Beetleaves in their Cages, putting in also a handful of earth and rubbish. Then
by degrees accustom them to darkness for ten days, putting them still in places
darker and darker, and at last in a room perfectly dark, that has not the
least chink to let in light. During all the time of their imprisonment in this
dungeon, no body must come in there but their Keeper, and he with a Candle once
in three days to give fresh water and meat, and to cleanse their Cages: [It
would be convenient to have two Cages, and change them every twentieth day.]
Every fourth day give them a Beet-leaf, and every tenth day juice of Beet, else
they will incur the danger of growing blind. In this manner they must be kept
till about the tenth of August, and then new purged, after the manner we before
prescribed; and then by degrees again accustomed to the light, but by no means
exposed to the Sunbeams for fear of blinding them. This doing you shall be
Master of your purpose.

Diseases incident to singing birds, and their remedies.
1. BLindness, which if radicated and confirmed is incurable; taken at first,
when their Eyes begin to water, may be remedied by giving them Sugar dissolved
in the juice of Beet every other day for four days, and putting into their
Cages a twig of Figtree to rub their Eyes against; which by the instinct of
nature they will use to do.

2. The Falling sickness, which Aldrovand also accounts an incurable disease.
If they escape the first fit he advises presently to cut their Claws to the
quick, and sprinkle them with Wine, and to keep them from the heat of the Sun
all Summer.

3. Fractures of the bones of their Legs or Wings: In which he advises by no
means to splinter or bind up the part; but only to take away the Perches out of
their Cages, and to set their meat and water in the bottom of their Cages; and
keep them where no company comes to scare them.

4. Swellings and inflammations or impostumes.

5. An Hydropical distemper.

6. The Gout, known by roughness and swellings in their Legs and Feet,
especially their Knees.

7. The Phthisic or subtle disease, in which their breast veins are distended,
but the flesh fallen away, and their Bellies swelled as though they had the
Dropsy. In all these distempers Aldrovand advises still to purge with Beet, as
was before prescribed.

8. Aphthae, or small Ulcers in their mouths, for the cure of which dissolve
Pumpion seeds in water, and give it them for their drink for three or four
days, and when you perceive them to mend, give them fine Loaf-Sugar in like
manner dissolved in water.

9. The Pip, which may be known by the hardness of the end of their Tongue:
Small birds (says a late English Writer) that feed upon Seeds are very seldom
subject to this disease; but most commonly Throstles, Blackbirds, and Stares,
which feed upon soft meat. I have also known Nightingales to be troubled with
it, that have been fed too much with Eggs hard-boyled. For the remedy of this
(for the bird will never eat his meat kindly, nor sing with any stomach so long
as he has it) take the bird in your hand, and having opened his Bill, with a
Needle take that hardness off from the top of his Tongue, and the sides of his
Bill also; and give him as in the precedent disease.

10. The disease of the Rump, known by the birds growing melancholy, and
abstaining from singing. The best remedy whereof is to cut off that sharp part
that lies upon the top of the Rump, and give him some cleansing thing in his
meat, and refreshing thing in his water.

11. The flux of the Belly or Scouring. For remedy whereof pluck off the
Tailfeathers, and the feathers about the Vent, and anoint the place with Oil or
Capons grease, and if they be hard-beak'd birds, instead of Hemp Seed, or
Rape-seed, give them Pumpion seeds [or red Beet seeds] for two or three days;
if soft-beak'd, give them nothing but the yolks of hard-boyl'd Eggs.

12. Moulting or casting their feathers is a kind of disease common to all
birds. At that time they all grow melancholy, and cease to sing, and forsake
their meat, and some of them will be very sick. For help of this Aldrovand
advises to sprinkle them twice or thrice a Week with Wine not too strong, then
setting them in the Sun till they be dry, and after putting some greens about
their Cage.

To preserve birds of all kinds in health, Aldrovand says, it would be useful
to purge them once a month with Pumpion seeds decorticated, Lettuce, Succory,
Beet, Pimpernel, or Mercury, which last herb is proper to the Linnet. Such
birds as are used to dust themselves, it would without doubt be convenient to
put sand or dust in their Cages; for this basking themselves in the dust rids
them of Lice and Vermin: Likewise, such as are used to wash themselves ought
to have water set them for that purpose.

It would also be of advantage, indeed it were necessary, to put a little fine
gravel in their Cages, that they may pick up and swallow some grit or small
stones, to help them in grinding their meat in their stomachs, as wild birds
are used to do, in whose Gizzards you will never fail to find small stones and
grit.

Olina advises in tumors or impostumes on the head, (which are most incident
to birds of a hot complexion) to cauterize the place affected with a hot Iron,
and then anoint it with black Soap dissolved, or Oil and hot ashes. Some use to
purge the birds, before they burn them, with juice of Beet.

For the Aphthae he prescribes lightly to touch the Palate with a feather dipped
in honey of Roses, which has been sharpened with a little Oil of Brimstone.
Sulphur.

For the Asthma, or shortness of breath, he advises to drop two or three drops
of Oxymel into their throats with a feather; mingling thereof also with their
water for two or three days, or dissolve white Sugar Candy in their water.

Hoarseness and loss of voice he says is remedied by giving them for their
drink a decoction of Jujubes, dried Figs, and pounded, boiled in common water,
and that for two days, and the next two or three days juice of Beet: And if it
be in Summer time setting them all night in the open air, so as the dew may not
fall upon them.

For a scouring he commends water in which Iron is quenched, or a light
decoction of Services, or Cornelian Cherries.

For costiveness he advises to put a feather anointed with oil into the
Fundament once or twice a day for two days, giving them also the same days
juice of Beet.

For the Gout: Washing the Legs and Feet twice a day for four or five days with
a decoction of the root of white Hellebore in common water, as hot as the Bird
can endure it; and for want thereof bathing it with Brandy Wine, or Aqua Vitae.

To stir up and quicken birds to sing, give them somewhat that they are most
greedy of, and most delighted in, or something that is heating. Some use to
give them Linseed mingled with Pine-kernels pounded; putting in their drinking
Cup two or three Chives of Saffron, encompassing their Cages with some pleasing
verdure, as of

Birds fed with Paste are wont to have their drinking Cup set without their
Cages; Seed-birds within. Keep their Cages neat, and in the bottom put in
Wintertime hay or straw broken, in Summertime sand. So far Olina. I suppose
it would be convenient to give them a little gravel in their Cages all times of
the year for the reason before intimated.

THE FIRST MEMBER OR SUBSECTION, Of small Birds with slender Birds.
OF these there are many sorts. All besides Swallows may conveniently enough be
divided into such as have the feathers of their Tails all of one color, and
such as have a parti-colored Tail. We will first treat of Larks and Swallows by
themselves, then we will reduce the rest to the now mentioned heads.

CHAP. I. OF LARKS.
. I. Of Larks in general.
A Lark, called by the Grecians (...) from the word (...), signifying a Helmet,
by the Latins also Cassita and Galerita, from Cassis, and Galea, or Galerus of
like signification (which names do yet properly agree to the crested Lark) is
distinguished from other sorts of Birds, 1. By its long Heel or Claw of the
back-toe; which is the characteristic mark of this bird: 2. By the testaceous
or earthy color of its feathers: Which note is not common to all the Birds we
comprehend under this title, nor proper to this kind, fith it agrees to
Sparrows, and other Birds: 3. By its singing as it flies mounting up in the
air. We have in England observed four sorts of Larks: 1. The most common one:
2. The Wood-Lark: 3. The lesser crested Lark: 4. The Tit-Lark.

. II. The common Skie-Lark. Alauda vulgaris.
IT is not much bigger than a House-Sparrow, yet longer bodied; of an ounce and
half weight: from the tip of the Bill to the Claws or Tail-end, (for they are
equally extended) six inches and a quarter. The ends of the great feathers in
the Wings stretched out were ten inches and a quarter distant. The Bill,
measuring from the tip to the angles of the Mouth, was three quarters of an
inch long: The upper Mandible black or horn-coloured, the lower commonly
whitish. The Tongue broad, cloven, hard: The Nosthrils round. It sometimes
ruffles up the feathers of its head, almost in fashion of a Crest. A cinereous
Ring or Crown compasses the hind part of the Head from Eye to Eye, but more
sordid, and less conspicuous than in the Wood-Lark. The Head is of a testaceous
or reddish ash color, the middle parts of the feathers being black. The Back
is of the same color with the Head: The Chin whitish: The Throat yellow, with
brown spots: The sides of a reddish yellow. Each Wing has eighteen
quil-feathers. Of these all betwixt the sixth and seventeenth have blunt,
indented, white tips. The edges of the four or five outmost are white, of those
next the body cinereous, of the rest reddish.

The Tail is three inches long, consisting of twelve feathers, of which the
outmost on each side has both its upper half, and also the exterior Vane of
the lower white: The next to this has only its outer Web white, the inner
being black: The three following on each side are black. The two middlemost are
sharp-pointed; of which that that lies undermost when the Tail is shut has
ash-colored edges: That which covers it lying uppermost, toward the tip is
cinereous, toward the bottom blackish. The Feet and Legs are dusky: The Claws
black, with white tips. The outer toe grows to the middle below as in other
small birds.

The Liver is divided into two Lobes, the left much less than the right, that
there may be room for the Gizzard, which in this bird is fleshy, and great for
the bigness of the bird. The flesh is very sweet and delicate. In mild Winters
it feeds wondrous fat: And there are then taken an innumerable number with us
in England for the furnishing and adorning of our Tables, as Polydore Virgil
truly writes. It builds upon the ground, and lays four or five Eggs at once: A
late Writer says three or four, and that to his knowledge he never found five
in all his life.

This Bird builds (says Olina) in plain, open ground, under some clod of
Earth; others say in Corn, or thick high grass in Meadows: And though in Winter
we see great flocks of them, yet we find the fewest of their Nests of any birds
that are so plentiful. He makes his Nest of dried herbs and strings, and breeds
thrice a year, in May, July, and August, rearing his young very suddenly: So
that if you have a Nest, you must take them as soon as they are
spoon-feathered, or else you run the risco of losing them, for they will get
them gone of a sudden. This bird breeds much later than the Wood-Lark, by
almost two months, for she seldom has young ones before the middle of May.

Young Nestlings may be brought up almost with any meat, but if you give them
sheeps Heart and Egg chopped together, till they are about three weeks old, it
will not be amiss: And when they come to eat alone, give them Oatmeal,
Hemp Seed and bread, mixed together with a little Egg. Olina says, to save
charges, you may feed them with Wheat, Oats, and Millet. These birds that are
so young may be brought up to any thing, one bird learning another birds Song.
You must always observe to give them sand at the bottom of the Cage, and let
them have a new Turf every week placed in a dish of water in their Cage, (which
must be as large as two of the Wood-Larks Cage.) They need have no Pearches in
their Cages.

The Cock may be known from the Hen, according to Olina, by having his heel so
long that it reaches beyond his knee; and having two black spots on his Neck,
one on each side, somewhat in fashion of a Ring or Collar; his breast darker,
and more speckled with black, and a grosser body. My English Author says, that
those you intend to keep for singing were best be taken in October or November,
and then they will sing a little after Christmas; and advises to choose the
streightest, largest, and loftiest bird, and he that has most white in his
Tail, for these (says he) are the usual marks for a Cock. If you find him very
wild and buckish, tie his Wings for two or three weeks, till he is become both
acquainted and tame also, and then when you perceive him pretty orderly, untie
his Wings, still letting him hang in the same place he did. You must feed this
old bird with Hemp Seed, Bread, and a few white Oats, for he takes great
delight to husk the Oats: And when he begins to sing, once in a week you may
give him a hard Egg, or shred him a little boiled Mutton, or Veal, or Sheeps
heart. You must observe in this bird, as in all others, that you give it no
salt meat, nor bread that is any thing salt.

. III. The Woodlark, called at Rome, Tottovilla.
THe Cock we made trial in weighed an ounce and a quarter: Its length from Bill
to Tail was six inches and an half: The distance between the ends of the Wings
spread twelve inches and an half.

It is lesser than the common Lark, and shorter bodied. Its Bill, as in the
rest of this kind, straight, slender, sharp-pointed, above half an inch long,
somewhat flat, of a dusky color: Its Tongue broad, cloven: The Irides of its
Eyes hazel-coloured: Its Nosthrils round. Its Feet of a pale yellow, inclining
to flesh color: Its Claws dusky; that of the back-toe longest. The outmost
fore-toe sticks to the middle below near the divarication.

The Breast and Belly are of a pale whitish yellow; the Throat deeper colored;
both spotted with black in the middle parts of the feathers. The Head and Back
are parti-colored of black and reddish yellow, the middle of each feather being
spotted with black. The Neck is ash-colored. A white line encompasseth the
Head from Eye to Eye like a Crown, or Wreath. The Rump is of a yellowish red or
tawny.

Each Wing has eighteen prime feathers; the outmost being much shorter than
the rest. The next five are half an inch longer than the rest, having their
points sharp, and their outer edges white: The rest have blunt points, indented
as it were in the middle, having yellow edges. The feathers of the bastard wing
are dusky with clay-coloured tips, and at its root is a white spot. The small
feathers on the ridge of the Wing are ash-colored. The Tail was two inches
long, consisting of the usual number of feathers, viz. twelve, not forked; yet
the middle feathers were something shorter than the rest, and ended in sharp
points, being between green and a sordid red or fulvous color. The four next
on each side had blunt points, were whitish at tips, the outmost most, the rest
in order less, else blackish.

It has no Craw: In the Stomach we found Beetles, Caterpillars, Gromil-seed,
etc. The stomach was provided with strong and thick muscles. The blind Guts in
this kind, as in all other small birds, that we have observed, are very short:
The Gut below these appendants is larger.

These birds fly many together in company, singing as they fly with a note not
much unlike a Blackbirds.

It is distinguished from the common Lark, by the following marks especially:
1. Whistling like a Blackbird. 2. A Circle of white feathers encompassing the
Head from Eye to Eye like a Crown or Wreath. 3. The first or outmost feather of
the Wing being much shorter than the second, whereas in the common Lark it is
near equal. 4. The outmost feathers of the Tail having white tips. 5. That it
sits upon trees. 6. It is lesser than the common Lark, but has a shorter, and
thicker, or rounder body for its bigness.

Aldrovandus makes no mention of this bird that I know of. Olina figures and
describes it in his Uccelleria under the title of Tottovilla.

The Woodlark is comparable to the Nightingale for singing, and by some
preferred before it. He will also emulate the Nightingale, and has great
variety of notes.

It is a very tender bird, and yet breeds the soonest of any in England. My
Author says, that he has had a Nest of young birds ready to fly by the
sixteenth of March: That it builds most commonly in lays, where the grass has
been pretty rank, and is grown russet, under some large Turf, to shelter its
Nest from the wind and weather. He could never bring up a nest of young ones,
because they either had the cramp, or fell into a scouring in less than a weeks
time after he had taken them: Nor could he ever hear of any who had kept them
so long as till they sung. So that they are never bred from the Nest.

The Seasons of taking Woodlarks, and which best to keep.
There are three seasons of taking Woodlarks; 1. The first is in June, July,
and August, when the Branchers are taken, having not yet moulted. These birds
sing presently, but continue their singing but little, for they soon fall a
moulting. They are commonly very familiar birds as being taken young.

2. The next season for taking them is in the latter end of September, which my
Author calls the general flight-time, when they rove from one Country to
another. By this time they have all moulted their feathers, and you can hardly
distinguish a young bird from an old. The birds taken at this season are brave,
strong, and sprightful; and prove well at Spring if they be well kept all
Winter; otherwise they will be lousie, and quite spoiled. They usually begin
not to sing till after Spring, and continue till July.

3. The third season is from the beginning of January to the latter end of
February, when they are paired, and have parted with their last years Brood.
These sing within three or four days, or a week at furthest, (if they be well
conditioned birds) and will soon become tame. For your fearful, wild, buckish
birds seldom prove good: For upon every turn they bolt against the sides of the
Cage, and bruise themselves, and so are apt to leave off singing. Therefore if
you have a bird that is a good bird and wild, have a Net knit French Meash, and
put it in the inside of the Cage, sowing it close to the sides and strait, that
when he bolts or flirts he may take no harm. Birds taken at this season for the
most part prove the best, they being in full stomach, and singing in a very
short time after, and being also more perfect in their song than those taken at
other seasons.

How to order a Woodlark when taken.
In the first place you must have a Cage with two pans; one for mixed meat, and
another for Oatmeal and whole Hemp Seed. First, boil an Egg hard: Then take the
crum of a halfpenny white-loaf, and as much Hemp Seed as the bread: Chop your
Egg very small, and crumble your bread and it together: Then bruise your
Hemp Seed very small with a rolling pin, or pound it in a Mortar, mingle all
together and give it him. 2. You must put red gravel sifted fine at the bottom
of his Cage; for he delights to bask himself in the sand, which if he does not
pretty often he proves lousie, and then seldom comes to any thing: If you leave
gravel-stones in the sand, he will be apt to break his feathers in basking him.
Shift this sand twice a week, otherwise he will be subject to clog his feet
with his dung. 3. Be sure that his meat be not too stale, for he will never
thrive upon it when dry or moldy. 4. Have a great care to shift his water often
[thrice a week at least] for it stinks sooner than any birds water; because
throwing about his meat some falls into it, which causes it immediately to
stink. 5. Line your Perch in the Cage with some green bays, or else make a
Perch of a Mat; which I have found them very much to delight in.

Note 1. If your bird be very wild when he is taken, keep him three or four
days from company, till he begins to eat his meat. Strew some of the Hemp Seed
and Oatmeal upon the sand, and some of his mixed meat also, because sometimes
they find not the Pan till they be almost famished.

Note 2. If he be very poor, at the beginning of the Spring give him every two
or three days a turf of three-leaved grass, and boil him a sheeps heart, and
mince it small, and mingle it with his meat, and it will cause him to thrive
exceedingly.

Note 3. If you would have your bird sing very lavish, feed him all the time of
his song with some sheeps heart mixed with his Egg and bread and Hemp Seed; and
put in his water two or three slices of Liquorice, and a little white
Sugar Candy, with two or three blades of Saffron; do so once a week, and it
will cause him to be long winded.

How to know a Cock from a Hen.
The surest way to know a Cock from a Hen is, 1. The largeness and length of
his call. 2. The tall walking of the bird about the Cage. 3. At Evenings the
doubling of his note, which we call Cudling, as if he were going to roost: But
if you hear him sing strong you cannot be deceived, for Hen-birds will sing but
little. The use of this is chiefly to know those birds that are taken at
flight-time; because those taken at other seasons sing soon after they are
taken, or not at all.

The Woodlarks Diseases, and their Cures.
Their diseases are, 1. The Cramp, caused by dung clogging and numbing their
Feet, if their gravel be not often shifted; or by hanging them out abroad in
the rain, so wetting the sand they sit upon. This is helped by lining their
Perch, that they may delight to sit upon it, and giving them fresh sand,
anointing them as the Nightingale.

2. Giddiness in the Head occasioned by feeding upon much Hemp Seed, is helped
by giving them some Gentles or Maggots, or else Hog-lice, or Ants and their
Eggs: And putting three or four slices of Liquorice in their water.

3. Lousiness and Scurf: Cured by smoking his feathers with Tobacco, and
giving him fresh Gravel, and setting him in the Sun: For if he has strength to
bask in the sand he will immediately rid himself of the Vermin.

. IV. The Tit-Lark, Alauda pratorum, Aldrov.
IT seemed to us less by half than the common Lark, weighing scarce an ounce;
having a long body, and a small head: A slender sharp Bill of half an inch
long, the upper Mandible black, more flat and depressed toward the Head: The
tip of the Tongue is jagged, the Circle about the Pupil hazel-coloured. The
color on the top of the Head, Shoulders, and middle of the Back various, of a
yellowish green and black; the middle parts of the feathers being black, the
outsides or edges of a yellowishgreen. The lower part of the Back or Rump is
only green without any mixture of black. The upper side is of the
forementioned various color, the single colors being less conspicuous by
reason of a small mixture of cinereous. As for the underside of the body, the
Breast and sides under the Wings were of a sordid yellowish white, spotted with
black, the lower belly and Throat under the Chin white, without any black spots.

The quil-feathers of the Wings were dusky, their exterior edges being of a
yellowish green. The middle feathers of the first row of coverts have their
tips and exterior edges white; and the middlemost of the second row theirs
still of a lighter white. The rest of the covert-feathers of the Wings are
almost of the same color with the scapular feathers. I suppose it is peculiar
to this kind to have the four first quill-feathersequal.

The Tail is made up of twelve feathers, the two outmost of which on each side,
are parti-colored of white and brown: In the outmost feather about the one
half, and that the uppermost, is white, the white dividing the feather
obliquely. Of the next feather the tip only is white: The rest of the feathers
are of a dark brown, having their exterior edges of a yellowish green. Of the
two middlemost the edges round about are of the same yellowish green, not so
even and trim as those of the other feathers, but as it were jagged or fringed.
The Tail, when folded up, is a little forked, near three inches long.

The Feet are yellow: The Claw of the back-toe, as in the rest of this kind
very long and dusky. The Gizzard not so musculous as in other Larks, wherein we
found Beetles and Insects like to meal-worms. The blind Guts are something
longer than in the common Lark. It has also a Gallbladder.

This bird sits also upon trees. In general it is less than the common Lark,
greener, and not so finely colored: In length from the point of the Bill to
the end of the Claws or Tail (for they are equally extended) six inches: In
breadth between the tips of the Wings spread out ten and a quarter.

Mr. Jessop suspects that there is yet another different sort of this bird,
which may be called the lesser field-Lark which is 1. A little bigger than that
here described; 2. Less The lesser field-Lark.
green; 3. Having paler Feet; And 4. much shorter Spurs.

The Titlarks Nest I once saw in a Furze-bush not far from the ground: It was
built outwardly of Moss, inwardly of straw, with a little horse-hair. She lays
five or six Eggs.

In this kind the Cock is all over more yellow than the Hen, but especially
under the Throat, on the Breast, Legs, and soals of the Feet.

The Titlark (says a late English Writer) sings most like the Canary bird of
any bird whatsoever; whisking, curring, and chewing: But his Song is short, and
has no variety in it: He comes with the Nightingale about the beginning of
April, and goes about the beginning of September. The Young are to be fed, when
first taken, after the same manner as the Nightingale: The old one (if taken)
in like manner to be at first crammed: When he will feed himself give him
Woodlarks meat, or almost any other. Before his going away he is apt to grow
fat like the Nightingale, but will eat though never so fat. He is a hardy bird,
and long-lived, if preserved with care, not subject to colds or cramps.

. V. The Titlark that sings like a Grasshopper, Locustella, D. Johnson.
IT is lesser than the Rogulus non cristatus, has a pretty long, straight
Bill, yet having a little declivity above, the upper Chap black, the nether of
a horn color. The upper side of the body is of a dusky yellow, besprinkled
with blackish spots; the underside of a Or yellowish white, orwhite dashed with
yellow.
pale yellow. The Tail is of the longest, of a brown or dusky color, when
spread ending in a circular circumference. On the lower Belly, the Thighs, and
under the Tail it has brown spots tending downwards. It has long, slender
dusky-coloured Legs, crooked Claws, and a very long Spur or heel. It feeds upon
flies: It has a note like a Grasshopper, but louder and shriller. When it sings
it commonly sits upon a bush, with its mouth open, and straight up, and its
Wings disshevel'd.

. VI. The Calandra, which perchance is no other than the Bunting.
THis bird Olina describes in this manner. It is a kind of Lark something
bigger than the common, otherwise for shape of body not much unlike it: In
respect of bigness comparable to a Thrush. Its head is greater than a Thrushes;
its Bill shorter and thicker: Its Feet as in other Larks. The color of its
under or fore part is a light cinereous, with certain black spots on the
Breast, after the manner of a Thrush. Of its upper or hind-part, viz. the Back,
Wings, and Tail, etc. like that of A certain earth which Painters use of a
dusky color.
Umber. About two inches below the Bill a circle of black feathers encompasses
the Neck, in fashion of a Collar or Necklace.

This bird seems to be the same with our Bunting hereafter to be described. The
figure of the Bill in Olina's Cut does not agree to the Bunting, indeed answers
not to his own description; it being drawn as slender and long as a Thrushes,
whereas he describes it thicker and shorter. Bellonius his description of the
Calandra agrees well enough to the Bunting; although he also describes the
Bunting elsewhere, under the title of Cenchramus. Howbeit, that we may leave
the Reader to the liberty of his judgment concerning these matters, we shall
subjoyn Bellonius his description of Calandra. Calandra (says he) is a sort of
Lark; which who so desires to know, let him fancy a crested Lark approaching to
the bigness of a Starling. Wherefore he that shall call it a great Lark, may
well seem not unfitly to denominate it. For both its voice, though higher, is
altogether like the voice of a Lark, and also the color of its feathers the
same, its Head the same, its Wings the same, its Tail the same, and likewise
its conditions the same: Its Legs, Feet, and Toes altogether alike, and in
these the Spur or back-claw long, as in Larks. The Neck slender where it is
joined to the Head, as we observed also in the Peacock, and which is likewise
common to Quails. But because it differs not from a common Lark save in
bigness, and the crested Lark, as we said, is bigger than the common, and has
a tuft on his Head, which both the common Lark and the Calandra want; I can
easily allow this sort of bird to be called a Lark, and to be comprehended
under the Genus of Larks. The Calandra exceeds the rest of this kind in
bigness, and therefore stands in need of a thicker Bill, that it might break
the harder sorts of grains upon which it feeds, though those that are kept shut
up in Cages are wont to be fed with Oats and crumbs of white bread. Thus far
Bellonius.

. VII. The crested Lark, called by the Germans, Kommanick, seen and described
at Vienna in Austria. Alauda cristata, Galerita.
IT is bigger than the common Lark, has a greater and longer Bill, almost an
inch long, measuring from the point to the corner of the mouth: The upper Chap
dusky, the lower whitish. The Tongue is broad, somewhat cloven; the Irides of
the Eyes of a cinereous hazel color. The Crest upon the crown of the Head
consists of seven or eight feathers [I counted ten or twelve.] These feathers
are situate Across the head.
transversly, and may be erected or lowred, spread or contracted at pleasure,
like the Tail. These feathers are blacker than the rest, and almost half an
inch long. The Back is more cinereous, and less spotted than in the common
Lark: The Rump almost wholly destitute of spots.

The prime feathers of the Wings are in number eighteen, besides the outmost
very short and small one. The outer Vane of the first Pinion feather is of a
dirty white, inclining to red or yellow: The rest are not so black as in the
common Lark, and have some mixture of a pale red, even in their lower part. The
Breast and Belly are white, with a dash of yellow: The Throat spotted, as in
the common Lark: The Tail is 2 inches long, composed of twelve feathers; the
two outmost whereof on each side have their exterior borders white, with a
dash of red, being else black; the third and fourth are wholly black; the fifth
and sixth of the same color with the body. The Gall from green inclines to a
dark blue. [I suppose this is accidental, and that the color of the Gall
varies in diverse birds.] The blind Guts are very short.

This differs from the common Lark, 1. In bigness: 2. In the Crest: 3. In the
color of the Back, which is less spotted, and not so beautiful: 4. In the
measure of the Tail, which in this Bird is shorter: 5. In that it soars not so
much in the air, and when it mounts up stays not so long there: 6. That it
flies not in flocks, as they do. Lastly, (as Aldrovandus observes) it is
frequently seen about the banks of Lakes and Rivers.

Dioscorides prescribes this bird to be eaten roasted, Galen in some places of
his works roasted, in some places boiled, to assuage Colic pains. Marcellus
Virgilius prefers the powder of it, put in an earthen pot, and dried or burnt
in an Oven, taken in water to the quantity of two or three spoonfuls, before
all other medicines for the Colic.

. VIII. The lesser crested Lark.
THis (as Lib. 18. cap. 14.
Aldrovandus describes it) is like the greater crested Larks, but much less,
and has a considerable long tuft on its Head for the smalness of its body: Red
Feet. The color of its whole body seems to incline more to brown than that of
the greater kind. I have observed them running in flocks abroad in the fields.

This Bird Mr. Johnson of Brigual has observed in the North of England.

. IX. The Giarola of Ornithol, Book 17. chap. 39.
Aldrovandus, having a long heel.
IT was of the bigness of a Lark. Its length from the tip of its Bill to the
points of its Claws was two Palms: Its Bill brittle, red, withinside and about
the corners of the Mouth yellow: It gapes wide. The color of its Crown, Neck,
Back, and Wings is various; so that therein it exactly resembles a Quail, and
is also very like to a Woodcock. For all the feathers are of a dusky
Chesnut-colour, only their edges are encompassed with a more dilute or whitish,
or moderately reddish color. The bottom of the Head, or beginning of the Neck
is encircled with a border of whitish feathers, as it were a Wreath or Crown.
The Tongue is cloven, the Belly white, the roots of the feathers cinereous. The
Tail so short that scarce any thing of it appears, yet is it forked and
parti-colored; for the last or outmost feather on each side is all over white,
the last save one partly white, partly chestnut. The whole Tail is scarcean inch
long, and narrow, being made up of very narrow feathers. Its Legs and Feet are
sufficiently large, and of a flesh color or reddish white. In the Feet this is
worthy the observation, that the back-toe is very long, and has a Claw of
equal length, so that both together make up an inch. This Claw is not, as in
other birds for the most part, crooked from its rise, but first straight for a
good way, and toward the tip moderately hooked. The Claws also are whitish.

. X. The Bird called Spipoletta at Florence, Tordino at Venice: Perchance the
Tom. 2. p. 732.
Stopparola, or Pa. 738, 731.
Grisola, or Spipola secunda of Aldrovand.
IT is less than a Lark, about the bigness of a Beccafigo: From Bill point to
Tail end 7 inches long: Between the tips of the Wings extended eleven three
quarters broad. Its Bill is small, slender, about half an inch long, straight,
sharp, and cole-black: Its Spur or back-claw very long, like a Larks.

Its color on the top of the Head, Neck, Shoulders, and Back cinereous, with a
dash of green. [Mr. Willughby makes the Back to be of an obscure or dusky
yellow, the Head more cinereous.] The Breast and Belly are white: The Throat
spotted. The Belly of the Hen-bird is yellowish. [The Throat, Breast, and Belly
in some are white, in others of a lovely yellow: But in all generally the
Breast is darker than the Throat or Belly, and spotted.] It has in each Wing
eighteen prime feathers, (I found not in this kind that small, short, outmost
feather, which we have observed in the Wings of many small birds,) of a dark or
dusky color; excepting the outer edges, which are either whitish, or
yellowish. The feathers also of the second row are of the same color with
those of the first. The Tail is about three inches long, and consists of ten
feathers, of which the two outmost on each side have their outward Vanes and
tops, in the whole, above their halves milk-white; all the rest are
dark-colored, and almost black, especially in the Males, excepting the two
middlemost, which round the edges are either yellowish or white. [Mr. Willughby
describes the Tail a little otherwise, and perchance more exactly, thus: The
Tail is black, but the upper half of the outmost feather on each side, and the
tip of the next are white; the two middlemost from dusky incline to an
ash color.]

This bird is sufficiently distinguished by the length of its heel from other
sorts of birds, by the black color of its Wings and Tail, Bill and Feet from
other Larks.

Concerning its manners, place, nest, breeding, etc. we have nothing further to
add. We saw it at Venice and Florence in the hands of Countrymen and Fowlers
among other small birds to be sold in the Markets. At Florence they called it
Spipoletta; whence, induced by the agreement of names, we guess it to be either
the first or second Spipola of Aldrovandus. But yet seeing in the descriptions
of these birds there is no mention made of the length of the heel, (which it is
not likely so curious a spectatour as Aldrovand should either oversee, or
through neglect and forgetfulness omit) notwithstanding the convenience of
names these may perchance be distinct Species. And therefore that we may not
give the Reader just occasion to to complain, that we have rashly omitted any
thing in our Ornithology, we will annex to this Chapter Aldrovandus his
descriptions of Spipolae, Stopparolae, and other small birds, to which we judge
this to be the same, or very like.

The first Spipola of Ornithol. lib. 17. cap. 26.
Aldrovandus.
The first Spipola, which is greater than the rest in this kind, has an
ash-colored Head: Under the Bill a white spot in place of a beard. Its Breast
is red: Its Belly parti-colored of red and white: Its Tail black above, white
underneath: Its Back ash-colored. Its Wings parti-colored of white, black and
red: its Legs and Feet yellow; its Claws black: Its Bill long, slender, and
dusky colored. This bird, if it be exactly described, is to us as yet unknown.

The other Spipola of Ibid.
Aldrovandus.
This inclines more to an ash color than the precedent: But differs from it in
that it has not a red Breast, but marked with black spots drawn downwards. It
is also more cinereous above than beneath: Moreover, the Belly is almost white.
Behind the Eyes is a great spot approaching after a sort to a ferrugineous
color. The master feathers of the Wings, and those which cover them, are
black, their sides and ends being cinereous. The Legs and Feet are dusky: The
Tail ash-colored.

The third Spipola of Aldrovandus, described in the same Chapter.
This some call Boarina. It is a small bird, almost all over of a pale or
whitish yellow, but deeper in the Wings than elsewhere. The Bill and Feet are
dusky.

The Stopparola of Aldrovand, lib. 17. cap. 27.
The Fowlers (says he) of our City call this bird Stopparola, a name I know
not what it signifies, nor whence it is derived, unless perchance it be from
Stubble, which our Rustici, that is, Pesants.
Country men call Stoppia. It is, if I be not mistaken, of the Genus of the
Fly-catchers
Muscicapae, has the Breast and Belly for the most part white; the Head (which
on the Crown is speckled with white spots) Neck, Back, and Tail brown; the
quillfeathers of the Wings black, as are also the coverts, but yellowish on the
sides: The Legs and Feet slender, and black: The Bill indifferently long,
sharp-pointed, and black.

A Bird like to Stopparola and Magnanina, Aldrov. in the same place.
It is of the bigness of a Wagtail; has a long, straight, sharp Bill, yet
above having a little declivity; black above, and of a horn color underneath:
The Neck, Breast, and Belly pale: The Eyes small and lively, having a black
Pupil; and a white circle, and a dusky spot hardly conspicuous about them; The
Feet leadencoloured.

The Grisola of Book 17. Chap. 28.
Aldrovandus.
There is a certain other small bird caught in our fields, which the Fowlers
call Grisola, perchance from its gray or hoary color, although it be not gray,
but of a dusky ash color: Or perchance because it cries much, keeping alone;
for we sometimes use the word gridare, to signify lamenting. It feeds upon
flies, and other such like Insects, as I gather from the figure and
construction of its Bill; for it is slender, straight, and long. On the Neck
and Breast it is distinguished with oblong, brown spots, tending downwards. The
whole Belly is white. The Head, upper side of the Neck, Back, and Tail are
dusky, as are also the Wings, the feathers whereof have their sides and ends of
a pale ash color. The Legs and Feet are also dusky or blackish.

The Glareana or Grien Vogelin of Gesner.
Hither also for its spotted Breast we will refer the Glareana or Grien Vogelin
of Gesner: which because the Author described from the inspection of a Picture
sent him from Strasburgh, we suspect not to differ from the above described,
although in some particulars it seems to vary. We refer the Reader, that
desires more concerning it, to Gesner or Aldrovandus.

CHAP. II. Of the Swallow in general.
THe characteristic notes of Swallows are a great Head, a short Neck, a small,
short Bill, a wide mouth, for the more easy catching of Flies, and other
Insects, as they fly to and fro: Very long Wings; a swift and almost continual
flight; a long and forked Tail for the more ready and speedy turning their
body, and directing their flight: White Eggs, speckled with ferrugineous spots,
as Aldrovandus truly observed. This bird is the Springs Herald, being not seen
throughout all Europe in Wintertime: Whence that Greek Proverb, common to
almost all Languages, (...); One Swallow makes not a Spring.

We have observed four sorts of Swallows in England, and not more elsewhere.
Those are, 1. The common or House-Swallow: 2. The Martin, or Martinet, or
Martlet: 3. The Sand-Martin or Shore-bird: 4. The black Martin or Swift. Of
this last we have seen a sort painted with the whole Belly white. And Julius
Scaliger affirms, that he has seen one of this kind as big as a Buzzard: No
way differing in shape from the common one, save in the Legs and Talons, and
hookedness of the Beak, all fitted for prey.

As for the Physical virtues and faculties of Swallows and their parts,
Schroder has thus briefly summed them up.

1. Swallows entire are a specific remedy for the Falling sickness, dimness of
sight, blear eyes, (their ashes mingled with honey and so applied) they cure
also the Squinancy, and inflammation of the Pin of the Mouth.
Uvula, (being eaten, or their ashes taken inwardly.)

2. A Swallows heart is also said to be good for the Falling sickness, and to
strengthen the memory. Some eat it against the Quartan Ague.

3. Some will have the blood to be a specific for the Eyes: And they prefer
that which is drawn from under the left Wing.

4. There is a Stone found sometimes (though seldom) in the stomach of some of
the young Swallows, called Chelidonius, of the bigness of a Lentile or Pease.
This they will have to help the Falling sickness in Children (bound to the arm,
or hung about the neck.)

Note. They report this stone to be found especially in the increase of the
Moon, and in the first hatched young one. Others take it out in August about the
Full of the Moon.

5. The Nest, outwardly applied gives relief in the Squinancy: Heals the
redness of the Eyes, and is good for the biting of an Adder, or Viper.

6. The Dung heats very much, discusses, and is acrimonious. Its chief use is
against the bitings of a mad dog, taken outwardly and inwardly; in Colic and
Nephritic pains taken inwardly, put up it provokes excretion. Schrod.

An approved Medicine for the Falling sickness.
Take one hundred Swallows, [I suppose here is some mistake, and that one
quarter of this number may suffice] one ounce of Castoreum, one ounce of Peiony
roots, so much White Wind as shall suffice. Distill all together, and give the
Patient to drink three drachms fasting every Morning. This will lessen every
fit, and perfectly cure them. Purge often, as the strength of the Patient will
bear, with Stibium.

CHAP. III. Of Swallows in particular.
. I. The common or House-Swallow. Hirundo domestica.
THe Female weighed scarce an ounce: From the Bill to the end of the Tail being
seven inches long, and measuring from tip to tip of the Wings extended, twelve
and an half broad. Its Bill was short, black, flat, and depressed, very broad
at the Head, but sharp-pointed; black also on the inside: But the Tongue and
roof of the mouth yellow. The aperture of the mouth gaping very wide, for the
convenience of catching Flies and Gnats as she flies. The Tongue short, broad,
and cloven: The Eyes great, and furnished with nictating membranes: The Irides
hazelcoloured. The Feet short and black; the outmost toe growing to the
middlemost at bottom.

The Head, Neck, Back, and Rump are of a very lovely shining, but dark purplish
blue color. As well above as underneath the Bill, that is to say, in the
Forehead and under the chin, is a deep sanguine spot: But that underneath is
much the bigger. The Throat is of the same color with the Neck. The Breast and
belly white, with a dash of red; as are also the interior covert-feathers of
the Wings. The Tail is forked consisting of twelve feathers; the outmost of
which are an inch longer than the next, and end in sharp points: Of the rest
the interior are also shorter in order than the exterior, but the difference
much less. All these feathers of the Tail, except the two middlemost, are
black, and each adorned with a white spot: Which spots cross the Tail in a
straight line. [The two middlemost want the white spot.] The Wings have
eighteen quill-feathers, alike black: But all the covert feathers are of a deep
shining blue.

In the Stomach of an old bird we found Beetles; in the stomachs of the young
many small, pellucid, unequal stones, tinctured with a fair Claret color; not
far from the Eggs small worms spirally rolled up, of three inches length. These
birds build in Chimneys. About the end of September we saw great numbers of
them to be sold in the Market at Valentia in Spain, when we traveled through
that Country, Anno 1664.

What becomes of Swallows in Winter time, whether they fly into other
Countries, or lie torpid in hollow trees, and the like places, neither are
natural Historians agreed, nor indeed can we certainly determine. To us it
seems more probable that they fly away into hot Countries, viz. Egypt,
Aethiopia, etc. then that either they lurk in hollow trees, or holes of Rocks
and ancient buildings, or lie in water under the Ice in Northern Countries, as
Olaus Magnus reports. For as Herodotus witnesses, they abide all the year in
Egypt, understand it of those that are bred there (says Aldrovandus) for those
that are bred with us only fly thither to winter. I am assured of my own
knowledge (says Peter Martyr) that Swallows, Kites, and other Fowl fly over
Sea out of Europe to Alexandria to winter.

Swallows sometimes vary in color, as do also many other birds; I have (says
Aldrovandus) often seen House Swallows all over white. If any one desires to
have white Swallows, let him anoint their Eggs while they sit, with oyl-olive,
Aldrov.

. II. The Martin, or Martinet, or Martlet. Hirundo agrestis sive rustica Plinii.
THis being measured from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail was six
inches long: The Wings being spread ten inches and an half broad. Its Head
flat; Its Bill also very much depressed and flat, as in the House-Swallow; at
its insertion into the Head of an inch broad, but sharp at the point: From the
tip to the angles of the Mouth but half an inch long; the upper Chap somewhat
longer than the nether. The Mouth is yellow withinside: The Tongue cloven. The
Circles encompassing the Pupils of the Eyes of a havel-colour. The Feet small,
and Legs short. The soal of the foot bare; in which appear the bottoms of the
exterior Toes joined by a membrane. The Claws are white: The Feet to the very
Claws covered with a white Down: By which note it is easily distinguishable
from all its fellows of the Swallowkind.

Its Head, Neck, Back, Tail and Wings are of the same color with the
House-Swallows, but sadder, and not so glossie: Its Rump, Breast, and Belly
milk-white. Under the Chin the white is somewhat more sullen or obscure. Each
Wing has eighteen master-feathers: From the tenth the six or seven following
have their tips broad and indented. The tips of the That is, those next the
body.
interior quil-feathers are white. The Tail is less forked than in the
House-Swallow. The feathers from the middle on each side are longer in order,
the exterior than the interior, almost by an equal excess; otherwise than in
the House-Swallow, the outmost feathers of whose Tail (as we said before)
exceed the next three times as much as they do the following, etc. The length
of the outmost feathers is two inches and an half, of the middlemost one and
three quarters.

In the stomachs of the Young of this kind we found no stones, but many Flies
and Beetles. This bird builds a round Nest like the House-Swallow, and also of
like matter, yet not in Chimneys, but in Windows, under Eves of Houses, etc. It
differs moreover, in that the House-Swallows Nest is like those of other birds,
semicircular, and all open above; but its Nest is covered above, a round hole
only being left open in the side, by which the old one goes in and out.

. III. The Sand-Martin, or Shore-bird. Hirundo riparia, Aldrov.
THis bird is the least that we know of the Swallow-kind; being from the tip of
the Bill to the end of the Tail no more than five inches and a quarter long.
Its Bill is small, sharp, flat, black, as in the rest of this kind, from the
point to the angles of the Mouth half an inch long: Its Tongue cloven: Its Eyes
great; its Feet dusky. At the rise of the back-toe a few small feathers grow;
else the Legs are bare as far as the knees.

Its Head, Neck, and Back are of a dark dun, or Mouse color: Its Chin, Breast,
and Belly white. At the bottom of the Throat a Ring of the same Mouse-dun
encompasses the Neck. The number of feathers in Wings and Tail is the same as
in other Swallows. But the quil-feathers of the Wings are blacker than the
feathers on the back; from the tenth to the last all of equal length; the six
next to the tenth have their tips indented. The middle feathers of the Tail are
an inch and three quarters long, the outmost an inch and half.

It builds in the holes of River-banks, lays five or six Eggs, makes its Nest
of straws, bents, etc. within of feathers, on which it lays its Eggs.

It differs from the Common Martin in having no white upon the Rump, nor its
feet feathered, as that has.

Of this kind great numbers are brought to the Markets at Valentia in Spain to
besold for the use of the Kitchen; where the Fowlers and Country people call
them That is Mountain Butterflies.
Papilion di Montagna. They are frequent also in Holland, and no less in
England.

. IV. The black Martin or Swift. Hirundo apus.
THis is the biggest of all Swallows we have hitherto seen. It has a great
Head, a huge wide mouth; but a very small, black Bill, (wherein it agrees with
the Caprimulgus.
Churn-Owl) toward the Nosthrils broad and depressed. Its Tongue is broad, and
somewhat cloven: Its Nosthrils long, placed obliquely, obtuse toward the Head,
acute toward the point of the Bill: Its Eyes great, and their Irides of a hazel
color.

It has almost no variety or difference of color in the whole body: For as
well the upper as the lower side, and also the Wings and Tail are black, with
an obscure tincture of green, or red: Only under the Chin is a notable spot of
white or ashcolour.

It has in each Wing eighteen quil-feathers, all ending in sharp points, but
especially the exterior ones. The Tail is about an hand-breadth long,
consisting of but ten feathers, from the middle to the outmost in order one
longer than another, ending all in sharp points.

Its Legs are very short, but thick: Its Feet very small. All its Toes stand
forwards; for the least, which in others is wont to stand backward, is in this
placed the same way with the rest. The least Toe has, as in other birds, one
bone: The other three, contrary to the manner of all other that we know besides
it, have all an equal number of bones or joints, viz. only two, the one very
short, the other longer. The Toes also are all divided from the very rise.

The Gallbladder is little. The Stomach not very fleshy, out of which
dislected we took Beetles and other Insects.

They say, that by reason of the length of its Wings, and shortness of its
Legs, if it happens to alight or fall upon the ground, it cannot raise it self
up again, but may easily be caught. Wherefore it does either always fly, or sit
upon the tops of Churches, Towers, or other ancient buildings.

Its weight was three quarters of an ounce: Its length from the tip of the Bill
to the Claws five inches, to the end of the Tail seven and a quarter. The
distance between the tips of the wings extended sixteen inches and an half.

Of this kind we have seen the Picture of one having its whole nether part,
Throat, Breast, and Belly, white: And, as we said before, Scaliger mentions one
of the bigness of a Buzzard.

. V. * Aldrovandus his Sea-Swallow.
THis bird, in my judgment belongs not to this Family, but ought to be ranked
with the Out of Aldrovandus.
lesser Lari or Sea-Gulls.

It is (says Aldrovandus) much bigger than a Swallow, and has longer legs.
Its whole Belly up to the Breast is white; its Head, Wings, and Back duskish.
Its Wings and Tail, as in Swallows, are very long, and of a blackish color,
but brown withinside. Its Tail is forked. Its Bill strong, and black, as in a
Gull. Its Rictus, which signifies properly the gape of the mouth.
Mouth wide, and of a scarlet color within. From the Bill through the Eyes,
almost to the Breast, is extended a notable black line, which near the Breast
makes as it were a Collar. The Feet are as black as Jet, and (as I said before)
less than a Swallows. For its likeness it is called by Fowlers, The Sea Swallow.

. VI. * The American Swallow, called by the Brasilians, Tapera, by the
Portugues, Andorinha. Marggrav.
IT is like our Country Swallows, of the same bigness, and flying about after
the same manner. It has a short, broad, black Bill: A wide Mouth, which it can
open beyond the region of the Eyes, like the greater Ibijan; elegant, black
Eyes: Long Wings, reaching as far as the end of the Tail; which is of a good
breadth. Its Legs and Feet like those of our Country Swallows. All the upper
part of the Head, the Neck, Back, Wings, and Tail feathers are of a brown
color mingled with gray. The Belly is white, as are also the feathers under
the Tail: The Legs and Feet dusky.

This bird perchance may not differ specifically from our Europaean black
Martin or Swift: For that, as we before observed, the Europaean Swift varies
sometimes in color, being found with a white belly.

. VII. * The Chinese Swallow of Bontius, whose Nest is edible.
IN the Seacoast (says he) of the Kingdom of China, a sort of small
parti-colored birds, of the shape of Swallows, at a certain season of the year,
viz. their breeding time, come out of the midland Country to the Rocks; and
from the foam or froth of the Seawater dashing and breaking against the bottom
of the Rocks gather a certain clammy, glutinous matter, perchance the Sperm of
Whales, or other fishes, of which they build their Nests, wherein they lay
their Eggs, and hatch their Young. These Nests the Chinese pluck from the
Rocks, and bring them in great numbers into the East Indies to sell; which are
esteemed by gluttons great delicacies, who dissolving them in Chicken or Mutton
broth, are very fond of them, preferring them far before Oysters, Mushromes, or
other dainty and licorish morsels which most gratify the Palate.

We have seen of this sort of Nests in the Cabinets of Athanasius Kircher the
Jesuit, and other Virtuosi. They are (as Musel. lib. 3. cap. 21.
Olaus Wormius reports) of a Hemispherical figure, of the bigness of a
Goose-Egg, of a substance resembling Ising-glass. Concerning their faculties or
virtues (says John de Laet in his Epistle to Wormius) reports vary, some
attributing to them something Venereal, others not. But he writes, that he had
been informed by those who commanded in chief in the East Indies, that the
birds that build them were found upon that part of the Seacoast that is
commonly called Coromandel, and chiefly about Patane.

CHAP. IV. Slender-bill'd birds that have their Tails all of one color.
The Hedge-Sparrow, Curruca Eliotae, An Magnanina Aldrov?
THis is almost as big as a Titlark or Robin-red-breast. Its Bill is slender,
From the tip to the corners of the mouth above half an inch.
pretty long, and black; the Tongue cloven, horny, and black at the tip: The
Nosthrils of the figure of a Kidney-bean: The Irides of the Eyes
hazel-coloured: The Ears great and wide.

The upper side of the body is parti-colored of black and dirty-red, the middle
parts of each feather about the shaft being black, the outsides or edges red.
These colors are so dull and sullen, that the bird notwithstanding, looked on
at a distance, appears but of a brown or dirty color. The Head and Back show
something of cinereous, the middle spots being darker. The Rump is greenish,
and void of spots. The prime feathers of the Wings dusky, with reddish edges.
The interior of the second row of Wing-feathers have whitish tips: The lesler
covert-feathers of the Wings are of the same color with those on the body.
This has that extreme short feather in each Wing, which some birds want. The
Tail is about two inches long, made up of twelve feathers, all dusky, without
any variety of colors. The nether part of the body is cinercous, yet the lower
belly whitish, but in some birds darker, and of a lead-colour. The Legs and
Feet are of a yellowish flesh-colors; the Claws dusky; the hind-claw greater
and longer than any of the rest. The outmost Toe, as in other small birds, at
bottom grows to the middlemost.

The Cock had large Testicles: The blind Guts seemed to us in this to be more
round and tumid than in other small birds. The stomach was not very fleshy. It
builds in hedges, and lays commonly five Eggs; is foolish bird, and easily
taken. Its Eggs are of a fine pale blue or Seagreen color.

A late English Writer says, that they are a very pleasant Song-bird, singing
early in the Spring, and having great variety of notes: Old or young become
tame very swiftly, and will sing in a short space after they are taken, if you
take them in the latter end of January, or beginning of February.

Its weight was three quarters of an Ounce: Its measures were from the Bill to
the Claws six inches; to the Tail end seven; from Tip to tip of the Wings
spread eight and an half. Perchance this may be the Bird which Gesner makes his
first Curruca, whose figure you have in Aldrovands Ornithology, lib. 17. cap.
34.

In the Nest of this bird the Cuckoo is said to lay her Egg, which the foolish
bird sits upon, hatches, and brings up the young one till it be fledged, and
can shift for it self: Whence the word Curruca signifies as much in Latin as
Cuckold with us in English, i. e. one that brings up another man's Child for his
own. I suppose our word Cuckold came from Cuckoo, but a man abused in that
manner is very improperly so called, he that abuses him being indeed the
Cuckoo, that lays an Egg in his Nest. Whether or no this Bird does hatch and
bring up the young Cuckoo I cannot say of my own experience, but I am sure this
is not the only Cuckows-nurse, for I have known the Waterwagtail, and other
birds perform that office.

Aldrovandus describes his Magnanina in these words. It is a bird of the
bigness of a The Magnanina of Aldrov.
Sparrow, having a slender, sharp, black Bill: On the nether side down to the
Belly of a pale ash color, the belly being white. Behind the Eyes it has a
notable spot of almost a Chestnut color, of which color is also the crown of
the head. The greater Wing-feathers are black; the Tail of a spadiceous, but
paler than the Back. The Legs and Feet yellow, the Claws black. Some of our
Fowlers call it Magnanina, as much to say, as a Smith or Carpenter-bird,
perchance because it makes a loud knocking or snapping with its Bill as it
catches flies: Other call it, Passere matto, that is a foolish Sparrow, perhaps
from its color, which approaches to spadiceous, or rather because it easily
yields it self to be taken.

CHAP. V. The Beccafigo or Fig-eater, perchance the fourth, or seventh Ficedula
of Aldrovandus, to which are subjoyned the descriptions of other small Birds
akin to this out of Aldrovand.
THis is a very small bird, scarce so big as the common Linnet, short bodied.
The color of its Head, Neck, Back, Wings, and Tail from ash color inclines to
green, in some dusky, with a Tincture of green. It has the same number of Wing
and Tail-feathers with all other small birds. But the quills of the Wing are of
a Mouse-dun, with black shafts, and green edges. The lesser rows of feathers
that cover the underside of the Wings are yellow. The Tail is about two inches
long, not forked, and all its feathers of a dusky color.

The Belly of a white or silver color: The Breast something darker, with a
tincture of yellow.

The Bill is short, the upper Mandible black, the lower bluish: The Mouth
withinside of a red or flesh-colors: The Legs short, the Feet bluish, and in
some of a lead color.

This bird is not remarkable for any variety of colors, so that it is very
hard so to describe it, as by certain and characteristic notes to distinguish
it from all others.

In its stomach dissected we found grape-stones, and other seeds.

Mr. Jessop shot this bird in Yorkshire, and sent it us by the name of
Pettychaps.

The seventh Ficedula of Aldrovand, which he says his Countrymen the
Bolognese The seventh Ficedula or Scatarello of Aldrov.
call Scatarello, but the Genoese Beccafigo, is almost all over of a dusky
ash color, especially on the back and upper-side, for the Breast is yellow:
The Feet are black. Saving in the color of the Feet it agrees with the Bird by
us described in this Chapter.

Neither is the second Muscicapa of Aldrovand, or Chiuin of the Bolognese,
called by the Genoese, Borin, much unlike to this. It is a little bigger than a
Wren; its Bill The second Muscicapa of Aldrov. or Borin of the Genoese.
slender, sharp, and very fit to strike flies. The upper part of its Head, as
also its Neck and Back are of a pale ash color: its Head beneath, its Throat,
Breast, and Belly are of a white, tending to yellow; but the Breast and Belly
more dilute. The Wings above dun, underneath also of the same color, but
paler. The Rump white. The Tail (which consists of twelve feathers) is three
inches long, and of the same color with the Wings. The Legs and Feet Of the
color of the Palm tree branch. The Salicaria or Willowbird of Gesner.
Spadiceous: The Claws long and slender.

Moreover, the Salicaria of Gesner is either the same with this, or certainly
near akin to it. It is, says he, a very small bird, of color partly dusky, as
on the upper side; partly yellowish, as on the nether; and partly whitish, as
on the sides, and near the Neck, having reddish Legs. It feeds upon Flies,
Spiders, and other Insects that it finds among Willows, which that it may enjoy
alone, it drives away other small Birds. It has a slender, straight Bill.

Aldrovandus describes another bird by the name of his first Muscicapa, or
Fliecatcher, The Boarina of Aldrov.
which he says from following and frequenting Kine, the Bolognese call
Boarola, or Boarina. It is is a long-bodied bird, and has a pretty long Bill,
of a dusky reddish color. The Head and whole Back are of a color mixed of A
lead-colour.
plumbeous, cinereous, and yellowish. The Breast and all the belly white; but
the Breast spotted with black. The Wings are parti-colored, of black,
yellowish, and white: The Tail long, black, and white on the sides: The Legs
and Feet black.

CHAP. VI. A small bird without name like to the Stopparola of Aldrovand,
perchance the Moucherolle of Bellonius.
FOr bigness and color it is very like to a Hen-Sparrow, but of a longer and
slenderer body. The Head, Neck, Back, and generally the whole upper side is of
a dark cinereous or Mouse-dun: Yet the Wings and Tail darker than the middle of
the Back: And on the top of the Head, to one who heedfully views it, appear
certain black spots. All the nether side is white: But the shafts of the
feathers in the Breast are black, and the Throat and Sides somewhat red. The
Tail is two inches and a quarter long, all dusky, as are also the greater
quil-feathers of the Wings, for the edges of the interior are of a yellowish
white. The outmost feather of the Wing is very short and little. [In some birds
of this kind the tips of the interior feathers of the second row, as also of
the bastard-wing feathers are of a yellowish white.]

The Bill is straight, black, broad, and depressed, or flat near the Head. The
upper Chap rises up in an angle or ridge all along the middle, (whence the Bill
seems to be triangular) and is a little longer than the nether, and
sharp-pointed. The mouth gapes wide; and is yellow withinside. The Tongue
cloven with a deep incision, rough on the sides. The Legs short and black: The
Feet also small and short. The outer toe below sticks fast to the middle one,
as in the rest of this kind.

The Gall is yellow: The Testicles small and black. In the Gizzard we found
Bees, Flies, and other Insects. In summertime it frequents gardens with us in
England. In the young birds of this kind the Back is spotted with black and
white.

This bird differs from the White-throat, in that its Tail is all of one
color; from the Beccafigo in the color of its body, being of a dusky
cinereous or Mouse-dun, whereas that is paler colored, and tinctured with
green; from both, in magnitude and in the figure of its Bill, which (as we said
before) is broad, depressed, and triangular.

We have before in the Chapter of Larks presented the Reader with the
descriptions of the Stopparola and Stopparolae similis of Aldrovand. As for the
Moucherolle, Bellonius describes it thus:

It is of the bigness of the Hedge-Sparrow.
Curruca, lives in woods, and feeds chiefly upon flies, whence also it is
called * Moucherolle (Mouche in French signifying a fly.) It is so like a
Sparrow, that unless by its conditions while it is living, and its Bill when
dead, it can hardly be distinguished from it. It has strong legs and feet: The
feet also black. The Bill is slender and oblong, like a Robin-red-breasts: The
Tail also long. In brief it is in all points like to the small Field-Sparrow
that haunts Oaks, excepting the Bill, and its pleasant note. It lies much in
Woods and Thickets, flying and hiding it self there. This description of
Bellonius seems rather to agree to our Hedg-Sparrow than to the bird described
in this Chapter.

* The Brasilian Tijeguacu of Marrgrave.
For the figure of its Bill alike depressed and triangular we have subjoyned
this bird to the precedent, though otherwise not much resembling it. It is
(says Marggrave) of the bigness of a Sparrow, or a little bigger; has a
short, triangular, and somewhat broad, black Bill: Its Eyes of a Sapphire
color; its Legs and Feet of a waxen, with duskish Claws. Its Toes are disposed
after the ordinary manner. The whole bird is as black as a Raven: But on the
top of the Head it has a shining sanguine spot of the figure of a buckler. The
feathers covering the whole back almost, and part of each Wing above, from
black incline to blue. The Tail is short and black.

CHAP. VII. The Redstart, Ruticilla, (...).
THe Breast, Rump, and sides under the Wings are red: The lower Belly white:
The Head, Neck, and Back of a lead-colour. The forehead marked with a white
spot, separated from the Eyes and Bill by a black line, although it seems to be
produced beyond the Eyes to the hinder part of the Head, and to encompass the
crown of the head (which is, as we said, of a lead color.) The Throat and
Cheeks under the Eyes black, with a mixture of gray in the ends of the
feathers. In the Female the Back is of a dusky ash color: The Throat of a
paler cinereous: The Breast red; the Belly white.

The quill-feathers in each Wing eighteen, as in other small birds, all dusky:
The upper covert-feathers black, the nether red. The Tail is made up of the
usual number of twelve feathers, of which the five outmost on each side are
red, the two middlemost dusky, two inches and an half long.

The Bill is black: The Legs also are black in the Cock; in the Hen both Bill
and feet are paler. The lowest bone of the outer Toe is joined to that of the
middle Toe. The Tongue is cloven: The mouth within yellow: The Irides of the
Eyes of a hazel color. The Eyes are furnished with nictating membranes.

It feeds upon Beetles, and other Insects, and comes to us in Summertime.

It weighs half an ounce, is five inches long, and nine broad.

This bird, says a late English Writer, is of a very dogged sullen temper: For
if taken old, and ordered as formerly directed in the Nightingale, he will be
sometimes so dogged as in ten days time never to look toward the meat, and when
he feeds himself to continue a whole month without singing. This is also the
shiest of all birds, for if she perceive you to mind her when she is building,
she will forsake what she has begun, and if you touch an Egg she never comes
to her Nest more: And if you touch her young ones, she will either starve them,
or throw them out of the Nest and break their necks, as I found by experience
more than once. The Young are to be taken at ten days old, and to be fed and
ordered as the Nightingales. Keep them warm in Winter, and they will sing as
well in the night as the day, and will learn to whistle and imitate other
birds. Taken young, and brought up, they become gentle and very tame.

Besides this common Redstart, Gesner and Aldrovand describe several other
kinds, as 1. That which Aldrovandus makes his third, which Gesner describes
thus: Its forehead is marked with a white spot: The feathers under the Bill are
black. The Head and Back are of a cinereous or dusky color. The Wing-feathers
are dusky, moderately inclining to red. The Breast, Belly, and Tail are red;
but the lower Belly whitish. The Tail consists of Either this place is
misprinted, or Gesner sure mistaken in the number of feathers: For all the
Europaean small birds I ever saw or heard of have twelve feathers in their
Tails. Gesners Rotschwentzel Aldr. tom. 3. p. 748.
eight feathers. For bigness this bird is inferior to the great Titmouse or
Ox-eye, equal to the Robin-red-breast. Its Bill is black, slender, long and
straight.

The fourth of Aldrovand is in all points like this, save that the white spot
on the forehead is changed into a long line: The Breast also seems to be more
cinereous, and the lower belly not white.

2. The Rotschwentzel of Gesner, so called from the redness of the Tail, the
description whereof he took from a Picture sent him from Strasburgh: Therefore
we shall add no more concerning it, esteeming such Pictures less exact, and not
much to be relied upon, who will may see the description in Gesner, or
Aldrovand out of him.

3. The Bird called Wegflecklin about Strasburgh, Gesn. Its Breast was blue,
the part between the Breast and Belly of a pale or yellowish red; which color
also the upper side of the Tail feathers, but not to the end, and those about
the Rump, were of. The Bill is short, the Belly cinereous, not white, as the
Strasburgh Picture represents it; the Legs dusky, not red, as in that Picture;
and the feathers under the Bill not blue, but dusky and parti-colored. The
German name is imposed upon it partly from the ways; for it is much conversant
about high ways, roads, and fields, and thence (as we guess) picks up worms and
seeds that it finds on the ground; partly from the blue spot on its Breast, as
I conjecture.

The Redstart (says Aldrovandus) abides with us all the Summer, but in the end
of the Autumn it either flies away, or hides it self, and in the Springtime
returns to us again. It feeds upon the same things the Robin-red-breast does,
to wit, flies, crumbs of bread, Ants Eggs, and if I be not deceived, Spiders
too. It builds its Nest in hollow trees.

CHAP. VIII. The Robin-red-breast or Ruddock, Rubecula sive Erithacus, Aldrov.
(...), Christ.
THis bird denominated from its red breast, is so well known in almost all
Countries, that it needs no long description. It weighs about half an ounce,
being from Bill to Tail half a foot long; and between the tips of the Wings
spread about nine inches broad. The Breast is of a red or deep Orange color:
which color compasses also the Eyes and upper part of the Bill. The Belly is
white; the Head, Neck, Back, and Tail of a dirty green or yellow, as in
Thrushes [rather cinereous, with a tincture of green.] A line of blue divides
between the red color and the cinereous on the Head and Neck. Under the Wings
is also seen something of Orangetawny.

The exterior borders of the Wings are almost of the same color with the
back: the interior are something yellow. The Tail is two inches and an half
long, and made up of twelve feathers.

The Bill is slender, of a dusky color, more than half an inch long: The
Tongue cloven and jagged: The Irides of the Eyes of a hazel color. The Legs,
Feet, and Claws of a dusky or blackish. The outer foretoe joined to the
middlemost at bottom, as in the rest of this kind.

In Wintertime to seek food it enters into houses with much confidence, being
a very bold bird, sociable and familiar with man. In the Summertime (as Turner
says) when there is plenty of food in the Woods, and it is not pinched with
cold, it withdraws it self with its Brood into the most desert places. It is a
solitary bird, and feeds singly, whence the Proverb took its rise, Unum
arbustum non alit duos Erithacos. Of the manner of building its Nest thus
Turner from ocular inspection. It makes its Nest among the thickest thorns and
shrubs in Spineys, where it finds many Oaken leaves, and when it is built
covers it with leaves, not leaving it open every way, but only one passage to
it. On that side also where the entrance is, it builds a long porch of leaves
before the aperture, the outmost end whereof when it goes forth to seek meat,
it shuts or stops up with leaves. What I now write I observed when I was very
young; howbeit I will not deny but it may build also after another manner. If
any have observed another manner of building let them declare it, and they will
very much gratify such as are studious of these things, and my self
especially. What I have seen I have heartily imparted. The Male (says Olina)
may be known and distinguished from the Female, by the color of his Legs,
which are blacker, and by certain hairs or beards which grow on each side his
Bill. It feeds upon Worms and other Insects, Ants Eggs, Crumbs of bread, etc.
For a Song-bird it is by some esteemed little inferior to the Nightingale.

They build commonly three times a year, in April, May, and June: Seldom have
above five young ones, and not under four. You may take them at ten days old;
if you let them lie too long, they will be sullen. Feed them with sheeps heart
and Egg minced small, in all points like the Nightingale; give them but little
at once, and pretty often, for if you give them too much, they are apt to throw
it up again. Be sure they lie warm, for they are tender birds. When they begin
to be strong, cage them in a Cage, like the Nightingales, lined with bays, and
having Moss at the bottom: And give them sheeps heart and Egg, or the
Nightingales Paste, or Woodlarks meat. In a Trap-cage with a meal-worm you may
take a dozen in a day. The Cock may be known by his Breast being of a deeper
red, and the red going up further upon the Head. He is subject to the Cramp,
and dizziness. For the first give him three or four Meal-worms and Spiders: For
the latter six or seven Earwigs a week.

CHAP. IX. The Nightingale, Luscinia seu Philomela, (...) Graecis.
THe Nightingale, being the chief of all singing birds, is about the bigness of
a Goldfinch or Redstard, long-bodied, of an ounce weight, from Bill-point to
Tail-end seven inches long, and between the extremities of the Wings extended
ten and an half broad. Its color on the upper part, viz. Head, and back is a
pale A Lion color, or deep gold color.
fulvous, with a certain mixture of green, like that of a Redwing. Its Tail is
of a deeper fulvous or red, like a Redstarts. From its red color it took its
name Rossignuolo in Italian. Its Belly is white. The parts under the Wings, the
Breast and Throat are of a darker color, with a tincture of green. In each
Wing it has eighteen quil-feathers, besides the outmost small one, the
interior Webs whereof are livid, the exterior fulvous. The Tail, as we said,
is red, not forked, two inches and an half long, compounded of twelve feathers.
The Bill slender, straight, indifferent long, viz. measuring from the tip to
the angles of the mouth, near an inch, of a dusky color: The upper Chap a
little longer and blacker than the nether, the nether paler, and flesh-coloured
at the root or rise. The Bill for its figure resembles a Thrushes or
Blackbirds. The Tongue is not very short, the mouth yellow within: The Irides
of the Eyes hazel-coloured: The Ears great: The color of the Feet and Claws a
deep flesh. [Olina attributes to the Feet a pale flesh-colors approaching to
white.] But the color varies according to the age, for in young birds it is
fainter, in old ones fuller. The outmost foretoes are very near of equal length
one to another, which the middlemost does much exceed both in thickness and
length. The Heel or Spur is strong, but not long as in Larks. The outmost Toe
beneath is joined to the middle one. The Guts are about ten inches long. The
blind Guts very small.

This bird is not remarkable for any variety or beauty of colors, but well
known from its singing by night. And now that mention has been made of
singing, I cannot forbear to produce and insert the elegant words of that grave
Naturalist Pliny, concerning the Nightingales admirable skill in singing, her
study and contention, the sweetness of her accents, the great variety of her
notes, the harmonious modulation and inflection of her voice; which because I
cannot so render in English but that they must needs lose much of their native
Emphasis and Elegancy, I shall put down in the Language the Author wrote them.
Lusciniis (says he) diebus ac noctibus continuis quindecim garrulus sine
intermissu cantus, densante se frondium germine, non in novissimum digna miratu
ave. Primum tanta vox tam parvo in corpusculo, tam pertinax spiritus. Deinde in
una perfecta musicae scientia modulatus editur sonus: Et nunc continuo spiritu
trahitur in longum, nunc variatur inflexo, nunc distinguitur conciso, copulatur
intorto, promittitur revocato, infuscatur ex inopinato: Interdum and secum ipse
murmurat; plenus, gravis, acutus, creber, extensus, ubi visum est vibrans,
summus, medius, imus, breviterque omnia tam parvulis in faucibus, quae tot
exquisitis tibiarum tormentis ars hominum excogitavit: Ut non sit dubium hanc
suavitatem praemonstratam. Ac ne quis dubitet artis esse, plures singulis sunt
cantus, nec iidem omnibus, sed sui cuique. Certant inter se, palamque animosa
contentio est. Victa morte finit saepe vitam, spiritu prius deficiente quam
cantu. Meditantur aliae juniores, versusque quos imitentur accipiunt. Audit
discipula intention magna and reddit, vicibusque reticent. Intelligitur
emendatae correctio, and in docente quaedam reprehensio. Thus Pliny.

The Rhetorical Harangues of Modern Writers in commendation of the Nightingale
I studiously omit, since almost all they have concerning it is owing to Pliny,
being either repeated in the same words, or a few only changed; or else
composed in imitation of what we have delivered out of him. These things,
though with me they scarce obtain belief, yet will they seem very credible, if
compared with what Gesner, from the relation of a certain friend of his,
delivers concerning the admirable faculty of these birds in imitating of humane
speech. To these things (says he) let me add a story which a friend of mine, a
very learned and credible person, wrote to me.

Because you are writing of Birds, I will tell you something concerning
Nightingales imitating men's voice, and repeating their discourses, which is
indeed wonderful, and almost incredible, but yet most true, and which I my self
heard with these Ears, and had experience of, this last Diet at Ratisbone in
the year 1546. whilst I lodged there in a common Inn at the sign of the Golden
Crown. Our Host had three Nightingales, placed separately, so that each was
shut up singly by it self in a dark Cage. It happened that at that time, being
the Spring of the year, when those birds are wont to sing indefatigably, and
almost incessantly; I was so afflicted with the Stone, that I could sleep but
very little all night. Then about and after Midnight, when there was no noise
in the house, but all still, you might have heard strange janglings and
emulations of two Nightingales, talking one with another, and plainly imitating
men's discourses. For my part I was almost astonished with wonder. For they in
the nightseason, when all was whist and quiet, in conference together produced
and repeated whatever they had heard in the day time from the Guests talking
together, and had thought upon. Those two of them which were most notable, and
masters of this Art, were scarce ten foot distant one from the other: The third
hung more remote, so that I could not so well hear it as I lay in bed. But
those two it is wonderful to tell, how they provoked one another, and by
answering invited and drew one another to speak. Yet did they not confound
their words, talking both together, but rather utter them alternately, or by
course. But besides the daily discourse, which they had lately heard of the
Guests, they did chant out especially two stories one to the other for a long
time, even from Midnight till Morning, so long as there was no noise of men
stirring, and that with that native modulation and various inflection of their
notes, that no man, unless he were very attentive and heedful, would either
have expected from those little Creatures, or easily observed. When I asked the
Host, whether their Tongues had been slit, or they taught to speak any thing?
He answered no; whether he had observed or did understand what they sung in the
night? He likewise denied that. The same said the whole Family. But I who could
not sleep whole nights together, did greedily and attentively hearken to the
birds, greatly indeed admiring their industry and contention. One of the
stories was concerning the Tapster, or Servant of the house.
House-knight (as they call them) and his Wife, who refused to follow him going
into the Wars, as he desired her. For the Husband endeavored to persuade his
wife, as far as I understand by those birds, in hope of prey, that she would
leave her service in that Inn, and go along with him into the Wars. But she,
refusing to follow him, did resolve either to stay at Ratisbone, or go away to
Nurenberg. For there had been an earnest and long contention between them about
this matter, but (as far as I understood) no body being present besides, and
without the privity of the Master of the House; and all this Dialogue the birds
repeated. And if by chance in their wrangling they cast forth any unseemly
words, and that ought rather to have been suppressed and kept secret, the
Birds, as not knowing the difference between modest and immodest, honest and
filthy words, did out with them. This dispute and wrangling the Birds did often
repeat in the night time, as which (as I guessed) did most firmly stick in
their memories, and which they had well conned and thought upon. The other was
a History or Prediction of the War of the Emperor against the Protestants,
which was then imminent. For as it were presaging or prophesying they seemed to
chant forth the whole business as it afterward fell out. They did also with
that story mingle what had been done before against the Duke of Brunswick. But
I suppose those Birds had all from the secret conferences of some Noblemen and
Captains, which as being in a public Inn, might frequently have been had in
that place where the Birds were kept. These things (as I said) they did in the
night, especially after twelve of the clock, when there was a deep silence,
repeat. But in the daytime for the most part they were silent, and seemed to
do nothing but meditate upon, and revolve with themselves what the Guests
conferred together about either at Table, or else as they walked. I verily had
never believed our Pliny writing so many wonderful things concerning these
little Creatures, had I not my self seen with my Eyes, and heard them with my
ears uttering such things as I have related. Neither yet can I of a sudden
write all, or call to remembrance every particular that I have heard.

The Nightingale is very impatient of cold, and therefore in Wintertime either
hides it self in some lurking place, or flies away into hot Countries. Ireland
(as Boterus relates) is altogether destitute of Nightingales; which whether it
be true or not I cannot tell. In the South part of England in Summer time they
are very frequent, but in the North more rare. Some build upon the ground at
hedg-bottoms, others in thick green bushes and shrubs. They lay four or five
Eggs.

It is called in Italian, Rossingnuolo, from its red or fulvous color; or (as
Aldrovandus rather thinks) from the diminutive Latin word, Lusciniola.

In Italy among those little birds, which growing fat in the Autumn are sold
indiscriminately for Beccafico's, the Nightingale is one.

It breeds in the Springtime about the month of May, building its Nest of the
leaves of trees, straws and moss. It seldom sings near its Nest for fear of
discovering it, but for the most part about a stones cast distant.

It is proper to this Bird at his first coming (says Olina) to occupy or seize
upon one place as its Freehold, into which it will not admit any other
Nightingale but its Mate.

It haunts for the most part in cool or shady places, where are little Rivulets
of water, such as are Quick-set hedges, small groves, and bushes, where are no
very high trees, for it delights in no high trees except the Oak.

Additions to the History of the Nightingale out of Olina, and others.
. 1. The choice of the Nestlings, and how to take and order them for singing.
MAke choice of such to bring up for singing as are bred earliest in the
Spring; because, 1. They prove the best singers, as having more time to con and
practice their notes before Winter. 2. They are easiest reared, and become
strong to endure the cold, having mued their feathers before Autumn, whereas
the second brood, muing them later, are subject to be overrun with Vermin,
and often surprised and killed by the cold, while they are bare of feathers. 3.
Such consequently prove more healthful and long-lived.

The young Nightingales (says Olina) must be taken when they are well
feathered; [saith a late English Author, when they are indifferently well
feathered, not too little, nor too much: if too much, they will be sullen; and
if too little, if you keep them not very warm, they will die with cold, and
then also they will be much longer in bringing up;] and together with the Nest
put in the bottom of a little basket made of straw, covering the Nest so that
they cannot get out, not tangle or double their Legs; keeping them at first in
a quiet place where few people resort, feeding them eight or ten times a day
with heart of a Veal or Weather raw, well cleansed and freed from skin, films,
sinews, and fat, cut into small pieces of the bigness of a writing Pen. [Our
English Author mingles a like quantity of white bread, soaked in water, and a
little squeezed, with the flesh, chopping both small as if it were for minced
meat,] giving to each bird upon a sticks end two or three small pieces [of the
quantity of a gray Pease] at a time. Make them drink two or three times a day,
by putting to them a little Cotton-wool dipped in water, on the end of a stick:
Keeping them in this manner covered, till they begin to find their feet, and
leap out of the Nest: Then put them in a Cage with fresh straw, fine moss or
hay at the bottom, [lining the Pearches with green bays, for they are very
subject to the cramp at the first] feeding and ordering them as before, till
you see they begin to feed themselves, which you shall perceive by observing
them pick the meat from the stick; then take of the heart some pieces of the
bigness of a nut, and fasten them to the Cage sides. When they are come to feed
themselves, give them four or five times a day a gobbet or two. Let them have a
cup of water very clean and bright, changing the water in Summertime twice a
day, doing the same by the flesh, that it grow not sower nor stink. When they
are fully grown, put into little boxes with stone bottoms, on one side of the
Cage crumbs of Paste, such as we shall anon describe, and on the other side
Sheeps heart, such as was before mentioned. When they begin to moult (says our
English Author) give them half an Egg hard boiled, and the other half sheeps
heart, with a little Saffron mixed in the water, for you must not make it too
stiff, nor too limber. Give them no Duck-eggs: For I had six Nightingales
killed one night with a Duck-egg.

Among these Nestlings the Cock may be known from the Hen by this token: How to
know the Cocks from the Hens.
After he has eaten he will get up the Perch, and begin to tune or record to
himself, which you shall perceive by the motion of his Throat, whereas the Hen
at first records little, or not at all. Moreover, the Cock is wont to stand
sometimes for a good space upon one foot; otherwhiles to leap or run furiously
to and fro in the Cage, and to draw out his warbling Notes with a long
continuance. Some are of opinion that these Nestlings sing not comparably to
the wild Nightingales, because they want the teaching of their Dams. Wherefore
to make them prove good, it is convenient to place them near one that has the
right wild note. But experience confutes this observation, these proving as
well as those: Nature without any other teacher instructing them to utter the
notes proper to their own kind. Herein I must crave leave to dissent from
Olina, for Authors generally agree, and experience confirms it, that old
Nightingales do teach their Young their Airs and that of all birds Nightingales
emulate one another, and other birds, yea, and men too, in singing most.

For finding the Nest where the Cock sings, and if so be he sings long in a
place; How to find the Nest.
then the Hen sits not far off; but if he has young ones he will now and then
be missing, and then the Hen when you come near her Nest will sweet and cur:
And if you have searched long and cannot find it, stick a meal-worm or two upon
a thorn, and observe which way the Cock carries them, and stand still, or lie
down, and you will hear the Young when the old one feeds them, (for they make a
great noise for so small a bird.) When you have found the Nest if they be not
fledged enough, touch them not, for if you do they will never tarry in the Nest.

These Nestlings sing for the most part in the Autumn, and sometimes in the
Winter, if they be kept in a warm Chamber, or in a place where the air is
temperate. Olina.

. II. How to take Branchers, and old Nightingales, and to order them when taken.
WHen you have found the birds haunts, they may be taken by a Trap-cage, or
Net-trap; described in Olina, and in the forementioned English Author; baited
with a meal-worm, or other worms or Maggots. So soon as you have taken the
Nightingale, tie the tips of his wings with some brown thread, not straining it
too hard, that he may not have strength to beat himself against the top and
wires of the Cage, for by this order he will grow tame sooner, and be more apt
to eat his meat. You shall shut him up in a Cage covered above half with green
Bays, or brown paper, [Olina says, covered with paper, and for a while without
Perches] or else turn the Cage from the light in some private place, that at
first he be not disturbed, to make him wilder than he would be. Birds taken in
April must be fed seven or eight times a day, for then they are apter by half
^o die for want of food than in July or August.
Feed him five or six times at the least every day with sheeps heart and Egg
shred small and fine, mingling amongst the same some red Ants, and three or
four red Earthworms. And because no Nightingale will at first eat any sheeps
heart or Paste, or hard Egg, but live meat, as Worms, Ants, Caterpillars, or
Flies; therefore taking him out in your hand, you must open his Bill with a
stick made thin at one end, and holding it open, give him a gobbet about the
bigness of a gray pease: Then when he has swallowed that, open his Bill and
give him another, till he has had four or five such bits: Then set him some
meat mingled with store of Ants, that when he goes to pick up the Ants he may
eat some of the sheeps heart and Eggs with it. At the first you may shred three
or four meal-worms in his meat, the better to entice him, that so he may
therewith eat some of the sheeps heart by little and little; at last when you
perceive him to eat, give him the less Ants in his meat, and at last nothing
but sheeps heart and Eggs. [Olina makes no mention of forcing meat down his
throat, but only laying it by him in the Cage, and advises to tie or fasten
some of heart to Maggots and Caterpillars, to inure the bird to eat flesh.] Our
Author also, if the bird besullen, advises to get some Gentles or Maggots, and
take your paste and roll it up in pieces like to little worms about half an
inch long, and put amongst them some Ants, and put your Maggots at the bottom
of your pan, then put your paste rolled like worms upon the Maggots, and they
stirring at the bottom will make the paste move as if it were alive; which will
cause the Nightingale to eat it more readily; and when he has tasted the meat
made of sheeps heart, and paste two or three times, he then is not apt to
forsake it. But whereas he says, that Nightingales feeding only upon live meat
do not know that any thing is for food but what stirs, he is surely therein
mistaken, for (as Olina observes) they feed upon Figs, and some sorts of
berries, when wild, as well as upon Insects. Such birds as you take in April
our Author advises when you go a taking to carry a bottom bag with you, and
some meat in a Gally-pot to feed them abroad, for if they be over-fasted they
seldom live, they requiring to be fed every hour: Also to put or cut their
feathers from their vent, otherwise they will be subject to clog and bake up
their vent, which is sudden death. Birds, that are long a feeding, and make no
curring or sweeting for eight or ten days, seldom prove good; but on the
contrary, they give great hopes of proving well when they take their meat
kindly, and are familiar, and not buckish, and sing quickly, and learn to eat
of themselves without much trouble. This is a sure token of their proving
excellent birds: For I have had some birds feed in twelve hours after taking of
them, and sing in two or three days, and those never proved bad. When you shall
find that the Nightingale eats well by himself, and sings often without seeming
to be disturbed at every little noise, you shall by little and little put back
the green Bays or Paper wherewith the Cage was covered, putting some Greens in
the opened part.

Now to know the Cocks from the Hens among the wild ones, Olina gives us these
How to discern the Cocks from the Hens.
marks of the Cock, That it has a bigger Eye, and rounder and greater Head, a
longer Bill, thicker Legs, a longer Tail, and of something a brighter red. Our
English Author will not allow these for sufficient notes of distinction; and
yet afterward he dare not deny but all taken together may be sufficient. He
adds, that Nightingales taken in August are most certainly to be discerned by
the singing: And as for those that are taken in April, your knowledge, says
he, rests in these observations: First, when you think you have taken the
bird you heard sing, call again, and if the Cock answers and sings again, then
you have taken the Hen, and not the Cock; but if you find the Cock not to sing,
then be assured you have taken him. Also you may know him by the lower parts of
the Sex, which the Cock puts forth, but the Hen does not. If you take a bird
about the middle of May, or beginning of June, the Breast of the Hen will be
bare with sitting, and all full of scurf, whereas the Cocks Breast is all
wellfeathered, without any bareness or scurf.

This Author says, that he has often proved, that old Nightingales are far
perfecter, and far excellenter in their songs than any Nestling or Brancher
whatsoever, and will come to sing as lavish and as often, and with care and a
little trouble will know you, and be as familiar also.

Branchers (says Olina) are better than Nestlings, and will come to be as
familiar, and very often sing all Winter. [Understand it in Italy where their
Winters are short and mild.]

. III. What Cages are best for Nightingales.
THe most convenient Cages for Nightingales are those which have the Wires only
before, and all the other parts made up, and the top lined with Bays, [the sides
also against Winter] partly for warmth, the Nightingale being a very tender
bird, and partly also because being buckish he is apt to mount up and strike
his head against the top-wires or wood, and endanger the dashing out his brains.

. IV. How to make a Paste to feed Nightingales, being also good for the Wren,
Robin-red-breast, Woodlark, Skie-lark, Throstle, and other birds.
TAke of the flower of Chiches [or horse-beans] finely sifted two or three
pounds, according to the number of birds you keep: Of sweet Almonds blanched
and beaten fine half a pound, of fresh Butter [without any salt in it] four
ounces, three or four Yolks of Eggs boiled hard and pounded. Put these
ingredients in a Pan of the fashion of that they make Confects in. Set the Pan
on a Trevet over a fire of Charcoal, taking care that it be not smoaked, and
stirring it constantly with a wooden stick or Spathule, that it burn not to the
bottom till it be sufficiently boiled. Then take a pound of Honey, and three
ounces of Butter, and melt it in any little Vessel, still scumming of it; and
when it is well melted and boiled, let your assistant, with a Ladle having a
hole or two in the bottom, take it up, and pour it upon the Paste, gently
moving his Ladle up and down, you in the mean while continuing to stir your
Paste till it be well incorporated and grained. This Paste serves for the
Summer: For the Winter, take a pretty quantity of Saffron and mingle with the
Paste, for it is hot and opening, and will maintain the bird more cheerful and
lively. Then take it from the fire, and pass it through a Sieve or Colander
with round holes of the bigness of an ordinary Tare. That which will not pass
through of it self force through with your hand. Then spread it upon a Table,
covered with a white clean cloth, to dry; and when it is sufficiently dry, put
it up in a Pot. If it be too dry, you may moisten and mollify it with a little
honey. This Paste will last three or four, and sometimes six months, and serves
for all sorts of small softbeaked birds.

Many other sorts of Paste may be made like this of less charge; as instead of
Almonds to use Walnuts, etc. These Pastes are best kept in earthen Vessels of
white ware, covered close with Parchment, and set in a place rather moist than
dry.

. V. The Nightingales diseases, and their cures.
FIrst, note that the principal thing which causes most diseases, not only in
Nightingales, but in other birds kept for singing, is want of keeping them
clean and neat, whereby they clog their feet, which causes the Claws of several
to rot off, and breeds the Cramp and Gout in others, and makes them never
thrive, nor delight in themselves. No birds can be kept too clean and neat.
Therefore be sure to let them have twice a week gravel at the bottom of the
Cage, and let it be very dry when you put it in, for then it will not be
subject to clog.

The Nightingale in Autumn is apt to grow extraordinary fat and foggy; [I have
had several when fat to be three weeks and not eat one bit of meat] to remedy
which during that time give him two or three times in a week worms taken out of
a Pigeonhouse, two or three at a time, or two or three field-Spiders a day,
which will purge and cleanse them extraordinarily. Upon the falling of his fat
he must be kept warm, and have some Saffron given him in his meat or water. To
raise them when they are very lean and poor, give them new figs chopped small
among their meat, continuing no longer than till they have recovered their
flesh.

Nightingales that have been kept two or three years in a Cage are very subject
to the Gout: Which when you shall perceive, take them out of their Cage, and
anoint their feet with fresh Butter or Capons grease: Do so three or four days
together and it is a certain cure for them.

Another thing that Nightingales are subject to, is breakings out about their
Eyes and Neb; for which likewise use your fresh Butter or Capons grease.

There also happens unto the Nightingale a straitness or strangling of the
breast; which comes very often for want of care in making of their meat, by
mincing fat therewith; and you may perceive it by the beating pain not before
accustomed that he abides in this place, and also by his often gaping: Other
whiles this disease happens by reason of some sinew or thread of the sheeps
heart (for want of well shredding) hanging in his throat, or clasping about his
Tongue, which causes him to forsake his meat, and grow very poor in a short
time, especially if it be in the Spring time, or when he is in song. When you
shall perceive it by his gaping, etc. take him gently out of his Cage, and open
his bill with a quill or pin, and unloosen any string or piece of flesh that
may hang about his tongue or throat: After you have taken it a way, give him
some white Sugar Candy in his water, or else dissolve it, and moisten his meat,
which is a present remedy to any thing that is amiss.

If they grow melancholy, put into their water some white Sugar Candy; and if
that will not do, about six or eight Chives of Saffron, continuing withal to
give them the Paste and sheeps heart shred very fine, and also three or four
meal-worms a day, and a few Ants and Ants Eggs: Also boil a new-laid Egg, and
chop it small, and strew it among the Ants and their Eggs.

. VI. How to provoke a Nightingale to sing.
TO make Nightingales sing more than ordinarily, or at such times as they are
not wont, give them in Wintertime Paste of Pine kernels pounded, and in their
drinking-cup a chive or two of Saffron: For those two things by heating them,
render them cheerful and brisk, without inducing any noxious alteration, and so
excite them to sing. That sympathy also which this bird has with Music both
vocal and instrumental is of exceeding force to this purpose. And therefore if
in the Chamber where she is kept there be a consort of sweet sounds or voices,
she is marvelously provoked to sing. Many stories we have of Nightingales
emulating and striving to outvie one another, and other birds, yea, and men too
in singing: Nay, that sometimes a bird will strain her note so to exceed that
of her Antagonist, that she will fall down dead upon the spot with contending
and over-straining her self.

Olina has the receipt of an odoriferous unguent to stir up a Nightingale to
sing.

Take of Civet not sophisticate twenty grains, Benjamin and Storax calamitae,
of each three grains, mingle these together in a Mortar in the form of a soft
ointment; Then diligently observe the bush and particular branch, on which the
Nightingale is wont to sit and sing, and there making as it were a little shelf
of the leaves and boughs, lay thereon some meal-worms, and anoint the branch
next to your shelf with this Unguent. The Nightingale when he returns from
feeding, will presently fly up to his bough, and finding there the meal-worms
will fall a eating of them, and senting the odor of the Ointment will begin to
sing, and being as it were intoxicated with the perfume, will not give over,
nor stir from the place though you take the boughs from about him. For as the
Nightingale exceeds all other birds in singing, so does he also in the
exquisiteness of his sent: Wherefore also when wild he does most willingly
haunt where sweet herbs grow: And is particularly delighted in Musk, so that a
grain or two of true Musk put in Cotton, and that in a small Reed serving for
him to perch on in his Cage, will provoke him to sing.

CHAP. X. The Black-cap: Atricapilla seu Ficedula, Aldrov. called by the
Greeks, (...) and (...), by the Italians, Capo Negro.
THis is a very small bird, not weighing above half an ounce: Its length from
the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail is six inches; its breadth between
the ends of the Wings stretched out nine. The top of the Head is black, whence
it took its name: The Neck cinereous; the whole back of a dark green. The
quill-feathers in each Wing eighteen in number, of a dusky color, save that
their edges are a little green. The Tail has twelve feathers, two inches and
an half long, and almost equal, sharp-pointed, of a dusky color, with a little
tincture of green. The nether part of the Neck, the Throat, and upper part of
the Breast are of a pale ash color: The lower Belly white, tinctured with
yellow. The Bill straight, slender, black, longer, and lesser than in the
Titmice: The Tongue cloven and rough: The Feet of a lead color, the Claws
black. The outmost Toe below is fastened to the middlemost. The head of the
Female is of a brown or chestnut color rather than black.

This bird is frequent in Italy, it is also found in England, but more rarely,
Turner in vain contradicting.

Gesner says, that the first Summer the head of these birds is red, and
afterward grows black, and that in the Cocks only, for in the Hens it continues
always red. The Ancients report, that the Black-caps [Atricapillae] in the
beginning of Autumn are changed into Ficedulae, or Beccafigos by the mutation
of their voice and color; from whom, till I be assured by experience, I must
crave leave to dissent.

* The fourth Beccafigo of Aldrovand.
The Beccafico described by Aldrovand in the fourth and fifth place in his
Chapter of Ficedulae may perchance differ specifically from our Black-cap. On
the upper side, Head, Back, Wings, and Tail it is of a brown color, inclining
to a chestnut. The Female on the nether side is all white; the Male from white
declines to cinereous. The quil-feathers of the Wings in the Male are black,
with some white ones intermixed: In the Female they incline to a chestnut color,
as does also the Tail, which in the Cock is black. Contrariwise, the Feet in
the Cock incline to a chestnut color, in the Hen are black.

Beccasigo's abound in Candy, as Bellonius witnesses, and also in the Island of
Cyprus, where they are salted up in great numbers, and transported into other
Countries. With us in England they are called by a general name, Cyprus-birds,
and are in no less esteem with our Merchants for the delicacy of their taste,
than they were of old with the Italians: And that deservedly, (says
Aldrovandus) for feeding upon two of the choicest fruits, viz. Figs and Grapes,
they must needs become a more wholesome food than other birds, yielding a better
nourishment, and of more easy concoction. Beccafigo's are accounted best and
most in season in the Autumn, as being then fattest by reason of the plenty of
meat that season affords them. At which time they are highly prized and coveted
by the Italians even now adays.

CHAP. XI. The gloden-crown'd Wren: Regulus cristatus, Aldrov. lib. 17. cap. 1.
The Trochilus of Pliny and Hist. Animal. lib. 9. cap. 11.
Aristotle, who also calls it (...) and (...). Others call it by a diminutive
word (...). In Tuscany it is called Fior Rancio, that is, the Marigold Flower,
from the color of its Crest.
THis is the least of all birds found with us in England, weighing not more
than one single dram. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the
Claws is four inches and an half, to the end of the Tail four and a quarter.
The breadth of the Wings extended six and three quarters. The top of the Head
is adorned with a most beautiful bright spot, (which they call a crest) of a
deep Saffron or pale Scarlet color. Hence it got those ambitious titles of
Little King and Tyrant.
Regulus and Tyrannus. This Crest or Crown (if you please so to call it) it can
when it lists, by corrugating its forehead, and drawing the sides of the spot
together, wholly conceal and render invisible. It is of an oblong figure, and
extended directly through the middle of the Head from the Bill toward the
Neck. The edges of it on both sides are yellow; the whole is environed with a
black line. The sides of the Neck are of a lovely shining yellowish green
color. The Eyes are encompassed with white. The Neck and all the Back from a
dark green incline to yellow. The Breast is of a sordid white. [In the bird
that I J. R. described the Breast and Belly were dashed with a faint green.]
The Wings were concave, not much unlike to a Chassinches Wings. The
quil-feathers of the Wings, as in almost all small birds, were eighteen, all of
a dusky color, only their exterior edges yellowish, and their interior
whitish. The tips also of the three next to the body were white. But what was
most especially notable in the Wings of this bird was, that the middle
quill-feathers, or indeed all excluding the five outmost, and the three inmost,
had their exterior Webs, as far as they appear above the covert feathers, to a
considerable breadth black, so that when the Wings are shut they make a black
spot of a good bigness about the middle of each Wing. The outmost quil-feather
was very short and little. The covert-feathers of the first row have white
tips, all together making a white line across the Wing. Above also toward the
ridge of the Wing is a white spot.

The Tail is made up of twelve sharp-pointed feathers, an inch and half long,
not forcipate, of a dusky color, only the exterior borders of the feathers
are of a yellowish green.

The Bill is slender, straight, black, half an inch long. The feet yellowish,
and the Claws of a not much different color. The Tongue long, sharp, and
cloven. The Irides of the Eyes of a hazel color.

The stomach small, musculous, and full of Insects; whence it is manifest (as
Aristotle rightly says) that it is a vermivorousbird. The Female, as in most
other birds, has not so fair colors.

We saw of these birds first to be sold in the Market at Nurenberg: Afterward
our worthy Friend Mr. Fr. Jessop of Broomhall in Sheffield Parish, whom we have
occasion often to mention in this Work, sent us of them, which he had found and
caught in the Mountainous Woods about Highloe, near Hathersedge in the Peak of
Derbyshire. The same also found them here in Middleton Park in Warwickshire,
where he shot them and brought them to us. They abide and haunt for the most
part on the tops of trees, especially Oaks.

What is spoken of the antipathy and feud between this bird and the Eagle we
look upon as an Old Wives Fable. Aldrovandus writes, that she lays six or seven
Eggs together before she sits, not bigger than Pease.

CHAP. XII. A little yellowish Bird without name, called by Aldrovandus Regulus
non cristatus, perchance the Asilus of Bellonius, or the Luteola of Turner.
THis is equal to, or somewhat bigger than the crested Wren, weighs two
drachms, being in length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail, or,
which is all one, the end of the Claws five inches, in breadth between the
extremities of the Wings extended seven.

All its upper side, save the Wings and Tail, is of a dusky or cinereous
color, tinctured with green. The Rump is greener than the rest of the Back. A
yellowish line is produced from the Nosthrils above the Eyes almost to the
hinder part of the Head. The nether side, viz. the Throat, Breast, and Belly is
white with a dash of green, and sometimes yellow. The Wing and Tail-feathers
are dusky, having their outer edges green. The feathers under the bastard-wing,
and the coverts of the underside of the Wings, from green decline to a lovely
yellow. Each Wing has eighteen prime feathers, the outmost of which is very
short and small. The Tail is two inches long, not forked, made up of twelve
sharp-pointed feathers.

Its Bill is slender, straight, sharp, half an inch long, the upper Mandible
being dusky on the outside; but the angles of the Mouth are yellowish: The
mouth within yellow. The Nosthrils are large: The Legs and Feet small, of a
dusky Amber color. The outmost fore-toe at bottom grows to the middle one. Its
Gizzard is small. It sings like a Grasshopper, and does much frequent
Willow-trees. It is much in motion, continually creeping up and down trees and
shrubs, and sings with a querulous note. It builds its Nest of moss, and
straws, and a few feathers and hairs within. It lays five Eggs all over
besprinkled with red specks.

The birds of this kind vary in color, some being of a paler, some of a deeper
green or yellow: in some the Belly is white, without any tincture of green.

Mr. Jessop set us a bird in all points exactly like that here described, and
whose note The greater not crested Regulus.
also resembled the noise of a Grasshopper, but twice as big.

Now that the Reader may judge whether the Asilus of Bellonius be the same with
this bird, as we suppose, we will subjoyn Bellonius his description thereof.

The Asilus, Avium, lib. 7. cap. 6.
says he, is of all birds the least, except the Regulus and Tyrannus (that is,
according to him, the common Wren, and the crested Wren) at least there is none
less than it. It is almost always singing. It would be like to the crested
Wren, were not the crest on its Head yellow. And yet it is yellow in the folds
of its Wings, and in their extremities, as also upon the Back, and about the
Tail. The Legs, Feet, Claws, and Bill are black; but both the extremities of
the Bill have something of yellow. It is long, weak, and fit to catch Insects,
upon which it feeds, refusing grain, and lives in the shady places of Woods.
Aristotle mentions a little bird by the name of (...), Gaza renders it Asilus,
thought to be so called because it is not much bigger than the Insect Oestrus.

CHAP. XIII. The Wren, Passer troglodites of Aldrovand, by Turner and Bellonius
called falsely Regulus.
IT weighs three drachms, being extended from the point of the Bill to the end
of the Tail four inches and an half: The Wings stretched out equal to six inches
and an half. The Head, Neck, and Back are of a dark spadiceous color,
especially the Rump and Tail. The Back, Wings, and Tail are varied with cross
black lines. The Throat is of a pale yellow, the middle of the Breast whiter:
Below it has black transverse lines, as have also the sides. The lower Belly
is of a dusky red. The tips of the second row of Wing-feathers are marked with
three or four small white spots. The tips of the covert-feathers of the Tail
are alike spotted. The number of quil-feathers in each Wing is eighteen. The
Tail, which for the most part it holds erect, is made up of twelve feathers.

The Bill is half an inch long, slender, yellowish beneath, dusky above: the
Mouth withinside yellow: The Irides of the Eyes hazel-coloured. The outer Toes
are fastened to the middle one as far as the first joint. It creeps about hedges
and holes, whence it is not undeservedly called Troglodites. It makes but short
flights, and if it be driven from the hedges, may easily be tired and run down.

It builds its Nest sometimes by the Walls of houses, in the back-sides of
Stables, or other Outhouses covered with straw, but more commonly in Woods and
Hedges, without, of Moss, within, of hairs and feathers. This Nest is of the
figure of an Egg, erect upon one end, and has in the middle of the side a door
or aperture, by which it goes in and out. Being kept tame it sings very
sweetly, and with a higher and louder voice than one would think for its
strength and bigness; and that especially in the Month of May, for then it
builds and breeds. It lays nine or ten, and sometimes more Eggs at a sitting.

A late English Writer tells us, that he has had eighteen Eggs out of one
Nest, and sixteen young ones out of another. It is strange to admiration that
so small a bodied bird should cover so great a number of Eggs, and more
strange, that it should feed such a company of young, and not miss one bird,
and that in the dark also. They breed twice a year, about the latter end of
April, and beginning of June, or middle of it. The Young are to be fed and
reared like the young Nightingales, giving them often, and but one or two
morsels at a time. Give them once in two or three days a Spider or two.

It perfectly cures the Stone of the Kidneys or Bladder (as Aetius writes)
being salted and eaten raw; or being burnt in a pot close-covered, and the
ashes of one whole bird taken at once, either by it self, or with a little A
kind of Mercury.
Phyllon and Pepper; or lastly, being roasted whole, only the feathers plucked
off and cast away.

All the Modern Writers of the History of birds before Gesner take this bird to
be the Regulus of the Ancients.

CHAP. XIV. The Humming Bird, Guainumbi of Marggrave, and Johnston in his
Natural History of Birds: Guaiminibique of Jo. de Laet in his Description of
the West Indies, Book 15. Chap. 7. Gonambuch, or Gouambuch of Lerius in the
eleventh Chapter of his American History, and of Thevet in his 48. Chapter of
the singularities of Antartic France; Tomineio of Josephus a Costa in Book 4.
Chap. 37. of his Natural and Moral History of the West Indies, so called
perchance because it is so light, that it weighs only one Spanish Tomino, that
is, twelve grains. Ourissia, (that is, a Sunbeam) or Tomineio of Clusius in
Book 5. of his Exotics, Chap. 7. Passer Mosquitus of Oviedo in his Summary,
Chap. 48. Hoitzitzil of Fr. Hernandez in Book 9. Chap. 11. Rerum medicarum
Novae Hispaniae. Gomarae in Historia de Mexicanae urbis expugnatione, Vicicilin.
THis kind of bird, whose Synonyma we have given, is the least of all birds. It
comprehends under it many Species, or differences of which in general these
things are delivered by those who have written of it.

1. That it moves the Wings with that swiftness, as not to be discerned by the
Eye, so that it seems rather to want Wings; and that as it flies it makes a
humming noise like a Hornet or Be; insomuch that one who should see it flying
by, would take it rather to be a Hornet than a Be: Hence it took its name in
English of humming bird. It will also so poise it self by the help of its Wings
for a long space of time, as if it rested and stirred not, and so, being on the
Wing, suck the flowers with its Bill, for it lights not upon them. But when it
moves from one place to another, it is carried with that velocity like a bullet
through the air, that very often it cannot be seen or discerned as it flies along.

2. That it is fed and nourished with honey, dew, and the juice of flowers,
which it sucks out of them with its Bill, or rather its very long Tongue,
provided and fitted by nature for that use; so that, being taken alive, they
cannot be kept for want of food, but die in a shorttime.

3. That it lies torpid or sleeps in Winter [hanging by the feet on a bough in
some open place, according to Franc. Lopez: The Bill being fastened to the
trunks of Pines or other trees, according to Hernandes and Recchus] and in the
Spring revives or awakens, whence also these birds are called That is, born
again.
Renati by the Inhabitants of the Caribbce Islands, viz. so long, say they, it
continues alive, as the honey-bearing flowers endure, and when they wither and
fail it becomes torpid, and continues without sense or motion for full six
months space until new flowers come. Neither (says Hernandez) is this an idle
tale, or such a thing whereof one may well doubt: For this bird has been more
than once kept in a Chamber fastened to the The word is Stipiti, which also may
signify a stake, or any truncheon of wood.
stock of a tree, and when it had hung as it were dead for six months, at what
time Nature had appointed, it revived, and being let go flew away into the
neighboring fields. Believe it who will, I am not wont rashly or hastily to
give credit to such relations: Though I know it is taken generally for an
undoubted truth, and I find our Mr. Josseline in his New Englands rarities to
report it for such. And truly if it lives only upon what it sucks out of
flowers, in the Northern parts of America, when flowers fail, it must either
lie torpid, or fly into the hotter Countries. But in the more Southern parts of
America (as in Brasil) Marggravius writes, that these birds are found all the
year long in the Woods in great numbers.

4. Of the feathers of these and other birds of beautiful colors the Indians
make the likenesses (for Pictures we must not call them) of Saints, and other
things so dexterously, and artificially, and to the life that one would think
they were drawn with a Pencil in colors, of which we have seen many in the
Cabinets of the Virtuosi.

5. Although almost all the Spaniards who have written of the West India
matters, have made mention of this bird, yet (which is strange) do they take no
notice at all of its singing: Only Lerius and Thevetus, both Frenchmen, do
attribute to it so high and sweet a note, that it gives not place to our
Nightingale, which no man, who should not hear and see it, could easily be
persuaded, could possibly proceed from so small a body. Marggravius affirms,
that they do not sing, but cry, Screp, screp, screp, with one tone, and that
almost continually, like Sparrows.

Marggravius describes nine sorts of this bird in the fifth Book of his Natural
History of Brasil, Chap. 4.

1. The length of the whole body of this first kind from the beginning of the
Head (where the Bill is inserted) to the rise of the Tail is two inches. The
Head, together with the feathers, is of the bigness of a mean-sized sweet
Cherry: The Neck is three quarters of an inch long; the body an inch and a
quarter. The body, together with the feathers, is scarce equal in bigness to a
Spanish Olive. It has a slender, and very sharp, round, even, straight Bill,
yet toward the end a little inclining downward, an inch and half long. The
color of this Bill is black, excepting the lower Chap toward the rise, where
it is reddish. It has a double or cloven Tongue, very small or slender, like a
fine silken thread, white, long, so that it can thrust it forth far beyond the
Bill: Small black Eyes; very small and short Legs and Feet, of a black color:
Four Toes in each foot, three standing forward, and one backward, armed with
long semilunar, very sharp, black Claws. It has a straight Tail, an inch long,
consisting for the most part of four feathers. The Wings, which are of two
inches length, reach almost to the end of the Tail. Nature has shown a
singular Art in the composure of the Wing-feathers. From the rise of the Wings
for about three quarters of an inch there is a double row of feathers one
longer than the other, and the feathers are put one upon another, as it were
short wings upon long ones. Then after these feathers come the Wing-feathers
(which are about ten) the subsequent interior being still longer than the
precedent exterior, so that the inmost, determining the end of the Wing, is
the longest of all. These Wings being spread it can fly a long time, and rest
in the same place, as it were hanging in the air. As it flies it makes a noise
like a Bruchus, or more truly, like a linen Spinning-wheel, Hur, hur, hur. The
feathers of the Wings spread appear very thin and transparent. The color of
the feathers of the whole Head, the upper side of the Neck, the sides, the
whole Back, and the beginning of the Wings is wonderfully resplendent, so that
it cannot be well represented by any Painter, for with a green, such as is seen
in the Necks of Peacocks and Mallards, a golden, flame-colour, and yellow are
strangely mixed, so that being exposed to the Sunbeams it shines admirably. In
the Throat, the lower side of the Neck, the breast, and all the lower Belly,
and the upper Legs are white feathers, wherewith underneath the Neck are
feathers of an excellent color, dispersedly intermixed. In the Belly beneath
the white feathers lie black ones. The beginning of the Wings was, as I said,
of an admirable rare color, all the rest of the Wing brown, and of a shining
spadiceous. The Tail consists of feathers of a blue color, like polished
Steel. They make their Nests in the boughs of trees, of the bigness of a
Holland Schilling. They lay very white Eggs, two for the most part, of an oval
figure, not bigger than a Pease.

2. The second sort is more beautiful than the first, of the same bigness and
figure. Yet is its Bill shorter, viz. of an inch long, of the same color and
figure with that of the former. The Tongue is the same, as also the Eyes, Legs,
Feet, and figure of the Wings and Tail. The color of the feathers in the Head,
upper side of the Neck, Back, Wings, and Tail like to that of the former: But
in the Throat or underside of the Neck, the whole Breast, and lower Belly, to
the very end of the body of so elegant and shining a green, with a golden
color, enterchangeably mixed, that they glister wonderfully. Near the Vent is a
spot of a good bigness, in respect of the bulk of the bird, consisting of pure
white feathers.

3. The third is lesser than all the rest. From the beginning of the Head, or
insertion of the Bill to the rise of the Tail two inches and an half long: The
Neck is almost one inch long: The Head not great: The Body an inch and half
long. The Bill a little more than an inch long, black, round, sharp, and almost
straight. The Legs and Feet like those of the rest. The feathers also of the
Body and Wings are alike disposed, but differently colored. It has a Tail
longer than any of the rest, somewhat more than three inches, consisting of
feathers, of which that which is nearer to its rise is shorter, the second
always longer: The Tail also is forked, and the bird flying spreads it into two
large horns, so that the tips of the horns are an inch and half distant one
from the other. The whole Head and Neck of this bird is of a shining silken
black color, inclining to, or interchanging with blue, as in the Necks of
Mallards. The whole Back and Breast are green, shining enterchangeably with
golden and Seagreen, as in the second kind; and near the vent is also the like
spot of white feathers. The Wings are of a liver-colour. The Tail is of a
blackish blue, shining like polished Steel blued over.

4. The fourth is a little lesser than the third. The shape of the body and
disposition of the feathers the same, but it is of another color, and differs
also in the Bill and color of the Legs. The Bill is an inch and half long,
bowed downward like a Polonian Sword, round, every where of equal thickness,
and sharp-pointed. The upper part thereof is black, the under yellow, excepting
the tip, which is also black. The top of the Head, the upper side of the Neck,
as also the Wings, are of like color with those of the first kind. The Throat,
the lower side of the Neck, the whole Breast, and lower Belly, from white
incline to a red color. It has a Tail an inch long, ending with the Wings,
consisting of feathers which from black incline to green, having white tips:
The Toes so disposed as the other Species, yet not black, but white or
yellowish, with like semilunar, sharp, and black Claws.

5. The fifth is in bigness equal to the third kind; having a black Bill, a
little more than an inch long, and a little bending downward, black Eyes, as
also Legs and Feet. The Throat, lower side of the Neck, and all the Belly are
covered with black Velvet feathers, having as it were a gloss of shining blue.
Near the Vent is a spot of white feathers. But the black ends of the feathers
on the sides of the Neck, Breast, and Belly shine wonderfully with a rare
mixture of Seawater color, golden and green. All the upper side of the Head
and Neck, and the whole Back are adorned with feathers mixed with golden,
fire-colour, and green, as is also the beginning of the Wings. The rest of the
Wings is of an iron or dusky color. The Tail is a little more than an inch
long, consisting of feathers of an elegant brown, with a gloss of blue. About
the edges these feathers are of the color of polished Steel blued.

6. The sixth is in bigness equal to the fifth; has a Bill of an inch long, a
little bending, white underneath, black above. The whole Head, Neck, Back, and
Belly, and the beginning of the Wings are covered with feathers of an excellent
shining color, consisting as it were of a mixture of much gold, half
fire-colour, and a little green: In brief, shining like the Sun. In the Belly
are a few white feathers mixed. The Legs are black: The Wings blackish: The Tail
almost an inch and half long, handsome and broad, consisting of some feathers of
the same rare color with the rest of the body, some of a mixed color of green
and golden, and white about the edges, some half white, half green, shining
with golden, that is, on one side the shaft white, on the other green.

7. The seventh is a little less than the fifth and sixth kind; has a Bill not
altogether an inch long, being of an ash color all over the body, almost like
a Sparrow, which here and there shines rarely with a mixture of red like a
Rubine.

8. The eighth is the most elegant of all, has a straight, black Bill half an
inch long; a long, double [or cloven] Tongue. Its bigness and shape agrees with
that of the second kind. The whole Head above and upper part of the Neck shine
with an admirable Rubine-colour, as if a Rubine were illustrated by the
Sunbeams: But the Throat and under-side of the Neck do resemble pure,
polished, Hungarian gold, shone upon by the Sunbeams: So that it is impossible
in words perfectly to set forth the likeness of these colors, much less for a
Painter to represent or imitate them. The beginning of the Back is covered with
a Velvet black, the rest with dusky feathers, with which is mixed something of a
dark green. The whole lower Belly is invested with feathers of the same color
with the back, the Wings with a dusky, as in other kinds. Near the Vent it has
a white spot. The Legs are slender and black: The Tail little more than an inch
long, consisting of feathers of a The French word signifies a dead leaf.
feuillemort color, which at the ends are dusky about the edges. The Tail is
broad, which it spreads very wide in flying. The Wings end with the Tail.

9. The ninth is for figure and bigness like the first. Its Bill is black
above, and red underneath. Its whole body shines with that bright green color
mixed with golden, that the Belly of the second sort is of. The Wings are dusky:
The Tail an inch long, pretty broad, consisting of feathers of the color of
polished blue steel.

This Bird is by the Brasilians called by many other names besides Guainumbi,
as Aratica, and Aratarataguacu, as Marggrave tells us, and Guaracyaba, that is,
A Sunbeam, and Guaracigaba, that is, the hair of the Sun, according to de Laet.
It is common in almost all the hotter Countries of America. It is reported
(says Nierembergius) that the powder of this Bird, taken inwardly, cures the
Falling sickness. What I find in Marggravius concerning the Tail of the first
Species, viz. that it consists of four feathers, I vehemently suspect to be a
mistake either of the Printer, or of the Author; for in the Tail of one that I
examined I found the usual number of twelve feathers.

CHAP. XV. Slender-billed Birds, whose Tail is parti-colored.
. I. The Fallow-Smich, in Sussex the Wheat-ear, because the time of
Wheat-harvest they wax very fat; called by the Italians, Culo Bianco, and by us
also in some places, White-tail, from the color of its Rump. Oenanthe sive
Vitiflora of Aldrovandus.
IN bigness it exceeds the House-Sparrow. The color of its Head and Back is
cinereous, with a certain mixture of red, like to that which is seen in the
Back of the Coccothranstes.
Hawsinch. [The Back of a Female Bird which I described at Florence was
cinereous, with a certain mixture of green and red.] The Rump in most is white,
whence also it took its name; in some it is of the same color with the Back,
or more red. The whole Belly is white, lightly dashed with red. The Breast and
Throat have a deeper tincture of red. The Belly in the Cocks is sometimes
yellowish. Above the Eyes is a white line continued to the hinder part of the
Head. Below the Eyes a black stroke is extended from the corners of the mouth
to the ears. [I found not this black line in the Females.]

Both the quil-feathers and covert-feathers of the Wings are all black besides
the fringes or extreme edges, which are white, tinctured with a sordid red. The
Tail is two inches and a quarter long, made up of twelve feathers, of which the
two middlemost have their upper half white, the rest their lower, the other
half being black. Moreover, the tips and edges of them all are white. [In the
Hen the white takes up but a quarter of the feathers.]

The Bill is slender, straight, black, more than half an inch long: The mouth
is black within, the Tongue black and cloven: The aperture of the Mouth great:
The Irides of the Eyes hazel-coloured. The back-toe is armed with a great Claw.

The Stomach is not very musculous; out of which dissected we took Beetles, and
other Insects. It breeds in forsaken Coney-burroughs.

The Sussex Shepherds, to catch these Birds, use this Art. They dig long turves
of earth, and lay them across the holes whereout they were dug, and about
the middle of them hang snares made of horse-hair. The Birds, being naturally
very timorous, if a Hawk happen to appear, or but a cloud pass over and
intercept the Sunbeams, hastily run to hide themselves in the holes under the
Turves, and so are caught by the Neck in the snares.

Upon the Downs of Sussex, which are a ridge of Mountains running all along by
the Seacoast for thirty or forty miles in length, they are taken yearly in
great numbers, in Harvest-time, or the beginning of Autumn, where for their
fatness and delicate relish they are highly prized.

Aldrovandus has another Oenanthe, which is a little less than the former, but
yet bigger than a Sparrow, on the Head, Neck, Back, and lesser Wing-feathers of
a reddish yellow, deeper on the Back, lighter on the Breast, having black Eyes,
behind which The other Oenanthe of Aldrovand.
is also a long black spot, of a semilunar figure: A long, slender, black Bill;
black Wing-feathers, whose ends are yellow, as are also those of the
Tail-feathers.

There is also a Bird called Strapazino by our Fowlers (says Aldrovand) in the
Bononian Territory, whose Rump underneath, and almost the whole Tail are
likewise white: The Head and Back of a rusty yellow: The Wing-feathers half
black and half The Strapazino of Aldrov.
yellow; the Bill indifferent long, of a dusky color. The Throat, Breast, and
Belly are white, lightly dashed with yellow. The Tail toward the Rump is
yellow, else black.

. II. The Whin-chat, under which also we treat of the Anthus or Florus of
Aldrovand.
IN bigness it scarce exceeds a Wagtail. The upper side of the body, viz. The
Back, Head, and covert-feathers of the Wings are of a pale feuille-mort color,
variegated with black spots, placed in rows. If you heed each single feather,
the middle part of it about the shaft is black, the sides of a feuille-mort, or
dusky yellow. The Belly is white, with a tincture of red. The sides and upper
part of the Breast from red incline to yellow. The Breast in some is variegated
with black spots. From the Nosthrils above the Eyes to the hinder part of the
Head is drawn a pale whitish line: Under the Bill also on each side is a white
line. The intermediate space between these lines in some birds is black. [In
one Bird of this kind I observed a white spot behind each Eye.] The
quil-feathers of the Wings are brown, with yellowish edges [or of a
feuille-mort color.] From the ninth the tips of the eight following are white.
The covert-feathers next above the quils are black, with red edges. In which
two white spots do mark or characterize each Wing, one under the bastard Wing,
the other at the first joint, by which note this Bird may be easily
distinguished from all others of its kind. The middle quil-feathers toward the
bottom are white. The Tail is two inches and an half long, consisting of twelve
feathers, of all which, excepting the two middlemost, the lower half is white,
the upper black, the utmost edges being red. The two middlemost in some birds
are wholly black, in all for the greater part; having red or feuille-mort
edges. They all end in sharp points. The feathers next to the incumbent on the
Tail both above and beneath reach further than its middle, so that they wholly
hide its white part.

Its Bill is slender, straight, short, black, not only without, but also
within: The Irides of the Eyes hazel-coloured. The Legs slender: The Feet,
Toes, and Claws black: The lower joint of the outmost Toe sticks fast to that
of the middle one.

In the Female those white spots of the Wing scarce appear, and the whole body
is of a duller color. It frequents banks and ditches, feeding upon Beetles,
and other Insects.

Nature sometimes sports her self in the colors of this Bird: For in some
birds the two middle feathers of the Tail are wholly black excepting the edges,
which are reddish; in others their bottoms are white, etc.

It differs from the following bird chiefly by these notes, 1. That the upper
side of the body is more beautifully colored, the feathers having their middle
parts about the shaft black, and their borders red. 2. That in each Wing they
have two white spots. 3. That the lower part of their Tails is white. 4. That
the feathers immediately incumbent on the Tail both above and beneath run out
as far and further than the middle of the tail, so that they wholly hide the
white part thereof. 5. In the white lines reaching from the Bill to the back of
the Head.

The Bird which Aldrovand says is called commonly Spipola, which perchance may
be the Anthus or Florus of Aristotle, is near of kin to, if not the same with
this. It is The Anthus or Florus of Arist. Aldrov.
of near the same bigness: Lives about Rivers and Fens, especially in moist
meadows; and if it be driven away by Horses feeding there, it flies away with a
certain chattering, wherein it seems after a fashion to imitate the neighing of
a horse. Whether it be dim-sighted or no I know not, but I hear that it flies
with difficulty. As for its color, that is rather to be called beautiful than
otherwise; on the upper side throughout the Neck, Back, and Wings being of a
dusky red, and varied with semilunar spots. The Head above is of the same
color, but has not those spots. The prime-feathers of the Wings, and those
that cover them are black, having their sides and tips yellowish. The Bill is
sit to catch Insects, being neither slender, nor thick, of a white color
tinctured with yellow. The nether side from the Bill to the Tail is of the same
color, but variegated with spots, some long, some round, and some of another
figure. Its Feet are black. This differs from our Whin-chat in the color of
its Bill, and in the place where it lives; since our Chat abides especially in
heaths, and among Furze-bushes.

. III. The Stone-smich, or Stone-chatter, or Moor-titling. Oenanthus nostra
tertia: Muscicapa tertia, Aldrov. The Rubetra of Bellonius as we judge, which
Gesner makes the same with his Todtenvogel, or Flugenstecherlin.
IT is of the bigness of a Linnet, or thereabouts: Of half an ounce weight:
From Bill-point to Tail-end five inches long. Its Bill is slender, straight,
black as well within as without. The upper Chap a thought longer than the
nether, and a little crooked: The Tongue cloven: the Irides of the Eyes
hazel-coloured: The Legs, Feet, and Claws black; the outer Toe grows to the
middle one below, as in other small birds. The Head is great, in the Cock
almost wholly black, as is also the Throat under the Bill: In the Hen it is
parti-colored of black and a dirty red. The upper part of the Neck is black; on
each side it is marked with a white spot, so that the bird seems to have a ring
of white about its Neck. The middle of the Back is black, only the outmost
edges of the feathers fulvous. Above the Rump is a white spot. The Breast is
fulvous, or of a yellowish red color: The Belly white, with a dash of red.

[In the Female the feathers of the Head, Neck, and Back from red inclining to
green, having their middle parts black; the Rump is red; the Chin of a pale
ashcolour. It has a whitish spot on each side the Neck: The Breast is of a
deeper, but the belly of like color with the Cocks.]

The prime feathers of the Wings are all dusky, excepting the two next to the
body, which have a white spot at bottom. The edges of all are red. All the
covert feathers of the Wings have also red edges. The Wings in both Sexes are
adorned with a white spot in the feathers next the Back. The Tail is near two
inches long, and consists of twelve feathers, not forked, and black. [The tip
and exterior Web of the outmost feather on each side are white.]

It has a Gallbladder; a Stomach not very fleshy, in which dissected we found
Beetles, and other Insects; short, round, tumid blind Guts.

That which I [J. R.] described at Florence differed somewhat in colors, and
other accidents; thus: It was of the bigness of a lesser Titmouse: Its Body
short and round: Its Head, for the proportion of its body, great. The top of
the Head, the Neck, and Back parti-colored of black and a dirty red, the middle
part of each feather being black, and the edges red. The quil-feathers are
eighteen, all dusky, their exterior edges being of a feuille-mort color. Of
the feathers of the second row those five on the middle joint are black, with
feuille-mort edges, the rest are of the same color with the quil-feathers. The
lesser rows are of like color with the foresaid five middle feathers, The
Tail-feathers are all black, only their edges are paler. The Cock is black
about both Eyes, and under the Throat, the tips of the feathers being white.
The Breast and parts under the Wings in both Sexes are fulvous or red; the
middle of the Belly being whiter. The feathers of this bird are soft, and stand
ruffling out, as in a Jay. In all other points it agrees with the above
described, so that I doubt not but it is the same.

The third and fourth Muscicapae of Aldrovand differ not, I think, from this,
nor from one another otherwise than in color.

It is found for the most part in Heaths, and is very querulous.

. IV. * The Brasilian Guiraru Nheengeta of Marggrave, which may be called, The
American Chat.
IT is as big, or a little bigger than a Water-Blackbird, or Crake; has a
straight, compressed, black Bill, more than half an inch long:
Sapphire-coloured Eyes, with a black Pupil. The Others call them the Thighs.
upper Legs are covered with ash-colored feathers: The lower with a black
skin, as are also the Feet, which have four Toes standing after the usual
manner, with sharp, black Claws. The whole Head, Neck, Breast, and lower Belly
are clothed with white feathers approaching to a dilute gray; but the Back
with cinereous. From the Bill on each side through the Eyes to the end of the
sides of the Head is a long black spot extended. The Wings are black, but not
of a deep color. The Tail has very black feathers, which yet have white tips;
and above also are covered with white ones. This for its bigness ought rather
to have been referred to the Thrush-kind.

. V. A Bird called Coldfinch by the Germans.
THis Bird was shot by Mr. Jessop in the Mountains of the Peak in Derbyshire,
and sent us by him. Its Belly is white; its Breast of a dusky yellow: The Head
and Back of a dusky or greenish ash color: The covert-feathers of the Tail
black. The quil-feathers of the Wings likewise black; but from the fifth they
are all white toward the bottoms, whence arises a whitespot or stroke cross the
Wing, from a narrow beginning widening by degrees, so that in the last feathers
it takes up all the exterior Vanes; but where it is broader, it is gradually
tinctured with yellow. The second row of Wing-feathers is black, with whitish
tips: The edges of the rest of the coverts are green. The Tail is two inches
and a quarter long. Its outmost feathers have their exterior Webs almost
wholly white; in the next to them the white part is narrower: All the rest are
black, but the middlemost deeper.

Its Bill is black, compressed, and almost triangular. The Tongue cloven and
rough: The Irides of the Eyes of a hazel-colour. The Feet black; The outmost
Toe joined to the middlemost, as in other small birds. The Testicles small and
round. In the Stomach we found Insects.

This excellent person sent us also out of the Peak of Derbyshire the third
Beccafigo The Ficedula tertia of Aldrovand.
of Aldrovand, which I suppose differs only in age or Sex from the precedent.
The Throat, Breast, and Belly are much whiter than in that. All the exterior
Webs of the outmost feathers of the Tail are white, of those next to them the
lower half. This has a great white spot in each Wing, altogether like the
precedent: Above the Bill also it has a white spot: The Back else is
cole-black. In its fashion, bigness, Bill, and Tail it agrees with the
Coldfinch.

CHAP. XVI. The White-throat. An Spipola prima Aldrov?
THe body of this Bird seems to be something longer than that of the Beccafigo
before described; but of almost the same magnitude. From the tip of the Bill to
the end of the Tail, or of the Feet, (for they are equally extended) it has
six inches and a quarter of length: Between the extreme points of the Wings
spread eight and an half of breadth. The upper Bill is black, the lower white.
The Tongue slit with a deep incision. The Mouth within yellow: The Irides of
the Eyes hazel-coloured. The Feet are of a dusky yellow or Amber-colour: The
backtoe great; the exterior foretoes equal, and less than in other small
birds, joined at bottom to the middlemost, the interior by an intervening
membrane, which we have not observed in other Birds of this kind. The upper
surface of the body from red inclines to an ash color. The Head more
cinereous: The Chin white, the rest of the Throat white, with a tincture of
red. The Breast also and lower Belly are something red. [In the Hen the Breast
is white, without any mixture of red.]

The outmost edge of the first or outmost quil-feather is white: The exterior
edges of those next the body are red. The extreme feathers of the Tail on each
side have all their exterior Webs, and half their interior white: Of the next
to these the tips only are white. All the rest are black, only the extreme
borders or edges, especially of the two middlemost, incline to cinereous.

It frequents Gardens, and feeds upon Beetles, Flies, and other Insects:
Creeping and hopping up and down in bushes, like the Hedg-Sparrow. It builds
also in bushes not far from the ground. The outer part of the Nest is made of
the tender stalks of herbs and dry straws; the middlemost of fine bents and
soft grass; the inner, on which the Eggs lie, of horse-hair, or other long
hair. It lays about five Eggs, oblong, of a dusky color, mingled of white and
green, besprinkled over with black specks.

This Bird is very like the Ficedula above described, yet differs in some
particulars, especially that the outmost feathers of the Tail in this are
white; whereas in that the Tail is all of one color.

Among the doubtful birds of this kind, at least to us not sufficiently known,
we reckon, 1. The small Nightingale, Lusciniola or Roussette of Bellonius,
which you may find in Aldrovand, tom. 2. page 767. perchance the same with the
Giarola of Aldrovand, having a red Bill, and the color of the body like a
Quail. 2. Oenanthe congener, Aldrov. tom. 2. p. 764. 3. The other Spipola of
Aldrovand. tom. 2. p. 731. the description whereof we have already set down, Of
the Latin Edition.
p. 153. which perchance may be the same with our Spipoletta, or with our
Whin-chat, p. 168. 4. Spipola tertia or Boarina of Aldrovand, p. 732. which we
have already entered the description of, p. 153. 5. The Stoparola of Aldrovand,
p. 732, which you may find also in page 153. of this work. 6. Boarina of
Aldrovand, p. 733. whose description we have subjoyned to the Ficedula, p. 158.
7. Grisola, which we have annexed to our Spipoletta, page 153. 8. Anthos or
Florus, which we have remembered in our Chapter of Oenanthe, page 169.

These, and some other birds, comprehended by Aldrovandus in three Chapters,
viz. twenty sixth, twenty seventh, and twenty eighth of the seventeenth Book,
under the titles of Spipolae, Stoparolae, and Muscicapae, seem to us reducible
to three or four Species, viz. to the White-throat, or Moucherolle or Passer
rubi, (for Bellonius his Moucherolle is perchance another sort of bird) and the
Beccasigo or Black-cap.

CHAP. XVII. The Water-Wagtail; Motacilla, in Greek (...).
. I. The white Wagtail: Motacilla alba.
THis Bird is every where so well known, that it may seem enough to name it,
not needing any description. It weighs six drachms, being in length from the
point of the Bill to the end of the Tail seven inches three quarters; in
breadth between the extremities of the Wings stretched out eleven. The Bill is
slender, not an inch long, sharp-pointed, and black. The Tongue cloven, and as
it were torn: The Mouth within black: The Irides of the Eyes hazel-coloured:
The Feet, Toes, and Claws long, and of a dark blackish color. The back-claw
very long, as in Larks. The outer Toe at its rise sticks fast to the middle
one. White feathers encompass the upper Chap of the Bill, then the Eyes, being
produced on both sides almost to the Wings. The Crown of the Head, upper and
lower side of the Neck, as far as the Breast, and the Back are black: The
Breast and Belly white. The middle of the Back from black inclines to
cinereous: The Rump is black. [In another Bird, below the Throat I observed a
semicircular black spot like a Crescent, the horns being produced almost as far
as the Jaws.] The Wings spread are of a semicircular figure; the quil-feathers
in each eighteen in number, of which the three outmost end in sharp points: The
tips of the middle ones are blunt and indented; the inmost are adorned with
white lines. The covert feathers of the first row are black, having their tips
and edges white: Those of the second row have only white tips. Its Tail is very
long, of about three inches and an half, which it almost continually wags up
and down, whence also it took its name. The Tail has twelve feathers, of which
the two middlemost are longer than the rest, and sharp-pointed; the others all
of equal length: The outmost are almost wholly white, the rest black. The
color of the Plumage in this kind in several birds varies not a little, being
in some more cinereous, in some blacker. The Liver is of a pale color.

It is much conversant about the brinks of Rivers, and Pools, and other watery
places, where it catches Flies, and water Insects: Moreover it follows the
Plough, to gather up the Worms, which together with the earth it turns up: As I
find in Aldrovandus, and our Husbandmen have told me of their own observation;
who therefore call it the Seed-bird, as Mr. Johnson informed me.

In the Northern part of England it appears not in the Winter, and is also then
more rare in the Southern: Either because it is impatient of cold, or for want
of meat; Flies, and other winged Insects, on which it chiefly feeds, being not
to be found in Wintertime. In the Gizzard of one dissected we found Insects
like to Meal-worms. Gesner writes, that the Fowlers in his Country have
observed the Cuckow-chicken hatched and brought up by this bird: The same,
Albertus, and our experience also confirms, as we have In the Chapter of the
Cuckoo.
elsewhere shown.

One or two ounces of the powder of this Bird put in a Pot close-stopt and
baked in an Oven together with the feathers, taken in Saxisrage water, or
strong Whitewine is said to be good against the Stone, especially that of the
Kidneys. But Alexander Benedictus thinks, that the modern Physicians, who
commend this Medicine through mistake, mean the Wren when they name the
Wagtail: As if the Wagtail were of no force in breaking the Stone. Gesner (to
whom also we readily assent) thinks that it matters not much what bird be
burnt, since the virtue of the ashes of almost all birds seem to be the same.
Yet (says he) if there be any difference, I would prefer those sorts of birds
which feed upon Insects, as Flies, Ants, and the like.

. II. The yellow Water-Wagtail: Motacilla flava.
IN bigness and shape of body it agrees with the white. It weighs five drachms;
from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail being almost seven inches long;
to the end of the Claws six. The under part of the Body is yellow, the Breast
being darker than the rest. The upper part is of a dark green, the middle of
the Back being black. The crown of the Head is of a yellowish green. Above the
Eyes is a yellow line reaching to the hinder part of the Head.

The Tail is two inches three quarters long, consisting of twelve feathers, the
middle two whereof are sharper than the rest. The outmost on each side are
above half white, the intermediate eight black: All of equal length. The figure
of the Wings is the same with that of the precedent. The quil-feathers in
number eighteen; of which the sixteenth is longer than those next it, and has
the outward limb white. The tips of the middle covert-feathers are of a
greenish white; else the Wings are all over dusky. The Bill is black: The
Tongue cloven, but not hairy. The Irides of the Eyes from cinereous incline to
a hazel-colour. The Feet are black: The outer foretoe is joined to the middle
one at bottom. The Spur or Claw of the back-toe is long as in a Larks: The
blind guts short. Some birds in this kind are much yellower or greener than
others.

It builds upon the ground among the Corn; making its Nest of bents and the
stalks of herbs, spreading hairs within under the Eggs. It lays at one time
four or five Eggs, varied with dusky spots and lines drawn without any order.

. III. The gray Wagtail. Motacilla cinerea, an flava altera Aldrov?
IT is of the bigness of the common or white Wagtail. Its note is shriller and
louder: Its Bill black, straight, slender, and sharp-pointed: Its Eyes gray:
Both upper and lower Eyelid white. Moreover, above the Eyes a whitish line is
all along extended. The upper surface of the body is Cinereous, i. e.
Ash-colored.
gray. The Head (which in proportion to the body is small and compressed) is
something dusky. The Wings are blackish, crossed in the middle by a whitish,
yet not very conspicuous line. The Chin and Throat are parti-colored of white
and gray: The Breast and Belly white, dashed with yellow: The Rump round about
of a deeper yellow. The Tail made up of twelve feathers, longer than the whole
body; its outmost feather on each side is all over white; the two next white on
the inside, blackish on the out; the six middlemost all over blackish. The Legs
(which are long) and the Feet (which are rugged or rough) are of a pale color,
but duskish. The Claws crooked, and the backclaw longer than the rest.

The bird here described was a Hen, as we learned by its Vitellary or bunch of
Eggs, wherein more than forty Eggs were very conspicuous and easy to be
discerned. The Cock differs little, save that under his Chin he has a black
spot. They frequent stony Rivers, and feed upon water-Insects.

The description of this Bird was communicated to us by Mr. Johnson of Brignal
near Greta Bridge in Yorkshire.

CHAP. XVIII. * The Brasilian Jamacaii of Marggrave.
IT is a small Bird, of the bigness of a Lark. Its Body is three inches long,
its Neck more than an inch, its Legs two inches: Its Tail almost four. It has
a small Head; a Bill an inch long, straight, only a little bending downward,
sharppointed, black, but below near its rise a little bluish. The Head is
covered with black feathers, as is also the Neck below, but above with yellow:
The whole Back, Breast, and lower Belly likewise with yellow. The Wings are
black, having in their middle some white feathers, which make white spots, in
each Wing one. At the rise of the Wings is a black spot crossing the back. The
Tail is also black: The Legs and Feet dusky. It is an elegant bird.

For the length of the Tail and colors of the feathers not much different, we
have subjoyned this to the Wagtails, although Marggrave makes no mention of the
manner of its feeding, or the places it frequents: Or whether it moves its Tail
or not.

CHAP. XIX. * The Brasilian Guira guacuberaba of Marggrave
IS a Bird of the bigness of a Goldfinch. The lower part of the Neck, the Back,
and end of the Belly are of a yellow or gold color. The upper part of the Head
and Neck, the fore-half of the Back, the Wings, and Tail are of a pale green.
In the ends of the Wings are some dusky feathers intermixed. Under the Throat
up to the Eyes it has a great black spot. It has a straight, sharp, yellow
Bill, a little black on the upper part. The Legs and Feet are of a dusky color.

CHAP. XX. * The Brasilian Guira coereba of Marggrave
IS a Bird of the bigness of a Chaffinch. It has a black Bill, three quarters
of an inch long, sharp, and a little bending downward: Black Eyes: A Tongue
slit into many filaments, on the top of the Head a cop or tuft of Seagreen
feathers. The rest of the Head, the Throat, and all the lower Neck, the Breast,
and whole Belly, with the hinder half of the Back are covered with blue, but
pale feathers: And from the Breast through the beginnings of the Wings to the
Back, where the blue color begins, passes a broad blue line cross through the
rise of the Wings. All the upper side of the Neck, with the fore-half of the
Back is covered with fine Velvet feathers of a deep black. The Tail is an inch
and half long, and black. The Wings are great, and yellow about the middle. But
the yellow part is covered, and cannot be seen when the Wings are closed, and
the Bird sits still, but when she flies the Wings appear elegantly straked with
black and yellow: Within side the Wings are almost wholly yellow. The upper
Legs or Thighs are feathered with black, and in a manner blue feathers: The
lower are naked, and of a Vermilion color, together with the Feet; the Claws
black. The Feet have four Toes disposed after the usual manner.

CHAP. XXI. * The Brasilian Japacani of Marggrave,
IS a Bird of the bigness of the Bemtere or Schanepue: Has a black, oblong,
sharppointed Bill, bending a little downward: Golden Eyes, with a black Pupil.
The Head is covered with black feathers. The Neck above, the Back and Wings
with feathers of a color mixed of black and Umber. The Tail above is black,
underneath spotted with white. The Breast, all the lower Belly and Thighs have
their Plumage mixed of white and yellow, interwoven with transverse black lines
or strakes. The Legs are dusky. Four Toes in each placed after the usual
manner, furnished with sharp, black Claws.

CHAP. XXII. Of Titmice: De Paris.
. I. Of Titmice in general.
TItmice are a sort of small birds, that are found for the most part about
trees, and live chiefly upon Insects which they find there. Turner writes, that
they feed not only upon Worms, but also Hemp Seed and Nuts, which they
perforate with their sharp Bills. Some of these build in holes of trees: Others
make Nests of an Oval figure, with a hole left open in the side to go in and
out at. They are restless birds, never sitting long still in a place, but
flitting from bough to bough, and from tree to tree. They have short Bills, but
bigger for the bulk of their bodies than the precedent small birds: Small
bodies; and long Tails. The most of them are canorous: But all of them
multiparous, laying many Eggs ere they sit. Titmice are called by Aristotle,
(...). The Germans, as well as we English, call them Mice, either because like
Mice they creep into the holes of trees, or because (as Gesner writes) they
will feed upon flaid Mice offered them: Which to us seems not likely. Of these
we have observed in England five kinds, viz. 1. The great Titmouse, or Oxe-eye.
2. The Colemouse. 3. The Marsh-Titmouse or Black-cap. 4. The blue Titmouse or
Nun. 5. The long-tail'd-Titmouse. The crested Titmouse and Wood Titmouse of
Gesner, we have not yet found in England.

. II. The great Titmouse or Ox-eye: Fringillago seu parus major: (...) of
Aristotle.
IT is well nigh as big as a Chaffinch: Of scarce an ounce weight: From tip of
Bill to end of Tail half a foot long; from tip to tip of the Wings expanded
nine inches broad. Its Bill is straight, black, half an inch long, and of a
moderate thickness. Both Mandibles of equal length. The Tongue broad, ending in
four filaments. The Feet of a lead or blue color. The outmost Toes below for
some space joined to the middlemost.

The Head and Chin are black. From the corner of the mouth on each side below
the Eyes a broad white line or spot passing backward takes up the cheeks. This
white is encompassed with black. In the hinder part of the Head is another
white spot, terminated on one side with the black of the Head, on the other
with the yellow of the Neck. [In the Bird that I (J. R.) described I observed
not this spot, and perchance in several birds the colors may vary somewhat.]
The Neck, Shoulders, and middle of the Back are of a yellowish green. The Rump
is blue: The Breast, Belly, and Thighs are yellow: Yet the lower or hindmost
part of the Belly white. A broad, black line reaching from the Throat to the
Vent divides the Breast and Belly in twain. The quil-feathers of the Wings, in
number eighteen, beside the outmost little one, are dusky, with white tips, or
tips partly white, partly blue. The outer edges of those three next the body
are green. Of the covert feathers of the first row, those that are about the
middle of the Wing, with their white tips make a transverse white line. The
smaller covert-feathers of the Wings are blue. The Tail is about two inches and
an half long, compounded of twelve feathers: The exterior Vanes of all which,
except the outmost, are blue or ash-colored, the interior black. The outmost
have their exterior Vanes and their tips white. The Tail appears not forked,
no not when it is closed.

. III. * The Brasilian Guiraienoia, akin to the Fringillago.
THis small bird is of the bigness of a Chaffinch: Has a Bill scarce half an
inch long, and blackish; black Eyes. The whole head, lower side of the Neck,
Breast, and lower Belly, and utmost half of the Back are clothed with blue
feathers: The upper side of the Neck, and fore-half of the Back are covered
with black. The Wings also are black, but in their beginning have some blue
feathers interspersed: The rest of the feathers are black, yet have blue edges.
The Tail is almost an inch and half long, and also black, and the Wings end a
little beyond the beginning of the Tail. The Legs are dusky, and each foot has
four toes placed after the usual manner.

. IV. The Cole-mouse: Parus ater Gesneri, page 616.
THe Head is by Gesner rightly described to be black, with a white spot in the
hinder part. The Back is of a greenish ash color: The Rump greener: The Wings
and Tail dusky. The exterior edges of the prime Wing-feathers green. The
interior covert-feathers of the Wings have white tips. The Tail, when shut,
appears something forked, from dusky inclining to green. The Bill is straight,
round, black. The Legs, Feet, and Claws bluish, or of a lead-colour. This is
the least of all this kind. By its smalness were other notes wanting, it is
abundantly distinguished from the great Titmouse.

It weighs two drachms, being from Bill-point to Tail-end four inches three
quarters long, and between the extremities of the Wings extended seven inches
broad. The number of quil-feathers in each Wing is eighteen. The Tail is an
inch and three quarters long, and composed of twelve feathers.

. V. The Marsh Titmouse or Black-cap: Parus palustris Gesneri.
THe Head of this is black: The cheeks white; the back greenish: The Feet of a
Lead-colour. It differs from that next above described, 1. In that it is
bigger. 2. That it has a larger Tail. 3. That it wants the white spot on the
back of the Head. 4. That its under side is whiter. 5. That it has less black
under the Chin. 6. That it wants those white spots in the tips of the
covert-feathers of the Wings.

It weighs more than three drachms. From the point of the Bill to the end of
the Claws it is by measure four inches and an half long. The distance between
the extreme tips of the Wings extended is eight inches. The number of Wing and
Tailfeathers is the same as in other small birds. The Tail is more than two
inches long, composed of feathers of equal length.

Gesner makes the Back of this bird dusky inclining to cinereous.

. VI. The blue Titmouse or Nun: Parus caeruleus.
THe Bill of this Bird is pretty short, thick, sharp, and of a dusky blackish
color: The Tongue broad, ending in four filaments: The Legs of a lead-colour:
The outmost Toes at bottom are fastened to the middle ones.

The Head being of an azure color is encompassed with a circle of white as it
were a Wreath or Coronet. To the white circle succeeds another parti-colored,
encompassing the Throat and hinder part of the Head, above being almost of the
same color with the Head, toward the Throat and under the Throat black. Below
this circle on the Neck is a white spot. From the Bill a black line passes
through the Eyes to the hinder part of the Head. The Cheeks are white: The Back
is of a yellowish green. The sides, Breast, and Belly yellow; save that a
whitish line produced as far as the Vent divides the Breast in two. In the
Cock-bird the Head is more blue, in the Hen and young ones less.

The tips of the quil-feathers next the body are white, as also the outer edges
of the foremost from the middle part upward. The covert-feathers of the Wings
are blue, the innermost of which with their white tips make a white line cross
the Wing. The Tail is two inches long, of a blue color, only the edges of the
outmost feathers are a little white.

Its weight is three drachms: Its length from Bill-point to Tail-end four
inches and an half, to the Claws four: Its breadth, the Wings extended, eight
inches. The quil-feathers in each Wing eighteen, besides the outmost short one:
The Tail-feathers twelve.

. VII. The crested Titmouse; Parus cristatus Aldrov.
THis has a pretty short big Bill, of a blackish color. Its Tongue is broad,
and divided into four filaments. Its Feet of a lead-colour. The outer Toes for
some space from their divarication joined to the middle one. The crown of the
Head black, the edges of the feathers being white. At the hinder part of the
Head begins a black line, which like a Wreath or Collar encompasses the Neck.
From the lower Mandible of the Bill to this Collar is a black line produced. To
the Collar and Chin is another bed or border of white contiguous. But beyond
the Ears is a spot of black. The middle of the Breast is white; the sides
something red. The Wings and Tail are dusky, only the exterior edges of the
feathers somewhat green. The Back from red inclining to green.

It weighs two drachms and an half: Is from the tip of the Bill to the end of
the Tail five inches long: From tip to tip of the Wings extended eight inches
and a quarter broad. The quil-feathers of the Wings are eighteen in number, the
Tail-feathers twelve. The Tail two inches long. The Bill from the tip to the
corners of the mouth half an inch.

. VIII. The long-tail'd Titmouse. Parus caudatus.
THe crown of this Bird is white: The Neck black. From the Bill above the Eyes
on each side to the hinder-part of the Head is a broad black line produced. The
Jaws and Throat are white. The Breast white, varied with small dusky spots. The
Belly and sides of a dilute Chestnut color: Of which, but mixed with black, both
the Back and also the Rump partake.

The quil-feathers of the Wings are of an obscure dusky color, the outer edges
of the interior of these are white. The singular structure or conformation of
the feathers of the Tail difference this Bird from all other small birds of
what kind soever. For the outmost feathers are the shortest, the rest in order
longer to the middlemost, which are the longest, and that by a notable
difference or excess, as in the Magpie. Of the outmost feather on each side the
top and outer half from the shaft is white: The next has less white; of the
third, only the outer part of the tip is white. All the rest are wholly black.
[In respect of these colors there may possibly be some variety in several
birds.]

The Bill is short, strong, black: The Tongue broad, cloven, and divided into
silaments: The Eyes bigger than in other small birds; their Irides
hazel-coloured: The edges of the eyelids yellow: The Nosthrils covered with
small feathers. The Feet black, as are also the Claws, but deeper. The Claw of
the back-toe biggest of all, as is usual in most birds both great and small.
With us it frequents gardens rather than mountainous places. It builds like the
Wren, or more artificially, making an arch over the Nest of the same matter and
contexture with the rest of the Nest; so that the Nest resembles an Egg erected
upon one end, a small hole being left in the side, whereat the bird goes in and
out. By this means both Eggs and Young are secured from all injuries of the
Air, Wind, Rain, Cold, etc. And that they may lie soft she lines the Nest
within with store of feathers and down. Without she builds the sides and roof
of it of Moss and Wool curiously interwoven.

Aldrovand in the seventeenth Book, and sixteenth Chapter of his Ornithology
does accurately describe the Nest of this bird, such as we have more than once
seen, in these words. It was of an oblong figure like a Pineapple, of two
Palms length, and one broad, round, built of sundry materials, viz. both tree
and earth-moss, Caterpillars Webs, and other like woolly matter, and Hens
feathers, with that order and art, that the chief and middle strength of the
work, or texture of the Walls was of that yellowish green Moss, the common
hairy Moss, that silk-like matter, and tough threads resembling those filaments
suspended in the Air, and flying up and down like Spiders Webs, which are
accounted signs of fair weather, connected and interwoven, or rather entangled
so firmly together, that they can hardly be plucked asunder. Of the interior
capacity all the sides, it seemed, as well as the bottom, were covered and
lined with feathers, for the more soft and warm lying of the Young. The outmost
superficies round about was fenced and strengthened with fragments of that
leavy Moss, which every where grows on trees, firmly bound together. In the
forepart respecting the Sunrise, and that above (where an arched roof of the
same uniform matter and texture with the sides and bottom covered the Nest) was
seen a little hole, scarce big enough one would think to admit the old one. We
found in it nine Young, etc.

. IX. The Wood Titmouse of Gesner. Parus Sylvaticus, Aldrov. t. 2. p. 724.
THis Titmouse is also very little, remarkable for a red spot through the midst
of its Crown; the parts on each side being black; the Legs dusky; the Wings
black, and also the end of the Tail: The rest of the body green; the Belly
paler. Our people from the Woods, in which it lives, especially about Fir-trees
and Junipers, call it, Waldmeiszle and Thannenmeiszle, others from its note
Zilzilperle, for it sings Zul, zil, zalp.

Mr. Willughby was apt to think that the bird described by Gesner is no other
than the Regulus cristatus.

CHAP. XXIII.
. I. * The Brasilian Tangara of Marggrave.
IT is an elegant bird, of the bigness of a Chaffinch. It has a straight,
pretty thick, black Bill: Black Eyes: Legs and Feet from cinereous inclining to
dusky. On the forehead above the rise of the Bill it has a spot of black
feathers. The whole Head and Neck are covered with feathers of a shining
Seagreen. A circle or border of black feathers encompasles the beginning of
the back like a Collar. But The word is sub, which is rather to be rendered
under the Wings
below the Wings to the rise of the Tail the Back is covered with yellow
feathers. The whole lower Belly is of a rare blue. The Wings are black, and
their lateral extremities blue, so that when closed they appear wholly blue,
and their whole ends, outsides, or borders [tota extremitas] seem black. The
beginning of the Wings also On the outside.
externally shines with Seagreen feathers; and in the ridge or upper lateral
extremity of each Wing are yellow feathers intermixed. It has a Tail about an
inch and half long, of black feathers, but whose lateral extremities or borders
are blue: The end of the Tail is black. It is kept shut up in Cages, and cries,
Zip, zip, like the Rubrica, called by the Germans Gympel. It is fed with meal
and bread.

This description is conceived in such obscure words, that I do not well
understand the meaning of the Author; and therefore the learned Reader would do
well to consult the Latin.

. II. The second kind of Tangara.
IT is of the shape and bigness of our common Sparrow: Has a Bill from Of a
dusky yellow.
yellow inclining to dusky, somewhat broad, sharp-pointed, the nether Chap much
shorter than the upper: Black Eyes: The whole Head is covered with feathers of
a rare The word is minium, which signifies red lead.
scarlet color: All the rest of the body, with the Wings and Tail, of a
shining black. The Thighs are covered with white feathers, and in their
exterior sides have an oblong scarlet spot, as if they were stained with
blood. The Legs and Feet are ashcoloured; and have four Toes disposed after the
usual manner. The Tail is short, of an inch length, and the Wings end near its
rise; i. e. when withdrawn or closed reach no further than the rise of the Tail.

BOOK II. PART II. SECT. II. MEMB. II. Small Birds with thick short strong
Bills, commonly called Hard-bill'd Birds.
CHAP. I. Of the Gros-beak or Haw-finch, called by Gesner, Coccothraustes.
. 1. The common Gros-beak: Coccothraustes vulgaris.
THis Bird for the bigness of its body, but especially of its Bill, in which it
exceeds all others of this kind, does justly challenge the first and chief
place among thick-billed birds. The French from the bigness of its Bill do
fitly call it Grosbec; the Italians, Frisone or Frosone. Hesychius and Varinus
of the word (...) write only, that it is the name of a bird, but what manner of
bird they do not explain. Gesner observing that name exactly to fit this bird,
imposed it upon it.

It is bigger than a Chaffinch by about one third part; short-bodied: Its Head
bigger than for the proportion of the body. Its Bill very great, hard, from a
broad base ending in a sharp point, of the figure of a Cone or Funnel, half an
inch long, having a large cavity within, of a whitish flesh-colors, almost like
that of the interior surface of the mother of Pearl shell, only the tip
blackish. The Eyes are gray or ashcoloured, as in Jackdaws. The Tongue seems as
it were cut off, as in the Chaffinch. The Feet are of a pale red: The Claws
great, especially those of the middle and back-toes. The middle Toe is the
longest; the outer fore-toe and the back-toe are equal one to the other.

At the base of the Bill grow Orange-coloured feathers, between the Bill and
the Eyes black. The lower Chap in the Males is compassed with a border of black
feathers. The head is of a yellowish red, or rusty color: The Neck cinereous.
The Back red, the middle parts of the feathers being whitish. The Rump from
yellow inclines to cinereous. The sides and Breast, but especially the sides,
are of a mixed color of red and cinereous. Under the Tail, and in the middle of
the Belly the Plumage is whiter. [In another bird the Back was of a gray or
ash color, tinctured with red: The Head and Throat greenish: The sides and
Breast painted with transverse black lines.]

The quil-feathers in each Wing are eighteen in number, of which the nine or
ten foremost for half way from the shaft inward are white. The white part from
the first inward being dilated. Of the subsequent one half is white, but not so
far as the shaft: The three inmost or next the body are red. The tips of all
from the second to the tenth shine with a changeable color of purplish and
blue, like the Necks of Pigeons. From the tenth the exterior borders of the
sixth or seventh succeeding are gray, else they are all dusky. The Tail is but
short, of about two inches length, composed of twelve feathers, spotted at the
top on their interior Vanes with white, on their exterior in the middle
feathers with red, in the outer with black. [In another bird the middle
feathers of the Tail were greenish]

About Frankefort on the Main, and elsewhere in Germany, and in Italy, it is
common. In Summer time it lives in the Woods and Mountains; in the Winter it
comes down into the Plains. It seldom comes over to us in England, viz. only in
hard Winters. It breaks the stones of Cherries, and even of Olives with
expedition, the Kernels whereof it is very greedy of. The Stomach of one we
dissected in the Month of December was full of the stones of Holly-berries. It
feeds also upon Hemp Seed, Panic, etc. and moreover upon the buds of trees,
like the Bulfinch.

It is said to build in the holes of trees, and to lay five or six Eggs. It
weighs an ounce and three quarters: Is in length from Bill to Claws seven
inches and an half; in breadth between the tips of the Wings extended twelve
and an half.

. II. The Virginian Nightingale: Coccothraustes Indica cristata.
IT is as big as a Blackbird, or something less. A black border compasses the
Eyes and Bill; which is like to that of the common Hawfinch, or a little
shorter. The Head is adorned with a towering crest, which it often moves as well
toward the Bill, as toward the Tail. The color of the whole is a lovely
Scarlet, in the Head and Tail more dilute. It is brought into England out of
Virginia; whence, and from its rare singing, it is called, The Virginian
Nightingale.

Of this Bird Aldrovandus writes thus: In its native Soil, viz. in the Islands
of Capo Verde, it is commonly called Fruso, a name very like to our Italian
Frisone, [i. e. Coccothrausti vulgari] to which also it is very like in the
Bill. Moreover, a black line or border encompasses its Bill; and it is (as
Hieronymus Mercurialis witnesses) of the bigness of a Thrush. Wherefore also we
thought fit to call it Coccothraustes Indica. It greedily devours Almonds, in
which also it agrees with the Grosbeak, which with its Bill cracks such kind of
fruits, and other Grains or stones; whence it is called Nucisraga or
Nut-cracker. And that this Bird does the like it is very probable, seeing it is
likewise armed with a very thick and strong Bill. Mercurialis affirms, that by
the Portugues it is commonly called, The Cardinal bird, because it is of a
scarlet [purpurei] color, and seems to wear on its Head a red hat. Of the
nature and qualities of this Bird Fr. Malochius, Prefect of the Physic-garden
at Pisa, gave me this account. It imitates the notes of birds, especially the
Nightingale: it is greedy of Panic and Almonds, devours Chickweed; seeing its
Image in a glass it has many strange gesticulations, making a hissing noise,
lowering its crest, setting up its Tail after the manner of the Peacock, shaking
its Wings, in fine striking at the Looking-glass with its Bill. The temper of
its body is very hot, which thence appears that it often immerses it self in
water. It is of a very gentle nature, and will take meat out of ones hand. Its
shape is as follows. It has a tuft on its Head of a triangular figure, and
scarlet color, with which color also the Neck, Breast, and Belly are adorned.
The ends of the Wings are not of so deep a scarlet, as neither the Tail, which
for the proportion of the body is pretty long, of about a Palm, something
erected, as broad as ones little singer. The Legs are short and whitish: The
Claws strong, and something crooked. The whole bird measured from Head to Tail
is full two Palms long.

CHAP. II. The Green-finch: Chloris, Aldrov. Ornithol. lib. 18. cap. 18.
IT is bigger than a House-Sparrow; of an ounce and weight; of six inches and
an half length, measuring from Bill-point to the Feet or Tails end: of ten
inches and an half breadth between the extreme terms of the Wings expanded. It
is called by some the Green Linnet.

Its Bill is like that of the Grosbeak, but much less, of half an inch length,
sharppointed, and not crooked: The upper Mandible dusky, the nether all
whitish. The Tongue is sharp, and as it were cut off, ending in filaments: The
Eyes furnished with nictating membranes: The Nosthrils round, situate in the
upper part of the Bill next the Head: The Feet of a flesh-colors; the Claws
dusky. The outer Toe at bottom sticks fast to the middle one.

The Head and Back are green, the edges of the feathers being gray. The middle
of the Back has something of a Chestnut color intermingled. The Rump is of a
deeper green or yellow: The Belly white: The Breast of a yellowish green: The
Throat of the same color with the Neck: The feathers contiguous to the Bill
are of a deep yellowish green.

The borders of the outmost quil-feathers of the Wings are yellow, of the
middlemost green, of the inmost gray. The inner feathers of the second row are
gray, the outer green. All the rest of the covert-feathers of the Wings are
green. The feathers along the base or (if you please) ridge of the Wing are of
a lovely yellow. The coverts also of the undersides of the Wings are yellow.
The Tail is two inches and a quarter long, made up of twelve feathers; of which
the two middlemost are all over black, those next have their outer edges
yellow: The remaining four on each side from the middle outwardly are black,
but all their inner Webs from top to bottom yellow.

The Liver is divided into two Lobes, and has a Gallbladder annexed. The bird
we dissected had a large Craw, a musculous stomach, filled with seeds of Plants.

It builds in hedges: The outmost part of its Nest is made of hay, grass, or
stubble; the middle of Moss; the inmost, on which the Eggs lie, of feathers,
wool, and hair. In this Nest it lays five or six Eggs, near an inch long, of a
pale green color, sprinkled with sanguine spots, especially at the blunt end.

The colors of the Hen are more languid, not so bright and lively: And on the
Breast and Back it has oblong dusky spots.

The Chloris of Aldrovandus, according to his description, seems to be less
green than ours. It feeds upon the seed of Rape, Thistles, Docks, and most
willingly Canarygrass, as do other birds of this kind.

The Anthus or Florus of Bellonius, called in French, Bruant, is of kin to
this. He The Anthus of Bellonius: Le Bruant.
describes it thus: Le Bruant in French has its name from its voice: For when
it sings it expresses the word Bruire. As it flies it makes a noise. Aristotle
calls it (...), which word the Latins render Florus. The modern Greeks, I know
not from what ancient name, call it also Florus. It is a little bigger than a
Chaffinch: The Cocks are for the most part yellow: Yet some part of the Wings
and Tail inclines to cinereous, but their greater feathers are of a more
elegant yellow. The extremities of the Tail-feathers are also altogether
yellow; but within of another color. The Bill is great and sharp, of a pale
color: The Legs and Feet are something red. They are kept in Cages for the
sweetness of their singing. They feed for the most part upon Hempseed, and keep
much about tall trees, far remote from Meadows. It hatches at least five young
ones.

CHAP. III.
. I. The Bulfinch, Alp or Nope. Rubicilla seu Pyrrhula.
THis Bird has a black, short, strong Bill, in figure and structure like that
of the Grosbeak, but less. [In the elder birds it is something crooked.] The
Tongue is as it were cut off: Its Eyes are hazel-coloured: Its Claws black: Its
Legs dusky. The lower joint of the outmost Toe sticks fast to the middle Toe.

The Head for the proportion of the body is great. In the Male a lovely scarlet
or crimson color illustrates the Breast, Throat, and Jaws, as far as the Eyes.
The feathers on the crown of the Head above the Eyes, and those that compass
the Bill, are black: The Rump and Belly white: The Neck and Back gray, with a
certain tincture of red. [The Neck, Back, and Shoulders seemed to me blue or
ash-colored.] The quil-feathers of the Wings are in number eighteen; the last
or inmost of which on the outer half from the shaft is red, on the inner black
and glossie. Of the rest the interior [i. e. those next the body] are black,
with a gloss of blue; the exterior dusky or black. Of the first or outmost
five the exterior edges in the upper half of the feathers are somewhat white.
The tips of the lower covert-feathers are cinereous, in the interior more, in
the exterior less. The next to these are of the same color with the Back. The
Tail is two inches long, black, and shining, made up of twelve feathers.

The Cock is of equal bigness to the Hen, but has a flatter crown, and excels
her in the beauty of his colors.

They feed most willingly upon those buds of trees which break forth before,
indeed are pregnant with, the leaves and flowers, especially those of the
Apple Tree, Pear Tree, Peach-tree, and other Garden-trees; and by that means
bring no small detriment to the Gardeners, who therefore hate and destroy them
as a great Pest of their Gardens, intercepting their hopes of Fruit.

Turner writes, that they are very docile birds, and will nearly imitate the
sound of a Pipe [or the Whistle of a man] with their voice. They are much
esteemed for their singing with us in England, and deservedly in my judgment.
For therein they excel all small birds, if perchance you except the Linnet. I
hear (says Aldrovandus) that the Hen in this kind sings as well as the Cock,
contrary to what is usual in most other sorts of birds.

. II. * The American Bulfinch or Guiratirica of Marggrave.
IT is of the bigness of a Lark: Has a thick, straight Bill, dusky above,
underneath white, and a little incarnate. Its Legs are cinereous, with four
toes standing after the usual manner. The whole Head, with the Throat, and the
lower and middle part of the Neck are of a rare sanguine color. The Eyes blue:
The Earholes large. The sides of the Neck, the whole Breast and lower Belly are
covered with white feathers. The upper side of the Neck has black ones, with
which a few white are mixed. The Back is gray (with a few black feathers
interspersed) as are also the beginnings of the Wings: The rest of the Wings is
black, as is the Tail, which is about three inches long. The lateral borders of
the Wings are white.

CHAP. IV. The Shell-apple or Cross-bill, called by the Germans Krutzvogel.
Loxia, Gesn. Aldrov. An Tragon Plinii?
IN shape of body it is not much unlike the Green-finch: It weighs an ounce and
half, and from tip of Bill to Tail end is six inches three quarters long.

Its Bill is thick, hard, strong, black, and contrary to the manner of all
other birds, crooked both ways, the Mandibles near their tips crossing one
another: For the lower, being drawn out into a sharp point, turns upward, the
upper bends downward. Neither do they always observe the same side; for in some
birds the upper Chap hangs down on the right side, the nether rises up on the
left; in others contrariwise, the lower takes the right side, the upper the
left. The lower Chap is like the Chafinches, neither is the Tongue different.
The Nosthrils are round: The Ears great and wide: The Irides of the Eyes from
gray tend to a hazel-colour: The Feet dusky, the Claws black. The lowest joint
of the outmost toe sticks to that of the middlemost.

The middle parts of the Back and Head feathers are black, the edges green. In
the Head there is something of cinereous mixed with the other colors. The Rump
is green: The Chin ash-colored: The Breast green: The Belly white, only under
the Tail the middle parts of the feathers are black or dusky.

Each Wing has eighteen quil-feathers, all blackish, only the outer edges of
the foremost are green. The Tail consists of twelve feathers, two inches and a
quarter long, and black, with green edges. The Guts have many spiral
convolutions. The blind guts are very short.

This bird was described in the Autumn: He that sold it told us that it changed
colors thrice in a year, being green in the Autumn, yellow in the Winter, and
red in the Spring. Gesner also says, that they are first of all red on the
Breast, Neck, and Belly; that then they grow yellow: And that they change
color especially in Winter. Some affirm, that it changes color every year, so
that it sometimes declines more to yellow, sometimes to green, red, or
ash color. That it changes its color with age, or according to the different
seasons of the year, we cannot but think probable, being so well attested.
Perchance also in the same age and season of the year the color in diverse
birds may be different. For we saw and bought at Nurenberg in Germany two of
this sort of birds brought up together in one Cage, of which one was green, the
other red, when the Summer was almost spent, and Autumn coming on. But however
the colors may differ, this bird is sufficiently characterized by the make of
it Bill. Kept in Cages they climb up and down the sides with the Bills and
Feet, after the manner of Parrots.

It is a most voracious bird; much delighted and feeding very fat with
Hemp Seed. It also loves Fir-kernels, and in the Months of January and February
builds its Nest in those, or the like trees. They say, that with one stroke of
its bill, it will in a trice divide an Apple in halves, that it may feed upon
the Kernels, by that means doing a great deal of mischief in Orchards.

In some parts of Germany, Bavaria, Suevia, Noricum, they are found in great
numbers all the year round. Sometimes they come over to us, and in the Western
part of England, especially Worcestershire, make bad work, spoiling a great
deal of fruit in our Orchards.

One thing also more (says Aldrovandus) seems to me strange and unusual in
the Cross-bill; that in the Wintertime, when all things shrink with cold, and
other birds are mute, she sings; and in Summer, when other birds sing, she is
silent. Which whether it be true or no let those observe among whom such birds
are common. It sings, they say, very sweetly.

CHAP. V. Of Sparrows.
THese Birds feed upon grains of Corn, Crumbs of bread, worms, and diverse Seeds.
Their Bills are short, thick, and something crooked: Their color testaceous or
earthy. They are very salacious, and therefore held to be short-lived.

. I. The House-Sparrow. Passer domesticus, Aldrov.
THe weight of this well known, and every where obvious bird is 1 ounce: Its
length from the beginning of the Bill to the end of the Tail six inches and an
half.

The Bill is thick, in the Cock black, at the corners of the Mouth between the
Eyes yellowish, in the Hen dusky, scarce half an inch long: The Eyes
hazel-coloured: The Legs and Feet of a dusky flesh-colors: The Claws black. The
lower joint of the outmost Toe, as in other small birds, grows to that of the
middle Toe.

The Head is of a dusky blue, or ash color; the Chin black. Above the Eyes are
two small white spots. From the Eyes a broad line of a spadiceous color. The
feathers growing about the Ears are ash-colored. The Throat [below the black
spot] of a white ash color. Under the Ears on each side is a great white spot.
The lower Breast and Belly are white. The feathers dividing between the Back
and Neck, on the outside the shaft are red, on the inside black, but toward
their bottoms something of white terminates the red. The rest of the Back and
Rump are of the same color with Thrushes. made up as it were of a mixture of
green, dusky, and ash color.

The Hen-bird wants that black spot under the Throat, as also the white spots
on the Neck, and above the Eyes: Its Head and Neck being also of the same
color with the Rump: The nether side of the body of a sordid white. Instead of
a white line cross the Wings it has black feathers with pale reddish tips. In
general the colors all the body over are not so fair and lively.

Each Wing has eighteen quil-feathers, dusky, with reddish edges. From the
bastard Wing a broad white line is extended to the next joint. Above this line
the covert-feathers of the Wings are of a A color near to chestnut, but redder.
spadiceous color; beneath they have their middle parts black, their exterior
edges red. The Tail has twelve feathers, and is two inches and a quarter long,
the middlemost feathers being something shorter than the rest: All of a dusky
blackish color, with reddish edges.

Its Testicles are great, as being a very salacious bird. Its Guts nine inches
long: The blind Guts very short. Its Stomach musculous, it feeding upon Wheat,
Barley, and other Grain. The Womb of the Female is great. It has a
Gallbladder.

Whether or no it be so short-lived as is reported, I think there is some
reason to doubt.

This kind of bird does sometimes vary in color: Aldrovandus setting forth a
white and a yellow Sparrow: The figures and descriptions whereof may be seen in
the fifteenth Book of his Ornithology, Chap. 11, 12.

. II. * The foolish Bononian Sparrow of Aldrovand.
IT is in bigness equal to the common Sparrow. The color of its whole body is
yellowish, spotted every where with oblong rusty, or rather red spots, which on
the Back are longer and bigger than elsewhere, all over tending downwards. The
Bill is red, thick, and short: The Eyes great, their Pupils encompassed with a
yellow circle, The Tail and Wings incline to black; but the ends of the lesser
feathers in the Wings are white.

. III. * A small bird akin to the Sparrow: Aldrov. Book 15. Chap. 17.
THis small bird, although it have not a black Chin, nor any footstep of it,
(as we have observed in some Hen-Sparrows) yet by the whole fashion and make of
its body it discovers and warrants it self to be of the Sparrow-kind. Its Bill
is whitish, as in the House-Sparrow. It is painted all over the body with
oblong reddish spots tending downward: But those on the underside of the Neck,
and on the Breast are more manifest, because those parts are white, whereas the
upper, viz. the Back, the upper side of the Neck, and the crown of the Head are
red; as are also the whole Tail and the Wings: but most of the feathers of
these have white ends: The Belly also and the Thighs are white: The Legs and
Feet yellowish: The Claws long and black.

. IV. * The spotted, or three-coloured Sparrow of Aldrovand. Book 15. Chap. 13.
HE calls it three-coloured, for that whereas it consists only of three
colors, viz. white, black, and yellowish, no one of them can be said to excel
another. The whole Head and Neck are white, varied with yellowish spots. The
Wings are adorned with the three forenamed colors, but the white and black are
in them predominant. The Bill, as in Sparrows, thick, sharp pointed, the upper
Chap yellowish, the nether altogether yellow. The Iris of the Eye is white; the
Pupil black. The Chin, Breast and Belly, Thighs, Legs, Feet, and Tail
underneath are of a yellowish white; else the Tail is almost yellow.

. V. * The white-tail'd Sparrow of Aldrovand. Book 15. Chap. 14.
THe Tail of this, although it be not altogether white, yet is of a pale,
whitish ash color, whereas otherwise for color it is almost like the
House-Sparrow, but has not that black spot under the Chin. The Bill, as in
that, is white: The Eyes black: The Head, and all the lower parts from white
incline to yellow. Large spots of almost a ferrugineous color, beautified with
very small milk-white lines, are dispersed all over the Back. All the feathers
of the Wings are of a chesnut-colour, round about yellow. The Legs and Feet are
dusky.

. VI. * The Dalmatic Sparrow of Aldrovand. Lib. 15. Cap. 21.
THis bird Aldrovand saw only the Picture of at Tartaglinus's a Citizen of
Venice. It is (says he) bigger than our common Sparrow, but for color almost
like it. The word Prone, which as Aldrovand usually accepts it signifies above.
Underneath also it is absolutely white, but above of a pale red, no other
color interceding. The Eyes and Bill for the proportion of the body are great;
and this last whitish. The Tail is forked; the Feet yellowish, adorned with
transverse lines almost of a flesh-colors. The Claws black, pretty long and
sharp.

. VII. * The Ring-Sparrow of Bellonius, and the small Sparrow living about
Walnut-trees of the same Author.
THe first of these differs from the common Sparrow, as well in that it is of a
diverse color, as because the spot, which in that is black, in this is yellow.
He calls it Ringed.
Torquatus, because a white ring or wreath encompasses the Eyes under the
Eyebrows. Moreover, it is more cinereous than the common Sparrow, has a
greater voice, and exceeds it in the bigness of the Body and Bill. It abides in
Woods, building in the hollows of trees.

The other, called Friguet by the French, is least of all, having a very short,
thick, black Bill; its Feet, Legs, Head, and Wings, like those of the
Wall-Sparrow. It builds in Trees.

. VIII. * The tailed purple and black Indian Sparrow of Aldrov. Book 15. Chap.
28.
IT has a Tail five inches long, made up of ten very black feathers. The
quil-feathers of the Wings are also cole-black. The Head, Neck, and Rump are of
a deep purple color, yet the roots or bottoms of the feathers yellow. The Bill
is pretty thick, somewhat hooked and sharp, something resembling that of the
Butcherbird, black above, beneath where it grows to the Head white. The color
of the Legs I know not, for they were wanting in the case communicated to me,
but it is likely that it has black ones.

. IX. * The Tijepiranga of Brasil or American Sparrow, Marggrave.
IT is a little bigger than a Lark, and sings like our common Sparrow. Its
whole Body, Neck, and Head are of a delicate red or sanguine color: But the
Wings and Tail of a shining black, saving that in the beginning of the Wings
there is something of red mixed therewith. The Legs are black, below the Knees
bare of feathers, above covered with black feathers. The Bill like a Sparrows,
the upper Chap black, the nether black also toward the point, but white toward
the Head. The feathers on the Head black, which she is sometimes wont to ruffle
up after the manner of Sparrows. All the feathers of the whole body are black
within, red without, yet so complicated, that outwardly they appear wholly red.
The Tail is almost three inches long. Each foot has four Toes, and so disposed
as in most other birds.

There is found another sort of this bird, of the bigness of a Sparrow, whose
whole body is covered with bluish ash-colored feathers: But the Wings approach
something to a Seagreen. In the Belly and lower part of the Neck or Throat it
is white, or rather of a shining silver color. The Legs are ash-colored, as
is also the Bill, which is like a Chaffinches. Each foot divided into four
Toes, and those situate as is usual in birds.

. X. * The long-tail'd Indian Sparrow with a scarlet Bill of Aldrovand.
IT is of equal bigness to our House-Sparrows, if you except the longer
feathers of the Tail. It has a short thick Bill of a scarlet color. Its Head
is flat, elevated near the Neck, blackish, with a mixture of a greenish color
inclining to blue; which also is seen running downward through the Back and
upper part of the Wings. The Wings are of three colors chiefly; first, that
now mentioned; secondly, a white, as appears in the figure; thirdly, a black:
To which succeeds fourthly, a yellowish color, next which are the
quil-feathers again black, but cinereous within. The Throat, lower side of the
Neck, the Breast and Belly are white. The Tail is double, as in the Peacock,
and also of two colors: The lesser which sustains the greater, being as it
were its prop, is white; the greater, consisting of four very narrow feathers
of nine inches long, is of a deep black. The Legs and Feet are spotted of black
and white; the Talons black, and as in birds of prey very sharp and hooked.

. XI. * Another Indian long-tail'd Sparrow of Aldrovand, Book 15. Chap. 23.
THis is an exceeding beautiful bird, even fairer than the former: Of the same
bigness. Its Bill is blue: Its Head also, as in that, flat; but more elevated
in the Neck; all black; its Eyes also black, encompassed with a white circle,
and having a yellow Iris: Its Neck and Breast are of a scarlet color; its
Belly and Thighs white: Its Wings, Back, and Tail black: But a certain paleness
is mingled with the quil-feathers of the Wings. The longer feathers of the
Tail, (which are two exceeding long ones, viz. five Palms, and very broad; and
a third first also broad, but ending in very slender filaments) are supported
by other smaller ones. The Legs and Feet are white: The Claws black, and, as in
the precedent, notably sharp and hooked.

. XII. * A short-tail'd Indian Sparrow of Aldrovand, Book 15. Chap. 24.
THis Bird is lesser than the two former, all over black: Which color yet has
I know not what kind of blue and violet gloss; as is usually seen to happen in
deep blacks. The Bill and Feet are of a flesh-colors; the Claws black. The Eyes
also black, but encompassed with a white circle.

. XIII. * The short-tail'd Italian Sparrow of Aldrovand.
THe Bird (says he) which you see here delineated, having a very short Tail,
called Passerino, that is a little Sparrow, is sometimes taken in the Country
about Bologna. Its whole body is of one color, viz. yellowish: Yet its Breast
and Belly are whiter than the other parts. Its Bill is of a deeper yellow.

. XIV. * The rumpless black and red Indian Sparrow of Aldrovand.
THe whole body, both above and underneath, as also the beginnings of the Wings
are of a most lovely shining scarlet color: The rest of the Wings is black:
But yet, if their feathers are spread out, something of white appears in their
sides. The Feet also are black: Moreover, it has along the Back two oblong,
black spots, almost contiguous. The Bill for the proportion of the body small,
(for it is a thick-bodied bird for its bigness) and less also than in the
common Sparrow, white where it is joined to the head, else black, sharp, and
slender. It altogether wants a Rump.

. XV. * The rumpless blue, red, and black Indian Sparrow of Aldrovand.
THis Bird is longer than the former, but less corpulent, and of three colors,
especially, viz. red, blue, and black. The Head, Neck, and Breast, and all the
lower parts are of a deep red color. On the sides of the Neck are two large
contiguous spots of a semilunar figure and scarlet color. The Wings are very
long, black and blue about the sides. The Legs short and black. The Bill a
little crooked, black, but white near the forehead.

All these Indian Sparrows are to us unknown: Aldrovandus also himself saw only
the pictures of them, not the birds themselves. But Pictures of them (as Pliny
rightly says) fallacious, these descriptions cannot be thought to come near
the exactness of such as are taken from the birds themselves.

. XVI. The Mountain Sparrow, frequent in Stiria and Carinthia.
FRom the tip of the Bill to the end of the Claws it was by measure six inches
long. Its Tongue was something cloven: The Irides of its Eyes between gray and
hazel-coloured. Its Chin was black: It had also on both sides a black spot
about the Ears. A border of white compasses the Neck almost half way, and the
spots about the ears. The Head of a dusky red. The outer Webs of the feathers
on the middle of the Back are red, the inner black. The Rump is of a yellowish
ash color. The Breast and Belly of a sordid white. Of the second and third row
of Wing-feathers all but the eighth or tenth outmost have white tips. The small
feathers on the base or ridge of the Wing are red, as are also the outmost
edges of the rest. The number of quil-feathers is eighteen. The Tail is two
inches and a quarter long, made up of twelve feathers, of almost equal length.
The Bill is black, more than half an inch long; at the corners of the Mouth and
lower Chap yellow. It had a large Craw, full of seeds: The muscles of the
Gizzard were not very thick. The Testicles great and white.

The description of the Mountain Sparrow in Aldrovand agrees indifferently well
with ours, save that he attributes to it two black spots beside the Eyes; one
of which is wanting in our bird; at least Mr. Willughby mentions only one.

We saw abundance of these birds in the mountainous Countries of Stiria and
Carinthia, as we traveled from Vienna to Venice.

. XVII. * The Wood-Sparrow of Aldrovand, Book 15. Chap. 16.
IN bigness it exactly corresponds with the common Sparrows. Its Bill from
yellow inclines to white; and is (as I may so say) exactly Sparrow-like. The
crown of its head, as in the precedent Mountain Sparrow, is of a rusty color,
inclining to Vermilion. The circumference of the Eyes white, the Iris
yellowish, the Pupil black. From Chin to Tail it is of an ash color, but the I
suppose he means the ends or tips.
extremities of the feathers incline to red. The Chin and underside of the Neck
are crossed with continuous, transverse, blackish lines; whereas in all other
Cock-Sparrows we suspect, nay, we positively affirm, that they are wholly
black. The Back, Tail, and Feet are of a dusky ferrugineous, save that the tips
or ends of the feathers are altogether yellow. The Wings are of the same
color, but the first feathers, which cover their Costae.
ridges end in a notable white.

. XVIII. * The Brasilian Sparrow, called Guiranheemgatu by Marggrave.
IT is of the bigness of a Sparrow. The Head above is of a pale yellow, as is
the Throat: The Neck, Breast, and lower Belly of a deeper yellow. The Wings are
mixed of green and yellow, and distinguished with dusky, as is also the Tail.
The Eyes and Bill black: The Legs dusky. The Cock of this kind sings rarely
well, like a Finch. The Hen is of the same bigness, covered with Sparrow-like
feathers, sings not, but cries Tschrip, tschrip like a Sparrow.

CHAP. VI.
. I. The Chaffinch: Fringilla, (...) Aristotelis.
IT is something less than a House-Sparrow, weighing not a full ounce. Its Bill
is sharp, strong, white underneath, above and toward the tip dusky: The lower
Chap Understand it in length.
equal to the upper: The Tongue cloven and rough: The Irides of the Eyes
hazel-coloured: The Ears great.

The Head in the Cock is blue, but the feathers contiguous to the Nosthrils
black. The Back is reddish with a mixture of ash color or green: The Breast
red; the Belly under the Tail white.

The colors of the Hen are not so bright and lively. But its Rump is green:
Its Back not so red: The Belly from red inclines to a dirty kind of green. The
Breast also is of a duller color.

The Quil-feathers in each Wing, in number eighteen, all but the three first,
or outmost have their bottoms and interior Webs white; their exterior edges
yellowish, or rather green. In the Cock the small feathers investing the ridge
or basis of the Wing are blue. Above in each Wing is a remarkable white spot:
Then after an interstice of black succeeds a long white fillet, beginning from
the fourth quill, and after the tenth continued through the tops of the
covert-feathers. That part of this white fillet which passes through the tips
of the coverts is tinctured with yellow.

The Tail is two inches and an half long, and made up of twelve feathers, of
which the outmost on each side have their bottoms, and also their tops on the
outside the shaft black, their middle part white. The next to these have less
white, viz. only near the top, and on the outside the shaft: The three
subsequent on both sides are black: the two middlemost cinereous with greenish
edges.

The Liver is divided into two Lobes, the right being the biggest. The Stomach
not very fleshy. The outmost Toe in each foot, as in other small birds, grows
to the middlemost at bottom.

This bird sometimes varies in the color of its feathers. For Gesner affirms,
that himself had seen a Chaffinch all over white: And Aldrovandus describes two
others, one whose whole body from white declined to yellow: Another that was
partly yellowish, and partly blackish.

They are (says Aldrovandus) birds of passage: They love moderate cold, but
are offended by immoderate. But with us in England they fear no cold, abiding
here all Winter, be the weather never so sharp: Neither is there any Bird more
frequent in all parts of this Land, excepting perchance the Lark, the Sparrow,
and the Yellowhammer.

. II. The Bramble or Brambling: Fringilla montana seu Montifringilla, (...),
Arist.
IN weight and bigness it agrees with the precedent. Its Bill is thick, strong,
streigt, from a broad base diminishing into a sharp point, almost like a Cone
or Funnel; in some birds wholly black, in others black at point, and yellow at
bottom. Its Tongue like the Chaffinches; the upper Chap of equal length with
the lower, its sides strong and thin'd into sharp edges. [The Bill of the
Female has no part yellow.] Its Feet of a pale dusky color: The outer Toe
joined to the middle below, as in other small birds. From the head to the
middle of the Back the color in the Cock is like that of a Starling, a shining
black, the edges of the feathers being of a reddish ash color. The lower part
of the Back is white. The Throat is of a yellowish red; the Breast white; the
feathers behind the Vent reddish.

In the Female the Head from red or dusky inclines to cinereous: The Neck is
ash-colored: The feathers of the Back have their middle parts black, their
borders of that same reddish ash color. The Throat is not so red as in the
Cock. Within the ridge of the Wing it has less yellow, and without no Orange
color. In brief it is every where more discolored.

The interior quil-feathers of the Wings are red, the inmost of all black,
with red edges. Beginning from the fourth, seventh, or eighth of the subsequent
feathers have a white spot on the outside their shafts, by the tips of the
feathers of the second row. Underneath also their exterior edges are whitish;
else the quil-feathers are all black. The Plumage near the base of the Wing
underneath is of a lovely yellow, above of an Orange color.

The Tail is four inches long, compounded of twelve feathers, of a black
color, but the exterior Web of the outmost feather on both sides is white,
and sometimes also the interior. The tips and edges of the two middle feathers
are of a reddish ash color.

At Venice we found great numbers of these birds in the Poulterers shops in
Winter time; whence we infer that they are common in the Country thereabouts at
least in that season of the year. They are found also in England, but more
rarely.

These birds also sometimes vary in their colors. Hence in Aldrovandus we have
three figures and descriptions of Montifringillae: Of which that in the second
place is of a paler color, and has its head wholly white. The third is
altogether like the first, save that under the Bill it has no black: And
besides that second yellow stroke which is in others, in this was far more
conspicuous.

. III. The great pied Mountain-Finch or Bramlin: Montifringilla calcaribus
Alaudae seu major.
IT is equal in bigness to the common Lark, from the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Tail being five inches and a quarter long; and between the extremes of
the Wings stretched out twelve and three quarters broad. Its Bill is half an
inch long, of a yellow color, with a black tip. The end of the Tongue is
divided into filaments. The top of the Head of a fulvous red, darker toward the
Bill. [Mr. Johnson attributes to the Head and upper part of the Neck a dusky
red or chestnut color.] The upper side of the Neck, the Rump and sides are also
red: So is the Breast, but paler, the rest of the under side, Throat, Belly,
Wings, etc. is white. The underside of the Neck, the Back and scapular feathers
are elegantly variegated with black and a reddish ash color; the middle part
of each feather being black, and the outsides red. The black spots appear of a
triangular figure. In the upper part of the Wings and bottom of the Back there
is more of red.

Each wing has eighteen prime feathers, of which the eight outmost or longest
are black; yet their bottoms, as far as they are hidden by the second row,
except the outer edge of the outmost feather are white: Moreover, the very
tips, or rather edges of the tips of all excepting the two outmost, are white.
The seven next, which take up the middle part of the Wing, are wholly white,
save that near the tip on the outside each feather has an oblong black spot.
The remaining three or four next the body are black, having their uppermost
edges red. All the covert-feathers of the Wings, excepting those next the body,
and two or three, which make up the bastard Wing, are white; those excepted
being black. But Nature (as I see) observes not an exact rule in the colors of
this birds Wings: For in the bird described by Mr. Willughby the
covert-feathers of the black quils were for the most part black, of the white
ones white: Yet in general in all birds that we have seen there were large
white spaces in each Wing. The Tail is somewhat forked, two inches and an half
long, made up of twelve feathers, the two outmost whereof on each side being
wholly white, save a very little of the outer edge toward the tip, which is
black, more in the outmost, less in the next. The outward Web of the third on
each side almost from the top quite down to the bottom is white: The remaining
six are black, having only their edges about their tips white. The Legs, Feet,
and Claws are cole-black. The back-Claw or Spur is longer than the rest, as in
Larks, of about half an inch. The outmost Toe for a good space from the
divarication is joined to the middle one, as in most small birds.

This Bird Mr. Willughby found and killed in Lincolnshire. Mr. Johnson sent us
the Bird it self, and the description of it out of the Northern part of
Yorkshire.

The same Mr. Johnson sent also the description of another bird of this kind by
the name of The lesser Mountain-Finch or Bramlin, together with the case of the
Bird; which by the case I took to be only the Female of the precedent, he from
its difference in bigness, place, and other accidents rather judges it a
distinct species. I shall therefore present the Reader with his description of
it.

It is of the bigness of a yellow Finch, has a thick, short, strong Neb, black
at the very point, and the rest yellow. All the forehead of a dark chestnut,
almost black, growing lighter backwards, about and under either Eye lighter
chestnut: The back of the Neck ash-colored, which goes down the Back to the
Tail, but there more spotted with black. Under the Throat white, but Breast and
Belly dashed or waved with flame-colour; at the setting on of the Wing gray. The
first five feathers blackish brown, all the rest white, save a little dash of
brown near the point of each feather. The Tail consists of twelve feathers, the
three outmost on either side white, save a little small dash of dark brown: The
rest dark brown. The Feet perfectly black. The hind-claw as long again as any
of the rest.

CHAP. VII. * The Brasilian Sayacu of Marggrave.
TO what tribe of small birds this is to be referred we do not certainly know:
But because the Author says it is of the bigness of a Chaffinch, we have
placed it here. The whole body is covered with feathers of a color mingled of
cinereous and Seagreen: But in the Wings and Back the Seagreen is so mixed
that, exposed to the Sun, they shine marvellously. The Bill is black; The Eyes
also wholly black.

CHAP. VIII. * The Brasilian Tijeguacuparoara of Marggrave.
IT is of the bigness of a Lark; has a short, thick Neb, dusky above, white
underneath. The top and sides of the Head, the Throat, and lower side of the
Neck are covered with yellow feathers, spotted with sanguine. [This Bird was a
Female, for in the Male the Plumage of these parts is wholly sanguine.] The
upper side of the Neck and whole Back with ash-colored ones, The words are
Umbra aliquatenus mixtas, by which perchance the Anthor might mean, mixed with a
little Umber-colour.
somewhat shaded: The Wing-feathers are dusky, with white borders: As also the
Tail: But the covert-feathers of the Wings are cineous. The Back for the most
part, excepting the ends of the feathers, the sides of the Neck, the Breast,
and whole Belly, with the Thighs are covered with white feathers. The Legs and
Feet are dusky: Four Toes in each placed after the usual manner. It has black
Eyes.

CHAP. IX. * The Brasilian Guiraperea of Marggrave.
THis is also of the bigness of a Lark: Has a short, thick, black Bill. The
upper part of the Head and Neck, the whole Back, and lower Belly have feathers
of a dark yellow color, like yellow Wax: The lower side of the Head and Neck,
the Throat and Breast black ones: Of which color there are also a few in the
Belly intermingled with the yellow. The Tail is two inches long, and reaches
further than the Wings. Both Tail and Wings are made up of dusky and blackish
feathers, every one of which has its side-edges of a Seagreen, so that the
Wings appear brown, straked with green: And in like manner the Tail. The Thighs
are of a Wax-colour: The Legs and Feet of a dark gray or ash color. It has
four Toes disposed according to the usual manner, armed with black Claws.

CHAP. X.
. I. The Goldfinch, or Thistle-finch; Carduelis.
THis Bird, in the opinion of Aldrovandus and Bellonius is the (...) of
Aristotle, by the later Greeks called (...). It is less than the House-Sparrow;
of an ounce and half weight; five inches and an half length from Bill-point to
Tail end; nine and a quarter breadth between the utmost tips of the Wings
spread out. Its Head for the bulk of the body is of the biggest: Its Neck
short; Bill white, but in some birds black at the very point, little more than
half an inch long, thick at the head, ending in a sharp point, of a Conical
figure: Its Tongue sharp: Eyes hazel-coloured. A ring of scarlet-colored
feathers encompasses the basis of the Bill. From the Eyes to the Bill on each
side is drawn a black line. The Jaws are white: The top of the Head black, from
which a broad black line, produced on both sides almost to the Neck, terminates
the white. The hinder part of the Head is white. The Neck and forepart of the
Back are of a fulvous or reddish ash color. The Rump, Breast, and sides are of
the same color, but paler. The Belly white. The Wings and Tail black; Yet the
tips of the principal feathers in both are white. Besides, the Wings are
adorned with a most beautiful transverse stroke of yellow. If you exactly view
each quil-feather, you will find the first or outmost wholly black; all the
rest tipped with white; and besides the lower half of the outward Web of every
feather from the second to the eleventh inclusively of an elegant yellow, which
together make that yellow bed across the Wing we now mentioned; whence this
bird is supposed to be called (...). The interior covert-feathers of the Wings
are also yellow. The Tail is two inches long, composed of twelve black
feathers, of which the two outmost have a great white spot on their tips; the
next a lesser; The third none; the fourth again a little one, and the fifth a
greater.

The Legs are short; the Back Toe strong, armed, with a Claw longer than the
rest. The lower of the outer foretoe grows fast to that of the middle toe. The
blind Guts, as in other small birds, are very short and little. It has also a
Gallbladder.

The Hen-bird has a smaller note than the Cock, and sings not so much, and the
feathers on the ridge of the Wing are dusky or cinereous, whereas in the Cocks
they are cole-black: and these (says Aldrovandus) are constant and infallible
marks by which the Sexes may be distinguished.

Goldfinches are gregarious birds, for the elegancy of their colors and
sweetness of their singing every where well known and highly esteemed. They are
of a mild and gentle nature, as may even thence appear, that presently after
they are caught, without using any art or care, they will fall to their meat
and drink; nor are they so scared and affrighted at the presence of a man, as
to strike their Bills and Wings against the sides of the Cage, as most other
birds are wont to do. Nor are they very much troubled at their captivity and
imprisonment in a Cage: Nay, if they have continued there a good while, they
like it so well, that though you let them loose, they will not fly away, as
(says Aldrovand) I my self have observed, to whom I refer the Reader. They
feed upon the seeds of Thistles in Winter times, from whence they took their
name, and not of Thistles only, but of Teasel, and Hemp, and Dock, and Poppy,
as Albertus tells us. The Goldfinch kept in a Cage will with its Bill draw up a
little pot of water hanging upon a string, and putting its foot sometimes under
the string when it can reach the Pot, will drink out of it, and quench its
thirst, which other small birds also will learn to do. Besides that little
Thistle-finch (says Turner) adorned with a golden fillet, I know another
spinivorous bird of a green color, which, in like manner as the Goldfinch, out
of two pots, one going up, the other mean time going down, will take meat out
of the one, and drink out of the other. The same does also the Millet-bird,
which our Country men call a Linnet. The same likewise will imitate any tune
you whistle to it. So then not only that bird which is in Greek called (...),
and in Latin by Gaza rendered Carduelis, will do what you bid it, and use its
Bill and Feet for a hand, but many others also. All which things (says
Aldrovandus) daily experience proves to be most true. It builds its Nest in
thorns, and trees. Gesner affirms, that it lays seven Eggs, Bellonius, eight:
The difference is not great, and it may lay sometimes the one, sometimes the
other number.

The Goldfinch, by reason of age, sex, or other accidents, varies sometimes in
its colors. Aldrovandus sets forth four varieties: 1. One not full grown,
which had no red at all on its Head: 2. One with white Eyelids: 3. A white one
with a red head: 4. A whitish one, which yet on the forepart of the Head and
under the Chin had something of red. Besides which he describes also a bird of
kin to the Goldfinch, (which perchance was a bastard kind) in these words.

In bulk of body it exceeds a Goldfinch, being equal to a Chaffinch. A circle
of a lively A Bird of kin to the Goldfinch.
Saffron color encompasses the Bill. Its Eyes are like a Goldfinches, but
bigger. Its Head, except the Saffron ring now mentioned, and its Back are of
the same color, viz. blackish. The Breast is of a black green, as are also the
small feathers, covering the ridges of the Wings: Whose quil-feathers are
black, and much more varied or distinguished with white, than in other birds of
this kind. That part which in other Thistle-finches is yellow, in this is of a
pale color. The Tail of as deep a black as in others; but in the two outmost
Tail-feathers on each side when extended appeared something of white; which
otherwise, when the Tail was closed, was hidden, and not exposed to view. The
whole Belly from cinereous inclined to dusky.

. II. * The Brasilian Jacarini of Marggrave.
IT is of the bigness of our Goldfinch: Has a thick, ash-colored Bill:
Ash-colored Legs and Feet, with four Toes situate after the usual manner. The
whole Body is covered with black feathers, but shining with a gloss like
polished steel. The Wings withinside are white. The Eyes are blue, and behind
each a large hole instead of Ears. This Bird being of the bigness of a
Goldfinch, and having a Bill not unlike it, not knowing better to dispose of
it, I have inserted in this Chapter, although it agrees not in color either
with the Goldfinch, or any other European Bird, that I know, of this bigness.

CHAP. XI. Of the Linnet.
. I. Of the Linnet in general.
THe Characteristic notes of this kind are, 1. A size of body something less
than a Chaffinch: 2. A testaceous or earthy color, mixed of cinereous and dusky
or brown: 3. A Tail a little forked: 4. A peculiar color of the outmost
feathers of the Tail, viz. brown, with white borders or edges: 5. A sweet note.
Of Linnets we have observed four sorts in England: 1. The common: 2. The
greater red: 3. The lesser red. 4. The Mountain Linnet.

. II. The common Linnet: Linaria vulgaris.
IT weighs about an ounce: From the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail
being half a foot long; between the tips of the Wings spread forth ten inches
broad. Its Bill is half an inch long, thick, strong, black above, white
underneath. The Tongue is as it were cut off: The Nosthrils round: The Head
parti-colored of cinereous and black; the Back of black and reddish, the middle
part of each feather being black, the edges or outsides in the Head cinereous,
in the Back reddish. The Breast is white: The lower Belly about the Vent
yellowish. The region of the Craw or bottom of the Gullet is of a lovely red,
the edges of the feathers being yellowish. Each Wing has eighteen
quil-feathers, all black but the edges, which in the exterior are whitish, in
the interior red. The foremost feathers of the second row are black, the edges
of the interior, or those next the rise of the Wing red. The lesser
covertfeathers about the ridge or base of the Wing are red. The Tail is
somewhat forked, its two outmost feathers being two inches and a quarter long;
the middle only two: Of the middle two the borders or edges are red, of the
rest white. The Tail consists of the usual number of twelve feathers. It
delights to feed upon Line-seed, whence Gesner, in imitation of the French,
(who call it Linote) imposed on it the name of Linaria. It seems not to have
been described or mentioned by the Ancients: Howbeit, Bellonius makes it to be
the Aegithus of Aristotle. It is kept in Cages with us for the sweetness of its
singing; wherein, in my judgment, it excels all other small birds. It feeds
upon Canary seed, Panic, Millet (whence also it is by some called Miliaria)
Rape-seed, Cole-seed, and Hemp Seed. But whatever seed it eats it first i. e.
hulls or pills it.
decorticates it with its Bill, that it may feed only on the pulp. But
Hemp Seed (that we may note that by the by) makes birds that feed upon it so
fat that it either kills them, or takes from them all courage and list to sing.
Olina says, that the Linnet builds in trees that are not very tall, and lays
three or four Eggs. We have observed it to build in black or white thorn
bushes, or Furze-bushes. Mr. Willughby ascribes to the Feet of this bird an
obscure dusky or blarkish color; Olina a middle color between fleshcolour and
white. Perchance the Feet of the younger birds are paler, of the old darker
colored: Or those of the Cock blacker, the Hen-birds white. Mr. Jessop sent us
a Linnet of the common sort with Feet perfectly black, but that was
extraordinary.

An Addition to the History of the Linnet out of our English Writer of Singing
Birds.
YOu may take the young ones out at four days old, if you intend they shall
learn to whistle or hear any other birds song: For then being so young they
have not the old birds song, and are more apt to take any thing than if you
suffer them to be in the Nest till they are almost quite fledged. You must be
sure when you take them out so young, to keep them very warm, and to feed them
but a little at a time. Your meat must be Rape-seed soaked, and then bruised,
mingled with full as much soaked white-bread. You must make fresh every day;
for if it be sour, it immediately makes them scour, and not long after die. You
must not give them their meat too dry, for if you do it will make them
Vent-burned; and that is as bad as if they scoured. If you intend to whistle to
them, do it when you feed them. For they will learn very much before they can
crack hard seeds. So hang them under any bird you intend they shall learn his
Song. I have known several that have been taught to speak.

You may know the Cock-Linnet by these two marks: 1. The Cock is much browner
on the Back and pinion of the Wing than the Hen. 2. By the white of the Wing.
Take your young Linnet when the Wing-feathers are grown, and stretch out his
Wing, holding his body fast with the other hand (otherwise I have known them by
a sudden jerk to break their Wings) and then observe the white upon the fourth,
fifth, and sixth feather, if it be glossie and glistering, and the white goes
close to the quill, this is a certain sign of a Cock.

The Linnets diseases and their cures.
1. This Bird is sometimes troubled with melancholy, and then you will find the
end of his Rump to be very much swelled; which you must prick with a Needle,
and let out all the corruption, squeezing it out very well with the point of
the Needle; then anoint him with the ointment made of fresh butter and Capons
grease, and feed him for two or three days with Lettice, or Beet seeds, and the
leaves also: And you may give him the seeds of Melons chopped in pieces, which he
will eat very greedily; and when you find him to mend take the Melon seeds
away, and give him his old diet again: Put into his water two or three blades
of Saffron and white Sugar Candy for a Week or more, till you perceive the bird
to be wholly recovered.

2. The disease this Bird is most troubled withal is a scouring; of which there
are three sorts: The first very thin, and with a black substance in the middle,
which is not very dangerous; for I have known many sing very strong and lavish
when they have had this scouring in a very violent manner. The second is
between a black and a white, but not so thin as the other, but very clammy and
sticking. This is worse than the former. It is recovered by giving your bird
some Melon-seed shred, and Lettuce seeds and Beet seeds bruised, and in his
water some Liquorice and white Sugar Candy, with a little flour of Oatmeal. You
must be diligent at the first to observe him when he is sick, that so he may
have a stomach to eat: For in two or three days his stomach will be quite gone,
and then it will be hard recovering him again. The third and worst sort of
scouring is the white clammy scouring, which is dangerous and mortal, if not
well looked after at the first. This is occasioned by bad seeds, and many times
for want of water. If it be not taken at the first appearance it immediately
causes him to droop, and fall from his meat, and then all medicines are
useless. First, give him Flax-seeds, taking away all other seeds; then give him
Plantainseeds, if green, otherwise they will do him no good: For want of
Plantain-seeds give him some of the Leaves shred small, and some Oatmeal
bruised, with a few crumbs of bread: And in his water give him some white
Sugar Candy and Liquorice, with a blade or two of Saffron.

To avoid the peril of scouring Olina advises to let him have always a piece of
chalk in his Cage.

. III. The greater red-headed Linnet: Linaria rubra major.
THis is something less than the common Linnet: Its Bill short, thick, of a
Conical figure like the Chaffinches, the upper Chap black, the lower at the
base white: The Tongue sharp, and as it were cut off, as in the Chaffinch: The
Nosthrils round: The Eyes hazel-coloured. The crown of the head adorned with a
red or sanguine color, but not very bright and shining. The rest of the Head
and Neck round about are cinereous. The Shoulders, Back, and covert feathers of
the Wings are red. The Breast is tinctured with red. The sides under the Wings
are of a yellowish red or spadiceous color. The outmost quil-feathers of the
Wings are black, the inner dusky. The exterior edges of the eight outmost,
excluding the first, are white, the white from the bottom toward the top
extending it self in breadth in every feather more and more in order, till in
the ninth feather it reaches almost to the tip. These white edges in the Wing
complicated concur to make up a white spot externally conspicuous. From the
ninth the tips of the sixth or seventh succeeding are blunt and indented. The
interior margins of all the quil-feathers are white, and the tips also of
those toward the body, or setting on of the Wing. The Tail is something forked,
two inches and an half long, made up of the usual number of twelve feathers;
all sharp-pointed, and of two colors, both edges, as well inner as outer,
being white, but the outer more; which color in the extreme or outmost
feathers takes up almost half the breadth of the exterior Web: In the rest it
grows narrower and narrower by degrees to the middlemost, which are almost
wholly black, the very extreme edges only remaining white. The feathers
incumbent on the Tail in the middle along the shaft are dusky, their outsides
being white. It has small Legs and Feet of a reddish dusky color, but not
perfectly black; black Claws, the hinder the biggest, the two outer Claws equal
one to the other: There is also the like cohesion between the outmost and
middle toes, as in other birds.

In the Female neither is the Back bay, nor the crown or Breast red; but the
Back dusky, with a tincture of green, the Breast of a dirty yellow, varied with
dusky spots. The other notes agree in both Sexes.

It weighs five drachms, from tip of Bill to end of Tail is five inches and an
half long; to the end of the Claws but five. A line of nine inches and a
quarter measures the Wings stretched out. It is common on the Seacoasts.

. IV. The lesser red-headed Linnet: Linaria rubra minor.
THis is lesser than the precedent. The Back colored like the common Linnet:
The forehead adorned with a remarkable shining red spot: The Bill like that of
the greater red Linnet, but less: The Breast red; the lower Belly white. The
prime feathers of the Wings and Tail dusky: The Tail about two inches long, and
something forked. The outmost borders or edges of the Wing and Tail-feathers
round are white.

The Legs and Feet are dusky; the Claws black, and long for the bigness of the
bird; but the Legs very short. The like cohesion or adnascency of the outmost
and middle toe at bottom, as in other small birds.

In this kind the Female also has a spot on her head, but more dilute than
that of the Cock, and of a Saffron color.

This Bird differs from the precedent red Linnet in many particulars. 1. In
that it is less: 2. That it has a lesser and sharper Bill: 3. That the Hen
agrees with the Cock in the spot on its head, though it be paler: 4. That the
Legs and Feet in this are blacker: 5. That the border of white about the
tail-feathers is narrower: 6. That the tips of the second row of Wing-feathers
being white make a transverse white line cross the Wing. Lastly, that this Bird
is gregarious, flying in flocks, not that.

Aldrovandus describes two sorts of red Linnets, neither of which agrees with
either of ours in all points. See their description in his Ornithology.

. V. The Mountain Linnet: Linaria Montana.
THis was found by Mr. Fr. Jessop in the Mountains of the Peak of Derbyshire,
and sent to us. It is twice as big as the precedent. The color of its Head and
Back is the same with that of the common Linnet; for the middle parts of the
feathers of both are black, but the outsides or edges of those on the Back red,
on the Head cinereous. The middle parts of the feathers on the Throat and
Breast are also black, but the edges whitish. Only the Rump is of a very fair
shining scarlet or Orange-tawny color. The edges of the middle quil feathers
of the Wings are white, as are also the tips of those of the second row. The
Tail is two inches and an half long, consisting of twelve feathers, of which
the two middle are all over of one uniform brown or dusky color. Of the rest,
as well the outer as inner edges, are white: These white edges in the outmost
feathers are broader than in the rest. Its Bill is like that of the precedent,
viz. less for the proportion of its body than that of the second species. The
whole bird from Bill to Tail was six inches and an half long; to the Claws five
and an half.

CHAP. XII. The Siskin: Spinus sive Ligurinus.
ITs Head is black. The upper side of its body, viz. Neck and Back are green.
Yet the This word is to be taken largely for the middle part about the shaft.
shafts of the feathers on the Back are black; and the Neck being darker than
the Back seems to partake something of the color of the Head. The Rump is of a
greenish yellow: The Throat and Breast of a yellowish green: The Belly white:
The feathers under the Tail yellowish, with oblong dusky spots in the
middledown the shaft. The feathers also investing the sides are spotted in the
middle with brown. The Hen is paler and more discolored. Her Throat and sides
under her Wings are white, the middle parts of the feathers being spotted with
brown. The Head and Back are of a greenish ash color, with brown spots in the
middle. The Throat and Breast have less of green.

The Wings are crossed by a broad line or bed of yellow. The Pinion-quill of
the Wing is all over dusky, only the edges green. Of the nine following the
outer Webs are green; the green part is widened by degrees in every feather,
till in the last it take up half the length. From the tenth almost the lower
half of each feather is yellow, the upper black. The exterior covert-feathers
of the Wings are black, the edges of the interior green. The Tail consists of
twelve feathers, the two middlemost black: The rest above half way of a most
lovely yellow, with black tips. The uppermost tips of the feathers, as well in
the Wings as in the Tail, are gray. The lower Mandible of the Bill has an
eminency or angle on each side, received in the upper. The Tongue is sharp,
horny at the tip, and channelled: The Eyes hazelcoloured. The outer and middle
Toe have the like cohesion at bottom as in other birds.

It is kept in Cages for its singing: It is common in Germany and England. At
Vienna in Austria they called it Seisel, a name not much different from our
English Siskin. In Sussex it is known by the name of Barley-bird, so called
because it comes to them in Barley-seed time. All the Winter, and in the
beginning of the Spring, it flies in flocks. Its differs from the two following
birds, 1. In that it is a little bigger: 2. It has a longer Bill: 3. A black
Head: 4. A shorter Tail, more than half yellow: 5. A struck or bed of yellow
cross its Wings.

Aldrovandus writes, that it seldom or never appears in cold Countries, as
France and England, as Bellonius and others report: But we have by experience
learnt the contrary. It is of a very mild nature, and not at all crafty, so
that it is easily taken by any kind of engine or deceit.

This bird is called by Aristotle and the ancient Greeks (...), as Aldrovandus
is of opinion. (...) also is the name of a bird, supposed to be this, as well
with the Greeks as with the Latins.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Canary-bird, out of Gesner, Aldrovandus, and Olina.
CAnaria is an Island of the Atlantic Sea, on the left side of Mauritania, one
of those which the Ancients for the excellent temperature of the Air called
Fortunate, so denominated from the multitude of great Mastive Dogs, as Pliny
out of Juba delivers. All those Islands, which the Ancients called Fortunate,
are now adays called the Canaries. Out of which in our Age are wont to be
brought certain singing birds, which from the place where they are bred they
commonly call Canary-birds: Others call them Sugar-birds, because the best
Sugar is brought thence. Of this bird we have thought fit to treat next after
the Siskin, because some have judged it to be a sort of Siskin, as Turner: And
in truth to look upon for color and shape it is very like it. This bird Gesner
from the relation of a friend of his thus describes. It is of the bigness of
the common Titmouse, has a small white Bill, thick at base, and contracted
into a sharp point: All the feathers of the Wings and Tail being of a green
color: So that it differs little from those small birds, which our Country men
call Citrinellae or Citrinae.
Citrils, or those they call Zisels, and the Italians, Ligurini, save that it
is a little bigger than either of those, liker in show or outward appearance to
this, something greener than that. So far Gesner. Between the Cock and Hen-bird
I have observed this difference, that the Breast, Belly, and upper part of the
Head, adjoining to be Bill, are more yellow in the Cock than in the Hen. This
is common to both Sexes to be fleshy, and not fat. Of its singing the same
Gesner has recorded as follows. It has a very sweet and shrill note, which
at one breath continued for a long time without intermission, it can draw out
sometimes in length, sometimes raise very high, by a various and almost musical
inflexion of its voice, making very pleasant and artificial melody. The sound
it makes is very sharp, and so quavering, that sometimes when it stretches and
exercises its little throat and Chaps, whistling with all its force, it
vehemently strikes, and even deafens the Ears of the hearers with its
shrilness. Many are delighted with this kind of its singing, many also are
offended, saying, that they are astonished and deafned by it. It is sold every
where very dear, both for the sweetness of its singing, and also because it is
brought from far remote places with great care and diligence, and but Now adays
there be many of them brought over; nor are they sold so dear but that even
mean persons can afford to buy and keep them.
rarely; so that it is wont to be kept only by Nobles and great men. But if any
one be taken with the melody of these Birds, let him buy those which have long
Tails and small Bodies. For it is found by experience that by how much less
they are, by so much are they more canorous. But the great ones shut up in
Cages turn their heads round about and backward, and are not to be esteemed
genuine or right bred Canary Birds. Of this sort there are brought from the
Islands Palma and C. Verde, which they call fools, from that motion of their
head, which is proper to fools. They are fed with Canary-seed, wherein they
take great pleasure, which therefore is wont to be brought together with them
out of the same Islands. Gesner from the relation of his friend writes, that
they are fed with the same food with the Siskin and Citril; viz. Line seed, and
Poppy seed, and sometimes also Millet: But particularly, that they delight in
Sugar and the Sugar-cane, as also in that sort of Chickweed or Mouse-ear, which
they commonly call Henbit. For he affirms, that by this they are presently
provoked to sing. This sort of birds is wont to be infested with certain
tumors or kernels in its head; which I take to be a kind of Atheromata: They
are to be anointed with Butter or the fat of Hens till they ripen, then they
are to be opened, and the matter dexterously pressed out, and again anointed
till they be perfectly whole. Sometimes also they happen to be troubled with
Lice: In which case it will be of advantage to sprinkle them often with Wine.
For so those Vermin will be killed, and they become stronger to overcome that
trouble. Thus far Aldrovandus.

There are also found (says Olina) of this sort of birds in the Island Ilva a
degenenerate kind, descended originally from true Canary-birds, which were
brought over from the Canary Islands in a certain Ship bound for Ligorn, that
was cast away near this Island, and after the shipwreck escaped, and saved
themselves in this Island; and afterward propagated their kind here, breeding
and multiplying greatly. But the difference of place has wrought some change
in the external figure of this Bird. For these spurious Birds have black Feet,
and are more yellow under the Chin than the genuine Canary-Birds.

Additions to the History of the Canary bird out of a late English Writer
concerning singing Birds.
CAnary birds (he says) of late years have been brought abundantly out of
Germany, and are therefore now called German birds: And these German birds in
handsomness and song excel those brought out of the Canaries.

The Cock of this kind is never subject to be fat: For his high mettle, and
lavish singing will hardly suffer him to maintain flesh on his back, much less
fat.

How to choose a Canary-bird.
Let him be a long bird, standing straight and not crouching, but sprightly,
like unto a Sparrow-hawk: standing with life and boldness, and not subject to
be scareful. Before you buy him, hear him sing in a single Cage; so you may be
sure not to be cheated with a Hen for a Cock, and may please your fancy in his
singing. He that has most variety of notes, and is the longest song-bird is by
most accounted the best.

How to know if he be in health when you buy him.
If he stands up boldly, without crouching or shrinking his feathers, if his
Eyes look cheerful, and not drowsy; and he be not apt to clap his head under
his Wing, these are good signs of a healthful bird: But the surest is to
observe his dung; which when he is in perfect health lies round and hard, with
a fine white on the outside, and dark within, and will quickly be dry. The
larger the birds dung is, I hold it the better, so it be long, round, and hard.
A Seed-bird very seldom dungs too hard, except it be very young. If he bolts
his tail like a Nightingale after he has dunged; or if his dung be very thin,
or if it have only a slimy white, with no blackness in it, the bird is not
healthful.

Of the ordering of Canary-birds, which you intend for breeding, in building
and breeding.
First, make a convenient Cage, or prepare a room fit for that purpose: You
must be sure to let it have an outlet toward the rising of the Sun, where you
must have a piece of wire, that they may have egress and regress at their
pleasure. When you have prepared a convenient Room, then set up in the corners
of it some Besoms, either Heath or Frail, opening them in the middle: If the
Room be pretty high you may set two or three brooms, one under another; but
then you must set partitions with boards over every broom; otherwise the birds
will dung upon one another heads; and also they will not endure to see one
another so near each others Nest, for the Cock or Hen will be apt to fly upon a
Hen that is not matched to them, when they see them just under their Nest, which
many times causes the spoiling of their Eggs and young ones.

2. You must cause something to be made so convenient, and of such bigness as
may hold meat for some considerable time, that you may not be disturbing of
them continually, and a convenient Vessel for water also. Let your place where
you intend to put your seeds be so ordered that it may hang out of the reach of
the Mice, for they will destroy all the Canary seeds, and so consequently way
starve your birds.

3. You must prepare some stuff to build withal of several sorts of things, as
Cotton-wool, small dead grass, Elks hair [this is hard to get in England] and
earth-moss. You must dry it before you put them together: Then mingle them all,
and put them up in a little Net like a Cabbage-net, hanging of it so that they
may with convenience pull it out. You must set Pearches all about the Room,
and, if big enough, set a tree in the middle, that so they may take the more
pleasure. You must proportion your birds according to the bigness of your Room:
Rather let it be under-stocked than over: for they are birds that love liberty.

4. When you perceive them begin to build and carry stuff, give them once a
day, or in two days at least, a little greens and some Loaf-sugar, for that
will cause a slipperiness in the body, that so the Eggs may come forth without
injuring the birds; for many times the Hen dies in laying her first Egg: Which
will be a great loss, both in losing the first brood, and unpairing the Cock.
If this happens, and you have but few pairs in your breeding place, take out
the single Cock, and match him, and put him in again: If many, it is advisable
to let your Cock alone, till you draw all your birds out to part them; because
it will be hard to find out the single Cock, and as hard to take him when found.

5. When you find that they have built, take away the Nets that have the
breedingstuff in them. They breed most usually three times in a year, begin in
April, and breed in May and June, and sometimes in August, which is not very
usual, neither here, nor in Germany.

How they breed them in Germany.
First, they prepare a large Room, and build it in the likeness of a Barn,
being much longer than broad, with a square place at each end, and several
holes at each end, to go into those square places. In those out-lets they plant
several sorts of trees, which grow pretty thick, for they will take much
delight both to sing and breed in them: And the bottom of the place they strew
with a fine sort of sand, and upon it cast seeds of Rape, Chickweed, and
Groundsil; which the old bird does eat, both at time of laying, and also when
they have young ones. They put in the house all sorts of stuff for the building
of their Nests; and Brooms up and down the corners, one under another, and to
the height of the place that is built for the purpose; and make partitions
between every Nest, to make them breed the quieter, without disturbing one
another: And in the middle of the Room they will set a board edge-ways to
darken the light on each side; for no bird almost does naturally love to have
much light come to his Nest. They plant a tree or two, if the house be big
enough, one at each end, with many Pearches also along each side of the house,
and all along where they make their Nests: The place also that is in the air is
full of Pearches. They hang their stuff for building all up and down the house,
that the rain come not at it, and strew some on the ground also. Some have fine
fountains in those places that are out-lets for the birds to go at pleasure
into the air; in which the birds take very much delight to wash and prune
themselves.

They seldom take their Nests away to bring them up by hand, as we do here, but
they let the old ones always bring them up; and when they are pretty stout, and
can crack hard seeds, they have small places for the young to come and feed in;
and they give them of all sorts of green seeds to feed upon; and have a kind of
trap-door to take them. They say, that if they do not soak seeds for the young
ones, very few will live, by reason the Hen is apt to forsake them, and go to
Nest again; and the seeds being very hard, they pine away and die.

How to breed and order the young ones taken out of the Nest.
These Birds must not be left too long in the Nest; for if they are, they will
be very apt to grow sullen, and will not feed kindly: Therefore take them out
about nine or ten days old, and put them in a little basket, and cover them
with a Net, else they will be very subject to jump out upon the first opening
of the Basket, and if they fall to the ground they will be bruised and die. You
must keep them warm for the first week, for they are very tender, and if they
take cold will be subject to the cramp, and not digest their meat.

Take them in the Evening, and if you can possibly when the old ones are out of
sight; otherwise they will be apt to take distaste when they sit again, and
have young ones; and will be apt at every fright to forsake both their Young
and Eggs.

Make their meat after this manner. Take some of your largest Rape-seeds, and
soak them in water twenty four hours or less, if the water be a little warm I
think twelve hours will serve the turn. Drain the water from the seeds, and put
a third part of white bread to the seeds, and a little Canary seed in flour,
and so mix them all together: Then having a small stick, take up a little at
the end, and give every bird some two or three times over; give them but a
little at first at a time and often; for if you over-charge their stomachs they
will cast up their meat, and seldom thrive after it. For the old ones give them
but little at a time, and besides, all the seeds huld and warmed in their
stomachs; which lie nothing so hard on their stomachs as seeds that have their
skins on. You must not make their meat too dry, for then they will be apt to be
Vent-burnt, by reason all the seeds are hot. For I have observed, that the old
ones do constantly drink after they have eaten seeds, and a little before they
feed their young ones; and they commonly after feeding of them sit a quarter of
an hour or more to keep them warm, that the meat may the better nourish them;
therefore do you also when you have fed them cover them up warm. I approve best
of the nestling bird by reason of his tameness and familiarity with his Keeper;
which is the chief pleasure of a bird. For if a bird be not tame, but
extraordinarily wild and buckish, there is no pleasure in feeding or hearing of
him sing, being apt upon all occasions to bruise himself, and to forsake his
singing when most desired.

CHAP. XIII. The Bird called Citril at Vienna; Verzellino at Rome; in Latin,
Thraupis and Citrinella.
IN the shape of the Head and whole body it is very like to a Linnet. The Head
and Back green: The Rump of a yellowish green: The hinder part of the Head and
Neck ash-colored. [In a bird that I described at Rome, the top of the Head,
the upper side of the Neck and the Shoulders were parti-colored, of a yellowish
green and dark brown.] The nether surface of the body is green, but about the
Vent it is whitish. The upper part of the Breast and the Belly in the Male
birds is of a lovely yellow. The Tail is 2 inches long, and black, but the
extreme edges of the feathers are green. The quil-feathers of the Wings are of
the same color with the Tail: The lesser rows of Wing-feathers green. [In
those birds I described at Rome the tips both of the quil-feathers, and also of
the secondary feathers of the Wings were white.]

The Bill is hard, of a dusky or livid color, having sharp edges, thicker and
shorter than the Siskins [yea, in proportion to its body shorter and thicker
than the Linnets or Greenfinches Bill:] The upper Chap equal to the lower. The
Tongue as in Chaffinches: The Feet whitish or flesh-coloured, with blackish
Claws. The Guts long, slender, and rolled up together.

It is mursed up in Cages for the sake of its singing. At Vienna in Austria we
saw of these birds to be sold, brought out of Stiria. It is frequent about Rome.

It differs from the Siskin and Serin, 1. In its ash-colored Neck: 2. In that
the whole nether side of its body is green. 3. That it has no spots in the
sides. Olina attributes to it a Tail a little forked; which we also observed in
a bird we described at Rome.

Bellonius esteems this bird to be the Thraupis of Aristotle, called in French,
Tarin. It hatches seven or eight Eggs at one sitting.

CHAP. XIV. The bird called Hirngryll at Vienna, Serinus Gesner. Aldrov. lib.
18. cap. 20.
THe Back of this is something red, the middle parts of the feathers being
spotted with black, as in the Yellow-hammer. The Head is yellow, of a deeper
color in the Males, and paler in the Females. The Rump from green inclines to
a lovely yellow. The Breast is of a yellowish green: The Belly white: The sides
variegated with oblong, black spots.

The Tail is black, the outmost edges of the feathers being green, consisting
of the usual number of twelve feathers. The prime feathers of the Wings are of
the same color with the Tail. The tips of the interior feathers of the second
row of the Wing are white; of the other lesser Wing-feathers green.

The Bill is shorter and stronger than in the Citrinella, sharp-pointed. The
upper Chap something prominent: The Tongue like the Chaffinches: The Feet
dusky; the Claws black. The like cohesion of the outer and middle toe at bottom
as in other small birds. The Guts are small, and have many convolutions.

These Birds also are kept in Cages for their singing: We saw of them to be
sold at Vienna in Austria, brought out of Stiria. This little bird (says
Gesner) for its rare musical singing is preferred before all others of this
kind, even the Citrinella.

The Siskin, Citrinella, and Serinus agree, 1. In having yellow Rumps: 2. That
they are canorous: 3. That they have greenish yellow Breasts, and 4. Long,
slender Guts.

The Serinus and Citrinella agree in the color of the Tail and Wings. The
Siskin and Serinus in their spotted sides and white bellies: The Siskin and
Citrinella in having a green back; but in the Siskin the shafts of the feathers
are black.

This Bird grows very tame and gentle (as Gesner reports) and will live many
years [thirteen or fourteen] shut up in a Cage.

* The Brasilian Teitei, which they call also Guiranhemgeta and Guraundi,
Marggrave.
It is a small bird, of the bigness of a Robin-red-breast. It is kept in Cages
for a singing bird, but it only chirps like a Redstart, [Rubrica] called by the
Germans, Gimpel. It feeds upon Paco and Mamao. It has a short, thick, black
Bill. The Head, upper side of the Neck, Wings, whole Back and Tail are invested
with black feathers, with which something of blue is mixed, so that they shine
like polished Steel. The Throat, lower side of the Neck, the Breast, the whole
lower Belly and Thighs are yellow. At the rise of the upper Bill behind the
Nosthrils it has a spot of yellow feathers. The Legs and Feet are of a dusky
color. And this is the Cock.

The Hen in proportion of body and magnitude agrees exactly with the Cock; has
the same Bill and Legs: But differs much in color. For it is green like the
Acanthis, called by the Germans, Zyschen. The Wings and Head with the upper
side of the Neck are somewhat dusky, with blue mingled. These birds delight to
live together five or six in a Cage.

CHAP. XV. The Anadavad Bird, brought from the East Indies, having a Finches
Bill and Larks Claws.
IN bigness it scarce exceeds the Golden-crown'd Wren. Its Bill is for shape
like a Goldfinch or Chaffinches; for color red, the upper Mandible above being
black. The upper side of the body is of a dusky color, in some birds lighter,
in others darker; only the feathers growing about the Rump are of a scarlet or
deep Orange. The quil-feathers of the Wings and those of the Tail are black.
The Tail it self is an inch and half long, made up of twelve feathers; the
middlemost being the longest, and the exterior in order shorter. The quils and
covert-feathers of the Wings are spotted with small round white spots,
scattered up and down in no order, in some birds more, in some fewer. In some
birds the upper part of the Breast is of a scarlet red, in others it is wholly
black, as is the rest of the Breast and Belly in all. In one Bird, which was
paler than the rest that we saw, and almost of the color of a Robin-red-breast
on the Back, not only the Wings, but also the side-feathers, and those scarlet
ones incumbent on the Tail were marked with white spots. The Legs and Feet are
white: The Claws very long, like those of Larks, but more crooked. The figure
of the body is rather long than round.

In the year of our Lord, 1673. I saw many of these birds (in the house of a
certain Citizen of London) that had been brought out of the East Indies, kept
all together in the same Cage: Being introduced by my worthy friend Thomas
Allen, Doctor of Physic, who also gave me the first notice and information of
them.

CHAP. XVI. A Bird called by the Bolognese, Petronia Marina, by Lib. 17. cap.
38.
Aldrovand, Oenanthae congener.
THe length of this Bird, taken from the tip of the Bill to the end of its
Claws, was little less than seven inches: Its breadth between the extremes of
the Wings distended twelve and a quarter. Its Bill strong, sharp-pointed, like
that of a Chaffinch, from the tip to the angles of the Mouth somewhat more than
half an inch long: The upper Chap black, the lower about the angle yellow. The
angle itself is round: The sides of the Bill sharp-edged. The Head is of a
dusky ash color, but for the most part through the middle of the crown is a
line drawn of a whiter color. The Neck is ash-colored. Below, between the
Shoulders the feathers have their outer edges of a pale ash color, their inner
black. The Rump from dusky inclines to green, but the tips of the feathers next
the Tail are white. The prime feathers in each Wing are in number eighteen, of
which the first or outmost is shorter than the second, the second equal to the
third, and longest of all. These three feathers are of a dark brown or
blackish, only their outmost edges of a pale green. The second, third, and
fourth rows of Wing-feathers have white tips, but else are black. The Plumage
on the base or ridge of the Wing is of a sordid green. The feathers covering
the underside of the Wing are white. The Breast is of a sordid white. The
feathers next the Tail have pale yellow tips, else they are brown. The Tail is
two inches and an half long, and made up of twelve feathers.

This sort is distinguished from all other small Birds, 1. That it has a very
fair, lovely, yellow spot about the middle of its Throat. 2. That all the
feathers of the Tail on the interior Web near the tip are marked with one
great round white spot, being else all black, save the edges, which are
greenish. The outer half of the outmost feather on each side is also white. 3.
It is distinguished from the Hortulane by a most certain note, that its Bill is
far bigger, and stronger, and equal to a Greenfinches Bill.

We saw many of these Birds at Bologna in Italy to be sold. The Bird which
Aldrovandus says is called Petrone at Bologna, and Petronello at Genua, and
describes under the title of i. e. A bird of kin to the Lark.
Alaudae congener, seems to be no other bird than the Emberiza alba of Gesner,
or our Bunting, as will appear to him that shall take pains to compare the
descriptions.

CHAP. XVII. The Hortulane kind, whose characteristic is a hard knob in the
upper Chap of the Bill.
. I. The Bunting called by Gesner Emberiza alba. I take it also to be the
Calandra of Aldrov. and Bellonius, moreover the Alaudae congener of Aldrovand,
and the Cenchramus of Bellonius: The Strillozo of Olina.
IT weighs about an ounce and half: Its length from the tip of the Bill to the
end of the Tail was seven inches and a quarter, and so much to the end of the
Claws. Its breadth between the tips of the Wings spread eleven inches and an
half. Its Bill is great and thick, having a hard knob or eminency in the upper
Mandible or Palate, wherewith it is thought to bruise Wheat, Oats, and other
Grain. The sides of the lower Chap rise up in an angle on each side, [as may be
better represented by a figure than expressed in words] and incline to one
another under the Tubercle of the Palate. The Tongue is sharp, and slit in two.
The Claws are of a pale dusky color. The back-toe is great, armed with a
lesser and more crooked Claw than in Larks. The outmost fore-toe is equal to
the inmost, and grows fast to the middlemost at bottom, as in other birds. This
birds Head somewhat resembles a Rails. The color of the whole body testaceous
or earth-like. The Chin, Breast, Belly are of a yellowish white. The Throat
has oblong, black spots. The quil and covertfeathers of the Wings are dusky,
having their outer edges cinereous. The Back (as we said) of a testaceous
color, the middle parts of the feathers being blacker. The Neck beneath the
Head behind is ash-colored. The shafts of the Head-feathers are of a dark
brown; the outsides or edges being of a reddish ash color. The Tail is more
than three inches long, of a dusky red color, without any whiteness, save that
a kind of dark shadow or appearance of white may be discerned in the outmost
feathers. It sings sitting upon the highest twigs of trees and shrubs. It feeds
upon Corn.

Both the figure and description of the Bird called Strillozo in Olina agree
exactly in all points to our Bunting, save only that he attributes to it the
bigness of the common Lark, than which our Bunting is something bigger. I my
self also, when I was at Rome, saw and described a small bird called Strillozo,
somewhat less (as it then seemed to me) than the common Lark. Seeing therefore
Olina besides the Strillozo describes also the Calandra, making it somewhat
bigger than the common Lark, and not much less than a Thrush, I do suspect that
the Calandra is the same with our Bunting, and the Strillozo a different kind
of bird, described by none besides him, at least clearly and exactly.

The description of the Alaudae congener of Aldrovand agrees exactly to this
Bird, so does also that of the Cenchramus of Bellonius, so that of one bird
Aldrovandus makes four, giving us the Bunting under the title of 1. Emberiza
alba: 2. Of Alaudae congener: 3. Of Cenchramus Bellonii: 4. Also (if we be not
much mistaken) of Calandra; all which he exhibits for distinct Species.

. II. The Yellow-hammer, Emberiza flava of Gesner; Hortulanus of Bellonius;
Luteae alterum genus of Aldrovand; Chloreus seu Lutea Aristotelis of Turner.
IT is equal to a Chaffinch, or a little bigger; weighs 1 ounce: From the tip
of the Bill to the end of the Tail is six inches and an half long; to the end
of the Feet but six. Its Bill is of a dark dusky color, half an inch long,
having a hard knob in the upper Chap to break the grains of corn, and the sides
of the nether Chap turned inwards, and bent together, like the Buntings. The
Tongue shorter than is usual in other birds, not reaching beyond the knob, its
tip horny and sharp, slit into filaments. The Eyes hazel-coloured: The Feet of
a horn color; the Claws black. The like cohesion between the outmost and
middle toe at the bottom, as in other birds.

The Throat and Belly are yellow: The Breast has something of red mingled with
it, as also the sides under the Wings. The Head is of a greenish yellow,
spotted with brown. Above the Shoulders in the lower part of the Neck is a
certain color between green and cinereous, or compounded of both. The middle
parts of the covert-feathers of the Back and Shoulders are black, the edges
from green incline to red. The Rump is reddish.

The Female is all over paler, less yellow on the Head, less red on the Breast
and under the Wings.

The quil-feathers of the Wings are dusky, having their exterior edges from
green inclining to a sordid white. The Tail is three inches long, composed of
twelve feathers, something forked, of a brown color; the middle two having
their edges on both sides, the rest only their outside-edges green. The two
outmost on the inside the shaft near the tip are marked with a white spot
cutting the feather obliquely.

It has a Craw and a musculous Stomach or Gizzard like the granivorous birds.
It has also a Gallbladder. The blind guts, as in almost all small birds, are
very little and short. These birds build upon the ground, being every where in
England most common.

. III. Aldrovandus his first sort of Yellow-hammer, which he calls Cirlus:
Zivolo of Olina.
IT is of the bigness of a Sparrow; has a short thick Bill. The Breast and
Belly are yellowish, sprinkled with brown spots. The Head, Back, Wings, and
Tail from testaceous inclining to a brown or dusky color: but in the Tail
there are two feathers on each side partly white, and partly of the same color
with the rest. Between the Male and the Female there is this difference, that
the Male has more yellow about him than the Female, especially in the upper
part about the Eyes, and in the Throat, and under the Neck on the sides, where
are seen good large spots of yellow, which are wanting in the Female. It abides
for the most part on the ground, seeking its food there of Seeds, and other
things, and therefore when it is new taken it is wont almost always to have its
Bill dirty. Whether this Bird be specifically distinct or no from the precedent
I am not fully satisfied; but because both Aldrovandus and Olina make it
distinct, I would not omit it.

Olina calls it Zivolo, from its note Zi zi, which it often ingeminates.

. IV. The Reed-Sparrow. Passer torquatus in arundinetis nidisicans. Perchance
the Passer arundinaceus of Turner.
IT is bigger than the Linnet, equal to the Chaffinch. The Cock weighed three
quarters of an ounce: Was from Bill-point to Tail-end six inches and an half
long: Broad between the extremes of the Wings spread ten inches. The Bill
short, black [Mr. Willughby makes the upper Mandible black, the nether whitish]
like the Bill of the Hortulane, [Mr. Willughby compares it to the Chaffinches
Bill,] the lower Chap having its edges on both sides bent inwards, is hollow in
fashion of a Funnel, and contains the Tongue within it. Besides, near its base
it rises up into a dent or angle on each side, to which there is a notch or
furrow correspondent in the upper Chap to receive it, as in the Buntings Bill.
The Head is black: The Cheeks about the Eyes red. A ring of white encompasses
the Neck, which on each side is stretched forth to the corners of the Mouth.
The Chin and Throat are black: The Breast and middle of the Belly white. The
Back and covert-feathers of the Wings are parti-colored of red and black; viz.
the middle part of each feather black, the outsides red. The Rump red, with a
mixture of ash color. The quil-feathers of the Wings are dusky, having their
exterior edges red. The tips of the seven first or outmost are sharp, of the
rest blunt, indented, and of an ash color. The lesser rows of Wingfeathers
have their outer edges and tips red, being else of an ash color. The Plumage
on the base or ridge of the Wing bluish, underneath the Wing white: The Tail is
two inches and an half long, and made up of twelve feathers, of which the two
middlemost are something shorter than the rest, and black, their outward edges
red: The three next on each side were dark colored, and almost black. The
exterior edge of the fifth is white: The interior also not far from the tip
is spotted with white. The outmost feather is wholly white. All end in sharp
points.

The Feet from flesh color decline to black. The Claws are black: The outmost
and middle Toe joined at bottom. The back-toe great and strong. The blind guts
short and thick. It has a Gallbladder. The Stomach is musculous: In it opened
we found seeds, etc.

The Hen, as in most Birds, is not so fair-coloured. The ring about her Neck is
darker, and scarce appearing. The Head, Back, Shoulders, and covert-feathers of
the Wings are parti-colored of black and dirty red; viz. the middle parts of
the feathers are black, and the outsides red. At the base of the Wing are red
feathers. The Throat is parti-colored, of red, black, and cinereous.

. V. The Hortulane of the Italians. Hortulanus Aldrov. Tordino Berluccio at
Venice.
IT is equal and very like to the Yellow-hammer [That which I J. R. saw and
described at Florence seemed to me somewhat less, and longer-bodied.] The Hen
measured from Bill to Tail exceeded seven inches length; being in our usual way
of measuring ten and an half broad. Its Bill was short, viz. from the tip to
the corners of the Mouth scarce half an inch long, thick at base, sharp at
point; of a red or flesh color in the Cock. In the Hen the upper Chap is
black, the lower blue. The knob on the upper Chap is much less than in the
Yellow-hammer. The sides of the Bill are sharp. The upper Mandible has on each
side an angle or furrow impressed, to which answers a tough or angular
eminency in the lower, as in the Bunting, the figure whereof for the clearer
apprehension and understanding of what we say is to be viewed. The Feet are of
a pale dusky: The Claws black. [In the Cock the Legs are reddish.] The back-toe
is great. The inner and outer fore-toes are of equal length. The outmost from
the bottom to the first joint sticks fast to the middlemost without any
membrane intervening, as in most small birds. The Throat and Breast are
ash-colored, the rest of the underside to the very Tail is red. The Rump of a
deeper red. The Head of a brown or dusky ash color, the middle parts of the
feathers being black: As they are likewise on the Back, having their edges of a
reddish ash color. [In the Cocks the Breasts are more red.] Under the Bill is
a yellow spot. The Head is of a color mingled of green and cinereous: The
middle parts of the Back-feathers are black, the edges of a color mingled of
red and cinereous, or red and green; the Rump is green.

The quil-feathers of the Wings, as in almost all small birds, are eighteen in
number, of which the greater have their edges of a greenish white, the lesser
or interior of a red. The tips of all the feathers of the second row have
their tips white, and exterior edges red. The tips of the third row are also
white. The edges of the lesser coverts are cinereous. The Tail is almost three
inches long, and made up of twelve feathers: Of which the middle and outmost
are something shorter than the rest. For color the two middlemost are of a
dark brown, with red edges: The three next on both sides black: The outmost but
one have the upper half of their interior Webs white. The outmost have more
white on the interior Web, and some also on the exterior. The Gallbladder is
little, and the Gall within yellow.

It is very like our Reed-Sparrow, with a white ring about its Neck, yet
differs manifestly from it in some marks, so that there is no doubt but it is a
distinct kind. 1. In its place, this abiding chiefly among Reeds: Whereas the
Hortulane frequents Gardens especially, as the name imports. 2. In color: The
Hortulane being more red, and wanting the ring about the Neck, which this has:
And besides, having a yellow spot under the Throat, which this wants.

Ornithol. lib. 13. cap. 24.
Aldrovand sets forth six kinds or varieties of this bird. 1. The first was all
yellow, almost of a straw-colour, excepting the ridges of the Wings, and tips
of the quil-feathers, which were white. 2. The second was all over white. 3.
The third, called also by the Fowlers a Hortulane, is indeed a bird wholly of
the shape of a Hortulane, but something different in color. Its Head from
cinereous inclined to yellow: Its Neck was cinereous, but speckled with black:
Its Belly, Legs, and Feet yellow. The ridges of the Wings and the quil-feathers
white; the other parts partly black, and partly cinereous. The whole Tail
brown, but yellow on the sides. 4. The fourth had a green Head and Neck; a red
Bill; ash-colored Legs; else it was black. Yet has it on the crown of the
head, and also in two of the quil-feathers only an oblong white spot. 5. The
fifth I may call a white-tail'd Hortulane: For its Tail was white, else it was
like the common Hortulanes, but in all parts paler. 6. The last some of our
Fowlers reckoned a kind of Spipola, others a kind of Hortulane; and indeed I
should make it congenerous rather to the Spipolae than the Hortulanes. For its
Bill is longer, and its Legs and Feet dusky, which in the Hortulanes are wont
to be yellow. Its whole body also is dusky, the Breast only and ends of the
Wings being white.

. VI. * A Bird called by Ornithol. lib. 18. cap. ult.
Aldrovand, Cirlus stultus.
IT is equal in bigness to the Yellow-hammers above described of the same make
and habit of body, the very same figure and shape (though it differs in
color.) It will also willingly fly to, and company with them shut up in Cages,
as to birds of its own feather: And besides, it constantly no less than they,
as well flying as resting, ingeminates this word Ci, Ci. Whence also in some
places, as at Genoa, it is not undeservedly called Cia, or for distinction
sake, Cia selvatica, or Cia montanina; and by our Bolognese, Cirlomatto. The
upper part of the Head behind, and all the Back are adorned with a Rusty.
ferrugineous color, distinguished with pretty large black spots. From the
Bill over the Eyes to the end of the Neck is extended an ash-colored line
tending to white. The Breast and all the Belly are wholly taken up with a
ferrugineous color. The prime feathers of the Wings and Tail are blackish, yet
their outmost borders terminate in a ferrugineous color. Besides, the Wings
have some white spots. In the Tail are one or two feathers on each side, partly
blackish, and partly white.

We have subjoyned this Bird to the Yellow-hammers and Hortulanes, to which it
is of kin; though whether or no it properly pertain to this Family, the figure
of the Bill being omitted in Aldrovands description we cannot certainly
determine.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ORNITHOLOGY OF FRANCIS WILLUGHBY Esquire
Of Waterfowl.
Waterfowl are either Cloven-footed, which are much conversant in or about
waters, and for the most part seek their Food in watery places. [Almost all
these have long Legs, naked or bare of feathers for a good way above the Knees,
that they may more conveniently wade in waters] or Whole-footed, which swim in
the water, and are for the most part short-leg'd.

Those that live much about waters are either, first, of great size, the
biggest of this kind, having each something singular, and being not reducible
to any other tribe, which therefore as straglers and anomalous birds we have
placed by themselves, though they agree in nothing but their bigness: Or
secondly, of lesser size. These lesser are either That seed upon fish.
Piscivorous, or such as suck a nourishing fat juice or moisture out of muddy
and boggy ground, or That seed on Insects.
Insectivorous. The Piscivorous are Herons, Storks, etc. The Limosugae or
Mud-suckers may be distinguished by their Bills into such as have very long
Bills, either crooked, as the Curlew, or straight, as the Woodcock. The
Insectivorous Waterbirds have either Bills of a middle size for length, as the
Himantopus; or short Bills, as the Plover, Lapwing, etc.

We call those Birds Mudsuckers, which suck out of the Mud or Channels some
oily slime or juice, wherewith they are nourished: Whence they have delicate
flesh, and their very guts not emptied or cleansed from the Excrements are
usually eaten. These have very long Bills for this purpose, broad near the tip,
and finely chamfered or wrought with lines: Speckled bodies; two toes somewhat
joined; all broad, that they may not easily sink as they walk upon muddy and
boggy grounds.

But because we are not so skilful, as that we can certainly determine what
Birds belong to each of these kinds, we shall choose rather to distinguish
Cloven-footed Waterfowl, not Piscivorous by the different length of their
Bills, into three kinds. The first shall be of those that have the longest
Bills, whether straight, as the Woodcock, etc. or crooked, as the Curlew, etc.
The second of such whose Bills are of a middle length, as the Himantopus, etc.
The third of short-bill'd birds, as the Plover, Lapwing, etc. Those we call
long-bill'd, whose Bills exceed two inches and an half length: those
middle-sized, whose Bills are of any length between two inches and an half, and
one and an half: Those short-bill'd, whose Bills exceed not an inch and half.

Most Waterfowl have a short Tail; none of them have their Feet so disposed as
Woodpeckers and Parrots, that is two forward, and two backward; none having
more than one back toe. Among Waterfowl of all kinds those that feed upon fish
have the ranker and stronger-sented flesh.

THE FIRST PART. Of Cloven-footed Waterfowl, wading in Waters, or frequenting
watery places.
THE FIRST SECTION. The greatest Cloven-footed Waterfowl of a singular kind.
CHAP. I.
I. The Crane: Grus, (...) Graecis.
THis is a large-bodied Fowl, weighing sometimes ten pounds. Measuring from the
beginning of the Bill to the end of the Tail it is well nigh five foot long.
That it has a very long Neck is so well known that it is needless to write it:
Its Legs also are very long.

Its Bill is straight, sharp-pointed, of a dark greenish color, near four
inches long, compressed side-ways: Its Tongue broad and horny at the tip. The
top of the Head black; from the Bill to the hinder part covered with black
hairs or bristles rather than feathers. On the back of the Head it has a space
or bed of the figure of a Crescent, bare, or thin set with hairs, and of a red
color: Below which, on the upper part of the Neck is a triangular spot of
ash-colored feathers. Two white lines or strokes, one from each Eye, are
produced backwards, and meeting behind the Vertex of the now mentioned
triangular spot, are thence continued as far as the Breast. The Throat and
sides of the Neck are of black hue. The Back, Shoulders, covertfeathers of the
Wings Excepting those on the utmost joint.
, Breast, and all the Belly and Thighs are ash-colored; only the quil-feathers
of the Wings, and those on the utmost Pinion are black.

The Wings are very large: The quil-feathers are in number twenty four, and (as
we said) black, yet the lesser of them from black incline to red or russet, as
do also the primary covert-feathers which are on the utmost joint or Pinion.
The Tail for the bigness of the bird is small and short, round when spread,
consisting of twelve feathers, all cinereous, with black tips.

The Legs are black, bare of feathers for an hand breadth above the Knees: The
Toes black, and very long. The lower joint of the outmost and middle Toe
connected by a thick membrane.

But that which is most rare, and especially remarkable, yea, wonderful in this
bird, is the conformation of the Windpipe. For entering far into the Breast
bone, which has a great cavity within to receive it, and being there thrice
reflected (as the figure adjoining to the sculp of the Crane represents) goes
out again at the same hole, and so turns down to the Lungs,

The blind guts are five inches long. The Stomach or Gizzard musculous as in
granivorous birds. The flesh is very savoury and well-tasted, not to say
delicate.

We saw many Cranes to be sold in the Poulterers shops at Rome in the Winter
time, which I suppose had been shot on the Seacoast.

They come often to us in England: And in the Fen-Countries in Lincolnshire and
Cambridgeshire there are great flocks of them, but whether or no they breed in
England (as Aldrovandus writes, he was told by a certain English man, who said
he had often seen their young ones) I cannot certainly determine either of my
own knowledge, or from the relation of any credible person. The delicate taste
of the flesh and the musculous Stomach are sufficient arguments to evince, that
this bird feeds not at all upon fish, but only upon herbs, grain, and seeds of
diverse sorts, and it is likely upon Insects too: As the Authors also that have
written of it unanimously report.

Cranes differ from Herons, 1. In that the Claw of the middle toe is not
serrate as in Herons: 2. In bigness, wherein they exceed them: 3. In having a
shorter Bill: And 4. a musculous stomach or Gizzard: 5. Two Appendices or blind
guts, whereas Herons have but one: 6. In the strange revolution of the
Windpipe within the Breast Bone.

. II. The Indian Crane.
THis is lesser than our common Crane, but of the same ash color, Its Tail is
short, and scarce conspicuous, being hidden by the Wings. Its Bill is straight,
narrow, and longer in proportion than the Bill of the common Crane: Its
Nosthrils oblong. The chief difference is, that in this the top of the Head
from the Bill to the Crown is bare of feathers [only set with thin hairs]
rough-skin'd, and of a red color. This we saw among his Majesty's rare Birds
kept in St. James's Park near Westminster.

. III. The Balearic Crane: Grus Balearica Aldrov. Pavo marinus Exot. lib. 5.
cap. 11.
Clus.
FOr the shape of its body it is like to a Stork: Yet its Bill is shorter not
only than a Storks, but than a Cranes. It has upon its Head a thick, round
Crest, made up of Bristles spread every way, like to Hogs Bristles, of the
color of the prickles of a common Hedghog: By which note it may at first sight
be easily known and distinguished from all other birds. In both Cheeks it has
a white spot terminated above with a red line. The lesser quil-feathers of the
Wings are white: the whole Bird besides is black, of the color of a Coot, the
Tail not excepted. Under the Bill hangs down a red Or Lobe of flesh.
excrescence on each side like a Gill or Wattle. The Legs are long, bare of
feathers from the knees upward almost to the second joint. We saw a bird of
this kind in the Royal Aviary in St. James's Park near Westminster.

Aldrovandus his description, which he took from a Picture he saw of this Bird,
differs in some particulars from ours: For 1. He makes the bristles of the
Crest of a Clusius makes them also of a yellow color.
Gold color: 2. All the underside of a dusky ash color, the Back of a dark
green, as in Lapwings: 3. He mentions some ferrugineous feathers in the Wings.

These Birds are found in the Country near CapoVerde. For bigness they may
match our Country Cranes. As they run they stretch out their Wings, and so run
very swiftly, otherwise they walk softly. They never roost in houses, but about
night when they have a mind to go to their rest, they search out high Walls
whereon to perch, after the manner of Peacocks, whose voice and conditions
they also imitate. They feed upon green herbs, and together with Hens and
Peacocks devour Barley and other grain. This out of Aldrovandus.

In the Tables of Birds, engraven by Vischer, it is figured by the title of
Struthio ex China, i. e. A China Ostrich.

CHAP. II. Marggraves Jabiru of the Brasilians, called by the Low Dutch, Negro.
THis Bird in bigness exceeds a Swan. Its body is fourteen inches long; its
Neck as many, and of the thickness of a man's arm. Its Head sufficiently great;
its Eyes black; its Bill also blackish, extended straight forward, and above
toward the point a little bending, eleven inches long, two and an half broad,
edged I do not well apprehend our Authors meaning in these words, therefore I
have put them down in the Language he wrote them in.
versus exteriora: The upper Chap of the Bill is a little higher [or deeper]
and bigger than the nether. It has no Tongue: under the Throat is a Crop of a
moderate bigness. The Legs are very long, viz. two foot. For the upper Legs [or
Thighs] are one foot and an inch long, and half way bare of feathers; the lower
eleven inches: These are straight, black, and as it were scaled, half an inch
thick. In each foot are four toes, three standing forward, and one backward, as
is usual in most birds. The whole bird all over is covered with white feathers
like a Swan or Goose. The whole Neck almost, viz. for eight inches length,
counting from the Head, is destitute of feathers; and one half of this bare
part, together with the Head, is covered with a black skin, the other half with
a white. But I suppose the feathers had been plucked off, and that the white
down stuck in the skin. The Tail is broad, ending with the end of the Wings.

CHAP. III. *Jabiru guacu of the Petiguares, Nhandu apoa of the Tupinambi,
Scurvogel of the Low Dutch.
IT has a great Bill, seven inches and an half long, round at the end, and
bending downward. It wants the Tongue, and the lower Bill is gray. On the top
of the Head it has a bony Miter or Crown, of a color mixed of white and
cinereous. The Eyes are black, and behind them large Ear-holes. The Neck is ten
inches long, the upper half whereof, together with the Head, is not covered
with feathers, but with a scaly ash-colored skin, whose scales are white. In
bulk of body it equals a Stork: It has a short, black Tail, reaching no
further than the ends of the Wings. The upper Legs [or Thighs] are covered
partly with white feathers, else the whole Legs are ash-colored; the upper
being eight inches long, the lower six, or a little more. There are four Toes
in each foot, so disposed as in the former. The whole Body and Neck are covered
with white feathers. Long feathers hang down from the Neck and about it. The
Wings are white; their quil-feathers black, with a gloss of a Ruby color. They
flay the skin off this bird, and eat the flesh boiled or roasted. It is fat,
dry, and well-tasted, especially if it be fried with butter. I have eaten of it
often.

CHAP. IV. The Brasilian Cariama of Marggrave.
THis is a Waterfowl of the bigness of the greater Heron. On its Head above
the rise of its Bill it carries a crest or tuft of feathers, standing upright,
of a black mingled with an ash color. The Bill is short, the upper part a
little hooked, brown, with a tincture of dark yellow. It has elegant golden
Eyes, with a black Pupil, and long, black Eyebrows. The Wings end a little
behind the rise of the Tail. It has long Legs, above covered half way with
feathers, else naked, and of a dark yellow color: Three Toes in each foot, the
middlemost the longest, the outer shorter than that, and the inner the
shortest; connected partly by a skin intervening. Behind, or on the backside
the foot it has a small Toe, set higher than is usual, and a round heel like
an Ostrich. The Claws are short, hooked, dusky. The whole Body is covered with
gray or ash-colored feathers, waved with brown, as in Falcons, and a dark
yellow intermingled. The ends of the Wings and Tail are brown, waved with a
dark yellow and gray. In the Breast and lower Belly it has more gray. It
carries its Tail low, its Neck high. Its cry is like a Hen -Turkeys, and is
heard afar off. It is very good meat.

CHAP. V. The Brasilian Anhima of Marggrave.
IT is a Waterfowl of the rapacious kind, bigger than a Swan. Its Head is not
great, like a Hens; its Bill black; the upper Chap whereof is something longer
than the nether, and turning downward at the tip. It has fair, golden Eyes,
with a black Pupil, and a black circle without. On the Head near the rise of
the Beak it carries an erect horn, bending forward at point, a little more than
two inches long, of the bigness of the greater string in a base Viol; round as
though it were turned, of a white or bone color. About the horn stand up very
fine, short, black and white feathers. Its Neck is seven inches long, the rest
of its Body to the rise of its Tail almost a foot and half. It has very large
Wings; the greater feathers being above a foot and half long. In the forepart
of each Wing are two straight triangular Spurs they may more properly be called.
horns, springing from the very bone of the Wing, as thick as the tip of ones
little finger, and of a Conical [more properly Pyramidal] triangulate figure.
The foremost of these goads or spurs are an inch long; the hindmost a little
shorter, and of a dusky color. It has a Tail ten inches long, and broad like
that of a Goose. The upper Legs [Thighs] are four inches long, and for the
lower half bare of feathers. The lower Legs are five inches long, and almost
two thick. In each foot it has four toes so situate as in Hens: The middle of
the three fore-toes is four inches and an half long; the other two three and an
half; the back-toe almost two. Each has a crooked, black Claw an inch long,
but the back toes a little longer. Both Feet and Legs, as far as they be naked,
are covered with a brown scaly skin. The crown of the Head is variegated with
black and white feathers. The sides of the Throat and upper half of the Neck
are black. The lower half of the Neck and Breast are variegated with white,
cinereous, and black feathers. The lower Belly is all white. On the sides under
the Wings, and on the Back the Plumage is black, white feathers being here and
there intermingled. The Tail is black: The Wings also are black, excepting the
outmost borders (near the bones) where they are covered with yellowish white
feathers. It has a terrible cry, sounding something like Vyhu, Vyhu. It is
never found alone, but always a pair, Cock and Hen, walk together, and when one
is dead, the other never departs from its carcass. The horn that grows on its
Head is held to be a remedy against poison, being infused a whole night in
Wine. The same is reputed a remedy against the suffocation of the Womb, and in
hard travel. This that I described was a Hen: The Cock is of twice the bigness.
It makes its Nest of clay by the bodies of trees upon the ground, of the shape
of an Oven. Thus far Marggravius. This is a bird of a singular kind, none like
it: Perchance it may be the Cuntur, so much talked of. Here we may note by the
by, that these spurs in the Wings are found only in some American birds, but in
none of our Continent.

BOOK III. PART I. SECTION II. Of Cloven-footed Piscivorous Waterfowl.
THese have very long Necks: Their Bills also are long, strong, ending in a
sharp point, to strike fish, and fetch them from under stones or brinks: Long
Legs to wade in Rivers and Pools of water: Very long Toes, especially the
hind-toe, to stand more firmly in Rivers: Large, crooked Talons, and the middle
serrate on the inside, to hold Eels and other slippery fishes the faster, or
because they sit on trees; lean and carrion bodies, because of their great fear
and watchfulness.

The Heron-kind is distinguished from all other tribes of birds by this most
certain note, that they have but one single blind gut a-piece, after the manner
of Quadrupeds; whereas all other birds known to us have twain.

CHAP. I. Of Herons.
. I. The common Heron or Heronshaw: Ardea cinerea major sive Pella.
THe Female (which I described) weighed almost four pounds: Being from the tip
of the Bill to the end of the Claws four foot long, to the end of the Tail
thirty eight inches and an half.

The foremost feathers on the crown of the Head were white, then succeeded a
black crest four inches and an half high. The Chin was white. The Neck being
white and ashcoloured was tinctured with red. The Throat white, being
delicately painted with black spots; and on its lower part grew small, long,
narrow, sharp, white feathers. The Back (on which grows nothing but down) is
covered with those long feathers that spring from the Shoulders, and are
variegated with whitish strakes or lines tending downwards. The middle part of
the Breast, and lower part of the Rump, viz. that underneath the Tail inclines
to yellow. Under the Shoulders is a great black spot, from which a black line
is drawn to the Vent.

The prime feathers of the Wings are about twenty seven in number, the last of
which are ash-colored, all the rest black, excepting the outer edges of the
eleventh and twelfth, which are somewhat cinereous. The undersides of all of
them is cinereous. The feathers of the bastard Wing are black. Under the
bastard-wing is a great white spot. Also white feathers cover the root of the
bastard wing above. Then a white line is continued all along the basis or ridge
of the Wing as far as its setting on. Ten of the second row of Wing-feathers
are black, then four or five have their exterior borders white: All the rest
are ash-colored. The Tail also is ash-colored, seven inches long, and made up
of twelve feathers.

Its Bill is great, strong, straight, from a thick base gently lessening into a
sharp point; from the tip to the angles of the Mouth five inches and an half
long, of a yellowish green color. The upper Mandible is a thought longer than
the nether, and therein a furrow or groove impressed, reaching from the
Nosthrils to the utmost tip. Its sides toward the point are something rough,
and as it were serrate, for the faster holding of slippery fishes. The lower
Mandible is more yellow: The sides of both are thinned into very sharp edges.
The Mouth gapes wide. The Tongue is sharp, long, but not hard. The eyelids,
and that naked space between the Eyes and Bill, are green. The Nosthrils are
oblong narrow chinks.

The Legs and Feet are green: The hind-part of the Legs and soals of the Feet
greener. The Toes very long. The outmost foretoes are joined to the middle by a
membrane below. The inner edge of the middle claw is serrate, which is worthy
the notice taking.

Its Stomach is large and flaggy, rather membranous than musculous, as in
carnivorous birds, in which dissected we found Lenticula aquatica trisulca.
Ivy-leaved Duckmeat. The Guts toward the Vent, where the blind guts are
situate, are larger than in other birds. It has not two blind guts, one on
each side, like other birds, but only one, like Quadrupeds, but that bigger and
thicker than ordinary. The Gullet under the Chin is dilated into a great
wideness. In the middle of the Merry-thought is an Appendix. It has a long
Gallbladder. Gesner counts but eleven Vertebres in the Neck; I observed
fifteen, of which the fifth has a contrary position, viz. is In another place
Mr. willughby puts it among his queries, whether the five upper vertebres in
the Neck of a Heron be reflected the contrary way.
reflected upward. It feeds upon Fishes, Frogs, etc. Oftentimes also it strikes
and wounds greater fishes than it can draw out and carry away. Young Herons may
be fatted with fish guts and entrails, flesh, etc. It sits sometimes with its
Neck so bent up, that its Head is drawn down to stand between its shoulders.

These Birds build sometimes on the tops of great trees, and for the most part
many together. But whether they are wont to build in old Rooks Nests, as
Aldrovandus out of Polydore relates, I leave to further enquiry.

We have Heronries in England such as they have in France, however Bellonius
denies it: In which Herons are so well instructed and accustomed to breed, that
the owners make yearly a good profit of the young.

. II. Aldrovandus his third sort of ash-colored Heron.
THis Heron which I make congenerous to the common cinereous, from the tip of
the Bill to the end of the Feet was thirty six inches, or four foot long: Had a
Bill an inch thick, of the length of a I suppose he means Italian measure, not
an hand breadth.
Palm; near the Nosthrils of the breadth of ones little finger, channel'd
within; beneath of a horn and rose color. The Iris of the Eye yellow, the
Pupil black. The Neck was a full span long. The feathers of the Head, Neck,
Back, and upper side of the Wings of a dusky ash color: All their ends marked
with a red spot: But the great Wing-feathers are variegated with white at their
tips; and also those which make up the Tail, which is a Palm and half long.
Those which cover the Breast are sprinkled with longer marks of black, red, and
white. The Belly is of a pale ash color, almost white. The Hips or Thighs are
somewhat red; and for the space of an inch above the The word is Poplit. s,
which may be Englished Hams.
knees bare of feathers. From these to the ends of the Claws remains the
measure of two Palms. The Legs are greenish, and the Feet cloven into Toes,
which yet at the beginning of the divarication are joined together by a short
membrane, because it must needs be conversant about waters. The Claw of the
back-toe is greater than the rest. Upon the tips of the feathers of the Head
stuck certain small, tender, white capillaments; which argued this to be a
young bird.

. III. The lesser ash-colored Heron, called by the Germans, The Night-raven.
IT is much lesser than the precedent, and has a shorter Neck. Its Back and
the crown of its Head are black; its Neck ash-colored. Its Throat and Belly
tinctured with yellow. A white line is extended from the Eyes to the Bill. From
the hinder part of the Head it has a Crest of three feathers five inches long
hanging down over the Back, whereby it is differenced from all other birds. Its
Wings and Tail are cinereous: Its Bill black: Its Legs and Feet of a yellowish
green.

At Sevenhuys, a Village in Holland in a fenny Country, not far from Leyden, we
described a young bird of this kind (as I suppose) taken out of the Nest, thus.
Its Legs and Feet were green; and those bare of feathers for about an inch
above the knees. The outmost Toe connected with the middle one by an
intervening membrane from the divarication to the first joint: The Claw of the
middle Toe serrate on the inner side, as in the common Heron. The Eyes of a
lovely yellow. In the color of its body it comes nearer to a Bittour than to
the common Heron-shaw. Two rows of the greater Wing-feathers are black, with
white tips. The Tail is of a dusky ash color, the tips of its component
feathers being also white. The Back and Neckfeathers are black, with red
shafts, or red lines in the middle. In the Neck the red lines are broader. The
tips of the lesser covert feathers of the Wings decline from white to red. The
Belly is white, with black spots: The Chin white: The feathers on the Throat on
one side white, on the other black. After it has mewed its first feathers
without doubt it changes its color, as most other birds do. It has a great
Gall; a large Stomach, glandulous within, but not fleshy or musculous (which
kind we in English call a Gizzard) in it were the shells of Beetles. In the
middle of the bone called the Merry-thought is an Appendix. This Bird lays
white Eggs.

The Germans call it, Nacht rab, that is, Night-raven, and under that title it
is figured and described by Gesner, whence Ornithol. lib. 19. cap. 57.
Aldrovandus propounds it under the title of Night-raven for a distinct species
of bird, subjoyning it to the Corvus Sylvaticus of Gesner. It is called
Night-Raven, because in the night time it cries with an uncouth voice, like one
that were straining to vomit.

. IV. The great white Heron. Ardea alba major.
IT weighed forty ounces. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the
Feet was fifty three inches and an half; to the end of the Tail no more than
forty. Its breadth, as we reckon it, between the tips of the Wings extended
sixty inches and an half.

Its color was all over as white as snow. The number of the main feathers of
its Wings was about twenty seven; of its Tail twelve: The length of its tail
six inches and an half. It had no Crest. Its Bill, as in the common Heron, was
yellowish. The edges of its Eyelids, and that naked space between the Eyes and
Bill green. The Eyes of a pale yellow. The Legs for some space above the knees
bare of feathers. The Feet and Talons black: The outer fore-toe connected with
the middle one from the divarication to the first joint by an intervening
membrane. The Claw of the middle toe had its interior edge Sawed of toothed.
serrate.

The figure of the Breast Bone was arcuate [bending like a Bow] as in other
Herons. The vertebres of the Back were six or seven: Those of the Neck to the
fourth were bent downwards, all the rest upwards. It had a great Gall: A
triangular Appendix on the Merry-thought. Of its fat is made Oil good for the
wind, etc.

This differs from the common Heron, 1. In magnitude, as being lesser than
that. 2. In the length of its Tail. 3. In that it wants a Crest. A certain
English man (says Aldrovand) affirmed, that he had seen white Herons, though
but rarely, which neither in bigness of body nor shape differed at all from the
common Heron, but only in color. I suspect this Relator whosoever he was, was
mistaken, accounting the bird in this article described by us not to differ
from the common Heron-shaw but only in color. For Mr. Johnson, who has seen
the white Heron in England, puts it down for a distinct kind in his Method of
Birds communicated to us.

. V. The lesser white Heron: Ardea alba minor.
BEing weighed it scarce amounted to one pound. From the tip of the Bill to the
end of the Tail it was twenty four inches and an half long, to the end of the
Legs thirty two and an half. It is all over of a pure white color, like the
bigger. From the hinder part of the Head hangs down backward a short Crest.
About the Eyes the skin is bare of feathers, and of a green color. The Bill is
four inches and an half long, and black. The Eyes are of a pale yellow. The
Tongue short: The Feet green; but sometime covered with a black, scaly bark,
which may easily be rubbed or scraped off. The Legs are bare of feathers
something above the knees, and up higher than in the former kind. The outer
fore-toe is connected with the middle from its rise to the first joint by an
intervening membrane. The middle Talon is toothed, as in the rest of this kind.
It has also but one blind gut, like them; and a great Gall.

It differs from the precedent white Heron in being much lesser, and in having
a crest, which that wants.

We take this to be the same with the small white Heron or Garzetta of Gesner
and Aldrovand, and with Bellonius his Aigretta of the French, although the
descriptions differ in some particulars.

Gesner says, that the feathers of the Crest are long, and sold at a great
rate. But Bellonius and Aldrovandus write, that these feathers, which Noblemen
and great Commanders are wont to stick in their Caps and Head-pieces for
ornament, and which are fold very dear in the Cities subject to the Turk, do
not grow on the Head, but on the Back, at the ridge of each Wing. Our Bird,
which we bought in the Market at Venice, had no such feathers; perchance they
had been before plucked off, and concealed by the Fowler that sold us the bird.

The second lesser white Heron of Aldrovandus is the very same with this,
called also Garzetta in the Valleys of Malalbergo, as will manifestly appear to
him that will but take the pains to compare the descriptions. Aldrovand. tom.
3. page 93. describes it thus. It is a bird all over white, excepting the Legs
and Bill, which are black. Its Bill is long, slender, very sharp-pointed, all
of one color. Between the Eyes and Bill is a certain spot of green. The Pupil
of the Eyes is black, encompassed with a yellow or golden circle, and that
again with a black. The Neck and Legs, as in other Herons, are long; so are
also the Toes, but yellow. The back-toe is the least of all: The middlemost of
the fore-toes longest, and that on the right side of it next in length. The
Claws black and sharp. The Wings very great; the Tail short; the Body slender
and little.

This, I say, is without all doubt the same with our small white Heron; neither
(as I judge) does it differ from the Garzetta of Aldrovand, before described,
in any thing but in age, for that was a young bird. In this there is no mention
made either of the Crest, or of those rare feathers growing on the Back.
Perchance they were by the Fowlers, (who knew well enough their value) plucked
off from both Aldrovands bird and ours.

. VI. * The third small white Heron of Aldrovand.
IT is lesser than the precedent, but more fleshy. Its Bill small, thick,
sharp-pointed, all yellow. The top of the Head and Neck are almost of a Saffron
color; which, though more remiss, is seen also in the Breast. The Neck is
shorter than in other Herons. The Eyes are situate as it were in a certain
yellow spot: Their Irides are yellow, encompassed with a black circle. The
Thighs and Legs are long, of a yellow color, inclining to Saffron. The Toes
are, in proportion to the body, bigger than in other Herons, very long, dusky,
encompassed also with whitish annulary scales. Two of the fore-toes are joined
together by a small membrane, as in the rest. Its Claws are long, very sharp,
and hooked: That of the middle toe, longer than the rest, is serrate, as in the
Bittour. The Tail is not very short.

Besides this Aldrovand figures another with a short, thick, sharp Bill, very
long toes, the fore ones dusky: The head inclining to Saffron-colour: The Bill
and Legs yellow. Else the whole bird is white.

. VII. * The red-leg'd Heron, or Cirris of Virgil according to Scaliger.
Aldrov. tom. 3. p. 398.
THis is lesser than all other Herons, and has also a very short Neck: The
whole bird almost from Saffron inclining to a Chestnut color; on the underside
deeper, on the upper side and Wings paler. The Tail is so little that it seems
altogether to want one. The Pupil of the Eye is encompassed with a yellow
circle, that with a The word is miniaceus, which signifies the color of red
lead,
scarlet one, and this again with a black. Very beautiful feathers, partly
yellow, and partly black, arising from the forehead hang down all over the
upper part of the Head and Neck. The Bill is strong, long, sharp, of two
colors, where it joins to the head green, or from green inclining to blue; and
this color reaches as far or farther than the middle of the Bill, the
remaining part being black. The Legs and Feet are of a deep red color as in
many Pigeons: The Talons black. The Toes very long, and joined with a small
membrane, or some rudiment of it.

Besides, he sets forth the figure of another in all things like this, save
that the same color in the body is more remiss, the Feet yellowish, the Neck
on the sides besprinkled with many black spots; which are not in the other.

. VIII. * The Heron which they call Sguacco in the Valleys of Malalbergo.
Ornithoi. tom. 3. p. 400.
Aldrov.
IT has tufts of feathers on the head almost of the same color with the
immediately precedent; to which also it is in bigness almost equal, or a little
less. Its Bill is shorter than in that, but strong, of the same color with the
whole Back, viz. of a yellow ferrugineous. The Iris of the Eye is of a golden
color, encompassed with a black circle. The whole Head and Neck are
parti-colored of yellow, white, and black. Underneath on the belly it is white,
as is also the Tail, and better part of the Wings. The Thighs are yellow: The
Legs and Toes are greenish, as in some Water-hens. They say it is a bold and
couragiousbird.

. IX. The Heron called Squaiotta at Malalbergo. Aldrovand.
IT has a yellow Bill, black at point, a short Tail, green feet. The tuft on
the Head consists of thirty feathers, the middlemost of which are white, and
the outermost black. There grow also on its Back of that sort of elegant
feathers before mentioned, of a red color, and black at their roots. Sguacco
and Squaiotta.
Both perchance have their names from their cry.

. X. * Another small Heron with a bow-bill, Aldrovand.
THe Bill of this is more Bending like a Bow.
arcuate than in any of the precedent. On the nether side the Neck and Breast
(which is spirinkled with black spots tending downwards) are white. Else the
whole bird is of an ash color, underneath paler, above deeper. The Thighs in
this Bird, contrary to what they are in others of this kind, are covered with
feathers.

. XI. * The Bird of kin to the Heron described by Aldrovand, t. 3. p. 412.
THis sort of Bird, though it has a much shorter Bill, I have made Of the same
kind or Family.
congenerous rather to the Herons than other birds, and am wont to call it the
black Heron, because in its mien, and the fashion of the rest of its body, it
resembles the Heron-kind. For it has a long Neck, long Legs, very long Toes,
sharp Talons, and finally, a short Tail. Its color is all over uniform, viz.
blackish, except the Neck, which is compassed with a white ring, and the Bill
which is yellow, in the middle, and at the end, as well above as below, marked
with a black spot.

It has not as yet been our hap to see these six last birds, and so we have
nothing to add to their descriptions, which we have borrowed of Aldrovandus.

. XII. The Bittour or Bittern or Mire-drum: Ardea stellaris, Taurus of Pliny,
called by later Writers Butorius and Botaurus, and by Aristotle also Ocnus.
IN bigness it falls not much short of the common Heron-shaw. Its length from
the tip of the Bill to the end of the Claws is thirty eight inches, to the end
of the Tail twenty nine. Its Head is small, narrow, or compressed at sides: The
crown black: At the angles of the mouth on each side is a black spot. The
Throat and sides of the Neck are red, with narrow transverse black lines. The
Neck being clothed with very long feathers, seems to be both shorter, and much
greater than indeed it is. The long feathers on the Breast are black in their
middles. The inner part of the Thighs and the lower Belly are white, with a
light tincture of red. The outsides of the Thighs are variegated with black
spots. The Back is parti-colored, of pale red, or feuille mort and black, [with
cinereous also mingled,] the black spots being greater there than in the rest
of the body. The bottoms of the feathers on the Throat are white. The great or
quill-feathers of the Wings are shorter than in the common Heron. The tips of
the greater feathers are black, else they are all variegated with transverse
red and black lines. The lesser rows of Wing-feathers are of a paler red. The
Tail is very short and little, made up of ten feathers of the same color with
the Wing-feathers.

The black strokes or marks between the shoulders are broader, and tend
downwards; but the red color is paler, languishing into a yellow. Its Bill is
straight, strong, thick at the Head, and growing slenderer by degrees to the
point, of a greenish color, and having sharp sides or edges. The sides of the
lower Mandible fall within the upper, when the Mouth is shut. The upper Chap
has a long cranny, or furrow, or channel excavated on each side, wherein are
the Nosthrils. The Tongue is sharp, not cloven, reaching scarce to the middle
of the Bill. The Irides of the Eyes from hazel incline to yellow. [In another
bird they were red.] The slit of the Mouth is very wide, running out beyond the
Eyes toward the hinder part of the Head, so that the Eyes seem to be situate as
it were in the very Bill. Under the Eyes the skin is bare of feathers, and of a
green color. The Ears are great, and wide open.

The Shanks are bare a little above the knees: The Feet green: The Toes great,
and very long, armed also with long and strong Talons; that of the middle Toe
serrate on the interior edge, in like manner, and for the same purposes, viz.
of holding fast Eels, and other slippery fish, as in the rest of this kind. The
back-claw, which is remarkably thick and long above the rest, is wont to be set
in Silver for a Pick-tooth, and is thought to have a singular property of
preserving the teeth. The outmost foretoe is joined to the middlemost at bottom
by a membrane.

They say, that it gives always an odd number of bombs at a time, viz. three or
five: Which in my own observation I have found to be false. It begins to bellow
about the beginning of February, and ceases when breeding time is over. The
common people are of opinion that it thrusts its Bill into a Reed, by the help
whereof it makes that lowing or drumming noise. Others say, that it thrusts its
Bill into the water, or mud, or earth, and by that means imitates the lowings
of an Ox. It hides it self commonly among reeds and rushes, and sometimes lies
in hedges with its Neck and Head erect.

In the Autumn after Sunset these birds are wont to soar aloft in the air with
a spiral ascent so high till they get quite out of sight: In the mean time
making a singular kind of noise, nothing like to lowing.

As for the interior parts, The annulary cartilages of the Windpipe after its
divarication, are not entire [or perfectly round] but only semicircular: The
other part of the circle being supplied by a thin, loose membrane: They stand
also at a greater distance one from another than before. The Liver is divided
into two Lobes, and has its Gallbladder annexed. The interior membrane of
the Stomach is wrinkled, and full of papillary glandules. Beneath the lower
Orifice of the Stomach was as is were a secondary stomach, of a singular
structure, and of the figure of the Letter, having a thick coat, and being
rugged and uneven with folds or wrinkles within. The first stomach was lax and
membranous rather than musculous, like a Dogs stomach, as Bellonius rightly
compares it. It has no Craw: Only one blind gut, like the rest of this kind,
half an inch long. The Gullet just below the Bill may be vastly dilated, so as
to admit a man's fist. In the stomach dissected we found the fur and bones of
Mice. Instead of the transverse ribs are only small Appendices. The Vertebres
next the Head are bent downwards, all the rest up wards. The Breast Bone is
Bending like a Bow.
arcuate. The angle or aperture of the Breast Bone is filled up with a thin,
loose, pellucid membrane. The Gullet and Windpipe descend down the right side
of the Neck. It has also a bony Appendix in the angle of the Merry-thought,
but less than the common Heron.

It is called by later Writers, Butorius and Botaurus, because it seems to
imitate boatum tauri, the bellowing of a Bull. The Author of Philomela calls it
Butio: But his mistakes are so many, that no account is to be made of his
authority. Some have made it to be the Onocrotalus, because of its voice;
which, to say the truth, seems to me much more to imitate the braying of an Ass
than the lowing of a Bull: But Pliny has so exactly described the Onocrotalus,
that no man that shall compare the notes with the bird, can possibly doubt that
it is that we commonly call the Pelecan: Though those that have seen and
observed it, never heard it make any such braying noise when kept tame: Which
is something strange; unless perhaps being discontented with its captivity, it
delights not to make that noise it does when at liberty. The Bittern is said
above all other birds to strike at men's eyes. It builds upon the ground,
commonly in a tuft of Rushes, lays four or five Eggs, of a round figure, and
whitish color, inclining to cinereous or green, not spotted at all.

This without doubt is that bird our common people call the Night-raven, and
have such a dread of, imagining it cry portends no less than their death, or
the death of some of their near Relations: For it flies in the night, answers
their description of being like a flagging Collar, and has such a kind of
hooping cry as they talk of.

. XIII. * Aldrovandus his third sort of speckled Heron.
THis Bird, sent from Epidaurus, was all over of one and the same color, to
wit, reddish, deeper above, lighter underneath. This same, or at least one very
like to it, taken in our Fens, had a Bill a palm long, of a horny color,
straight, and sharppointed. The upper Mandible was a little hooked at the end,
and longer than the nether, with some blackness. The crown was black: The Neck
ferrugineous, two palms long: The Back was black, and so was the Tail, which
was very short; the Rump beneath white: The Wings partly ferrugineous, partly
white. The Legs nine inches long. The Iris of the Eyes was yellow. This seemed
as yet to be a young bird, that had not mewed its first feathers.

. XIV. The greater speckled or red Heron of Aldrovand.
THis seems to be a bastard kind between the Bittour and the common Heron, but
to partake more of the common Heron, whence it would be more rightly entitled,
The ash-colored or blue Heron with red breast and sides.

In its bigness, shape, and serrate Claw it agrees with the common Heron. The
crown of its Head is black, adorned with a long Crest: Its Back ash-colored,
but darker than the common Herons. On the shoulders grow long, red, bristly
hairs. The lesser covert-feathers of the inner side of the Leg are red. The
Thighs are white, dashed with red. Near the Breast on both sides is a broad red
stroke. The middle of the Throat is parti-colored, with black and pale red
spots. Down the sides of the Neck is a black line in the middle of two red
ones. The lower part of the Neck under the long feathers was of a deep red. In
other particulars it agreed with the common Heron. It had but one single
blind-gut: A huge Gallbladder. The Ribs tend straight downwards from the
vertebres of the back, like those of Quadrupeds. The Guts are small and
slender. The remnant of the passage conveying the Yolk into the Guts is plainly
to be seen in the form of a blind gut, about the middle of the intestines, the
Pipe conveying Gall from the Gallbladder to the gut, and the The gallduct or
vein conveying gall from the Liver.
porus bilarius do not concur in one common passage, but continue their
channels several and distinct, and perforate the Gut in two places, but near
one to the other.

. XV. * The Brasilian Soco of Marggrave.
IT is a Waterfowl, of which here [in Brasil] many sorts may be observed. It
is of the bigness of the lesser Heron: Has a straight, black, and
sharp-pointed Bill, two inches and an half thick where it is thickest. Its Head
is like a Herons, as is also its Neck, being a foot long: Its Eyes black with a
I suppose he means the Pupil black, and the Iris golden.
golden circle. The Wings and Tail are equally extended, ending together. For
the Tail is short, being not of above five inches length. The Legs are
sufficiently long, above the knees four inches, and as many below. Each foot
has four Toes, three standing forwards, and one backwards. The Thighs above
the Knees are above half way bare of feathers, covered with a dusky skin. The
Head and Neck are clothed with brown feathers, variegated with small specks.
Along the lower side of the Neck down as low as the Breast is a line drawn of
white feathers, mixed with black and brown ones. The Back and Wings are indeed
black, but variegated or powdered with very small yellow specks or points. The
Belly is of the same color with the Back. Under the Wings are black feathers,
spotted with white.

. XVI. * The Brasilian Heron called Cocoi of Marggrave.
IT is an elegant bird, of almost the bigness of a Stork: Has a straight,
sharp Bill, about six inches long, which is of a yellowish green at its rise:
Crystal Eyes, with a golden circle; the skin about the Eyes bare, and
ash-colored. The length of the Neck is fifteen inches, of the Body ten, of the
Tail five. The Tail and Wings equally extended. The upper Legs are feathered
half down, being eight inches long; the lower are but six and an half, covered
with an ash-colored skin. The Feet have four Toes, disposed in the usual
manner; the middle the longest, the rest shorter, all armed with crooked dusky
Claws. The Throat and all the Neck are white: The top of the Head and sides of
a black color, mixed with cinereous. It carries [on the Head] an elegant, erect
crest of the same color, from which two neat feathers hang down backwards, of
a black color, inclining to cinereous, each five inches and an half long. The
foreside of the Neck is spotted longways [or down its length] with feathers
mixed of black and cinereous. In the lower part of the Neck before, it has
long, white, fine delicate feathers hanging down, which we were wont to wear in
our Caps. The whole Back, Wings, and Tail are of a pale ash color, mingled
with a little white. The upper half of the Legs upper is invested with white
feathers. Along the length of the Back are extended fine elegant, ash-colored
feathers, for their figure and structure like those on the Neck. It is good
meat.

. XVII. * The Brasilian Heron, with a serrate Bill, of Marggrave.
IT is of the bigness of a tame Duck, or a little bigger: Has a straight,
sharp Bill, the fore-half, as well above as beneath, doubly serrate, four
inches and an half long. It has the Head and Neck of a Heron; a black Pupil,
with a golden circle: Its Neck is a foot long; its body five inches and an
half; its Tail four, wherewith the Wings end. The whole Legs are nine inches
and an half long: The upper, to the middle part only, covered with feathers,
the lower half being bare. In each Foot four Toes, after the usual manner. The
upper Bill is dusky, but toward the rise of a yellowish green. The whole Head,
and upper side of the Neck are covered with long feathers, of a pale yellow
color, waved with black. Under the Throat it is White. The Neck beneath, the
Breast and lower Belly have white feathers, waved with brown, which [brown] is
round about edged with yellow. The whole Back and Wings are covered with dusky
feathers, waved with yellow. The quil-feathers of the Wings are mixed of equal
parts of black and green, their tips being white. The Tail consists of such
feathers as the ends of the Wings, but crossed with white lines. The Legs and
Feet are of a dark gray color. The Claws dusky. Its flesh is eaten, and tastes
like that of other Herons.

. XVIII. * Guiratinga of the Brasilians, called by the Portugues Garza, that
is, a Heron. Marggrave.
IT is of the bigness of the Spoon-bills or Pelecan of Gesner, and the same
shape of body. It walks erect, with its long Neck and extended Bill, which is
straight, sharp, yellow, four inches long, the upper part thereof black, the
lower white. It has long Legs like a Heron, of about six inches. The Toes are
after the usual manner. The Legs outwardly, as also the Feet, are yellow,
inwardly mixed of green and dusky. The whole body is covered with milk-white
feathers. On the neck are most elegant white feathers, more fine than
Ostriches. It is a Waterfowl, and its upper Legs are [for some space] bare of
feathers.

. XIX. * A small Brasilian Heron of Marggrave.
IT is scarce so big as a common Pigeon: Has a very long Neck; a straight,
sharp Bill, dusky above, of a yellowish white beneath, two inches and an half
long: A short, sharp Tongue: Eyes of a mean size, with a black Pupil, and a
yellow circle: A small Head; a slender Neck, but seven inches long, whereas the
length of the Body is scarce four: Long Legs, each five inches; the This part
of the legs others call the thighs, though indeed it answers most properly to
the legs in man, being the second internodium from the foot.
upper half bare of feathers half way: Four Toes in each Foot, placed the
common way, with crooked and sharp Talons. As for its color, near the Eyes,
where the Bill is inserted the skin is of a yellow [melini.] The Head above is
covered with feathers of a steel-colour, with pale brown ones intermingled. The
whole Neck, with the Breast and lower Belly have a white Plumage, mixed with
cinereous and pale feathers, so that they appear variegated. The Back is black,
and partly of a Steel color, with pale brown feathers intermingled. The long
Wing-feathers are greenish, having a white spot on their tips. The rest of the
Wing is elegantly variegated of brown, steel-colour, wax-colour, and
ash color. The Tail is two inches long, covered with the ends of the Wings,
which are equally extended with it. The Legs above are mingled of ash and
wax-colour. The naked part and the Feet are covered with a yellow skin. The
Clawsbrown. This bird walks erect and stately.

CHAP. II. Of the Stork. De Ciconia.
. 1. The common or white Stork: Ciconia alba.
IT is bigger than the common Heron: Its Neck thicker and shorter than the
Herons: Its Head, Neck, and forepart white: The Rump and outside of the Wings
black: The Belly white. The quil-feathers of the Wings black: The Tail white:
The Bill long, red, like a Herons Bill. The Legs long, red, bare almost to the
Knees or second joint from the Foot. The Toes from the divarication to the
first joint connected by an intervening membrane. The Vertebres of the Neck are
fourteen in number. Its Claws are broad, like the nails of a man; so that
(...). will not to be sufficient to difference a man from a Stork with its
feathers plucked off. N. B. Herodotus attributes such like Claws to the white
Egyptian Ibis. The Claw of the middle Toe is not serrate. It is seldom seen in
England, and not unless driven overby a storm of wind, or some other accident.
My honored Friend Sir Thomas Brown of Norwich, a person deservedly famous, for
his skill in all parts of learning, but especially in natural History, sent me
a Picture of one of these birds taken on the Coast of Norfolk, drawn by the
life, with a short description of it, as follows. It was about a yard high: It
had Of a red lead color.
red Bill and Legs; the Claws of the Feet like humane Nails. The lower parts of
both Wings were black, so that when the Wings were closed or gathered up, the
lower part of the Back appeared black. Yet the Tail, which was wholly covered
and hid by the Wings (as being scarce an inch long) was white, as was also the
upper part of the Body. The quills were equal in bigness to Swans quills. It
made a snapping or clattering noise with its Bill, by the quick and frequent
striking one Chap against the other. It readily eat Frogs and Land-snails which
we offered it; but refused Toads. It is but rarely seen on our Coasts. So far
Sir Thomas Brown: Whose description agrees exactly with ours in all points.

The white Stork, says In his Annotations on Recchus his Animals.
Joannes Faber, is very rare in Italy: All these twenty eight years that I have
spent at Rome, I never but once saw a white Stork, and then but one, on the top
of the Tower, called Torre de Conti, I know not by what wind driven thither.
Aldrovandus also himself an Italian born, and then a very old man, confessed
that he had never seen a white Stork, for that the Territory of Bologna did
neither breed nor feed them. But since it is most certain, that Storks before
the approach of Winter fly out of Germany into more temperate and hot
Countries, very strange it is, Italy being contiguous to Germany, and hotter
than it, that they should not fly thither, at least pass over it in their
flight Southward.

I know them (says the same Faber) who have learned by ocular inspection, that
Storks and Peacocks, when such Serpents as they swallow passed alive through
their bodies, (as they will do several times, creeping out at their Fundaments)
use to set up their Rumps, and clap their Tails against a wall so long, till
they feel the Serpents dead within them.

. II. The black Stork. Ciconia nigra.
IT is equal to the white Stork, or but little less than it. Its Head, Neck,
Back, and Wings are black, with a certain gloss or mixture of green, not unlike
the color of a Cormorant: Its Breast, Belly, and sides are white. The Bill
green: The Legs also green, and bare of feathers up to the Knees or second
joint from the Foot. The membrane connecting the Toes reaches on the outside as
far as the first joint of the middle Toe, not on the inside. The young ones
when they want meat make a noise not unlike to Herons. We saw this Bird first
near Frankefurt on the Main, after at Strasburgh: We suppose those we saw were
young ones, for that their Bills and Legs were green, whereas in that which
Faber described they were red.

Jo. Faber In his Annotations upon Recchus his Animals.
describes this Bird very diligently and exactly thus: Its length from the
point of the Bill to the Feet was six The Latin word is Spitha^ae.
spans and an half: The measure was the same of the Wings extended. The Bill
alone (wherein was seen a short reddish Tongue) was a Roman foot long: The Legs
two spans. The Gullet was of that capacity or wideness, that the Bird being
hanged up by the Feet, a great Frog dropped out of the mouth of its own accord,
without any force, and four more were found entire in its stomach. In which
stomach, made of hard flesh, were many Frogs bones, and a certain dry lump not
unlike dung. The Neck was a span and half long: The Legs and Feet meager. The
color of the Wings and all the Back blackish, as far as the lower Belly. This
black is mixed with a dark bluish and purple, the dusky color being
predominant, especially in the greater feathers of the Wings. The Neck recedes
further from the color of the Back, and does wonderfully delight the Eyes with
a most grateful mixture of blue, purple, and green; such as is observed in the
necks of Pigeons and Mallards. And because only the lower region of the Belly,
beginning far below the Breast, has white and soft feathers; the whole Bird is
rather to be denominated black than white. The orbits of the Eyes, the whole
Bill, Legs, and Feet are of a most pleasant scarlet red, or Resembling the
minium of the Ancients, or our Cinnabar.
vermilion color. All which things put together, viz. the stately structure of
the whole body, and that symmetry of various and pleasant colors, render this
Bird very elegant and beautiful to behold. It is not altogether whole-footed
like a Duck, yet the three fore-toes are joined together halfway by a tough
membrane; the back-toe or keel being pretty long, and armed with a strong
Talon. These birds frequent Fens, Lakes, and Sea-shores; into these waters they
run, intent upon their prey, sometimes also diving under water, maintain
themselves by fishing, as I am assured by our Fowlers upon their credit. This
Bird is not very frequent at Rome, yet is it sometimes exposed to sale among
other Sea-fowl. Its flesh has such a fishy taste and stench, that being thrown
to our Cat, she refused it, and would not touch it. He endeavors to prove this
Bird to be the Mergus of Ovid. See the Author.

All Storks make a clattering or snapping noise with their Bills, by clapping
one Mandible nimbly against the other. They are said to live only in Republics
and free-States; but this we found by experience to be false, observing them in
the Territories of some Princes in Germany. There is a tradition also that they
feed and nourish their Parents in their old age, when they are unable to seek
their own food: Whence the word (...), signifying the duty of Children in
requiting and maintaining their aged Parents.

. III. * The American Stork, called by the Brasilians Maguari of Marggrave.
IT is a Bird lik to the Stork in figure, and bigness, and partly also in
color. It has a Neck a foot long: A straight, sharp Bill, of nine inches
length; long, naked Legs, like the Stork; a short Tail reaching no further than
the Wings. Its Bill at botom half way up is of a yellowish green: The other
half being of a bluish ash color. It has small, silver-coloured Eyes with a
black Pupil, and about them a Vermilion-coloured skin, and the like also below,
near the rise of the Bill, or between the Bill and the Throat, which when she
is angry she lets hang down under the Throat after the manner of the Senembi.
The whole Head, Neck, and all the body is covered with pure white feathers; and
on the lower part of the Neck those white feafeathers are of a good length. The
Tail also is white, but above covered with certain black feathers. The Wings at
setting on are covered with white feathers, but near the Back with black; which
black has a gloss of green. It Legs and Feet are red and like a Storks. It
snaps also with its Bill like our Country Stork. Its flesh is esculent.

CHAP. III. * The Ibis of Bellonius.
FOrmerly (says he) we took the black Ibis to be the Haematopus: But observing
its manners and conditions, we found it not to be the Haematopus, but the black
Ibis, which Herodotus first mentioned, and after him Aristotle. It is of the
bulk of the Eloritis.
Curlew, or a little less, all over black: Has the Head of a Cormorant. The
Bill where it is joined to the Head is above an inch thick, but pointed toward
the end, and a little crooked and arched, and wholly red, as are also the Legs,
which are long, like the Legs of that Bird which Pliny calls Bos taurus,
Aristotle names Ardea stellaris. It has a long Neck like a Heron, so that when
we first saw the black Ibis, it seemed to us in the manner and make [habitu] of
its body like the Bittour.

This kind of Bird is said to be so proper to Egypt, that it cannot live out of
that Country, and that if it be carried out it dies suddenly.

The Ibes are birds very useful to the Egyptians, for destroying Serpents,
Locusts, and Caterpillars, with which that Country is greatly infested; and
therefore divine honors were given them. The Ibes (says Cicero) dispatch a
power of Serpents. They turn away a great Plague from Egypt, when they kill and
consume those flying Serpents that are brought in thither by the West wind out
of the Deserts of Libya. Whence it comes to pass, that they do no harm either
alive by their biting, or dead by their stench. For which cause the Ibes are
invocated by the Egyptians. What else the Ancients have delivered concerning
the Ibis, see in Aldrovandus.

CHAP. IV.
. I. The Spoon-bill. Platea sive Pelecanus of Gesner. Leucorodius sive
Albardeola of Aldrovand. Lepelaer of the Low Dutch.
THat which we described was a young one taken out of the Nest. It weighed
forty five ounces and an half. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Claws was thirty four inches, to the end of the Tail twenty four. The
color of the whole body was Snow-white like a Swans. Beyond the Eyes toward
the Bill grow neither feathers nor down, as in the Heron and Cormorant. The
angle also of the lower Chap is bare, which perchance is peculiar and proper to
this Bird.

The first quil-feather of the Wing is black; of the second only the exterior
Web, or outer half from the shaft; and the tip of the interior are black; of
the third only the top, and of the fourth yet less. In like manner the tips and
shafts of the inferior feathers of the second row were black. The Tail is very
short, viz. three inches and an half, made up of twelve feathers.

The Bill is of a singular and unusual figure, plain, depressed, and broad,
near the end dilated into an almost circular figure, of the likeness of a
Spoon, whence also the Bird it self is called by the Low Dutch, Lepelaer, that
is, Spoon-bill. The broad part of the Bill is graven with twelve or fourteen
lines or crevises; but its inward surface is smooth and even, without any such
sculptures or gravings. The Bill in the young ones before they be grown up is
white, or of a flesh-colors, in old ones black. The Tongue is sharp and little.
The Legs half way up the second joint are bare of feathers; in the young ones
of a whitish color. The Feet strong: The fore-toes joined together by a
membrane; the outmost and middlemost to the second joint, the middlemost and
inmost no further than the first. The Toes and Claws black.

We did not observe in our Bird those reflections of the Windpipe, which
Aldrovandus mentions, describes, and figures. It had a large Gall: The Guts had
many revolutions. Above the Stomach the Gullet was dilated into a Bag, whose
inward surface was rough and uneven, with many papillary glandules.

Its Eggs are of the bigness of Hens Eggs, white, and powdered with a few
sanguine or pale-red spots.

In a certain Grove, at a Village called Sevenhuys, not far from Leyden in
Holland, they build and breed yearly in great numbers, on the top of high
trees; where also build Herons, Night-ravens, Shags, Cormorants, etc. In this
Grove every sort of Bird (as they told us) has its several quarter, where they
build all together. When the young ones are ripe, those that farm the Grove
with a hook on the top of a long pole catch hold of the bough on which the Nest
is built and shake out the young ones, but sometimes Nest and all down to the
ground.

. II. * Tlauhquechul, or the Mexican Spoon-bill of Hernandez.
It is a Bird of a strange Palate: It feeds only on living fish, and will not
touch dead ones. It delights in ravin: In shape of body is like to the
Spoon-bill or Pelecan, but almost all over of a most beautiful scarlet or pale
red color. Its Bill is broad, round toward the end, and of an ash color: The
Pupil of its Eye black, the Iris red, and wrinkled: Its forehead like that of a
Turkey or Aura: Its Head almost void of hairs or feathers, of a white color,
with near the whole Neck, and part of the Breast: A broad black ring,
distinguishing the Head from the Neck. It lives about the Sea-shores and Rivers.

. III. * The Brasilian Spoon-bill, called Aiaia, and by the Portughese,
Colherado, Marggrav. the same I suspect with the precedent.
IN figure it agrees with the European Platea, differing only in color. Of the
bigness of a Goose: Its Bill broad like a Spoon, and white: Its Neck long: Its
Feet broad. It is all white, save that the Back and Wings are of a pale
carnation color. Its flesh is edible. It is very common about the River of St.
Francis, and elsewhere in Fenny places. Probably this Bird is the same with the
precedent. We have a Bill of (I suppose) one of these American Plateas, which
is almost twice as big and long as that of the common European.

BOOK III. PART I. SECTION III. Waterfowl not Piscivorous with very long
slender straight Bills.
CHAP. I.
. I. The Woodcock: Scolopax Aldrov. tom. 3. page 472.
IT is somewhat lesser than a Partridge: The upper side of the body
parti-colored of red, black and gray, very beautiful to behold. From the Bill
almost to the middle of the Head it is of a reddish ash color. The Breast and
Belly are gray, with transverse brown lines. Under the Tail it is somewhat
yellowish. The Chin is white, with a tincture of yellow. A black line on each
side between the Eye and Bill. The back of the Head is most black, with two or
three cross bars of a testaceous color.

The prime feathers in each Wing are about twenty three, black, crossed with
red bars. The feathers under the Wings are curiously variegated with gray and
brown lines. The Tail is 3 inches long, consisting of twelve feathers, the tips
whereof are cinereous above, and white underneath; their borders or outsides as
it were indented with red; the remaining part black.

The Bill is three inches long, or more, dark brown toward the end, near the
Head paler or flesh colored: The upper Mandible a very little longer than the
nether: The Tongue nervous: The Palaterough: The Ears very great and open. The
Eyes stand higher or nearer to the top of the Head than in other birds, that
they be not hurt when she thrusts her Bill deep into the ground. The Legs,
Feet, and Toes are of a pale brown or dusky color: The Claws black: The
back-toe very little, having also but a little Claw.

The Liver divided into two Lobes, having a Gallbladder annexed: The Guts
long, slender, and having many revolutions. The blind Guts very short, not half
so long as that single blind gut the remnant of the Yolk-funnel.

These are Birds of passage coming over into England in Autumn, and departing
again in the beginning of the Spring; yet they pair before they go, flying two
together, a Male and a Female. They frequent especially moist Woods, and
Rivulets near hedges. They are said both to come and to fly away in a Mist. At
Nurenberg in Germany I saw of them to be sold in August, whence I suppose they
abide thereabout all the year. On the Alps and other high Mountains they
continue all Summer. I my self have flushed Woodcocks on the top of the
Mountain Jura in June and July. Some straglers by some accident left behind
when their fellows depart remain also in England all Summer, and breed here.
Mr. Jessop saw young Woodcocks to be sold at Sheffield, and others have seen
them elsewhere. Their Eggs are long, of a pale red color, stained with deeper
spots and clouds.

Of two that I described, one was a Male, and the other a Female; the Female
was heavier than the Male by an ounce and half; the Female weighing eleven
ounces and an half, the Male but ten: The Female also was of a darker color.

The flesh of this Bird for the delicacy of its taste is in high esteem. The
Leg especially is commended, in respect whereof the Woodcock is preferred
before the Partridge it self, according to that English Rhythm before recited
in the Chapter of the Partridge.

If the Partridge had the Woodcocks thigh,
'Twould be the best bird that ever did fly.
The length of this Bird, measured from the tip of the Bill to the end of the
Tail, was thirteen inches and an half: The breadth between the tips of the
Wings extended twenty six inches.

Among us in England this Bird is infamous for its simplicity or folly; so that
a Woodcock is Proverbially used for a simple, foolish person.

. II. The Snipe or Snite: Gallinago minor.
THis weighs about four ounces. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Toes is thirteen inches; to the end of the Tail eleven and an half. The
Wings spread were seven inches and an half wide.

A pale red line divides the Head in the middle longways, and on each side
parallel thereto a list of black, and without the black over the Eyes another
line of the same color with that drawn along the middle of the Head. Between
the Eyes and the Bill is a dusky brown line. The Chin under the Bill is white:
The Neck is mingled of brown and red. The Breast and Belly are almost wholly
white. The long feathers springing from the shoulders reach almost to the Tail,
having their outward halfs from the shaft of a pale red, the inner black and
glistering, their tips red; which colors succeeding one another make two lines
down the Back. The covert-feathers of the Back are dusky, with transverse white
lines: Those incumbent on the Tail are red, crossed with black lines. The
greater covert-feathers of the Wings are dusky, with white tips, the lesser are
parti-colored with black, red, and gray. The inside coverts are curiously
variegated with brown and white lines.

The Quil-feathers are in each Wing about twenty four in number; of which the
outer edge of outmost is white almost to the tip: of the succeeding the tips
are something white, but more clearly from the eleventh to the twenty first;
else they are all brown. But the last five are variegated with transverse black
and pale-red lines. The Tail is composed of twelve feathers, two inches and an
half long. It seems to be shorter than it is, because it is wholly covered and
hid by the incumbent feathers. The tips of its outmost feathers are white, the
rest of the feather varied with cross bars or lines of brown, and gray, or pale
red color. The following to the two middlemost are of like color with these
outmost, save that their tips are less white, their bottoms more black, and the
uppermost cross bar reddish. Of the two middle feathers the tips are white,
next beneath the white is a brown bar, under the brown a red one, with some
dusky spots in the middle. The rest of the feather is black, save that in the
outer Webs are sometimes seen one or two reddish spots. [I suppose the colors
of the Tail vary, and are not exactly alike in all birds.]

The Bill is almost three inches long, black at the tip, and somewhat broad and
chamferd: The Tongue sharp: The Irides of the Eyes hazel-coloured. The Legs are
of a pale green, the Talons black. The Toes long, and separated from the first
rise, without any connection or cohesion. The back-toe is very small.

The Liver is divided into two Lobes, with a large Gall appendant. The Stomach
not very fleshy. Its flesh is tender, sweet, and of an excellent relish.

It lives especially on the fatty unctuous humor it sucks out of the earth;
but feeds also upon Worms and other Insects.

Some of these Birds abide with us all the Summer and build in our Moors and
Marshes; laying four or five Eggs at a breeding time. The greatest part leave
us, and fly into other Countries. It seeks its food in moist and fenny places,
and in Rivulets and Gills of water, where also it hides it self, so that it is
very hard to find or espy it.

. III. The Gid or Jack-Snipe or Judcock: Gallinago minima seu tertia Bellonii.
IT weighed two ounces: Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the
Claws was ten inches and a quarter, to the end of the Tail eight and a half. It
is about half so big as a Snipe; whence it is called by the French, i. e. Two
for one.
Deux pour un, as Bellonius witnesses. The color of the Rump is a shining
bluish purple, like the feathers on a Stares back; the tips of the feathers
being white. The scapular feathers covering the Back have their outward border
yellow, the middle part brown, with red spots, their inner border of a shining
blue, yet without any mixture of purple. The Neck is parti-colored of brown,
white, and pale red. The top of the Head black, with a red tincture: Above
either Eye passes a broad line of a pale yellow. The Throat is of a pale red,
painted with white and brown spots. The Breast and Belly white. Between the
Eyes and Bill is drawn a black line or border. The Males in this kind differ
from the Females neither in color, nor in magnitude. The prime feathers of the
Wings were in number twenty four, of which the first or outmost ten were brown
or dusky: The tips of the next ten white. The three last or inmost on the
outside the shaft were straked with red and black. The tips of the greater
covert-feathers are white: The lesser rows of Wing-feathers are black, but
partly tipped with red.

The Bill is almost two inches long: The upper Chap a little longer than the
nether, toward the end broad and rough with As if it were carved or graven.
points, [chamfered] yet the very utmost tip smooth. The Legs bare somewhat
higher than the Knees, pale-coloured, with a dash of green. The Toes divided to
the bottom: The back-toe small: The Claws black. It has a Gallbladder, a
musculous Stomach: The single blind Gut or Appendiz being the remainder of the
Umbilical funnel conveying the Yolk into the guts, shrunk up. It feeds upon
Beetles, and other Insects.

It hides it self among Rushes, not rising sometimes till you are just ready to
set your foot upon it: It is a simpler bird than the Snipe, and less frequent
with us. I sometimes following the vulgar error, thought it not to differ from
the Snipe in kind, but only in Sex, taking it to be the Cock-Snipe. But
afterward being advised by Mr. M. Lister, I found it to differ specifically:
For dissecting several of these small ones some proved to be Males, some
Females.

. IV. * The Brasilian Guarauna of Marggrave. Rusticula aquatica Brasiliensis.
IT is of the bigness of the Jacu; has a straight Bill, a little inclining
downward, yellow, but dusky at the tip, four inches and an half long. Its body
is also of the same length. The upper Legs are feathered down half way, six
inches long. Each Foot has four Toes so disposed as is usual, the middle of
which is three inches long, the rest shorter. The whole bird is covered with
brown feathers, mingled with much shade. The Head and all the Neck are indeed
of the same color, but besides, speckled with white, as in the Jacu. It is
pretty good meat.

CHAP. II.
. I. The Godwit, called in some places the Yarwhelp, or Yarwip, in others, the
Stone-Plover: The Barge or Aegocephalus of Bellonius, as I take it. An Fedoa
Gesneri? An Tom. 3. page 439.
Rusticula Aldrov?
IT is like and equal to a Woodcock, or a little bigger: From point of Bill to
the Claws seventeen inches and an half long: Between the tips of the Wings
spread twenty eight and an half broad. The feathers of the Head are gray or
cinereous, with some tincture of red, their middle parts being black; above the
Eyes white. The Neck and Throat are reddish. The Breast of a sordid white. The
Back is parti-colored of red, black, and white; the middle parts of the
feathers being black, the edges of a pale red. In the Cock the Throat and
Breast are crossed with black lines: In the Hen the Throat and Neck are gray
[or ash-colored,] The whole rump almost is white, powdered with blackish
specks. [In the Bird that I described a triangular spot of white, took up the
Rump or lower part of the Back, the vertex respecting the birds Head.] The
great feathers of the Wings are black, with white shafts: The rest of the first
row, as also those of the second row have reddish ash-colored tips and edges.
The lesser covert-feathers of the Wings are of like color with the body. The
Tail-feathers are in number twelve, all crossed alternately with black and
white lines; the middlemost, which are the longest, of 3 inches length: The
rest on each side in order somewhat shorter, the exterior than the interior.

The Bill is white at the Base, black toward the point, longer for the bigness
of the bird even than the Snipes or Woodcocks; the upper Mandible a little
longer than the lower: The Tongue sharp: The Nosthrils oblong: The Ears great.

The Legs are not very long; naked to the middle of the second joint: The Claws
black. The Claw of the middle fore-toe on the inside is thinned into an edge.
The outer Toe is joined to the middle one from the rise to the first joint by a
pretty thick membrane of a dusky or dark green color.

It lives and seeks it food on the sandy shores by the Seaside, which for a
great space are uncovered when the Tide is out, where it hides not it self like
the Woodcock, but walks up and down the Sands in open view, like a Gull.

Barge of Bellonius, which he says they in French call, A small Curlew.
Petit Corlieu.
It lives in Meadows like the Curlew, and in like manner frequents the Sea. It
is a timorous bird, not abiding the approach of a man. It has a cry like a
Goat; whence we guess it was named by Aristotle, Aegocephalus, or Goathead. But
lest perchance this my conjecture may seem rash and groundless, I will describe
it. It is lesser than the Curlew, but for color not much unlike it, has also
a shorter Bill, and straight. Aristotle writes thus of it. It altogether wants
a Spleen, and a little after, For in some birds the Gall sticks to the Stomach,
in some to the Guts, as in the Dove, Raven, Quail, Swallow, Sparrow; in some to
the Liver and the Stomach, as in the Aegocephalus, and lastly, in other to the
Liver and the gut, as in the Hawk and Kite. But in our Barge dissected we found
the Gall sticking both to the Liver and Stomach, as any one that will be
content to take the pains to cut it up, may observe. It is esteemed a delicate
bird by the French, but seldom appears in places far remote from the Sea,
seeking its food most willingly in salt Marshes. A good part of Marsh-birds are
nocturnal, as this also is, intent upon feeding by night rather than by day.
Wherefore we shall receive it for the Aegocephalus, till some other more fit
name be found out for it. Thus far Bellonius.

I take this bird of Bellonius to be the same with our Godwit, which in
Cambridgeshire and the Isle of Ely they call Yarwhelp.

. II. The second sort of Godwit, which seems to be the same with the Totanus of
Tom. 3. page 430.
Aldrovand, called at Venice, Vetola.
IT weighs above nine ounces: Its length from Bill to Tail is full seventeen
inches; to the feet twenty one: Its breadth from Wings-end to Wings-end twenty
eight.

Its Bill is like a Woodcocks, three inches three quarters long, black at the
end, else reddish: Its Legs long, and bare above the Knees: The outmost Toe
joined to the middle by a membrane as far as the first joint: The middle Claw
excavated on the inner side.

The Chin is white, with a tincture of red: The Neck Ash-colored, or gray.
cinereous: The Breast and Belly white: The Head of a dusky ash color, whitish
about the Eyes: The Back brown: The Rump encompassed with a white ring, as in
the Pygargus.

The quil-feathers in each Wing were twenty six: The first or outmost the
longest, all black, as were also the six next. The rest to the nineteenth were
half white: In the twentieth and twenty first the outer edges were also white.
The tips of the feathers of the second row were white, and together made a
white line crossing the middle of the Wing. Its Tail was three inches long,
made up of twelve feathers. The two middlemost of which were almost wholly
black: The outmost, especially on the outside Web, white almost up to the tips:
In the rest in order the white part was less and less to the middlemost.

This bird has thick blind-guts, of an inch long, and besides that single one
about the middle of the guts. It differs from the precedent, 1. In the color
of the Tail: 2. In the color of the Back and upper side, which in that is
various, in this one and the same: 3. In bigness, being less than that.

. III. The third sort of Godwit.
BEsides the two already described Mr. Willughby acknowledges a third sort of
Godwit, which in Cornwall they call the Others call the Oedicnemus of Bellonius
the Stone Curlew.
Stone-Curlew, differing from the precedent in that it has a much shorter and
slenderer Bill than either of them.

BOOK III. PART I. SECTION IV. Waterfowl not piscivorous with very long,
slender, crooked Bills.
CHAP. I.
I. The Curlew: Numenius sive Arquata.
THe Female weighed twenty eight ounces; the Male, which is somewhat less, and
commonly called, The Jack Curlew, twenty five and a quarter. The length of the
Female from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Claws was twenty nine inches:
To the end of the Tail twenty three and an half. The distance of the tips of
the Wings spread forty inches.

The middle parts of the feathers of the Head, Neck, and Back are black, the
borders or outsides ash-colored, with a mixture of red. In the Throat and
Breast the middle parts or shafts of the feathers are black, the borders or
edges, in the Breast white, in the Throat white, with a tincture of red. The
Chin is not spotted. The Rump and Belly are white.

The feathers investing the underside of the Wing are all white: the first or
outmost quil-feathers all over black, the rest spotted with white. The first
feather of the second row is all black: the tips of the eighth or ninth next
are white. This Bird has a small, sharp-pointed, black feather at the end of
the Wing, which whether or no it is to be reckoned among the quil-feathers one
may justly doubt.

Its Bill is In some five inches and an half. in some above six.
very long, narrow, bowed, of a dark brown or black color: Its Tongue sharp,
and very short, extending not further than the angle of the lower Chap: The
Nosthrils long: The Legs long, of a dusky blue color, bare of feathers half up
the second joint: The Claws small and black: That of the middle Toe thinned
into an edge on the inside: All the Toes connected by a thick membrane from the
divarication to the first joint. It has a great Gallbladder, with a long neck
extending to the gut, which concurs not in one common passage with the Porus
bilarius.
Gall-pore, but enters the gut at a distinct hole, though near to that.

It has a musculous Stomach or Gizzard like granivorous birds: In the Stomach
of one we found Periwinkle shells, small stones, and grit, etc. in another
Frogs, etc. The single blind gut is very long: The common blind gut three or
four inches long, and full of excrements. Above the Stomach the Gullet is
dilated into a bag, granulated within with thick-set papillary glandules.

This bird for the goodness and delicate taste of its flesh may justly
challenge the principal place among Waterfowl: Of this our Fowlers are not
ignorant, and therefore sell them dear. They have a Proverb among them in
Suffolk:

A Curlew, be she white, be she black,

She carries twelve pence on her back.

It is a Sea-fowl, seeking its food on the Sands and Ouze, and in salt Marshes:
It is found on the Seacoasts on all sides of England.

. II. The Whimbrel: Arquata minor, at Venice Taraniolo.
THis bird, the bigness excepted, is very like the Curlew. It weighs twelve
ounces. The measure from Bill to Tail was seventeen inches, to the end of the
Feet twenty: Of the Wings spread thirty three and an half. The Bill three
inches long: The blind guts two: The guts twenty nine. Its Legs were greenish:
The quil-feathers marked with great, semicircular, white spots. The lesser rows
of covert-feathers had their edges white, their middle parts of a reddish
black. The Belly and Thighs were white.

Mr. Johnson of Brignal, in his Papers communicated to us, describes this Bird
by the name of a Whimbrel thus. It is less by half than the Curlew, has a
crooked Bill, but shorter by an inch and more: The Crown deep brown without
speckles: The Back under the Wings white, which the Curlew has not. Besides,
the color of the whole body is more duskish or dull. It is found upon the
Sands in the Teez mouth.

The Gallinula Phaeopus of Gesner, which I suspect to be the same with the
precedent.

This Bird about Strasburgh is called Brachvogel: It has a black body,
sprinkled with a few red and yellowish spots; a slender, long, black Bill,
moderately bending; a whitish Neck, its underside about the middle and below
tending to yellow or The word is russus, (...) may be rendered russet.
red: A white Belly; dusky or ash-colored Legs, as the Picture represents.
This description was taken from a Picture, and therefore the less to be
credited.

The other Phaeopus or lesser Curlew of Gesner; the same with our Whimbrel.
This Bird some call (as they do the greater Curlew) Regenvogel, that is,
Rain-fowl; and in Italy, Tarangolo. It is almost like the last described, has
ash-colored Legs like that, and a white Belly and Chin: A like Bill also, save
that it seems a little longer. The Wings are spotted with white, else of a
dusky red; but their long feathers and the upper side of the Back are blackish.
The Throat and Breast have something of an obscure and very faint red, and are
speckled with many black spots.

I see no reason to doubt but this is our Whimbrel, since the Taraniolo and
Tarangolo in Italian.
names agree, and the descriptions differ not in any considerable note.

CHAP. II. * The Falcinellus of Gesner and Aldrovand, which we may English, The
Sithe-Bill.
WE have thought fit (says Aldrovand) to place this next after the Herons,
because that both in magnitude and the whole shape of its body it resembles a
Heron, the Bill only excepted. This Gesner sometime saw alive at Ferraria in
Italy. Its body was bigger that a Pigeons, of an elegant color, almost green,
with something of purple here and there mixed, as in the Back of the Lapwing,
the color varying, as it is variously exposed to the light: The Head and Neck
brown: But the upper part whitish, spotted with black. Its Bill was slender,
long, and bending downwards like that of the Curlew or Corvus Sylvaticus: Its
Legs long, and Feet cloven. Some call it, Airon negro in Italian.
The black Heron. But this that I saw was not grown up: They say it comes to be
bigger, and perchance also may change something in color by age. Among all the
Birds that I have happened to see, none seems to me to come nearer the Ibis. Thus
far Gesner. Now (proceeds Aldrovandus) whether this be that Bird which our
Countrymen call Falcinellus, I do not well know. For it differs not a little
from Gesners description. But it may happen (as he well notes) that this kind
of bird may vary, according to the difference of age, both in bigness and also
in color. Our Falcinellus comes well up to the bigness of the Herons, and
resembles them in the whole fashion and shape of the body, excepting the Bill.
Its Head, Neck, Back, Breast, Belly, Thighs, Rump are of a spadiceous color,
tending to dusky: But the Neck and Breast are sprinkled with certain oblong
dusky spots. In the middle of the Back is a kind of spot, of a dark green
color: Which same color is also seen in the Wings and Tail. The Bill is
blackish, very long, and falcate. The Thighs as far as they are naked, the Legs
and Feet are of the same color with the Bill. The Legs and Toes are extended
to a conspicuous length.

CHAP. III. *Curicaca of the Brasilians, called by the Portughese Masarino.
IT is a Bird, in the judgment of Clusius like to the Curlew: Of the bigness of
a handsome Goose: But its Head about as big as a Ducks. Its Neck six inches
long, three thick, or a little more: Its Bill six inches long, crooked like an
Hungarian Sword, of a dusky fire color. The length of its body from Neck to
Vent eleven inches, the thickness one foot. The length of the Wings sixteen
inches, of the Tail (which ends with the Wings) nine: Its Legs are eight inches
long: Its Feet two and an half; red like a Ducks, but not flat, having four
Toes with black Claws, three standing forward, and one backward. Its Head and
Neck have a white Plumage, mingled with yellow, in the upper side pretty long.
Its Eyes are black, with a yellow circle. About the Eyes and the beginning of
the Throat there is a black skin. The whole body is covered with black
feathers, excepting the Back, Head, and Belly, where are some of a dark
ash color, and in the middle of the Wings others white, mixed with gray, as in
Storks. The rest of the feathers of the body, of the beginning and end of the
Wings and of the whole Tail are black. The upper Legs to the middle are void of
feathers; for it is a Waterfowl. Its flesh is good, which I have often eaten
roasted and friend with butter.

There is found also another sort like to this, but much less, about the
bigness of a Hen, which is called Matuitui.

It is common about the River of S. Francis, in Itapuama, and elsewhere.

CHAP. IV. * The Acacalotl or Water-Raven [Corvus aquaticus] of Hernandez.
THe Cock from the end of the Tail to the point of the Bill was almost four
spans long; and of a moderate bigness. The Legs a span and half: The Bill
bending like a Bow, two Palms long, and pretty slender: The Feet cloven into
four Toes, armed with very black Claws. The Legs are not so black as the Claws:
The Bill is blue, and the Head small. The lower feathers are dusky, with red
intermingled: But the upper promiscuously purple, black, green, and shining.
The Neck is seven inches long. The Head and Neck are covered with dusky, white
and green feathers, and some a little yellowish. The Eyes are black, but the
Iris of a sanguine color. From the outer angles of the Eyes as far as the Bill
for the space of one inch the skin is bare of feathers and smooth, of a reddish
color. The Wings underneath are of a shining changeable color, which varies
according as it variously reflects the Sunbeams; but above near their setting
on first then of a lovely ^asseae.
green and Peacock color. It is native of the Coast of Mexico: It lives about
Lakes, and feeds upon Fishes. It breeds and brings up its Young in the Spring
time in fenny places. It yields a good nourishment, and not very unpleasant,
but gross, and (as other Marsh birds) of a fishy sent. This Bird does not much
differ from the Falcinellus of Gesner and Aldrovand.

CHAP. V. * The Brasilian Guara of Marggrave: The Indian Curlew of Clusius,
Exot.
IT is a Land and Waterfowl, of the bigness of the Spoon-bill; It has a Bill
of the figure of a Polonian Sword, long, of a whitish ash color; black Eyes; a
Neck and Head like the Spoon-bill. The Wings end with the Tail, which is short,
and carried low. The Legs are long, the upper half whereof covered with
feathers, the rest bare. In each footfour Toes, situate as is usual, long, with
short Claws, at bottom joined together by a skin. The Feet and Legs as far as
naked are of a light gray, as is also the Bill. The whole Bird is covered with
feathers of an elegant scarlet color: Only the quil-feathers of the Wings have
their ends black. This Bird, when first hatched, is of a blackish color; next
it becomes ash-colored; then white: After by degrees it begins to grow red,
and in the second year of its age is all over of that color they call
Columbin; and as it grows older it acquires that elegant scarlet color. It
feeds upon fish and flesh, water always added.

That Bird which Clusius from a Picture sent him by the Duke of Areschot,
described by the title of the Numenius Indicus.
Indian Curlew, is without all doubt the same with this. It approached well to
the bigness of a Curlew: Had a long Neck, a long and sharp Bill, but crooked
like a Sith: Long and slender Legs, furnished with four Toes, of which the
three foremost are longest, the hind-toe short: All armed with black Claws. The
Thighs for half that part that is above the knee are destitute of feathers:
Which note is common to it with all other birds which are wont to frequent
watery and fenny places. Its Tail was short, not exceeding the ends of the
Wings. But the feathers investing the whole body were of another color than
those of our common Curlew, for they were wholly red like Vermilion, excepting
the ends of the quilfeathers of the Wings, which were black. Its Bill and Legs
were yellow, almost like Oker.

SECTION V. Waterfowl not piscivorous, with slender Bills, of a middle length.
CHAP. I. * The Himantopus of Pliny, Aldrov. lib. 20. cap. 30.
THe whole Belly, Breast, and under-side of the Neck is white, as is also the
Head beneath the Eyes: For above the Eyes it is black, and so is it too on the
Back and Wings. The Bill is likewise black, a Palm and more long, slender, and
fit to strike Wood-lice, and other Insects. The Tail from white inclines to
ash color, but underneath is white. On the upper side of the Neck are black
spots tending downward. The Wings are very long. The Legs and Thighs are of a
wonderful length, very small and weak, and so much the more unfit to stand
upon, because it wants a hind-toe, and the fore-toes for the length of the Legs
are short; so that well and of right may it be called Himantopus, or Loripes,
its Legs being soft and flexible like a thong or string. The Toes are of almost
equal length, and of a sanguine color, yet is the middle toe a little the
longest. The Claws are black, small, and a little crooked.

See Gesners description of this bird, and what else he has concerning it in
the Author himself, or in Aldrovandus, who repeats it out of him, Ornithol.
lib. 20. cap. 30. To say the truth, it has not been our hap as yet to see this
bird.

CHAP. II. * The Crex of Bellonius.
IT has long Legs like the Limosa, called by the French, Chevalier, but is
bigger; yet lesser than the Curlew. It has a long, black Bill like the Curlew;
and also black legs and Head, the Neck, back, and Breast white. The rest of the
upper parts of the body incline to ash color. The Wings are blackish, crossed
on both sides by a white line near the The Latin word is Costae.
ridge. It seeks its food on the ground, and in the air also pursues and preys
upon flies, in like manner as the Lapwing. When it flies it makes a great noise.

This Bird Bellonius saw about the River Nile; and thence guessed it to be the
Crex of Aristotle, because in its cry it often repeats this word Crex, Crex.

CHAP. III. The Sea-Pie: Haematopus Bellonii.
IT is of the bigness of a Magpie or Crow: of the weight of eighteen ounces:
From Bill to Tail, or Claws (for it is all one) eighteen inches long.

Its Bill is straight, three inches long, narrow, or compressed sideways,
ending sharp, of a red color, [In another bird, perchance a young one, the
Bill was half black from the tip.] By its figure the Bill seems to be framed by
Nature, to thrust under Patella.
Limpets, and to raise them from the Rocks, that so it may feed upon their
meat. The upper Chap is a little longer than the nether. The Irides of the
Eyes, and edges of the Eyelids of a curious red color, [in another bird they
were from yellow hazel-coloured.] The Legs and Feet red. It wants the back-toe.
The outmost and middle toe are for a good way up joined together by a membrane:
So that this Bird seems to be of a middle nature between whole and cloven
footed. [In some we observed the feet to be of a pale dusky color, perhaps
those also were young ones.] The Claws were black.

The Head, Neck, Back, and Throat to the middle of the Breast were black. The
rest of the Breast and Belly white, as also the Rump. From this likeness in
color it took the name of Sea-pie. In one bird there was a great white spot
under the Chin, and another lesser under each eye.

The Tail is made up of twelve equal feathers, of four inches long, the lower
half white, the upper black. The prime feathers of each Wing are about twenty
eight, of which the first is black, having only the interior edge white: In
the rest in order the white part is enlarged, till in the twentieth and three
following it takes up the whole feather. The succeeding from the tweenty third
grow gradually black again. The covert-feathers of the middle quils are white,
and together make up a transverse bed of white in the Wing.

The Stomach is great, not musculous, but membranous, in which dissected we
found Limpets entire, upon which it seems chiefly to feed and live; as from the
make of its Bill we gathered before. It has a great Liver, divided into two
Lobes, with a Gall annexed: A small Spleen: Huge Ureters. The Cock differs not
from the Hen in color. Its flesh is very black, hard, having a rank taste, in
a word very bad meat; which we cannot but wonder at, seeing it feeds chiefly
upon Shel-fish; as do also the best rellish'd and most savoury of Waterfowl.
On the Coast of Wales and elsewhere on the Western Shores of England we saw
abundance of these birds.

Care is to be taken that the Haematopus be not confounded with the Himantopus
or Loripes, so called from the weakness and flexibility of its long legs, as we
said before.

CHAP. IV.
. I. The greater Plover of Ornithol. lib. 20. cap. 66.
Aldrovand: The Venetian Limosa of Gesner: As also the Glottis of the same
Gesner and Baltner: Called at Venice Totano, a name it should seem common to
this and the following bird.
IT weighs near seven ounces: In length from the tip of the Bill to the end of
the Claws it exceeds seventeen inches; to the end of the Tail fourteen; in
breadth from tip to tip of the Wings expanded it is about twenty four and an
half. Its Bill is black, yet at the angle of the lower Mandible red, slender,
straight, two inches and an half long. Its color on the upper side of the
Head, Neck, Wings, Shoulders, and forepart of the Back is mixed of brown and
whitish, we commonly call it gray. On the Head the outer borders of the
feathers are white, the middle parts black. A white line passes above the Eyes.
The under side of the body is all white and also the lower part of the Back or
Rump.

The quil-feathers of the Wings are in number about twenty six, all dusky or
dark brown. The five outmost darker than the rest, their interior Webs being
powdered with white specks: The inner quils are paler, speckled with white. The
Tail is three inches long, composed of twelve feathers, waved with cross lines
or bars of brown and white alternately placed.

Its Legs are very long, bare of feathers for two inches above the first joint
[or Knees] of a middle color between green and livid, or Lead color
plumbeous: The backtoe small: The Claws black. The outmost Toe joined to the
middle at bottom. Its Stomach small, less fleshy than in granivorous birds.

This bird seemed to me in bigness to exceed the Redshank: Its Legs are also
longer. Gesners description of the Limosa, which you have in Aldrovands
Ornithology, lib. 20. cap. 28. answers in all points exactly to this bird. The
description also of the Glottis in Gesner and its figure in Baltner agree to
it. I believe also that this is the bird which the French call Chevalier aux
pieds verds, or the green-leg'd Horseman, from the length and color of its
Legs. At Venice in Italy we saw many of them.

. II. The other Totano, perchance Gesners Totanus, Aldrov. lib. 20. cap. 24. An
Callidrys rubra Bellonii?
WE saw and described at Venice another bird, we think different from the
precedent: though the main difference were in the color of its Legs, which
were of a pale yellowish-red. Its Bill also seemed to be something shorter.

We take this to be the bird the French call Chevalier aux pieds rouges, the
red-leg'd Horseman; the precedent (as we said before) that they denominate,
Chevalier aux pieds verds. And perchance they may differ only in Sex; for this
was a Male, that a Female. For in other birds also of this kind, as for
example, the Erythra of Gesner, which he puts among the Water-hens, the Female
differs from the Male both in bigness, and in the color of the Legs. The red
Callidrys of Bellonius is either the same with this or very like it: It differs
in that the Neck and feathers under the Wings and Rump are ash-colored, and
that on the Temples on each side it has two black spots, which give as it were
a shadow to the Eyebrows, which themselves also are marked with a white spot.
His figure of the red Callidrys does not answer to the description, for the
Bill and Legs are drawn too short.

CHAP. V.
. I. The Redshank or Pool-Snipe: Gallinula Erythropus major Gesneri Ornithol.
Book 20. Chap. 26.
Aldrov. Totanus of the same Gesner, as it seems to us, Aldrov. tom. 3. page
439. An Bellonii Pardali congener longiore rostro?
IT is of a middle size for bigness between a Lapwing and a Snipe, approaching
to the quantity of a Plover. The Head and Back are of a dusky ash color,
spotted with black [In some I observed the Back to be of a dusky or brown
color, in lining to green.] The middle of the Neck is more cinereous. The
Throat parti-colored of black and white, the black being drawn down longways
the feathers. The white color seems to have something of red mingled with it.
The Breast is whiter with fewer spots, and those transverse.

The Tail, and feathers next to it are variegated with transverse waved lines
of white and black alternately. The number of Tail-feathers is twelve; the
length of the Tail two inches three quarters. The quil-feathers in each Wing
are twenty six, of which the first is brown, only its shaft white: The five
next of a black brown; on the inner side white, and as it were sprinkled or
powdered with white. The tip of the seventh is white, with one or two
transverse black lines. In the following feathers the white spreads it self
further, till in the nineteenth it takes up the whole feather: The Understand
it of the first row of coverts
foremost covert-feathers are black; the middle varied with white lines. The
other rows of covert-feathers are of the same color with the Back, that is of
a dark ash color.

The Bill is two inches long, slender, and like a Woodcocks, of a dark red at
base, black toward the point. The Tongue is sharp, slender, and undivided; the
upper Mandible longer, and something crooked at the very tip: The Eyes
hazel-coloured: The Nosthrils oblong. The Legs of a fair, but pale red: The
Claws small and black. The back-toe is very small, having a very little Claw.
Of the fore-toes the inmost is the least: All are connected by a membrane
below; but the outmost with a larger, extending to the second joint.

It is common on the sandy shores about England every where.

It breeds in Marshes, and if any one comes near its Nest it flies about,
making a great noise like the Lapwing.

It differs from the Totanus of Aldrovandus, 1. In that it is much less. 2.
That it has shorter Bill and Feet. 3. In the dusky color of its Back. 4. In
the red color of its Legs and Feet.

The figure of the Gallinula erythropus major.
greater red-leg'd Water-hen in Gesner and Aldrovand does not agree well to
this bird: For the Bill is drawn too short and thick at the Head. Gesners
description of his Totanus does so well agree to it in almost all particulars
that I doubt not but it is the same bird. Only in the length of the Bill and
Legs, and in the bigness of the body is some diversity.

. II. The Gambetta of Lib. 20. c. 25.
Aldrovand.
THe Gambetta of Aldrovand is also near of kin to the Redshank, which he thus
describes. Its Head, Neck, and Breast are cinereous, all over sprinkled with
many Fuscis, i. e. dark or dusky.
brown spots, greater on the Back, lesser on the Neck and Breast, least of all
on the Head. The master-feathers of the Wings are black: The body cinereous, on
the Wings and Back inclining a little to red: The Belly white: The Bill black.
The Irides of the Eyes of a yellowish green, encompassed with a black circle.
The legs and feet from yellow incline to red.

This Bird we saw at Milan in Italy, and thus described. It is something less
than a Lapwing. The upper surface of its body is gray, of such a kind of color
as is seen in the Backs of Hen Ducks and Teal, or of the Curlew. Its Legs and
Feet are long and yellow, its Claws black. It has the back toe. Its Bill is
shorter than the Redshanks, longer than the Lapwings; near the Head of a
flesh-colors, near the tip black. The prime feathers are twenty five in each
Wing. The Tail half a hand-breadth long, not reaching so far as the ends of the
Wings closed. It has the Head and Neck of a Tringa.

CHAP. VI. Of the Birds called Tringae.
. I. The Tringa of Tom. 3. page 481.
Aldrovand: The Cinclus of Bellonius: The Gallinula rhodopus or phoenicopus,
and also the Ochropus media of Aldrov. Ornithol. tom. 3. p. 461.
Gesner. The Steingallel of Leonard Baltner.
IN bigness it equals or exceeds a Blackbird. The color of the upper side is
of a Or brown, with a tincture of green.
dusky green, and shining like silk. The feathers growing on and between the
Shoulders, as also the quil-feathers next the body, and most of the
covert-feathers of the Wings are spotted on the edges with many white specks.
Those on the top of the Head and upper side of the Neck want these spots. [N.
B. That this Bird was a Female, for in the Males there are many and thick set
spots on the Head, so that they make up certain lines or strakes.] The
Circumference of the Eyes and the Chin are white. The Throat is white, and
spotted with brown. The feathers on the middle of the Back are blackish, with
white edges: Those next the Tail milk-white. The color also of the Breast and
whole Belly is purely white.

The quil-feathers, twenty four in each Wing, are all dusky, save only the
forementioned, three in number. The Tail is more than two inches long,
consisting of twelve feathers of feathers of almost equal length. The outmost
of these are wholly white; the next near their tips marked with a white spot.
The third in order from the outmost have one broad transverse white line not
far from the point; the fourth two; the fifth two and an half; the middlemost
three or four. The covert-feathers of the underside of the Wing are brown, with
white edges. The interior bastard wing makes a lovely show. For its feathers
being of a dark brown, or black color, are curiously varied with many white
lines, drawn not directly cross each feather, but obliquely, yet parallel one
to another in each Web of the feather, and by pairs concurring at the shaft in
an obtuse angle all along the length of the feather.

The Bill is an inch and half long, straight, slender, compressed at the sides,
of a dark green, black at the point: The upper Mandible a little longer than
the nether: The Tongue sharp, not cloven. The Eyes of a greater size, with
hazel-coloured Irides. The Legs are long, lead-coloured, with a tincture of
green: The Toes also long; the two outmost connected by a membrane almost to
the first joint: The backtoe little: The Claws black.

This is a solitary bird; yet in breeding time they fly two together, Male and
Female, about the banks of Pools, Lakes, and Rivers.

The Gallinula rhodopus or phoenicopus of Gesner, which he says the Germans
call Steingallel, differs from the Steingallel of Baltner in the color of the
Legs, which in Gesners Bird was like that of a Rose or Amethyst, in Baltners a
dirty green. But seeing the other notes agree, I judge it to be the same Bird,
different perchance in Sex: since (as Baltner has observed) in some of these
Birds the Sexes differ in the color of their feet.

. II. * The third Tringa of Aldrovand, called by the Italians, Giaroncello and
Pinirolo.
THe Bill of this is much blacker than that of the precedent, and a little
shorter; the upper Chap somewhat longer than the nether. It is the same for
shape of body, only somewhat different in colors: For whereas both are chiefly
of a dusky and chesnut-colour in the Head, Neck, Back, and Wings, that in all
these parts has more of dusky, this more of the other color. The Tail in like
manner, though it be something shorter, is white underneath, above approaches
to the same chestnut color. In the Breast, Belly, Thighs, Legs and Feet it
differs little or nothing.

. III. The lesser Tringa or Sandpiper: An Cinclus secundus seu minor Ornithol.
tom. 1. p. 492.
Aldrov? Gallinula hypoleucos Gesneri, Aldrov. tom. 3. page 469. Ein
Psisterlein Leon. Baltner.
IT weighs near two ounces; and is from Bill to Feet eight inches three
quarters in length.

The middle of the Neck is ash-colored, else the whole upper surface of the
body is of a dusky sordid green, elegantly variegated with darker transverse
lines; only there is something of red mingled with the feathers on the middle
of the Back, and those that spring out of the Shoulders. The Head is paler, not
varied with cross lines, but black strokes drawn downward along the shafts of
the feathers. The Sides, Breast, and Belly are white. Above the Eyes is a white
line. The Throat is of a sordid white, the shafts of the feathers being darker.
The three or four quil-feathers next to the body are of the same color with
the body: The outmost is dusky, [or dark brown] the inner edge of the second,
about the middle of the feathers length, has a spot of white: Of the rest to
the tenth the inner Webs in order have larger white spots. After the tenth the
white spreads beyond the shaft into the other Web of the feather. The tips
also of the feathers, from the fourteenth to the twentieth, are white. The
primary covert-feathers of the Wings, or those of the first row, as well the
upper, as the nether, have white tips: Of the upper, those especially from the
tenth to the twentieth: Of the nether, those next the body, which indeed are
wholly white, and not varied with lines. The ridge or base of the Wing is
white. The feathers of the third row are white almost to the bottom. But
between the third row and the basis of the Wing is a broad line of brown. The
middle feathers of the Tail are of the same color with the body: The third on
each side from the two middlemost have their tips white: The fourth are more
white: Of the fifth all the exterior Web is white, and a little also of the
interior: In the outmost the white spreads further into the interior Web.

The top of the Bill is of a dusky blackish color, the bottom whitish: The tip
a little bent downward: The Eyes hazel-coloured: The Ears great. The Feet of a
pale green: The Claws black. The outmost fore-toe joined at bottom to the
middle one by a membrane; the back-toe small: The Stomach less musculous than
in granivorous birds, in which dissected we found water-insects.

These are also solitary birds, living singly, except in breeding time, when
they fly together by pairs, the Male and his Female. I suppose this Bird is the
same with that Gesner describes under the title of Pilvenckegen, especially for
that he says it makes a noise by night, like one crying or lamenting, which
thing (as we have been informed) is true of our bird. Only it seems to be
something lesser, and of a darker color above. See Aldrovand. tom. 3. p. 485.

They frequent Rivers and Pools of water. I have seen of them about the River
Tame in Warwickshire, the Lake of Geneva, etc.

CHAP. VII. The Knot: Canuti regis avis. An Bellonii Callidrys nigra?
IT weighed four ounces and an half; from the tip of the Bill to the end of the
Feet was ten inches long; between the ends of the Wings stretched out twenty
inches broad.

As for the color, the Head and Back were of a dusky ash color, or dark gray:
The Rump varied with white and black lines: The Breast and Belly white: The
sides under the Wings spotted with brown. [In some Birds we observed a white
line between the Eyes and the Bill.]

The greater quil-feathers of the Wings were black, with white shafts: The
outer edges of the next after the fifth white: Of the second row of
Wing-feathers, the foremost were black, with white tips: From the fourth the
white increased, or spread it self further down the feather. The lesser
covert-feathers of the Wings were of the same color with the back, only
fringed as it were with white. The Tail was two inches and a quarter long, made
up of twelve feathers, the outmost whereof on each side was white.

The Bill was near an inch and half long, black, as in the Woodcock; bigger and
stronger than in the Snipe-kind: The Tongue extended to the very end of the
Bill. [Some Birds have a knob or eminency under the Bill like Gulls.] The Eyes
great, and hazel-coloured. The feet greenish: The back-toe small: The fore-toes
divided from the very beginning of the divarication, no membrane intervening.
The Liver divided into two Lobes, with a Gall appendant.

About the beginning of Winter they are said to come into Lincolnshire, where
they continue two or three months about the Sea-shores, and away again. They
fly in flocks. [In the month of February, in the year of our Lord 1671, on the
Coast of Lancashire about Leverpool, I observed many of this sort of birds
flying in company; so that they are not peculiar to Lincolnshire.] Being fed
with white bread and milk they grow very fat, and are accounted excellent meat.
King Knout is reported to have been so fond of them, that from him they got the
name of Knots or Knouts.

They may at first sight be easily distinguished from the Tringae by the line
of white cross their Wings, were other notes wanting.

CHAP. VIII. The Ruff, whose Female is called a Reeve. Avis pugnax Tom. 3. p.
413.
Aldrov.
THat we described was a young one. It weighed five ounces: Its length from the
tip of the Bill to the end of the Feet was fifteen inches. Its Neck was
ash-colored: Its Head of a dusky ash color, spotted with a dark brown. The
Back and scapular feathers parti-colored, of cinereous, black, and white: The
Breast and Belly white: The Throat white and cinereous: The Chin white. The
outmost ten Wing-feathers of the first row were black: Of the following the
tips began to be white: From the fourteenth to the twentieth the edges were
also white. The five next the body were of the same color with it, having
darker spots. The tips of the second row of Wing-feathers were white (of the
foremost more obscurely) the remaining part of the same color with the Back.
The covert-feathers of the under side of the Wing were white. Those of the
exterior bastard wing purely white. The Tail was two inches a quarter long,
made up of twelve feathers, of a dusky color, with whitish tips.

In the Cock birds a circle or collar of long feathers, something resembling a
Ruff, encompasses the Neck under the Head, whence they took the name of Ruffs.
This shaft in some is white, in some yellow, in some black, in some
ash-colored, in some of a deep blue, or black, with a gloss of blue shining
like silk. For there is wonderful and almost infinite variety in the colors of
the feathers of the Cocks, so that in the Springtime there can scarce be found
any two exactly like one to another. After Midsummer, when they have moulted
their feathers they say they become all alike again.

The Hens are somewhat less than the Cocks; they change not their colors, and
are like the Bird here described: They seldom or never fight.

Their Bills are like the Tringa's, black, but somewhat red about the
Nosthrils. The upper Mandible a little longer than the nether. The Tongue
reaches to the end of the Bill. The Eyes are hazel-coloured. The Legs from
yellow incline to red: The back-toe small: The outmost fore-toe joined to the
middlemost below with a membrane: The Claws black, pretty long, and almost
straight. The Stomach within yellow: The Gall large.

They breed in Summertime in the Fens of Lincolnshire about Crowland. They are
fatted with white bread and milk, like Knots, being shut up in close dark
rooms: For let in but the light upon them, presently they fall a fighting,
never giving over till one has killed the other, especially if any body stand
by. The Fowlers when they see them intent upon fighting, spread their Nets over
them, and catch them before they be aware.

In the Spring time they come over also to the Low Countries: And it is
reported, that at their first coming in the beginning of the Spring there are
many more Cocks than Hens, but that they never cease fighting till there be so
many Cocks killed, as to make the number of both Sexes equal.

The Hens never have any Ruffs, the Cocks have none immediately after moulting
time. When they begin to moult, white Tumors or Warts break out about their
Eyes and Head.

CHAP. IX. The Sanderling, called also Curwillet about Pensance in Cornwall.
IT is something bigger than the Sand-piper, though both take their names from
sand. It weighs almost two ounces. Its length from the Bill to the end of the
Feet is eight inches and an half, to the end of the Tail eight. The breadth of
the Wings spread sixteen. It is rather long than round-bodied.

Its Bill is straight, black, slender, an inch long; for its figure and make
like to a Tringa's Bill: The upper Mandible a little longer than the nether.
The Tongue extended to the end of the Bill: The Nosthrils oblong. The Ears
great. The Legs, Feet, and Claws black: And, which is especially remarkable, it
wants the back-toe: The fore-toes disjoined from the very rise.

The Head is small, parti-colored of cinereous and black. The Neck more
cinereous. The middle of the Back, the Shoulders, and scapular feathers are of
a lovely color, in some various, of black and white; in others of black and
ash color, each feather being black about the shaft, and cinereous about the
edges. The rest of the Back to the Tail is of the same color, but more faint
and dilute. But the edges of the feathers have more of a reddish ash color.

Each Wing has twenty two quil-feathers: The four outmost (excepting the
shafts, which are white) all of a dark brown, or dusky color. The rest have
their upper halves, as far as they appear, above the second row brown, the
lower white. Howbeit, these colors do not divide all the feathers equally, but
from the fifth the white is gradually increased, so that in the twentieth it
takes up almost the whole feather. The next following after the tenth have also
their tips white. The first row of covertfeathers [next the quils] have white
tips, which when the Wing is spread make a long transverse white line, broader
and broader by degrees from the beginning. The feathers near the ridge of the
Wing, and on the outmost joint, are all dusky, in the Cocks almost black, of
the same color with the middle of the Back. The Wings, when closed, reach as
far or further than the Tail it self; which is short, of about an inch and
half, or two inches, consisting of twelve feathers, of an ash color: The two
middlemost darker than the rest, and almost black.

The whole Belly and underside of the Wings as white as Snow. The Breast in
some spotted or clouded with brown; in others (perhaps these are the Males) no
spots appear, yet the Breast is darker than the Belly, and inclined to red. The
blind guts are an inch and half long. The Stomach not very musculous. These
birds live upon the sandy shores of the Sea, and fly in flocks. We saw many of
them on the Seacoasts of Cornwall.

CHAP. X. * The Rotknussel of Baltner, Rotkmillis or Gallinula Melampus of
Gesner, Lib. 20. cap. 45.
Aldrov.
THe German name Rotkmillis (says Gesner) seems to be compounded of the
color. For this Bird is of a red or russet color, with dusky spots in the
Neck and about the Eyes. But Kmillis (I know not whence derived) is a more
common or general word; since another Water-hen of this kind is also called
Matkmillis. We from the color of the Legs have imposed on it the name
Melampus, which signifies Black-soot. For there is no bird I know of this kind
that has blacker feet. The body is dusky, with some spots of a sordid and dark
color. The Bill also is black: The Wings marked with black spots.

To this Bird (says Aldrovand) that which I here give you, called by our
Fowlers Giarola, a name common to many birds, is very like, if not the same.
For on the Head, Neck, and Breast, down to the middle of the Belly it is red,
sprinkled with brown, and sometimes also white spots. Its Feet [and Legs] are
cole-black. The small Wing-feathers are distinguished with cinereous and black:
The great ones are black. The Bill is long, and a little bending, sharp at
point. The Belly is white, with a tincture of red, and curiously spotted with
black spots. The Tail also is white, but black at the end.

CHAP. XI. * Matkneltzel of Baltner: Gallinula Erythra of Gesner.
THis Bird the Germans call Matkern, but for what reason (says Gesner) I know
not. I from the color of its whole body have called it Erythra. But though
almost the whole body (I except the Belly, which is whitish, with a faint
tincture of red, and the Legs, which are ash-colored) be red, yet is that
redness darker on the Back, and intercepted with white spots: Brighter in some
of the Wing-feathers; the longest whereof approach to the color of red Oker.
In the Neck beneath are some white specks. The Bill is black, not without
somewhat of red, shorter than in most others of this kind. It is taken among
Reeds with snares. It has a cry somewhat resembling the sound of Fullers
striking of Wool.

Leonard Baltner describes his Matkneltzel (if at least it be the same bird
with Gesners Matkern) thus: It is a very fair beautiful bird. From the tip of
the Bill to the end of the Claws it is a full Strasburgh Ell long. It weighs
six Lots and an half, that is, three ounces a quarter: For a Lot is about half
an ounce. It Guts are an Ell long. It frequents Waters, and seeks its meat in
watery places. The Cocks are adorned with beautiful feathers, like those of
Partridges, and have pale-red Feet. The feathers of the Hens are less
beautiful, and their Feet gray. Some also weigh thirteen Lots, and are three
quarters of a Ell long. These birds in figure, magnitude, and color do very
nearly resemble the Female RUFFS, which they call REEVES. Whether they be the
same or not let the Virtuosi at Strasburgh, where they are found, examine.

CHAP. XII. The North-Country Dunlin of Mr. Johnson.
IT is about the bigness of the Jack-Snipe or Judcock, has a straight,
channell'd, black Bill, a little broader at the end; oblong Nosthrils; a
blackish Tongue. The Throat and Breast white, spotted with black. The middle of
the Belly is blackish, waved with white lines. The lower Belly, and feathers
under the Tail white. All the upper side is red, every where spotted with
pretty great black spots with a little white. Yet the Wings from a Caesio.
gray incline to a brown or dusky color. The Legs and Feet are of a
Longiuscula, i. e. rather of the longest.
competent length, and black. The back-toe the shortest. The Tail consists of
twelve feathers, of which the two middlemost are dusky [brown] with one or two
red spots: the rest from brown incline to white. It gets its food out of the
mud.

The Rotknussel or Gallinula melampus of Gesner and Aldrovand differs not much
from this bird.

CHAP. XIII.
. I. The Stint, which the French call the Sea-Lark: Schoeniclos seu Junco
Bellonii: An Cinclus prior Aldrov?
IT is equal to the common Lark, or but very little less: For the shape of its
body like to a Snipe. From Bill to Feet eight inches and an half long. Its Bill
is straight, slender, black, an inch and half long, and like to a Snipes bill.
The Tongue extended to the end of the Bill. The Feet dusky or blackish, with a
tincture of green. The toes not joined by any membrane. The back-toe small. The
color of the upper side of the body, excepting the prime feathers of the
Wings, and first row of coverts, is gray, or cinereous, with black spots, or
lines in the middle of each single feather. The feathers in the middle of the
Back and upper side of the Wings have a tincture of red. [Mr. Willughby
describes it a little differently thus: The middle parts of the feathers on the
Head are black, the edges red or russet. The Neck is more of an ash color. The
Back-feathers of a Or black with a purple gloss.
dark purple, with reddish ash-colored edges. Those on the Rump of a lighter
red, with black lines or strokes down their shafts.]

The Wings are long, and when folded up reaching to the end of the Tail. The
quil-feathers of each Wing twenty four, of a dusky color as far as they appear
above the covert-feathers, for their bottoms are white, and the interior in
order gradually more than the exterior to the nineteenth, which is almost
wholly white. [Mr. Willughby in the bird he described observed the tips of the
second row of Wing-feathers to have been also white, in the same proportion as
in the Sanderling, making together a white line cross the Wing, yet narrower
than in that. The exterior edges of the fifth, counting from the outmost, and
of the subsequent to the eleventh are white. The four next the body are wholly
dusky, and by little and little straightened into sharp points, and when the
Wing is closed reach almost to the end of the Tail. The Tail is scarce two
inches long, not forked, made up of twelve feathers, of which the two
middlemost are longer than the rest, sharper pointed also, and darker-coloured.
All the rest are of a pale ash color, without any cross lines or bars, only
their outmost edges whitish. All the under-side of the body is white, only the
Throat and upper part of the Breast clouded a little with dark-colored spots.
Mr. Willughby observed small brown spots under the Wings, and the Throat to be
of an ash color, thick-set with black spots, down sometimes to the Breast.

The Liver divided into two Lobes, of which the right is much the bigger. The
Stomach musculous.

These Birds live about the Sea-shores, and fly together in flocks. At
Westchester they call them Purres.

Bellonius his description of his Junco agrees in all points with this bird.
His figure represents the Bill too short. The Bill of the Cinclus also in
Aldrovands figure is drawn too short.

. II. * The third Cinclus of Lib. 20. cap. 56.
Aldrovand.
IT is of the same colors with the precedent, save that it has a white Tail,
adorned with transverse black lines: It has also the same shape and make of
body. It differs in the Bill; for that has it of almost an even bigness, this
thicker where it is joined to the Head, and by degrees slenderer to the tip. It
seems also to differ in the Legs, they being somewhat longer and thicker. In
bigness it agrees, and has also a common name with it, being called by our
[the Bolognese] Fowlers, Giaroncello.

CHAP. XIV. The Stone-Curlew: The Oedicnemus of Bellonius: Charadrius of
Gesner, Lib. 13. c. 15.
Aldrov. called at Rome, Curlotte.
ITs weight is eighteen ounces: Its length from Bill to Tail eighteen inches,
to the points of the Claws twenty: Its breadth from tip to tip of the Wings
extended thirty six inches. The length of the Bill, measuring from the tip to
the angles of the mouth, two inches. The Bill is not much unlike a Gulls, but
straight, sharp-pointed, black as far as the Nosthrils, then yellow. The Irides
of the Eyes and edges of the Eyelids are yellow. Under the Eyes is a bare
space of a yellowish green color. The Legs are long and yellow. The Claws
small and black. It has only three fore-toes, wanting the back-toe. The
outmost Toe a little longer than the middlemost; All joined together by a
certain membrane, which on the inside the middle toe begins at the second
joint, on the outside at the first, and reaches almost to the Claws of the
outer Toes. The Legs (as Bellonius observes) are very thick below the Knees, as
if they were swollen, by reason of the bones, which are there great; wherefore
that he might render the Bird more easy to be known, he named it, Oedicnemus.
The upper Legs are above half way bare of feathers; which note alone, were
there no other, argues this Bird to be a Waterfowl. The Chin, Breast, and
Thighs are white: The Throat, Neck, Back, and Head covered with feathers,
having their middle parts black, their lateral or borders of a reddish
ash color, like that of a Curlew: Whence they of Norfolk call it, The
Stone-Curlew.

In each Wing are about twenty nine quil-feathers; the first and second of
which have a transverse white spot, else their exterior surface black: The
four next to these black: The three following have their bottoms and tips
white: Then succeed thirteen black ones; the last or next to the body are of
the same color with it. The first feathers of the second row are black: The
rest have white tips, and under the tips a cross line or border of black. In
the lesser rows of Wing-feathers is a transverse bed or bar of white. The
coverts of the under-side of the Wings, especially those springing from the
shoulders, are purely white. The outmost feathers of the Tail for the space of
an inch are black, then white: The next to these, one on each side, are
variegated, with one or two brown bars crossing the white part: The rest, the
white by degrees fading and disappearing, become of the same color with the
body. The tips of the middlemost are a little black. The Tail is five inches
long, consisting of twelve feathers. The guts great: The blind guts three
inches long: The single umbilical blind gut half an inch. We bought this bird
in the Market at Rome, and there described it.

It breeds very late in the year (says Bellonius) for we found of the Young
about the end of October, which could not yet fly. Bellonius when he traveled
first in England, observed this Bird here; for the feathers and the Feet very
like to a Bustard.

The learned and famous Sir Thomas Brown Knight, Physician in Norwich, informed
us, that it is found about Thetford in Norfolk, where they call it the
Stone-Curlew, and that its cry is something like that of a green Plover.

Another bird congenerous to this, wanting also the back-toe, (which
Aldrovandus described from the intuition of a bare Picture) but different in
that its Thighs are feathered, and its Toes without any intermediate membrane,
see in his Ornithology, Book 13. Chap. 15. I suspect it to be the same with the
Oedicnemus, and those different notes to be but mistakes of the Painter.

The Charadrios of Gesner, which Aldrovand judges to be the same with our
Oedicnemus, The Charadrios of Gesner.
is a foolish and stupid bird. Being shut up in any room, it walks up and down,
sometimes in a round about a Pillar or any other thing for a long time, and if
any block or impediment be in its way it will rather leap over it, than decline
from the right way. It winks not.
It shuts not its Eyes though you put your finger to them. It is easily made
tame, for when it is at liberty in the fields it is not much afraid of a man.
It is a Waterfowl, and lives in fenny Meadows, or about Marshes. In houses
also it catches Mice in the night time. I hear that it abounds in the Low
Countries, that it wanders up and down in the night, and makes a noise like a
Whistle, or Pipe.

SECTION VI. Cloven-footed Waterfowl with short Bills, that feed upon Insects.
CHAP. I. The Lapwing or Bastard Plover: Capella sive Vannellus.
THis Bird is in all Countries very well known; and every where to be met with.
In the North of England they call it the Tewit, from its cry. It is of the
bigness of a common Pigeon, of eight ounces weight; thirteen inches and an half
length, measuring from Bill to Claws, and not much less from Bill to Tail: Its
breadth, taken between the tips of the Wings spread out, is twenty one inches.

The top of the Head above the Crest is of a shining black. The Crest springs
from the hind part of the Head, and consists of about twenty feathers, of which
the three or four foremost are longer than the rest, in some birds of near four
inches length. The Cheeks are white; only a black line drawn under the Eyes
through the Ears. The whole Throat or under side of the Neck, from the Bill to
the Breast is black, which black part somewhat resembles a Crescent, ending in
horns on each side the Neck. The Breast and Belly are white: As are also the
covert feathers of the underside of the Wings. The feathers under the Tail are
of a lovely (...) spadi^^ae.
bright bay: Those above the Tail are of a deeper bay: The feathers next them
are dusky, with a certain splendor. The middle of the Back and the scapular
feathers are of a delicate shining green, adorned with a purple spot on each
side next the Wings. The utmost edges of the tips of the middlemost of the long
scapular feathers are whitish. The Neck also is of an ash color, with a
mixture of red and some black lines near the Crest.

Of the master-feathers of the Wing the three or four outmost are black, with
white tips: The following to the eleventh are black. From the eleventh they are
white at bottom, the hindmost more and more in order than the foremost. Yet
this white does not appear in the upper side of the Wing, but is hid by the
covert-feathers. Those next the body from the twenty first are green. The
lesser covert-feathers are beautified with purple, blue, and green colors,
variously commixt. The outmost feather of the Tail on each side is white,
saving a black spot in the exterior Web. The tips of all the rest are white,
and beneath the tips the upper half black, and the lower white. The Bill is
black, hard, roundish, of an inch length. The upper Mandible a little more
produced: The Tongue not cloven; but its sides reflected upwards make a channel
in the middle. The Nosthrils oblong, and furnished with a flexile bone. The
Ears seem to be situate lower in this than other Birds: The Eyes are
hazel-coloured.

The Feet are long, reddish [in some Birds brown.] The back-toe small. The
outmost of the fore-toes joined to the middle one at the bottom.

The liver is large, divided into two Lobes, with a Gall annexed. The Gizzard
not so thick and fleshy as in granivorous birds, therein we found Beetles like
to Mealworms. It is infested with Lice like the Tetrao.

The Hen is a little lesser than the Cock: Her throat is all white as low as
the That black ring, representing a crescent, we spoke of.
collar: The bay color under the Tail paler. Moreover, the outmost feather of
the Tail is wholly white, wanting that brown spot. The colors also in the
Cocks do somewhat vary, not answering always exactly in all things to our
description.

It lays four or five Eggs, of a dirty yellow, all over painted with great
black spots and strokes. It builds its Nest on the ground, in the middle of
some field or heath, open, and exposed to view, laying only some few straws or
bents under the Eggs, that the Nest be not seen. The Eyes being so like in
color to the ground on which they lie, it is not easy to find them though
they lie so open. The Young so soon as they are hatched instantly forsake the
Nest, running away (as the common tradition is) with the shells upon their
heads, for they are covered with a thick Down, and follow the old ones like
Chickens. They say, that a Lapwing the further you are from her Nest, the more
clamorous she is, and the greater coil she keeps, the nearer you are to it, the
quieter she is, and less concerned she seems: That she may draw you away from
the true place, and induce you to think it is where it is not.

These Birds are wont to be kept in Gardens in the Summer time, in which they
do good service in gathering up and clearing the ground of Worms and other
Insects. Their flesh is indifferent good meat. In Summer time they scatter
themselves about the Country to breed: In Winter time they accompany together,
and fly in flocks.

CHAP. II. Of the Plover: De Pluviali seu Pardale.
. I. The green Plover. Pluvialis viridis.
IN bigness it equals or exceeds the Lapwing, weighing about nine ounces; being
in length from Bill to Tail eleven inches, in breadth between the tips of the
Wings extended twenty four.

Its color on the top of the Head, Neck, Shoulders, Back, and in general the
whole upper side is black, thick set with yellowish green spots. If you heed
each single feather, you will find the middle part to be black, the borders or
edges round about spotted with a yellowish green color. The Head for the bulk
of the body is greater than in the Fringae; the Bill straight, black, of an
inch length, furrowed about the Nosthrils. The Neck short, equal to a Lapwings.
The Breast brown, spotted with a yellowish green. The belly white, yet the
feathers on the sides tipped with brown, and crossed also with brown lines.

Of the quil-feathers in each Wing the eleventh ends in a blunt point, those
before it running out into sharp points on the outside the shaft, those behind
it on the inside. All but the five next the body are brown. The shafts of the
outmost eight or nine are half way white. The exterior edges of the fifth, and
those following it, are a little white toward their bottoms. The inmost five
next the body are of the same color with the Back. The second row of
Wing-feathers are brown, [or dusky] with white tips. The rest of the
covert-feathers are on the upper side of the Wing of the same color with the
Back, on the under-side with the Belly. The Tail is short, made up of twelve
feathers, of the same color with the Back, when spread terminated in a
circular circumference.

The Feet and Claws are black. It wants the back-toe: By which note alone it is
abundantly distinguished from the other birds of its kind. Its Legs are long,
as in all other birds which live about waters, and bare of feathers for some
space above the knees. Its flesh is sweet and tender, and therefore highly
esteemed, and accounted a choice dish, as well in England as beyond Seas.

This Bird from its spots, something resembling those of a Leopard, is called
Pardalis.

. II. The gray Plover: Pluvialis cinerea, called at Venice, Squatarola.
IT is from Bill to Tail twelve inches long, to the Claws fourteen: Between the
tips of the Wings spread twenty four inches broad. Its Head, Back, and lesser
coverts of the Wings are black, with tips of a greenish gray. The Chin is
white; the Throat spotted with oblong, brown [or dusky) spots. The Breast,
Belly, and Thighs white.

The quil-feathers in each Wing about twenty six: Of which the first or outmost
are black: In the fourth the middle part of the outer edges is white, the white
part in the five following being enlarged gradually. The outmost of the second
row of Wing-feathers are also black. The tips of those next after the fourth
are white, and the edges too after the tenth. Of the third row the foremost ten
are black, with white tips. The Tail is three inches long, not forked, varied
with transverse bars, or beds of black and white.

Its Bill is black, above an inch long, like to the rest of this kind: The
Tongue not cloven: The back-toe very small: The fore-toes joined by a membrane
at the beginning of their divarication; that between the middle and inmost
lesser: The Feet of a sordid green: The Claws little and black. It has a Gall.

The flesh also of this Bird is very tender, savoury, and delicate; and in no
less esteem than that of the former.

CHAP. III. The Dottrel: Morinellus Anglorum.
THe Males in this kind are lesser than the Females, at least they were so in
those we happened to see: For it might fall out to be so among them by some
accident. The Female was almost ten inches long, the Male but nine and an half;
the Female nineteen inches and an half broad, the Male but eighteen three
quarters: The Female weighed more than four ounces; the Male scarce three and
an half. The Bill, measuring from the tip to the angles of the mouth, was an
inch long: The Head elegantly variegated with white and black spots, the middle
part of each single feather being black. Above the Eyes was a long whitish
line: The Chin whitish. The Throat is of a pale cinereous or whitish color,
with oblong brown spots. The Breast and underside of the Wings of a dirty
yellowish color, the Belly white. Each Wing has about twenty five prime
feathers, of which the first or outmost is the longest, the tenth the shortest;
from the tenth to the twentieth they are almost equal: The rest to the twenty
fourth are again longer the foregoing than the following. The first or
Pinion-quil has a broad, strong, white shaft: The three outmost are blacker
than the rest, which are of a dusky [or brown] color, having the edges of
their tips whitish. The lesser rows of the Wing-feathers are brown, with
yellowish white tips, but those next the quils blackest. The middle of the Back
between the Wings is almost of the same color with them. The Rump and Neck are
more Gray.
cinereous. The Tail is composed of twelve feathers, two inches and an half
long, but the middlemost something the longer: The bottoms of all are
cinereous, the tips white, the remaining part black: In the outmost feather the
white part is broader, in the middle ones narrower: The edges also of the
outmost feathers are whitish. The Legs are bare for a little space above the
Knees, of a sordid or greenish yellow; the Toes and Claws darker colored than
the Legs. The inner Toe joined to the middle only at bottom, the outer by a
thick membrane as far as its first joint. It wants the backtoe, wherein it
agrees with the green Plover, from which yet it is sufficiently distinguished
by its color, magnitude, and other accidents. Its Bill is straight, black, and
in figure like that of the Plover. It has a fleshy stomach, in which dissected
we found fragments of Beetles, etc. Its guts were fourteen inches and an half
long. The Cock and Hen can scarce be known asunder, they are so like in shape,
and color.

It is a very foolish bird (says Dr. Key in his Letter to Gesner) but
excellent meat, and with us accounted a great delicacy. It is taken in the
night time by the light of a Candle, by imitating the gestures of the Fowler:
For if he stretches out an Arm, that also stretches out a Wing; if he a Foot,
that likewise a Foot: In brief, whatever the Fowler does, the same does the
Bird; and so being intent upon men's gestures it is deceived, and covered with
the Net spread for it. I call it Morinellus for two reasons, first, because it
is frequent among the Flemmings.
Morini: And next, because it is a foolish bird, even to a Proverb, we calling
a foolish dull person a Dotterel.

Of the catching of Dotterels, my very good Friend Mr. Peter Dent, an
Apothecary in Cambridge, a Person well skilled in the History of Plants and
Animals, whom I consulted concerning it, wrote thus to me. A Gentleman of
Norfolk, where this kind of sport is very common, told me, that to catch
Dotterels six or seven persons usually go in company. When they have found the
Birds, they set their Net in an advantageous place; and each of them holding a
stone in either hand get behind the Birds, and striking their stones often one
against another rouse them, which are naturally very sluggish; and so by
degrees coup them, and drive them into the Net. The Birds being awakened do
often stretch themselves, putting out a Wing or a Leg, and in imitation of them
the men that drive them thrust out an Arm or a Leg for fashion sake, to comply
with an old custom. But he thought that this imitation did not conduce to the
taking of them, for that they seemed not to mind or regard it.

CHAP. IV. The Sea-Lark: Charadrius sive Hiaticula.
IN bigness it somewhat exceeds the common Lark: From the point of the Bill to
the end of the Tail or Legs (for they are equally extended) being eight inches
and an half long, a line of black compasses the base of the upper Bill. This
black line from the corners of the mouth is produced through the Eyes as far as
the Ears, and then turns up and passes cross the middle of the Head,
encompassing a broad bed or fillet of white drawn from the inner corner of one
Eye to the inner corner of the other. The hinder part of the Head is
ash-colored: The Chin white. The Neck encompassed by a double ring or collar,
the upper white, which underneath reaches as far as the Bill, and under the
Chin is dilated almost to the Eyes; the lower black, which is broader in the
middle, and takes up part of the Breast, before also runs out toward the Bill.
The Back and lesser covert feathers of the Wings are Or gray.
ash-colored. The Breast and Belly white.

The outmost of the quil-feathers of the Wings is black, on the middle of the
shaft only spotted with white, which color spreads it self gradually and
continually more and more in the following feathers, insomuch that the
twentieth and twenty first are wholly white. Those next the body are of the
same color with the Back. The feathers of the second row have white tips,
excepting the foremost or outmost. Hence, and from the white of the first row
arises a long transverse white line in the Wings. The outmost feather of the
Tail on each side is white, as also the tip and exterior half of the next; of
the three following only the tips: The two middlemost are of the same color
with the Back, or a little darker. The Tail is two inches and an half long,
made up of twelve feathers, of which the outmost are the longest, of the rest
the interior are a little shorter in order than the exterior. [The
Tail-feathers in diverse birds vary in color, for in some the two outmost
feathers are wholly white, and the tips also of the middlemost.]

The Bill is short, scarce an inch in length, of two colors: For beneath
toward the Head it is of a deep yellow or gold-colour more than half way,
toward the point black. The upper Mandible a little longer, and somewhat
crooked. [In others (perhaps they were young ones) we observed the whole Bill
to be black.] The Tongue is not divided: The Eyes are hazel-coloured: The Legs
and Feet of a pale yellow: The Claws black. It wants the back-toe. The outmost
of the fore-toes is joined to the middlemost by a membrane reaching to the
first joint. The Stomach has not very thick muscles, in it dissected we found
Beetles. The Gallbladder is large.

It builds on the Sea-rocks, making its Nest of grass, straws, and stalks of
Plants: Its Eggs are of a greenish color, spotted with brown, all the blunt
end being dusky. It runs very swiftly on the shores, and makes short flights,
singing or crying continually as it flies. It is with us in England every where
very common upon the Seacoasts. We saw it also about the Lake of Geneva, and
it has been brought to us killed upon the banks of the River Trent, not far
from Notingham.

This Bird is the very same which Marggravius describes, Book 5. Chap. 5. by
the name of Matuitui, as he says the Brasilians call it, as will clearly
appear to him that shall but compare them together. So that it seems there are
some Birds common to Europe, and even the Southern part of America. Leonard
Baltner describes and pictures two sorts of this bird. Perchance his lesser
kind is that which the Welsh call Goligod, and say is like a Sea-Lark, but less.

CHAP. V. The Turn-stone, or Sea-Dottrel: Morinellus marinus of Sir Thomas
Brown. An Cinclus Turneri?
IT is lesser than a Plover, and something bigger than a Blackbird: in length
from the tip of the Bill to the points of the Claws ten inches: In breadth
between the extremities of the Wings extended twenty. It is long-bodied, and
has but an indifferent Head. The Cocks and Hens differ not in colors. Its
Bill is straight, black, an inch long, from a thick base lessening by degrees
into a sharp point, something flat, stronger and stiffer than in the Woodcock
kind.

The color of the Plumage in the Head, Neck, Shoulders, Wings, and upper part
of the Breast is brown. [Mr. Willughby makes the feathers covering these parts
to be black, or purplish black in the middle, cinereous, or of a white russet
about the edges.] All the under-side, but the Breast, is as white as snow. The
Plumage on the middle of the Back is white; but on the very Rump is a great,
transverse, black spot. The long scapular feathers are brown, with edges of an
ash color, or dirty white. The quil-feathers of the Wings are about twenty
six, of a brown or dusky color: But from the outmost three or four their
bottoms are white, continually more and more, till in the nineteenth and
twentieth the white spreads almost over the whole feather. In the second row
the foremost feathers are wholly black: The tips of the following being white,
together make a broad line of white cross the Wing. The edges of the lesser
rows are red. Near the second joint of the Wing is a white spot. The Tail is
two inches and an half long, consisting of twelve feathers, of which the lower
half is white, the upper black, yet the very tips white.

The Legs are short, of a Saffron or Orange color. The Claws black: The Toes
divided almost to the bottom, but the outmost and middle toe coupled by a
membrane as far as the first joint. It has the back-toe.

The Liver is divided into two Lobes, of which the That on the right side.
dexter is much the bigger. I found no Gall, yet dare not say that it wants
one. Upon the Western shores of England, about Pensans in Cornwall, and
Aberdaren in Merioneth-shire in Wales, we observed many of them, where they fly
three or four in company: Nor are they less frequent on the Seacoasts of
Norfolk.

Our honored Friend Sir Thomas Brown of Norwich sent us the Picture of this
bird by the title of the Sea-Dottrel.

CHAP. VI. * The first Junco of Book 10. Chap. 55.
Aldrovand.
IT is of the bigness of a Sparrow, has a black, channelled Bill, sufficiently
hard, and crooked at the end; the Tongue also channelled, and at the tip hard,
and cloven. The upper part of the Head, Neck, and the Belly are of a
chesnutcolour. All the underside of the Neck and Breast white. All the other
parts of the body from Are of a dark brown.
dusky incline to black. The Tail is three inches long, consisting of ten
feathers: The Legs and Feet dusky. The Cock differs from the Hen only in this,
that in her the colors are more dull, in him more lively.

To this Aldrovand adds another, which being altogether of the same bigness,
the same shape and fashion of body, and make of Bill and Feet, he thinks to be
of kin to it, but to differ only in color. For its Throat and Breast indeed
are white, but its whole Belly from cinereous inclines to dusky [or brown.] The
rest of the Plumage is dusky.

BOOK III. PART. II. Birds of a middle nature between Swimmers and Waders, or
that do both Swim and Wade.
Of these there be two kinds, the one of cloven-footed Birds that swim, the
other of whole-footed with long Legs.
SECTION I. Cloven-footed Birds that swim in the Water.
I. Such whose Toes have no lateral membranes, called WATER-HENS.
CHAP. I. Of Water-hens or More-hens in general.
THe Characteristic notes of Water-hens or More-hens, by which they may be
distinguished from other kinds of Birds, are a small Head, a slender,
compressed, or narrow Body: A short Bill, moderately bending; short concave
Wings, like to Hens; a very short Tail; long Legs; very long Toes: Short
flights.

They are called i. e. Little Hens.
Gallinulae by modern Writers, a diminutive word from Gallina, which signifies
a Hen, for the likeness of their bodies, (especially their Bills and Wings) and
conditions to Hens.

CHAP. II. Of Water-hens in particular.
. I. The common Water-hen or More-hen: Gallinula chloropus major Aldrovandi.
IN shape of body it is like a Coot, but smaller: Narrow-bodies, or very much
compressed sideways (which is common to all this kind) contrary to the
Duck-kind, whose bodies are broad, flat and depressed. The Hen weighed twelve
ounces, the Cock fifteen. The length of the Hen from the point of the Bill to
the end of the Feet was more than seventeen inches, to the end of the Tail
thirteen and an half; of the Cock fourteen and an half. The extremes of the
Wings extended were twenty two inches and an half distant.

The Bill from the tip to the corners of the mouth was more than an inch long,
The Bill.
straight, or but little bending: The nether Chap, as far as the angle, of a
pale yellow, then red; the upper less yellow at the end; about the Nosthrils,
and to the end of the bald part red. The bald part is round, and ends at the
top of the Head, being like that of a Coot, save that the Coots is white, but
this birds red. The redness on the Bill is as it were plaistered on, and may be
scraped off. The red part of the Bill is separated from the yellow by a round
circumference a little elevated, so that in the middle of the Bill it is
produced further than on the sides. The Tongue is pretty broad, The Tongue,
Eyes,
not cloven, rough at the end. The Irides of the Eyes are red. The lower
Eyelid is not feathered. [In the young birds neither the Bill, nor the bald
spot in the forehead are red.] The Legs are green: The Claws of a dark brown,
near black, indifferently Legs, Claws, Toes,
long. The Toes long, as in the Coot; the middle the longest, next the outmost,
all broader and plainer below than in the other cloven-footed birds for the use
of swimming: The back-toe broad, as in Coots, serving them perchance as a
Rudder, to steer and direct their course. The Legs are feathered almost down to
the knees, between the feathers and the joint marked with a red spot.

From the Shoulders or setting on of the Wing all along its base or ridge, and
to the The color of the feathers.
very ends of the feathers runs a line of white. The longer feathers under the
Wings are curiously adorned with white spots, or lines tending downwards. The
Breast is of a lead-colour: The Belly inclining to gray or ash color. Under
the Tail are white feathers; as it swims or walks it often flirts up its Tail,
and shows the white, especially when it puts down its head to pick up any
thing. The Back and lesser rows of Wing feathers approach to a Rusty.
ferrugineous color: Else it is all over blackish. In the Male the feathers
under the Tail are whiter, the Belly more Ash-colored or gray.
cinereous, and the Back more ferrugineous.

Its Liver is small; Gallbladder great; the Gall within being of a greenish
black The Liver and Gall. Its flesh good meat. Its food.
color. It will feed very fat. Its flesh is well tasted, and even comparable
to that of Teal. It gets its food on grassie banks and borders near Waters, and
in the very Waters, especially if they be weedy: Feeding (I suppose) upon the
water-Insects it finds among the weeds. It builds upon low trees and shrubs by
the water side; breeding twice or thrice in a Summer, and when its young ones
are grown up it drives Its breeding,
them away to shift for themselves. Its Eggs are sharp at one end, white, with
a tincture Eggs,
of green, spotted with reddish spots. It strikes with its Bill like a Hen: It
sits Manners,
upon boughs, but those only that are thick and near the water. It lives about
Motes Place.
and great Pools of water near Gentlemen's houses. It flies with its Feet
hanging down.

. II. The other green-footed Water-hen of Aldrovand, perchance our Water-Rail.
THis Bird from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail is almost eighteen
inches long. It has a Bill two inches long, both above and underneath for some
space yellow, the remaining part being black. The Neck and Head are black: The
Back and upper part of the Wings of a chesnut-colour: The nether part of a dark
cinereous: Only the extremes of the Wings are white. The lower Belly also is
almost all white. On the sides toward the Wings it is covered with thick
feathers. The Tail ends The Latin is in anum, but I suppose it is misprinted
for in acutum.
sharp, being above of a chesnut-colour, underneath white. The Thighs are
covered with ash-colored feathers, [varied lightly with transverse white
borders, not altogether down to the Knees.] The Legs are green: The Toes long,
furnished with Claws a little crooked, broad, and plain underneath; perhaps
that it may swim with them when there is need or occasion. The Female is in all
parts paler than the Male.

This Bird, if it be not our Water-Rail, is, I confess, to me unknown. I do
indeed suspect it to be the Rail, though, to say the truth, the marks do not
agree. Wherefore I would not omit its description, that the Reader, comparing
it with that of the Rail, may himself judge.

. III. Another green-footed Water-hen of Bellonius like to a Coot, perchance
our Grinetta.
WE have necessarily separated the Water-hen [la Poulette d'eau] from the
lesser and greater Coot [de la Poule and Macroule] because it swims not in the
water, nor is Web-footed. We have imposed the name of Water-hen upon this Bird
from its likeness, though it be much less; yet is it bigger than a Rail, so
that it seems to partake of both. The Fowlers to whom we showed it, seeing it
to be like a Coot, would needs persuade me that it differed only in bigness,
being not yet come to its full age and growth. Whereupon I did more diligently
search out some discriminating notes: Among which this was the chief, that this
Water-hen had green Legs and Feet, not unlike to a Bitterns, and not so plain,
nor having such broad appendant membranes as in a Coot. The Tail also of this
Water-hen is longer, and the bare spot upon its forehead less. In color it is
indeed like to a Rail, but tending to that of a Coot: Wherefore at first sight
I took it to be a Rail, but viewing it more carefully, I observed that it had
white Eyelids, which neither Rail nor Coot have. In the Tail were two white
feathers, one on each side. Under the Breast it inclined a little to blue. The
Back is of a deep chestnut color. Some also are blacker than others, and have
the folds of their Wings white; and moreover, another white line in the In
minore ala, by which words and the following I do not well apprehend what our
Author means.
lesser Wing, which its first feathers longways of the quil or shaft compose.
The same meat was found in its Stomach as in the Rails and Coots. It has a
Breastbone and a Hip-bone different from other Birds, yea, even from the Coot.

Its flesh is like that of the Morehen, tender, and of easy digestion: Its
bones easy to be broken: Its Liver also brittle: Its Craw large: Its Guts and
Entrails as in a Coot: When roasted also it is of the same taste with a Coot.
It builds, breeds, and brings up its young like the Rail.

This Bird in many things resembles our Grinetta, or The lesser gray footed
Water-hen.
Gallinula poliopus minor of Aldrovand, so that I doubt not but it is the same:
Howbeit, I thought fit to insert its description in this work, that I might
leave the Reader to the freedom of his judgment.

. IV. The Water-Rail, called by some the Bilcock or Brook-Ouzel: Rallus
aquaticus Ornithol. tom. 3. p. 455.
Aldrov. i. e. Ortygometra Bellonii: Also the Gallinula chloropus altera,
Aldrov. And perchance the Gallinula Serica of the some: So of one species he
makes three.
IT is like the common Water-hen, but less; bigger than a Quail; of a slender,
narrow or compressed body: From point of Bill to the end of the Claws sixteen
inches long, to the end of the Tail but twelve: According to our usual way of
measuring sixteen inches broad.

Its Head is small, narrow, or compressed sideways. Its Bill, like the Ruffs,
about two inches long, straight, compressed likewise sideways, red, especially
the lower Mandible, and lower part of the upper, for toward the top or point it
is black, smooth, and hard. The Tongue reaches to the very end of the Bill, and
is white and rough at the tip. It has a round, black, bald spot or naked skin
in the forehead, but much less than that of the Coot, so little that it is
scarce observable. The color of the Head, Shoulders, Back, covert-feathers of
the Wings, in brief, the whole upper side is various of black or dark brown,
and olive color; each single feather having its middle part black, and its
edges olive-coloured. [Mr. Willughby makes the color of the borders or edges
of the feathers a yellowish red or russet; and attributes white spots to the
Head, which were not, or at least not observed in the birds seen and described
by me.] The Chin is white, the Throat red, with a mixture of ash color; the
extreme edges, and as it were fringes of the feathers being a little gray. The
Breast is more blue, with a bed of white in the middle. On the Thighs and sides
under the Wings grow black feathers, elegantly variegated with transverse white
lines. The Belly is russet, with white feathers under the Tail, like the common
Morehen, marked with one or two black spots. The Wings are hollow, the
quilfeathers short, black, or very near it, in number twenty two. Along the
basis of the Wing is a line of white, as in the Morehen. The Tail is Of about
two inches length.
short and black, only the edges of the two middle feathers are red. The Legs
and Feet are of a dark flesh-colors: The Legs strong: The Toes, as in the rest
of this kind, very long, divided from the very rise, except that the outer Toe
is joined to the middle by a membrane at the bottom. The Claws are of the same
color with the Toes.

It had a great, long, crooked Gallbladder; and a large Gall-pore besides:
Long blind-guts, filled with Excrements; a musculous Stomach, in which we found
a shell-Snail.

It runs very swiftly, and hides it self about the banks of Rivers: It walks
rather than swims in the water. It flies with its feet hanging down. It is
called at Venice, Forzane, or Porzana, a name common to other Water-hens also.

. V. * The Velvet Runner: Gallinula Serica Gesneri. Tom 3. p. 470.
Aldrov. Perchance the same with the precedent.
THis is a remarkable bird; very handsomely parti-colored of black and red
almost all the body over, (as far as I remember) except that the Belly is
white. And because the black color in its feathers shines like Velvet, I
thought sit to make and impose upon it the German name Samethunle. Its Legs are
long and dark-colored: Its Toes very long, but the back-toe short: Its Bill
long. Thus far Gesner, and again in his Epitome: This Bird may be called
Gallina Serica, because in it the black color shines like silk. Quaere whether
this be not the Ortygometra of Bellonius? And we truly hitherto have been of
that opinion, but then Gesner has not well described it: Which yet is not at
all strange, since (as we see) he described it by memory.

. VI. A small Water-hen, called Grinetta in Italy; and at Milan Gillerdine:
Poliopus Gallinula minor, Aldrov.
IT is less not only than the common Water-hen, but than the Rail, but in shape
of body like. Its Legs and Feet are of the same, both figure and color, with
the common Water-hens, viz. a sordid green. The Toes very long, divided to the
bottom: The Bill shorter than either the Rails or common Morehens, compressed
or narrow, sharp-pointed, of a yellow color, brighter at the head, darker
toward the tip. The upper part of the upper Chap near the Head above the
Nosthrils is crusted over with a kind of yellow plaster. The Head, as in the
rest of this kind, is little. The color of the feathers in the middle of the
crown is darker: From the Bill above the Eyes on each side is drawn a line of
gray or pale ash color: Beneath about the Ears the feathers are of the same
color with the rest of the body; under the Throat again they are ash-colored
or blue. The Neck, both above and beneath, and all the Breast are
parti-colored, viz. of a middle color between green, yellow, and dusky,
elegantly sprinkled with black spots. [Mr. Willughby makes the Breast white or
cinereous, the bottoms of the feathers being black, the Throat black, with
white spots, the Chin of a dark ash color without spots.] The feathers on the
crown of the head have their middle parts black, their edges red: Those on the
Shoulders and middle of the Back their middle parts about the shaft black,
their sides and tips of a sordid red, their utmost edges on each side white.

The quil-feathers of the Wings are all of a dark brown, with a certain
tincture of red: The covert-feathers red, with transverse waved lines of white
at intervals. The lateral parts covered by the Wings, are clothed with brown
feathers, variegated with transverse waved lines of white. The Tail is short,
consisting of twelve feathers, of the same color with the quils of the Wings,
save that the middlemost on their lateral edges have something of white. But
what is especially remarkable in the Tail is, that when spread it is not plain,
as in most birds, but notably concave. The middle feathers are longer than the
rest. Moreover, the Wings are very hollow, as in most Landfowl of the
Poultry-kind. The Gall is large, the Stomach musculous: In it we found seeds of
Plants.

This sort of Water-hen we first saw and described at Milan, then at Florence,
where the Fowlers call it Tordo Gelsemino, unless perchance that be a distinct
kind; and lastly, at Valence in Spain. That this is the Gallinula poliopus of
Aldrovand the names imposed on it do persuade us, though the descriptions do
not in all points agree.

The Bird that I described at Florence was of the bigness of the lesser Tringa,
longbodied, with a small Head, Wings of a mean size, a short Tail, Legs bare
for a little above the knees, very long Toes except the back one, which is
shorter in proportion than the rest, and situate higher. The Bill, for the
bigness of the bird, is of a good length, straight, narrow, or compressed
sideways; of a greenish yellow color: But the upper Mandible both at the base
and toward the tip is darker colored, and as it were of a dusky green. The
Legs and Feet are of a sordid green, neither is the color of the Claws
different. In the color of the feathers it agrees mostwhat with the described,
save that in the middle of the Back between the Wings a black list runs down
besprinkled with white spots, of a considerable length and breadth: to which
also are two lines adjacent, one on each side, in the covert-feathers of the
Wings, not parallel to the middle one, but running out wider toward the Tail.
The Eyes are small, and their Irides of a greenish yellow. In the bird that Mr.
Willughby measured the length from Bill to Claws was thirteen inches, from Bill
to Tail nine and an half: The breadth between the tips of the Wings sixteen.
The Bill, like that of the common Water-hen, from the point to the angles of
the mouth scarce an inch long: The Tail two inches. along the utmost edge of
the Wing from the Shoulders to the very tip of the outmost pinion feather runs
a line of white, as in the common Water-hen. This line of white was not in the
Bird we described at Florence: Yet I persuade my self that both these
descriptions are of one and the same Species of bird, differing either in Age
or Sex.

. VII. * The Water-hen called by Gesner Ochropus: Schmirring, Aldrov. lib. 20.
cap. 42.
SO he denominates it from the pale yellow or Brimstone-like color of its
Legs, (which appears also in its Bill to the middle part or further, for the
forepart of it is black.) It is called in High Dutch Schmirring, a name (as I
guess) framed in imitation of its voice or the noise it makes. It has the
greatest variety of colors of any bird of this kind; there appearing in it
seven distinct ones (as the I wish Cesner had seen the bird from which the
Picture was taken, we should have had a better and truer description of it.
Picture shows.) For besides the yellow color I spoke of, every where all over
the whole body appears a russet, [ruffus:] In the ends of the shortest feathers
of the Wings a red, like red Oker: A white both on the Head and about the Eyes,
and also in the middle feathers of the Wings, and in the Belly. The longest
feathers of the Wings are black, and elsewhere in the Back, Tail, Neck, and
Wings are spots of black. The edges of the Eyelids are tinctured with a
Saffron-colour. There is also something of brown and cinereous in the Wings.
The Feet want the back-toe, unless the Picture deceives me. It builds among
shrubs with moss and grass. Thus far Gesner. This Bird (if it be rightly
described, of which we are very doubtful) we have not yet seen.

. VIII. * The Wyn-kernel or Gallinula ochra of Gesner, Aldrov. lib. 20. cap. 48.
I (says Gesner) named this Ochra, from the greenish, but sordid and dark
color of almost the wholebody, more dusky on the upper side. The Head, Neck,
Breast, and Wings are adorned with points and spots of white. The Tail is in
part white. The Bill partly purple, partly black. The Legs pale yellow.

. IX. * The Land-hen: Gallinula terrestris of Aldrovand. Perchance the
Land-Rail.
WE suspect this Bird (however Gesner contradicts it) to be the Land-Rail or
Ortygometra of Bellonius, however the Toes in the figure are drawn too too
long. But that the Reader may satisfy himself whether or no we judge aright,
we shall here put down Gesners description of it.

In the whole habit and fashion of its body it is very like the Waterfowl, if
you except only the Bill. Gesner having no Greek or Latin name for it, it may,
says he, be called i. e. The Land Runner.
Trochilus terrestris; (for there are also other Water-Trochili, likewise of
the Hen-kind) since it is of the same Genus.
common kind, and runs swiftly, whence the Grecians gave it that name; howbeit
some do call that very small bird the Regulus also by the name of Trochilus.
This Bird runs very swiftly through shrubs, and sometimes leaps sideways. It
flies ill, and with great difficulty raises it self from the ground up into the
Air. So he. And in his Epitomy again he names it, the Land-Trochilus or
Land-Rail, to difference it from that which lives about Waters, and adds, that
Bellonius his Land-Rail is another bird. About the Lago maggiore (so he goes
on) some call it Polle, which is as much as a Pullet or Hen, by a name too
general. The German Fowlers call it, Eggenschar, Heggeschar, and Hegesar,
because they run in companies near hedges, where they are found after
Hay-harvest. For the Germans call a hedge Hegga, or Haga, and a flock or troup
Schara: Or perchance because they dig the earth about hedges, for the word
Scharren with us signifies to dig or scrape with the feet, as Hens are wont:
Which whether or no these birds do is to me uncertain. There are some who call
it periphrastically, Ein gross wasser Hunle, that is, a great Water-hen. This
Bird he thus briefly describes. It is thick and short-bodied, and shaped
otherwise like its Picture, [of which he there gives a draught,] scarce any
bird has longer Toes for its bigness. The hind-toe also is about half as long
as the fore ones. The colors I do not well remember, but I think their Legs
were greenish. The Back and Wings from a reddish color inclined to brown. Its
note (as they say) is harsh, Ger, ger, ger, something like a Serpents. And
therefore it is also taken by Fowlers imitating its voice by a knife drawn
through dry wood. But whereas he says, that the English, accounting it a very
delicate bird, use several snares and devices to catch it among the standing
corn, he was certainly deceived by a false relation; for that England neither
breeds nor feeds any such bird besides the Land and Water-Rail.

. X. The Brasilian Water-hen, called Jacana.
THis most elegant Bird is of the bigness of a Dove, but has much longer Legs,
Out of Marggrave
of a yellow color mixed with green. The lower Legs are more than two inches
long; the upper (for the greatest part bare, as in Water-birds) a little less.
It has four Toes in each foot, the middle of those three which stand forward
two inches long, the other two a little shorter; the fourth or back-toe a foot
or more long; all armed with yellow Claws, half an inch long. Its Tail is short
like a Water-hens. The feathers on the Back, Wings, and Belly are mingled of
green and black: Those under the Tail white: Those near the Neck, and on the
whole Neck and Breast of the same color with the feathers that are seen on the
Necks of Peacocks and some Pigeons. It has a small Head like a Water-hen,
covered with a certain round membranous tegument, of the color of a Turcois
stone. Its Bill is straight, like a Hens. above an inch long, from the
beginning to the middle of a rare Or red-lead color.
scarlet color, the remaining part being of an excellent yellow, wherewith
something of green is mixed. It is very frequent every where in the fenny places
or Marish grounds of Brasil. Its flesh is edible, but not much valued.

. XI. The Brasilian Water-hen, called Aguapecaca.
IT is in bigness equal, and in shape like to the precedent, but different and
inferior to it in color. Its feathers on the Back are like those of the
former; the Wings browner. It wants the Cap or Miter on the Head, and has in
each Wing on the inside a straight horn or spur, where with it defends it self.

. XII. The third Brasilian Water-hen of Marggrave.
IT is for figure and bigness like and equal to the precedent, but different in
color. The whole Head, Neck, Back, and Tail are black, the beginning of the
Wings brown: The remaining part green; the ends of the quil-feathers brown:
Moreover, the Breast and lower Belly are of a brown color, as also the upper
half of the upper Legs. The Bill is straight, of a Saffron-colour, with a red
skin at its rise, and on the forepart of the Head. The Legs are bare, the Feet
ash-colored. In the forepart of each Wing it has the like horn or spur as the
former, of a yellow color.

This is the The horned bird.
Avis cornuta of Nierembergius, or rather Hernandez, which the Indians (says
he) call Yohualcuachili, or Caput nocturnum.

. XIII. The fourth Brasilian Water-hen of Marggrave.
IT is of the same figure or shape with the rest. Its Bill is yellow. It has a
red skinny Miter or Cap on its forehead near the rise of its Bill: It has also
processes extended down the sides after the manner of the Gallinae Numidicae,
perchance he may mean Turkeys.
Guiny Hens. Its whole Head, Neck, Breast, and lower Belly are covered with
black feathers. The Back, Tail, and beginning of the Wings with red, or light
brown. The quil-feathers of the Wings are of a Seagreen, with black tips; but
they are covered with those red [or russet] ones forementioned, and cannot be
seen unless when the bird flies. Its Legs are long; its Toes also long: Each
has I suppose he was herein mistaken, for no bird we ever saw has an equal
number of joints in every toe save the Swift.
four joints, of an ash color. Each Wing in the forepart has a very sharp
horn [or spur] of a Saffron color.

. XIV. A Water-hen, called by the Brasilians, Tamatia.
IT has the Bill of a Sparrow-hawk, is of the bigness of Yassana asu, walking
with a crooked Back, and crooked Neck. It has a great Head, great, black Eyes,
situate near the rise of the Bill: A Bill two inches long, more than one broad,
like a Ducks indeed, but The Latin words are anterius acuminatum.
sharp toward the tip: Its upper part black, its nether yellowish. The upper
Legs are bare of feathers, and of a good length. It has in each foot four
Toes, three standing forward, one backward, long, as in Water-hens. The Legs
and Toes are of a yellowish green color. The Tail very short, not longer than
in the Yassana. Its Head is covered with black feathers, the rest of its body
with brown: But in the Belly some white feathers are intermingled.

CHAP. III.
. I. * Of the Porphyrio, or purple Water-hen.
THis Bird neither Gesner, nor Aldrovandus, nor we truly have hitherto seen,
but Pictures of it only. It is (if the Pictures deceive us not) of the Waterhen
kind. Its body is all over of a blue color. The extreme half of the Tail is a
whitish ash color: The Bill and Legs of a shining purple. So Gesner describes
it by a Picture sent him from Montpellier. Aldrovandus describes it otherwise,
as may be seen in Book 20. Chap. 28. of his Ornithology. Seeing therefore the
Pictures of this Bird do so much vary, and none of those who have compiled
Histories of Animals do profess themselves to have seen the Porphyrio, we did
sometimes doubt, whether there were any such bird in nature, especially seeing
some of those things which the Ancients attribute to it, as for example, that
it has five Toes in each foot, are without doubt false and fabulous. But
because all the Pictures of it do agree in the figure of its Bill, Legs and
Feet, and indeed the whole body, we have now changed our minds, and are more
apt to believe the affirmative, viz. that there is such a Porphyrio as they
picture, akin to the Coots or Water-hens. Let others, who have the hap to see
it, describe it more exactly, and so remove all doubt and scruple concerning
this matter out of the minds of the learned and curious.

. II. * The Quachilto or American Porphyrio of Nieremberg.
THe Quachilto does imitate the watching and crowings of a Cock. Some call it
Yacacintli. Late at night, and early in the morning it crows after the manner
of Cocks. It is of a dark purple color, with some white feathers intermixed.
The Bill is pale at the beginning. In the young birds the bald part at the rise
of the Bill is red. It is like a Coot. Its Legs are yellow, inclining to green,
ending in four palecoloured Toes, without any membrane. The Eyes are black,
with a fulvous Iris [or circle about the Pupil.] It is a Marsh-bird, feeding
upon fishes, it self being no unpleasant or ill-tasted meat.

CHAP. IV. Ornithol. book 19. chap. 16.
Aldrovands Italian Rail.
THis Rail (as Gesner describes it) is more a Water than a Land Fowl: And at
Mestre, a Village not far distant from Venice, it is taken, not without great
toil and expense, viz. in Falcons, or other Hawks, and a troup of Servants, who
wearing Buskins or high-shoos, do, in the room of hunting Dogs, wade up and
down the shallow waters thereabouts, and put up those Birds with certain Clubs
they carry, shaking and beating the shrubs and bushes where they lie; that so
they may afterward become a prey to the Falcons that wait for them. This is a
very noted Bird in that City, but in my judgment much inferior for taste both
to a Thrush and a Quail. Aloysius Mundella, principal Physician at Brescia, in
his Letters to me, writes thus. This Bird differs from our Coot.
Fulica, in that it has more white in the Wings, and about the Eyes. Its Bill
is black; its Legs greenish. It has no such dissected or scalloped membranes
between the Toes, no baldness on the Head, as far as I gather from the Picture.

What Bird this is, and whether we have ever seen it, being so briefly
described with a few, and some of those negative notes, we cannot certainly
determine.

MEMB. II. Cloven-footed, fin-toed Birds, of kin to the Waterhens.
. I. The Coot: Fulica.
IT weighs twenty four ounces: From Bill-point to Tail-end is sixteen inches
long; to the Claws twenty two. The Bill is an inch and half long, white, with a
light tincture of blue, sharp-pointed, a little compressed or narrow; both
Mandibles equal. The feet bluish, or of a dusky green: The back-toe little,
with one only membrane adhering, and that not scallop'd, but extending all the
length of the Toe. The inner fore-toe is a little shorter than the outer: All
the Toes longer than in whole-footed birds. About the joints of the Toes are
semicircular membranes appendant, on the inner Toe two, the middle three, the
outer four. These circular membranes are bigger, and more distinct on the
inside of the Toes, so that the intermediate incisures or nicks reach to the
very joints. [This may be thus briefly expressed, The three fore-toes have
lateral membranes on each side, scalloped, the inner with two, the middle Toe
with three, and the outer with four scallops.] From the Bill almost to the
crown of the Head arises an Excrescency or Lobe of flesh, bare of feathers,
soft, smooth, round, which they call the Calvities.
baldness. The feathers about the Head and Neck are low, soft, and thick. The
color all over the body black, deeper about the Head. The Breast and Belly are
of a lead-colour. The Thighs covered with feathers almost down to the knees:
Just beneath the feathers is a ring of yellow about the Leg. The first ten
quil-feathers are of a dark, dusky, or black color, the eight next lighter,
with white tips; the last or next the body are of a deeper black The Tail
consists of twelve feathers, and is two inches long.

The Liver is great, divided into two Lobes, having also a large Gall. The
blind guts are nine inches long, their ends for an inches space being reflected
or doubled backwards. It builds its Nest of grass, broken reeds, etc. floating
on the top of the water, so that it rises and falls together with the Water.
The Reed, among which it is built: stop it that it be not carried down streams.
This Bird in the figure and make of its body resembles a Water-hen, to which
genus it ought without all doubt to be referred. It seldom sits upon trees. The
flesh of it with us is accounted no good meat: In Italy it is more esteemed.

. II. Bellonius his greater Coot, called by the French Macroule, or Diable de
mer.
IT always dives in fresh waters, and is of a color so exquisitely black, as
if it were laid on with a Pencil. The white bald spot on the Head is broader
than in the common Coot: And it is somewhat bigger-bodied. It draws up its
Legs, and has broad Toes, divided from each other, like the common Coot.

SECTION II. Whole-footed long-leg'd Birds.
CHAP. I. The Flammant or Phoenicopter: Phoenicopterus.
IT has extraordinary long Neck and Legs. The Bill is broad, of singular,
strange, unusual figure. For the upper Mandible is flat and broad, crooked, and
toothed: The lower thicker than it: The tip of the Bill black, else it is of a
dark blue.

The Neck and body are white: The quil-feathers of the Wings black: The
covertfeathers are wholly died with a most beautiful bright purple or
flame-colour, whence it took the names Phoenicopter and Flammant.

It is whole-footed (as Gesner rightly has it) from whom Aldrovandus, deceived
(I guess) by the Picture of it dissenting, affirms the contrary, viz. that it
is clovenfooted.

In Wintertime in hard weather it comes over to the Coast of Provence and
Languedoc in France, and is often taken about Martiguez in Provence, and
Montpellier in Languedoc. We saw several cases of it dried at Montpellier.

The French call it Flambant or Flammant, rather from the flammeous color of
its Wings and Feet, than because it comes from Flanders in the Wintertime to
the Coasts of Languedoc. For I believe there was scarce ever seen about
Flanders a bird of this kind, so far are they from being common there, and
flying from thence into other Countries. Howbeit, the Provencals might
perchance through mistake think so. Whence it comes, or where it breeds, is to
me unknown.

It feeds upon Periwinkles and fishes. The Ancients reckon the Phoenicopters
Tongue among the choicest dainties. Apitius, the most profound gulf of
gluttony and riot, (as Pliny relates) wrote, that a Phoenicopters Tongue is of
an excellent taste and relish.

CHAP. II. * The Trochilus, commonly called, Corrira, Lib. 19. cap. 55.
Aldrov.
THis Bird has long Legs, yea, the longest of any whole-footed Here he is
mistaken, for the Flammant has longer.
Fowl except the Avosetta: Wherefore because it runs very swiftly they call it
Corrira [Courier] whence I conjecture it to be the Trochilus, which, as they
write, runs along the shores with that celerity many times, that its running is
swifter than its flying. It is a parti-colored Bird, has a straight yellow
Bill, black at the tip: A wide slit of the mouth; black Eyes, compassed about
with a white circle, which is environed by another spadiceous one. Underneath
on the Belly it is white. Two white feathers, which yet have black tips, cover
the Tail. The upper side, Head, Neck, Back, and Wings are mostly of a
ferrugineous color. It has (as I said) long Legs, short Thighs, Toes joined
together by membranes. Having not seen this Bird we have no more to add
concerning it. Its figure somewhat resembles a Larus. Aldrovandus is mistaken
in that he writes his Trochilus has the longest Legs of any whole-footed bird
but the Avosetta: For the Phoenicopter has much longer Legs than the Avosetta
it self. But Aldrovandus is herein to be excused, for that he held the
Phoenicopter to be a cloven-footed bird.

CHAP. III. The Avosetta of the Italians: Recurvirostra.
IN bigness it somewhat exceeds a Lapwing, weighing ten ounces and an half;
being extended in length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Toes twenty
three inches and an half; to the end of the Tail but eighteen: In breadth,
taken between the tips of the Wings spread, it is full thirty one inches. The
Bill is three inches and an half long, slender, black, flat or depressed,
reflected upwards, which is peculiar to this Bird, ending in a very thin,
slender, weak point. The Tongue is short, not cloven. The Head is of a mean
size, round, like a ball or bullet, black above, (save that the fore part of
the Head is sometimes gray) which color also takes up the upper side of the
Neck extending to the middle of it. The color of the whole under side of the
body is a pure snow-white; of the upper side partly white, partly black, viz.
the outmost quil-feathers of the Wings are above half way black, the rest
white, as are also the feathers of the second row. The rest of the
covert-feathers almost to the ridge of the Wing are black, which make a broad
bed of black, not directly cross the Wing, but a little oblique. On the Back
again it has two black strakes, beginning from the point of the Shoulder or
setting on of the Wing, and proceeding transversly till in the middle of the
Back they do almost meet, being thence produced straight on to the Tail. The
whole Tail is white, three inches and an half long, made up of twelve feathers.
The Legs are very long, of a lovely blue color, bare of feathers for almost
three inches above the Knees. The Claws black and little. It has a back-toe,
but a very small one. The blind guts are slender, almost three inches long. The
whole length of the Guts is three foot. It has a Gallbladder, emptying it
self into the Gut by its own proper duct or channel, and a Gall-pore besides.
The Stomach is small, in which dissected we found nothing but little stones, so
that thence we could not learn on what it feeds. Indeed, the Bill being so
slender, weak, long, and of so inconvenient a figure, turning upwards, one
would wonder how it could gather its food, be it what it will.

Mr. Willughby describes the Wings thus. The interior scapular feathers are
black, which make a long black spot in the middle of the Back. The
covert-feathers of the upper part of the Wing, from the setting on thereof to
the first joint, are white; from the first to the second joint the lesser
covert-feathers are black; from the second joint to the roots of the greater
quil-feathers white again. The first quill or pinion feather is wholly black,
the succeeding have by degrees less and less black, till in the eight only the
exterior tip remains black.

We saw many of these birds both at Rome and Venice: They do also frequent our
Eastern Coasts in Suffolk and Norfolk in Winter time. But there needs no great
pains be taken or time spent in exactly describing this bird: For the singular
figure of its Bill reflected upwards is sufficient alone to characterise and
distinguish it from all other birds we have hitherto seen or heard of.

BOOK III. PART III. Of WHOLE-FOOTED BIRDS with shorter Legs.
WHole-footed birds with shorter Legs we distinguish into Or such as have but
three toes, and such as have four.
such as want the back-toe, and such as have it: These latter into such as have
all four toes web'd together, and such as have the back-toe loose or separate
from the rest: These latter again we subdivide into narrow-bill'd and
broad-bill'd: The narrow-bill'd have their Bills either hooked at the end, or
streighter and sharp-pointed. The hook-bill'd have their Bills either even, or
toothed on the sides. Those that have streighter and sharp-pointed Bills are
either short-winged and diverse, called Douckers and Loons; or long-winged, and
much upon the Wing, called Gulls. The broad-bill'd are divided into the
Goose-kind, and the Duck-kind. The Duck-kind are either Sea-ducks, or
Pond-ducks.

The general marks of whole-footed birds are, 1. Short Legs; Here we must
except the Phoenicoptter, Corrira, and Avosetta: 2. Legs feathered down to the
Knees: 3. Short hind-toes: 4. The outmost fore-toe shorter than the inmost: 5.
Their Rumps less erect, than other birds: 6. Most of the broad-bill'd kind have
a kind of hooked narrow plate at the end of the upper Chap of their Bills;
their bodies flat or depressed.

N. B. Under the name of whole or web-footed we comprise some birds, which have
indeed their Toes divided, but membranes appendant on each side, such are some
of the Diverse or Loons. These might more properly be denominated sin-toed or
sin-footed than whole-footed.

SECTION I. Whole-footed Birds that want the Back-toe.
CHAP. I. The Bird called Penguin by our Seamen, which seems to be Hoiers
Goifugel.
IN bigness it comes near to a tame Goose. The color of the upper side is
black, of the under white. Its Wings are very small, and seem to be altogether
unsit for flight. Its Bill is like the Auks, but longer and broader, compressed
sideways, graven in with seven or eight furrows in the upper mandible, with ten
in the lower. The lower Mandible also bunches out into an angle downward, like
a Gulls Bill. It differs from the Auks Bill in that it has no white lines.
From the Bill to the Eyes on each side is extended a line or spot of white. It
wants the back-toe, and has a very short tail.

I saw and described it dried in the Repository of the Royal Society. I saw it
also in Tradescants Cabinet at Lambeth near London.

The Penguin of the Hollanders, or Magellanic Goose of Clusius.
The Birds of this kind, found in the Islands of the strait of Magellane, the
Hollanders from their fatness called Penguins. [I find in Mr. Terries Voyage to
the East Indies mention made of this Bird. He describes it to be a great lazy
bird, with a white Head, and coal-black body. Now seeing Penguin in the Welsh
Tongue signifies a white head, I rather think the Bird was so called from its
white head; though I confess that our Penguin has not a white Head, but only
some white about the Eyes.] This (says Clusius) is a Sea-fowl of the
Goose-kind, though unlike in its Bill. It lives in the Sea; is very fat, and of
the bigness of a large Goose, for the old ones in this kind are found to weigh
thirteen, fourteen, yea, sometimes sixteen pounds; the younger eight, ten, and
twelve. The upper side of the body is covered with black feathers, the under
side with white. The Neck (which in some is short and thick) has as it were a
ring or collar of white feathers. Their skin is thick like a Swines. They want
Wings, but instead thereof they have two small skinny sins, hanging down by
their sides like two little arms, covered on the upper side with short, narrow,
stiff feathers, thick-set; on the under side with lesser and stiffer, and those
white, wherewith in some places there are black ones intermixed; altogether
unfit for flight, but such as by their help the birds swim swiftly. I
understood that they abide for the most part in the water, and go to land only
in breeding time, and for the most part lie three or four in one hole. They
have a Bill bigger than a Ravens, but not so Elated.
high; and a very short Tail; black, flat Feet, of the form of Geesefeet, but
not so broad. They walk erect, with their heads on high, their fin-like Wings
hanging down by their sides like arms, so that to them who see them afar off
they appear like so many diminutive men or Pigmies. I find in the Diaries [or
Journals of that Voyage] that they feed only upon fish, yet is not their flesh
of any ungrateful relish, nor does it taste of fish. They dig deep holes in the
shore like Conyburroughs, making all the ground sometimes so hollow, that the
Seamen walking over it would often sink up to the knees in those vaults. These
perchance are those Geese, which Gomora says are without feathers, never come
out of the Sea, and instead of feathers are covered with long hair. Thus far
Clusius, whose description agrees well enough to our Penguin; but his figure is
false in that it is drawn with four toes in each foot.

Olaus Wormius Musei, lib. 3. cap. 19.
treating of this bird, to Clusius his description adds of his own observation
as follows. This Bird was brought me from the Ferroyer Islands; I kept it
alive for some months at my house. It was a young one, for it had not arrived
to that bigness as to exceed a common Goose. It would swallow an entire Herring
at once, and sometimes three successively before it was satisfied. The feathers
on its back were so soft and even that they resembled black Velvet. Its Belly
was of a pure white. Above the Eyes it had a round white spot, of the bigness
of a Dollar, that you would have sworn it were a pair of Spectacles, (which
Clusius observed not) neither were its Wings of that figure he expresses; but a
little broader, with a border of white.

Whether it has or wants the back-toe neither Clusius nor Wormius in their
descriptions make any mention. In Wormius his figure there are no back-toes
drawn.

This Bird exceeding the rest of this kind in bigness justly challenges the
first place among them.

CHAP. II. The Bird called the Razor-bill in the West of England, the Auk in
the North, the Murre in Cornwall: Alka Hoieri in Epist. ad Clusium. Worm. mus.
THis is less by half than the Penguin, being not so big as a tame Duck:
Between the tips of the Wings spread it was twenty seven inches broad. Its
Head, Neck, Back, and Tail, in general its whole upper side is black. Its Belly
and Breast as far as the middle of the Throat white. The upper part of the
Throat under the Chin has something of a dusky or purplish black. Each Wing
has twenty eight quil-feathers; the tips of all But the eleven outmost.
to the eleventh are white. The Tail is three inches long, consisting of twelve
feathers, the exterior shorter by degrees than the interior: The excess of
the two middlemost above the next them is greater than that of the rest.

The Bill from the tip to the angles of the mouth is two inches long, of a deep
black, narrow or compressed sideways. A little beyond the Nosthrils in the
upper Mandible there is engraven a furrow or incision deeper than that in the
Coulter-neb. As far as this groove the Bill is covered with a thick, short,
soft down, like the nap of Velvet, The upper Chap is crooked at the end,
concave and overhangs the lower: Both are of equal length, channelled with two
transverse furrows or grooves [the upper for the most part with three,] that
next the Head, which is the widest, and almost crosses the whole Bill, being
white. In these furrows there is some diversity in several birds, for some have
more than two: Yet are the white lines like and equal in all. Besides from each
Eye to the corner of the upper Mandible is a narrow white line drawn. The Mouth
within is of a lovely yellow: The Eyes hazel-coloured. The Legs are situate as
in the Penguin and Coulterneb, of a black color, as are also the Feet and
Claws. It wants the back-toe.

It lays, sits, and breeds up its Young on the ledges of the craggy Cliffs and
steep Rocks by the Sea-shores, that are broken and divided into many as it were
stairs or shelves, together with the Coulternebs and Guillemots. The Manks men
are wont to compare these Rocks, with the Birds sitting upon them in breeding
time to an Apothecaries shop, the ledges of the Rocks resembling the shelves,
and the Birds the pots. About the Isle of Man are very high Cliffs, broken in
this manner into many ledges one above another from top to bottom. They are
wont to let down men by ropes from the tops of the Cliffs to take away the Eggs
and young ones. They take also the birds themselves when they are sitting upon
their Eggs, with snares fastened to the tops of long poles, and so put about
their Necks. They build no Nests, but lay their Eggs upon the bare Rocks. They
fetch many circuits in getting up to their Nests, and if they have not aimed
right, and so miss of them, they drop down into the Sea, and ascend up again by
degrees.

All the birds of this kind that we know lay extraordinary great Eggs in
proportion to their bodies: This birds are two inches three quarters long, the
lesser ends not so sharp as in the Guillemots, white, varied with black spots,
as Hoierus rightly describes them. They feed altogether upon fish.

CHAP. III. * The Mergus of Bellonius, Tom. 3. page 240.
Aldrov. Perchance the same with the precedent.
BEllonius, in his Book of Observations writes, that there is a peculiar sort
of Seadiver in Candy, differing from the The Coot.
Phalacro-corax, and other diverse, which he thinks to be the Aethyia of
Aristotle. The Inhabitants of the Candy-shores (says he) call it Utamania. It
is of the bigness of a Teal [d' une Sarcelle] has a white Belly, a black Head
and Back, as also Wings and Tail. This alone among wholefooted birds wants the
back-toe. [Herein Bellonius is mistaken.] Its feathers are like down, sticking
fast in the skin. Its Bill has sharp edges, is hollow, and almost plain, for a
good part of it covered with downy feathers; the upper Chap being black, the
lower white: the crown of its Head is broad.

This bird in many things resembles the Auk, and perchance it may be the same,
for its figure is not unlike: But if it be indeed, as it is described, no
bigger than a Teal, and the lower Mandible of its Bill be white, it must be
different.

CHAP. IV. The Bird called by the Welsh and Manks-men, a Guillem; by those of
Northumberland and Durham, a Guillemot, or Sea-hen; in Yorkshire about
Scarburgh, a It is another Bird which the Scots about the Bass Island, and the
Northumbers about the Farn Islands call a Skout, viz. the Alka of Hoier.
Skout; by the Cornish, a Kiddaw: Lomwia Hoieri in Epist. ad Clusium.
IT is like the Auk, but greater, coming near to the bigness of a Duck: In
length from Bill to Tail eighteen inches and an half; in breadth the Wings
being spread out thirty. Its Head, upper-side of the Neck, Back, Wings, and
Tail, and beside, the Chin also as far as the middle of the Throat are of a
dark brown, or black ash color: Its Belly, Breast, and the rest of its Throat
are white, as in the Auk. The tips of the eleven foremost or outmost
Wing-feathers of the first row are white, as in the Auk. The Tail is two inches
long, consisting of twelve feathers, the middlemost the longest, the rest by
degrees shorter and shorter to the outmost.

The Bill is straight, sharp-pointed, black, from the tip to the angles of the
mouth, almost three inches long, round. The upper Chap near the point has on
each side a small angular process or tooth which is not received in the lower,
but overhangs it on both sides when the mouth is shut. The Tongue undivided:
The mouth within yellow. The Feet situate very backward near the Tail, as in
the precedent, of a black color, as are also the Claws. It wants the back-toe.

The skin of the stomach within is yellow: The Gallbladder large: The
Testicles in the Males great, from which the seminal vessel with various
winding and reflections tend to the vent.

It lives and companies together with the Auks and Coulternebs: Breeding after
the same manner, and in the same places: But it is a simpler bird, and more
easily taken.

It breeds yearly on the steep Cliffs and inaccessible Rocks of the Isle of
Man, as do the Auks, etc. Likewise on an Island or Rock called Godreve, not far
from St. Ives in Cornwall: Also on Prestholm Island, about a League distant from
Beaumaris in the Isle of Anglesey, where for want of fresh water no body at
present dwells, nor are there any buildings remaining, save an old ruinous
Chapel dedicated to St. Sirician. My Lord Bulkley is proprietor of this
Island. Moreover, this Bird frequents and builds on the Farn Islands near the
coast of Northumberland; and the Clifts about Scarburgh in Yorkshire, in the
Summer-months.

This lays the biggest Eggs of all this kind, more than three inches long, very
sharp at one end, and blunt at the other, of a bluish green color, some varied
with black spots or strokes, some without any.

Mr. Johnson has observed these birds to vary somewhat in color, some having
black backs, some brown or bay: Perchance these may be Hens, those Cocks.

CHAP. V. The Bird called Coulterneb at the Farn Islands, Puffin in
North Wales, in South Wales Gulden-head, Bottle-nose, and Helegug, at Scarburgh
Mullet, in Cornwall Pope, at Jersey and Guernsey Barbalot: Anas Arctica Clus.
Pica marina vel Fratercula Gesneri Tom. 3. page 215.
Aldrov.
THis is lesser than the tame Duck, extended in length from Bill to Feet twelve
Inches. Its Bill is short, broad, and compressed side-ways, contrarily to the
Bills of Ducks, of a triangular figure, and ending in a sharp point, the upper
Mandible arcuate, and crooked at the point. Where it is joined to the Head a
certain callous substance encompasses its base, as in Parrots. Between this
callous body and the first furrow, anon to be described, are long holes for the
Nosthrils produced by the aperture of the mouth. The Bill is of two colors,
near the Head * cinereous Ash-colored.
or livid, toward the point red; it has three furrows or grooves impressed in
it, one in the livid part, two in the red. The Mouth is yellow within. The Eyes
gray or ash-colored. The Eyelids are strengthened with a black cartilage: in
the lower is a carneous protuberance of a Black and blue, the color in the
skin after a stroke or confusion.
livid color, in the upper a small triangular excrescency of the same color.

The Feet of some are yellow; I suppose those are young ones, of others red,
situate backwards almost in the same plain with the Belly, as they are in
Doukers or Loons, so that the Bird stands and walks almost perpendicularly
erected upon the Tail. It wants the back-toe. The inmost of the fore-toes is
the shortest, the middlemost the longest. The Claws are of a dark blue,
inclining to black. The top of the Head, the Neck, and Back are black: The
Breast and Belly white. A ring or muffler of black produced from the Neck
encompasses the Throat. The sides of the Head from the crown, to the now
mentioned muffler are white, or of a very pale ash color, so that the Eyes and
Ears are included in these white spaces.

Their Wings are small, made up of short feathers, nevertheless near the
supersicies of the water they fly very swiftly. They say that out of the sight
of the Sea they cannot fly at all, nor unless they do ever and anon dip their
Wings in the water. The Tail is two inches long, made up of twelve feathers,
all black. The Stomach within is yellow: The Liver divided into two Lobes, with
a Gall annexed.

They build no Nest, but lay their Eggs upon the bare ground. They breed in
holes under ground, which either they dig for themselves, or borrow of the
Rabbets, whom they drive out and dispossess of their burrows. They lay but one
Egg apiece (which is especially remarkable) but if you take away the Egg out of
any Nest, that Bird will lay a second; if you remove that, a third, and so on
to the fifth. It lays huge Eggs for its bigness, even bigger than Hens or
Ducks, of a reddish or sandy color, much sharper at one end than Hens Eggs,
and blunter at the other.

In the Islands of Man, Bardsey, Caldey, Farn, Godreve, Sillies, and other
small desert Islets near the Seashore they breed yearly in great numbers: And
not only in Islands, but also on Rocks and Cliffs by the Seaside, about
Scarborough, Tenby, and elsewhere.

In the Summer time they abide in the places mentioned, being busy in breeding
and feeding their Young: In the beginning of Autumn they fly away, returning
again the next Spring. Whither they fly, and where they spend their Winter we
know not. It is reported, that in the latter end of March, or beginning of
April there come over first some Spies or Harbingers, which stay some two or
three days as it were to view and search out the places they use to breed in,
and see whether all be well: Which done they depart, and about the beginning of
May return again with the whole troup of their fellows. But if that season
happen to be stormy and tempestuous, and the Sea troubled, there are abundance
of them found cast upon the shores lean and perished with famine. For they
cannot, unless the Sea be calm, either proceed in their journey, or fish for
their living. In August they all depart, nor are they seen any more any where
about our Coasts till the next Spring. The Young which cannot then fly they
leave to shift for themselves. All these things are to be understood also of
the Auk and Guillemot. For these three kinds do for the most part fly together,
and build in the same places.

A certain Fisherman told us, that in the middle of Winter he once found a
Puffin under water, torpid, among the Rocks not far from This Island is not far
distant from the Promontory of Carnarvanshire
Bardsey Island, which being again cast into the Sea streightway sank to the
bottom. Believe it that will. Mr. Fr. Jessop sent us one killed in the fresh
waters not far from Sheffield in Yorkshire, much less than this we have
described, which yet I think differed only in age; for all marks agreed.

Of all the birds of this kind hitherto described I think it to be true which
Mr. Johnson has observed, that the underside is so far white as it is immersed
in the water in swimming, the upper side as far as it is extant above the water
being black.

The Auk, Guillemot, this Bird, and perchance all the rest of this kind and the
Soland-Goose lay but one Egg, and bring up but one young one at once, which is
a thing very remarkable and worthy the observation: But that Egg for the
bigness of the birds is an extraordinary great one.

CHAP. VI. The Greenland-Dove or Sea-Turtle: Columba Groenlandica dicta.
HIther also is to be referred that bird which in Holland they call the
Greenland-Dove, for that also wants the back-toe. It is like the Coulterneb,
but less: Its Legs alike red: Its Bill longer, not compressed sideways,
sharp-pointed, a little crooked at the end, and prominent.

It has a large white spot on the upper surface of each Wing, else it is all
over black, of the color of a Coot. We counted in each Wing twenty six or
twenty seven quil-feathers.

I guess this bird to be the same with the Puffinet of the Farn Islands, which
they told us was of the bigness of a Dove: Its whole body in Summertime being
black, excepting a white spot in each Wing, but turning white in the Winter:
That it had a narrow, sharp Bill, that it built in the holes of the Rocks, and
laid two Eggs. I persuade my self also, that it is the same with the
Turtle-dove of the Bass Island near Edinburgh in Scotland, being thereto
induced by the agreement of names.

Why they call it a Dove or Turtle I cannot certainly tell. It is indeed about
the bigness of a Turtle, and lays (they say) two Eggs at once like them, and
possibly there may be some agreement in their voice or note.

SECTION II. Whole-footed Birds with four fore-toes, or four toes all web'd
together.
CHAP. 1. The Pelecan: Onocrotalus sive Pelecanus, Aldrov.
THe length of this Bird from the point of the Bill to the end of the Feet or
of the Tail was sixty inches: Of the Bill it self from the tip to the angles of
the mouth fourteen. The space between the Eyes and the Bill is Bare of feathers.
naked. Its feathers are almost like a Gooses: Those on the top of the Head
longer than the rest, standing up like a Crest. The color of the whole body
white: Yet the Neck is yellowish. The shafts of the back-feathers are black.
The Tail and covert-feathers of the Wings are of a dusky ash color, as in
Geese: The ends of the quil-feathers black. The Tail is about seven inches
long, made up of twenty or twenty two feathers, of almost equal length, save
that the outmost are a little shorter than the middlemost. Each Wing has
twenty eight quil-feathers. The Bill toward the Head is of a Lead-colour, the
end being yellowish: The upper Mandible broad and flat, the nether as it were
two long ribs or spars joined at one end, with a thick yellow skin interceding,
which reaches backwards to the Throat beyond the Bill. At the end of the Bill
is a little knob or protuberance, but the utmost tip of the Bill is hooked. The
Nosthrils are situate at the base of the Bill near the Head; above the cranny
or furrow running along the length of the Bill, as in the Soland-goose, and are
round. The Eyes are of a yellowish ash color, or rather whitish: The Legs and
Feet of a lead color. The shanks bare above the knees. All the four toes are
web'd together, as Aldrovand has rightly observed.

We saw and described this Bird in the Royal Aviary in St. James Park near
Westminster. The Emperor of Russia by his Ambassadors sent to his Majesty in
the year 166^ among other rarities presented the King with two birds of this
kind.

Franciscus Stellutus, in a Letter to See his Annotations on Recchus his
Animals.
Jo. Faber at Rome, describes a Pelecan he saw at Fabriano thus. This Bird is
much bigger than the biggest Goose, yea, equal to, or bigger than a Swan. [That
which Gesner described weighed twenty four pounds, of twelve ounces the pound:
Of Aldrovands two one weighed eighteen pounds, the other twenty five.] Of a
whitish color, yet not purely white, but clouded with something of dusky or
red. Nor is this color uniform all the body over, for the Wing-feathers are
darker than of the rest of the body. Its Feet are made up of three Toes joined
together by a membrane, and a Heel behind. [Here by inadvertency I suppose
Stellutus is mistaken, for all four toes are web'd together.] The Bill almost
as long as ones arm, but not toothed. The tip of the upper Chap is bent
downward, with a hook like the claw of some bird. I could not see any Tongue,
[neither could Faber, who saw this same bird afterward at Rome, find the
Tongue, though he searched diligently for it] but where the root of the Tongue
was fixed I observed certain perforate bodies. On the crown of the Head there
stood up some feathers elevated above the rest, imitating a Crest. The bag
which hangs down under the Bill, and which makes the Pelecan greatly different
from other birds, is membranaceous, which it sometimes contracts and draws up
so to the Bill, that it is scarce conspicuous, other times it suffers to be so
dilated as to receive and contain many (Faber says thirty) pounds of water:
The membrane being so stretched and distended, that it appears transparent, many
fibers and veins running up and down through it. I wondered most (they are
Fabers words) when the Bill being opened very wide, I saw the whole head of a
man of great stature received in that vast gulf of the He so calls this bag
under the Bill.
Craw. In the Head I discovered two manifest but small holes reaching to the
brain, which served for smelling. Wanting a Tongue it must make that uncouth
sound, like the braying of an Ass, by the help of its Larynx only. I heard not
this, but the Keeper of this Bird, that carried it up and down to show, when he
provoked it, striking it on the Bill, and the Bird seemed angry, and ready to
peck or strike with its Bill, so that it would sometimes catch hold of his
hand, it made a noise somewhat like the cry of a Goose, and that a small and
hoarse one.

The noble Lord Jo. Carolus Schaad related to me, that a great while since
there were three Pelecans shot in the River Danow running through Bavaria, two
of which were killed, the third brought alive to the Duke of Bavaria's Court,
where it lived forty years. It was much delighted in the company and
conversation of men, and in Music both Vocal and Instrumental. For it would
willingly stand by those that sung or sounded the Trumpet, and stretching out
its Head, and turning its Ear to the Music, listened very attentively to that
sweet harmony, though its own voice is said to be like the braying of an Ass.
This confirms what we read in Aldrovand of the age of the Pelecan. which was
kept fifty years at Mechlin, and was verily believed to be eighty years old.
Thus far Faber.

It is singular in this Bird, that its bones are pellucid, solid, without any
marrow at all within; and that the division of the Windpipe into two branches
is near about the middle of the stomach, which I never observed in any other
bird, says Aldrovand.

This bird feeds upon fish, as do all the rest of this kind. Faber saw it
swallow two fresh Hakes, that weighed about four pounds, whole.

Many of them frequent the River Danow, but breed not there. Bellonius says he
saw flocks of Onocrotali in Egypt: Olaus Magnus writes, that they are frequent
in the Northern Countries. Oviedus reports, that there is often seen a great
flock of them about Panama in the West Indies, where they breed on the adjacent
Rocks and Islandr. There are said to be of them likewise on the Caspian Sea. Of
old time it seems they have frequented the Coast of Italy about Ravenna, for
Martial has it, Turpe Ravennatis guttur Onocrotali. Matthiolus makes them very
common in the Seacoasts of Tuscany, especially about the Cape Argentaro, being
frequently found about Port Hercole, and the Lake of Urbicello, where the
Inhabitants call them Agrotti. What credit this deserves (says Faber) I know
not, this I know, that many of Matthiolus his Country men have scarce ever seen
so much as the Picture of an Onocrotalus, which if they were so common there,
would not sure be accounted such strange things as to be carried about to show
at Rome, and in other places of Italy.

CHAP. II. The Soland Goose: Anser Bassanus.
IN bigness it equals a tame Goose. It is by measure from the tip of the Bill
to the end of the Feet thirty four inches long: To the end of the Tail thirty
nine. Its Wings are of an extraordinary length, for being extended their
extreme tips are seventy two inches distant.

Its Bill is long, straight, of a dark ash color, a little crooked at the
point, having on each side not far from the hook an angular Appendix or tooth,
like the Bills of some rapacious birds. Beyond the Eyes the skin on the sides
of the Head is bare of feathers, as in the Cormorant. The Palate, and all the
inside of the Mouth is black: The slit of the Mouth huge wide. At the angle of
the Os hyoides.
Upsilon-like bone is a very small Tongue: The Ears of a mean size: The Eyes
hazel-coloured. [In another bird they were yellow.] By a diligent search we
could find no Nosthrils, but in their stead a furrow or cranny extended on each
side through the whole length of the Bill. If one view them attentively the
edges of both Mandibles appear serrat, that it may more firmly hold the fish
that it catches. It has four fore-toes; for all its four toes are web'd
together, and stand forward. The Legs are feathered down to the knees: The Feet
and Legs, as far as they are bare, black: The Claw of the middle Toe is broad,
and pectinated on the inside as in Herons. The Plumage is like that of a Goose.
The color of the old ones that have moulted their Chicken-feathers is all over
white, excepting the greater quil-feathers of the Wings, which are black, and
the top of the head, which with age grows yellow. The young ones are
parti-colored of white and dark brown or black, especially on the upper part of
the body. The number of quil-feathers in each Wing is about thirty two. The
Tail is white, about seven inches long, consisting of twelve feathers. The skin
is very full, sticking loose to the flesh.

The Bird we described was taken alive near Coleshil, a Market Town in
Warwickshire, not being able by reason of the length of his Wings to raise
himself from the ground, on which, I know not by what chance, he had fallen
down. The blind guts were very short: Scarce any footstep remaining of the
channel conveying the Yolk into the guts.

In the Bass Island in Scotland, lying in the middle of Edinburgh Frith, and no
where else, that I know of, in Britany, a huge number of these Birds does
yearly breed. Each Female lays only one Egg. Upon this Island the Birds, being
never shot at or frightened, are so confident as to alight and feed their young
ones close by you. They feed only upon fish, yet are the young Geese counted a
great dainty by the Scots, and sold very dear, so that the Lord of the Islet
makes no small profit of them yearly. They come in the Spring, and go not away
again before the Autumn. Whither they go, and where they Winter is to me
unknown.

CHAP. III. The Cormorant: Corvusaquaticus.
IN bigness it is not much inferior to a Goose. The color on the upper side
is dusky, shining with an obscure tincture of green; exactly like that of a
Shag. The Breast and Belly are white. Each Wing has about thirty
quil-feathers, the extreme tips whereof, as also of those of the second row,
are a little ash-colored. The Tail is extended beyond the Feet, being an
hand-breadth and an half long, when spread ending in a round circumference,
being concave on the underside, consisting of fourteen stiff hard feathers, not
being in any part covered with feathers incumbent on it either above or
beneath. The Bill is like that of the Shag, three inches and an half long,
hooked at the end; the upper Mandible black with sharp edges; the sides of the
lower Mandible compressed and broad. The Tongue small, and almost none. The
Eyes situate nearer the aperture of the Mouth than in most other birds, having
cinereous circles round the Pupil. The Legs are strong, thick, but very short,
broad, and flat, at least in the young ones. The Feet and Claws black, covered
with a skin not divided into perfect scales, but cancellated. It has four Toes
in each foot, all web'd together by a broad black membrane, and standing
forward, the outmost the longest, the rest in order shorter, The Claw of the
middle Toe is serrate on the inside. But what is especially remarkable in this
Bird, wherein it chiefly differs, the bigness excepted, from the Shag, is, that
the basis of the nether Chap is covered with a naked yellow skin or membrane,
like the Elks.

Its stomach is membranaceous, but its upper part thick and glandulous: Within
were bones of fishes which it had devoured, and also one fish entire; that was
a small Codfish; also many little, long, blackish worms of the figure of
Earthworms. Such like worms also Mr. Willughby found in the stomach of a young
one, which he got at Sevenhuys in Holland, where many birds of this kind build
upon trees. The Guts are long, having many revolutions: The blind Guts very
small: The Liver large, divided into two Lobes, the right one the bigger. It is
infested with Lice of a pale red color, having a great black spot in the
middle of their Backs.

They are wont (says In his Annotationsupon Recchus his Animals.
Jo. Faber) in England to train up Cormorants to fishing. When they carry them
out of the rooms where they are kept to the fish-pools, they hood-wink them,
that they be not frightened by the way. When they are come to the Rivers they
take off their hoods, and having tied a leather thong round the lower part of
their Necks that they may not swallow down the fish they catch, they throw them
into the River. They presently dive under water, and there for a long time with
wonderful swiftness pursue the fish, and when they have caught them they arise
presently to the top of the water, and pressing the fish lightly with their
Bills they swallow them; till each Bird has after this manner devoured five or
six fishes. Then their Keepers call them to the fist, to which they readily
fly, and little by little one after another vomit up all their fish a little
bruised with the nip they gave them with their Bills. When they have done
fishing, setting the Birds on some high place they loose the string from their
Necks, leaving the passage to the stomach free and open, and for their reward
they throw them part of their prey they have caught, to each perchance one or
two fishes, which they by the way as they are falling in the air will catch
most dexterously in their mouths. This kind of fishing with Cormorants is it
seems also used in the Kingdom of China, as Lib. 10. chap. 54.
Nierembergius out of Mendoza relates.

This Bird builds not only on the Sea-Rocks, but also upon trees. For (says a
certain Englishman mentioned by Aldrovand) I have seen their Nests on the Rocks
near the mouth of the River Tine, and in Norfolk upon high trees together with
the Herons. Which same thing we also have observed. For on the Rocks of
Prestholm Island near Beaumaris we saw a Cormorants Nest, and on the high trees
near Sevenhuys in Holland abundance. Which thing is worthy the notice-taking:
For besides this and the following, we have not known or heard of any
whole-footed bird that is wont to sit upon trees, much less build its Nest upon
them.

CHAP. IV. The Shag, called in the North of England, the Crane: Corvus
aquaticus minor sive Graculus palmipes.
IT is bigger than a tame Duck, weighing almost four pounds. Its length from
Bill-point to Tail end was two foot and an half. Its breadth the Wings being
spread forty four inches. Its Bill straight, slender, neither flat, nor
compressed sideways, but rather round, from the tip to the angles of the mouth
four inches long; the upper Mandible black, hooked at the end, the nether from
green of a pale yellow. It has a wide gape. The Tongue is small, and almost
none. The Nosthrils were not conspicuous, at least I could not discover any
that it had. The Eyes small, situate lower and forwarder than is usual in other
birds. Its body is small, flat and depressed like the dun Diverse: The upper
side of a black purplish color, or black, with a dark tincture of green,
shining like silk. The under-side is dusky, but in the middle of the Belly
inclining to ash color. Under the Chin it is white, behind the Vent blacker
than the rest of the Belly. The Tail is an hand-breadth and an half long,
composed of twelve feathers, hard and stiff, the middlemost being the longest,
and the outmost the shortest, so that being spread it seems to resemble an
hyperbolical circumference. Each Wing has thirty feathers in the first row.
This mark agrees also to the Cormorant.
The Wings when closed reach no further than the base or beginning of the Tail.
The Legs are short, broad, compressed, feathered down to the Knees. The skin of
the Legs is cancellated, not scaly. It has four Toes, all connected by
intervening membranes, armed with black Claws; the outmost Toe the longest, the
rest in order shorter. The soals of the Feet and backsides of the Legs are
black: The membranes connecting the Toes dusky. The Claw of the middle toe is
serrate on the inside. It has a huge, long, membranous stomach, which in the
birds we dissected was full of small fishes. It swims in the Sea with its Head
erect, its body almost immersed in the water. When a Gun is discharged at it,
as soon as it sees the fire flash, immediately it pops under water like a
Doucker, so that it is a very hard thing to shoot it.

It differs from the precedent, 1. In bigness, being much less: 2. In the
color of the Belly, which in this is blackish, in that white: 3. In the number
of the feathers of the Tail, which is this are but twelve, whereas in that they
are fourteen: 4. In that the claw of the middle toe in this is serrate, as in
Herons, in that only sharpedged. [Mr. Johnson gives the Cormorant a serrate
Claw, and denies it to this. Perchance herein there may be variety, Nature (as
they term it) sporting it self, and not observing constantly the same rule:] 5.
That in this there is not so much bare skin at the base of the Bill as in that,
nor of the same yellow color: 6. Lastly, in the slenderness and length of the
Bill.

This Bird also builds on trees: Its Eggs are long and white.

CHAP. V. * The Sula of Hoier Auctar. ad lib. 5. cap. 6. exotic.
Clus. near of kin to, if not the same with the Soland-goose.
FRom the bottom of the Neck to the Rump, measuring along the Back, it was a
Roman foot long. From the top of the Head to the Back were eleven inches. The
Neck was as much about. The length of the Bill (which was very sharppointed and
strong) was five inches and an half. The thicker part of the Bill, and that
about the Eyes was black. The compass of the body was full twenty four inches,
that is, two Roman feet. The Wings were more than a foot long; but the longer
feathers of the Tail did not exceed the length of seven inches. It had but
slender and infirm Legs, and those not more than two inches long, and wholly of
a black color, as were also the Feet, which were very broad, consisting of
four Toes, of which the outermost, and that next it (which were the longest)
consisted of three articulations, the third of two, the least of one, each
armed with a small claw, except the second, the Nail whereof is a little
broader than the rest, and serrate on one side; but they are all joined
together by a black membrane. The longer prime feathers of the Wings are all
black, as are also those three, which are longest, and lie uppermost, and take
up the middle part of the Tail. The rest of the body was covered with white
feathers, which yet in the Back were something yellowish, as if they were
strowed with clay or dust.

This Bird in many things agrees with the Soland-goose, yet in some it differs,
viz. the sharpness of the Bill, the black color about the Eyes, the smalness
of the Legs, and the black color of the middle feathers of the Tail. But I
suppose Clusius was mistaken in the number of the joints of the outer Toe, for
the outer and middle Toe in no bird that I have yet happened to see, except only
the Swift, do agree in the number of joints: Nor does the outer Toe consist of
three articulations, but four, the middle of three, the inner of two, and the
least or back-toe of one.

Clusius took this description from a dried bird, sent by Dr. Henry Hoier,
Physician in Bergen in Norwey, to Dr. Peter Pauw, first Professor of Physic in
Leyden. It is (he says) called Sula by the Inhabitants of the Islands
Ferroyer, where it is taken. Those Islands, Hoier writes in his Epistle to
Clusius, are said to be so called from the abundance of feathers there.

CHAP. VI. The Tropic Bird.
IT is of the bigness of a Duck, has a red Bill, about two inches long,
somewhat bending downward, and sharp-pointed. A line of black is drawn on each
side from the corner of the mouth to the back of the Head. The Belly is white:
The Back also is white, but variegated with transverse lines of black thick
set, which make it very beautiful to behold. The Wings are very long, yet each
single feather short, as in the Soland-goose. In the outmost quil-feathers the
one Web, i. e. that on the outside the shaft is black, the other or inner Web
white; in the next to these the middle part of the feather along the shaft is
black, the edges on both sides white; the next to these are all white; those
next of all to the body black, and longer than the rest. The Feet are black,
the Legs white: All the four Toes web'd together. In the Tail (if one may rely
upon the stuffed skin, or credit the relation of those those that sent it) are
only two very long feathers, of about eighteen inches, narrow, and ending in
snarp points. This description I took from the case of the bird conserved in
the Repository of the Royal Society.

It is called the Tropic-bird because it is found about the Latitude of the
Tropic circles, and no where else, so far as has been by our English
Travelers hitherto observed.

My honored and ingenious friend, Mr. Martin Lister of York, takes this to be
the bird described in the History of the Carribbee Islands in these words:
There are seen near these Islands, and sometimes at a great distance from them
in the Sea, certain birds perfectly white, whose Beaks and Feet are as red as
Coral. They are somewhat bigger than Crows: They are conceived to be a kind of
Herons, because their Tails consist of two long and precious feathers, by which
they are distinguished from all other birds frequenting the Sea. This, says
Mr. Lister, can be meant of no other than the Tropic-bird: But then it is wrong
described, with red legs, and a perfectly white body.

CHAP. VII. * The Anhinga of the Tupinambae a people of Brasil. Marggrav.
IT is an elegant sort of Mergi aquatici.
Diver. Its body (excepting the Neck) is of the bigness of a common tame Ducks:
Its Bill straight, not thick, very sharp, three inches long, the foremost half
both above and below having a double row of very sharp The word is Hamuli,
signifying little hooks.
teeth inclining backwards. Its Head is small, oblong, resembling a Serpents, a
little more than an inch and half long: Its Eyes black, with a golden circle:
Its Neck slender, round, a foot long: Its body but only seven inches. Its Legs
are short: The upper two inches long, and feathered; the lower scarce an inch
and half. It has four Toes, three turned forwards, joined together by
membranes, after the manner of Ducks or Cormorants, the fourth shorter,
extended sideways below, joined to the rest by a membrane; very sharp, crooked
Claws: A broad Tail, ten inches long, consisting of twelve feathers. The Wings
end about the middle of the Tail. The Bill is gray, and after its rise a little
yellowish. All the Head and Neck are covered with very fine feathers, to the
touch as soft and sleek as Velvet, on the upper side of the Head and Neck of a
color from gray inclining to yellow: Under the Throat and beneath the Neck of
a gray color, like the fur of those skins called Verhfelle, of which women's In
Germany the women wear great round furcaps as big and round almost as Turbants.
Caps are made, which fur they resemble both to the touch and sight. The whole
breast, lower Belly, and upper Legs are covered with soft feathers of a silver
color: The beginning of the Back with brown ones, each whereof has in its
middle an oblong spot of a whitish yellow color, so that it appears speckled:
The rest of the Back has a black Plumage. It has long Wings, at the Or their
beginning perchance he may mean near the ridge.
setting on covevered with the like short feathers as the beginning of the
Back. Then follows a row of half gray, half black ones, that is, on one side
the shaft gray, on the other black: But the prime feathers are black. The Tail
consists of black and shining feathers, whose ends are gray. The Legs and Feet
are of a color from a dark yellow inclining to gray. It is very cunning in
catching of fish. For after the manner of Serpents, first drawing up its neck,
it darts forth its Bill upon the fishes, and catches them with its Claws. I
have eaten of its flesh, but it is not much better than the flesh of a Gull.

SECTION III. Whole-footed Birds, having the back-toe loose, with a narrow
Bill, hooked at the end, and not toothed.
CHAP. I. * Of the Artenna of the Tremiti Islands: De Ave Diomedea.
THis Bird Aldrovandus sets forth for the Diomedea avis, induced thereto by
this argument chiefly, because the present Inhabitants of the Diomedean
Islands, called now Tremiti, do affirm thereof what Pliny of old concerning the
Diomedean Birds, viz. that they are found in no other place but in those
Islands. His description he partly borrows of Gesner, partly takes from a
Picture of the Bird.

They are (says he) of the bigness of a good corpulent hen, but have pretty
long Necks and Legs. Their color is dusky, or a dark ash, and (if I be not
mistaken) they have some white under their Bellies, as wild Pigeons sometimes
have. [My Bird on the under-side was almost wholly white.] Its Bill is very
hard, and hooked at the end like an Eagles, but not so much, of a bright red,
if I well remember. [I believe he did not well remember this, for the Bill in
my Bird was of a pale yellow, all but the hook, which was black.] Its Eyes
fair, of a fire-colour, not very great. For I did once see one, which being
smitten with a rod on the Head opened its Eyes and cried out, but shut them
presently again, not being able to bear the light of the Sun. And again: Their
color is not simply white (as Pliny writes) but inclining to cinereous, as in
Fulicae (he means a Bird of the Gull-kind) to which also he compares them.
Whether they have toothed Bills or not, I did not observe, but they have them
strong and pretty long. Thus far Gesner. Which notes (says Aldrovandus) do for
the most part agree exactly to my Bird, which had it not a hooked Bill, one
might not unfitly judge to be of the great Gull-kind: It does so resemble them
in the whole body, but especially in the Wings. The Feet are of the same color
with the Bill, as are the Legs also.

But this description is not much to be confided in, being partly borrowed of
Gesner, (who had it from the relation of a certain friend, who described it by
memory) partly took from a Picture, or a dried case of the Bird sent him out of
the Island. Those who happen to travel to the Islands called Tremiti, would do
well to enquire diligently concerning these Birds, or rather themselves procure
and exactly describe them, that so we may not be any longer without a true and
perfect history of them.

CHAP. II. The Puffin of the Isle of Man, which I take to be the Puffinus
Anglorum.
MR. Willughby saw and described only a young one taken out of the Nest, who
makes it equal in bigness to a tame Pigeon. Those which I saw dried in the
Repository of the Royal Society, and in Tradescants Cabinet, seemed to me
somewhat bigger. Its color on the Head, Neck, Back, and whole upper side is
dusky or black, on the Breast and Belly white. The Bill is an inch and half, or
it may be two inches long, narrow, black, and for its figure something like to
a Lapwings Bill, the upper Chap being hooked at the end, like a Cormorants. Its
base is covered with a naked skin, in which are the Nosthrils. From the
Nosthrils on each side a furrow or groove is produced almost to the hook. The
Head is blacker than the rest of the Back: The Wings long: The Tail an
hand-breadth long, and black. The Feet underneath black; above, the outer half
of each foot is black, the inner of a pale or whitish flesh-colors, so that the
middle toe is partly white, partly black. It has a small back-toe, and black
Claws.

For its extraordinary fatness its flesh is esteemed unwholsom meat, unless it
be well seasoned with salt.

At the South end of the Isle of Man lies a little Islet, divided from Man by a
narrow channel, called the Calf of Man, on which are no habitations, but only a
Cottage or two lately built. This Islet is full of Conies, which the Puffins
coming yearly dislodge, and build in their Buroughs. They lay each but one Egg
before they sit, like the Razor-bill and Guillem; although it be the common
persuasion that they lay two at a time, of which the one is always addle. They
feed their young ones wondrous fat. The old ones early in the morning, at break
of day, leave their Nests and Young, and the Island it self, and spend the
whole day in fishing in the Sea, never returning or once setting foot on the
Island before Evening twilight: So that all day the Island is so quiet and
still from all noise as if there were not a bird about it. Whatever fish or
other food they have gotten and swallowed in the daytime, by the innate heat
or proper ferment of the stomach is (as they say) changed into a certain oily
substance [or rather chyle] a good part whereof in the nightime they vomit up
into the mouths of their Young, which being therewith nourished grow
extraordinarily fat. When they are come to their full growth, they who are
entrusted by the The Earl of Darby.
Lord of the Island draw them out of the Cony-holes, and that they may the more
readily know and keep account of the number they take, they cut off one foot
and reserve it; which gave occasion to that Fable, that the Puffins are
single-footed. They usually sell them for about nine pence the dozen, a very
cheap rate. The same is reported of the French Macreuse, perch ance the same
bird with the Puffin.
They say their flesh is permitted by the Romish Church to be eaten in Lent,
being for the taste so like to fish.

Gesner, and Aldrovand following him, from the relation of a certain English
man, write, that they want hard feathers, being covered only with soft
feathers, or a kind of down: Which is altogether false, they being furnished
with sufficiently long Wings and Tail, and flying very swiftly. They say it is
a foolish bird, and easily taken. We are told that they breed not only on the
Calf of Man, but also on the Silly Islands. Notwithstanding they are sold so
cheap, yet some years there is thirty pounds made of the young Puffins taken in
the Calf of Man: Whence may be gathered what number of birds breed there.

CHAP. III. * The Brasilian Maiague of Piso.
MAiague, also received into the number of whole-footed, edible, but Sea
wildfowl, is of the bigness and shape of a Goose; not unlike to those great
black diving birds of our Country, having in like manner the end of their Bills
hooked and fitted for ravin: So that it seems to resemble Gesners The Cormorant.
Corvus aquaticus. It has a thick, round Head; shining Eyes; a long Neck,
decently bowed like a Swans. The whole Bird is of a dusky and blackish color,
only the forepart of the Neck adorned with yellow feathers. It lives in the Sea
about the mouths of Rivers: But builds its Nest and lays its Eggs on the shore.
It is a swift bird, swims and dives well, and cunning in avoiding and escaping
the snares of the Fowlers.

Its flesh is esculent, and good meat, especially if it be young, but because
it feeds always upon fishit is disapproved and rejected by some.

Whether this Bird has all its four toes web'd together or not Piso does not
tell us, therefore we have subjoyned it to those which have the back-toe loose,
although we suspect that it does rather belong to the former genus.

CHAP. IV. The Shear-water.
OUr learned and worthy friend Sir Thomas Brown of Norwich among the designs
and Pictures of many other birds, sent us also that of this, with a short
history of it as follows. The Shear-water is a Sea-fowl, which fishermen
observe to resort to their Vessels in some numbers, swimming swiftly to and
fro, backward, forward, and about them, and does as it were, radere aquam,
shear the water, from whence perhaps it had its name. It is a fierce and
snapping fowl, and very untractable. I kept two of them five of six weeks in my
house, and they refusing to feed, I caused them to be crammed with fish, till
my Servant grew weary, and gave them over: And they lived fifteen days without
any food. So far Sir Thomas. This Bird, according to the Picture of it, has a
great head like a Gull: Its upper part [Head and Back] were of a dark brown or
blackish: Its Chin, Throat, and Breast white: Its Feet of a flesh-colors: Its
Bill long, round, hooked at the end like a Cormorants, and blackish: Its Wings
long, when gathered up reaching to the end of the Tail.

SECTION IV. Of whole-footed Birds with the back-toe loose, having a narrow
Bill, hooked at the end, and toothed, called DIVERSE, in Latin, MERGI.
CHAP. I. The Goosander. Merganser, Ornithol. book. 16. chap 63.
Aldrov. Harle, Bellonii.
ITs weight was almost four pounds: Its length from the tip of the Bill to the
end of the Tail or Claws (for they were equally extended) twenty eight inches:
Its breadth, the Wings being spread, forty. It is long-bodied: Its Back broad
and flat. The Head and upper part of the Neck is of a very deep shining green,
almost black: The lower half of the Neck is of a glossie white. Yet the upper
side of the bottom of the Neck, the middle of the Back, and the interior
scapular feathers are black [the exterior are white.] The lower part of the
Back is of a pale ash color. On both sides near the Rump, and on the very Rump
and Thighs the feathers are variegated with transverse Or gray, for they are
made up as it were of innumerable little black points or specks.
dusky lines. The Tail is made up of eighteen feathers, wholly cinereous. Each
Wing has about twenty six prime feathers, the ten outmost black; the four next
also black, but tipped with white: The five succeeding white, with their bottoms
black: The remaining six or seven next the body white, with their exterior
edges black. In the second row of the Wing those incumbent on the white
quil-feathers are white from their tips to the middle, beneath black. Thence as
far as the bastard Wing all are white: But between those white ones and the
long scapular feathers some black ones intervene. Whence if you take the long
scapular feathers, which cover the Back, for part of the Wing, the Wings will
be (as Aldrovandus describes them) black toward the back, next white, with a
certain paleness; then black again, but more remissly; after that again white,
the extreme feathers at last being black. The whole under-side of the body
(excepting the Wings, which are white underneath) of a faint yellow or Isabella
color. The exterior feathers of the Thighs are elegantly varied with
transverse waved lines of a whitish and blackish color, alternately placed.

The Bill measured from the tip to the corners of the mouth exceeds the length
of a man's middle singer: The lower Mandible black; the upper along its middle
or upper part black, on the sides red; the tip being black and hooked, both
upper and lower toothed on both sides like a Saw, the teeth inclining inward.
The Tongue and Palate are yellow.

It has not a Crest properly so called on the Head, but the feathers are more
loose, and stand more staring upwards than ordinary, whence also the Head seems
to be bigger than indeed it is. The Ears are round; the Nosthrils large, the
Irides of the Eyes of a sanguine color. The Legs and Feet are of an elegant
red-lead color. The back-toe broad, with an appendant membrane. It has a huge
bony labyrinth on the windpipe just above the divarications and besides, the
windpipe has two swellings out one above another, each resembling a
powder-puff.

The Stomach is scarce musculous; out of it dissected we took a Roch and an Ed,
whence it is manifest, that the bird feeds upon fishes. It has a gallbladder.
The blind guts were two or three inches long, and full of Excrements.

The Dun-Diver or Sparlin-fowl: Merganser foemina. Mergus cirratus longiroster,
Gesn. and Aldrov.
The Sexes in this kind of bird differ extremely from one another in color, so
that both Gesner and Aldrovand do set them forth for different species, calling
the Female, Mergus cirratus longiroster major.

The Head of this (which we take to be the Female of the precedent) is of a
sordid red. The feathers on the Crown of the Head stand out somewhat, and seem
to bend backward in form of a crest or toppin. The Chin is white: The whole
Back of bluish ash color; the Fowlers call it Dun, whence this Bird also is by
them called the Dun Diver. The underside of the body is of the same color as
in the Male. The quil-feathers of the Wings also do not much differ as to their
colors. The Bill and Feet agree with those of the Male. The Wings in both
Sexes are short, and little for the bulk of the body; notwithstanding by the
very quick agitation of them, it flies exceeding swiftly near the surface of
the water.

The Stomach of this Bird is as it were a Craw and a Gizzard joined together.
The upper part resembling the Craw has no wrinkles or folds in its inner
membrane, but is only granulated with small papillary glandules, resembling the
little protuberances on the third ventricle of a Beef, called the Manifold, or
those on the shell of a Sea-Urchin.

CHAP. II. The Bird called at Venice, Serula: Mergus cirratus fuscus: Anas (ut
puto) longirostra Gesneri, Aldrov. t. 3. p. 281.
THis Bird is very common at Venice. In bigness it comes near to the common
Duck. All its Head and the upper part of its Neck are of a dark fulvous color,
but the crown of the head darker or blackish. It has a pretty long crest or
tuft on its head hanging down backward. The Back is dusky, or of a very dark
cinereous. The Throat for an inch and halfs space is white, below grisled of
black, white and red. The whole Belly white. The Bill from the tip to the
angles of the mouth three inches, slender, and of a round figure: The lower
Mandible wholly red, has in the end an ash-colored oval spot, the upper is of
a dark brown above with some mixture of green, red on the edges, hooked at the
end, and marked with a whitish oval spot: Both toothed on both sides along the
edges with teeth like those of a Saw inclining inwards. The Eyes of a sanguine
color. The Wings are very short and little for the bigness of the bird, having
each about twenty five or twenty six feathers in the first row. Of these the
outmost ten are black, the eleventh has the tip white, and the three next in
order still more, the following six have their upper halves white: The rest are
indeed white, but have their edges black, some on one side only, some on both.
Of the second row those that cover the white ones of the first are themselves
white half way. Above toward the base of the Wing is a great white spot,
beginning from the bastard Wing. The coverts of the underside of the Wing, and
the interior bastard wing are white; but those under the outmost quilfeathers
are dusky. The Tail is short, consisting of eighteen feathers. The Legs short:
The Feet red, or of a deep Saffron color. The Windpipe at the divarication
has such a vessel as the precedent, and besides above swells out into a
puff-like cavity. In the stomach we found a Mullet.

This Bird is not much more than half so big as the precedent: It differs also
in its color, its crest, the white spot below the bastard Wing, and other
accidents. We suspect the Bird described was a Female, and that its Male
represents the Goosander, though we have not as yet happened to see it; unless
perchance it be that whose skin stuffed we saw in Sir William Fosters Hall at
Bambergh in Northumberland, which had on each Wing a white spot, and two small
transverse black strakes. We cannot but wonder (if the Male of this Bird be
such a one as the Goosander) that among so many Females at Venice we should not
see one Male. Mr. Willughby saw and described at Venice another Bird of this
kind, perchance specifically different from this, under the name of Cokall; for
1. It was less: 2. It had no Labyrinth. This makes us doubt again concerning
the Sexes of these birds; for in others of the Duck-kind the Females have no
labyrinth; whereas in the dun Diver, which we take to be the female of the
Goosander we found a large labyrinth; and yet in this lesser Diver, called
Cokall, it seems there was none; so that we will not be very consident that the
Goosander and Dun Diver differ no more than in Sex. This Bird Leon. Baltner
calls Klein Merch, i. e. a little Diver.

Gesner besides these sets forth four or five species of this kind of birds,
whose descriptions were sent him by a certain German. But those descriptions
are so short, general, and obscure, that we cannot thence certainly learn what
birds the Author means.

CHAP. III. The Diver of the River Rhine.
Mergus Rheni of Gesner, Aldrov. tom. 3. page 275.
IT is in bigness equal to a Duck, and the most Duck-like of any of the Mergi:
Its body all over parti-colored of black and white: Its Bill and the space
about the Eyes black. On both sides the back of the Head are black spots: The
rest of the Head is partly black, partly dusky or cinereous. The lower or
forepart of the Neck with the Belly are of a white color, but varied here and
there with cinereous points or spots, which in the lower part of the Belly and
sides being drawn out in waved lines, make a very pretty show, and pleasant to
behold. The Legs grow backwards about the bottom of the Belly. The Feet and
Toes are dusky, the membranes on the inside black. The Tail black: The Wings
and whole back distinguished with several black and white spaces alternately.
Some call this Bird a White Nun.

I suspect that this Bird was no other than our Albellus, next to be described:
Only the bigness and want of a crest forbid it. Perchance Gesner might describe
it from the relation of others, or from a Picture. I am sure Leonard Baltner, a
Fisherman and Fowler of Strasburgh, who did very diligently observe, gather
together, and cause to be painted all the birds frequenting the Rhene
thereabouts, gives us no other bird of this kind but the Albellus, to which
also he gives the title of White Nun.

CHAP. IV. The other Albellus of Aldrovand, tom. 3. p. 279. the Mergus major
cirratus of Gesner, Aldrov. tom. 3. p. 276. We may call it with the Germans the
White Nun.
IN bigness it comes near to a Wigeon; weighing about twenty four ounces. From
the point of the Bill to the end of the Tail, or of the Feet it was by measure
eighteen inches and an half long: between the tips of the Wings extended twenty
seven inches broad. The Bill an inch and half, or near two inches long.

Its Head and Neck were white, excepting a black spot under the Crest (which it
has hanging down backward from behind its Head) encompassing the Crest, and
ending in an acute angle below, and another on each side extending from the
angles of the mouth to the Eyes. The Breast, Belly, and whole under-side is
purely white. As for the upper side, all the Back is black. The long scapular
feathers incumbent on the back are white. At the setting on of the Wing on each
side there is a crooked line of black, half encircling the Neck just above the
shoulders, and higher up the Neck, where the black we mentioned in the middle
of the Neck begins, there is another such like arcuate line on each side,
resembling half a collar.

The ten outmost quil-feathers of the Wings are wholly black; the tips of the
next ten are white, of the hindmost in order more than the foremost. Then
follow two half white, viz. on the outside the shaft, the other half being
black: The rest of the feathers are cinereous: The number of all twenty seven.
The feathers of the second row growing on the middle of the Wing are black,
only their utmost tips being white. Above, a broad and long spot or bed of
white beginning from the bastard wing reaches to the twentieth quil-feather.
The interior bastard wing is white. The side-feathers under the Wings
variegated with transverse waved black lines are very pleasant to behold. The
Tail is dusky, or between ash-colored and black, composed of sixteen feathers,
a quarter of a yard, or three inches and an half long, the middle feathers
being the longest, the rest on each side gradually shorter to the outmost.

The Bill is of a cinereous or lead color, [but at the tip of each Mandible is
a spot of sorbid white] thicker at the Head, growing slenderer by degrees
toward the point, narrower, and less than in the Duck-kind. The upper Mandible
hooked at the end, toothed on the sides: The Nosthrils oblong, open, at a good
distance from the feathers: The Eves of a dark color. The Legs and Feet of a
cinereous or lead color, the Toes being joined by a dusky membrane. The
foremost Toe and the back-Toe have lateral appendant membranes, reaching their
whole length.

The Windpipe at the divarication ends in a certain great, strong, bony
vessel, which we are wont to call a Labyrinth; whence proceed the two branches
tending to the Lungs.

This Bird has not two blind guts, after the manner of other Birds, but only
one short blunt one, [yet in one bird of this kind we found two.] The Windpipe
is fastened to the upper angle of the Merry-thought by a transverse ligament,
and then ascends upward to the Labyrinth. It feeds upon fishes.

The Albellus aquaticus of Aldrovand, as it seems to me, differs not from this
bird, for both the figure, and all the marks he gives of it, agree; only he
makes no mention of the crest, perchance it was a young bird he described.

There is in this kind also so much difference between the Sexes, that the
Writers of the History of Birds have taken the Male and Female for different
sorts. The Female is described by Gesner under the title of Mergus glacialis,
which Mr. Johnson Englisheth the Lough-diver. It was sent us by Mr. Dent from
Cambridge by the name of a Smew.

In the Female the whole Head and the Cheeks are red or fulvous: The Throat
white. On the beginning of the Breast above the Craw there is seen as it were a
collar of a darker or brown color: It has no Crest. All the upper side except
the Wings is of a dusky ash color or brown. About the middle of each Wing are
two transverse white lines. In other particulars it agrees well enough with the
Male.

It has a great Gall; oblong Testicles: The Guts have many revolutions. The
Stomach larger than in granivorous birds, less musculous, filled with fishes,
in the birds we opened.

SECTION V. Of DOUCKERS or Loons, called in Latin, COLYMBI.
CHAP. I. Of Douckers in general.
DOuckers have narrow, straight, sharp-pointed Bills: Small Heads, and also
small Wings: Their Legs situate backwards near the Tail, for quick swimming,
and easier diving; broad flat Legs; by which note they are distinguished from
all other kinds of birds: Broad Claws like humane nails. Of these Douckers
there are two kinds, The first is of such as are cloven-footed, but fin-toed,
having lateral membranes all along the sides of their Toes, and that want the
Tail; the second is of those that are whole-footed and Have the Tail.
caudate, which do nearly approach to those birds we call Tridactylae, that
want the back-toe. These are not without good reason called Douckers, for that
they dive much, and continue long under water, as soon as they are up dopping
down again.

CHAP. II. Cloven-footed DOUCKERS that have no Tails.
. I. The greater Loon or Arsfoot: Colymbus major, Aldrov.
IT weighed a pound: Was from Bill to Claws twenty three inches long: Between
the extremities of the Wings spread twenty three and an half broad. The Bill
from the tip to the angles of the mouth was two inches long. The feathers
investing the whole body were fine, soft, and thick: The Head and Neck brown:
The Back blacker: The sides and lower Belly dusky: The Breast of a silver
color. It wholly wants the Tail. Each Wing has about thirty quil-feathers: Of
which the outmost twelve are black; the tip of the thirteenth is white; and the
tops of the following in order more and more to the twentieth, after which the
next four are wholly white: The twenty fifth toward the tip is brown, and in
the twenty sixth the white ends. The lesser rows of Wing-feathers underneath
are white.

Its Bill is black, narrow or compressed sideways; about the angles of the
mouth and on the nether Chap yellowish. The Tongue long, and a little cloven:
The Eyes of an ash color with some mixture of red: Its Claws are broad like
the nails of a man, black on one side, on the other of a pale blue or
ash color: The outmost toe the longest. The Legs broad, flat, serrate behind
with a double row of asperities: The Toes are broad, bordered on each side with
appendant membranes, but not web'd together.

It has no Labyrinth on the Windpipe: That we described had a great Gall: A
large Stomach, almost round, and therein we found Sea-weeds and fish-bones.

. II. The greater crested or copped Doucker of Aldrovand, lib. 19. cap. 52.
BOth Mandibles of the Bill, where it joins to the Head, are tinctured with a
Saffron-colour. The Head is black on the crown, beneath cinercous; which
colors meet near the ends of the Eyes (which are yellow.) From the back of the
Head hangs down a tuft of black feathers. The upper part of the Neck is also
black, the remaining part of a middle color between Rusty.
ferrugineous and rose. The Breast and Belly are of a whitish ash color. The
Back and Wings black, but of these the ridges and extremes are white. It has
no Tail at all: The Rump from cinereous is black. The Legs, Feet, and Claws are
of the same make and shape as in the former.

. III. Of the Water-Hare, or crested Mexican Doucker of Hernandez.
THat kind of Duck [so he calls it] which Aristotle calls Colymbus, but Gaza
renders Urinatrix, the Mexicans are wont to call Acitli or the Water-hare. This
would be altogether the same with that described and delineated by some of the
later Writers, were not the Head adorned with a greater and black crest, the
Belly of a shining silver color, and the Neck beneath of a pure white, above
of a dark brown. It frequents Lakes, either swimming in the water or abiding
near it: For it can neither fly, nor conveniently walk on the Land, its Thighs
being so joined and as it were Coalitis. i. t. growing together.
united to the body, that they serve only for swimming, not for walking. It
feeds upon the fishes it catches, and they are its sustenance. It breeds up its
young among rushes and reeds; and exceeds not the bigness of our common Ducks.
The Male is somewhat longer-bodied, and has a larger neck and crest. The Bill
of the Female is shorter, black, and on both sides near the Eyes covered with
fulvous feathers, whereas the Males is with white. This is that Bird which the
Indians fabulously report to call forth or conjure up winds, when he perceives
the Fowlers aim to catch him, which blowing trouble the waters so that their
Canoes are overturned and the men drown, if they do not happen to kill him in
the shooting of five arrows out of a bow. They fancy that in his heart
dissected is or may be found a Jewel, useful for many things, and highly
prized, not to be consecrated to any but God. But these are idle stories and
lies, proceeding from the credulity of these people. Its flesh is not pleasant,
nor very wholesome, like that of other fenny birds, and therefore not to be
used for food by any one of a critical palate.

Between this and the precedent Doucker there is so little difference, that I
scarce doubt but they are the same.

. IV. The gray or ash-colored Loon of Dr. Brown.
THis Bird differs from the common Doucker, as well crested as not crested, in
the gray color of its body, being much rarer with us. The Picture represents
the feathers on the crown of the Head standing up in form of a crest or toppin.

. V. The greater crested and horned Doucker.
IT is something less than that described in the first place, but has a
thicker and longer Bill, approaching to a ferrugineous color. It is both
crested and horned, having long feathers standing out about the crown of the
Head and upper part of the Neck, black above, and red on the sides. The Chin
and space about the Eyes is white, bounded with red. The Neck is not so long as
in the first kind. The upper or backside of the Neck is partly blackish, and
partly shows something of red. The Breast and Belly are almost of the same
color with the spot we mentioned encompassing the Eyes, viz. white with a
mixture of red. On the Back some long downy feathers of a cinereous and a
reddish color are mingled with the black ones. The Wings are longer in
proportion than in the first, their ridges and almost all their quil-feathers
being whitish, else of a sooty color. [In the Bird we saw the Wings were of a
dusky or brown color, but the lesser quil-feathers were white, as also those
small feathers on the base or ridge of the Wing.] The Legs are not situate so
backward as in the first.

. VI. The Didapper, or Dipper, or Dobchick, or small Doucker, Loon, or Arsfoot:
Colymbus five Podicipes minor.
FOr the shape of its body it is like to a Teal, but lesser by almost a third
part: Of the weight of six ounces: From the tip of the Bill to the end of the
Claws ten inches and an half long: between the tips of the Wings distended
sixteen broad. Its Bill from the point to the angles of the mouth is one inch,
straight, sharp, almost like a Thrushes Bill, thicker at the Head, and
lessening by degrees to the point: The upper Chap black, excepting only its
very tip and sides, which are of a white or pale yellow, as is also the whole
lower Mandible. The Tongue is long, sharp like the Bill, and cloven. The
Nosthrils are a little remote from the feathers; The Eyes great, with
hazel-coloured Irides. The whole body is invested with a thick and soft Plumage
or down, especially on the under-side. Its color on the Back is a dusky or
dark brown, on the Belly a white, or rather silver-colour. The Chin white: The
Head and Neck darker than the Belly, lighter-coloured than the Back. The Throat
and sides of the Neck are a little red: The lower Belly of a sordid dusky
color. The Thighs have a little mixture of red. The Neck is slender, scarce an
hand-breadth long. Its Wings are small and concave: Each having about twenty
six quil-feathers: The twelve outmost are of a Mouse-dun, or black brown, the
interior to the twenty third parti-colored, the outer Webs being dusky, the
inner partly white, the white part being in the nearer to the body broader, in
the more remote feathers narrower. As for the lesser rows of Wing-feathers,
those above are black, those beneath white. It has no Tail at all, but yet
has the rump-glandules, though lesser than ordinary, out of which also springs
a brush or tuft of feathers, as in other Birds. The Legs are situate very
backwards at the end of the body, made rather for swimming than walking, (so
that it cannot walk, but with the body erect almost perpendicularly) compressed
or flat, of a sordid green color, serrate behind with a double row of
asperities. The soals of the feet are black. The Feet are divided into three
broad Toes, finned on each side with lateral membranes, having thin, broad,
blunt Claws like humane nails. Yet are the Toes joined together by intervening
membranes from the divarication to the first joint. It has also a small
backtoe finned in like manner on each side: Two blind guts of a moderate
length: No Labyrinth on the Windpipe: A membranaceous stomach: Strong
musculous Thighs, by the help whereof it swims very swiftly, diving down to the
bottom, and rising again at pleasure. From the make and conformation of its
parts it moves with more ease and expedition under water, than either upon the
surface of the water, or upon the Land. So soon as it is risen above water it
holds up its Head, looks about it, and with wonderful celerity plunges it self
under water again. It can hardly raise it self up out of the water, but when it
is once gotten upon the Wing it can hold out flying a long time. The stomach of
that we dissected was full of grass and weeds. Bellonius says, that it feeds
most willingly upon fishes. Being roasted it smells very strong.

Both Gesner and Aldrovand describe two kinds of small Douckers, but they
differ so little one from the other that I suppose the diversity is rather in
Age or Sex than in Species.

CHAP. III. Whole-footed Douckers with Tails.
. I. The greatest speckled Diver or Loon: Colymbus maximus caudatus; Mergus
max. Farrensis five Arcticus, Clus.
THis is a singular kind of Bird, and as it were of a middle nature between
whole-footed birds with four fore-toes and with three. In bigness it exceeds a
tame Duck, coming near to a Goose. It is long-bodied, has a round Tail, and a
small Head. The upper part of the Neck next to the Head is covered with
feathers so thick set, that it seems to be bigger than the very Head it self.

The color of the upper part, viz. the Neck, Shoulders, covert-feathers of the
Wings, and whole Back, is a dark gray or dusky, pointed or speckled with white
spots, thinner set on the Neck, and thicker on the Back. These white spots are
bigger upon the long scapular feathers and coverts of the Wings, and smaller in
the middle of the Back. The lower part of the Neck, the Breast and Belly are
white. In a bird I saw that was killed in the Isle of Jarsey the Head was black
and also the Neck, which had a white (or rather gray) ring, about the middle of
an inch or inch and half broad, consisting of abundance of small white specks.
We counted in the two outmost Internodia. i. e. bones between joint and joint.
joints of each Wing thirty quil-feathers, but they are short, all black, or of
a dark brown. It has a very short Tail, of the figure of a Ducks, made up of
at least twenty feathers. Its Bill is straight, sharp, like that of the
Guillem, almost three inches long; the upper Mandible black or livid, covered
with feathers to the very Nosthrils, reflected a little upwards; the nether is
white. The Nosthrils are divided in the middle by a skin hanging down from
above. It is whole-footed, and has very long fore-toes, especially the
outmost. The back-toe is very short and little. Its Legs are of a mean length,
but flat and broad like the ends of Oars, the exterior surface being brown or
black: The interior livid or pale-blue. The Claws broad like the nails of a
man. The Legs in this bird are situate almost in the same plain with the Back;
so that it seems not to be able to walk unless erected perpendicularly upon the
Tail. It has no Labyrinth upon the Windpipe. The Liver is divided into two
Lobes, and has a bladder to contain Gall: Above the stomach the Gullet is
dilated into a kind of Craw, the interior surface whereof is granulated with
certain papillary glandules. The Throat is vast, loose, and dilatable. The guts
large, especially toward the stomach; The stomach less fleshy and musculous
than in granivorous birds.

The Bird described was shot on the River Tame in Warwickshire. I have seen
four of them, 1. One at Venice in Italy: 2. One in Yorkshire at Dr. Hewleys,
shot near Cawood: 3. A third in the Repository of the Royal Society: 4. A
fourth in the house of my honored friend Mr. Richard Darley in London, taken
in the Isle of Jarsey. They differ something one from another in colors. For
some of them have a ring about their necks, their Back, Neck and Head blacker,
and painted with little white lines: Others want the ring, and have the upper
side of their bodies more ash-colored or gray, varied with white specks, and
not lines. Perchance these are the Hens, those the Cocks.

That which Clusius described was bigger than a tame Goose, or at least equal
to it. For from the Neck, where it joins to the Breast, to the Rump it was two
foot long. The compass of the body round was more than two foot. The Wings were
fourteen inches long: The Tail scarce three: The Tongue almost three: The Bill
more than four: The Neck near eight, and somewhat more in compass: The Head
short, three inches broad: The Legs somewhat longer than three inches: The Feet
four inches wide. So far Clusius, Of that which Mr. Willughby described at
Venice the measures were as follows: The weight thirty six ounces: The length
from Bill to Claws thirty one inches; from Bill to Tail twenty eight. The Bill
from the tip to the angles of the mouth was almost three inches long: The Tail
two: The second bone of the Leg four and a quarter; the third two and an half;
the outmost fore-toe three inches and an half. The Tongue long, sharp, having a
transverse bed of asperities not far from the bottom, beneath which it is
toothed on each side, as this figure represents. In the Palate, on each side
the fissure, are five rows of prickles or asperities. The blind guts were three
inches and an half long. Hence it manifestly appears, that the bird described
by Clusius was bigger than ours. But perchance Clusius his was a Cock, ours a
Hen. For those I saw at Dr. Hewleys and Mr. Darleys were nothing at all less
than that of Clusius, sent him by Hoierus. But what Hoier writes of them, that
they cannot fly at all, is a mistake; for though they never breed in England,
yet in hard Winters they come over hither. I scarce believe they swim so far.
Whence it is manifest, that they not only fly, but make great flights.

. II. * Gesners greatest Doucker: Colymbus maximus Gesneri.
IN the Lake of Constance I hear there is taken, though but seldom, a certain
bird congenerous to the aforesaid, but bigger than a Goose, called Fluder, from
its uncouth fluttering motion on the surface of the water, for that it can
neither fly well, nor walk conveniently, unless it leans both upon Feet and
Wings, as do also the other Douckers, by reason of the position of the Legs so
turned backwards: That it has a long, sharp Bill: A loud, shrill cry, of a
singular kind: That it dives exceeding deep, so that it is sometimes taken
twenty yards deep under water, viz. with a Net, or an Iron-hook baited with a
fish: that they are commonly sold for two drachms and an half of silver a piece.

Leonard Baltner, a Fisherman of Strasburgh, describes this bird thus. In
bigness it equals a Goose: Its length from the point of the Bill to the end of
the Toes is one Strasburgh yard and an half. Its Bill from the point to the
Eyes is five inches long: The Legs from the Claws to the feathers (that is the
bare part) ten inches: The space of the Wings extended two yards and a quarter.
The Stomach small: It feeds upon fish: The Bill sharp: The Feet broad, the toes
web'd together. The upper side of the body is cinereous and black, the
under-side white. The Tail three inches long. It dives very far, a Pistol-shot
before it rises again. Its flesh is commended for good meat, and is of no
unpleasant taste.

This Bird if it be different from the above described, is I confess hitherto
to me unknown. Mr. Johnson, in his Papers sent us, writes, that he has seen a
bird of this kind without any spots in its Back or Wings, but yet thinks it not
to differ specifically, but accidentally.

. III. * Wormius his Northern Doucker, called, Lumme.
IT is common among the Norwegians and Islanders, who in their own Country
Language call it I suppose our English name Loon is borrowed of them.
Lumme. Carolus Clusius mentions it in his Auctarium, page 367. It is an
elegant bird, of the bigness of a Duck, with a black, sharp Bill, two inches
long. Its Head and Neck are covered with gray [cinereous] feathers, ending in a
sharp point, as if it had a Monks hood on its Back. Its Back and Wings are
black, sprinkled over with square spots of white, which yet are bigger on the
Back than the Wings. Under the Neck is a square oblong black spot like to a
shield, five inches long, and two broad, compassed on all sides with feathers
variegated of black and white as with a Zona, a border or fringe,
Girdle. The whole Belly and lower parts of the Wings are white. The Legs are
stretched forth beside the Tail [as if they grew out of the Vent] fitted not so
much for walking as for swimming, not slender, but flat and broad. Each foot
has three Toes, that are black, and joined together with black membranes,
armed with sharp and crooked Claws. The Thighs are also hid in the Belly. It is
of the Mergi [Diver] or rather Colymbi [Doucker] kind. In diving it can hold
its breath a long time, and no bird can plunge under water more nimbly and
speedily than it, as they experience who shoot them. For so soon as the powder
flashes, it presently ducks under water, before the bullet can come at it. It
builds its Nest so near the water, that it can, if need be, speedily cast it
self into it: But when it betakes it self again to its Nest, fastening its Bill
into the earth, it hangs its whole weight upon it, till it raises up its body,
and so by degrees reaches its Nest. It perceives before by a peculiar natural
instinct when there are about to fall great showers and shots of rain, and
fearing lest the floods should destroy its Nest and Young, its makes a
querulous noise and cry: On the contrary, when it presages fair weather, it
expresses its joy by cheerful acclamations, and another more pleasant note. It
lays yearly three or four Eggs as big as Geese Eggs, of a Prasini, i. e. a leck
color.
green color, and spotted. They say, that at set times of the year they depart
into hotter Regions, and return not until the Spring be well come on. Whence
they think it ominous for any one to hear the cry of this bird first fasting.
The Norwegians think it Nefuc.
a sin to kill or disturb this Bird, which they account holy. They sometimes
catch it in their Nests against their wills, and sometimes shoot it with Guns.
The Islanders because they eat it, take it either with a snare, or with an
angle-line. They fasten two stakes at the entrance of the Nest, upon which they
hang, and so accommodate the Snare, that the Bird going to her Nest may thrust
her head into it. Or they cross the Pool where she frequents at its narrowest
part with a fishing line, so that one on each side holds it, raking therewith
the surface of the water, till the bird fearing some danger toward dives down
to the bottom; then observing the place where she is rising up again by the
circles there made in the water, thither they direct and there hold a snare
fastened to the line, that coming up out of the water, she may put her head into
it, and so be caught by the Neck.

Its skin is used to defend the Head and Breast from the injury of cold, and
preferred before a Swans. This Bird Besler has figured in his Gazophylacium by
this title. A singular kind of exotic Water-Swallow. But it has nothing almost
common with a Swallow.

. IV. * The small black and white Diver with a short, sharp-pointed Bill.
THe Picture of this Bird was communicated by that worthy person Sir Thomas
Brown. It has a short Bill, a little bending at the end, [both Mandibles.] The
top of the Head, the Back, Wings, and in general the whole upper part is black,
excepting a transverse line of white in the Wings. The Chin, Throat, Breast, as
far as the middle of the Belly, and sides of the Tail white: The Tail short:
The Legs of a sordid green. The Toes web'd together. The Picture does not show
any hindtoe. This Bird (says Sir Thomas) is not usual with us; I have met with
but two of them, brought me by a coaster, who could give it no name.

SECTION VI. Of SEA-GULLS, called in Latin, LARI.
CHAP. I. Of Gulls in general.
GUlls are a whole-footed fowl, with an indifferent long, narrow, sharppointed
Bill, This is true especially of the greater Gulls.
a little crooked at the end; oblong Nosthrils; long and strong Wings: short
Legs, small Feet (for they do not swim much) a light body, but invested with
many and thick-set feathers, a carrion carcass, the fat that is sticking to the
skin, [as in other birds;] much upon the Wing, very clamorous, hungry, and
Feeding upon fish.
piscivorous.

These we divide into two kinds, First, The greater, which have Tails composed
of feathers of equal length, and an angular prominency or knob on the lower
Chap of the Bill underneath, to strengthen it, that they may more strongly hold
fishes. 2. The lesser, which have a forked Tail, and no Or but a very small one.
knob on the Bill. Both kinds may be divided into pied or parti-colored, and
gray, or brown.

CHAP. II. The greater Gulls with Tails of equal feathers.
And first such as are pied or parti-colored of white and cinereous or black.

. I. The great black and white Gull: Larus ingens marinus Clusii.
THis Bird, the biggest by much of all the Gulls we have hitherto seen, weighed
four pounds and twelve ounces. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Tail was twenty six inches: Its breadth from tip to tip of the Wings
distended sixty seven. Its Bill was yellow, compressed sideways, more than
three inches long, something hooked at the end, and like in figure to those of
the rest of this kind. The lower Mandible underneath bunched out into a knob,
marked on each side with a double spot, the lower red, the upper black. The
edges of the Eyelids round about were of a Saffron color. The Head great,
flat-crowned. Both Head, Neck, Breast, Belly, and Tail white. The middle of the
Back and the Wings, excepting the tips of the quil-feathers, were black. Each
Wing had about thirty four feathers in the first row, all black, with white
tips. Its Tail was six inches long, made up of twelve snow-white feathers: Its
Legs and Feet white: Its Claws black. It had a small back-toe; a wide Mouth, a
long Tongue, a large Gullet. It preys upon fishes: For out of its stomach
dissected we took a Plaise entire. It had a great Liver divided into two Lobes,
with a Gall adhering: Short and small blind guts: A musculous Stomach, and an
oblong Spleen.

In another bird of this kind, (which was I suppose a young one) both the top
of the Head and the Neck were parti-colored of black and white: The Back and
Wings paler than in that described. I suppose that this is the very same bird
which Clusius describes in the fifth Book of his Exotics, Chap. 9. under the
title of a Larus ingens marinus.
huge Sea-gull, though his description be not so full and exact, as being taken
only from a Picture.

This Bird we saw and described at Chester, being not rarely found on the
Seacoasts near that City. In the Feroe Islands it is called, The Swarth-back.

. II. The Herring-Gull. Larus cinereus maximus.
IT is well nigh as big as a tame Duck: From tip of Bill to the end of the Toes
twenty four or twenty five inches long, to the end of the Tail twenty two or
twenty three: Between the terms of the Wings stretched out fifty, and in some
fifty five inches broad. The weight was different in several birds, one
weighing only twenty six ounces, another thirty, another thirty four. The Bill
was yellow, two inches long, narrow, as in the rest of this kind, but pretty
deep: The lower Mandible not straight, as in other birds, but the upper edges
unequal or arcuate; underneath it bunches out into an angle or knob, on the
sides of which is a large spot of red. The Irides of the Eyes were of a lovely
yellow. The edges of the Eyelids in some yellow, in some, (perchance these
were Cocks) of a red-lead color. The Legs in some yellow, bare of feathers for
some space above the knees, in others white, or of a pale flesh-colors: The
hind-toe small: The Claws black: The inner edge of the middle Claw sharp. Its
Head, Neck, Rump, Tail, and whole under-side white: Its Back, the
covert-feathers of its Wings, and the quil-feathers also, except the outmost
five, of a dark ash color. The two outmost quils were marked with a white spot
near the tip, the outmost with a greater, the inner with a lesser, but the very
tips of both were black. The tips of the fifth and sixth were dusky. All the
rest had white tips. [These colors in several Birds vary something: Yet in
general the quilfeathers in all Birds of this sort are parti-colored of white,
black and cinereous.] The Tail was about five inches long, not forked, made up
of twelve feathers of equal length. The Wings when gathered up reached beyond
the end of the Tail, and crossed one another. It had a large Craw, a musculous
Stomach, in which were fish-bones. They say that is preys upon Herrings, whence
it took the name Herring-gull. It lays Eggs as big as Hens Eggs, sharp at one
end, whitish, but spotted with a few black spots.

In the young ones the Back and Head are ash-colored, with black spots, the
Bill black, but white at the tip.

This sort, though it be very common with us, yet has it not hitherto, that I
know of, been described.

. III. The common Sea-Mall: Larus cinereus minor.
THat which I described was a Hen-bird. It weighed a full pound of sixteen
ounces: It was from the beginning of the Bill to the end of the Toes fifteen
inches and an half long, to the end of the Tail sixteen and an half. The tips
of the Wings extended were forty one inches distant from each other. It is
something less than the greater Gull described by Aldrovand; like to the
Herring-Gull, but much less. Its Bill was like to those of the rest of this
kind, narrow, but deep, sharp-pointed, of a whitish color, but yellow toward
the tip. The knob under the lower Chap small, and scarce conspicuous, the upper
Chap something hooked or bending at the point. The Tongue cloven: The Nosthrils
oblong. The Eyes were great, and furnished with membranes for nictation; the
Irides of a pale hazel-colour: The Ears of a mean size: The Feet of a pale
green: The Claws black; that of the middle Toe sharp on the inner side: The
back-toe very small, yet armed with a Claw. The membranes connecting the Toes
reached as far as the Claws. The Head and upper part of the Neck were clouded
with brown spots, the nether part white: The Back ash-colored, but the
feathers covering the Tail white. The Throat and whole under-side of the body
was as white as snow: The Tail also purely white. The Shoulders and upper
covert-feathers of the Wings ash-colored, the coverts of the underside white.

In each Wing were about thirty quil-feathers; the first of which at the tip in
the inner Web had a black spot, and on the outer edge a black line, scarce
appearing, then followed a white bar about two inches broad, the rest of the
feathers to the bottom being black. The tip of the second was white: Under the
white a cross bar of black, half an inch broad, beneath that a white bar of an
inch breadth, the rest of the feather to the bottom being black, but the very
bottom ash-colored. The tip also of the third was white; from the tip the
upper half of the feather was black, the lower ash-colored. The three next had
also white tips, but the black part was still shorter and shorter, or narrower
and narrower in the following than the foregoing feathers, till in the sixth it
became scarce a quarter of an inch broad. All the rest of the quils were
ash-colored, with white tips. The Tail was six inches long, not forked, made
up of twelve feathers.

The Liver was large, divided into two Lobes: The Gall yellow: The Sweetbread.
Pancreas great: The muscles of the Gizzard not so thick and strong as in
granivorous birds; within which we found grass and Beetles. It is a gregarious
bird, frequenting Meadows, and the banks of Lakes. That which we described we
shot on the bank of the Lake of Bala in Merioneth-shire in Wales, commonly
called Pimble-mear, through which the River Dee, on which Chester is built,
runs, and they say mixes not its waters with those of the Lake.

It differs from the Herring-gull, 1. In that it is less. 2. In the color of
the Bill: From Bellonius his ash-colored Gull, 1. In that it is bigger: 2.
That it has a backtoe armed with a Claw.

. IV. * Baltners great ash-colored Sea-Mew, perchance our Pewit.
THe whole body (at least on the upper side is of a dark ash color or bluish,
as are also the Tail and lesser quil-feathers, for the greater are black. The
crown or top of the Head is black, with an obscure tincture of green (if the
Sure the Picture is false in this, for nothing of green appears in any Gull we
ever yet saw.
Picture deceive us not.) The Bill straight, of a red-lead color: The Legs and
Feet black: The Wings very long, and when gathered up reaching beyond the end
of the Tail. The length of the Bird from the tip of the Bill to the end of the
Tail was a A Strasburgh yard is not much above half a yard English.
Strasburgh Yard or more: The breadth from tip to tip of the Wings extended two
yards. The Leg so far as it was bare [from the feathers to the end of the
Claws] a quarter of a yard long: The Guts seven quarters. I suspect this Bird
was no other than the Cepphus of Turner and Gesner, that is, our Pewit: But
then the Legs are painted of a wrong color; for in the Pewit they are red: so
is also the Tail.

. V. Bellonius his ash-colored Gull, called in Cornwall, Tarrock.
IN bigness it exceeds not a common Pigeon, neither is it much different in the
shape of its body, save that its Head is bigger. It weighs seven ounces: Its
length from the point of the Bill to the end of the Tail is almost sixteen
inches. Its Wings extended were by measure full thirty six inches. Its Tail
almost five inches long, not forcipate, consisting of twelve feathers. The
under-side of the body was all purely white: As for the upper side, the Head
and Neck were white, save that at the Ears on each side was a black spot: The
lower part of the Neck was black: The middle of the Back and the Shoulders
ash-colored: The Tail white, only the tips of the feathers for about an inch
black: Yet the outmost feather on each side was all white. The four outmost
quil-feathers were above half way black: The two next to these had only black
tips, being else white. The seventh had only a black spot near the tip: All the
rest were white: In brief, the ridge, upper or forepart of the Wing extended
was all along black; which color near the Back was dilated into a large and
broad stroke, [or spot.] The Bill was more than an inch long, something arcuate
or bending downwards, especially toward the point, which is sharp, of a black
color. The lower Mandible, not far from the tip, bunched out into an angle
underneath, as in the rest of this kind. Its Legs and Feet were of ash or livid
color: Its Claws black. It has some rudiment of a hind-toe rather than a
perfect toe; for it is only a carneous knob without any Claw. The Legs also are
destitute of feathers for about the length of an inch above the knees.

The color of the Mouth within and the Tongue is like that of an Or Adams
Apple.
Assyrian Apple, as Bellonius has observed. The Tail is five inches long, made
up of twelve almost equal feathers: The number of quil-feathers in each Wing
twenty eight, or twenty nine.

This Bird is easily known and distinguished from all others of this kind, that
we have hitherto observed by its wanting the back-toe. It is common on our
Seacoasts.

. VI. The Pewit or Black-cap, called in some places, The Sea-Crow and
Mire-Crow: Larus cinereus, Ornithologi Tom. 3. page 73.
Aldrov. Also the Larus cinereus tertius, Aldrov. The Cepphus of Turner and
Gesner.
IT is about the bigness of a tame Pigeon. That which we described weighed
about ten ounces: Its length from tip of Bill to end of Tail was fifteen
inches: Its breadth thirty seven. Its Bill was of a sanguine color, bending
something downwards, from the point to the angles of the Mouth two inches long.
The Palate was of a red-lead color: The Eyes hazel-coloured, The edges of the
Eyelids red: Both upper and lower Eyelids toward the hind-part of the Head
were compassed with white feathers. The Head and Throat were black, but dilute.
The middle of the Back ash-colored: The Neck, Tail, Breast, and Belly white:
The number of quil-feathers in each Wing twenty nine: The tip and extreme edges
of the first were white, the rest of the feather black; the following feathers
to the tenth had black tips, yet with some diversity in several birds; else the
whole Wings were ash-colored. The Tail all snow-white, of about five inches
length, not forked, consisting of twelve feathers. The Wings gathered up reach
beyond the end of the Tail. The Legs were of a dark sanguine color: The
back-toe small: The Claws little, and black. The Males differ little from the
Females in color or outward appearance. Near Gravesend a huge number of these
birds frequent the River Thames.

We saw and described at Chester a Bird of this kind, which there they called
the Sea-Crow, which differed from the precedent in some accidents of less
moment, viz. The crown or top of its Head only was black, not its Throat. Each
Wing had twenty eight quil-feathers, the outmost of which had its tip and
exterior edge black; the three next in order had their outer Webs white, their
tips and interior edges black; the three succeeding had only their tips black.
[The third, fourth, and fifth, and in some also the second feathers have a spot
of white on their tips.] Of this kind also are those birds which yearly build
and breed at Norbury in Staffordshire, in an Island in the middle of a great
Pool, in the Grounds of Mr. Skrimshew, distant at least thirty miles from the
Sea. About the beginning of March hither they come; about the end of April they
build. They lay three, four, or five Eggs, of a dirty green color, spotted
with dark brown, two inches long, of an ounce and half weight, blunter at one
end. The first Down of the Young is ash-colored, and spotted with black: The
first feathers on the Back after they are fledged are black. When the Young are
almost come to their full growth, those entrusted by the Lord of the soil drive
them from off the Island through the Pool into Nets set on the banks to take
them. When they have taken them they feed them with the entrails of beasts, and
when they are fat sell them for four pence or five pence apiece. They take
yearly about a thousand two hundred young ones: Whence may be computed what
profit the Lord makes of them. About the end of July they all fly away and
leave the Island.

Some say, that the crowns of those Birds are black only in Spring and Summer.
A certain friend of mine (says Aldrovand) did sometime write to me from
Comachio, that the feathers on their Heads grow black in March, and that that
blackness continues for three months, viz. so long as they are breeding and
rearing their Young, and that the other nine months of the year they are white.
Which thing if it be true (for to me indeed it seems not probable) no wonder
that of one and the same Species of Bird described at several times of the year
there should be three or four made. Aldrovandus writes, that the description of
Gesner agrees in other things to his ash-colored Gull, disagreeing only in the
color of its Bill and Feet. But perhaps (says he) the color of the Bill and
Feet may vary in birds of the same species, which I will not easily grant,
unless they differ in Age or Sex.

. VII. * The greater white Gull of Bellonius, which we judge not to be
specifically different from our Pewit.
IT is, says he, lesser than the ash-colored Mew, and a veryhandsom bird, as
fair to see to as a white Pigcon, though it seem to be bigger-bodied; and yet
being stripped of its feathers it has far less flesh. It is as white as snow,
yet I suppose it should have been upon the Wings.
under the Wings it has somewhat of ash color. The Eyes are great, and
encompassed with a black circle. Near the region of the Ears on both sides is a
black spot. It is well winged, for the Wings exceed the Tail in length. Its
Legs and Bill are red, which they are not in the ash-colored Gull. It stands
straight upon its Legs, carrying the hinder part of the body more elevated, so
that the lower parts seem to be bent like a bow. The Bill is round and
sharp-pointed, the ends of the Wings black. This Bird in most things approachos
to our Pewit last described, it differs in the color of the crown, and in the
black spots about the Ears. Aldrovandus makes the lesser white Larus of
Bellonius to be the same with the Cepphus of Turner, that is, our Pewit. I
rather think it to be the Sea-Swallow, because he writes, that it frequents
fenny places, and tho banks of Rivers.

CHAP. II. Great brown and gray Gulls.
. I. Our Catarracta, I suppose the Cornish Gannet. Skua Hoier, Clus.
THe skin of this stuffed was sent us by our learned and worthy friend Dr. Walter
Needham, who found it hung up in a certain Gentleman's Hall. The Bird it self
living, or newly killed we have not as yet seen at hand. It is of the biggest
of this kind, equal to, or bigger than a tame Duck. Its Bill is stronger,
bigger, and shorter than in other great Gulls, black, hooked at the end, and
seemed to be covered with a skin from the base to the Nosthrils, as in
Land-birds of prey. Its Legs and Feet were black: Its Toes armed with strong,
crooked Claws, such as we never before observed in any whole-footed Fowl. The
color of the Back is a rusty cinereous or brown, like that of a Buzzards: Its
Belly and underside paler. The greater quilfeathers of the Wings are black: The
Tail also is black, about seven inches long, made up of twelve feathers, of
which the two middlemost are somewhat longer than the rest. The bottoms of the
feathers as well of the Tail as Wing-quils are white. The length of the Bill
from the tip to the angles of the Mouth was no more than two inches and an
half. The angular prominence on the lower Chap is small and scarce conspicuous.

Happening to read over the description of Hoiers Skua in the Auctarium of
Clusius his Exotics, page 367. I find it exactly to agree with ours, so that I
do not at all doubt but this Bird is the Skua of Hoier. Clusius his description
being more full than ours I shall here subjoyn.

The Bird sent me by Hoier was (says he) of the bigness of a great Gull, from
the bottom of the Neck to the Rump nine inches long. The compass of its body,
measuring under its Wings, was sixteen inches. The Neck from the crown of the
Head to the Back was seven inches long. The Head not very great, nor the Bill
flat, but rather long and narrow, on the part next the Head rugged and rough,
toward the point smooth, black, and crooked, almost like those of rapacious
birds or Gulls, not exceeding the length of two inches. The Wings were almost
seventeen inches long, reaching something further than the end of the Tail. The
four greater quil-feathers of the Wings were black, not white at the tip, as
Hoier wrote, unless perchance he had observed that mark in other birds of this
kind. From the quill or naked part I found them to be white half way up the
feather, as were also the three greater and uppermost Tail-feathers below where
they were inserted into the Rump, the upper part being black as in the
quil-feathers. As for the rest of the feathers investing the body they were of
a color between black and cinereous, but the black predominant, and did nearly
resemble the feathers of a bald Buzzard or Kite. The Legs were placed backward,
in the hindmost part of the body, at in most Waterfowl, above the Knee they
were very short, below the Knee down to the Foot almost three inches long. The
Feet were flat, having three Toes and a short Heel. The outmost Toe (next in
length to the middlemost) consisted of four joints; the middle (which was the
longest) of three; the inmost (which was the shortest) of two; and the heel or
back-toe of one. All ending in sharp, crooked Claws, and joined together by a
black membrane or cartilage to the very Claws.

The characteristic notes of this species are, 1. The thickness and its Bill.
2. The uniform black color of its Tail [as far as it appears beyond the
incumbent feathers.] 3. The bigness and crookedness of its Talons.

Hoier writes, that it preys not only upon fish, but on all kinds of small
birds.

The Cornish Gannet (as they told us) does constantly accompany the sholes of
Pilchards, still hovering over them in the Air. It pursues and strikes at these
fish with that violence that they caught it with a strange artifice. They
fasten a Pilchard to a board, which they fix a little under water. The Gannet
espying the Pilchard, casts himself down from on high upon it with that
vehemence, that he strikes his Bill clear through the board, and dashes out his
brains against it, and so comes to be taken. We saw many of these Gannets
flying, but could not kill one. They seem to be very strong birds, long-winged,
and fly swiftly.

. II. * Aldrovandus his Catarracta.
IT comes near to the bird last described. It (says he) exactly resembles a
Goshawk. [to which our Bird also answers very well, both in bigness and figure,
and in the color of the upper side of the body,] so that you can scarce
distinguish them; for on the upper side, like that, it is variegated with
brown, white and yellow mingled; on the under side it is all white, spotted
with brown, as the Picture shows. Aristotle also writes, that it is less than a
Hawk, and that it has a large and broad Throat or Gullet; which last note
agrees exactly to my bird, though indeed other Gulls also have a wide throat as
well as this. But I think Aristotle likened it to a Hawk, not only for its
bigness, but because it was alike spotted, and especially because it preys
after the manner of a Hawk; and for that purpose is endued with a Bill for the
bigness of its body very great and strong, sharp-pointed also, and the upper
Chap more than ordinarily hooked. It is an inch thick, and of a deep black. The
Neck also is pretty long: The Head lesser than in Gulls. The Wings in length
are even with the Tail. The Tail is a Palm long, and black: The Hips covered
with feathers to the Knees, which in other Gulls are not so, but bare a little
higher. Its Legs, Feet, and intervening membranes cinereous: The Claws black,
crooked, and small.

It differs from our Catarracta chiefly, 1. In the color of the underside of
the body: 2. In the color of the Feet: 3. In the smalness of the Claws. But
these things notwithstanding, perchance it may be the same. For Aldrovandus (as
I gather from his words) took his description from a Picture. But Painters are
not wont to be very exact either in expressing of the colors, or delineating
the parts.

This description also does in many things agree to that Gull which we shall
next describe under the title of the Cornish Wagel.

. III. The great gray Gull, which we take to be the Cornish Wagel, called at
Venice, Martinazzo, at Amsterdam, the Burgomaster of Groenland: An Larus
albo-cinereus torque cinereo of Aldrov?
IT weighed twenty two ounces; being stretched out in length from the point of
the Bill to the end of the Feet twenty one inches and an half, to the end of
the Tail twenty one: its breadth was fifty three inches. Its color as well in
the lower as upper side was gray, such as is seen in the back of a wild Duck,
or a Curlew, being mixed of whitish and brown. [Mr. Willughby gives also some
mixture of ferrugineous both to the brown, and to the ash color in the Wings
and Back.] The feathers of the Back are black in the middle, and ash-colored
about the edges. The Rump-feathers incumbent on the Tail are for the most part
white, only spotted in the middle with brown. The Chin is white. Each Wing has
thirty quil-feathers, all black. The tips of the lesser rows of Wing-feathers
in some are black, in some cinereous. The Tail is six inches and an half long,
consisting of a dozen feathers, the outmost tips of which are white, then
succeeds a cross bed or bar of black, of about two inches broad: The lower part
is varied with transverse bars of white and black, the white also spotted with
black.

The Bill is almost three inches long, all black, the upper Chap bending a
little downward, and as it were hooked: The lower between the angle and the tip
underneath bunches out into a knob. The Nosthrils oblong: The Eyes gray: The
Neck short: The Head great, which in walking or standing still it always draws
down to its shoulders, as do also other Gulls, so that one would think they had
no necks, of a whitish gray color. Its Legs and Feet are white, or white with
a little duskishness: The hind-toe small: The Claws black, that of the middle
toe sharp on the inside.

It has a huge Liver, divided in two: a Gall annexed to the right Lobe. The
Stomach more musculous than in carnivorous birds: The blind guts short and
little, yet turgid, and full of Excrement.

The Cornish men related to us for a certain truth, that this Bird is wont to
persecute and terrify the Sea-Swallows, and other small Gulls so long, till
they mute for fear; and then catches their excrements before they fall into the
water, and greedily devours them as a great dainty: This some of them affirmed
themselves to have seen.

The Larus albo-cinereus torque cinereo of Aldrovand is very like to, if not
the same with this. On the Breast and Belly it is of a color from white
inclining to cinereous, as also on the upper side of the Wings. It has a very
great Head, encompassed with a kind of ash-colored wreath, which yet reaches
not to the Neck behind, but turns up to the middle of the crown. Along the Neck
and Back it declines from gray to blue. The covert-feathers of the Wings are of
a color mixed of white and cinereous. The longer quil-feathers are black,
reaching an inch further than the Tail. The Tail is ash-colored, and black at
the end. The Legs, Bill, and Eyes red, yet the tip of the Bill black.

. IV. The Winter-Mew, called in Cambridge-shire the Coddy-moddy. Larus fuscus
five Hybernus.
IT weighs well nigh seventeen ounces. In length from the tip of the Bill to
the end of the Claws or Tail it was by measure eighteen inches and better. The
extremes of the Wings extended were forty five inches distant. The lower part
of the Throat about the Craw is a little dusky, else the under-side of the body
is all white. The Head is white, spotted with brown: The Neck brown: The middle
of the Back cinereous. The long scapular feathers varied with brown spots. The
Rump is white. The Tail more than five inches long, made up of twelve feathers.
The extreme tips of the Tail-feathers are white; then succeeds a black bar an
inch and an half broad, the rest of the Tail being white. The outmost
quil-feather of the Wing is of a dark brown or black color; the second
ash-colored on the inner side: In the following the black part is lessened by
degrees, till in the sixth and seventh the tips only remain black. The tips of
the eighth and all the following are white. The eleventh feather is wholly
cinereous, yet in the middle of the shaft, not far from the tip, darker: In the
two next is a brown spot. The succeeding have also their exterior edges black.
In the twenty third the blackness disappears again, so that the twenty fourth
and twenty fifth are wholly cinereous. Of the last or those next the body the
one half is black. The lesser covert-feathers in the upper part of the Wing are
of a mixed color of cinereous and black: Those on the underside of the Wing are
white.

The Bill is more than two inches long; from the Nosthrils to the end whitish:
The upper Mandible longer and crooked, the nether underneath bunches out into
an angle or knob, as in other great Gulls: The Tongue white, cloven, reaching
to the end of the Bill: The Eyes hazel-coloured, and furnished with nictating
membranes: The Ears great: The Legs and Feet of a dusky or greenish white: The
back-toe little, armed with a small Claw: the inner fore-toe the least: The
Claws black; that of the middle Toe sharp on the inner side.

The Guts were long [twenty eight inches] having many spiral revolutions: The
stomach musculous: The Liver divided into two Lobes: The Gallbladder large. It
frequents moist Meadows, Fens, and Rivers, and sometimes plowed Lands too many
miles distant from the Sea.

This Bird in many things comes near to the Larus major of Ornithol. Book 19.
Chap. 4.
Aldrovand, but differs from it in the color of the Eyes, Bill, and Feet, the
Bill and Feet in Aldrovands bird being yellow. But the description of this
greater Gull [Larus major] in Aldrovand answers exactly to that bird which
Leonard Baltner has painted under the title of Ein Winder-Meb: wherefore we
will here subjoyn his description.

. V. * The Larus major [Greater Gull] of Aldrovand, called by Leonard Baltner,
Ein Winder-Meb, that is, A winter Mew.
FRom the point of the Bill to the end of the Wings it was almost two spans
long: Had a very great and thick Head, parti-colored of white and cinereous:
Also a large full Breast of the same color, but more dilute, especially
toward the lower belly: A thick yellowish Bill, black at the tip, and very
sharp, in the upper Chap whereof are long Nosthrils. It gapes very wide. The
Pupil of the Eye is black; the Iris yellow, or shining like gold; the yellow is
encompassed with a circle of black, the black with a white, and lastly, the
white with a gray or ash color. The Wings are of a color mingled of white,
Cinereous.
gray, and brown, or chestnut, to the quils, which on the outside are dusky or
blackish, on the inside for the most part cinereous, and Reach beyond.
exceed the Tail by an hand-breadth: The longest of them are more than a span.
The Tail it self is four inches and an half long and better, all cinereous,
except a cross bar or border of black, near the end, of more than an inch
broad. The Thighs are cinereous, and near the Legs bare of feathers: The Legs
of a good length, and slender, as became a light bird, of a pale yellow color.
The Feet, Toes, and intervening membranes also yellow: The Claws black, short
and crooked: The back-toe conspicuous enough, armed also with a claw.

. VI. * Baltners great gray Sea-Mew, the same perchance with ours described in
the third place.
FRom the point of the Bill to the end of the Wings it was 1 of a Sirasburgh
Ell long: Between the tips of the Wings extended two Else broad. It weighed
scarce a pound. The length of its foot from the feathers to the Claws was a
quarter of a yard: Of its guts seven quarters. Its Bill and Feet were brown
[braunlecht.] The Picture represents them of a dark purple. The color of the
whole body was gray [grau,] I take this to be no other than the great gray Gull
described in the third place, but then the color of the Legs is mistaken.

. VII. * Aldrovands Cepphus.
It Is not like a Gull in any thing save the Bill and shape of the Legs and
Feet, for in other things it rather resembles a Duck. From the Bill to the end
of the Tail it is a span and half long, and because it has abundance of
feathers it seems to be corpulent, whereas the matter is nothing so. The Bill
is of a moderate both length and thickness, of a horn color, on the sides of
the Mandibles red, at the tip (which is hooked) black. The Eyes little, for the
most part red, encompassed with a white circle. The Head (which is something
less than in Gulls) together with the Neck, Breast, Belly, Thighs, and Rump are
variegated with white and Dusky,
brown spots, with a mixture of bay and yellow. The Wings are black, the ends
of the feathers being yellowish. The greater feathers of the Tail are also
black: The Legs and shanks greenish; the Feet and membrane connecting the Toes
dusky.

This Bird is as yet to us unknown, and therefore we have no more to add
concerning it. What the Ancients have left us concerning the Cepphus see in
Aldrovand. Turner thinks that bird which we call the Pewit to be the Cepphus of
the Ancients, as we have already told the Reader.

. VIII. The brown Tern: Larus cinereus minor Aldrov. called by Baltner, Ein
Kessler.
IT is about half so big as Bellonius his ash-colored Mew, for it scarce
exceeds a span in length. On the Back and Wings it is of an ash color, but far
deeper than in that, inclining to a blue. The quil-feathers of the Wings are on
the outside cinereous, but on the inside black; on both sides at The word
extremitatibus, which may as well signify edges or extremities.
the ends white. The Bill is slender [or small] for the proportion of the body,
a little bending and black. The crown of the head toward the hind-part black.
The Feet, Legs and membranes uniting the Toes of a Saffron-colour: The Claws
black. All the other parts purely white. This is the bird which Leon. Baltner
describes and paints under the title of Ein Kessler, of the bigness of a
Blackbird, with long Wings, short legs, a small Head, and black for the most
part; the Back and quills of the Wings brown, the covert-feathers cinereous,
yellow or Saffron-coloured Feet; a black, sharp Bill, moderately bending. It
flies up and down continually over the water in pursuit of Gnats and other
water-Insects. It feeds also upon fish. This is also the brown Tern of Mr.
Johnson, (if I be not mistaken) whose underside is all white, the upper brown:
The Wings partly brown, partly ash-colored: The Head black: The Tail not
forked. The Birds of this kind are gregarious, flying in companies.

. IX. * Marggraves Brasilian Gull, called Guaca-guacu, Gaviota of the
Portughese.
IT is of the bigness of a common Hen; has a straight, long, thick, yellow
Bill. Its Head above is covered with black feathers, as are also the hinder
moieties of the Wings and Tail. The Throat, whole Neck, Breast, and lower
Belly, and forepart of the Wings are white. It lays its Eggs in the sand,
which are like to a Hens for sigure, bigness, and color: They are indeed well
tasted, but the flesh of the Bird is nothing worth.

CHAP. III. The lesser Gulls with forked Tails.
. I. The Sea-Swallow: Hirundo marina, Sterna of Turner, Speurer of Baltner.
THe weight of this Bird was near five ounces: Its length from Bill to Tail six
teen inches: its breadth from Wings end to Wings end thirty two inches.

It is a small bird, slender, and long-bodied: Has a forked Tail, whence it
got the name of a Swallow: A black crown, the black being terminated by a line
drawn from the Nosthrils through the Eyes to the Neck, so that above the Eyes
the Head is black, under the Eyes white. The Cheeks, Chin, lower Belly,
underside of the Wings are all white: The Breast has something of cinereous
mingled. The Rump is white: The Back and upper side of the Wings are of a dark
ashcolour. Each Wing has twenty nine quils; the outmost ten whereof have their
outer Webs running out into sharp points, the rest their inner. The exterior
Web of the first or outmost feather is black, the shaft white, and of a notable
thickness: The tips of the following till the tenth, and the inside of all
white, and moreover half the interior Web of the four or five foremost. The
Tail is composed of twelve feathers, the outmost being half a foot long and
better, and having their exterior Webs from cinereous inclining to black: The
two middlemost scarce three inches long and white: The rest having their outer
Webs cinereous, their inner white.

Its Bill is long, almost straight, black at the tip, else red. Its mouth is
red within: Its Tongue sharp: Its Legs red; the back-toe small: The fore-toes
web'd together as far as the very Claws. The craw was large, out of which we
took a Gudgeon: The Gizzard full of fish-bones: The Guts twenty inches long:
The blind guts very short.

These Birds flock together, and build and breed on Islands uninhabited near to
the Sea-shores many together in the same quarter. In the Island of Caldey,
adjacent to the Southern shore of Wales, they call them Spurs; [a name (as
appears by Baltner) common to them with the Germans about Strasburgh,] and that
little Islet where they build Spur Island. In other places of England they
are called Scrays, a name, I conceive, framed in imitation of their cry: For
they are extraordinarily clamorous. In the Northern parts they call them Terns,
whence Turner calls them in Latin, Sternae, because they frequent Lakes and
great Pools of water, which in the North of England are called Tarns.

They lay three or four Eggs, either upon the bare ground, or in a Nest made of
Reeds. Their Eggs are like the great Gulls Eggs, though much less: The Young
are also spotted with black like theirs. They fly up and down over the water,
intent upon their prey, and when they espy a fish, they cast themselves down
with wonderful swiftness into the Water, and catching it up, fly away with it
in a trice. They frequent Rivers far remote from the Sea, as for example, the
Rhene about Strasburgh, where they were taken, described and painted by Leonard
Baltner, by the title of Ein Speurer, who tells us also that they build in
gravelly and sandy places by the banks of the River; so that if it happen there
be a flood in their breeding time, their Eggs are marred, and Nests destroyed.

This Bird for its long Wings, small Feet, forked Tail, continual flying, and
finally, for the figure of its whole body, is commonly, and not undeservedly,
called, the Sea-Swallow.

. II. The lesser Sea-Swallow: Larus Piscator of Gesner and Aldrov. Ein
Fischerlin of Baltner.
GEsner describes this Bird thus. They say that it is white, with a black
crown. It is lesser than the ash-colored Gull, with a black head like the
Sterna, Bill and Feet of a pale dusky color: Of swift flight, and when it
catches fish, plunging it self into the water, which the ash-colored Gull does
not.

Leonard Baltner describes his Fischerlin after this manner. It is a very
little kind of Speurer, that is, Sea-Swallow, even less than a Blackbird. It
has long ash-colored feathers: Bill and Feet of a Saffron-colour: A black
crown: The neither side of the body all white, in like manner the Tail. It
preys upon small fishes, whence it had its name. Its guts are half a yard long.
The Females are less than the Males. Their flesh is good to eat. The Picture
represents the Tail forked, and the point of the Bill black: The greater
quil-feathers of the Wings likewise black.

It differs from the greater Sea-Swallow chiefly in bigness, and the color of
the Bill and Feet.

Mr. Johnson thus briefly describes it. It has the Wings, Tail, and swiftness
of a Swallow: A red Bill; a black crown; brown Legs; a forked Tail six inches
long. In the color of the Legs he agrees with Gesner: but perchance the color
may vary with Age, or differ in the Sexes.

. III. The Scarecrow: Larus niger Gesneri; Tom. 3. page 81.
Aldrov. Ein Brandvogel or Megvogel of Baltner.
THis small Gull has black Bill, Head, Neck, Breast, Belly, and Back, (as far
as one can judge by the Picture) ash-colored Wings, reaching beyond the Tail.
The Legs have a light dash of red. About Strasburgh it is called Megvogelin,
that is, the May-fowl, because (says Baltner) it comes to them in the month of
May. Baltner describes and paints it under the title of Brand-vogel. It is
(says he) of the bigness of a Blackbird; has long Wings, small and short Legs
and Feet, partly cloven, a black Bill, of which color is also the whole body.
They fly in flocks for the most part, twenty or thirty together. They catch
Gnats, and other water-Insects. Their flesh is good to eat.

This is (Isuppose) the same with that which Mr. Johnson says, they in the
North call the Scarecrow; and thus briefly describes. It cannot abide the
presence of men: Its Head, Neck, and Belly are black; its Wings ash-colored;
its Tail a little forked: Its feet small and red. The Male has a white spot
under his chin.

. IV. Our black cloven-footed Gull.
IT is less than the Sea-Swallow: In length from the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Tail ten inches: in breadth from Wings end to Wings end twenty four. The
Bill from the point to the angles of the mouth is an inch and half long,
sharp-pointed, and black: The Tongue sharp, and slit at the end: The Head
black: The back and upper surface of the Wings of a dark cinereous: The Throat
and Breast black: But the feathers of the lower belly under the Tail pure
white. The number of quils in each Wing twenty seven: The Tail forked, made up
of twelve feathers, the outmost 3 inches long, the middlemost two and an half.
The outmost on each side is all white, all the rest ash-colored. The Legs are
bare up to the middle of the second joint: The Feet small, of a reddish black
color: The Claws black: The hind-toe little; the middle fore-toe the longest,
and next to that the outmost. The membrane connecting the inmost and middle
toes in the inmost is extended to the Claw, in the middle toe proceeds not
beyond the first joint; so the upper bone of the Toe is altogether free and
loose. That which joins the outmost and middle Toes, though it begins in both
from the very Claws, yet is it depressed in the middle, and as it were hollowed
into the form of a Crescent, whose horns are the Toes. The Claw of the middle
toe on the inside is thinned into an edge, Its cry is hardly distinguishable
from that of the Sea-Swallow. It builds among the Reeds, and lays three or four
Eggs, like to those of other Gulls, of a sordid green, spotted with black,
compassed with a broad black girdle about the middle. The blind Guts, as in the
rest of this kind, are very short. In the Stomach were Beetles, Maggots, etc.

This Bird comes very near to the black cloven-footed Gull of Aldrovand: But
its Tail is forked, of which remarkable note he makes no mention, which sure
could not have escaped him, if it had been in the birds he described.

It frequents Rivers, Mears, and Plashes of Water far from the Sea.

. V. * Aldrovands cloven-footed Gull, with longer Wings.
THis Bird on the Wings and Breast is all ash-colored, has very large Wings,
exceeding the Tail three inches in length, and toward the end black. The Tail
is short, and cinereous: The part under the Tail white: The Toes are of a good
length, and armed with notable Claws; the Legs short; both black. The Eyes very
black, as is the whole Head, and also the Neck, and the Bill beside, which is
pretty long, and a little crooked at the end.

. VI. * The other cloven-footed Gull of Aldrovand, with shorter Wings.
IT is almost of the same bigness with the precedent, but has far shorter
Wings, and on the contrary a much longer Tail. Its bigness is equal to that of
a Blackbird; its color cinereous; its Head black. Its length from the Head to
the Rump is nine inches: The Tail is a full Palm [hand-breadth] long. The
ridges of the Wings are white: The Bill black, slender, a little crooked. The
feathers under the Tail are white. The Feet are reddish, small, as in Swallows,
It has four Toes, with some rudiment of a membrane between them. The Claws are
black, and small, however crooked.

These Birds (says Aldrovand) because they do in the shape of their bodies
something resemble Swallows, are called by us Rondini marini.

. VII. Mr. Johnsons small cloven-footed Gull.
IT is of the bigness of a Blackbird, or something less. Its Bill is slender,
straight, sharp-pointed, black, round, having no knob in the lower Mandible.
The crown of a black or dark red. The sides and under-side of the Neck are red:
The Belly and whole nether side white: The Back and Wings brown, spotted with
yellowish spots. In the Wings is a transverse white line in the tips of the
feathers. The Wings are long; the Tail short. The Toes not web'd together, but
bordered on each side with lateral membranes scalloped, and elegantly serrate:
Whence when I first saw the skin of it stuffed at Mr. Johnsons at Brignal in
Yorkshire, from the make of its Feet I judged to be of the Coot-kind. But
afterward being informed by Mr. Johnson that it is much upon the wing, has
sharp Wings, and cries like a small Gull, differs also in the fashion of the
Bill, I changed my opinion, and think that it ought rather to be referred to
the Gulls, to which I have subjoyned it.

SECTION VII. Of Whole-footed Birds with broad Bills.
THese may be divided into the Goose-kind, and the Duck-kind. The marks of the
Goose-kind, of which we shall first treat, are a bigger body: Large Wings; a
long Neck; a large, and round-ended train: A white ring about the Rump: A
rounder Back, not so flat and depressed as in the Duck-kind: A Bill thicker at
the base, slenderer toward the tip, and not so flat and broad at the end as in
Ducks: To which might be added shorter Legs.

MEMB. I. The Goose-kind.
CHAP. I. Of the Swan: De Cygno.
. I. The tame Swan: Cygnus mansuetus.
THis Bird is much the biggest of all whole-footed Waterfowl with broad Bills.
An old one we made trial of weighed twenty pounds: From the tip of the Bill to
the end of the Tail was fifty five inches long, to the end of the Feet fifty
seven. The distance between the tips of the Wings extended was seven foot and
eight inches.

The whole body is covered with a soft, delicate Plumage, in the old ones
purely white, in the young ones gray. The quils of the greater Wing-feathers in
this Bird are greater than in the wild Swan.

The Bill in the young ones of the first year is of a lead color, having a
round nail as it were at the tip, and a black line on each side from the
Nosthrils to the Head. From the Eyes to the Bill is a triangular space, bare of
feathers, of a black color, the base whereof respects the Bill, the vertex the
Eyes. In old ones the Bill is red, the hook or nail at the end being black.
Above at the base of the Bill grows a great Lobe of tuberous flesh of a black
color, bending forward or downward. The space under the Eyes always continues
black. The Tongue is indented or toothed: The Feet of a lead color, bare a
little above the knee. The inmost Toe has a lateral membrane appendant. The
Claws are black.

The stomach is furnished with thick and strong muscles: The Guts have eight or
nine revolutions, and are large. The Windpipe in this kind enters not the
Breast Bone. Wherefore Aldrovand does not rightly infer that Aristotle never
dissected this Fowl, because he makes no mention of this ingress, and of the
strange figure of the Windpipe. For this is proper to the wild Swan, not
common to both kinds; we having not observed such a conformation of the
Windpipe in any of those tame Swans we have dissected. Aldrovandus therefore
thinking there was but one kind of Swan, viz. that which he dissected, did
erroneously attribute what was proper to that one kind, to the Swan in general.
We have opened two wild Swans, and in both have observed the Windpipe so to
enter the cavity of the Breast Bone, and to be there so reflected as
Aldrovandus has expressed both in words and figures: Of tame Swans we have
anatomized many, and in all have observed the windpipe to descend straight
down into the Lungs without any such digression or reflection.

It is a very long-lived fowl, so that it is thought to attain the age of three
hundred years: Which (says Aldrovandus) to me seems not likely. For my part, I
could easily be induced to believe it: For that I have been assured by credible
persons that a Goose will live a hundred years or more. But that a Swan is much
longer-lived than a Goose, if it were not manifest in experience, yet are there
many convincing arguments to prove, viz. that in the same kind it is bigger:
That it has harder, firmer, and more solid flesh: That it sits longer on its
Eggs before it hatches them. For, that I may invert Plinies words, Those
creatures live longest that are longest born in the Womb. Now incubation
answers to gestation. For the Egg is as it were an exposed Womb with the young
enclosed, which in viviparous Animals are cherished, and, as I may so say,
hatched within the body, in oviparous Animals without the body, by the warmth
of the old one sitting upon them.

The Swan feeds not upon fish, but either upon herbs growing in the water, and
their roots and seeds, or upon Worms, and other Insects, and shellfish.
Albertus writes truly, that its flesh is black and hard. As the Bird it self is
far bigger than a Goose, so its flesh is blacker, harder, and tougher, having
grosser fibers, hard of digestion, of a bad and melancholic juice: Yet for its
rarity serves as a dish to adorn great men's Tables at Feasts and
entertainments, being else in my opinion no desirable dainty. It lays seven or
eight Eggs, and sits near two months before its young ones be hatched.

They make use of the skin, the grosser feathers plucked off, and only the Down
left, and so dressed, as a defensative against cold, especially to cover and
cherish the Breast and Stomach.

. II. A wild Swan, called also an Elk, and in some places a Hooper.
IT weighs less than a tame Swan, not exceeding two hundred sixty five ounces,
or sixteen pound three quarters, Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Feet was sixty inches, to the end of the Tail fifty six. The figure of
the body is the same with the tame Swans: The color white, yet not all over so
white as the tame Swans: For the middle of the Back, and the smaller
covert-feathers of the Wings are cinereous: Sometimes also here and there a
brown feather is mixed with the white ones in the Back. Each Wing has thirty
eight quils. The first feather of the bastard-wing is longer than ordinary, as
in the tame Swan: The quils much less than in that. The Bill toward the tip,
and as far as the Nosthrils, is black: Thence to the Head covered with a yellow
membrane. [Mr. Willughby describes the Bill a little differently thus. The
upper Mandible is moveable, from the Eyes to the Nosthrils bare, and of a fair
yellow color, beyond the Nosthrils black. The lower Mandible is black, but the
membrane under the Chin yellow.] The Legs are bare of feathers a little above
the knees, of a dusky yellow, as are also the Feet. The Windpipe after a
strange and wonderful manner enters the Breast Bone in a cavity prepared for
it, and is therein reflected, and after its egress at the divarication is
contracted into a narrow compass by a broad and bony cartilage, then being
divided into two branches goes on to the Lungs. These branches before they
enter the Lungs are dilated, and as it were swollen out into two cavities.

On the sides of the Rump grow two huge glandules, out of which by a light
pressure may be squeezed a certain glutinous substance like to ear-wax,
wherewith she anoints and composes her feathers. But these glandules are not
peculiar to this Bird, though perchance greater and more remarkable in her, but
common to all. The Bird we described was a Female. The knot or bunch of Eggs
was situate far within the body, between the very Lobes of the Lungs. The
Windpipe enters the breast bone, and comes out again below the Merry-thought:
The stomach is very fleshy, and furnished with thick muscles. Above the Stomach
the Gullet is dilated into a bag, thick-set, and as it were granulated within
with many papillary glandules, excerning a kind of Saliva, which serves as a
menstruum to macerate the meat.

The Windpipe reflected in form of a Trumpet seems to be so contrived and
formed by nature for modulating the voice. Hence what the Ancients have
delivered concerning the singing of Swans (if it be true, which I much doubt)
seems chiefly to agree to this bird, and not to the tame Swan.

For my part, those stories of the Ancients concerning the singing of Swans,
viz. that those Birds at other times, but especially when their death
approaches, do with a most sweet and melodious modulation of their voice, sing
their own Naenia or funeral song, seemed to me always very unlikely and
fabulous, and to have been therefore not undeservedly exploded by Scaliger and
others. Howbeit Aldrovandus, weighing on both sides the Arguments and
Authorities of learned men, has (he says) observed them to be equal;
wherefore to cast the scale, and establish the affirmative, he thinks that
wonderful structure of the Windpipe, by him first observed, is of weight
sufficient. But this Argument though it be very specious and plausible, yet
does it not conclude the controversy. For we have observed in the Windpipe of
the Crane the like ingress into the cavity of the Breast Bone, and reflection
therein, or a more remarkable one; yet no man, that I know of, ever commended
the Crane for singing, or musical modulation of its voice. But if you ask me,
to what purpose then does the Windpipe enter into the breast bone, and is in
that manner reflected there? I must ingenuously confess, I do not certainly and
fully know. Yet may there be other reasons assigned thereof; as that which
Ornithol. t. 3. p. 19.
Aldrovand alleges in the first place, 1. That whereas sometimes for almost
half an hours space the Swan continues with her heels up, and her head under
water, seeking and gathering up her food from the bottom of the Pool or River
she swims in, that part of the Windpipe enclosed in the breast bone may supply
her with air enough to serve her all that while. So the use of it will be to be
a storehouse of air, for the advantage of diving and continuing long under
water. 2. This kind of structure does undoubtedly conduce much to the
increasing the strength and force of the voice. For that the wild Swan has a
very loud and shrill cry, and which may be heard a long way off, the English
name Hooper, imposed upon it (as I suppose) from its hooping and hollowing
noise does import.

Hence it appears how uncertain and fallacious a way of arguing it is from the
final cause. For though Nature, Gods ordinary Minister, always acts for some
end, yet what that is we are often ignorant, and it does not rarely fall out to
be far different from what we fancy: Nay we may be deceived when we think we
are most sure, and imagine it can be no other than what we have presumed.

Wherefore I make more account of the testimonies he alleges; as of Frederick
Pendasius, that affirmed he had often heard Swans singing sweetly in the Lake
of Mantua, as he was rowed up and down in a Boat. But as for the testimony of
George Braun concerning flocks of Swans in the Sea near London, meeting, and as
it were welcoming the Fleets of Ships returning home with loud and cheerful
singing, is without doubt most false: We having never heard of any such thing.

Masae. book 3. chap. 13.
Olaus Wormius of late confirms the opinion of Aldrovand, and the reports of
the Ancients concerning the singing of Swans, producing the Testimonies of some
of his familiars and Scholars who professed themselves to have heard their
music. There was (says he) in my Family a very honest young man, one Mr. John
Rostorph Student in Divinity, a Norwegian by Nation. This man did upon his
credit, and with the interposition of an Oath solemnly affirm, that himself in
the Territory of Dronten did once by the Seashore early in the Morning hear an
unusual and most sweet murmur composed of most pleasant whistlings and sounds:
Which, when as he knew not whence it came, or how it was made, for that he saw
no man near which might be the author of it, looking round about him, and
climbing up the top of a certain Promontory, he espied an infinite number of
Swans gathered together in a Bay of the Sea near hand, making that harmony; a
sweeter than which in all his lives time he had never heard. By some Islanders,
my Scholars, I have been told, that nothing is more frequent with them than
this harmony, in those places where there are Swans. This I therefore allege,
that it may appear that the report of those famous ancient Authors concerning
the singing of Swans is not altogether vain, but attested and proved by modern
experiments. Thus far Wormius. Let the Readers judge whether his witnesses be
sufficient.

This Bird has not as yet, that I know of, been described by any Author.

CHAP. II. Of the Goose.
. I. Of the tame Goose.
IT is less than a Swan, bigger than a Duck; weighing sometimes when fatted ten
pounds. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail, in that we
measured, was thirty five inches and an half, to the end of the Feet thirty
seven and an half: The Wings extended were sixty inches and an half over. The
length of the Neck from the tip of the Bill to the setting on of the Wings
seventeen inches. The Bill it self from the tip to the angles of the Mouth was
two inches three quarters long, to the Eyes three and an half. The Tail was six
inches and an half long, compounded of eighteen feathers, the outmost the
shortest, the rest by degrees longer to the middlemost, which are the longest.
The color in these, as in other tame Birds is various, in some brown, in some
gray, in some white, in some flecked, or parti-colored of white and brown. The
Bill and Legs in young ones are yellow, in old ones for the most part red. The
Bill is thick at the head, and slenderer by degrees to the point. Each Wing
has twenty seven quils or feathers in the first row. When it is angry it
hisses like a Serpent. It is very long-lived. A certain friend of ours of
undoubted fidelity told us that his Father had once a Goose that was known to
be eighty years old, which for ought he knew might have lived the other eighty
years, had he not been constrained to kill it for its mischievousness in
beating and destroying the younger Geese.

But of the Goose, a Bird so well known in all Nations, more than enough.

. II. The common wild Goose: Anser ferus.
IN bigness it equals a tame Goose; is for the shape of its body very like it,
and not much different in color. Its Head, Neck, Back, generally its whole
upper side, excepting the feathers incumbent on the Tail is of a dark gray or
brown. Yet the uppermost covert-feathers of the Wings are paler. The second,
third, and fourth rows of Wing feathers, and likewise the scapular ones have
white edges about their tips. The feathers also next the Tail are purely white.
The quils of the Wings are twenty seven in number, of a dark brown, almost
black. The Tail is six inches long, composed of eighteen black feathers, having
their tips and exterior edges white. The color of the underside of the body
is a light gray, by degrees lighter from the Head to the Tail, whereunder it is
perfectly white. The Bill is more than two inches long, from the Head almost
half way black, then of a Saffron color, the tip again being black. The upper
Mandible all along is toothed or indented with many rows of small teeth; the
nether only with one row on each side. The Tongue also has on either side a
row of Teeth in its bordering membrane. Its Legs and Feet are of a Saffron
color: Its Claws black or livid. Under each Eye is a whitish line. That we
described weighed seven pound and a quarter.

. III. The Bernacle or Clakis: Bernicla seu Bernacla.
IT is lesser than a tame Goose. Its length from the tip of the Bill to the end
of the Claws or Tail (for they are equally extended) is thirty one inches. Its
Bill black, much lesser and shorter than a Gooses, from the tip to the angles
of the Mouth scarce an inch and half. The Chin, Cheeks, and what of the
forehead touches the Bill is white, excepting only a line or bed of black
between the Eyes and Bill. The Neck and forepart of the Breast to the
Breastbone.
sternum both above and beneath is black. The under-side of the body is white,
with some mixture of cinereous, yet the lower feathers on the Thighs a little
above the Knees are black. The feathers next the Tail are white, those above
them black, else the Back is parti-colored of black and cinereous. The Tail
black: The quil-feathers of the Wings brown: The lesser rows of covert-feathers
of the Wings have white edges, then they are black for a good way, the
remaining part of the feather being ash-colored: which colors so succeeding
one another make a very fair show. The hind-toe is very small.

It frequents the Seacoasts of Lancashire in the Wintertime. This is the Bird
which Bellonius describes under the title of Cravant or Oye Nonnette, which he
thinks to be the Chenalopex of the Ancients. See Bellonius his description in
Ornithol. tom. 3. p. 166.
Aldrovand, which agrees exactly to this bird. We have sometimes thought the
Bernacle and Brent-Goose to differ only in Sex, not in Kind.
Species, but afterward more diligently considering and comparing both their
cases we changed our opinion, for there are remarkable notes by which they may
be distinguished, as will easily appear to whosoever will take the pains to
compare their descriptions. For in this the Chin and Cheeks are white, in that
the whole Head and Neck black, save only a black line on each side the Neck;
which in the Bernacle are wanting. Besides, the Bernacle seemed to us bigger,
and much fairer, for those cinereous and black colors alternately disposed in
the feathers of the Back and Wings make a very lovely show.

This also seems to be the same with the Brenta or Bernicla of Gesner, although
his description be not very exact. Perchance also the Baumgansz or tree-goose
of Gesner may be the same, although he make them different birds: For the
description of this he took from a Picture, as it seems, not exactly drawn:
Unless his Baumgansz be the same with Baltners, i. e. the Brenta, next to be
described.

What is reported concerning the rise and original of these birds, to wit, that
they are bred of rotten wood, for instance, of the Masts, Ribs, and Planks of
broken Ships half putrified and corrupted, or of certain Palms of trees falling
into the Sea, or lastly, of a kind of Sea-shels, the figures whereof Lobel,
Gerard, and others have set forth, may be seen in Aldrovand, Sennertus in his
Hypomnemata, Michael Meyerus, who has written an entire book concerning the
Tree-fowl, and many others. But that all these stories are false and fabulous I
am confidently persuaded. Neither do there want sufficient arguments to induce
the lovers of truth to be of our opinion, and to convince the gainsayers. For
in the whole Genus of Birds (excepting the Phaenix whose reputed original is
without doubt fabulous) there is not any one example of equivocal or
spontaneous generation. Among other Animals indeed the lesser and more
imperfect, as for example many Insects and Frogs, are commonly thought either
to be of spontaneous original, or to come of different seeds and principles.
But the greater Animals and perfect in their kind, such as is among Birds the
Goose, no Philosopher would ever admit to be in this manner produced. Secondly,
those shells in which they affirm these Birds to be bred, and to come forth by
a strange metamorphosis, do most certainly contain an Animal of their own kind,
and not transmutable into any other thing: Concerning which the Reader may
please to consult that curious Naturalist Fabius Columna. These shells we our
selves have seen, once at Venice growing in great abundance to the Keel of an
old Ship; a second time in the Mediterranean Sea, growing to the back of a
Tortoise we took between Sicily and Malta. Columna makes this shellfish to be
a kind of Balanus marinus. Thirdly, that these Geese do lay Eggs after the
manner of other Birds, sit on them, and hatch their Young, the Hollanders in
their Northern Voyages affirm themselves to have found by experience.

. IV. The Brent-Goose: Brenta.
IT is a little bigger than a Duck, and longer-bodied. The Head, Neck, and
upper part of the Breast are black. But about the middle of the Neck on each
side is a small spot or line of white, which together appear like a ring of
white. The Back is of the color of a common Goose, that is, a dark gray.
Toward the Tail it is darker colored: But those feathers which are next and
immediate to the Tail are white. The lower Belly is white: The Breast of a dark
gray: The Tail and greater quils of the Wings black, the lesser of a dark gray.
The Bill is small, black, an inch and half long, thicker at the head, slenderer
toward the tip: The Eyes hazel-coloured: The Nosthrils great: The Feet black,
having the back-toe. The length of the Bird from Bill to Tail was twenty inches.

I am of opinion that the Brant-Goose differs specifically from the Bernacle,
however Writers of the History of Birds confound them, and make these words
Synonymous.

We have seen both alive among his Majesty's Wild-fowl kept in St. James's
Park. The Case of the Brent-Goose stuffed we have seen with Mr. Johnson at
Brignal in Yorkshire, of the Bernacle in Sir William Fosters Hall at Bamburgh
in Northumberland: Mr. Jessop also sent us them both out of Yorkshire.

This is the Bird whose figure Aldrovandus gives us in the third Tome of his
Ornithologie, Chap. 37. which Brancion sent him painted out of the
Low Countries: The whole Head, and Neck besides a certain imperfect white
circle in its upper part, the Back and inside of the Thighs were black, the
Eyes yellow: The Bill shorter than in that of Bellonius [our Bernacle] and
thicker where it joins to the Head: The Wings from ash color inclined to brown.

Both the description and the figure of the Ring-Duck [Anas torquata] of
Bellonius agree in all points to this Bird of ours, so that I doubt not but
they are the same. See Aldrovands Ornithologie, Book 19. Chap. 37. It is
painted and described by Leonard Baltner under the title of Baumganss, that is,
Tree-Goose; and perchance may be also the Baumgansz of Gesner.

Mr. Johnson, in his Letters lately sent us, writes, as if he thought that this
were only the Female of the precedent, induced chiefly by this argument, that
the Fowlers observe these to company and fly together with them, as themselves
told him.

. V. The Swan-Goose: Anser cygnoides Hispanicus seu Guineensis.
THe Back, as in other Geese, is of a dark gray: The Belly white: The Throat
and Breast of a reddish brown. A line or list of dark brown runs all along the
ridge of the Neck from the Head to the Back. The Bill is black, from the root
whereof arises a knob or bunch over-hanging it, which in the Males and old
Birds is bigger than in the Hens and Young. A line or fillet of white between
the Eyes and Bill adorns the Head. The Tail is of the same color with the Back
and Wings, the tips of the feathers being whitish. The Feet are red, and in
some the Bill too. The back-toe is little. It is a stately Bird, walking with
the Head and Neck decently erected.

. VI. The Gambo-Goose, or Spur-wing'd Goose.
IT is for shape of body like to the Muscovy Duck, and of equal bigness: Has
long red Legs: A white Belly; the Back of a dark, shining, purple color. Its
Bill is red: Its Cheeks and Chin white. Its Head has a red Fleshy protuberance.
Caruncle. But what is most remarkable in it, is a strong Spur proceeding from
the first joint of the Wings: The like whereto Marggrave has observed in four
or five sorts of Brasilian Birds: But no Europaean Fowl, that I know of, has
them.

. VII. The Canada Goose.
ITs length from the point of the Bill to the end of the Tail, or of the Feet
is forty two inches. The Bill it self from the angles of the mouth is extended
two inches, and is black of color: The Nosthrils are large. In shape of body
it is like to a tame Goose, save that it seems to be a little longer. The Rump
is black, but the feathers next above the Tail white: The Back of a dark gray,
like the common Gooses. The Bottom.
lower part of the Neck is white, else the Neck black. It has a kind of white
stay or muffler under the Chin, continued on each side below the Eyes to the
back of the Head. The Belly is white: The Tail black, as are also the greater
quils of the Wings, for the lesser and covert-feathers are of a dark gray, as
in the common tame Geese. The Eyes are hazel-coloured, the edges of the
Eyelids in some, I know not whether in all, white: The Feet black, having the
hind-toe.

The title shows the place whence it comes. We saw and described both this and
the precedent among the Kings Wild-fowl in St. James's Park.

. VIII. The Rat-Goose, or Road-Goose: Brenthus fortasse.
MR. Johnson, who showed us this Bird at Brignal in Yorkshire, thus describes
it. It is less by half than a tame Goose, about two foot long; its Bill scarce
an inch, black of color, as are also the Feet. The top of the Head and part of
the Neck black: The feathers next the Bill, the Throat and Breast brown: The
rest of the under-side white: The upper-side gray, but the ends of the feathers
from gray darken into a brownish color, the edges changing into white, as is
usual also in the common tame Goose. The quils of the Wings, and the Tail are
black, but this has white feathers on each side. The Rump is also white.

It is a very heedless Fowl, (contrary to the nature of other Geese) so that if
a pack of them come into Tees, it is seldom one escapes away, for though they
be often shot at, yet they only fly a little, and suffer the Gunner to come
openly upon them.

SECTION VII. MEMB. II. Broad-billed Birds of the Duck-kind.
CHAP. I. Of the Duck in general.
THe Duck-kind have shorter Necks and larger Feet in proportion to their bodies
than Geese: Lesser bodies: Howbeit, the biggest in this kind do equal, if not
exceed the least in that. They have shorter Legs than Geese, and situate more
backward, so that they go wadling: A broader and flatter Back, and so a more
compressed body; and lastly, a broader and flatter Bill. Their Tongue is
pectinated or toothed on each side, which is common to them with Geese.

These are of two sorts, either wild or tame. The wild again are of two sorts,
1. Sea-Ducks, which feed most what in salt water, dive much in feeding, have a
broader Bill, (especially the upper part) and bending upwards, (to work in the
slem) a large hind-toe, and thin, (likely for a Rudder) a long train, not
sharppointed. 2. Pond-Ducks, which haunt Plashes, have a straight and narrower
Bill, a very little hind-toe, a sharp-pointed Train, white Belly, speckled
feathers, black, with glittering green in the middle Wing, with a white
transverse line on either side. For this distinction of Sea-Ducks and
Pond-Ducks we are beholden to Mr. Johnson.

CHAP. II. Of Sea-Ducks.
. I. * Wormius his Eider or soft-feathered Duck.
THere has been brought me (says Wormius) from the Ferroyer Islands a certain
sort of Duck they call there Eider: What name the Latins give it I know not, I
have thought fit to entitle it, The softfeathered Duck.
Anas plumis mollissimis. The Cock differs from the Hen in many things, though
the lineaments of the body are much what the same. The Cock in figure or shape
exactly resembles a tame Drake or Mallard; has a flat, black Bill, coming
nearer the figure of a Gooses than a Ducks; perforate in the middle with two
oblong holes, serving for respiration; of the length of three inches,
pectinated on the sides. From the Nosthrils through the crown of the Head above
the Eyes two very black spots or strokes consisting of soft feathers tend to
the hinder part of the head, divided by a narrow white line ending in the upper
part of the Neck, Upper part of the Neck.
which from green inclines to white. The whole Neck, the lower part of the
Head, the Breast, the upper side of the Back and Wings are white: The quils of
the Wings black, as also the whole Breast and Rump, The Tail, which is three
inches long, is also black: The Legs short and black: The Feet consist of three
black Toes, joined together to the ends by a black membrane: The Toes armed
with sharp, crooked Claws. They have a A back-toe he means.
Spur behind, situate at the beginning of the Leg, furnished also with the like
membrane and claw.

The Hen is of the same bigness and figure, but all over of one uniform color,
viz. brown, sprinkled here and there with certain black spots: in its other
lineaments and parts agreeing with the Cock.

They build themselves Nests on the Rocks, and lay good store of very savoury
and well-tasted Eggs; for the getting of which the neighboring people let
themselves down by ropes dangerously enough, and with the same labor gather
the feathers (Eider dun our People call them) which are very soft, and fit to
stuff Beds and Quilts. For in a small quantity they dilate themselves much
(being very springy) and warm the body above any others. These Birds are wont
at set times to moult their feathers, enriching the Fowlers with this desirable
merchandise. This same description Wormius repeats again in the third book of
his Museum, page 310.

. II. The Cutbert-Duck: Anas S. Cuthberti seu Farnensis.
IT is bigger than the tame Duck. The Male is parti-colored of white and black,
the Back white, the Tail and feathers of the Wings black. The Bill is scarce so
long as a Ducks: The upper Mandible a little crooked at the end, over-hanging
the lower. The Legs and Feet black; having a back-toe. But, what is most
remarkable in this kind is, that on both sides the Bill in both Sexes the
feathers run down in an acute angle as far as the middle of the Nosthril below
[under the Nosthrils.] The Female is almost of the color of a Hen-Grouse. This
Fowl builds upon the Farn Islands, laying great Eggs. I suspect, nay, am almost
confident, that it is the same with Wormius his Eider. I saw only the Cases of
the Cock and Hen stuffed, hanging up in Sir William Fosters Hall at Bambergh in
Northumberland. It breeds no where about England but on the Farn Islands, that
we have ever heard of. When its young ones are hatched it takes them to the Sea,
and never looks at Land till next breeding time, nor is seen any where about
our Coasts.

. III. Aldrovandus his black Duck.
IT is bigger than the common Duck. Its Bill is broad and short, yellow on both
sides, black in the middle, with a red hook at the tip. The Head and part of
the Neck are of a black green, or black, with a tincture of green: The Legs and
Feet are red on the outside, of a citron-colour on the inside: The Web of the
Foot and the Claws of a deep black. All the rest of the body is black, saving a
cross line of white in the middle of the Wings, and a white spot behind each
Eye. The feathers of the whole body are so soft and delicate as nothing more,
so that it might be not undeservedly called the Velvet-Duck. In the Stomach and
Guts, almost down to the straight Gut, I found small indigested fragments of
Cockle and Periwinkle-shells: But in the straight gut they were all concocted,
and reduced into a fine powder or sand. It is seldom seen with us, unless
driven over by a storm, but on the shores of Norway there are great flocks of
them, hundreds together.

This is that Duck which William Mascerellius, a Physician of Collen, sent to
Aldrovandus, giving it this title: The black Duck with a black, red, and yellow
Bill; whose figure, though not very elegant, we have borrowed. The description
of this Bird we owe to Mr. Johnson, with whom also we saw its Case stuffed.

. IV. The Sheldrake or Burrough-Duck, called by some, Bergander; Tadorna
Bellon. Vulpanser quibusdam.
IT is of a mean bigness, between a Goose and a Duck. Its Bill is short, broad,
something turning upwards, broader at the tip, of a red color all but the
Nosthrils, and the nail or hook at the end, which are black. At the base of the
upper Mandible near the Head is an oblong carneous bunch or knob. The Head and
upper part of the Neck are of a black, or very dark green, shining like silk,
which to one that views it at a distance appears black: The rest of the Neck
and region of the Craw milk-white. The upper part of the Breast and the
Shoulders are of a very fair orange or bright bay-colour. [The forepart of the
body is encompassed with a broad ring or swath of this color.] Along the
middle of the Belly from the Breast to the Vent runs a broad black line. Behind
the Vent under the tail the feathers are of the same orange or bay color, but
paler. The rest of the Breast and Belly, as also the underside of the Wings is
white: The middle of the Back white: The long scapular feathers black. All the
Wing-feathers, as well quils as coverts, excepting those on the outmost Bone^
joint, are white.

Each Wing has about twenty eight quil-feathers, the ten foremost or outmost
whereof are black, as are those of the second row incumbent on them, save their
bottoms: Above these toward the ridge of the Wing grow two feathers, white
below, having their edges round about black. The next twelve quils, as far as
they appear above their covert-feathers, are white on the inside the shaft, on
the outside tinctured with a dark shining green. The three next on the inside
the shaft are white, on the outside have a black line next the shaft, the
remaining part being tinctured with an orange color. The twenty sixth feather
is white, having its outer edge black.

The Tail has twelve feathers, white, and tipped with black, all but the
outmost, which are wholly white.

The Legs and feet are of a pale red or flesh-colors, the skin being so
pellucid that the tract of the veins may easily be discerned through it.

It has as it were a double Labyrinth at the divarication of the Windpipe.

Its flesh is not very savoury or delicate, though we found neither fish nor
fish-bones in its stomach.

They are called by some, Burrow-Ducks, because they build in Coney-burroughs:
By others, Sheldrakes, because they are parti-colored: And by others, it should
seem, Berganders, which name I find in Aldrovand, Book 19. Chap. 19.

We have seen many of them on the Seacoasts of Wales and Lancashire, nor are
they less frequent about the Eastern shores of England.

. V. The sharp-tail'd Island Duck of Wormius, called by the Islanders, Havelda.
IT is less than the broad-bill'd Duck, called by Gesner Schellent: From the
crown of the Head to the Rump of a foot and three inches length. Its Head is
small, compressed, having white feathers about the Eyes; on the crown black
ones inclining to cinereous. The Neck is of the same color: The Back down to
the Rump is black, with a mixture of Gilvo.
Isabella color. The Plumage on its Rump is mingled of black and white. Out of
the end of the Rump spring four sharp, black feathers; two of which are nine
inches long, the other two of the same color and figure, being but one third
of the former in length. The underside of the Neck and the Belly halfway are
black; the other half, and the sides, so far as covered by the Wings, white.
The feathers on the upper surface of the Wings are of a purplish black, on the
under side cinereous. The Bill is broad like the common Ducks, toothed; the
tip, and the part next the Head black, the middle part of an elegant
red-lead-colour: It is small and proportioned to the body. The Feet are Or
dusky, fascil.
brown; the Claws and membranes between the Toes black. The fourth (which
stands backward, and resembles a Spur) has a broad membrane annexed.

. VI. The Swallow-tail'd Sheldrake of Mr. Johnson.
THe Bill is short and simous, black at the root to the Nosthrils, and at the
end, the rest red: The Head and Neck all white, which color reaches to a good
part of the Breast, but further on the Back almost to the Scapulae, save that
there and behind the Ears there is a mixture of dusky Plumage: The Back and
Wings black, as is the Breast to the mid-belly; but the Wings are lighter than
the Back, especially the middle Pens, which incline to a russet. On either side
the Back from the Scapulae go down diverse long, sharp-pointed white feathers,
which make an area of about four inches long, and one broad: The rest of the
Belly and under the Tail is all white: The Tail has sixteen pens; the two
outmost all white, the four middle all black, and two of those longer than the
rest by three inches at least, and very sharp-pointed, the rest black on the
out edge, and white on the inner; the Legs whitish blue, with black Webs. She
is a great diver, and of the size of a Wigeon.

I should have taken this to be the Male, and that described by Wormius the
Female Havelda, in respect of some common notes in Tail and Neb; but that the
Female was with this of mine (as may be presumed, a pair only feeding together,
several days in Tees River, below Barnards-Castle) and did not much differ in
color. Thus far Mr. Johnson: I am almost persuaded that it is specifically the
same with Wormius his Havelda, differing only in Age or Sex, or perhaps both.

. VII. The great red-headed Duck: Seen and described at Rome.
IT is full as big or bigger than the tame Duck; weighing two pounds and ten
ounces Roman. Its Bill is broad, as in the rest of this kind, thicker and
broader at the base, slenderer, and narrower toward the point, straight, of a
light sanguine color. Each Mandible is pectinated or toothed with low teeth.
The Tongue is thick, broad, as is usual in Ducks, of a flesh color, cut in on
each side with black teeth, like those of a Sickle. The Head seems greater and
thicker than in proportion to the body. The crown of the Head is covered with a
curious silken Plumage of a pale red color. These feathers are longer than
ordinary, and more erect, so that they appear like a great crest or tuft. The
Eyes are red like the Bill, or rather of a red-lead color. Beneath the Eyes on
each side and under the Throat the feathers are of a deep Ruffus.
red. The whole Neck, the Breast, Shoulders and whole Belly are black. The
sides under the Wings, and the interior surface of the Wings white, with a
very slight tincture or dash of red. Each Wing had twenty six quils of the
same color also above, excepting only the six next the body, which are gray,
or ash-colored. Yet the tips of all are black, and in the four or five outmost
the exterior Webs also. In the middle quils the extreme tips are again white.
All the covert feathers are gray, excepting a white line in the uppermost ridge
of the Wing. The middle of the Back is of a gray or ash color, with a light
tincture of red. Of the same color are those long feathers growing at the
setting on of each Wing, and covering the Back: Above which appear in the Back
two broad white spots of the figure of the segment of a circle. The hinder part
of the Back to the very Tail is black. The Tail it self very short, composed of
sixteen feathers, their upper sides gray, their under white, with a light
tincture of red. The Legs and Feet, as in other birds of this kind, red, yet
here and there, especially about the joints, clouded with sable. The membranes
connecting the Toes, and all the soals of the Feet black. The Bird I described
was a Cock, and had a Labyrinth at the divarication of the Windpipe. The
Windpipe it self was greater at the head, slenderer in the middle, and above
the Labyrinth again swollen into a greater tube. Its Stomach or Gizzard very
large, and provided with very thick and strong muscles, filled with very small
stones mingled with grass. Its Liver pale; Gallbladder little, blind guts long.

This Bird I found in the Market at Rome, shot, I suppose, upon the Seacoast.
I never happened to see it else where, neither do I find any description of it,
or so much as any mention made of it in any book. Where it lives and breeds I
know not.

. VIII. The Scaup-Duck: Perchance the Fuligula of Gesner.
IT is somewhat less than the common Duck, about two foot long. Its Bill is
broad, and blue; the upper Mandible much broader than the nether. The Head and
part of the Neck are of a black green: The Breast and underside of the Neck
black, the lower part of the Neck has something of white mingled. The Belly is
white, with a sprinkling of yellow in its lower part, about the Vent of black.
The upper part of the Back is of a sooty or sable color; the middle white,
waved with transverse lines of brown; the lower, together with the Tail, brown.
The Tail is scarce two inches long: The Wings brown, adorned on the upper side
with white spots, having also a cross line of white. The Legs and Feet,
together with the Web and Claws, are of a dusky blue color.

This Bird is called the Scaup-duck, because she feeds upon Scaup, i. e. broken
shelfish: She varies infinitely in color, especially in Head and Neck, so that
among a pack of forty or fifty you shall not find two exactly alike: A thing
not usual in this kind.

This Bird we have not as yet seen: We owe this description and history of it
to Mr. Johnson.

. IX. The tusted Duck: Anas Fuligula prima Gesneri, Ornithol. c. 3. p. 217.
Aldrov. Mergus cirratus minor Gesn. Querquedula cristata five Colymbis
Bellonii, Aldrovand. p. 210. as we think. Capo negro at Venice.
THe Bill from the tip to the corners of the Mouth is about two inches long,
broad, of a pale blue color all but the tip, which is black. The feathers on
the forehead descend down the middle of the Bill in a peak or angle. The
Nosthrils are great, at a pretty distance from the Plumage. The Irides of the
Eyes of a yellow or gold color: The Ears small, as perchance in all
Water-sowl. The Head, especially the crown, of a dark purple inclining to
black, or rather black with some mixture of purple; whence at Venice, and
elsewhere in Italy, it is called, Capo negro. It has a crest or cop hanging
down backwards from the Head, of an inch and halflong. The color of the Neck,
Shoulders, Back, in fine the whole upper part is a dark brown, almost black.

The Wings are short, all the covert feathers black: The four outmost quils of
the same color with the body; the succeeding little by little whiter, the
subsequent than the antecedent. The second decad or middle quils are purely
white, all but their tips, which are black. The next six are wholly black. The
Tail is very short, composed of fourteen black feathers.

The nether side of the Neck and forepart of the Breast are black, the rest of
the Breast and Belly, as far as the Vent, of a white or silver-colour, the
lower the darker. Behind the Vent it is black. The lateral feathers covered by
the Wings when closed, those on the Thighs, and the under-coverts of the Wings
are white. The interior bastard-wing consists of six white feathers.

The Legs are short and situate backwards: The Feet of a livid or dark blue
color, the Web black: The Toes long.

The body is short, thick, broad, and something compressed or flat, weighing
about two pounds.

In the angle of the lower Mandible some have a white spot, which in others is
wanting.

The Windpipe has its labyrinth. The Liver is divided into two Lobes, having
a Gall annexed. The Gizzard is composed of thick muscles: Therein we found
nothing but small stones and Sea-wrack.

We saw a Bird very like this, perchance the same, in his Majesty's Pools in S.
James's Park.

Its Bill and Legs were of a lead-colour: Its Head black. Its Wings little, but
above the Wings the sides white. A long crest hangs down backward from behind
the Head. [To me, beholding the Bird at a distance, the whole Wings seemed
white, but perchance that color was proper to the covert-feathers, not common
to the quils.]

. X. The black Diver or Scoter: Anas niger minor.
IT is almost as big as the common Duck, but rounder-bodied. The whole body all
over is of a black or sable color. From the Shoulders in some birds spring
blacker feathers. In the Chin and middle of the Breast some ash-colored or
whitish feathers are mingled with the black. The Wings are of the same color
with the body, without any diversity of colors at all. The Bill such as in the
Duck-kind, yellow about the Nosthrils, else black; pectinated about the sides,
yellow within, without any bunch in the upper Mandible. Its Feet are black.
This description is of a Hen.

In the year 1671. I found the Male of this kind at Chester, killed on the
Seacoasts thereabouts, and bought in the Market by my Lord Bishop Wilkins his
Steward, and described it in these words.

It is something less than a tame Duck, short-bodied for its bigness, and
broad; all over black both upper and under-side: Only the Head had a dark
tincture of purple, and the under-side of the first, second, and third rows of
Wing-feathers inclined to cinereous. The wings were short; the quils in each
twenty five. The Tail more than an hand-breadth long, consisting of sixteen
feathers, the outmost of which were the shortest, the rest in order longer to
the middlemost, which were the longest, so that the Tail runs out into an acute
angle, more acute than I remember to have observed in other Sea-ducks; and each
single feather is very sharp-pointed.

The Bill in this Bird is especially remarkable, being broad, blunt, as in the
rest of this kind, of about two inches length, having no Appendix or nail at
the tip, contrary to the manner of other Ducks. The upper Mandible above the
Nostrils, next the forehead, bunches out into a notable protuberance, being so
divided in the middle as to resemble Buttocks, distinguished by a yellow
intercurrent line. Now the color of this upper Mandible is black about the
sides, yellow in the middle, the yellow part being so broad as to contain the
Nosthrils, and about an inch long. The Tongue is very great. The Eyelids
yellow. The Irides of the Eyes dark. The Legs and Feet dusky: The Toes very
long, and web'd together, so that its oars are broad and large. The shorter Toe
has a membranous border extant along its outside. This had no labyrinth on its
Windpipe. The blind-guts for a bird of this kind were very short: The Gall
great. It weighed two pounds and nine ounces: Its length from Bill to Tail was
twenty two inches: It breadth from Wings end to Wings end thirty four and an
half.

This Bird has not as yet been described by any Author extant in Print that we
know of. It abides constantly at Sea, gets its living by diving, and is taken
in Nets placed under water. In the wash in Lincolnshire it is found
plentifully. Its Case stuffed was sent us first by Mr. Fr. Jessop out of
Yorkshire: Next we got it at Chester, as we have said: Then Sir Thomas Brown
sent us a Picture of it from Norwich; and lastly, Mr. Johnson sent a
description of it in his method of Birds, in which description are some
particulars not observed by us, viz. that the Male has on the upper side some
tincture of shining green, and that in the Hen the Neck and Head on both sides,
as far as the Eyes, is white.

. XI. The Poker, or Pochard, or great read-headed Wigeon: Anas fera fusca of
Gesner, Aldrov. t. 3. p. 221. Penelops veterum and Rothalss of Gesner, Aldrov.
p. 218. Cane a la test rouge of Bellonius.
THat we described weighed thirty two ounces: From tip of Bill to end of Tail
was nineteen inches long, to the Claws points twenty one. It is bigger than the
common Wigeon, and for its bigness shorter and thicker. The lesser
covert-feathers of the Wings, and those on the middle of the back are most
elegantly variegated with dark brown and cinereous waved lines [or
ash-colored, with very narrow, waved, cross, dusky lines.] The Rump and
feathers under the Tail are black, so that the Tail is compassed with a ring of
black. The lower part of the Neck is likewise black, so that the forepart of
the body seems also to be encircled with a ring or swathe of black. The Head
and almost the whole Neck are of a deep fulvous or red color: the middle part
of the Breast white, the sides and lower part, and Belly all of the same color
with the Back, and varied with the like transverse undulated lines, but both
colors paler: Toward the Vent it is by degrees darker colored. The Tail is
very short, not exceeding two inches, made up of twelve feathers, of a dark
gray, the outmost the shortest, the rest gradually longer to the middlemost;
yet the excess is not considerable, so that notwithstanding it is not to be
reckoned among those that have sharp Tails. The quils of the Wings are about
twenty five, all of one color, viz. a dark cinereous, though if they be
carefully heeded, there will appear some diversity, for the tips of the
exterior and greater feathers are marked with black, of the middle ones with
white. The interior bastard-wing and lesser covert-feathers of the underside
of the Wings are white.

The Bill is bigger and broader than in the Wigeon. The feathers divide the
middle of the upper Mandible coming down from the forehead in form of a peak or
acute angle. The upper Mandible is of a lead-colour, but its tip black: The
nether is wholly black. The Irides of the Eyes are of a very beautiful color,
from yellow inclining to a sparkling red: The Feet lead-coloured: The membranes
connecting the Toes black: The inmost toe the least, having a membranous border
annexed to its outside. The back toe has likewise an appendant membrane or fin.

The characteristic note of this Bird, is one uniform color of its Wings,
without any feathers of different color in the middle of the Wing, as is usual
in most Birds of this kind.

In another Bird of this kind, (which we take to be the Female of this) the
Bill was black with an ash-colored spot of the form of a crescent a little
above the tip. The back feathers and coverts of the Wings had no such
transverse waved lines as those of the Male. In other points it agreed mostwhat
with the Male.

. XII. The lesser red-headed Duck: Perchance the Anas Filigula altera of
Gesner, Aldrov. p. 227. The Glaucium or Morillon of Bellonius: Capo rosso at
Venice.
IT is bigger than a Teal, and something less than a Wigeon. Its Bill two
inches and an half long, of a moderate breadth, of a dark blue color, paler
about the edges, and toward the tip. The very tip or nail is round and black.
The Nosthrils small, long, situate almost in the middle of the Bill. The Irides
of the Eyes of a cream or Ivory color. The Head is pretty great, all over red:
But in the very angle of the lower Mandible is a small white spot. The Neck, as
in others of this kind, is short, encompassed in the middle with a ring of
brown. The whole Back and covert-feathers of the Wings are of a dark brown or
dusky color. All the quils of the Wings (which are in each about twenty six)
except the three or four outmost, and the three or four inmost are white with
brown tips, so that when the Wing is spread they represent a broad transverse
line of white. The Tail is very short, the middle feathers which are the
longest being about two inches and a quarter in length, the outmost shorter; of
a brown or dusky color, the number of feathers fourteen. The Breast below the
ring down to the Merry-thought is red, which color above also reaches to the
middle of the Shoulders. The rest of the Breast and the upper Belly is white,
the lower to the Vent dusky or dark gray. The feathers under the Tail are
white, those long ones on the thighs red. The Legs and Feet black, especially
the joints and membranes connecting the Toes. The back-toe has a broad
appendant membrane or sin, as in the rest of this kind. The Windpipe has a
labyrinth at the divarication, and besides above swells out into a puff-like
cavity. The stomach is musculous. These Birds vary something in the color,
especially of their Wings.

A Bird of this kind weighed twenty one ounces; was in length from the tip of
the Bill to the end of the toes seventeen inches and an half; in breadth
between the extremes of the Wings expanded twenty six and three quarters: The
length of the guts forty two inches.

The description of the Anas Fuligula altera of Gesner in Ornithol. p. 227.
Aldrovand agrees well to this Bird: So does also the description and figure of
the Morillous or Glaucium of Bellonius, especially in the color of the Eyes.
But because there is some difference, we will subjoyn his description that the
Reader himself may judge.

The Glaucium or Morillon of Bellonius.
There is (says he) also another Waterfowl, called in our common speech
Morillon, very like to a Duck, and of the same bigness, having its Bill cut in
the edge like a Saw; its Legs and Feet red on the inside, dusky on the out: Its
whole Head to the middle of the Neck of a deep ferrugineous. Below the
ferrugineous a whitish circle encompasseth the Neck. The Breast is of an
ash color, the Belly white: The Back and Wings black. But in these, if they be
stretched out appear seven white feathers, which render the Wings parti-colored
as in a Pie. The rest of the Wings, as also the Tail (resembling that of a
Corvus aquaticus.
Cormorant) are black. Getting its food for the most part out of the water, it
lives upon little vermin and creeping things, which it finds in the bottom of
the water: Diving also, and continuing long under water, it catches small
fishes, and water Millepedes or Lice, which the French call les Escrouelles. It
feeds also upon the seeds of herbs which grow on River-banks, and upon young
Cray-fish and Snails. It has a Tongue so fleshy, that near the root it seems
double: A broad Breast, like the rest of the Duck-kind: Short Legs, stretched
out backwards, like the Diverse [Mergi.] In the inward parts this only is
peculiar to it, that no Gall appears in it. The Liver is divided into two
Lobes, one whereof is incumbent on the stomach, the other on the guts.

This description in most notes, the magnitude excepted, agrees to our Bird.
For though Bellonius in his description affirms, that the ring about the Neck
is white, yet in his figure he represents it black.

. XIII. The Golden-eye: Anas platyrhynchos mas, Aldrov. p. 225. Clangula
Gesneri, Aldrov. p. 224. That is, four eyes.
Quattro occhii Italis: Weisser Dritvogel of the Germans about Strasburgh.
IT is thick and short-bodied; and has a great head. Its Neck, as in the rest
of this kind, is short: Its Bill broad indeed, but short; more elevated, and
not so flat or depressed as in the rest of this kind, thicker at the head,
lesser and narrower toward the tipl all black, from the tip to the angles of
the mouth an inch and three quarters long. The Head is of a very dark green, or
of a changeable color of black, purple, and green, as it is variously exposed
to the light, shining like silk. At the corner of the Mouth on each side is a
round white spot, as big as a three pence, whence it got its name Quattr'
occhii in Italian. The Irides of the Eyes are of a lovely yellow or
gold-colour. The whole Neck both above and underneath, the Shoulders, Breast,
and whole Belly are white: The space between the Shoulders and all the lower
part of the Back are black. The Wings parti-colored of black and white, viz.
the middle feathers, both quils and coverts, are white; the outer and inner
black. To speak more exactly. The fourteen outmost Quils are black; the seven
next white; the four inmost again black. The covert-feathers above the seven
white ones are white, all but those near the ridge of the Wing. But the bottoms
of those of the second row are black half way up. The long scapular feathers
are also mixed or parti-colored of black and white. The Tail is three inches and
an half long, made up of sixteen feathers, from the outmost by degrees longer,
yet is not the Tail sharp, but rather round-pointed, all of one uniform black
color.

The Legs are very short, of a Saffron or yellowish red color, as are also the
Feet. The Toes are long, dusky about the joints; the outmost the longest; the
inmost has a broad appendant membrane. The membranes connecting the Toes, and
the Claws are black. The back-toe is small, having also a broad appendant
membrane or sin. The Windpipe has a labyrinth at the divarication, and
besides, above swells out into a Belly or puff-like cavity.

Its weight was about two pounds, its length from Bill to Claws nineteen
inches: its breadth thirty one.

These Birds are very common at Venice in Italy, and not rare upon our
Seacoasts.

Our smaller reddish-headed Duck, which it seems is no other than the Female of
the precedent: Perchance the Anas Schollent of Gesner, or the Anas fera fusca
alia of Aldrovand, p. 222.
It is about the bigness of the Anas fuligula prima of Gesner: Weighs twenty
four ounces; is from Bill to Claws seventeen inches long. It has a great Head,
of a fordid red color: A short Neck of a gray or hoary: A white Breast and
Belly: Its Back, Tail, most of the covert-feathers and ten outmost quills of
the Wings are of a dark brown or black. The quil-feathers from the tenth to
about the twentieth are white. In the lesser rows of covert-feathers is also a
great spot of white. [The second row of Wing-feathers, as many as are incumbent
on the white quils, are white, but tipped with black.] In the lesser rows of
wing-feathers there is also a large white or ash-colored spot: So that in some
the whole Wing almost seems to be white. The Wings are small for the bigness of
the Bird, their feathers being short. The Tail is made up of sixteen feathers,
and is for this kind long. The Bill is shorter and narrower than that of the
tufted Duck, thick at the head, sharper toward the tip, the extreme hook or
nail being black, and encompassed by a broad yellow space, very elegant to
behold; the rest of the Bill black. The Eyes were of a lovely yellow or
gold-colour. The Feet large, situate backwards, of a yellowish red color, the
Web of the Feet dusky; the soal black. I observed no labyrinth on the
Windpipe, It has a small Gallbladder of an oval figure. In the Craw we found
a Crabfish.

Since the finishing of the Latin History we have been informed that this Bird
is no distinct kind, but only the Female Golden-eye. And truly, the shape of
the body, the make of the Bill, the length, number of feathers, figure and
color of the Tail, the fashion and color of the Feet, and other accidents
induce us to think so, neither is there more difference in weight than is usual
between different Sexes. Besides that, this was a Female the want of the
labyrinth proves; but in the next Article I shall show some reason to doubt
whether of the Golden-eye or not. Mr. Willughby also was suspicious that it
might be the Hen Golden-eye.

. XIV. The greater reddish-headed Duck, perchance the same with the last
described, or the Male thereof: An Anas Schellent dicta Gesnero? Aldrov. p. 223.
IT weighed twenty four ounces, being in length from the tip of the Bill to the
end of the Tail eighteen inches and an half, to the end of the Toes nineteen;
in breadth the Wings being spread out, thirty, The Bill two inches long,
yellow, not only about the tip, like the precedents, but also of a fordid or
dark yellow all along the middle beyond the Nosthrils, The Irides of the Eyes
are of a bright lovely yellow: The Head of a fordid red: the Neck gray. For
that chestnut or red color of the Head extends not to the middle of the Throat.
The Back and whole upper side are of a dark brown or black. The Throat, Breast,
Belly to the very Tail white; but at the Vent is a cross bar of brown.

Each Wing has about twenty six quils; of which the outmost ten are black, the
tip of the eleventh white; in the succeeding the white increases, till after
three or four it reaches to the bottom. The twentieth or twenty first has its
exterior half white, its interior black. [There is some variety in several
Birds in the colors of these feathers.] The feathers immediately above the
white feathers are also white: Besides, in the lesser covert-feathers is a
great spot of white in some birds, of gray in others. The Legs and Feet are of
an obscure, fordid yellow, but about the joints black. The web of the Foot is
also black. The Legs are situate backwards, as in the rest of this kind,
feathered down almost to the knees, the Shanks short, but the Feet large: The
inmost Toe has a membrane bordering on the outside of it. The hindtoe has
also its membrane annexed. The Tail is three inches and an half long, made up of
sixteen feathers, of the same color with the Back.

I should take this Bird to be the very same with the precedent, not only in
Species, but in Sex, notwithstanding its difference in bigness, were it not
that it had a labyrinth on the Windpipe, which I suppose is proper only to the
Males. So that either this is the Male of the precedent, and both different in
species from the Golden-eye: Or, which I rather incline to believe, this must
be a young Cock-Golden-eye, that had not moulted its chicken-feathers; and the
precedent an old Hen-Golden-eye: And so these two supposed Species are reduced
to the Golden-eye; they being all three the same.

. XV. The Shoveler. Anas platyrhynchos altera sive clypeata Germanis dicta:
Taschenmul Tom. 3. page 224.
Aldrov. Anas latirostra major, Gesner. Aldrov. p. 227. Breitschnabel Germanis.
IT is something less than the common tame Duck, weighs twenty two ounces,
being in length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail twenty one
inches. Its Bill is three inches long, coal-black, much broader toward the tip
than at the base, excavated like a Buckler, of a round Circumference. At the
end it has a small crooked hook or nail. Each Mandible is pectinated or
toothed like a comb, with rays or thin plates inserted mutually one into
another when the mouth is shut. The Tongue is fleshy, thick, broad, especially
toward the tip; but the tip it self is thinner and semicircular. The Eyes are
of a deep yellow: The Legs and Feet of a Vermilion color: The Claws black: The
hind-toe little. The membrane connecting the Toes serrate about the edges. The
Feet are less than inothers of this kind.

The Head and Neck almost halfway are of a fair blue. [In the Bird which I
described at Rome, and in another which Mr. Willughby saw at Crowland it was
very Blackish.
dark, lightly tinctured with a deep shining green.] The under-side of the Neck
and region of the Craw are white; the upper-side and Shoulders parti-colored of
white and brown. The rest of the Breast and the whole Belly to the Vent are
red. Behind the Vent the feathers under the Tail are black. The Back is brown,
with a light dash of a shining green, blue or purple color. The feathers
covering the outside of the Thighs are adorned with transverse dusky lines, as
in many others.

The number of quils in each Wing is about twenty four: The ten or twelve
outmost whereof are wholly brown: The next nine have their outer edges of a
deep shining green: The four next the body are varied in the middle and about
their edges with white lines. The feathers of the second row incumbent on the
green quil-feathers have white tips, which together taken make a cross line of
white in the Wing. The lesser covert-feathers of the Wing, excepting those on
the outmost bone, are of a pleasant pale blue, inclining to ash color. The
Tail is about three inches and an half long: consists of fourteen feathers,
parti-colored of white and black, the outmost feathers being wholly white, the
middlemost, except the extreme white edges, wholly black, the rest black in
their middle parts, white about the borders or outsides.

At the divarication of the Windpipe it has a small labyrinth: A large Gall:
Oblong Testicles: A small musculous Stomach or Gizzard: Guts many times
reflected, very long. The Female in respect of colors both in the Head and
Neck, and also in the whole body, upper-side and under-side, excepting only the
Wings, is very like to a wild Duck. The Wings are of the same colors with the
Wings of the Male, but more dull, and not so bright and pleasant. The Fowlers
affirm, that these Birds change their colors in Winter. Gesner and Aldrovand
set forth this kind twice or thrice under several titles. It is sufficiently
characterized and distinguished from all others of this kind by the breadth and
bigness of its Bill.

. XVI. Anas platyrhynchos erythropus.
The broad-bill'd, red-footed Duck of Aldrovand, which I take to be the
Hen-Shoveler.
THe Legs and Feet wholly are of a deep red. The Bill is almost three inches
long, very broad, and Recurvum.
turning up after the fashion of a Buckler, of a dark chestnut color; yet the
lower Mandible, which almost enters the upper [being received into it] is in
some places of a spadiceous color, and has a remarkable struck running
through its middle long-ways. The Bill has such teeth on both sides as Gesner
attributes to his Anati muscariae.
Muggent. The color of the feathers, almost the whole body over, comes near to
that of pulveratricious birds [Partridge and Quail, etc.] called (...), that
is, testaceous or pot-sheard color. [Their pots were paler than ours now
adays.] The whole Head and middle of the Neck were of a Mustilin^ coloris.
Weasel color, sprinkled with greater and lesser spots, partly white, and
those very small and scarce conspicuous, partly brown, and those most in the
crown and hinder part of the Head. The Neck underneath is of a pale whitish
cinereous color, with semilunar brown spots. The same spots, but greater, are
dispersed over the forepart of the Back, the Breast, the Belly, the Rump, and
the Tail, all which parts are of the same color with the Head, or yellowish.
The middle and lower part of the Back are covered with feathers of a dark
spadiceous color, only white about the outmost edges. The ridges of the Wings
are of a Woad color. A line of the same color crosses the middle of the
Wings, above which is likewise seen a transverse white line. The remaining
parts of the Wings are of a dark spadiceous color.

. XVII. * A broad-bill'd Duck with yellow Feet, of Aldrovand.
IT differs little from the precedent in magnitude, unless perchance it be
somewhat bigger. Its Bill is partly brown, partly yellowish. Over the whole
body, which is of a yellowish ash color, are brown spots disseminated,
thick-set, and little in the Head, greater, and thinner, or more scattering in
the Neck, Breast, Belly, Rump, and Tail, but much greater yet and thicker in
the whole Back. The Wings to the middle part are brown. A white line crosses
them in the middle; after which is seen a Or four cornered.
square blue spot, three angles whereof end in a black line: To this succeeds a
white line. Its Legs are yellow; its Toes also yellow, but connected by dusky
membranes.

This seems to be some Hen-bird of the Duck-kind, not hitherto observed by us.

CHAP. III. Pond-Ducks, frequenting chiefly fresh waters.
. I. The common wild Duck and Mallard: Boscas major; Anas torquata minor Tom.
3. page 212.
Aldrov.
IT weighs from thirty six to forty ounces; being about twenty three inches
long, measuring from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail. The Wings
stretched out reached thirty five inches. The Bill is of a greenish yellow, from
the angles of the mouth produced two inches and an half, of about an inch
breadth, not very flat. The upper Mandible has at the end a round tip or nail,
such as is seen in most Birds of this kind. The lower Eyelids are white: The
Legs and Feet of a Saffroncolour; the Claws brown; but that of the back-toe
almost white: The inmost foretoe is the least. The membranes connecting the
Toes are of a more sordid color than the Toes. The Windpipe at its
divarication has a vessel we call a labyrinth.

The Legs are feathered down to the Knees. In the Mallard the Head and upper
part of the Neck are of a delicate shining green: then follows a ring of white,
which yet fails of being an entire circle, not coming round behind. From the
white ring the Throat is of a Chestnut color down to the Breast. The Breast it
self and Belly are of a white ash color, bedewed or sprinkled with innumerable
dark specks, as it were small drops. Under the Tail the feathers are black. The
upper side of the Neck from cinereous is red, sprinkled in like manner with
spots. The middle of the Back between the Wings is red, the lower part black,
and still deeper on the Rump, with a gloss of purple. Thesides under the Wings,
and the longer feathers on the Thighs are adorned with transverse brown lines,
making a very fair show. In them the white color seems to have a mixture of
blue.

The lesser rows of Wing-feathers are red: The long scapular feathers are
silvercoloured, elegantly variegated with transverse Fuscis, dusky.
brown lines. In each Wing are twenty four quils, the outmost ten of a dusky or
dark brown: The second decad have white tips, then their outer Webs are of a
shining purplish blue color: But between the white and blue intercedes a
border of black. The tip of the twenty first is white, the exterior Web of a
dark purple: The middle part of the twenty second is a little silver-coloured:
The twenty third is wholly of a silver-colour, yet the edges on each side are
black: The twenty fourth is likewise of a silver-colour, only the exterior
border black. The outmost covert-feathers are of the same color with the
quils; but those immediately incumbent on the purple-blue quils have black
tips, and next the tips a broad line or cross bar of white, so that the blue
spot is terminated with a double line, first black, and above that white. The
Tail has twenty feathers, ending in sharp points. The four middle of these are
reflected circularly toward the Head, being black, with a gloss of purple. The
eight next to these on each side are white, especially the outer ones, and on
their exterior Webs, the nearer to the reflected ones, the greater mixture of
brown have they. The covert-feathers of the inside of the Wing, and the
interior bastard Wing are white.

In Winter time they company together, and fly in flocks; in the Summer by
pairs, Duck and Mallard together. They build their Nests among Heath or Rushes,
not far from the water, seldom in trees; laying twelve, fourteen, or more Eggs
before they sit. The Female or Duck has neither green head, nor ringed Neck,
but both parti-colored of white, brown, and dark red. The middle parts of the
Back-feathers are of a dark brown, the edges of a pale red.

As for the great Ring-Duck of Gesner, he being very brief in describing of it,
and using only general notes, and my self having never seen any such bird, I
know not what to make of it, and do doubt whether there be any such Bird in
nature; especially because the description he brings of it, made by a certain
German, does in all things answer to our Mallard above described.

In the Fens in the Isle of Ely, Norfolk, and Lincolnshire, about Crowland, and
elsewhere, Ducks, Wigeons, Teal, and other birds of this kind, at what time
they moult their feathers and cannot fly, are taken yearly in great numbers in
Nets placed after this manner.

AB, CD are Nets extending a great length in form of a wall or hedge, inclining
one to another, at the further end of which, before they concur in an angle are
placed 1, 2, 3, or more conoideal Nets, like tunnelling Nets for Partridges.
Which things being so prepared, and the day for fowling set, there is a great
concourse of men and boats. These drive the Birds, now unable to fly, into the
grounds enclosed in the Nets with long Staves and Poles, and so by degrees into
those Conoideal Tunnels, 1, 2, 3, disposed, as we said in the angle. By the way
many are knocked down by the Boatmen and other Rabble with their Poles, others
and more are driven upon the side Nets AB, CD. These belong to them who own the
Nets (for the Nets for the most part have several owners) those fall to their
shares that killed them. Those which are cooped up, and driven into the
end-tunnels 1, 2, 3, belong to the Lord of the Soil. To one Fowling sometimes
you shall have four hundred Boats meet. We have heard that there have been four
thousand Mallards taken at one driving in Deeping Fen.

The Mallards change their feathers (we call it Moulting, a word derived from
the Latin, muto, signifying to change) when the Hens begin to sit; the Ducks
not before their young ones are grown up and ready to fly, at what time they
come hither for that purpose, viz. the Mallards about the end of May, the Ducks
not before the end of June, when the Mallards have recovered their feathers and
begin to fly again. The Cock -Teal and Wigeons accompany the Ducks, and moult
together with them. The Hens of these Birds moult something later. So that this
kind of sport or (if you please) exercise lasts from the middle of June till
the end of August. In a Weeks time all the old feathers fall off; the new ones
come not to their full growth in less than three Weeks space. When they begin
to moult they are all very fat and fleshy; but before their feathers be
perfectly grown, they become lean. The Ducks and Mallard are called whole fowl;
the Wigeons and Teal half fowl, because they are sold for half the price of the
other.

Here it may be worth the while to enquire, why Birds do yearly moult their
feathers? Mr. Willughby supposes that there is the same cause of the casting
the feathers in Birds, that there is of the falling off of the hair in Men and
other Animals upon recovery from a Fever or other disease, or upon refection
after long abstinence. For in Cock-birds the heat and turgency of lust, is, as
it were, a kind of Fever, and so in the Springtime their bodies being
exhausted by the frequent use of Venery, they become lean: But in the Hens the
time of sitting and bringing up their Young answers to a disease or long
abstinence, for at that time they macerate themselves by hunger and continual
labor. When these times are over, both Sexes returning to mind their own
bodies and feed for themselves, do in a short time recover their flesh and grow
fat again, whereupon the pores of the skin being dilated the feathers fall off.

Our Countrymen (imitating, as I suppose, the Low Dutch, who were Authors of
the invention) in maritime and fenny places, in Pools prepared by a new
Artifice and fitted with their Channels and Nets, and stored with Coy-Ducks,
take yearly in, the Wintertime Duck and Mallard, Wigeon, Teal, and other Birds
of the Duck-kind in great numbers.

A place is to be chosen for this purpose far remote from common Highways, and
all noise of people, and in which those Birds are wont in great numbers to
frequent. Having pitched upon a convenient place, prepare a large Pool A, set
round with Willows and Reeds. On the South side N, or the North side S of this
Pool draw as many Ditches or Channels 1 1 1 (Pipes they call them) as you
please or think needful; let them be broad at the Pool, and by degrees narrower
till they end in a point. Along these Channels on each side at little distances
thrust into the banks rods or wands of wood, and bending them over-head bind
them two together by pairs all along in form of an Arch or Vault from the
beginning of the Channel to the end. As the Channels grow narrower and narrower
so the bows are made lower and lower. The Poles thus bent in fashion of Bows
are to be covered with Nets cast over them, and so the Pipes are made: These
Arches or Vaults end in long Cylindrical Nets kept stretched by hoops like
bow-nets, that end which respects the Arch being open, the other shut. Along
the banks of the Pipes are made many hedges or walls n n n of Reeds woven thick
together, parallel to each other, but standing obliquely to the Bank, the acute
angles respecting the Pool, and along the bank of the Pool, at the exit of the
Pipes is likewise a hedge of Reeds (l m) to be drawn. The Coy-Ducks are to be
fed at the mouth or entrance of the Pipes, and to be accustomed at a token
given them by a whistle to hasten to the Fowler. The Fowler first walks about
the Pool, and observes into what Pipe the Birds gathered together in the Pool
may most conveniently be enticed and driven, and then casting Hemp Seed, or
some such like thing at the entrance thereof, calls his Coy-ducks together by a
whistle. The wild fowl accompany them, and when the Fowler perceives them now
entered into the Pipe, he shows himself behind them through the interstices of
the hedges n, n, n, which being frightened, and not daring to return back upon
the man, swim on further into the Pipe, then by other interstices the Fowler
shows himself again behind them, till at last he has thus driven them into the
Cylindrical Nets. If any Birds rise and endeavor to fly away, being beaten
back by the Nets spread over the Pipe they fall down again into the Channel.
The whole art consists in this, that the Birds within the Pipes may see the
Fowler, those in the Pool not seeing him. So those only seeing him, these
notwithstanding often enter the Pipes, and so sometimes besides those the
Fowler drives before him there are others taken the second or third time. The
Coy-ducks go not into the Cylindrical Nets, but stay without and entice others.
Some train up a Whelp for this sort of fowling, teaching him to compass the
hedges, and show himself behind the Birds, to which purpose there are holes
made in the hedges for him to pass freely. The Whelp in compassing the hedges
ought always to keep his tail directed toward the Pool, his Head toward the
Pipe, and so he terrifies the Birds before him, and drives them forward: Those
behind him he allures and tolls forward, they following him to gaze at him as a
new and strange object. When the wind blows sideways the Birds are more easily
driven whither the Fowler pleases, than when its blows Lies in their faces, or
on their backs.
directly contrary to them, or with them. For when it is directly contrary the
Birds are very hardly driven to bear up against it: When it blows just behind
them, it brings the sent of the Man or the Whelp into their Nosthrils.
Wherefore (as we said) the Channels are drawn either on the North or South end
of the Pool, because the West-wind with us as it is the most boisterous, so is
it by far the most frequent of all.

Of the Coy-ducks some fly forth and bring home with them wild ones to the
Pool, others have the outmost joint or pinion of their Wings cut off, so that
they cannot, fly, but abide always in the Pool. The Fowlers house is to be
covered with trees and reeds, and hid as much as possible.

. II. The Gadwall or Gray, perchance the Anas mediae magnitudinis.
Mitelenten of Gesner: Anas platyrhynchos rostro nigro and plano. Aldrov. p.
233. forte Anas strepera Gesneri, Aldrov. p. 234.
IN bigness it equals or exceeds the Pochard, and comes very near the Duck. Its
length from Bill to Tail was nineteen inches: Its breadth thirty three: Its
Bill from the tip to the corners of the mouth two inches long. It is
long-bodied: Its whole Rump black: Its Back brown, the edges of the feathers
being of a whitish red: Its Chin and Cheeks white, speckled with small brown
specks. Its head from blue inclines to black, the edges of the feathers being
of an ash color in the Throat, and of a whitish red near the Breast. The lower
part of the Neck and upper part of the Breast and Shoulders are covered with a
most beautiful Plumage parti-colored of black and white. The extreme edges and
as it were fringes of the feathers are reddish, then a black line of a
semicircular figure encompasses the tip of the feather, running parallel to its
edges; within this is included another semicircular white line parallel to it,
and in the white again a black. The Breast is white: The Belly darker, with
transverse black spots. Under the Tail the feathers are crossed with brown. The
lesser covert-feathers under the Wings and the interior bastard Wing are
purely white. The sides are curiously variegated with alternate black and white
lines. The Tail is short, scarce appearing beyond the feathers incumbent on it,
round-pointed, made up of sixteen feathers with sharp tips, of a white color,
especially on the under side, for the two middle ones above are of a dark
ash color: In the rest, especially the outmost, there is something of red
mingled with the white: The edges of all are whitish.

Each Wing has twenty six quils, of which the first ten are brown; the three
next tipped with white: The four following have their outer Webs black, their
tips also being whitish: In the three succeeding the inner Web of the feather
is wholly white: The four next the body are of a cinereous or reddish brown.
The feathers of the second row, incumbent on the white quils, have their
exterior Webs of a black purplish shining color. In the third row are spots
of red scattered.

Its Bill is like that of the common Duck or Teal, flat, broad, with a hook or
nail at the end: The lower Mandible inclines to a Saffron color; of the upper
the sides are of the same color, the middle part black: The Nosthrils great.

The Legs are feathered to the Knees: The Feet whitish: The hind-toe small: The
inner fore-toe shorter than the outer: The membranes connecting the Toes black.
It has a huge Gallbladder.

The Female has the same spots in the Wings, but far duller colors; wants the
black color on the Rump, the feathers there growing having pale red edges; as
have also those on the Back and Neck. It wholly wants those elegant
semicircular black and white lines and spots in the Neck and Breast feathers,
and the strakes under the Wings.

This Bird may be distinguished from all others of the Duck-kind by this
characteristic note, that it has on the Wings three spots of different color,
one above another, viz. a white, a black, and a red one.

. III. * Gesners Muggent: Anas muscaria, Aldrov. lib. 19. cap. 41.
IT is so called because it catches flies flying upon [or above] the water. It
is of the bigness and shape almost of a tame Duck. The Bill is broad and flat,
its upper Chap being wholly of a Saffron-colour, in length beyond the feathers
two inches: it is serrate on both sides with broad and in a manner
membranaceous teeth, pretty high or deep; but those of the nether Chap are
lower, and Stand up or out but very little.
rise not much, making long striae. The Plumage almost all the body over is
parti-colored of blackish, fiery color, and white, with a mixture of Weasel
color in some places, or in short almost like that of the Partridge, that is,
testaceous, as of most of the pulveratricious kind, but yet differing. Its Feet
are yellow: Its Toes joined by blackish membranes: Its Neck both on the upper
and under side is speckled [(...)] with the colors we mentioned. The crown of
the Head is blacker than the other parts, which color also is seen in the
Wings, which are shorter than the Tail. Thus far Gesner. This Bird, if it be
different from the Gadwall, as the color of the Bill and Feet might persuade
one, is to me unknown.

. IV. The common Wigeon or Whewer: Penelope Aldrovandi, tom. 3. p. 218. lin.
30. Anas fistularis, Argentoratensibus Ein Schmey.
IT weighs twenty two ounces: Its length from Bill to Feet is twenty inches.
The Head and upper end of the Neck are red. The crown toward the Bill is of a
dilute color, from red inclining to a yellowish white. The upper part of the
Breast and sides as far as the Wings is beautified with a very fair tincture of
a red Wine color, with small transverse black lines. The scapular feathers,
and those on the sides under the Wings are very curiously varied with narrow
transverse black and white waved lines. The middle of the Back is brown, the
edges of the feathers being cinereous, especially toward the Tail. The
feathers behind the Vent, next the Tail are black: The Breast and Belly white,
with a little mixture of yellow. On both sides under the Legs are spots of a
reddish brown: Under the Tail are white feathers alike spotted, mingled with
the black. The Tail is sharp pointed, and consists of fourteen feathers, of
which the six outer on each side are brown, their exterior edges being
whitish; the two middle ones are black, with a mixture of ash color.

Of the quil-feathers the ten outmost are brown: The next ten have white tips,
and among them the fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth have their
outer webs first of a black purplish color, then as far as they appear beyond
the covert-feathers of a lovely blue. In the eighteenth feather the exterior
half of the outer web is of a purplish black, the interior toward the bottom
is cinereous: But along the border of the black are small white spots from the
white tip to the bottom. The twentieth feather is all of a pale or white
ash color: The twenty first and twenty second are white about the edges, black
in the middle along the shaft. The small covert-feathers of the Wings are of a
light brown or dark ash color; but those that cover the quils from the tenth
to the twentieth are parti-colored of brown, white, and cinereous.

Mr. Willughby in this and other Birds is, in my opinion, more particular and
minute in describing the colors of each single feather of the Wings and Tail
than is needful; since in these things nature does as they say sport her self,
not observing exactly the same strokes and spots in the feathers of all Birds
of the same sort.

In the structure of the Mouth, Tongue, and Head, it differs little from the
common wild Duck, unless perchance the Head be less in proportion to the body.
The upper Mandible of the Bill is of a lead-colour, with a round black nail at
the end. The Feet from a dusky white incline to a lead-colour. The Claws are
black: The outmost Toe longer than the inmost: The back-toe short.

It feeds upon grass and weeds growing in the bottoms of Rivers, Lakes, and
Channels of water, also upon Whilks, Periwinkles, etc. that it finds there. The
Males in this kind at Cambridge are called Wigeons, the Females Whewers.

The flesh of it for delicacy is much inferior to that of Teal, or indeed
Wild-Duck.

. V. The Sea-Pheasant or Cracker: Anas caudacuta, Aldrov. tom. 3. page 234.
Coda lancea at Rome.
IT is of the bigness of the common Wigeon; of twenty four ounces weight:
twenty eight inches long from Bill to Tail: From tip to tip of the Wings
extended thirty seven inches broad.

Its Head is slender, its Neck long for this kind: Its Bill from the tip to the
angles of the mouth two inches and an half, of equal breadth almost throughout;
the nether Mandible wholly black, the upper partly blue, partly black, viz.
black in the middle, on the sides beneath the Nosthrils blue: Black also at the
corners of the mouth, at the very tip, and in the lower edges near the tip. The
color of the Plumage on the whole Head is ferrugineous or brown, behind the
Ears tinctured with a light purple. Beyond the Ears on each side from the
hinder part of the Head begins a line of white which passes down the sides of
the Neck to the Throat. All the feathers between or adjacent to these lines are
black: Under the black the Neck is ash-colored, then curiously varied with
transverse black and white lines, as is also almost the whole Back. The long
scapular feathers are black in their middle parts, but the exterior have their
outer Webs almost to the shafts black, their inner (which are much the
narrower) varied with white and black [brown] lines. All the nether part, Neck,
Breast, Belly, to the very Vent is white. Yet in the lower Belly the white is a
little darkened with a mixtue of cinereous. The feathers under the Tail are
black.

As for the Wings, the ten outmost quils and most of the covert-feathers are of
a dark cinereous [In some Birds the interior edges of the seventh, eighth,
ninth, and tenth quils are white.] The second decad of quils is parti-colored;
for the tips of all are white, [or from white red] then in the outer Web
succeeds a black line, the remaining part thereof, as far as appears beyond the
incumbent feathers being of a glistering purple, or purplish blue color: The
interior Webs of all are of the same color with the rest of the feathers. Of
the following the exterior Webs are cinereous, the interior black. The covert
feathers of the second row immediately incumbent on the second decad of quils
have their tips of a fair red or Lion-colour. The long feathers covering the
Thighs are elegantly varied with black and white transverse lines, beneath
which the Plumage is yellow.

The Tail is made up of sixteen feathers, all ash-colored excepting their
exterior edges, which are whitish. The two middlemost run out into very long
and sharp points, being produced two inches and an half beyond the rest: Whence
also this Bird is in some places of England called the Sea-pheasant.

Its feet are of a lead-colour, darker about the joints. It has a small
Labyrinth, and a great Gall.

The Hen is like in color to the common Wild-Duck, but fairer, and variegated
with more full and lively white and brown colors. The Wing-feathers agree in
color with those of the Cock, save that they are duller and less lively. The
Belly is reddish, the middle part of each single feather being black. The Chin
is white, with a tincture of red. The Back of a dark brown, with transverse
lines and beds of a pale red. The Breast of a sordid white, and the Belly yet
darker.

This Bird may be distinguished from all others of the Duck-kind by the length
of the middle feathers of its Tail as by certain and characteristic note.

. VI. The Teal, Querquedula secunda, Aldrov. p. 209.
THis, next to the Summer-Teal, is the least in the Duck-kind; weighing only
twelve ounces, extended in length from the tip of the Bill to the end of the
Feet fifteen inches; in breadth, measuring between the ends of the Wings
spread, twenty four. Its Bill is broad, black, at the end something reflected
upwards: The Eyes from white incline to hazel-coloured. The Nosthrils are of an
oval figure. The top of the Head, Throat, and upper part of the Neck of a dark
bay or spadiceous color. From the Eyes on each side to the back of the Head is
extended a line of a dark, shining green. Between these lines on the back of
the Head a black spot intervenes. Under the Eyes a white line separates the
black from the red. The feathers investing the lower side of the Neck, the
beginning of the Back, and the sides under the Wings are curiously varied with
transverse waved lines of white and black. The region of the Craw in some is
yellowish, elegantly spotted with black spots, so situate as somewhat to
resemble scales. The Breast and Belly are of sordid white or gray color. Under
the Rump is a black spot encompassed with a yellowish color.

Each Wing has above twenty five quils. Of these the outmost ten are brown;
the next five have white tips; under the white the exterior Web of the Feather
is black: In the sixteenth begins the green, and takes up so much of the
feather as we said was black in the precedent three, The exterior Web of the
twenty third is black, with some yellowness on the edges. The covert-feathers
of the black quils have white tips, of the green ones have tips of a reddish
yellow: Else the Wings are all over brown [dusky.] The Tail is sharp-pointed,
three inches long, made up of sixteen feathers, of a brown or dusky color.

The Legs and Feet are of a pale dusky color, the membrane connecting the Toes
black: The inmost Toe the least. The Back-toe has no fin annexed. The Windpipe
in the Cock is furnished with a Labyrinth: in the Hen we found none.

The Female differs from its Male in the same manner almost as the wild Duck
does from the Mallard, having neither red nor green on the Head, nor black
about its Rump: Nor those sine feathers variegated with white and black lines
on the back and sides.

This Bird for the delicate taste of its flesh, and the wholesome nourishment it
affords the body, does deservedly challenge the first place among those of its
kind.

. VII. The Garganey: Querquedula prima Aldrov. t. 3. p. 209. Kernel at
Strasburgh.
IN bigness it something exceeds the common Teal; yet that Mr. Willughby
described weighed no more than the common Teal. viz. twelve ounces. Its length
from Bill to Claws was seventeen inches: Its breadth from tip to tip of the
Wings extended twenty eight. For the shape of its body it was very like to the
common Teal: Its Bill also black: Its Legs and Feet livid with a certain
mixture of green, [Mr. Willughby has it from dusky inclining to a
lead-colour.] The back-toe small.

The crown of the Head is almost wholly black, but the Bill besprinkled with
small reddish-white specks. From the inner corner of the Eye on each side
begins a broad white line, which passing above the Eyes and Ears is produced to
the back of the Head, till they do almost meet. The Cheeks beneath these white
lines and the beginning of the Throat were of a lovely red color, as if dashed
with red wine, having white spots or lines along the middle of each feather
about their shafts. Under the Chin at the rise of the lower Mandible is a great
black spot. The whole Breast is curiously varied with black and dusty,
transverse, arcuate [elliptical] waved lines in each feather. The Belly in some
is white, in others tinctured with yellow: But toward the Vent are brown lines,
and bigger spots under the Tail. The color of the Back is brown, with a
purplish gloss. The Thighs are covered with feathers handsomely variegated with
transverse black and white lines. The scapular feathers next the Wings are
ash-colored, the rest are of a very beautiful purple color, with white lines
in the middle.

Each Wing has twenty five quils, the outmost ten of which are brown on the
outside the shaft, on the inside of a Mouse-dun: The eleven next have white
tips, beneath the tips, as far as they appear beyond the covert-feathers, their
exterior Webs of a Mr. Willughby describes them to be of a purplish color,
with a mixture of cinereous.
shining green, the interior and the bottoms of the feathers being of a dusk
or Mouse-dun. The rest are brown, only the exterior Webs edged with white. The
lesser rows of Wing-feathers are ash-colored excepting those immediately
incumbent on the quils, some of which have white tips.

The Tail is short [three inches] and when closed ending in a sharp point, of a
dusky or dark brown color, consisting of fourteen feathers; the outmost
feathers are varied with spots of a pale or whitish red. The soal of the foot
is black.

The Cock had a Labyrinth at the divarication of the Windpipe, the Hen none.

The Hen is less than the Cock, and duller-coloured, wants the black spot under
the Chin, and the red color of the Cheeks. The Wings underneath are as in the
Cock, above more brown. The Back colored like the Cocks; but the scapular
feathers have not those beautiful colors.

. VIII. * Of the Summer-Teal, called by Gesner Ana circia.
GEsner takes that Duck they call Circia to be of the kind of the lesser Teal.
Querquedulae: A certain German renders it in High Dutch, Ein Birckilgen, and
says it is so called from the sound of its voice; that it is like a small
Duck, but differs in the color of the Wings and Belly. For the Wings want
those glistering feathers, and the Belly is more spotted.

This kind (so he proceeds) I think is also found in our Lakes, for I saw not
long since a small sort of Duck taken in the beginning of January, little
bigger than a Dobchick, brown all over, having the Bill of a Duck, that is
broad and brown: Also dusky colored Legs and Feet; the Neck an hand-breadth
long, the rest of the body six inches. But it was a Hen, and had Eggs in the
Belly. The Cock, I guess, has more beautiful colors. In the Stomach I found
nothing but small-stones, and the seeds of some water-plants, almost of the
fashion of Lentiles (but lesser and thicker) and reddish. Thus far Gesner.

From this short description, and that too of a Hen bird, we cannot certainly
gather, whether it be a distinct Species from the precedent. But we suspect it
was of that bird which our Country men call the Summer-Teal, which Mr. Johnson
informs us is of that bigness; for we have not as yet seen it.

Its Bill is black: The whole upper side of a dark gray or light brown; the
edges [or extremes] of the feathers in the Back are white. In the Wings is a
line or spot of an inch breadth, partly black, partly of a shining green,
terminated on both sides with white. In the Tail the feathers are
sharp-pointed. The whole under side seems to be white, with a slight tincture
of yellow; but on the Breast and lower Belly are many pretty great black spots.
The Legs are of a pale blue, the membranes between the Toes black. This is the
least of all Ducks. In its stomach dissected I found nothing but grass and
stones. This description we owe to Mr. Johnson.

. IX. * A wild Brasilian Duck of the bigness of a Goose. Marggrave.
IT has a black Bill, dusky Legs and Feet. It is all over black except the
beginnings [setting on] of the Wings, which are white; but that black has a
gloss of shining green. It has a crest or tuft on it heads consisting of black
feathers, and a corrugated red mass or bunch of flesh above the rise of the
upper Mandible of the Bill. It has also a red skin about the Eyes. It is very
fleshy, and good meat. They are commonly shot sitting on high trees: For after
they have washed themselves in cold water, they fly up high trees, for the
benefit of the fresh air and Sun.

. X. * A Wild Brasilian Duck, called, Ipocati-Apoa, by the Portughese, Pata,
that is, A Goose. Marggrav.
IT is of the bigness of a Goose of eight or nine months, of the very shape and
figure of our common Ducks: The Belly, lower part of the Tail, the whole Neck
and Head are covered with white feathers; the Back to the Neck, the Wings and
top of the Head with black, having a mixture of green, as in the Necks of our
Ducks. In the Neck and Belly are black feathers, all about sparsedly mingled
with the white. It differs from our Country Ducks in these particulars: 1. That
it is bigger. 2. It has indeed a Ducks Bill, but black and hooked at the end.
3. Upon [or above] the Bill it carries a fleshy crest, broad, and almost round,
of a black color, remarkably spotted with white. The Crest is of equal height.
Between the Crest and the Bill (viz. on the top of the Bill) is a transverse
hole of the bigness of a Pease, conspicuous on both sides, which serves instead
of Nosthrils. 4. The color of the Legs and Feet is not red, but of a dusky
ash color. It is full of flesh, and good meat. It is found every where about
the Rivers.

I had another in all things like this, excepting that those long feathers in
the Wings were of a shining brown color. I suppose this is the Male, the other
the Female.

. XI. * The first Brasilian wild Duck, called Mareca, of Marggrave.
IT has a Ducks Bill, of a brown color, at the rise whereof on each side is a
red spot. The Head above is of a gray Hare-colour: The sides of the Head under
the Eyes all white. The whole Breast and lower Belly has an obscure
resemblance of the color of Oaken boards; and is besides variegated with black
points [specks.] The Legs and Feet are black; the Tail gray. The Wings elegant,
at the setting on of a dark gray color. I suppose he means, that the inner
quils, or those next the body are of a dark gray as was before intimated.
The quil-feathers on one side are of the former color, but all the outer half
of them [medietas extrema] of a pale brown: In the middle they are of a shining
green, with a border of black; like the color of the Mallards Neck. Its flesh
is very good meat. The outmost of a light brown, and the middlemost of a
shining green, with a fringe or border of black.

. XII. * The second Brasilian wild Duck, called Mareca, of Marggrave.
IT is of the same bigness and figure with the precedent, has a black shining
Bill. The top of the Head, the upper part of the Neck, and the whole Back are
of an Umber color mixed with brown [fusco.] Under the Throat it is white. The
Eyes are black, and before each Eye is a small round spot of a yellowish white
color. The whole Breast and lower Belly are of a dark gray, with a mixture of
golden. The Tail is black: The Wing-feathers dusky, with a gloss of shining
green, and the middle feathers of the Wings are of a rare green and blue
shining in a dusky: Here also they have a waved line of black: But the Or
border, or perchance outside.
end [extremitas] of the quil-feathers is wholly white. The Legs and Feet are
of a bright red or vermilion color. The Bird roasted colors the hands of
those that touch it, and linen cloth with a sanguine color. It has well
tasted flesh, but a little bitter.

CHAP. IV. Of Tame Ducks.
. I. The common Tame Duck: Anas domestica vulgaris.
IT is called by the Greeks, (...) or (...), from the Verb (...), signifying,
to swim: As Anas also by Varro is derived from no, nas, to swim. It is a Bird
every where known, and therefore it would not be worth while to bestow many
words in exactly describing it. It is less than a Goose, almost as big as a
Hen, but much lower, having a broad, flat Bill, a broad Back, short Legs,
situate backward, that in swimming it may more strongly strike the water with
the finny oars of its Feet: As Aristotle rightly. Hereupon they become less
convenient for walking, so that this Bird goes but slowly, and not without some
difficulty. Ducks vary infinitely in colors, as do Hens, and other tame fowl.

Between the Duck and the Drake there is this difference, that he has growing
on his Rump certain erect feathers reflected backwards toward the Head, which
she has not. The Duck lays twelve, fourteen, or more Eggs as big as Hens Eggs,
and white, with a light tincture of blue or green, the Yolk being of a deeper
and redder color.

The best Physicians (says Aldrovand) disallow the flesh of these Birds,
because they are hard and of difficult concoction, and agree not with the
stomach: We rather think them disagreeable to the stomach, for their moistness
and clamminess than for their hardness, whence also they are apt to produce
excrementitious, gross, and melancholic humors. The flesh of wild Ducks is
preferred before that of tame, as being more savoury and wholesome.

The Drake has a certain bony vessel or buble at the divarication of its
Windpipe, which we are wont to call a labyrinth; of the use whereof we have
said as much as we thought fit, in the first Book at the end of the second
Chapter.

Of the virtues and use of the Duck, and its parts in Physic, out of Schroder.

1. A live Duck asswages Colic pains, the feathers being plucked off, and the
naked part applied to the Belly.

2. The Fat heats, moistens, mollisies, digests, discusses. Therefore is of use
in inward and outward pains, viz. of the sides and joints, in the cold
distempers of the Nerves, etc.

Note. This Fat is preferred before all others, especially that of the wild
Duck.

3. The blood is Good against poison and infection.
Alexipharmacal, and hereupon is sometimes received into Antidotes. It is a
known history which A. Gellius in the seventeenth Book of his Noctes Atticae,
Chap. 16. relates. The Pontic Duck is said to maintain her self by feeding
commonly upon Poisons. It is also written by Lenaeus Cn. Pompeys A freed man.
libertus, that Mithridates, that King of Pontus, was skilful in Physic, and
cunning in remedies of that kind: And that he was wont to mingle their blood in
Medicaments, which were of force to digest and carry off Poisons; and that that
blood was the most effectual ingredient in such Confections. Moreover that the
King himself by the use of such Medicines did secure himself against the secret
practices of such as sought to poison him at Feasts and Banquets. Yea, that he
would wittingly and willingly for ostentation sake often take a draught of
violent and quick poison, and yet received no harm by it. Wherefore afterward
when he was overthrown in battle by the Romans, and had fled into the furthest
parts of his Kingdom, and resolved to die, and had in vain made trial of the
strongest Poisons to hasten his death, he ran himself through with his own
Sword.

4. Its dung is applied to the bites of venomous beasts.

. II. The hooked-bill'd Duck.
IN shape of body and outward lineaments it is very like the common tame Duck;
differs chiefly in the Bill, which is broad, something longer than the common
Ducks, and bending moderately downward. The Head also is lesser and slenderer
than the common Ducks. It is said to be a better layer.

. III. The Muscovy Duck: Anas moscata, an Cairina, Aldrov?
IT is in this kind the biggest of all we have hitherto seen. The color both
of Male and Female is for the most part a purplish black. Yet I once saw a Duck
of this kind purely white. About the Nosthrils and the Eyes it has red
Tuberous naked flesh.
Caruncles. It has a hoarse voice; and scarce audible, unless when it is
angry. Its Eyes are rounder than ordinary: Those of the young ones at first are
of a sordid green, afterward become continually whiter and whiter.

. IV. The Cairo-Duck of Aldrovand.
THese Ducks Aldrovand thus briefly describes. They exceed ours in bigness of
body. The Male also in this kind is bigger than the Female. It Bill where it
joins to the Head is very thick and tuberous; thence to the very tip it is
continuedly narrower, till it ends in a sharp and crooked hook: It is of a
black color excepting toward the end, where it has a good large red spot, and
in its beginning another small one of the same color, but more dilute. Its
Head was black and tufted: Its Throat just under the Bill was powdered with
whitish specks. The Eyes yellow, wherein appeared many little sanguine veins.
The whole body almost was also black. The feathers of the Back in the
beginning, and also in the middle, were black, in the end green, or at least
black, with a tincture of green. In the Wings also and in the Tail were some
green feathers to be seen, and one or two white ones, which made a kind of
white spot. The Legs were very strong, but short, coming near to a Chestnut
color, as did also the feet. The Female was less than the Male, and had a less
tuberous Bill, where it was joined to the Head, marked with a pretty broad
line, partly white, and partly red. Besides, that spot we mentioned, which in
the Bill of the Male was red, in the Bill of this was of an ash color,
wherewith something of red was mixed: Else it was of a color from black
inclining to cinereous, if you except two whitish spots, which in the middle of
the Bill turning one to another, each by it self formed the letter C. It had no
tuft on its black Head. Its Breast also was of the same color, spotted with
white pricks. The Back as in the Male, but the Wings were much greener than
his, and spotted also with two white spots. In other particulars it differed
little or nothing from him.

. V. * The Guiny Duck: Anas Libyca, Aldrov. and Bellon. which we take to be the
same with the Muscovy and Cairo Duck.
THis kind of Duck Bellonius thus describes. A few years agone a certain kind
of Ducks began to be kept in France, of a middle size, between a Goose and a
Duck, having a broken voice, as if it had distempered or ulcerated Lungs. Now
there is so great plenty of them in our Country, that they are every where kept
in Cities, and publicly exposed to sale: For at great entertainments and
Marriage Feasts they are sought for and desired. They have short Legs: The Male
is bigger than the Female; and, as is usual in other Birds, of a different
color, so that it is hard to ascribe any certain color to it, unless one
would say that it comes near to a Duck-colour. They are for the most part
either black or parti-colored. They have a Bill in a manner different from
Geese and Ducks, hooked at the end, also short and broad. In the Head rises up
something of a red color like a Crest, but much different from a Cocks Comb.
For it is a certain tuberous eminency, situate between the Nosthrils, exactly
resembling the figure of a red Cherry. The Temples near the Eyes are without
feathers, the skin showing like a red hide; of the same substance with that
Cherry-like bunch between the Eyes: By which Marks I think it may be certainly
known and distinguished from other Birds. But this one thing may seem very
strange in this Bird, that it has so great a privy member, that it is an inch
thick, and of four or five inches length, and red like blood. If it were not
very chargeable many more of them would be kept than are: For if you give them
but meat enough they will lay many Eggs, and in a short time hatch a great
number of Ducklings. Their flesh is neither better nor worse than that of a
tame Goose or Duck.

This seems to me to be the very same Bird with Aldrovands Cairo-Duck, for most
of the marks do agree, as will appear to him who will take the pains to compare
the descriptions; and also the same with our Muscovy Duck. For Scaligers Indian
Duck, which Aldrovand makes the same with his African or Guinny Duck.
Libyc, is the same with our Muscovy-Duck, or we are very much deceived. So
that I strongly suspect our Muscovy-Duck, the Guinny Duck of Bellonius, and
Aldrovands Cairo-Duck, yea, and Gesners Indian Duck too, to be all one and the
same bird, more or less accurately described. Perchance also the Birds
themselves may differ one from another in those tuberous eminencies and naked
skin about the Bill, and upon the Bill between the Nosthrils.

. VI. * Gesners Indian Duck, which perchance may be also the same with our
Muscovy.
THere is with us (says he who sent us [Gesner] the figure and description of
this Bird out of England) a Duck brought out of India, of the same shape of
body, the same Bill and Foot with the common Duck, but bigger and heavier by
half than it. Its Head is red like blood, and so is a good part of the Neck
adjoining, on the backside. All that red is a callous flesh, and divided by
incisures; and where it ends at the Nosthrils, it lets down a Caruncle of a
different figure from the rest of the flesh, like that of a Swans, contiguous
[or joyned] to the Bill. Its Head is bare of feathers, and that part also of
the Neck which is red, save that on the top of the Head, through the whole
length of it, there is a crest or tuft of feathers, which when it is angry it
sets up. Under the Eyes at the beginning of the Bill the skin is spotted with
black spots placed in no order: Above the Eye also are one or two spots tending
upward. The Eye is yellow, separated from the rest of the Head by a circle of
black. Under the further end of the Eye backwards is a singular spot separated
from the rest. The whole Bill is blue, only it has a black spot at the tip.
The feathers all along the rest of the Neck are white. At the setting on of the
Neck is a circle of black, spotted with a few white spots, and unequal,
narrower below, broader above. Behind this circle the Plumage of all the lower
Belly is white, of the upper side of body brown, but the white Plumage is
divided at the top by that black circle. The ends of the Wings and the Tail are
of a shining green like Cantharides. The skin of the Legs is brown, with light,
circular incisures. The membrane between the intervals of the Toes is more
pale, sprinkled with two or three brown spots, placed in no order, except in
the left foot, where there are six set in arrow along the outmost Toe. It
walks softly by reason of the heaviness of its body. Its voice is not like that
of other Ducks, but hoarse, like a man's that has his Jaws and Throat swollen
with a cold. The Cock is bigger than the Hen. The Hen is like the Cock, but
has not such variety of colors. It gets its living out of muddy waters, and
delights in such other things as the common Duck does.

There are many things in this description, which do persuade me, that this
Bird also is no other than our Muscovy Duck: As, equal bigness, naked tuberous
flesh about the Bill, a hoarse voice, the Cock being bigger than the Hen, etc.
Nor is the diversity of colors a sufficient argument of the contrary: For that
they (as we have often said) in tame Birds of the same kind vary infinitely.

. VII. The Brasilian Ipeca-guacu of Piso.
IT is a domestic, whole-footed bird, reputed for the goodness of its flesh. As
to the bulk and shape of its body it is of a middle proportion between our
Country Ducks and Geese; but in the beauty of its feathers and colors excells
them both. Its Bill from the end to the middle is yellow: The middle of its
Head is curiously tinctured with red; the whole body from the crown to the Tail
being of a delicate white color like a Swans. It has Ducks Feet, of a
yellowish red. It feeds fat as well upon Land, as in Pools. For the goodness of
its flesh it is not inferior to our Ducks, and had in esteem by persons of
quality. It is a fruitful bird, lays great Eggs, and a great many, almost all
seasons of the year, dispatching its sitting in a short time. It is also
salacious; its penis and other internal parts serving for generation, being
more than usually strong and great. As for its bowels and entrails, they are of
like constitution and make with those of our Ducks.

AN APPENDIX TO THE History of Birds. Containing Such Birds as we suspect for
fabulous, or such as are too briefly and unaccurately described to give us a
full and sufficient knowledge of them, taken out of Franc. Hernandez especially.
Of the foolish Sparrow.
THis Bird is deservedly famous for its notable folly. It is not afraid of them
that go to catch it, but sits still with a great deal of confidence till they
lay their hands upon it, not offering to fly away, but only seeming to wonder
what they intend to do. It is a Seafowl, and feeds upon fish. It has the cry
of a Jay; is of the bigness of a Mag-pie, of the shape and color of the Gull,
excepting that part of the forehead next the Bill, which is cinereous;
wholefooted. Its Bill is three inches long, slender, round, and straight, only
a little crooked near the tip: Its Legs and Feet (which are like those of other
whole-footed Birds) black: Its Pupil is also black, but the membrane about the
Pupil gray.

The tameness of the Birds of the Island Cerne is well known and celebrated.
They alight upon the heads and shoulders of the Mariners that go ashore there,
as it were upon trees, and suffer themselves without difficulty to be caught,
coming readily to hand.

Of the Bird called Day laying great Eggs.
THe Bird called Day is remarkable for the extraordinary and unusual nature or
manner of its Eggs and Young. It is not bigger than a Pigeon, and tolerable
good meat. For its Nest it scrapes a hole with its Feet and Tail in sandy
grounds four spans deep; where when the rains fall it lays its Eggs, (which are
bigger than Gooseeggs, almost as broad as ones fist, called by the Natives
Tapun) fifty or more in number, being of a gross and fat substance, without any
Yolk in them, which roasted or boiled are good wholesome food, but fried Coarse.
tough, bad, and of hard concoction.

It is very strange [more strange I dare say than true] that so little a Bird
should lay so great Eggs, and so many together, and in such deep vaults under
ground, and that being there hidden they should be hatched without being ever
sitten upon or cherished by the old ones, and that the Young once hatched
should of themselves presently fly away.

I dare boldly say that this History is altogether false and fabulous. For
though some Birds lay very great Eggs (as for example, Puffins, Guillemots,
Razor-bills, etc.) some also build in holes under ground. Yet such lay but one
Egg, not a great many before they sit. Neither do I think that there is any
Bird in the world whose Eggs want the white.

Of the Guitguit that sets upon Ravens.
A Little body contains a great spirit and courage. There is a very small Bird
(Guitguit the Indians call it) like the Wren, of a green color, and
sweet-tasted flesh. Such is the wonderful force of nature, that this Bird, as
little as it is, and next to nothing, dares set upon and pursue whole flocks of
Ravens, and forces them to hide themselves from it, and to take shelter among
the Reeds.

I suppose that this story is feigned in imitation of what the Ancients have
delivered concerning the Wren, viz. that with great courage [indeed
fool-hardiness] she dares enter combat with the Eagle.

Of the Bird called Maia.
THere is another sort of small Birds, especially in the Island Cuba, that fly
in flocks, and waste the fields or plantations of Rice, (which grain grows
abundantly, and is of much use in those Countries) called Maia, of a fulvous
color, its flesh pleasant, of easy concoction, and yielding a plentiful
nourishment: Whose Stomach, (or rather Craw) and first receptacle of
nourishment, is on the back side of the Neck: A wonderful and singular thing,
of which there is not another instance in nature.

Of the Yayauhquitotl or long-tail'd Bird.
THere proceed from the end of the Tail [or Rump] of this Bird two feathers
longer than the rest, below naked, without any lateral hair-like bodies,
adorned at the tips with blue and black Vanes. The body of the Bird is as big
as a Stares, parti-colored of blue, green, fulvous, and gray. Perchance this
may be the same Bird which Marggrave has accurately described under the title
of Guira-guainumbi.

Of another sort of Xochitenacatl, that is the Toucan or Brasilian Pie.
THis Bird breeds and feeds on the shores of the Southern America, being of the
bigness of a Pigeon, with a thick, sharp-pointed, black Bill, black Eyes, and a
yellow Iris. The Wings and Tail are parti-colored of black and white, a black
list reaching from the Bill to the very end of the Breast, yet is there some
yellow about the forepart of the Wings. The rest of the body generally is of a
pale color, excepting the Feet and Legs, which are brown, and the Claws, which
from white incline somewhat to a pale yellow. It lives about flowring trees,
feeding upon the honey it sucks out of their flowers. It breeds its Young in
the Spring, and is much esteemed by the Tototepecenses, in whose Country it is
very frequent.

Of the Bird called Momot.
THis abides and delights in hot Countries. It is of the bigness of a Dove;
has scarlet-colored Eyes, with a black Pupil: A crooked, blackish Bill,
almost three inches long, sharp-pointed, the nether Chap shorter, the upper
serrate: A blue Head, like a Peacocks; brown Feet, the rest of the body green.
What is rare and extraordinary in this Bird is, that it has in its Tail one
quil longer than the rest, and which is feathered only at the end, [This is, I
dare say, more strange than true: For the Tails of all Birds I ever yet saw
have their feathers growing by pairs, that is, two of a sort, on each side
one,] and that so beautiful a Bird should be of no use, but for its feathers.

Of the Verminous Bird or Tuputa.
THis Bird seems to be of a strange nature, as we gather from its note, from
which it took its name Tuputa; but it is, and deservedly, more famous for its
singular putrefaction. For while it is living it is wholly stuffed with worms
instead of flesh, all its members and muscles being full of them. Nothing of
flesh besides these and the skin. Yet they do not eat or make their way through
the skin, which is adorned with thick-set feathers. It abides among Sedge, and
in grassie places. For shape of body it is like a Pheasant, but lesser.

What is here delivered concerning this Bird, if understood generally of all
the individuals of this sort we are so confident to be false, that we think it
needless to spend time in the confuting of it. This however we thought fit to
signify to the Reader, lest he should imagine we gave any credit to the story.

Of the Mozambick Hens.
THe feathers, flesh and bones of these Hens are so black that being boiled one
would think they had been sodden in ink; yet are they thought to be very
savoury, and far better than those of other Hens. This history is as true as
the precedent.

Of the laughing Bird or Quapachtototl.
MIrth is often unsecure. Quapachtototl or the fulvous Bird imitates humane
laughter, and yet is dreaded and hated by the Indians as inauspicious and
ominous, fore-boding some evil or mischief. The body [from Bill to Tail] is
eight inches long; and the Tail as much. The Bill from blue inclines to black,
being pretty long and crooked. The circle about the Pupil of the Eye is white:
The Breast cinereous: The Belly from thence to the Tail black. The Tail of a
dark fulvous: But the Wings, Neck, and Head fulvous, whence it got its name
among the Indians. They say it is pleasant and wholesome meat.

Of the Water-Quail or Acolin.
A Certain brown Bird of the Lake of Mexico is called Acolin, because it is of
the bigness of a Quail. It has a long Bill, bending downward; and long Legs.
It runs very swiftly near the top of the water: And seldom or never flies. It
feeds upon fish: And it self is made food by man.

Of the Cornet Ducks.
THere is a certain sort of Ducks in Asia, which one may not underservedly
reckon among Cornets or Horn-winders: Their voice does so nearly resemble the
sound of a horn such as Post-boys use. This same Bird though it be feeble and
weak, yet is it bold and stout, and the Turks have a persuasion that it
frightens and drives away evil spirits. Certes it is so constantly desirous of
liberty, that though it be kept up and fed three whole years in a Cage, if it
get an opportunity of escaping, it will prefer its liberty before its ease, and
fly away to its natural and usual haunts and manner of living.

Of Birds that cannot stand.
THe Indians call a sort of Duck with a black Bill, indifferently broad; tho
whole body almost being white, black, and gray, but about the Head and Neck
purple, white, blue, green, and changeable according as it variously reflects
the Sunbeams, like the Heliotrope stone, or a Peacocks head, Yztactzon
Yayauhqui, or the Bird of a parti-colored Head. Its Legs and Feet are red: Its
food like that of other marshbirds. It is a Bird of passage, coming to the Lake
of Mexico at a certain season. We must not omit to tell you, that this Bird
like the Acitli or Water-Hare cannot walk but only swim; the Legs of both
growing in like manner at the very end of their bodies.

Of the broad-bill'd Bird or Tempatlahoac.
THere is a certain sort of wild Duck among the Indians, called by them
Tempatlahoac, [the Spaniards, Natives of America, call it a Swallow] of the
bigness of a tame Duck, and therefore called among the Indians by the same
name. It has a broad, long Bill, all over black; A white Tongue: Pale-red Legs
and Feet: Its Head and Neck shine with green, purple and black colors, like
those of a Peacock, or the heliotrope stone. Its Eyes are black, and Iris pale:
Its Breast white: But the rest of the body beneath fulvous, and adorned with
two white spots on both sides near the Tail; above beautified with certain
semicircles, the circumference of which from white tended to brown, the middle
or inner part from black to a shining green. The Wings at the setting on [or
beginning] are blue, next white, and then lastly of a shining green. Yet their
extremes are on one side fulvous, on the other side shining and green. The
circumference of the Tail both above and beneath is white, else it is black
underneath, and of a Peacock color above. This also is a stranger coming from
some other Country to the Lake of Mexico, and its flesh is such kind of meat as
that of other marsh Birds.

Of the crested Eagle.
THis is a beautiful kind of Eagle, and as it were crowned like a Kingly Bird;
the Indians call it Yzquauhtli. Its Bill is yellow at the root, then black; Its
Talons black: Its Feet of a pale color: Its Legs and Belly mingled of black
and white: Its Neck fulvous; its Back and Tail black and brown: Its crest or
crown black. It is about as big as a common Ram; and is as stout and hardy as
the fiercest creatures, so that being reclaimed and kept tame upon a slight
provocation, it will assault and fly upon even men themselves. Yet is it very
tame and gentle, and becomes as fit and serviceable for hawking as other Hawks,
of which it is a kind.

Of the Bird having three tunes, or notes.
A Small Bird that sings very sweetly is found in Hispaniola. It sings in three
several voices or notes, varying its tune with almost indivisible modulations:
from a sharp note presently falling down to others, that it seems to utter them
all together, and with one breath to form several notes, as if they proceeded
from three throats. An anonymous manuscript Author, who affirms that himself
has heard, thinks that there is no bird in the World sings more pleasantly,
yea, that it clearly excels the Nightingale in the almost inexplicable
sweetness of its accents. This Bird he says he saw not, only heard it: But
from the testimony of others he declares that it is very beautiful, and adorned
with wonderful variety of lovely colors.

Of the Water-Sparrow.
A Cototloquichitl or the Water-Sparrow, the Cock sings pertinaciously without
intermission. From Sunrising to Sunsetting it chirps and cries stiffly with a
noise like the squeaking of Mice. It gratifies the Palate more than the Ear. It
sits upon Rushes and Seggs, and among them it builds. For bigness and shape it
resembles a Sparrow, yet its Bill is black; its Legs and Feet fulvous. The
lower or underside of the body is for the most part white: The rest fulvous,
varied with a kind of white and black. It is found in the coasts of Mexico.

This Bird is not much unlike that we have entitled the Reed-Sparrow.

Of the hoarse Bird.
THe ludicrous motion and contraction of its Neck at pleasure has ennobled the
Acaca cahucactli, or water bird that cries hoarsly: For the hoarseness of its
voice has given it its name, It is of that kind of Halcyons [King-fishers]
which our Countrymen [Spaniards] are wont to call Martinet Pescador, which
naturally frequents Rivers and Streams of water to get its food. It is a little
less than a wild Duck, having its Bill and Neck of a spanlong: Its Bill is
about three fingers breadth long, of a moderate thickness, ending in a sharp
point, and very fit to strike and peck withal, black above, white underneath,
and pale about the sides. The Pupil of the Eye is black, the Iris next the
Pupil red, then pale, and at last white. From the Eyes to the rise of the Bill
proceeds a Or Swathe.
line [fascia] of a pale green. Its Legs and Feet (which are cloven into toes,
are green on the outside, on the inside incline to paleness. The color of the
whole body is for the most part white, with fulvous feathers intermixed: But the
upper side inclines more to brown, the underside is whiter. The Wings
underneath are gray; above about the extremes black, next from fulvous
inclining to red, then from fulvous declining to pale, and lastly near the Back
fulvous. It feeds and lives upon fishes, very easily becomes tame, and sings
not unpleasantly; but must be carefully and tenderly fed with worms, and
water-insects. You may also for want of other more natural food give its flesh
to eat. It yields a gross nourishment, not unlike to that which wild Ducks
afford. It is native of the Country of Mexico, and breeds in the Spring among
the Rushes. Whereas the Neck, in comparison with the rest of its body, is very
long, it is wonderful strange into what a shortness it can contract it; which
it is commonly wont to do. Its Tail is little and black, showing something of
splendor, and widening into a greater breadth. Here seems to be some fault in
the Copy, the following sentence arguing the word Tolcomoctli to be the name of
another though like Bird.
They call it by its Country-name Tolcomoctli. This Bird would be altogether
like its fellow, were not its Bill black above; and red underneath, as also its
Legs and Feet: And the color of its whole body fulvous and black promiscuously.

Of the Hoactzin.
ITs use in Physic recommends the bird Hoactzin, that utters a sound like its
name. It is almost as big as a Turkey; has a crooked Bill, a white Breast
inclining to yellow: Wings and Tail spotted at intervals of an inch distance:
Of a white and pale color; the Back and upper part of the Neck fulvous, but
both inclining to brown; as do also the temples of the Head as far as the Bill
and Eyes. It has black Claws, and dusky Legs. It has a crest made up of
feathers from white inclining to a pale color, but their backside black. It
feeds upon Snakes. It has a great voice, representing a kind of howling. It
appears in the Autumn, and is by the Natives accounted an unlucky bird. Its
bones assuage the pain of any part of man's body by launcing. The smoke or
suffumigation of its feathers brings them to their right mind who grew
distracted by any sickness. The ashes of its feathers taken inwardly cure the
French Pox, giving mavelous help. It lives in hot Countries, as is Yautepec,
and very often is found sitting upon trees near Rivers.

Of the dry Bird or Hoactli.
NEither is the Hoactli or Tobactli, that is, the dry bird, feeding about the
Lake of Mexico, a contemptible spectacle. From the point of the Bill to the end
of the Tail it is three spans long, and of the bigness of a common Hen. Its
Legs are a foot long: Its Bill is five inches long, [perchance he may mean 1 of
an inch, the words are, Cum uncia trientem,] and an inch thick, black above,
pale on the sides, and underneath black and brown. Its Eyes are great; its Iris
yellow, and Eyelids red. The crown of the Head is covered with black feathers,
and adorned with a crest in like manner black. Its Neck, Breast, Belly, and
whole body are white, but its Tail ash-colored, as are also its Wings above,
for underneath they are whiter. The upper parts of its Wings shine with a kind
of greenness. The Back though it be covered with white Plumage [or down] yet is
wont to be invested with black feathers, inclining to a shining green. The Feet
which are cloven into Toes, and also the Legs are pale. Its Head is compassed
with a white wreath or ring proceeding from the rise of the Bill to the Eyes.
It is a stranger to the Lake of Mexico, coming from some other place; and is
called by Spaniards Natives Martinete pescador, from its catching of fish, upon
which it feeds. It breeds among the Reeds; it bites shrewdly; and has a great
flat voice.

Of the Wind-bird, Heatototl.
HEatototl or the Wind-bird is also worthy to be beheld. It is adorned with a
great orbicular crest, standing up like a crown, and a little whitish. Its
Breast from brown inclines to cinereous: Its Belly is white, and Feet flat: Its
Legs and the feathers growing about them fulvous. Its Tail is round underneath
varied with white and a sooty color, but above brown: Its Wings underneath are
white, ash-colored and sooty, above black, yet with some white feathers
interspersed. In other respects it is of the same nature with other Waterfowl,
and like to the other Heatototle, which is something less then a tame Duck,
with a black, slender round Bill, and near the end wreathen: Its feathers
underneath white, but above near the Thighs fulvous. Its Wings underneath are
ash color, but above brown, black, and white. Its Head is black and crested;
but from the hinder part of the Head black strokes proceed on both sides to the
Eyes, which are black, with a yellow Iris. In other things they are like to
birds frequenting Fens and Marshes.

Of Achalalactli and Amalozque, birds with rings about their necks.
ITs silver-coloured ring adorns the Neck of Achalalactli, or the Bird that
tosses and throws fishes about. Some call it Michalalactli. It is of the
bigness and shape of a Dove, has a black, sharp Bill, three inches long, and
thick for the proportion of its body. Its Head is adorned with a long crest,
from blue inclining to black. Its Belly is covered with white feathers, and its
Neck beautified with a white ring. Its Wings underneath are white, but their
ends brown, spotted with white: Above, like the rest of the body, blue, but
their extreme parts black, and spotted every where with white specks. Its Tail
is partly black, partly blue, but at intervals also varied with white spots.
Its Legs are red; its Feet divided into Toes, ending in black Claws: Its Eyes
black, and Irides white. It is a Not native of it, being a bird of passage.
stranger to this Country of Mexico, and frequents Rivers and Fountains,
feeding upon little fish and water Insects. It is edible, but of like taste and
nourishment with other Fen and Marsh birds.

Nor is the Amalozque or red-neckt bird of less beauty. It is also a
Marsh-bird, of the bigness of our common Turtle-dove: Its Legs and Feet (which
are divided into Toes) being of a delayed red, [or white dashed with red:] Its
Claws black: Its Bill of a moderate length, slender, and black: Its Eyes black,
and Irides red. The lower parts of the Breast, Belly, and Wings are white: But
its Tail, which is of a moderate bigness, is sprinkled with fulvous and black:
But, what is most remarkable, two black collars, distant by the breadth of ones
little finger, encompass the Neck and Breast; the foremost whereof incircles it
round, the hindmost fails and disappears in the upper part, [or above the
Neck.] On both sides are two white spots of equal bigness, above the Eye toward
the Neck, and reaching almost to it. The upper part of the body and also the
tail are of a white, black, and fulvous color. But the Wings above fulvous and
brown. This Bird is native of the Lake of Mexico, breeding and bringing up its
young there in the Springtime. Its flesh is eaten, and affords like
nourishment with that of other Waterfowl. It feeds upon little fishes, Gnats,
and other Water-Insects. It has a louder and stronger cry than suits to the
proportion of its body: yet is it not to be numbered among the clamorous birds.

The healing Wood-pecker, or Tleuquecholtototl.
THis Tleuquecholtototl or Bird with a Head like the Spoon-bill [Platea.] It is
bigger than a Blackbird, has a long black Bill, but the nether Chap much the
shorter. The crown of the Head, and almost the whole Neck above is red, the
lower parts being altogether cinereous. The Wings and Back are black, varied
with transverse white lines. It lives in the fields of Pavatlan, in the
Province of Totonacapae. It is a kind of Wood-pecker, that perforates trees,
the red feathers of whose Head being applied and glued to the Head are reported
to cure the Headache: Whether they came to be of that opinion, because they
grow on the birds Head, or found it to be so by some experiment.

Of the Wood-pecker that breeds in the time when the rains fall.
QUatotoni is a kind of Woodpecker of the bigness of a Hoopoo, varied with a
black and brown color. Its Bill, wherewith it perforates trees, is three
inches long, strong and white, the nether Chap the shorter. Its Head is small,
covered with a red plumage, adorned also with a red crest, three inches long,
and black at top. On each side the Neck goes down a white stroke [fascia] as
low as the breast. Its Legs and feet are of a livid or lead-colour. It lives
not far from the South Sea: Builds upon high trees: Feeds upon Cicadae, or
Tlaolli, Worms, and other Insects. It breeds in the time that the rains fall,
that is from the month of May to September. It is neither good to eat, nor
useful for any thing else that I have heard of.

Of the Queen of the Aurae.
COzcacoauhtli the Indians call a Bird, which they say is the Queen of those
fowl the Mexicans call Aurae. It does not less deserve that name from its
constancy or firmness against all the force of blasts, and impulse of winds. It
approaches in bigness to the Gnossian Eagles. its whole body besides the Neck
and those parts which are near the Breast is from a black purple, fulvous and
dark or sad-coloured. Its Wings underneath about their rise black, else
cinereous; but above mixed of fulvous and black, and something inclining to
purple. Its Legs are red, and Claws hooked. The extremes of the Bill (which one
would think were those of a Parrot, they are so undiscernably like) are white,
the rest of the Bill of a sanguine tincture. The Nosthrils are large; the Eyes
black, but Iris fulvous; the eyelids red: The forehead died with a sanguine
color, and frowning or wrinkling, which wrinkles it does sometimes explicate
and smooth. In which particular, and also in some thin, scattered hairs,
frisled, not unlike Blackmores hairs, it seems to resemble the Turkey. It has
a Tail like an Eagle, gray beneath but black above. It feeds upon Snakes, Mice,
and Lizzards that it catches; but especially upon Carrion, or dead beasts, and
man's dung. It soars aloft, flying high with its Wings spread, and almost
without intermission. It is native of the Province of Mexico, and breeds in the
Spring. With an incredible force it resists the Winds, bearing up stiffly
against them, and persisting in the same place immovable, let them blow never
so boisterously. Its flesh is unuseful for food, not being tasted of by any
man, that I have yet known of, but only for Physic. I hear that the Indians do
heal Ulcers by applying to them the feathers of this bird outwardly, and giving
the Patient its flesh boiled to take inwardly for his food during the
distemper: Which they say also is a present remedy for the French Pox.

Of the Garagay.
GAragay is said to be a Bird of prey, of the bigness of a Kite: Having its
Head and the ends of its Wings white: Being of short flight, a great destroyer
of Crocodiles and Tortoises Eggs. It smells them out though hidden under the
sand in the banks of Rivers, scrapes them up and devours them. It is a solitary
bird, save that the Aurae follow it that they may partake of its prey: For they
cannot scrape in the ground to dig up Eggs.

Of the Hoacton.
THe Female of this Bird, called Hoacton, is a little bigger than the Male
called Hoactli, akin to, or like the common Heron; white on the Neck and Belly,
with brown feathers intermixed. The rest of the body is brown, set here and
there with white feathers. Its Eyes great, and black, with a pale Iris.

Of the Scarlet-feathered Indian Bird.
THe Iustre of its Wings commends the Acolchichi or red-shouldered bird, and
obtained for it of the Spaniards an honorable name, who call these Birds
Commendadores, because they resemble the badge or cognizance of those Knights,
who wear on their side the like shining red. They seem to be a sort of Stares,
which the Spaniards call Tordos, agreeing with them in bigness, color, and
shape, and every where companying with them; although their shoulders at first
appear fulvous, inclining to red, and as they grow older are wholly changed
into a I suppose here is the the mistake in the Copy or Author, and that it
should be red.
fulvous color. Being kept in Cages they learn to imitate humane speech, and
prattle very pleasantly. They eat any thing you offer them, but especially
Bread and Indian Wheat. You may find these Birds both in hot and cold
Countries: By their numerous flocks they are very troublesome to people living
in Towns, especially in hot and maritime Countries. They yield a bad and
unpleasant juice; and build in trees not far from Towns and the commerce of
men, wasting and destroying the cornfieldsd where they light. They sing and
play whether they be shut up in Cages, or suffered to walk freely up and down
the house.

Of fair-feathered Birds.
ITs feathers have made the Quetzaltototl more precious than gold, and
therefore it is called the bird of feathers. It has a crest, and is in good
part adorned with Peacocks feathers, of the bigness of a Pie or Pigeon, having
a crooked yellow Bill, and Feet something yellow. The Tail is composed of very
long feathers, of a shining green, and of a Peacock color, like for shape to
the leaves of Flower-de-luce; and covered above with other black ones, but
beneath and where they touch the Peacock-coloured or purple ones, (which are in
the middle) inclining to green, as if nature took care of the beauty of the
middle feathers. The Crest consists of shining and very beautiful feathers. The
Breast and Neck underneath are covered with a red and shining Plumage; and with
a purple [pavonina] as is also the Back and the sides under the Wings, and the
Belly between the Legs; but the feathers in this last place are of a fainter
color, slender, and soft. The feathers of the Wings are very long, tinctured
with a dilute green, and ending in sharp points. The feathers growing on the
shoulders are green, but black underneath; but those between the Wings are
something crooked, and of the color of the The word is unguium, it may be the
Author may mean humane nails.
Claws. The feathers of this Bird are highly esteemed among the Indians, and
preferred even before Gold it self; the longer ones for crests, and other
ornaments both of the head and whole body, both for War and Peace: But the rest
for setting in feather-works, and composing the figures of Saints and other
things; which they are so skilful in doing, as not to fall short of the most
artificial Pictures drawn in colors. For this purpose they also make use of,
and mingle and weave in together with these the feathers of the humming bird.
These Birds live in the Province of Tecolotlan beyond Quauhtemallam toward
Honduras, where great care is taken that no man kill them: Only it is lawful to
pluck off their feathers, and so let them go naked; yet not for all men
indifferently, but only for the Lords and Proprietors of them; for they descend
to the Heirs as rich possessions. Fr. Hernandez in some pretermitted
annotations adds concerning the manner of taking these Birds some things worth
the knowing. The Fowlers (says he) betake themselves to the Mountains, and
there hiding themselves in small Cottages, scatter up and down boiled Indian
Wheat, and prick down in the ground many rods besmeared with Birdlime,
wherewith the Birds entangled become their prey. They fly in flocks among
trees, on which they are wont to sit, making no unpleasant noise with their
whistling and singing in consort. They have by the instinct of nature such
knowledge of their riches, that once sticking to the Birdlime, they remain
still and quiet, not struggling at all, that they may not mar or injure their
feathers. The beauty whereof they are so in love with, that they choose rather
to be taken and killed, than by endeavoring to get their liberty do any thing
that may deface or prejudice them. They are said to pick holes in trees, and
therein to build and breed up their Young. They feed upon Worms, and certain
wild I suppose this word is mistaken, for what pinnae sylvestres mean I know
not.
Pinnae, of that sort which the Mexicans are wont to call Matzatli. They love
the open air, nor has it been yet found, that ever they would be kept tame, or
brought up in houses. They make a noise not much unlike Parrots: But they have
a cheerful and pleasant whistle, and they sing thrice a day, to wit, in the
Morning, at Noon, and about Sunset.

Next to the Quetzaltototl the Tzinitzian is most esteemed. It is a small bird,
almost as big as a Dove, clothed with feathers of many colors, with which the
Natives compose Images and Figures of wonderful subtilty and curiosity: For
from this artifice they are become known and famous all the world over. These
they use and make show of on Feast days, in War, in their Temples, and public
Merriments and Dancings. Its Bill is short, crooked, and pale; its Head and
Neck like a Doves, but covered with green and shining feathers. Its Breast and
Belly are red, excepting that part which is next the Tail: For that is died
with blue and white promiscuously. Its Tail green above, and black underneath:
Its Wings partly white, and partly black. The Iris of its Eye is yellow, but
inclining to scarlet: The Legs and Feet cinereous. It lives in hot Countries
near the Southern Ocean. It is nourished up in Cages, and fed with fruits. It
is as beautiful and lovely a Bird as any is, but neither does it sing, nor is
its flesh (that I know of) good.

Totoquestal also (as Antonius Herrera writes) is a lesser-sized bird than a
Pigeon, all over green. The feathers of its Tail are very long, highly prized,
and a special commodity used in commerce. It was a capital crime to kill this
bird; wherefore they only plucked it, and let it go.

Of the Thrushes of Chiappa and Artisicer-Sparrows.
THere is a sort of Thrushes found in Chiappa, which they call
Artisicer-Sparrows. They are black only on the Breast, and red on the Head.
They feed only upon Acorns. With their Bill they perforate the barks of
Pine-trees; and in each hole fitly accommodate or stick in an acorn, so that by
the hand it cannot be plucked out; and so very elegantly set the Pine Tree round
with Acorns. Then sticking to the bark with their Feet, they strike the A corn
with their Bill, and devour the kernel.

Of the long bird or Hoitlallotl.
HOitlallotl or the long bird is more taken notice of for its running than for
its feathers. From the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail (which also is a
span long) it is extended nine inches. Its Bill is black above, cinereous
underneath, three inches long, and moderately thick. Its Tail is green, but
with a purplish splendor. The feathers of the whole body from white tend to
fulvous, but toward the Tail from black to the same color. Yet the feathers on
the upper side of the body are black, sprinkled with white spots. It flies near
the ground, and makes but short slights; but runs so swiftly that it far
exceeds the speed of the fleetest horses. It lives in hot Countries, and yields
no very desirable nourishment.

Of Indian Quails.
THose of New Spain call Quails Colin. These are like our Country Quails,
though they be without doubt to be referred to the kind of Partridges. There
are found many sorts of them in New Spain: Some brown and crested, which they
call Quauhtzonecolim; of a moderate bigness, and a remarkable, but mournful
cry: Others brown in like manner, but without crests, and a little less:
Others, the biggest of all, of a fulvous color, but their Heads varied with
white and black, the ends [extremis] of their Wings and Back white, their Bill
and Feet black. They are all (as I said) like to the Spanish Quails, very good
and pleasant meat, provided you kill them two or three days before they be
roasted and served up. Physicians allow sick persons to eat of their flesh:
Neither is there any Fowl among the Indians, next to tame Poultry, whose flesh
is to be preferred before it, either for wholsomness or taste. They have a tune
like our Quails, and some a more pleasant one than others. They are kept in
Coops, and fed either with common or Indian Wheat; and are common in many parts
of this Country.

The same Author [Fr. Hernandez] of the Coyolcozgue or sounding Quail in
another place writes thus. It is one among many other sorts of Colin or Mexican
Quails, of which we shall speak singly: like to our Quails for bigness, note,
feeding, flight, and conditions, but of a different color; above mingled of
fulvous and white, underneath only fulvous; yet the crown of the Head and the
Neck are set with black and white feathers; which make seams or strakes on each
side from the Neck to both Eyes. The Eyes are black, and the Legs fulvous. It
is native of this Country, and frequent in the open fields, as is the common
Quail, and yields a like nourishment, coming next to the Spanish Partridge, of
which it is a sort.

Colcuicuiltic or the Quails Image is also a sort of Quail varied with white,
black, and scarlet Plumes; above rather produced in lines than round spots,
underneath disposed rather into thick-set spots than lines. Its Feet and Legs
are blue: But for its note, bigness, conditions, and all other qualities, it is
altogether like the precedent.

Acolin is of the bigness of a Stare, has pale-green Legs and Feet, divided
into four pretty long Toes. Its Bill is yellow, and of the longest for the
proportion of its body, slender also, and sharp-pointed: Its Eyes black, its
Irides fulvous, and Head small, The under side of the body is white, the sides
spotted with brown: The upper surface of the body and the Tail (which is short)
are fulvous, but spotted with black; lines of white encircling all the
feathers, sprinkled or powdered sometimes with specks of the same color. It
frequents Lakes, and has a fishy taste, yet is it no unpleasant meat. It feeds
usually upon Worms, Flies, and other Insects flying about the Fens. It breeds
in the Lake of Mexico. Its Head glisters with a wonderful variety of colors, a
black line dividing it in the middle, and others of a gray or ash color
distinguishing the sides: The exterior corners being pointed with small white
spots. The Neck and Breast are gray [cinerea,] the rest of the Plumage from
fulvous rather incline to green.

Of the Snow-bird or Ceoan.
IT is a little bigger than a Thrush: Esteemed of for imitation of humane
speech: About the Breast, Belly, and setting on of the Wings fulvous; near the
Tail are gray feathers mingled with the fulvous. The ends of the Wings and the
Tail it self underneath are cinereous: But above, all the body is of a dark
brown. The Bill, (which is small and slender) and the Legs are fulvous: The
Chin is white, yet having some black feathers intermixed. It imitates humane
speech, mocking, and as it were deriding those that pass by: Whom yet if it may
it will follow.

Of the Cenotzqui or Snow-calling bird.
IT deserves its name, because before it snows it cries, afterward is silent.
It is remarkable for variety of colors: Having a fulvous Breast, pale Legs,
black Claws, a Belly spotted with black and white. Under the Wings it is white
and ash-colored; above fulvous, black, and then cinereous spotted with black,
and near the ends or tips speckled with white. Its Tail underneath is black and
white, above fulvous, spotted with black. Its Head is black, encircled with a
wreath of gray: Its Bill small, gray both above and beneath, but above near its
rise encompassed with a yellow line. Its Eyes are black, and Eyelids pale. It
endures any kind of air or weather, but abides in mountainous places, and in
the Springtime breeds and brings up its Young. It so turns its Head up and
down, winding its Neck every way, that abiding immovable in the same site it
can look round about it.

There is also another sort of this Bird differing in some varieties of color,
having its Head fulvous and gray, its Neck partly black, and partly white,
which some call Loceto.

Of the Bird called Pauxi.
I Take this to be the same with the Mitu of Marggravius, and with the Mountain
Bird or Tepetototl above described. The whole difference is in the Crest,
instead whereof this Bird has a certain tumor at the root of its Beak, of the
figure of a Pear, and the hardness of a stone; of a blue color like that of
the Turcois stone. In another place he says, that this tumor called a stone,
though it be not over-hard, is like an Egg or bigger, of a rusty color.

Of Picicitli.
THe small Bird called Picicitli appears after showers: It is noted for the
obscurity of its original. The Tetzcoquenses do not yet know where it breeds.
It is a mute Bird, brought up in the house it soon dies and decays. It
gratifies both the Palate and Stomach. It is all over ash-colored, except the
Head and Neck, which are both black: Only a white spot encompasses its black
Eyes.

Of the Of many notes.
Polyglott Bird.
I Saw, heard, and admired a small Bird brought to Madrid, the Queen of all
singing Birds, that could command any voice or tune. The Indians from its
multiplicity of notes call it Cencontlatolli or four hundred tongues. It is not
bigger than a Starling, white underneath, brown above, with some black and
white feathers intermixed; especially next the Tail, and about the Head which is
encircled with the likeness of a silver crown. It is kept in Cages to delight
the ear, and for a natural rarity or rather wonder. It excells all Birds in
sweetness and variety of Song, and perfect command of its voice; imitating the
note of any sort of Bird whatsoever, and excelling its exemplar. It goes far
beyond the Nightingale. I my self kept it a long time, It is content with any
meat; it loves hot Countries, but can abide temperate.

Tzaupan is like to this. Some suspect that it is only the Hen of the same
sort, they being equal in bigness, singing alike, and agreeing in shape, saving
that the feathers underneath are white, cinereous, and black, those above
sad-coloured, black and white.

Of the singing Night-bird.
CHicuatli or the Night-bird is of the bigness of our Woodcock, has a long,
slender, black Bill, and crooked yellow seams near each Eye. The lower parts of
the body are of a pale color, with a few black feathers intermixed about the
Neck. The Eyes are black, with yellow Irides. The rest of the body is of a
mingled color of fulvous, brown, and gray. It lives in the Mountains, and
flies low: Being kept in a Cage it prattles or chatters prettily. It is easily
brought up, for it is wont to feed upon bread made of Tlaolli, Worms, Gnats,
and other Insects. It is taken both in hot and cold Countries; it feeds fat,
and affords no contemptible nourishment. Some there are that call it
Chiquatototl from the Owl, being a Bird not less Augural and ominous than that.

Of the Xomotl.
WE owe the protection and coverture of our nakedness not to Sheep and
Quadrupeds only; for the Indians weave the feathers of this Bird into their
Garments. It is whole-footed, has its Back and Wings above black, its Breast
brown. When it is angry it ruffles up the feathers upon its Head like a Crest.

Of the Rabihorcado.
THis Bird divides its forked Tail into two parts, sometimes opening, sometimes
shutting or drawing them together like a Tailors Sheers: Therefore it is called
Rabihorcado, and by the Portughese, Raboforcado.

An account of some Birds of the Ferroe or Ferroyer Islands, out of Hoiers
Epistle to Clus.
THe Birds of the first and second Classis are inserted already into this work
in their proper places.

In the third Classis or rank (says the Author) I place three Species
different in shape, but in this quality very near of kin that they presage
storms and tempests, and abide only far out at Sea. The biggest of these is
much about the bigness of an ordinary Pullet, [or middle-sized Hen,] of the
shape of a Falcon. It is commonly, and not improperly, called Haffhert, i. e.
The Seahorse. It is all over of an ash color, and every where spotted with
white; it has a crooked Beak like a Falcons, but shorter. At the sight thereof
the Fishermen are horribly afraid, as they are also at the appearance of the
two following, and make to the Shore as fast as they can, being sure that there
is a dangerous tempest at hand.

The second, called Stormfinck, is a little bigger than a Sparrow. This also is
all gray, but without spots, having a very slender Bill. You might with better
reason term this Pegasus than the former: For that you shall to admiration see
it with incredible velocity run upon the very Waves, crossing of them as swift
as the Wind, being carried on like a storm, as its name imports. If flocks of
these draw near to any Vessels at Sea; experienced Mariners know they must
presently lowr their Sails. This Bird seems to have some affinity with that
which Oviedus mentions in his fourteenth Book of the natural and general
History of the Indies, about the beginning of the first Chapter, telling us,
that the Mariners call it Patines: It being of equal velocity in flying even in
a troubled and tempestuous Sea, so that one would think it ran with a swift
course over the tops of the Waves.

The third Species named Barnfiard, is equal to a Sparrow, white under the
Breast, with the Neck and Back black: Its Beak is also black, and somewhat
broad: Its Feet red: This is as swift in swimming as the Stormfinck in running.
Where these three kinds breed their Young is not known. Whence, in my opinion,
among all that we have enumerated they seem to come nearest to the description
of the Halcyon; though in color they do not altogether agree with Plinies
description.

5. In the fifth rank remain to be described two different sorts of wild Geese;
the former whereof, called Helsingegnaas, has a black Head and Neck
encompassed with a white ring, a white Breast, gray Wings, a blue Back, and red
Feet. In bigness it answers to a Duck: The other sort [Erandgaas] is a little
less than a wild Goose. Its Head is gray: Its Neck compassed with a circle of
red: Its Breast gray, in like manner its Wings and Neck: Its Feet red. These
kinds of Geese are very rarely seen in the Ferroyer Islands, nor do they breed
there. Whence they come, and whither they go no man knows. But the Inhabitants
have a superstitious conceit, grounded upon long experience, that when they do
appear they portend a change of Magistracy of Government. Beside these here is
also plenty of common wild Geese.

Gesners Wood-Crow. Aldrov. lib. 19. cap. 57.
OUr Wood-crow is of the bigness of a Hen, black all the body over, if you
behold it at a distance. But if you view it near hand, especially in the Sun,
the black seems to be mingled with green. Its Feet are almost like a Hens, but
longer: Its Toes divided: Its Tail not long. It has a Crest hanging down
backwards from the Head, which I know not whether it be in all Birds of this
sort, and always. Its Bill is red, long, and fit to thrust into the narrow
chinks and holes of the Earth, Trees, Walls, and Rocks, to fetch out Grubs and
Insects lurking there, upon which it feeds. Its Legs are long, and of a dark
red. I hear that it feeds upon Grasshoppers, Crickets, little Fishes, and Frogs.
It builds for the most part in the high Walls of demolished or ruinous Towers,
which are common in the mountainous parts of Switzerland. In the stomach of one
dissected, besides other Insects I sometimes found very many of those which eat
the roots of corn, especially Millet; the French call them Curtillas, our
Countrymen [the Germans] Tuaren, from the site of their Feet, as I conjecture.
They eat also those Grubs of which the May-flies are bred. They fly very high:
They lay two or three Eggs. The first of all (as far as I know) fly away about
the beginning of June, if I be not mistaken. Their Young taken out of the Nest
before they can fly may easily be fed, and made so tame, as to fly out into the
fields and return of their own accord. The young ones are commended for good
meat, and counted a dainty: Their flesh is sweet, and their bones tender. Those
that take them out of the Nests are wont to leave one in each, that they may
the more willingly return the following year. They are called by our
Countrymen, Wald-rapp, that is Wood-Crows, because they are wont to live in
woody, mountainous, and desert places: Where they build in Rocks, or old
forsaken Towers: Wherefore also they are called Steinrapp, and elsewhere [in
Bavaria and Stiria] Clauszrapp, from the Rocks, or Crags, and straits between
Mountains, which the Germans call Clausen, that is, enclosed places, wherein
they build their Nests.

Mr. Willughby suspects this Bird to be no other than the Coracias or
Pyrrhocorax: But if it be rightly described its bigness and the crest on its
head forbid it.

A SUMMARY OF FALCONRY, Collected out of several Authors.
FAlconry is usually divided into two parts: The first concerning the
reclaiming and managing of Hawks: The second concerning the diseases of Hawks,
their signs, prevention, and cures. Which method I shall also observe.

In the first part I shall give 1. An Exposition of some words and terms of
Art. 2. Some general observations. 3. I shall proceed to the managing and
reclaiming of 1. Long-winged Hawks, viz. The Falcon, Ger-falcon, Lanner,
Merlin, and Hobby. 2. Short-winged Hawks, viz. The Goshawk, and Sparrow-hawk.

CHAP. I. Terms of Art used in Falconry explained.
B.
BAting, is endeavoring to fly off the Fist or Perch to which the Hawk is
tied: from the French word Battere. Bathing needs no explication. Bowsing is
when a Hawk drinks often, and seems to be continually thirsty. A Brancher, Vide
A Ramage Hawk.
C.
CRabbing is when Hawks, standing too near, fight one with another. A Creance
is a fine small long line of fine and even twined Packthred, which is fastened
to the Hawks Lease. The Cere is that skin which covers the base of a Hawks
Bill, from the Latin word Cera, signifying Wax, because it is in most birds of
prey of the color of Bees Wax; The skin of the Legs and Feet, as far as it is
bare of feathers, is also so called. Check, or to kill check is when Crows,
Rooks, Pies, or other Birds coming in the view of the Hawk, she forsakes her
natural flight to fly at them. Casting is any thing you give your Hawk to
cleanse her gorge with, whether it be Flannel, Thrums, Thistle down, Feathers,
or the like. What ever you give them of this kind, overnight, or at any other
time, it is the nature of these Birds to cast it up again the next morning, or
after a convenient time, made up into a lump or pellet. A Cadge is that on
which the Falconers carry many Hawks together, when they bring them to sell. To
Cope a Hawk is to cut her Beak or Talons.
D.
DIsclosed is newly hatched. Dropping is when a Hawk mutes directly downward,
and jerketh it not long ways from her.
E.
TO Endew is when a Hawk digesteth her meat, not only putting it from her
gorge, but cleansing her panel. An Eyas or Nyas Hawk is a Hawk taken out of
the Nest, or brought away in the Nest. The Eyrie is the Nest, or place where
Hawks build and breed their Young.
G.
THe Gorge is that part of the Hawk which first receives the meat, called in
other fowls the Craw or Crop. Gurgiting is when a Hawk is stuffed or suffocated
with any thing, be it meat or ought else.
I.
THe Ink, whether it be of Partridge, Dove, or any other prey, is the Neck from
the Head to the body. Intermewd is from the first exchange of a Hawks coat, or
from her first mewing till she come to be a white Hawk. Jesses are those short
straps of leather, which are fastened to the Hawks Legs, and so to the Lease by
Varvels, Anlets, or such like. To Imp is to put a feather into Wings or Train,
instead of one lost or broken: from the Latin impono.
L.
THe Lease is a small long thong of leather, by which the Falconer holds his
Hawk fast, folding it many times about his finger. The Lure is that whereto
Falconers call their young Hawk, by casting it up in the air; being made of
Feathers and leather, in such wise that in the motion it looks not unlike a
fowl.
M.
THe Mail of a Hawk is the Breast or Plumage of the Breast in reference to its
color: So they say a Hawk changes the mail, or is white-maild, etc. To mail a
Hawk is so to wrap her up in a handkerchief, or other cloth, that she may not
be able to stir her Wings or struggle. Muting is the excrement or ordure that
comes from a Hawk, and contains both dung and urine. A make-hawk is an old
staunch flying Hawk, which being inured to her flight will easily instruct a
younger Hawk. To make or manage a Hawk, is by Art to prepare, fit, and instruct
her to fly at any game. The Mew is the place, whether it be abroad, or in the
house, where you set down your Hawk during the time she changes her feathers.
The word mew signifies to change, being derived of the Latin muto.
N.
THe Nares, i. e. The Nosthrils: It is a Latin word.
P.
PLuming is when a Hawk seizes on a Fowl, and plucks the feathers from the
body. Plumage are small downy feathers, which the Hawk takes, or are given her
for casting. The Pelt is the dead body of any fowl however dismembered. The Pill
and pelf of a fowl is that broken remains or refuse, which are left after the
Hawk has been relieved. The Plume is the general color or mixture of feathers
in a Hawk, which shows her constitution. A Perch is that whereon you set
down your Hawk when you put her off your fist. The Panel is that part of the
Hawk next her fundament. I take it, they mean the stomach [ventriculus] by this
word.
Q.
THe Quarry is the fowl which is flown at, and slain at any time, especially
when young Hawks are flown thereto.
R.
A Ramage-Hawk or Brancher is a young Hawk that has just left the Nest, but
flies not far from it, only leaping from bough to bough, and following the old
one. Ramage is also said of a Hawk that is wild, coy, or disdainful to the man,
and hard to be reclaimed. Reclaiming is to tame, make gentle, or bring a Hawk
to familiarity with the man. A Rufter-hood is the first hood a Hawk wears,
being large, wide, and open behind.
S.
THe Sarcel is the extreme pinion feather in a Hawks Wing. Seizing is when a
Hawk takes any thing into her foot, and gripeth or holds it fast. Slicing, is
when a Hawk muteth from her long-ways, in one entire substance, and does not
drop any part thereof. Stouping is when a Hawk being on her Wings at the height
of her pitch, bends violently down to strike her prey. Summed is when a Hawk
has all her feathers, and is fit to be taken out of the mew. Setting down is
putting a Hawk into the mew. A Sore-hawk is from the first taking her from the
Eyrie till she has mewed her feathers. To Seel a Hawk is artificially to sow
up her Eyes, so that she may see but little.
T.
THe Train of a Hawk is her Tail. Trussing is when a Hawk raseth a fowl aloft,
and so descends down with it to the ground. To truss a Hawk is to tie her
Wings so as she cannot stir them.
U.
UNsummed is when a Hawks feathers are not come forth, or not come to their
full length. Varvels joining the Jesses to the Lease.
W.
WEathering is setting abroad your Hawk to take the air either by day or by
night, in the frost or in the Sun, or at any other season.
CHAP. II. Some general Rules and Observations for a Falconer or Ostrager to
remark and practice, collected out of Carcanus and other Authors.
1. A Falconer out to learn and mark the quality and mettle of his Hawks, to
know which he shall fly with early, and which late.

2. He must be fond of his Hawk, patient with her, and careful to keep her
clean of Lice and Mites, etc.

3. He must rather keep his Hawk high and full of flesh than poor and low,
being when poor much more subject to infirmities.

4. Every night after flying he must give her Casting, sometimes Plumage,
sometimes pellets of Cotton, or the like: Sometimes also he must give her
Physic, as by her casting and mewts he shall perceive her to need it.

5. Every night he must make the place very clean under her Perch, that he may
know assuredly whether she has cast or not; and by her casting whether she
needs scouring, Stones, or the like.

6. He must remember every day to weather his Hawk in the Evening; excepting
such days wherein she has bathed; after which in the Evening she should be put
in a warm room, on a Perch with a Candle burning by her, where she must sit
unhooded if she be gentle, to the end she may trick her self, and rejoice by
enoiling her after the water, before she fly again. In the morning early he
must also set her out to weather, where she may cast, if she has not done it
already, and there keep her hooded till such time as she goes into the field.

7. In feeding his Hawk he must beware of giving her two sorts of meat at one
time; and have a care that what he give her be perfectly sweet.

8. If he have occasion to go abroad, let him not leave his Hawk tied on too
high a Perch, for fear of bating and hanging by the heels, whereby she may
spoil her self. Two Hawks must not be set so near as to approach one another,
for fear of crabbing.

9. He ought to carry into the field with him mummy in powder, with other
medicines; for frequently the Hawk meets with many accidents, as bruises at
encounters, etc. nor must he be unfurnished with Aloes washed, Cloves, Saffron,
Casting, Cryance, and such like necessary implements, as coping Irons to cope
the Beak and Talons, if need be.

10. He must be able to make his Lures, Hoods, Jesses, Bewets, and other
needful furniture.

CHAP. III. Of the reclaiming and managing long-winged Hawks, and first of the
Falcon.
. I. Of the reclaiming and making a Falcon, out of Turbervile, according to
Tardiff, as I suppose.
A Falcon newly taken should be seel'd in such sort, that when the seeling
begins to slacken, she may see forwards the meat that is straight before her,
for she is better content when she sees it so, than if she saw it sideways, or
looking back. And she should not be seel'd too straight.

Such a Hawk should have all new furniture, as new Jesses (maild) a Lease made
with a button at the end, and new Bewets. You must also have a little round
stick hanging in a string, with which you must frequently stroke your Hawk. For
the more she is handled, the sooner and better will she be reclaimed and
manned, she must have two good Bells, that she may the better be found and
heard when she stirs or scratteth. Her Hood must be well fashioned, raised
and bossed against her Eyes, deep, and yet straight enough beneath, that it may
better abide on her head without hurting her. You must also a little cope her
Beak and Talons, but not so near as to make them bleed.

The Soar Falcon, which has been timely taken, and already passed the Seas, is
held by some to be the best Falcon, and also hard to be won and manned: Such an
one you must feed with warm meat, as Pigeons, and such like quick birds, until
she be full gorged, twice a day for three days. For you must not all at once
break her off her accustomed diet, which was warm meat.

When you feed her you must whoop and lure as you do when you call a Hawk, that
she may know when you will give her meat.

You must unhood her gently, giving her two or three bits, and putting on her
Hood again give her as much more. Be sure that she be close seeled. After three
days, if you perceive her feed with a good appetite, begin to abate her meat,
giving her but little at once and often till Evening, and bear her late on your
fist before you go to bed, setting her near you, that you may wake her often in
the night. Before day take her on your fist again, with some quick bird. After
two or three nights, when you find she begins to grow gentle, and feed eagerly
on good meat, change her diet, giving her sheeps heart, often, but little at
once.

Late at Even let her seeling thread a little loose, spouting water in her
face, that she may jeouk the less, and watching her all night hold her upon
your fist unhooded. But if she see any thing she mislikes, and makes show of
being afraid, carry her into some dark place, where you have no more light but
to hood her again. Afterward give her some beaching of good meat; and watch
her diverse nights together till she be reclaimed, and jeouk upon the fist by
day. Although to let her jeouk also sometimes in the night will make her the
sooner manned. In the Morning by break of day give her warm meat. When she
begins to be acquainted you may unhood her in the day time far from company; at
taking off, and after putting on the Hood, giving her a bit or two of meat. For
to unhood her in a place where she may be frayed is enough to mar her at first.
When she begins to be acquainted with company, and is sharp-set, unhood her,
and give her a bit or two, holding her right against your face, for that will
cause to dread no company. At night cut the thread wherewith she was seeled.
You need not watch her, but only set her by you, and wake her two or three
times in the night. For over-watching is not good, if she may be reclaimed
otherwise. When you have brought her thus far, then give her washed meat, laid
in clear water half a day, and beach her in the morning, that she may always
have somewhat in her gorge. Cause her to feed in company, giving her about
Sunrising the wing of a Hen or Pullet, and at Evening take the foot of a Hare
or Coney, chopped off above the joint, and flay it, cutting away the Claws; steep
the skin in fair water (pressing and wringing it a little) the which you shall
give her with the joint of the pinion of a Hens wing. Give your Hawk no
feathers till she be thoroughly reclaimed: For till then she dares not cast on
the fist: and on the fist you must bear her till she be thoroughly manned. When
she makes semblance to cast, unhood her gently by the tassel of the hood. [You
may give her two days washed meat, and the third Plumage, as she is clean or
foul within.] When she has cast, hood her again, giving her nothing to eat
till she has gleamed after her casting; but when she has cast and gleamed
give her a beaching of hot meat in company, by two or three bits at once: And
at Evening make her plume a Hens wing, being in company also.

If the feathers of her casting be foul or slimy, and of a yellowish color, be
sure to cleanse her with washed meat and casting: If she be clean within, give
her not so strong casting as Hares feet, but the pinion of an old Hens wing, or
the neck-bone chopped four or five times between the joints, washed and steeped
in fair water.

. II. How to lure a Hawk lately manned.
HAving well reclaimed her, thoroughly manned her and made her eager and
sharpset, then you may venture to feed her on the lure.

But before you show her the lure you must consider these three things: 1. That
she be bold and familiar in company, and no ways afraid of Dogs and Horses. 2.
That she be sharp-set and hungry, regarding the hour of the Morning and Evening
when you will lure her. 3. That she be clean within. The Lure must be well
garnished with meat on both sides, and you must abscond your self when you
would give her the length of the Lease. You must first unhood her, giving her a
bit or two on the Lure, as she sits on your fist: Afterward take the Lure
from her, and so hide it that she see it not; and when she is unseized, cast
the Lure so near her that she may catch it within the length of her Lease; use
your voice according to the custom of Falconers, and feed her upon the Lure on
the ground, with the heart and warm thigh of a Pullet. Having so lured her at
Evening give her but a little meat, and let this luring be so timely that you
may give her Plumage, and the jack of a joint.

In the Morning betimes take her on your fist, and when she has cast and
gleamed give her a little beaching of warm meat. Afterward when it is time to
feed her, take a Creance, and tie it to her Lease, and go into some pleasant
field or meadow, and give her a bit or two on the Lure; and if you find that
she is sharp-set, and has seized eagerly on the Lure, then give her some one
to hold, to let her off to the Lure. Then unwind the Creance, and draw it after
you a good way; and let him which holds the Hawk hold his right hand on the
Tassel of the Hawks hood in readiness, so that he may unhood her as soon as you
begin to lure: And if she come well to the Lure, and stoop upon it roundly, and
seize it eagerly, then let her eat two or three bits thereon. Then unseize her
and take her off the Lure, hood her, and deliver her again to him that held
her, and going further off lure her, feeding her as before with the accustomed
voice. Thus lure her every day further and further off, till she is accustomed
to come freely and eagerly to the Lure. After this lure her in company, but
have a care that nothing affright her and when you have used her to the Lure on
foot, then lure her on horseback, which you may effect the sooner, by causing
horsemen to be about you when you lure her on foot: Also you may do it the
sooner by rewarding her upon the Lure on horseback among horsemen. When this
way she grows familiar, let some body on foot hold the Hawk, and he that is on
horseback must call and cast the Lure about his head. Then must the holder take
off the hood by the Tassel: And if she seize eagerly upon the Lure, without
fear of man or horse, then take off the Creance, and lure her loose at a
greater distance. And if you would have her love Dogs as well as the Lure, call
Dogs about you when you feed her, or give her Tiring or Plumage.

. III. Of bathing a Falcon lately reclaimed, and how to make her flying, and to
hate the Check.
HAving weaned your Hawk from her ramageness, she being both ways lured,
thoroughly reclaimed, and likewise in good case, offer her some water to bathe
her self in, in a Basin, wherein she may stand up to the thighs, choosing a
temperate, clear day for that purpose. Having lured your Hawk, and rewarded her
with warm meat, in the Morning carry her to some bank, and there hold her in
the Sun till she has endewed her gorge, taking off her hood, that she may
preen and pick her self: That being done hood her again, and set her near the
Basin, and taking off her hood let her bathe as long as she pleases: After this
take her up, and let her pick her self as before, and then feed her. If she
refuse the Basin to bath in, show her some small River or Brook for that
purpose. By this use of bathing she gains strength and a sharp appetite, and
thereby grows bold: But that day wherein she batheth give her no washed meat.

If you would make your Falcon upwards, the next day after she has bathed get
on horseback, either in the Morning or Evening, and choose out some field
wherein are no Rooks or Pigeons: Then take your Lure well garnished on both
sides, and having unhooded your Hawk give her a bit or two on the Lure, then
hood her: Afterward go leisurely against the Wind, then unhood her, and before
she bate, or find any Check in her eye, whistle her off from your fist fair and
softly. As she flies about you trot on with your horse, and cast out your
Lure, not suffering her to fly long about you at first: Continue thus doing
Morning and Evening for seven or eight days. But if you find your Hawk
unwilling to fly about you, or stoop to the Lure, then must you let her fly
with some Hawk that loves the company of others, and will not rove at any
Change or Check: And that must first be done at a Partridge, for they will not
fly far before the Hawk. If she has flown twice or thrice, cast out the Lure,
and reward her on horseback, feeding her up to a full gorge, on the ground,
with good hot meat, to make her more courageous and resolute in flying, and to
return to you with a better will. If the fowl you flew her at be killed by
another Hawk, let her feed with him a little, and then further reward her on
the Lure.

If you would have your Hawk prove upwards and high-flying, you must let her
fly with such as are so qualified. If she love the company of others, and is
taught to hold in the Head, then if the Fowl be in Pool, Pit, or Plash, cast
off your highflying Hawk, and let him that has your new-lured Hawk get under
the Wind, and when he sees his advantage let him unhood her, and if she bate,
it is out of desire to get up to the other Hawk. Let him then cast her off, and
before she get up to the other, now near his full pitch, lay out the Fowl. If
she kill her Game reward her with the heart, and let her partake of the Breast
with the other Hawk.

To take your Falcon from going off to any check, thus you must do. If she has
killed a check, and has feed thereon before you could come in, rebuke her not
severely at first, but take her down to the Lure, give her a bit or two, hood
her, and fly her not in three or four days; and if you do, let it be where no
checks are: But if you come in before she has tasted the check she has
killed, then take the Gall of a Hen and anoint the breast of the fowl she has
killed [any other bitter thing will do, but you must not put on too much] and
this will make her hate to go at Check again, hving little list to fly at such
a fowl.

. IV. How to enseam and make a Falcon, with her castings and scowrings, etc.
THe longer a Falcon has been in the Falconers hands the harder she is to be
enseamed: Because a Hawk that preyeth for her self feeds cleaner and better
according to her nature; and has the benefit of open air, and more exercise.
When you draw your Hawk out of the Mew, if she be greasy, (which you shall
know by the roundness of her thighs, and fullness of her body, the flesh being
round, and as high as her Breast bone,) and if she be well mewed, and have all
her feathers full summed, then give her in the Morning a bit or two of hot
meat: at night give her but little, unless it be very cold. If she feed well
and freely, then give her washed meat thus prepared: Take the Wings of a Hen or
Pullet for her dinner, and wash them in two waters; and if you give her Hares
flesh or Beef, let it be washed in three waters: On the morrow give her the Leg
of a Hen very hot, and at Noon meat temperately warm, a good gorge, then let
her fast until it be late in the Evening; and if she have put over her meat,
then give her a little warm meat, as you did in the Morning, and thus let her
be dieted till it be time to give her Plumage: Which you shall know by three
tokens. 1. By the tenderness and softness of the flesh at the end of the pinion
of the Wing, above what it was before she eat washed meat. 2. By the mewts being
clean and white, the black thereof being right black, and not mingled with any
foul thing or color. 3. If she be sharp-set and plume eagerly. You may give
her casting of a Hares or Conies foot, as was before prescribed, or the small
feathers on the pinion of an old Hens Wing.

Having set her on the Perch, sweep clean underneath, that you may see whether
the mewt be full of streaks, or skins, or slimy: If it be, then continue this
sort of casting three or four nights together; but if you find the feathers
digested and soft, and that her casting is great, then take the Neck of an old
Hen, and cut it between the joints; then lay it in cold water, and give it your
Falcon three nights together: In the daytime give her washed meat after this
casting or plumage, as you shall see requisite: And this will bear all down
into the panel.

When you have drawn your Falcon out of the Mew, and her principal feathers be
not yet full summed, but some in the quill, do not give her washed meat, but
quick birds, and good gorges thereof, and set her as much as may be in open
places, for otherwise her feathers may chance to shrink in the quil and come to
nothing.

When you feed your Falcon call and lure as if you called her to the Lure, and
every day profer her water, and every night give her castings accordingly as
she endeweth. Take off her hood frequently in company, that you may hinder her
from bating, holding the hood always ready by the Tassel in your hand.

In the Evening by Candlelight take off her hood among company, till she rowze
and mewt; then set her on the Perch, and not before, setting a light before
her.

Every Falcon ought to have a Make-Hawk to teach her to hold in the head: If
that will not do, cut off some part of her two principal feathers in each Wing,
the long one, and that next to it, which will force her to hold in.

Be sure to reward your Hawk well at the beginning, and let he feed well on the
Quarry, which will so encourage her that she will have no fancy to go out to
the Check. When she is well in blood and well quarried, then let her fly with
other Hawks.

If you would make your Falcon to the Crane, her Lure should be a counterfeit
Crane. If you would make her to the Hare, her Lure should be then a Hares Skin
stuffed with some light matter: When she is well lured, and you would enter her,
tie the Hares Skin so stuffed to the end of a Creance, and fasten it to your
Saddle-pummel, by which means when you gallop it will resemble a running Hare:
Then unhood your Hawk, and cry, Back with the Dogs, Back with the Dogs. When
you find she has seized it, let go your Creance, and suffer her to fasten
thereon; then instantly reward her upon it, and encourage her as much as is
possible.

When she is well entered after this manner, take a living Hare and break one of
her hinder Legs, and having before well acquainted your Falcon with your Dogs
by coutinual feeding among them, I say then put your Hare out in some fair
place with your Dogs, and the Falcon will stoop and ruff her until the Dogs may
take her; then take the Hare from the Dogs, and cast her out to the Falcon,
crying, Back, back there.

If you would make your Hawk flying to the Partridge or Pheasant after she is
reclaimed and made, then every time you lure her cast your Lure into some low
Tree or Bush, that she may learn to take the Tree or Stand: If she take the
Stand before she sees the Lure, let her stand a while, and afterward draw the
Lure out before her, and cry with what words you have acquainted her to
understand you by, and then reward her well. After this manner she will learn
to take stand.

Feed her always on the ground, or in some thick place, for in such places she
must encounter with the Pheasant at Perch.

At first fly with her at young Pheasant or Partridge, to encourage her by
advantage, and afterward at the old.

If a Falcon will not take stand, but keep on the Wing, then must you fly her
in plain places where you may always see her upon you.

Draw your Falcon out of the Mew twenty days before you enseam her: If she
truss and carry, the remedy is to cope her Talons, her Powlse and petty-single.

Never reward your Hawk upon River-fowl, but upon the Lure, that she may the
better know, love, and esteem thereof.

The Crane ought to be flown at before Sunrising, for she is a slothful Bird,
and you may cast off to her a Cast or Lease of Falcons, or a Goshawk from the
Fist, without Dogs. You must fly but once a day at the Crane, after which you
must reward your Hawk very well, ever succouring her with the Greyhound, which
is the best of Dogs for that purpose.

Give your Falcon a Beaching very early in the Morning, and it will make her
very eager to fly when it is time for it.

If you would have her a high-flying Hawk, you must not feed her highly, but
she should be fed nine days together before Sunrising, and at night late in
the cool of the Evening.

The Falcon will kill the Hern naturally if she be a Peregrin or Traveller: Yet
you will do well to give her Trains.

A Falcon may fly ten times in a day at a River, if the Season be not extreme,
but more is inconvenient.

A Hawk ought to have forty Castings before she be perfectly made. And indeed
all Hawks ought to have Castings every night, if you would have them clean and
sound: For Hawks which have not this continual nocturnal Casting will be
surcharged with abundance of superfluous Humors, which ascending to the Brain,
breed so great a disturbance that they cannot fly so high as otherwise they
would. And it is good to give them Tiring or Plumage at night, especially
Field-Hawks, but not River-Hawks, for fear of weakening their Backs.

When your Hawk has flown or bated, feed her not so long as she pants, (but
let her be first in breath again;) otherwise you may bring her into a disease
called the Pantas.

If a Falcon or other Hawk will not seize nor gorge, take the Quill of a
Wild-goose, and tie it under her long -Single; then will she seize and gripe.
When she begins to seize, take away the said Quill, and she will seize long
afterward.

If you cannot give Covert to your Falcon or Goshawk, then cast her off with
the Sun in her back.

CHAP. IV. How to man, hood, and reclaim a Falcon according to an Italian
Falconer, quoted by Turbervile.
LEt his Jesses and Bewets be of good Leather, having Bells big and shril
according to the proportion of the Hawk, with a Hood that is bossed at the
Eyes, and sizable for the Head.

He must use his Hawk in such manner that he may make her grow familiar with
him alone, or in company, and to that end he must often unhood and hood her
again.

In nine nights the Falconer ought not to let his Hawk jouk at all, nor suffer
her to perch, but keep her during that time continually on his Fist.

When the Falconer would call his Hawk, let him set her on the Perch, unhood
her, and show her some meat within his Fist, call her so long till she come to
it, then feed her therewith: If she come not, let her stand without food till
she be very sharp set. Observe this order for about nine days.

When you would lure her, give her some man to hold, and call her with a Lure
well garnished with meat on both sides, and give her a bit: Use her to this six
or seven days, then cause her to be held farther from you, and cast the Lure
about your head, and throw it on the ground a little way from you: if she come
to it roundly, reward her bountifully, walking softly about her while she is
feeding on the Lure, and using your voice. Having used her to this some certain
days, take your Lure garnished as aforesaid, and every day call her to you as
far as she may well see or hear you, and let her be loose from all her
furniture, without Loins or Creance. If she come freely, reward her, and stop
her now and then in her feeding, for that will make her come the better. Call
her also sometimes on horseback. After you have thus used her a month, or till
she will come freely to you, you may do well to stop the Lure upon her
sometimes, and let her fly upon you. Here note, it is requisite to bathe her
before you take this course, lest when she is at liberty she rangle to seek
water, and in the mean time you lose your Hawk; wherefore bathe her every seven
or eight days, for her nature requires it.

When you have thus manned, reclaimed, and lured your Hawk, go out with her
into the Fields, and whistle her off your Fist, standing still to see what she
will do, and whether she will rake out or not: But if she fly round about you,
as a good Hawk ought to do, let her fly a Turn or two, and fling her out the
Lure, and let her foot a Chicken or Pullet, and having killed it, let her feed
thereon.

Unhood he often as you bear her, continue so doing till she has endewed and
mewted sufficiently.

Your Hawk being thus made and manned, go abroad with her every Morning when it
is fair, and let the place where you intend to fly her be plashy, or some
narrow Brook; and when you cast her off, go into the Wind so far that the Fowl
may not discover you. When she is cast off, and begins to recover her Gate,
make then to the Brook or Plash where the Fowl lie, always making your Hawk to
lean in upon you: And when you see her at a reasonable pitch, (her Head being
in) lay out the Fowl, and land it if you can; and if you cannot, take down your
Hawk, and let her kill some Train, to which end you must always carry some live
Fowl with you, as a Duck, etc. And having slipped one of her Wing-feathers,
thrust it through her Nares, and cast her up as high as you can underneath your
Hawk, that she may the better know your hand. Never fly a young Hawk without
some Train, that if she fail to kill the wild Fowl, you may make her kill that.

If you would have your Hawk fly at one particular Fowl more than at another,
you wust then feed her well upon a Train of the same kind, as thus: Take a
Creance and tie that Fowl you would accustom her to fly to by the Beak, with
meat on her back, and cause one to stand close that shall hold the Creance;
then standing a far off unhood your Hawk, and let the Fowl be stirred and drawn
with the Creance until your Hawk perceive it stir; and if she foot it, make
another Train thus: Take a living Fowl that can fly, half seel it, and cast it
out; then let your Hawk fly to it; and if she kill it, reward her well upon it.

CHAP. V. How to man and make a Falcon according to Carcanus the Vicentine,
abbreviated.
. I. Of the Eyass or Nyass Falcon.
THese, he says, seldom prove well, and require much pains and patience to
make them kill and stoop a Fowl well, or fly to a high pitch.

But if any one will needs be doing with them, he advises him, first to make
them to the Heron from the Fist, or to other such great fowls; for that they
are bold and hardy birds, and good seisers.

After they are entered to these and well in blood, you may make them to the
River going into some large field, where there be Crows, or some other great
Fowl, with your Hawk on your fist; loose her hood in a readiness, drawing as
near the Fowl as you can; and the first fowl that springs unhood her and let
her fly from the fist to it; that it may draw the Hawk upwards. When she is at
a reasonable pitch, throw her out a Duck or Mallard seel'd, with a feather
through the Nares, and if she kill it, then reward her well, and feed her upon
it with as much favor as you can, always luring and crying to her to encourage
her.

. II. Of the Ramage-Falcon.
IF a Falconer chance to recover a Ramage-Hawk that was never handled before,
let him immediately seel her, and at that instant put on her Jesses made of
soft Leather, at the end thereof fix two Varvels, the one may bear your Coat of
Arms, the other your Name, that if she chance to be lost, they that take her up
may know where to return her: Put her on also a pair of Bells with two proper
Bewets. Having thus furnished her, you must begin her manning by gentle
handling. To avoid the danger of her Beak, you must have a smooth stick about
half a foot in length, with which you must stroke your Hawk about the Pinions
of her Wings, and so downwards thwart her Train. If she offer to snap at the
Stick, withdraw not your hand, and let her bite thereon, the hardness whereof
will soon make her weary of that sport.

If you would man her well, you should watch all the night, keeping her
continually on your Fist.

You must teach her to feed seel'd; and having a great and easy Rufter-hood,
you must hood and unhood her often, seel'd as she is, handling her gently about
the Head, coying her always when you unhood her, to the intent she may not be
displeased with her Keeper.

Let her plume and tire sometimes upon a Wing on your Fist, keeping her so day
and night, without perching, until she be weary, and will suffer you to hood
her without stirring.

If your Hawk be so rammage that she will not leave her snapping or biting,
then take a little Aloes socotrina, and when she offers to snap, give it her to
bite; the bitterness whereof will quickly make her leave that ill quality.
Garlic I have heard will do the like, the strong sent thereof being equally
offensive.

. III. How to hood a Hawk.
HAving seel'd your Hawk, fit her with a large easy Hood, which you must take
off and put on very often, watching her a night or two, handling her frequently
and gently about the Head as aforesaid. When you perceive she has no aversion
to the Hood, unseel her in an evening by Candlelight, continue handling her
softly, often hooding and unhooding her, until she takes no offense at the
Hood, and will patiently endure handling.

Take this Observation by the way, that it is the duty of a Falconer to be
endowed with a great deal of Patience; and in the next place he ought to have a
natural love and inclination to Hawks: without these two qualifications all the
Professors of this Art will prove Mar-Hawks instead of good Falconers.

But to return where I left off: If your seeled Hawk feeds well, abides the
Hood and handling without striking or biting, then by Candlelight in an
Evening unseel her, and with your finger and spittle anoint the place where the
Seeling-thread was drawn through; then hood her, and hold her on your Fist all
night, often hooding, unhooding, and handling her, stroaking her gently about
the Wings and Body, giving her sometimes a bit or two, also Tiring or Plumage.
Being well reclaimed from striking and biting at your hand, let her sit upon a
Perch; but every night keep her on the Fist three or four hours, stroaking,
hooding, and unhooding, etc. as aforesaid: And thus you may do in the daytime,
but in a Chamber apart, where she may see no great light, till she feed surely
and eagerly without dread.

. IV. How to make a Hawk know your Voice, and her own Feeding.
HAving manned your Hawk so that she feeds boldly, acquaint her with your
Voice, Whistle, and such words as Falconers use: You may do it by frequently
repeating them to her as she is feeding on your Fist, etc. But I think the best
way of making her acquainted with them is by your experience and practice. If
your Hawk be not eager or sharp-set, wash her meat sometimes in fair water, and
other whiles in Urine, wringing it a little, and feeding her with it for two or
three gorges, intermitting a day or two.

When she feeds boldly, and knows your Voice and Whistle, then teach her to
know her Feeding, and to bate at it, in this manner. Show her some meat with
your right hand, crying and luring to her aloud: if she bate or strike at it,
then let her quickly and neatly foot it, and feed on it for four or five bits.
Do thus often, and she will know her Feeding the better.

After this give her every night some Casting either of Feathers, or Cotton
with Cloves or Aloes wrapped up therein, etc. These Castings make a Hawk clean
and eager.

. V. How to make your Hawk bold and venturous.
IN the first place, to make her hardy, you must permit her to plume a Pullet
or large Chicken in a place where there is not much light: Her Hood in a
readiness, you must have either of the aforesaid alive in your hand; then
kneeling on the ground, luring and crying aloud to her, make her plume and pull
the Pullet a little; then with your teeth drawing the Strings, unhood her
softly, suffering her to pluck it with her Beak three or four times more; then
throw out the Pullet on the ground, and encourage her to seize it. When you
perceive she breaks it and takes blood, you must lure and cry aloud to her,
encouraging her all the ways imaginable: Then hood her gently, and give her
Tiring of the Wing or Foot of the said Pullet.

. VI. How to make a Hawk know the Lure.
YOur Hawk having three or four times thus killed a Pullet or large Chicken in
some secret place, then thus teach her to know the Lure.

Having fastened a Pullet unto your Lure, go apart, giving your Hawk unto
another, who must draw loose the strings of her Hood in readiness: Being gone a
little way, take half the length of the String, and cast it about your Head,
luring with your voice at the same time; then let your Hawk be unhooded as you
are throwing your Lure a little way from her, not ceasing luring all the while.
If she stoop to the Lure and seize, suffer her to plume the Pullet, still
coying and luring with your voice; then let her feed on the Pullet upon the
Lure: After that take her on your Fist together with her meat, then hood her
and let her tire as aforesaid. And thus you may teach her to come by degrees to
a very great distance.

. VII. How to make a Hawk flying.
WHen your Hawk or Haggard-Falcon will come and stoop to the Lure roundly
without any fear or coyness, you must put her on a great pair of Luringbells;
the like you must do to a Soar-Hawk: By so much greater must the Bells be by
how much your Hawk is giddy-headed, and apt to rake out at Check.

That being done, and she sharp set, go in a fair morning into some large.
Field on Horseback, which Field must be very little encumbered with Wood or
Trees: Having your Hawk on your Fist, ride up into the wind, and having loosned
her Hood whistle softly, to provoke her to fly; and then you will observe she
will begin to bate, or at least to slap with her Flags and Sails, and to raise
her self on your Fist: Then suffer her until she rouse or mewt: When she has
done either of them, unhood her, and let her fly with her Head into the wind,
for thereby she will be the better able to get upon the Wing; then will she
naturally climb upwards, flying in a circle.

When she has flown three or four Turns, then cry and lure with your voice,
casting the Lure about your head, unto which you must first tie a Pullet: And
if your Falcon come in and approaches near you, then cast out the Lure into
the wind; and if she stoop to it, reward her as before.

There is one great fault you will often find in the making of a Hawk flying,
and that is, when she flies from the Fist she will not get up, but take stand
on the ground; a frequent fault in Soar-Falcons. You must then fright her up
with your Wand, riding in to her; and when you have forced her to make a Turn
or two, take her down and feed her. But if this do no good, find out some
Chough, Starling, or such like bird, and making ready your Hawks Hood, draw as
near them as you may till they rise. Then unhood your Hawk, and no doubt if she
will fly them, they will train her well upwards. Then you must have in
readiness a Duck seel'd so that she may see no way but backwards, and that will
make her mount the higher. This Duck you must hold by one of the Wings near the
body in your right hand, then lure with your voice to make your Falcon turn the
head: When she is at a reasonable pitch, cast up your Duck just under her, that
she may perceive it: If she strike, stoop, or truss the Duck, permit her to
kill it, and reward her, giving her a reasonable Gorge. Use this custom twice
or thrice, and your Hawk will leave the Stand, delighting on the Wing, and will
become very obedient.

Here note, that for the first or second time it is not convenient to show your
Hawk great or large Fowl, for it often happens that they slip from the Hawk
into the wind; the Hawk not recovering them, raketh after them, which puts the
Falconer to much trouble, and frequently occasions the loss of his Hawk.

But if it so chance that your Hawk so rake out with a Fowl that she cannot
recover it, but gives it over, and comes in again directly upon you, then cast
out a seeled Duck; and if she stoop and truss it, cross the Wings, and permit
her to take her pleasure, rewarding her also with the Heart, Brains, Tongue,
and Liver. For want of a quick Duck, take her down with the dry Lure, and let
her plume a Pullet, and feed her upon it.

By so doing your Hawk will learn to give over a Fowl that rakes out, and
hearing the Lure of the Falconer, will make back again to the River, and know
the better to hold in the Head.

. VIII. A flight for a Haggard.
WHen you intend a Flight for a Haggard, for the first, second, and third time
make choice of such a place where there are no Crows, Rooks, or the like, to
take away all occasion of her raking out after such Check.

Let her not fly out too far on head at the first, but run after and cry, Why
lo, why lo, to make her turn Head. When she is come in, take her down with the
Lure, unto which must be fastened a live Pullet, and let her tire, plume, and
feed as aforesaid.

Sometimes a Haggard out of pride and a gadding humor will rangle out from her
Keeper: Then clog her with great Luring-bells, and make her a Train or two with
a Duck seel'd, to teach her to hold in and know her Keeper: Take her down often
with the dry Lure, and reward her bountifully, and let her be ever well in
blood, or you may whoop for your Hawk to no purpose.

. IX. How to make a Soar-Falcon or Haggard kill her Game at the very first.
IF she be well lured, flies a good Gate, and stoopeth well, then cast off a
well quarried Hawk, and let her stoop a Fowl on Brook or Plash, and watch her
till she put it to the plunge; then take down your Make-Hawk, reward her, hood
her, and set her: So you may make use of her if need require.

Then take your Hawk unentred, and going up the wind half a Bow-shot, loose her
Hood, and softly whistle her off your Fist, until she have rouzed or mewted:
Then let her fly with her Head into the wind, having first given notice or
warning to the company to be in readiness against the Hawk be in a good Gate,
and to show water, and to lay out the Fowl.

When she is at a good pitch, and covering the Fowl, then notify that all the
company make in at once to the Brook upon the Fowl, to land her: If your Falcon
strike, stoop or truss her Game, run in to help her, and crossing the Fowls
Wings, let her take her pleasure thereon.

If she kill not the Fowl at first stooping, give her then respite to recover
her Gate. When she has got it, and her Head in, then lay out the Fowl as
aforesaid, until you land it at last; not forgetting to help her as soon as she
has seized it, giving also her due Reward. You shall do well always to have a
quick Duck in readiness, that if the Hawk kill not the Fowl stooped you may
seel and throw it up to her being at her pitch.

. X. Remedy for a Hawks taking Stand in a Tree.
IN the first place you must choose such places where are no Wood or Trees, or
as little as may be. If you cannot avoid it, then have two or three live
Trains, and give them to as many men, placing them conveniently for to use
them. When therefore your Hawk has stooped, and endeavors to go to Stand, let
him to whom the Hawk most bends cast out his Train-Duck seel'd: If the Hawk
kill her, reward her therewith. If this course will not remedy that fault in
her by twice or thrice so doing, my advice is then to part with the Buzzard.

. XI. How to help a Hawk forward and coy through pride of grease.
THere is a scurvy quality in some Hawks proceeding from pride of grease, or
being high kept, which is a disdainful Coyness. Such a Hawk therefore must not
be rewarded although she kill: Yet give her leave to plume a little; and then
let the Falconer take a Sheeps Heart cold, or the Leg of a Pullet, and whilst
the Hawk is busy in pluming, let either of them be conveyed into the body of
the Fowl, that it may savor thereof; and when the Hawk has eaten the Brains,
Heart, and Tongue of the Fowl, then take out your Enclosure, and call your Hawk
with it to your Fist, and feed her therewith: After this give her some Feathers
of the Neck of the Fowl to scour and make her cast.

. XII. What must be done when a Hawk will not hold in the Head.
IF you find your Hawk rake after Checks, and lean out so far that neither
Whooping, Luring, nor casting of the Hawks Glove is any way available, but she
rather gads out more and more, and at last flies away; I know not how to advise
otherways, than to follow after with Whooping and Luring: If she turn and come
to the Lure, show her all the kindness imaginable. This fault is frequently
found in Soar-Hawks, or Hawks of the first Coat.

. XIII. How to keep a Hawk high-flying.
IF your Hawk be a stately high-flying Hawk, you ought not to engage her in
more Flights than one in a morning: For often flying brings her off from her
stately pitch. If she be well made for the River, fly her not above twice in a
morning; yet feed her up though she kill not.

When a high-flying Hawk, being whistled to, gathers upwards to a great Gate,
you must continue her therein, never flying her but upon broad waters and open
Rivers; and when she is at the highest, take her down with your Lure; where
when she has plumed and broken the Fowl a little, then feed her up; And by
that means you shall maintain your Falcon high-flying, inwards, and very fond
of the Lure.

Some will have this high-flying Falcon seldom to kill, and not to stoop: Yet
if she kill every day, although she stoop from a high Gate, yet if she be not
rebuked or hurt therewith, she will, I can assure you, become a higher Flier
every day than other; but she will grow less fond of the Lure. Wherefore your
high-flying Hawks should be made inwards, it being a commendable quality in
them to make in and turn Head at the second or third toss of the Lure, and when
she pours down upon it as if she had killed.

And as the teaching of a Falcon, or any other Hawk, to come readily to and
love the Lure, is an Art highly commendable, because it is the effect of great
labor and industry: So it is the cause of saving many a Hawk, which otherwise
would be lost irrecoverably.

Mark this by the way, that some naturally high-flying Hawks will be long
before they be made upwards, still fishing and playing the slugs: And when they
should get up to cover the Fowl, they will stoop before the Fowl be put out.
And this may proceed from two causes. In the first place, she may be too sharp
set; and in the next place, it may be she is flown untimely, either too soon,
or too late.

When you see a Hawk use those evil Tatches without any visible cause, cast her
out a dead Fowl for a dead Quarry, and hood her up instantly without Reward, to
discourage her from practicing the like another time: Half an hour afterward
call her to the Lure and feed her, and serve her after this manner as often as
she fisheth in that fashion.

Besides, to correct this error, the Falconer ought to consult the natures and
dispositions of his Hawks, and should carefully observe which fly high when in
good plight, and which best when they are kept low, which when sharpest set,
and which on the contrary in a mean between both, which early at Sunrising,
which when the Sun is but two hours high, which sooner, and which later in an
evening.

For know that the natures of Hawks are different; so are the times to fly each
one: For to fly a Hawk in her proper time, and to fly her out of it, is as
disagreeable as the flight of a Gerfalcon and a Buzzard. Therefore the Ostrager
must fly his Hawks according to their natures and dispositions, keeping them
always in good order.

Where by the by take notice, all Hawks, as well Soar-Hawks as Mew'd-Hawks and
Haggards, should be set out in the evening two or three hours, some more, some
less, having respect to their nature as it is stronger or weaker; and in the
morning also according as they cast, hooding them first, and then setting them
abroad a weathering, until you get on Horseback to prosecute your Recreation.

. XIV. To make a Falcon to the Heron.
THis Flight has less of Art in it than pleasure to the beholders; and to say
the truth, the Flight is stately and most noble.

As it is less difficult to teach a Hawk to fly at Fowl than it is to come unto
and love the Lure, the first being natural, and not the last; so there is less
industry to be used in making a Hawk fly the Hern than Waterfowl. To the first
she is instigated by a natural propensity and inclination; to the latter she is
brought with Art, pains, and much diligence.

At the beginning of March Herns begin to make their Passage: If therefore you
will adapt your Falcons for the Hern, you must not let them fly longer at the
River, and withal you must pull them down to make them light: which is done by
giving them Hearts and flesh of Lambs and Calves, also Chickens: But give them
no wild meats.

To the intent you may acquaint them one with the other, so that they may the
better fly the Hern and help one another, you must call a Cast of them to the
Lure at once; but have a care they crab not together, for so they may endanger
one another in their flight.

When your Hawk is scoured and clean and sharp set, you must then get a live
Hern, upon the upper part of whose long sharp Bill you must place a joint of a
hollow Cane, which will prevent her from hurting the Hawk: That being done, tie
the Hern in a Creance; then setting her on the ground, unhood your Hawk, who
will fly the Hern as soon as she sees her. If she seize her, make in apace to
succor her, and let her plume and take blood of the Hern: Then take the
Brains, the Marrow of the bones, and the Heart, and laying it on your
Hawking-glove give it your Falcon. After this rip her Breast, and let your Hawk
feed thereon till she be well gorged: This being done, hood her up upon the
Hern, permitting her to plume at her pleasure; then take her on your Fist, and
let her tire on the Foot or Pinion.

Because Herns are not very plentiful, you may preserve one for a Train three
or four times, by arming Bill, Head, and Neck, and painting it of the same
color that the Hern is of: And when the Falcon seiseth her, you must be very
nimble to make in; and deceive by a live Pigeon clapped under the Wing of the
Hern for the Falcon, which must be her Reward.

The Hawk having thus several times taken her Train without discovery of the
delusion, you may then let the Hern loose in some fair Field without a Creance,
or without arming her: When she is up of a reasonable height, you may cast off
your Falcon; who if she bind with the Hern and bring her down, then make in
apace to rescue her, thrusting the Herns Bill into the ground, and breaking his
Wings and Legs, that the Hawk may with more ease plume and foot him. Then
reward her as before, with the Brains, Marrow of the bones, and Heart, making
thereof an Italian Sop.

Thus much of a Train-Hern. Now to fly the wild Hern it is thus: If you find a
wild Hern at Siege, win in as nigh to her as you can, and go with your Hawk
under the wind; and having first loosed her Hood in a readiness, as soon as the
Hern leaves the Siege, off with her Hood, and let her fly. If she climb to the
Hern and bring her down, run in (as I said before) to rescue her, thrusting her
Bill into the ground, breaking her Wings and Legs, and rewarding her as
aforesaid on your Hawkingglove.

Now if your Falcon beat not down the Hern, or do give her over, then never fly
your Falcon again at a Hern unless with a Make-Hawk well entered; for the coward
by this means, seeing another fly at the Hern and bind with her, takes fresh
courage. And if they kill the Hern flying both together, then must you reward
them together while the Quarry is hot, making for them a Soppa as aforesaid.
This is the only way to make them both bold and perfect Herners.

. XV. Of mewing of Hawks.
FAlcons may be flown with till St. Georges day; then they must be set down:
And be sure to search them for Lice, and if they have any pepper them well.
Scowr them also before you cast them into the Mew.

There are two sorts of Mewing: 1. At the stock or stone. 2. Loose, or at large.

1. For the Stock, the place should be a ground-room, far from all noise or
concourse of people. Place therein (upon Tressels two or three foot high) a
Table, for length according to the number of your Falcons, and five or six foot
broad, with little thin boards of four fingers high nailed along the sides and
ends. Fill the Table with great sand, that has small pebble stones in it, and
in the middle place some great free-stones, a cubit high, made taper-wise, but
plain and smooth above. Then take a Cord of the bigness of a large Bow-string,
put it through a ring, and bind it about the stone, in such sort that the ring
or swivel may go round the stone without any let: And thereunto tie the Lease
of the Falcon. If you mew more Hawks than one, you must set your stones at that
distance, that when they bate they may not reach one another, for crabbing. The
great stones for their coolness the Hawks will delight to sit on: The little
gravel-stones are for them to swallow. The sand is of use, that when they bate
they mar not their feathers, and for the better cleansing their mewts: The Cord
and Ring, that when the Hawks bate this way or that way they may never tangle,
the Ring still following them. All day let your Falcons stand hooded upon the
stone, only when they would feed you must take them on the Fist. At night off
with their Hoods. To avoid and remedy all ill accidents and inconveniences it
were well that the Falconer had his bed in the Mew.

2. If you would mew at large you can mew but one in a room, unless it be so
big that you may divide it into several partitions. Twelve foot square is scope
enough for one Falcon, with two Windows a foot and an half broad apiece, each
fitted with its shut, one toward the North, for cool air, the other toward the
East, for the heat and comfort of the Sun. If your Hawk be a great bater your
Mew were best be a groundroom, which if it be, you must cover the floor with
gross sand four fingers thick, and thereupon set a stones as aforesaid.
Besides, you must make her two handsome Pearches, near each Window one, that
sitting on the one she may have the comfort of the Sun, on the other the
benefit of the fresh air.

Every Week, or at least every Fortnight, set her a Basin of water, that your
Hawk may bathe if she desire it, and if she does, then take it away the night
following.

Your Mew must also have a Portal with a little hole below, to convey in the
device whereon their meat is served, called among Falconers the Hack. And that
must be made on this fashion. Take a piece of thick board, a foot and half
long, and a foot broad or thereabout, under the which fasten two little
Tressels, three or four fingers high. Let them be fast pinned or nailed to.
Then bore two holes on each side thereof, and through each of these put a
short. Cord of the bigness a Bowstring, with the ends downward, and knots fast
knit on them under the button of the board, so straight that you cannot raise
the Cord above the board above a fingers breadth or thereabouts. And when you
would give your Hawks meat, take a little stick somewhat longer than the Hack,
and as big as your finger, but let it be of strong wood, as Crab-tree, Holly,
or such like, and upon that stick bind your Hawks meat, and put the ends of the
stick under the cords upon the Hack, and so convey it into the Mew to your
Hawks, that the Hawk may not truss or drag away her meat into the Mew, but, and
as soon as she has fed and gorged her self, take it away again. It is good to
keep one set hour of feeding your Hawk, for so she will mew sooner and better.

This Author prefers mewing at the stock or grate before mewing at large. His
reason is, because in that kind of mewing we take our Hawks on the Fist every
day, and so may see in what state they be; and if they fall into any sickness
or infirmity, may give them proper medicines, which cannot be done when you mew
at large. Besides, if we happen upon Hawks that have preyed for themselyes, it
will be needful to bear them often in the cool air in the morning till mid July
or thereabout, yea, and to call them to the Lure, and to ride abroad with them
sometimes an hour or two.

Mr. Latham is of opinion, that it is better to mew at large, and disapproves
mewing at the stock. For (says he) when she is at large she has the exercise
of her Wings in flying up and down, which must needs be good for her. Also she
may go to the water if she be disposed, and takes stones at her pleasure. She
may do all things at her own liking, whereas she can do nothing at the stock
when she would: Neither can you give her that is fitting to her own content but
by guess and imagination, wherein we are many times deceived. And truly upon
these considerations I am of his opinion, that it is better to mew at large,
than at the stock or stone.

CHAP. VI. Of the Haggard Falcon.
. I. Something of the name and nature of the Haggard Falcon.
HE makes the Haggard Falcon to be the same with the Peregrine; and is of
opinion, that the Falcon-gentle and Haggard are also of one and the same kind,
the only difference being, that the former is the Eyass or Ramage Hawk, the
latter the same taken wild after she has preyed for her self, making the word
Haggard to signify as much as wild, opposite to gentle or tame. The word
Haggard is borrowed of the French, Hagar, and signifies (as Robert Stephen
interprets it) an old Falcon of five or six years, having its pens worn short,
or otherwise harmed, and so taken for a price set on its head. Aldrovandus
makes the word Hagar to be originally Dutch, and to signify a bunch, whence
the Germans call this Falcon Ein Hager-falck, or rather Hogerfalck, that is, a
gibbous or bunch-backt Falcon. But this gibbous Falcon he makes to be a species
distinct both from the Falcon-gentle and Peregrine. For my part, being not
willing unnecessarily to multiply species, I incline to Mr. Lathams opinion,
that all these are names of one and the same kind of Hawk.

The Haggard-Falcon is now-adays most esteemed, not being (as some write) a
choice and tender Hawk to endure wind and weather, but for hardiness far before
the Falcon-gentle. It is a bird of great spirit and mettle, like a Conqueror
in a Country, keeping in aw and subjection most Fowl that fly, in so much that
the young ones will venture upon Brants and Wild-geese, till being soundly
brusht and beaten by those strong birds, they learn their error, and desist to
meddle with such unwieldy game.

She rests no day, but toils continually, unless hindered by extremity of
weather. Hence he infers that it is an error in Falconers after a day or two's
flying to give their young Hawks a day or two's rest, and concludes that
whosoever can fly his Hawk every day, shall have every day a good and perfect
Hawk, but he that covets to fly upon rest shall seldom have a good and staid
Hawk.

When she has slain and seized her prey, if it be a Dove, as soon as she has
broken its neck she presently goes to the place we abhor our Hawks should so
much as touch, which is the Crop, and takes her pleasure of what she finds
there, especially mustard or carlock seed, which he conceives she uses by way
of Physic to preserve her health.

. II. How to reclaim a Haggard Falcon.
HAving taken or purchased one of these birds, whether she be full or empty,
set her down as soon as you can, and let her rest quietly the first night,
either seeld, or in a rufter-hood. The next day taking her up gently, carry her
continually on your Fist, using a feather to stroke her withal instead of your
hand. When she will endure to be touched without starting, pluck off her Hood,
and quickly and gently put it on again, holding this course till she begin to
feed. Then profer her meat, but suffer her to take but little at a time, never
hooding and unhooding her without a bit or two to quiet her, and win her love
to the Hood and your self. Use your voice to her before you take off her Hood,
and all the while she is feeding, and no longer, that as she reclaims she may
learn to know, that when she hears your voice she shall be fed.

When you have brought her to feed boldly, then teach her to jump to your Fist
in this manner. Set her on a Perch breast-high [if it be lower, you must be on
your knees; for being so high above her at first, till she be better
acquainted, will be apt to fright her.] Then unstrike her Hood, and lure her,
using your voice, with a bit or two of meat bestowed on her as she is unhooded,
which will make her to love your voice, being careful that she take no sudden
fright or dislike; for it is hard to work such impressions out again. Be sure
to keep her stomach perfect, sharp, and well edged. For venture magister artis,
it is that only that guides and rules her; That is the curb and bridle that
holds her in subjection to the man, and it is the spur which pricks her forward
to perform her duty.

By this time you may pull off her Hood, and let her sit barefaced, keeping
your self as yet close by her. And as you perceive any untoward humor in her,
profer her a bit of meat with your hand, and use your voice to her, to draw her
to you, till you have brought her boldly to attend, willingly to receive bits
at your hand, and jump readily to your Fist: Then set her to the Lure garnisht
with meat, to which when she will readily come in the Creance: stay not long in
that kind, for she will soon begin to scorn it, and look another way: But let
her see a live Dove at the Lure, and lure her to it: Which when she has
killed, and eaten up the head, take her up very gently with a bit of meat, and
put on her Hood: Then lure her again to the dead pelt, and so use her two or
three times, and no more; for she will quickly grow loath to be taken off, and
her desire to keep the pelt will cause her to drag and carry it from you, than
which there cannot be a worse quality in a Hawk.

Often luring at one time at her first entering is good to make her perfect
quickly; but use it not longer than I have directed, especially to a
Field-hawk: For the reason given.

Now it is full time to lure her loose to live Pigeons, which you must let her
see at your Lure (to draw her you with love and courage) and also let her seize
on them, and kill them at your foot, one after another, for six days together,
being sure that he that holds her have skill to let her in with her head right
toward you; and lure not far till her stomach be perfect, for otherwise she
may spy something by the way which she has more liking to, and so for that
time be lost, which would be very hurtful to her though she should be recovered
again.

Likewise forget not all this time of her making (while she is on the ground
either pluming or feeding) to walk round about her, using your voice, and
giving her many bits with your hand, till you have won her even to lean and
bend her body to your hand, and to bring what she has in her foot toward you.
By this time it will not be amiss to spring her up some live Doves, as she
comes unto you between the man and the Lure: And be sure they be given in a
long Creance, that she may not kill them far from you, but that always she may
truss them over your head, and fall near you: For otherwise it may strike a
timorous conceit into her, making her sit and stare at you, or carry from you,
and sometimes forsake what she has got, and go her way, when she shall see you
coming so far from her.

By this time you may be bold (at a convenient hour in the Evening, when she
hears your voice, and has you in her sight) to hold in your Lure, and suffer
her to fly about you, holding her with your voice and lure as near you as may
be, to teach her to do her business, and work it on your head. Then cast her up
a Dove with a loud voice, etc.

. III. How to remedy carrying in a Hawk.
THe reason of the Hawks carrying is not the lightness of the Dove, as some
pretend, but the unskilfulness or negligence of the Keeper in not dealing
gently and kindly with them in their reclaiming, or giving them little or no
content in their luring, giving them for a reward only the pelt of a Pigeon, or
some other dead thing, whereas their delight is in such as are living. For the
prevention of this coyness or fugitive desire in your Hawk, at her first luring
unto live Doves, you must restrain her, and draw her gently to you with your
Lure or Creance, not suddenly or rashly, but by degrees, and give her some bits
of meat with your hand, being on your knees, to please and content her: And by
this loving usage you shall find your first Dove to be the worst Dove, and the
oftener you use her to them, the quieter she will be: And she did not drag so
fast from you at the first, but she will soon come to bring it with as much
speed toward you, yea, meet you with it, and be willing to exchange it with you
for a bit of meat at your hand.

. IV. Of giving stones and casting.
WHen your Hawk is grown so gentle that she will endure to sit barefaced in
the evening or night amongst company, then it is meet to give her stones. Every
night, when she has put away her supper from above, before you go to bed, give
her half a dozen small stones. Give them above hand if you have the art, if
not, then otherwise as you like best to cast her. This do till you find her
stomach good, and then you may profer her Casting; but be sure at your first
giving it be with her liking: For otherwise I have seen diverse Hawks beaten out
of love with it, so that they would never take it willingly after. Add to the
ink of a Dove as much clean-washt flannel as will make her a reasonable
casting, bearing in mind this old Proverb,

As washed meat and stones make a Hawk to fly,
So great castings and long fasting makes her to die.
These stones given at night you shall be sure to have again in the morning:
But given in the morning she will either cast them before they have done their
work, or keep them all day and the next night. I have learnt by experience that
stones given once by night do more good to a Hawk than twice by day, for speedy
inseaming, or removing any glut or evil humor.

He makes account that stones serve to cleanse the stomach, etc. others are of
opinion, that their use is to cool the body: I rather think, that they are of
the same use to Hawks as to other birds, viz. to help grind their meat in their
stomachs, though I confess there may be difference in this respect between
Hawks and other birds; Hawks having rather a membranous than musculous stomach
or gizzard.

. V. Of bathing your Hawk.
I My self (says my Author) have had very few Haggards that would ever bathe
at all, so long as they continued sound: But whenever I proved them
barefaced abroad, having fitted them with a reasonable gorge, they did
themselves more harm by bating, than bathing would have done them good.
Therefore if you find your Hawk not disposed to bathing, you were better keep
her on your Fist. But after two or three mews, in their declining age, through
unnatural heats and surfets they will desire bathing; and then you are not to
neglect the occasion; but when the weather will permit, show her the water, and
if she do bathe, let her dry her self abroad if it be fair, and the weather
temperate; otherwise let her have the air of the fire with measure, and come no
more abroad that day nor night, but set her upon a very warm Perch, and from
the air.

Note. This kind of Hawks though you labor them carefully the first year in
their making, having brought them to be so familiar, that they will sit abroad
barefaced hard by you when they are empty; yet if you shall absent your self
for trial, you shall find when you come to them again they will be unquiet, and
by bating and striving do themselves much harm, if they be full.

. VI. How to weather your Hawk.
EYas Hawks are much subject to heat, and therefore much addicted to weathering
and bathing, and will almost never refuse the water. You may boldly set abroad
these Hawks at any time of day unhooded to take the air: For in regard of their
fondness of, and familiarity with the man, they will take no occasion to bate,
thereby to hurt themselves when they are full-gorged.

But your Haggard Falcon, if you intend to weather her, you must do it in the
morning, or else in the evening before she be fed, also you must remain close
by her with meat clean and ready dressed, to take her to your Fist withal. But I
rather advise all Falconers to weather her in her Hood, which can do her no
harm, but is rather a means to prevent her bating and striving, by which her
spirit and courage is taken away.

. VII. When it is convenient to set down, and leave flying of your Haggard.
ABout Lady Day, or somewhat before, is the time when these Hawks leave ours
and other strange Countries. They begin to draw together, and to dispose
themselves thereunto a month before: The reason is, because at that time of the
year being moved by their lust they repair to their breeding places. Therefore
the old Haggard must needs then be set down, and fed up with hot and bloody
meat: The intermewed Haggard is more able to resist the course of nature, being
not so violent in her, therefore you may fly her somewhat longer. The
Passenger-soar-Falcon may be flown a month longer than any of the other. All of
them will upon a small occasion be apt at that time to fly quite away; the
inclination to cawking and procreating Young, being then so strong in them, as
to deface and obliterate, or at least overruled all artificial impressions of
subjection and obedience.

. VIII. How to diet and prepare your Hawk for the Mew.
YOu must beware, when you purpose to feed up your Hawk, and put her in flesh,
that she be not her own carver in her diet, and that you do not give her too
great a gorge your self: For if you do. it is ten to one but she will
over-feed, and surfeit of the same. The reason is because she wants exercise to
digest it. Your best way therefore is, to keep your Hawk all the flying time as
clean as you can; and at her setting down, keep your wonted course of feeding
twice a day, and as near as you can with hot and bloody meat, and no more in
quantity than you find her well able to endue and put away: And if after a week
or fortnights space you find she is mended, then you may be bold to begin to
feed her once a day; and if it be possible at first let her have young Pigeons:
But if you give her old birds, her first gorges must be less. Thus observing
how she mends by feeding once a day, and the eagerness of her stomach does
abate, you may order her accordingly, and you will find her shortly raised in
her flesh, and settled in her health, and fit for the Mew.

. IX. How to order your Hawk while she remains in the Mew.
BEfore you put her in, be sure she be free from Mites and Lice: Which else
will increase upon her there, and hinder her thriving.

Also take off her old Jesses, and put her on a pair of new and strong ones,
that may last till the time of her drawing, that you be not forced to hold her,
and strive with her too long, to heat her when she is in the prime of her
grease, which may do her much harm.

Keep your Mew aways sweet, and clean with sweeping.

Observe how your Hawk thrives by her castings and mutes, for so you may know
how to diet her, continuing or altering her usage accordingly.

You must not fail to let your Hawk have fair water always standing by her,
which must often be shifted.

Be sure never to let her be without stones lying by her in gravel. He advises
also to gather up the stones she casts, and wash them, and lay them for her to
take again: But I suppose it would be better to give her fresh stones. For
those stones which she has taken and cast up, are by mutual attrition in the
stomach worn smooth, and so become less fit for the grinding of the meat, which
is the reason why she casts them up. Wherefore (as we have noted before)
Poultry before they swallow stones try them with their tongues whether they be
rough or not.

That meat which you do kill for your Hawk with a Piece be sure to search, and
cut out the black and bruised flesh, which proceeds of the Gunpowder. For there
is no Gun but after one shot or two, (especially in wet weather) sends forth
the shot as black as ink.

. X. How to take your Hawk from the Mew, inseam her and make her ready to fly.
WHen you draw your Hawk, be careful not to strive long with her, or heat her
by struggling and bating, but with all possible expedition set her down upon a
Perch, to rest quietly, till her anger and turbulent humor be assuaged; and
so let her sit among company, and in their hearing, without any occasion of
disturbance as near as you can. Then when you think it convenient, take her
gently upon your Fist, and carry her up and down, stroaking her with a feather
lightly and gently: And if you perceive her begin to stir or grow unquiet, set
her down again, and thus use her until by degrees you have drawn her to some
reasonable familiarity, and that she will begin to feed: Then give her more
carriage, and use her to it more and more, and be sure still to keep her as
quiet as may be, and by all means prevent bating. For there is more danger in
some one Hawk that is to be reclaimed and inseamed from the Mew, than in many
other Hawks that have been newly taken in England, or from the Cage: The reason
is, because by reason of her ease and full feeding, and want of exercise in the
Mew, no crammed Fowl will be more fat and full than she, and so she will be apt
to receive much harm by bating or any sudden heat: Whereas the wild Hawk,
coming from the labor of her body, and exercise of her Wings: And the
Cage-Hawk being tossed and tumbled in her voyage, are seldom over-fat, and so
in less danger of over-heating themselves by bating or otherwise.

When you have brought her to eat, you must feed her twice a day, and so order
and diet her continually, and it must be with new and good meat, which you must
dress and wash clean, wringing out the blood with fair water, that so she may
sooner come to a stomach: And for the quantity thereof let it be as much as the
Wing of an old Dove at once, or as you shall find her, to put away the one
meal, and make her self fit and ready for the other. And for the first week or
ten days after she begins to feed, give her neither casting nor stones, but the
week after give her half a dozen stones every night, after she has put away
her supper from forth her gorge, which you shall find she will cast you up
again in the morning very early. The third week approaching you must give her
every night a casting, continuing your former manner of diet till your Hawk be
flying, and all her flying time, only adding unto her meals somewhat in
quantity, and forbearing to wash altogether so hard, with respect to the
mildness and hardness of the weather, etc.

Then prepare your self to lure her, and let her exercise and have the benefit
of her Wings.

If you give your Hawk a piece of Flannel or Cotton for casting, he advises
that it be perfectly clean washed; and that when you give the lightest and
easiest suppers, and some Plumage with it, but never upon a great gorge to the
soundest Hawk that is. Also in a morning, when your Hawk makes a loose and
unwrapped casting of Plumage, it is good to give a little knot with stones, to
bring away loose or straggling feathers out of the Panel. Many sound Hawks
will never brook a woollen casting; and therefore my Author advises not to give
your Hawk any such, unless it be sometimes for trial, but to give her only
casting of Plumage; and so you shall be sure to preserve and keep her safe, and
in continual case to do her business.

Here my Author enters into a long discourse about giving of stones, giving
many reasons why it is better to give them over night than in the morning;
which, because I am not of his opinion concerning the use of stones, and think
that they may be indifferently given either at night or in the morning, when
the Hawk is willing to take them, and that it matters not much how long she
keeps them, I shall omit. Only I shall set down some of his experimental
observations. I have (says he) seen a Hawk in the time of her flying, that
has taken a dozen or more stones of her self in a morning, and has kept half
of them till next morning: The same Hawk when they were given her would not
miss at her feeding time, or at the sight of meat to cast half of them, and
keep the rest till the next day. This he observed many Hawks to do.

Another Hawk when I came into the Mew with her dinner did cast up some few
stones at the sight of the meat, and when she had eaten up the same (being a
young Pigeon) she presently took above a dozen more, which she kept till the
next day. The like story he relates of a Tarcel gentle, that after he had eaten
a whole young Pigeon took presently fifteen or sixteen stones, and made it
something late the next day before he cast them. This Hawk also at the sight of
his meat would not fail to cast some of his stones.

No such Physic (says he) for a Hawk as to give her stones in due time. Here
he takes a great deal of pains to prove that stones do not, according to the
commonly received opinion, cool, but rather at present heat, their use being in
his judgment to melt and waste the glut and fatness, and to empty and evacuate
those gorgitive and stuffing humors, and so to inseam and make her clean. But
this I omit, because, as I said before, I think the main use of the stones is
to assist the stomach in comminution and grinding of the meat, thereby causing
a more speedy and perfect concoction, and so they conduce much to the
preservation and recovery of health; the stomachs not performing its office
well being the foundation and original of most diseases in Hawks and other
animals, since an error in the first concoction is not amended in the subsequent.

One remarkable observation he has, which may seem to argue that stones have a
purgative quality in them, which is this, That upon giving stones after
forbearance a while, a Hawk will oftentimes at her beginning to cast before the
stones, in the midst, and at the end of them, gush out abundance of waterish,
and yellowish greasy slime and glut from forth her body: Which before, though
she had casting daily, flowed not forth.

He advise at the beginning to make your Hawk perfectly clean, and so to keep
her without pampering with great meals, and to have her empty, and with a good
stomach when she flies: For if she be flown full, it may endanger her life; and
besides, she will never fly with regard and attention to her Keeper, if her
stomach be not perfect. For proof whereof, Take any young Hawk out of the Nest
(though newly disclosed) and breed her up as familiarly as you can devise: Yet
when you shall come afterward to fly her, she must be altogether governed by
her stomach. For let her fail of that never so little, and every puff of wind
will blow her from you; nay, if there be no wind stirring, yet she will wheel
and sink away from him and from his voice, that all the time before had lured
and trained her up. Contrariwise, if it be his hap to find her again when she
is hungry, though she would starve before she would prey for her self, yet then
will she own him or any other man: Nay, she will be ready to take his Cap from
him before she will either leave or lose him.

Note well, that what show of cleanness soever you find in your Hawk by her
casting, mutes, or otherwise, although you have taken never so much pains with
her, by casting, clean feed, and stones to purge and cleanse her inwardly; yet
will she not be perfectly inseamed till she come to the exercise of her Wings,
and labor of her body, after which she will break grease, and by degrees
inseam thoroughly. And be sure that her labor at first be not immoderate, for
if it be, it will engender grief. Also you must give her liberty by degrees to
stir her Wings, and use her body, that there may be no heat excessively taken,
until she be thoroughly inseamed, and then she may be weary with flying, but she
will never take harm.

. XI. How to alter some ill qualities and conditions in a Falcon.
YOu shall sometimes meet with a Hawk, that when you have well lured her, and
given all the good content you can devise to her, yet upon the least scope and
liberty that shall be offered, she will not tarry with you, but go her way. To
reclaim her from so bad a condition you must take this course.

Abate her pride somewhat, yet with reason and respect to the weather. Then get
you a Make-hawk, and taking a fit hour in the Evening, upon a convenient and
easy place, and one couple of Fowl with your Make-Hawk flown and stooped once
or twice, or as you see cause in managing your flight to your best advantage in
landing, but when she is coming for the last to kill it overland, be sure to
stand under the wind with your Hawk, and let her see the Fowl overthrown, and
go in to the quarry; and if you perceive she flies in with a courage, and
seiseth with love and heat on the Fowl, make in apace and cross the Wings of
the Fowl, and make that safe, suffering them a while to take their pleasure
together; which done with meat cleanly dressed take up your old Hawk, but gently,
lest you fray your young one, and let her have the Quarry to her self, and take
her pleasure thereon, with your own help on your knees to please her, and
beware she take no pill or pelf to glut her withal, and so reward her with Be
careful to feed clean, the benefit whereof few take notice of.
cleanly feed, giving her supper unto her as she sits upon the Fowl: Use her
thus three or four times together, but let it be with good meat, clean washed
and well dressed from your hand.

When you have used this course, at your next coming to the brook, let your
Make-Hawk be flown, and when she has stooped and is wrought to her place
again, at your next showing, let your Hawk see the Fowl thrown in, and fly for
the killing of it her self with the other Hawk. Mark the manner of that flight;
For if she hotly and kindly entertains the advantage offered her, and with
attentive eagerness follows the Fowl she saw thrown in, flying round upon that
and your self, and with good hap enjoys the Fowl she may make you a good Hawk:
But if this course stay her not, there is no hope of her for the River.

But to enter a gently and lovingly disposed Hawk, having a couple of Fowl that
lie sit for your purpose, throw off your Make-Hawk, and when she has once
stooped them upon her point or before at the setting in of the Fowl, let in
your young Hawk: If she fix her Eye on the other Hawk and work her, then need
you not doubt, but suffer her to fly till she has almost reached the other, but
then be sure to show the Fowl; and then if she stoop with the other Hawk, and
work it again with her, then if it be possible let them kill it at the next
down-come. For the only content you can give to these kind of Hawks is to let
them have their desires speedily, before they be weary, while their courage is
in them. For nothing puts a young Hawk sooner out oflove with the man, and
drives her sooner away, than suffering her to fly too long before she be served.

He lays great stress on this as an excellent rule, That in the time of her
making no scope be given to the Haggard, neither to fly high nor wild, but that
she be held down and near to you.

CHAP. VII. Of the Ger-falcon.
THe Ger-falcon, Turbervile says, is of a fierce and hardy nature, and
therefore difficult to be reclaimed, but being once won, proves an excellent
Hawk -Latham says, that Ger-falcons are for the most part very kind and loving
Hawks, and will suddenly be reclaimed and made to love the man. Their Tercels
or Males are called Jerkins. These Hawks do not fly the River, but always from
the Fist they fly Herons, Shovelers, forked-tail'd Kites, etc. In going up to
their gate they hold not that course which other Falcons do. For they climb
upon the Train when they find any Fowl, and as soon as they have reached her,
they pluck her down, if not at the first, yet at the second or third encounter.
The Haggard of this kind is most commendable, and easiest to be made for any
pleasure. To reclaim and make her fit to be set to the Lure, you must take the
same course as is prescribed for the Haggard slight Falcon.

When she shall come to be lured loose, then would she first of all be taught
to come unto the Pelts of Hens, Herons, or any such like thing, so it be dead;
for thereby she will not be over-hot or eager of it, neither must you suffer
her to touch any part of the flesh, to draw her love from your voice and your
hand, but to spend only her time on it in pluming. All this time you must be
close by her, and on your knees using your voice to her, with her dinner or
supper clean dressed and washed, giving still unto her some part thereof in bits
with your hand, that from thence only she may be satisfied, and her whole
delight be in that, accounting the other in her foot but as a stand or means to
stay her by you, while she receives her full reward at your hands. And in using
this course often to her, she being a Hawk of never such strength and ableness
to carry, it will in the end so reclaim and win her to your self, that she will
quite forget the same: And after if you list to train her with Doves, she will
not carry one feather from you, but draw toward you, and ever desire to have
her content at your hand.

It is a special point in a Falconer to take good time at the first making of
his Hawk, and not post her to another thing till she be perfect in one.

Before you spring her up any Doves, it is meet you let her kill half a dozen
at your Lure, close by your foot, having a pair of short Creances at your Lure:
For it may be at the first seeing of the Dove to stir and flutter, she may come
roystingly to twitch or take it away, so far as she is able: Which if she
should do, you have a remedy by restraining her gently with your Creance, so
that there shall be no offense committed: Then ought you to get gently into
her, and as beforesaid with bits of meat cleanly dressed and bestowed on her you
shall please her at the full, and take her to the Fist again.

The Heron and the stately flight and mountee thereto is the thing for which
these Hawks are most desired and accounted of: For which purpose your
intermew'd Hawks are fittest and most esteemed. N. B. Remember to be favorable
to them the first year of their making, [and not to put them to any toil, but
to train them gently with such Herons as you are sure cannot go from them, nor
cause them to labor much before they master them,] and ever after at the
drawing: And take good time with them in the inseaming: For these times as yet
have ever shortened their lives and destroyed them. No man (he says) can make
one of these Hawks from the Mew ready to be lured under six weeks at the least,
but he shall hazard her life if she take any heat at all. They are prepared for
the Mew, and mewed in like manner as the slight Falcon. Let her have in the
Mew Sods or Turfs to stand on, and those often shifted, that they grow not too
hard and dry: For she is a very heavy Hawk, and very subject to infirmity on
the bottom of her feet. He disallows mewing of them at the stock, and approves
of mewing them loose. She ought also to have very often given to her Plumage,
bones, and stones, to purge and cleanse her.

Turbervile says, they covet to keep their castings long through sloth; and
therefore advises not to give them casting of Cotton, but of Tow, Hazel or hard
things.

When she is mewed, Latham says, that you ought at the least three weeks
before you take her to your Fist, to inseam her with washed meat and stones: For
then is the danger of shortning her life, whereas by good ordering they are as
hardy as the Lanner, and will last as long: He says, he has known one hold
out and continue her goodness twenty years.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Lanner.
THe Lanner is not over-dainty of her feeding, but can better brook gross or
coarse diet than any other Falcon.

Lanners of all Hawks are fittestfor young Falconers, because they will hardly
take surfeit, and seldom be over-flown, or melt their grease.

Mewed Lanners [and Sacres] are hardly known from the Soar-hawks, because they
do not change their plume.

Turbervile says, that with this Hawk you may fly the River. Latham says, he
has not known any Lanner made for the River, yet prescribes a way to make them.

They are very slothful and hard-metled, so that unless you keep a hard hand
over them they will do littlegood.

You shall not lightly see a Lanner lie upon the Wing, after she has flown to
mark, but after one stooping she makes a point, and then waits for the Fowl
after the manner of the Goshawk, she is so slothful and dull; and therefore
does commonly use upon the questing or call of the Spaniels to attend very
diligently, and so to prey at her pleasure. As the Eyass of this kind exceeds
other Hawks in gentleness and love to her Keeper, so the Haggard passes all
others in wildness, and is very hard to be reclaimed. She must be managed and
ordered in all respects like the Haggard slight Falcon.

The Ramage Lanner is also a coy Hawk, and must be ordered as the Haggard
Falcon; only her diet must be with hard-washed meat and stones more or less as
you shall find her natural inclination.

Above all you must use your utmost skill and pains to keep her from dragging
or carrying any thing from you; which ill quality no Hawk is more subject to
than she. To prevent which, first you must beware, that if she but once only
knows the Lure, that you lure her no more than once at one time, though you
take the more time to make her: Else you hazard the spoiling of her. For as
soon as she knows the Lure she will settle her love on it, and desire to hold
it, and be loath to be taken up from it to be lured again; and out of fear lest
you should deprive her of it, will quickly fly you, and drag and carry it from
you. Secondly, During the time of her luring and training let her have her
reward at your hand for the most part in bits, reserving some small quantity to
take her to your Fist withal. Thirdly, All this while have your Spaniels by you
as she is on the ground: For these be Hawks of all other most coy and fearful
to have any Dogs come near them: And therefore at her first entering you ought
to have but few Dogs, and they such as be both cool and gentle, till she be
well entered and acquainted. For if she should chance to take any sudden fright
with a Dog, she would never abide them again: And so she will be for ever
married; for being able to carry away her prey, whenever she shall have a
Patridge in her foot, she will suffer neither Man nor Dog to come near her, but
carry it away, and prey upon it. Which if she do but once, it is as good as an
hundred times, for she will never be reclaimed from it.

Of the Merlin.
She is a courageous and hardy Hawk, flying with greater fierceness and more
hotly than any other bird of prey; so that she will venture to fly the
Partridge, Heathpowt and other birds bigger than her self, and pursue them
eagerly even into Villages and Towns.

They are such busy and unruly things, as oftentimes they eat This my Author
upon his own experience denies.
off their own Feet and Talons very unnaturally, so as they die of; which is
the true cause why you shall seldom or never see an entermew'd Merlin: For that
in the Mew they so spoil themselves.

A Merlin may be made both to the Fist and to the Lure. When you have made her
to the Lure in manner For the Falcon.
before described, make her a train with a Partridge, or other livebird: If she
foot and kill it, reward her, suffering her to take her pleasure on it. This
done, fly her at the wild Partridge, if she take it at the first flight, or if
she take it at the second flight, being retrived by the Spaniels, feed her upon
it with a reasonable Gorge, chearing her with your voice, that so she may know
it. If she prove not hardy at the first train, prove her with another before
you fly her at wild Game. If at the second train she prove not hard, it is a
sign she is nothing worth.

It is very good sport to fly with a cast of Merlins at the Lark or Linnet; for
besides that they love to fly in company, it is pleasant to see the one
climbing to the mountee above the Lark, and the other lying low for her best
advantage, the one striking the bird at the stooping, the other at her
down-come. When you have found the birds go as near as you can into the wind to
the bird; and as soon as the bird rises from the ground unhood your cast of
Merlins, and cast them to fly until they have beaten down the Lark or Linnet,
and let them feed on her for their labor indifferently. He advises not to fly
your Merlin at Cut-Larks, because they not mounting upward, but flying straight
foward, they afford you but little sport, and besides endanger the loss of your
Hawk.

CHAP. IX. Of the reclaiming and manning of short-winged Hawks, and first of
the Goshawk.
. I. Of the Goshawk, in general.
HAwks of all Creatures are most fearful of man, and the Goshawk as coy, nice,
and hard to be dealt with as any. She may be won by gentle usage; and will as
soon perceive and unkindly resent any rough or harsh behavior.

The Ostringer must bring his Hawk to love and be familiar with the Spaniel.

Some Goshawks are swift of flight, which in pursuing and catching their prey
trust to the swiftness of their Wings, others fly slow, and win what they get
by policy: None of them but by industry may be trained up to, and made good for
somewhat.

The Goshawk is of a hotter temper and stronger constitution than any other
Hawk; the first appears, in that her mutings are always liquid; the second, in
that she is seldom troubled with those diseases, which be incident to most
other Hawks, viz. to be liver-shotten, and to the Filanders. And though the
Lanner be accounted the hardiest Hawk in use among us, and longest-lived; yet
the reason is not the firmness of her constitution above the Goshawks, but
because the Goshawk in time of her pride and fullness is a froward and unruly
bird, and when she is inseamed very prone to extreme bating (wherefore she
requires more labor and attendance of her Keeper than any other Hawk) and by
these extremes she often shortens her days: Whereas the Lanner is a meek and
gentle Creature, and will seldom bate or be unruly in the time of her
inseaming; which is the reason she lasts longer.

. II. How to order a Goshawk taken from the Mew.
BEcause it is likely that she will be fat and full in the highest degree with
rest and frank feeding in the Mew, therefore it is necessary that she be fed in
the Mew twice every day with clean dressed and washed meat for sixteen or twenty
days before the intended time of her drawing, that she may be well inseamed of
her body, and have scoured forth of her panel and guts all glut and fatness,
and so she will be in no danger through her bating, struggling, or other
forcible motion of her body at the time of her drawing. Then draw her, having a
rufter-hood in readiness very sit for her, from which time she must be
continually fed on the Fist, and have casting every night. This course with
continual carriage on horseback and on foot must be taken with her in her
rufter-hood some eight or ten days longer; and then take it off, when you shall
find her to be well reclaimed and inseamed, and free from all danger, and ready
to be called; and with diligence and pains she will be next week as ready to
fly: And after two or three flights at her first entering may be put to hard
flying, and she will receive no harm thereby, etc.

. III. How to reclaim and order a Goshawk taken from the Cage.
FEw of these are so fat or full-bodied as to take harm by any reasonable
bating.

Give your Hawk sweet meat, clean dressed, and reasonably washed, and moderate
gorges of the same: By this diet you must bring her to a good stomach before
you profer her casting, and then she will not be nice or curious in taking it.
Let it be no more than she may well and easily swallow, and when she has done
so, presently put on her Hood, then suddenly give her one bit or two of meat to
please her withal; then make a little stay, until you perceive assuredly that
she has put it down into her Panel, which being perceived put on her Hood
again, and give her a reasonable supper. By this course taken, the Hawk will
soon come to be in love with her casting, hasting to take it without niceness
in expectation of her supper.

For my own part (says my Author) when my Hawk is well inseamed, and in flying
I give her Plumage every night when I feed her up: When she rests I feed her
very clean, without any casting at all, and so set her up to rest, and in the
morning very early give a woollen casting, fashioned and soaked all night in
fair water, which she will willingly take being used to it: And in an hour or
thereabouts her appetite to her breakfast will provoke her to cast it up again.
So he disapproves the giving a woollen casting at night: But if any will needs
give it, then he advises it be with small store of meat, and some Plumage with
it. Also he disapproves of stones given with Celandine, and castings of hazel,
unless much undersized, because of their swelling. When ever he found his Hawk
to distaste unnatural Cotton castings, he suddenly left them and betook himself
to Jukes, and sometimes to Hares or Conies feet, the bones and wool well
broken together, which he never found to disagree with her, but always wrought
to good purpose.

He condemns the giving of bloody meat, because the Hawk will not therewith be
reclaimed. And therefore, says he, the unreclaimed and unclean Hawk of this or
any other kind ought to be reclaimed, inseamed, and made to fly with good meat,
clean dressed and washed, and for these Hawks the water dried out again with a
fair cloth. And this course to be held all flying time, unless there be just
cause for the contrary. As to a sick and crasie Hawk, with due respect unto the
eyes, or to a hot and eager mettled Hawk, as also to the soundest and hardest
Hawk that is, when she shall have continual hard flying, and kills often, you may
with discretion in the quantity give bloody rewards, and three or four times in
the week suppers of the same, as Pheasants and Partridges heads and necks:
Always being mindful in time of rest to feed with meat clean dressed, hard washed
and dried again, to hold the stomach right and sharp withal, else no subjection
to be looked for abroad when she is at liberty.

All the flying time, but especially when you fly to the covert, (it being then
usually cold weather) suffer not your Goshawk to be too long fasting, for it
breeds much wind in her, and is a special means, with cold adjoined, to take
down her flesh, which at that time will not very easily be put on again.
Therefore for every Hawking day provide a reasonable meal of clean-drest meat,
the which you must keep in a fair cloth: Then in the morning, suddenly after
she has cast, give one bit when her Hood is on. Also if you chance to spend an
hour more before you find your flight, give her another bit, and so after this
manner, proportioning her meat to the time of her being abroad, that she never
be over-empty, and yet have a perfect appetite and good courage to fly.

When ever you feed with cold meat you need not wash it: But I would advise you
to use it as seldom as you may, for a continuance of it breeds poverty and many
diseases.

Whenever you have set down your Hawk off your Fist hooded or unhooded, come
not to take her up again without using your voice in whistling or chirping to
her, also without some bit of meat, or a stump to please her withal; for so you
shall work in her an everlasting love and desire of your coming and company.

Also when you set her on your Perch hooded, let her not know where it
stands, if she do, she will have a longing to be there, and will not rest
quietly on the Fist after she is once within doors: Whereas till she be
thoroughly reclaimed and flying, and till she has been well flown, your Fist
for the most part must be her Perch, and she must know no other. For these be
Hawks that in their first making with a little rest will quickly forget what
they were formerly taught, and return to their wildness again.

When she is untowardly or frowardly disposed, endure her unquietness with
patience and gentleness, and evermore have some stump in a readiness to appease
her anger.

In the time of her inseaming and reclaiming give her not her dinner at any
time all at once, for thereby you shall prolong the time of her making: For her
stomach once full she will mind you no more, therefore divide it in the
forepart of the day, and let her jump often to the Fist for it.

When she is first to be entered put her upon the highest pin of hunger, and
then she will show all the mettle that is in her, and when she has once taken
her prey rather die than forsake it: Whereas if her stomach be imperfect, the
least occasion that may be, as the approach of her Keeper, or any other man,
the appearance of either Horse or Dog, etc. will be sufficient to cause her to
forsake it and go her way.

. IV. How to make a Goshawk like the Hood, that has with ill usage been beaten
out of love with it.
CArry a Hood of some notable color on your finger, that may well be seen and
viewed by her as it hangs there, and so as she may feed close by it for a
week together, but beware you do not as yet show it her with your other hand.
But then take it gently in your other hand, and move and stir it about her
meat, that she may touch it as she eats. This do another week, still letting
the Hood rest on your little in her sight between feeding times. Use this
course till without fear she will but thus endure it. Then you must hold your
meat in the hand she sits on, and with the other hand hold the Hood by the
Tassel upon the meat, moving and stirring it as though you would keep her from
feeding; but it must be done softly and gently: When you shall perceive that
she will strive to feed beside it, you shall hold it by the Tassel just over
the meat, so that she must needs eat clean through it. Do thus so long as till
you see that she will feed and search boldly through the hood for her meat, and
eat it without any snatching or fear. Then as she is feeding, and does thrust
through the Hood for her meat, do you bear the Hood a little against her, and
she will hood and unhood herself as often as you would have her. When she has
with your assistance put on her Hood, let her eat freely until she has done,
and take it off no more till feeding time again. In this manner, within a month
and less she will be brought to hood her self with the least stump you carry
about you, as often as you shall have occasion.

Practice not this till she be come to a perfect stomach, for if you do, you
mar your Hawk for ever.

. V. To reclaim a Goshawk from the Cage.
GIve her a fortnights carriage or more in her rufter-hood, always stroaking
her with your hand or a feather. Be careful to feed clean with washed meat, for
so she will be the sooner brought to a good stomach, and be gentle and well
pleased to be handled. This obtained (which you shall perceive by her listening
to your voice, or eager feeding) some evening wash and pepper her well. Then
take off her rufter-hood, having another ready to put on: As she grows to be a
little dry put on her Hood, and give her a bit of good meat upon it to please
and refresh her. Hold this course to hood gently, and unhood now and then, not
forgetting her reward ever after it is on, until she be thoroughly dried, and
afterward the most part of the night: Then you may set her down barefaced to
have two or three hours rest; and be sure it be in a special warm place, and on
a dry and warm Perch on high, for these kind of Hawks are very subject to take
cold, and apt to have the cramp on such occasions.

When she and your self have taken a little rest, go softly to her with show of
meat in your hand, withal chirping or whistling to her, and take her gently on
your Fist, and dividing her meat into several parts bestow it on her for the
most part when her Hood is put on: This will make her love and look for the
Hood expecting to be fed; if she be nice in suffering your hand or the Hood to
come near her head, you must seldom do it in the day time, but at her feeding,
and late at night, when she will be more willing to take it.

Next teach her to jump and come to the Fist. For though other Hawks are used
to come to the Lure thrown some distance from the man; yet she being a Hawk of
the Fist, must be taught and used to come boldly to the hand, and without fear
to seize and sit upon it during your pleasure, which she will never be brought
to do with all the Art in the world, if her stomach be any way imperfect.

This obtained, let her be called a little further off, viz. twenty or forty
yards at most: By dividing one meal (as I said) let her come oftentimes in a
day if it be possible: Which will quickly make her perfect, that she will never
check at the Fist, but will come and draw at any time of the day: Whereas using
her to one hour for her meal, causes her not to come or draw till that time;
which is an ill quality.

[He wishes not to be too hasty in flying Goshawks before they be thoroughly
reclaimed and taught, but to take sufficient time to teach them. And he
affirms, that if a Hawk be too much impoverished and her flesh taken off, she
will lose her spirit and mettle, how good soever she was, and will neither fly
well, nor ever last healthful.]

Now it will be good time to call her loose. In doing which shun all places
near Houses and Towns, to avoid the inconveniences of her being tempted aside
by Poultry, Dove-houses, and such like places, which all these Hawks are
subject to; and having once caught such an ill property they will seldom or
never be reclaimed from it, how far soever from any Town they shall be flown:
Walk therefore with her to the young Woods betimes in the afternoon, having
before prepared her stomach, and there put her up into a tree, walking along
from her, using your voice softly as though you had Spaniels with you, but
chiefly to her in chirping and whistling: By which means no doubt she will draw
and follow after you with little noise, Then suffer her not too long, but call
her to your fist again, and reward her with some bit of meat, or Leg of a
Pigeon, etc. to please her. Then put her up again, and by your softest voice or
whistle draw her after you again. To use a loud voice would be a means to make
her sit and loiter behind you so far as she can hear you, which is an ill
quality: And besides, to make your Spaniels range far off, and spring out of
the way far from you, which must needs be much displeasing both to Man and Hawk.

To make your Hawk familiar with your Dogs, first feed her amongst them all
very often upon your Fist: Then throw oftentimes from you among the thickest of
them the dead Pelt of a Pullet or Hen in a short Cruce, that she may fly from
your Fist, and eagerly chop among them, and seize upon the same, suffering her
to plume a while: then take her to your Fist with a stump. This course you must
use every day often, till you find that she will venture boldly among them all.
She will soon perceive and understand by the Dogs giving way with fear unto
her, that she has even got the upper hand of them, and so will never fear them
in the field or covert, or be beaten off her Game by them, as otherwise she
would.

. VI. To enter a Goshawk to fly to the field.
PRovide three or four hand-Partridges, with a companion, and one couple of
staunch Spaniels; then go into the field, having prepared your Hawk with
appetite and courage to fly. Then one of you shall go near hand from the other
unto some bushes or other covert, whereas he shall spend his voice to the Dogs
after the accustomed manner, and using some blows with his Pole, he shall
secretly let the Partridge spring as from forth the same, with such judgment in
the delivery as that the Hawk may see it, crying with a loud voice, How, How,
How, that she may learn to know the word of warning, when she should at any
other time look about her, and be watchful at an instant to take her advantage.
This done, and your Hawk flying after it with spirit, and taking it, be sure
with all expedition to get in to her, that no Dog or other thing may fright
her, or deprive her of it: But suffer her to plume and take her pleasure on it,
and further to take blood thereon, still having the Spaniels in sight close by
her. Then you must teach her to take the head in her foot, and eat it on the
ground: And when she has so done, and looks about her, having your Spaniels
by you, through the Partridges pelt (as before in her first teaching) once
among the Dogs, and let her take it being in her Leash, that she may not carry
it from you: And whilst she sits there and plumes make her supper ready; take
her gently to your Fist, and there content her. By thus ordering and using of
her, you will without doubt very suddenly have an excellent Hawk: And by all
means fly her to the field all the first year, and let her not see the Pheasant
at all, for that will draw her love from the Partridge, and make her give them
over; being a shorter flight.

When you have thus entered and blouded her, and also killed three or four
Partridges more from the mark at the retrive, and perceive that she knows a
Partridge by sight, and the accustomed terms, and will go readily from the Fist
thereto; be sure, that all the forepart of the year you let her go no more one
flight in ten, near to the rising of her Game, for that will make her slothful;
the Partridge being then weak, and she taking them easily at the sowce in a
short space, she will afterward remember it, and look for the same order, and
without it will not fly toward the latter end of the year, but if the
Partridge be sprung far from her, will make as if she saw it not, and fly to
the next tree she meets with.

Some Hawks have an ill property, that when they have flown a Partridge hard to
any covert, and take it not at the first flight, there will they sit still on
the ground, and not get up to any stand for their better advantage. To amend
which fault, when your Hawk has flown a Partridge, make after her with all the
speed you can, taking your Dogs with you by your command, and when you have
found her, be sure to take her up, but not on your Fist by any means, if there
be either hedge or tree near hand, but take her by the body or shoulders
suddenly with both your hands, and throw her upon either hedge, bush, or tree,
and then beat for the Partridge, when as it is impossible but she must see it;
if it does spring then, and she fly after and kill it, well. This course being
well followed will certainly reclaim her from that fault, and teach her to rise
her self; for she will quickly understand that else she shall be caught and
tossed up, and also that thereby she shall enjoy some pleasure and content. This
is a common and lasting fault of the Eyas Hawk or brancher, seldom of the
Haggard, and therefore you need not fear frighting or angring her by so doing.

It is in my opinion the most commendable and safe way after one of these Hawks
is first entered, and only knows a Partridge, then immediately to teach her and
use her to fly from forth the Hood. Often bating at Partridges sprung to other
Hawks discomforts and discourages her: Besides, she will, if carried
barefaced, be very stirring and unquiet on the Fist, not a Dog can stir, or
bird rise, but she will offer to be gone. Let her also sit and weather in the
Hood, and never take it off but when she shall either fly, feed, bathe, or is
to take her rest at night.

. VII. How to enter your Goshawk to the Covert.
NO man is fit to order and manage a Goshawk to the covert but he that has a
strong and able body, and a good spirit and courage to follow her, for in this
sport, and with this Hawk he must altogether trust to his feet.

Here because the man cannot follow by view to succor the Hawk, you ought to
be chary of what place you enter her in, especially that she may be there well
guarded and kept from taking any mislike or offense at the Dogs, the which if
she should do at the beginning she will never endure them again: For it is the
sudden rushing of the Spaniels upon her, (their sight by means of the covert
being obscured) that breeds this offense. The best time to enter her is early
before the leaf do stir; for then the Pheasant flies not far. Also afterward
the nature of them is to leave the young shoots and small groves, and draw to
the high and thickest woods.

Having made good choice of your place, and let your Hawk go unto her flight,
you must be sure to command your Dogs to you till you have found her; then if
she have killed, you have your desire; if not, and that you chance to find her
on the ground, (as it may well be you may, for many of them at their first
entering will be very hot and eager of that sport, and oftentimes seeking for it
on the ground) if there be any tree near hand, that she may well see from it,
put her up into the same, otherwise keep her on your Fist and beat for it
again. Then if she do fly and kill it, you must be sure to make stay of the
Dogs till you have found her: Which done you shall get gently in to her, and if
you dislike the place for the uneasiness or thickness, draw her gently to
another more open, where she may with more ease and quiet enjoy her prey; and
there suffer her to plume and take her pleasure on it a while. Then call your
Dogs to you, and walk and stir gently about her, with some moderate rusling and
bustling in the bushes, the better to acquaint her with the same noise. Then
when you see it convenient stoop to it on your knees, and rending the Chaps
give her blood in the throat, where it will issue abundantly, to her great
content. Then covering the body with your hat, pluck of the head, and give it
her in her foot, to eat on the ground: And having your Spaniels close by you,
when she has done, and begins to look about her, throw the Pheasant as it
were in their very mouths, that she may, together with some words of rebuke
from your self, make them give way with fear unto her, yet drawing them into
her sight again, so long to remain as she is on the ground, and till you make
ready her supper. And when you see she has taken her sufficient pleasure,
exchange that artificially with her, and let her eat it on the ground where the
quarry lay, only reserving some little thing to take her to your Fist withal:
And then put on her Hood, not forgetting to bestow some reward on her
afterward, which she will be well pleased withal.

To make your Goshawk with boldness take a Pheasant from the Perch, before you
offer to fly her thereto, provide a young Capon or brown Pullet, and take it
with you to the Wood, and when you call her to her supper, as she is drawing
and attending after you, having a Pole fit for the purpose provided, call your
Spaniels about you, to make them bay, and suddenly breaking the neck of the
Poultry, lift it up on a bough, so high as the Hawk may well have sight of it,
there stirring it, and withal crying, Abay, abay to her: At which noise, and
seeing it flutter, no doubt she will come in, and pull it down: Which if she
shall do, be sure that the Dogs may with some rebuke from your self, make way
for her descending, and then suffer her to plume and take her pleasure thereon,
etc. as was before directed: And in using this course but a while, she will
become so bold and venturous, as that the Pheasant shall no sooner go to
Perch, but she will have him by the ears, and pull him down.

By threatening words and blows, with reason, you may bring your Spaniels into
such subjection, as to trust them alone with your Hawk in your absence: taking
care there be no strange Dogs among them: For one strange unruly Dog is
sufficient to mar all the rest, and the Hawk too.

Be careful to enter your Goshawk first to the Cock-Pheasant, for the veriest
dastard that is will kill the Hen; which if you enter her first to, it may be
afterward with all your Art and Skill you shall never force her to fly at the
Cock. If you find that at first she is afraid to buckle with him, then with two
or three days rest prepare her stomach soundly, and put her to him again.

. VIII. Of the Haggard-Goshawk.
THis being the wildest Hawk of all, and so requiring more labor, care, and
attendance in her reclaiming and perfect making than any other, he advises not
to deal hastily with her by peppering, watching, and the like: For many Hawks
have so been spoiled and lost; their bodies being unfit for such sudden changes.

It is the nature of these Hawks when wild to feed on their prey in covert
places, where they may not be descried by such other birds as love them not:
Wherefore also being reclaimed, whenever they take it in any Plain or
Champain place, they will be apt to carry it to the next harbor or covert: To
reclaim her from this ill quality you must take this course. Though you do call
and draw her along after you by your chirping and whistle through the thick and
covert places, yet do not there take her to your Fist to be fully satisfied,
but let her still wait on you, till you come to some plain place, and there
entertain her to the Fist, and let her feed a little thereon, then put to her
Leash, and let her eat the rest on the ground close by you, and having reserved
some stump, take her to the Fist. Remember that you sometimes stoop gently on
your knee, and quietly and softly convey some bits unseen afar off to her, that
she strike not at your hand with her Talons, etc. Thus doing daily with gentle
usage so long as you call her, you will embolden her, and make her so familiar
as never to offer to carry any thing from you.

When she kills, be sure to get in gently to her, having before provided her a
meal ready dressed, and as she sits on the Partridge, bestow the same on her in
bits with cleanly conveyance, which will prolong her time in pluming, and stay
the sharpness of her appetite, and desire to feed, which she must not do, for
it would cause her to love the Bird better than your self, and to be loath
afterward at any time to be bereaved of it, and thereby take occasion to carry
it from you, hoping to enjoy it to her self more quietly and secretly: Whereas
this course will so please her, and draw her love so certainly to you, as she
will never after offer to carry one feather from you. All this while give her
no blood at all, but with some reversion take her to your Fist again. By this
means she will never break the Prey so long as there is one feather left on it,
I speak this by experience and on my credit.
but still attend for your coming, and to have a reward only at your hand. When
you have well nuzled up and inured her herein, afterward when you find her with
a Partridge in her foot; then after a good time spent in pluming, take off the
head and neck, and give it unto her with the most part of her supper together,
and so take her to your Fist.

He prescribes how to teach a Goshawk to fly to the Wild-duck, which is by
providing three or four hand-fowl, and letting her fly and foot them out of
your hand one after another, day after day, and letting her plume and be well
rewarded on them: And afterward getting another like bird, and letting a
companion carry it into a close place or plump of bushes, and there throw it up
in sight of your Hawk before prepared with a good stomach, etc. In like manner
he teaches, how to enter a Hawk to the Rook, Heron, Wild Goose, Mew, etc. with
a train-Rook or two, etc. which who desires to be particularly informed in, may
consult the Author.

. IX. Certain Observations for an Ostreger in keeping a Goshawk.
A Goshawk that was good in her soarage, many times proves worse after mewing:
Because in her soarage she was not cherished to make her take delight in her
flight. For the chief skill of an Ostreger consists in coying and cherishing
his Hawk, so as she may take pride in her flight. Wherefore it were good at her
first entering to have always a train-Partridge in his Bag, to serve her withal
if need be, and so win her love.

Ply your Hawk with Tiring and Plumage morning and evening; for that will open
her head; and cast out the moist humors, wherewith Goshawks are naturally
troubled. Let her Tiring be a Rump of Beef, or the Pinion of a Wing, or a
Chickens Leg, given by the fire, or in the warm Sun, which will not only open
her head but keep her in exercise.

Give her every night casting either of feathers or Cotton, and in the morning
mark whether it be wrought round or not, whether it be sweet or not, whether it
be moist or dry, and of what color the water is that drops out of it: For
thereby you may judge in what case your Hawk is. You must also have regard to
the mewts, whether they be clean or not.

In Winter and cold weather set your Hawk warm, in some place where fire is
made, and roll your Perch with Cotton, or some such like thing. Set your
Perch far from the wall, that your Hawk hurt not her feathers when she bateth.
If it be not cold, set her every morning in some place where the Sun has power
for an hour or two.

Let no Hens or Poultry come near the place where your Hawk shall perch.

In the Spring offer your Hawk to the water every week, or else she will soar
away when she flees, and make you seek her. If any time she bathes of her own
accord after her flight, if it be Winter, go presently to the next house, and
weather her by a fire with her back to it, and not her gorge, for that would
make her sick: Likewise dry her if you have carried her in the rain.

Keep her lusty and high, and yet her stomach so sharp, that she may fly
eagerly. The plucking down a Hawk mars her, and makes her cowardly; and liable
to sickness and infirmity.

Keep your Hawk clean, and her feathers whole, and if a feather be broken or
bruised imp it presently.

The first year it is best to fly your Goshawk to the field, and not to the
covert, for so they will learn to hold out and not turn tail in the midst of
their flight: And when they are mewed Hawks you may make them do what you will;
it is better to let them be a littleramage than over-manned.

Her feeding is best on hot meats: And if you would breed her to kill great
fowl, make her trains thereof: And if you would have her continue those flights
never fly at less, for that will take her off from them and spoil her.

If you would make her to fly with a Dog to assist her, feed her with great
fowl, and your Dogs with flesh tied under their Wings. If you train your Hawk
with them, reward her upon the train, and your Dog with her: This will make
them acquainted together. Thus continue doing till your Dog thoroughly knows his
duty: And be sure to keep your Dog tied up, for if you let him go loose, it
will spoil the best Dog that is: And never give him a reward but when he makes
in at such Fowls to rescue the Hawk.

CHAP. X. Of the Sparrow-hawk.
THe Sparhawk (says Latham) though a demy-creature, yet for her spirit and
mettle is worthy to march in the best company: Nay, there is no better Hawk
than she, if she be kept, as she ought to be, lusty and strong. Besides, he
that knows how to man, reclaim and fly a Sparrow-hawk, may easily know how to
keep and deal with all other Hawks.

And herein lies an excellency in the Sparrow-hawk, she serves both for Winter
and Summer with great pleasure, and will fly at all kind of Game more than the
Falcon. If the Winter Sparrow-hawk prove good, she will kill the Pie, the
Chough, the Jay, the Woodcock, Thrush, Blackbird, Fieldfare: Latham adds the
Rook, Mew, Lapwing, Ring-dove, House-dove. To be kept strongly in the Hood and
flown from it, she is a most excellent Hawk, and will kill more Partridge in
one day than the best longwinged Hawk will do in two.

Her diet should be of the daintiest meat, unless in times of rest, and then
also well washed and dried again, especially if she be mewd.

Against she is to fly she must be prepared with a short cut, to put a perfect
edge upon her, and then she will fly after the best manner. Also she should not
be flown in the Morning, unless she be prepared over night with a short and
clean supper for the purpose.

Likewise you ought to have always about you a little box full of fresh Butter,
mixed with a little Saffron and Sugar Candy, to give with her meat now and then;
or let her eat it out of the box: Which she will do with great delight, and it
will keep her head evermore loose, and in good temper, and also prevent the
Cray, and keep her proud and full of spirit.

For the Eyas or Nyas Sparrow-hawk (which is of greatest difficulty to bring to
perfection) you must first feed her in some cool room, which has two Windows,
the one to the North, and the other to the East, which must be open and barred
over with Laths, not so wide for a Hawk to get out, or Vermin to come in:
Strew the Chamber with fresh leaves, and do in every respect to this Room, as
was ordered for the mewing of the Falcon.

You must feed your Eyas with Sparrows, young Pigeons, and Sheeps hearts.
Whilst she is very young and little, you should cut her meat, or shred it into
small pellets, and feed her twice or thrice aday, according as you find her
endew it or put it over.

When she is full summed and flies about, then give her whole small Birds, and
sometimes feed her on your Fist, suffering her to strain and kill the Birds in
your hand; and sometimes put live Birds into the Chamber where she is, that she
may learn to foot and to kill them; and let her feed upon them in your
presence: By this course you will not only neal her, but take her off from that
scurvy quality of hiding her Prey when she has seized it, a natural property
belonging to all Eyasses. Likewise every morning go into the Room, call her to
your Fist, whistle and use such terms as you would have her hereafter
acquainted with. When she has put forth all her Feathers and is full summed,
then take her out of the Chamber, and furnish her with Bells, Bewets, Jesses,
and Lines.

It will be altogether requisite to seel her at first, that she may the better
endure the Hood and handling: And let it be a Rufter-hood, that is large and
easy, which you must pull off and put on frequently, stroaking her often on
the Head, till she will stand gently.

In the evening by Candlelight unseel her, giving her somewhat to tire upon,
handling, and stroaking her feathers gently, hooding and unhooding heras often
as you think fit.

Before I proceed any farther, I shall inform you how to seel a Hawk after the
best manner. Take a Needle threaded with untwisted Thread, and casting your
Hawk, take her by the Beak, and put the Needle through her Eyelid, not right
against the Sight of the Eye, but somewhat nearer the Beak, that she may have
liberty to see backward; and have especial care that you hurt not the Web: Then
put your Needle through the other Eyelid, drawing the ends of the Thread
together, tie them over the Beak, not with a straight knot, but cut off the
Threads near to the end of the knot, and so twist them together, that the
Eyelids may be raised so upwards that the Hawk may not see at all, but as the
Thread shall slacken, she shall be able to see backwards only, which is the
cause that the Thread is put nearer the Beak.

When your Eyas is well won to the Hood and to the Fist, let her kill small
Birds thereon; then call her two or three days or longer, till she will come
far off; then take a live Pigeon tied by the foot with a Creance, and stir it
till your Hawk will bate at it and seize it, but not far off, that you may
quickly help her at the first, lest the Pigeon struggling with her she prove
too strong, and so discourage your young Hawk: Then let her plume and foot her,
and feed her thereupon, whistling the while, that she may know it another time:
Then hood her, and let her plume and tire a little.

You may use her to Trains of Chicken and Quail: And when she will seize
readily by often Training, ride out with her in the morning into the Fields,
where calling your Sparrow-hawk to your Fist, and giving her a bit or two, go
with your Spaniels to seek some Beavy of young Quails, advancing your Fist
aloft, that your Hawk may see them when they spring, flying her at advantage:
If she kill, reward her, etc. if she miss, serve her with a Train of a Quail.

Let your Dogs hunt on your right hand when they range, but especially when
they quest and call, to the end you may the better cast off your Hawk. When
your Hawk is thoroughly entered and well nouzled, you may then hold your hand
low, for she will now bate at the Whurr: But whatever you do, have a quick eye
and a good regard to the Spaniels, not coveting to be too near them, but a
little above them, that you may let your Hawk fly coasting at the advantage
when the Game springs.

. II. Of the Brancher, Soar, Mewed, and Haggard Sparrow-hawk.
HAving spoken of the first kind of Sparrow-hawks, viz. the Eyas, the other
four in the title of this Chapter must consequently be discoursed of.

I shall give you but few instructions, for in effect the same precepts that
serve for the Eyas will serve also for the Brancher, Soar, Mewed, and Haggard
Hawks; only this, these four last require not so much pains to be taken to make
them know their Game as the Eyas, because they have been accustomed to prey for
themselves.

Above all things the Falconer must take them off from their ill custom of
carrying, and that may be done by serving them with great Trains, whereby they
will learn to abide on the Quarry.

Be very mindful of coying them as much as you can, for they will remember a
kindness or injury better than any other Hawk.

If the Hawk be newly taken, and will not feed, then rub her Feet with warm
flesh, whistling to her, and sometimes putting the flesh unto her Beak: If she
will not yet feed, rub her Feet with a live Bird; if at the crying of the Bird
the Hawk seize it with her Feet, it is a sign she will feed; then tear off the
Skin and Feathers of the Birds Breast, and put the Bird to her Beak, and she
will eat.

When she will feed upon your whistle and chirp, then hood her with a
Rufterhood, and feed her betimes in the morning; and when she has endewed,
give her a Beaching in the daytime, and every time you hood her give her a bit
or two; at evening give her the Brains of a Hen for her supper: and in every
thing else order these Hawks aforesaid as you do the Falcon and the rest.

. III. How to mew Sparrow-Hawks.
SOme use to put their Sparrow-Hawk into the Mew as soon as they leave flying
her, cutting off both her Bewets, Lines, and knots of her Jesses, and so leave
them in the Mew till they are clean mewed.

If you will have your Sparrow-Hawk to fly at Quail, Partridge, or Pheasant
Powt, then you must draw her in the beginning of April, and bear her on the
Fist till she be clean and thoroughly enseamed.

Others keep their Sparrow-Hawks on the Perch until March, and then throw them
into the Mew, peppering them for Lice if they have any. Her Mew should be a
Chamber aloft from the ground, eight or nine foot long, and about six foot
broad: Her Windows and Pearches must be like the Goshawks.

Her Mew being thus provided, in May go in to her in an evening by
Candlelight, and taking her up softly, pull out all her Train-Feathers one
after another: This shall make her mew the faster, especially if you feed her
with hot meat and Birds, observing a certain hour to feed her in.

Once in fourteen days set water before her in the Mew: If you perceive she
has any Feathers or Down which stand staring upon her Back, sitting as if she
would rouse, then set her water sooner. If you put water by her continually, it
delays her Mewing; and to keep it always from her causes her to mew her
Feathers uncleanly: But water once in a fortnight is the best medium for her
Mewing between those two extremes.

PART II. Of Diseases and dangerous Accidents incident to Hawks, and their
several Cures.
IT is necessary for a skilful Falconer not only to know how to man, reclaim,
keep, fly, imp, and mew his Hawks, with other things pertinent to that purpose,
but also to know their Diseases, with the proper Cures of them, and other
Accidents frequently befalling Hawks, both in their Flights and otherways.

Before we shall characterize their Maladies, and prescribe rules for their
Cures, it will be requisite to tell you that Hawks, as well as men, (which
seems somewhat strange) have four complexions, the true Indicators of their
natures: And as in man his natural Complexion and Constitution is known by his
Skin, so is the Temperament and natural Disposition of a Hawk by her Coat and
Plume. This opinion has not been only averred by the Ancients, but confirmed
by the modern experience of the skilful in the noble Art of Hawking. Take it in
this manner.

Falcons that are black are Melancholic, and are to be physicked with hot and
moist Medicines, because their Complexion is cold and dry; for which purpose
Aloes, Pepper, Cocks-flesh, Pigeons, Sparrows, Goats-flesh, and the like, are
very good.

Falcons blank are Phlegmatic, and must have Physic hot and dry, because
Phlegm is cold and moist; to which purpose Cinnamon, Cloves, Cardamum,
Goats-flesh, Choughs, etc. are very good.

Falcons russet are Sanguine and Choleric indifferently mixed, and their Physic
must be cold, moderately moist and dry, as Myrtles, Cassia fistula, Tamarinds,
Vinegar, Lambs-flesh, and Pullets.

Thus much for the Complexions: now for the Diseases and their Cures.

CHAP. I. Of Castings and Mewtings, either good or bad, according to their
several Complexions and smells.
CAstings are of two sorts, Plumage, or Cotton: The latter is most commonly
given in Pellets, which must be about the bigness of an Hazel-nut, made of fine
soft white Cotton: After she has supt you must convey this into her Gorge.

In the morning diligently observe how she has rolled and cast it, whereby you
shall know whether she be in a bad or good condition: For example, if she cast
it round, white, not stinking, nor very moist or waterish, you may conclude her
sound; but if she roll it not well, but cast it long, with properties contrary
to the former, then she is unsound and full of Diseases.

Besides, if her Casting be either black, green, yellowish, slimy, or stinking,
it denotes your Hawk to be diseased. The former Casting is remedied by hot
meats; the latter by feeding her well, and washing her meats in cool water, as
of Endive, etc. and give her one or two Castings of Cotton, incorporating
therewith Incense and Mummy. But if she continue notwithstanding in this
condition, give her an upward Scowring made thus: Take Aloes pulverized one
scruple, powder of Cloves four grains, powder of Cubebs three grains,
incorporate these, and wrap them in Cotton, and give it your Hawk empty, having
no meat in her Panel.

Casting of Plumage is to be observed as the former Casting: That is, if in the
morning you find them round, and not stinking, it is a good sign; but if long,
slimy, with indigested flesh sticking to the same, and having an ill sent, it
is very bad. Here note, that by how much the more sweet or stinking the Casting
is, by so much is the Hawk in a better or worse condition.

Mewts must be observed as well as Castings, in this manner: If the Mewt be
white, not very thick nor clear, having no black spot in it, or but very
little, it is a sign of the healthy constitution of the Hawk; but if it be
white and very thick in the middle, though it does not import sickness, yet it
shows her to be too gross and overfull of grease, which you must remedy by
giving her moist meats, as the Heart of a Calf or Lamb, etc. and for two
mornings after give her some Sugar Candy, or else the Gut of a Chicken well
washed, and filled with Oyl-Olive: Either of these will scour her, and make her
to slise freely.

It is a very bad and mortal sign to see your Hawks Mewt full of variety of
colors: therefore you must speedily prevent ensuing mischiefs by giving her
Mummy purified and beaten to powder, wrapping it in Cotton.

If the Mewt be more yellow than white, then does she abound with Choler
proceeding from great Flights in hot weather, also from much Bating. This is
remedied by washing her meat in Bugloss, Endive, Borage, and such like cold
waters, wringing the said meat after you have so washed it.

The black Mewt is a most deadly sign, and if it continue four days she will
peck over the Perch and die. If she mewt so but once, there is no great
danger, for it proceeds either from the Blood or Guts of the Fowl in tiring, or
else from being gorged with filthy meats: In this case give her good warm meat
and Cotton-casting, with the powder of Cloves, Nutmeg, and Ginger, or Mummy
alone.

If the Mewt be green, it is a bad sign, and denotes her troubled with an
infected and corrupt Liver, or with some Aposteme, unless she be a Rammage
Hawk, and then that sign holds not good. Her Cure is, by feeding her with meat
powdered with Mummy; if she will not take it with her Food, then give it her in
a Scouring or Casting: But if this ill-coloured Mewting continue still, then
give her a Scouring of Agarick, and after that another of Incense pulverized to
comfort her.

The dark sanguine Mewt with a black in it is the most deadly sign of all, and
differs but little, if any thing, from the former black Mewt. A Hawk mewting
after this manner is irrecoverable, and therefore it is needless to prescribe a
Cure.

Lastly, The gray Mewt like sour milk is a mortal token, yet curable, as shall
be shown hereafter.

Thus you see how requisite it is for a Falconer to observe diligently every
morning his Hawks Castings and Mewtings, that knowing thereby their Maladies,
he may timely find out their Remedies. Let us now proceed to their particular
Diseases.

CHAP. II. Of the Cataract.
THe Cataract in the Eyes of a Hawk is a Malady not easily removed, and
sometimes incurable, when it is too thick, and of a long continuance.

It proceeds from gross Humors in the Head, which frequently do not only
dim, but extinguish the Sight: and sometimes the Hood is the cause of this
mischief.

The Cure must be effected by Scouring her two or three days with Aloes or
Agarick: Then take the powder of washed Aloes finely beaten one scruple, and two
scruples of Sugar Candy; mingle these together, and with a quill blow it into
your Hawks eye afflicted as aforesaid three or four times a day. This is the
gentlest and most sovereign medicine of any yet I have tried. But if this will
not do, you must use stronger medicines, as the juice of Celandine roots,
bathing her Eyes often with warm Rosewater wherein has been boiled the seeds
of Fengreek.

CHAP. III. Of the Pantas or Asthma.
THe Pantas is a dangerous Distemper, and few Hawks escape which are afflicted
therewith. It happens when the Lungs are as it were so baked by excessive heat,
that the Hawk cannot draw her breath, and when drawn, cannot well emit it
again. You may judge of the beginning of this Distemper by the Hawks laboring
much in the Panel, moving her Train often up and down at each motion of her
Panel: and she cannot many times mewt or slise, or if she do, she drops it
fast by her. It is known likewise by your Hawks frequent opening her Clap and
Beak.

The best Remedy is, to scour your Hawk with good Oyl-Olive well washed in
several waters till it become clear and white; which you must do after this
manner: Take an earthen pot with a small hole in the bottom thereof, which you
must stop with your finger; then pour therein your Oil with a quantity of
water, and coil these together with a spoon till the water grow darkish, after
which remove your finger, and the water will run out, but the Oil remain behind
floating on the top; thus do seven or eight times, till you have thoroughly
purified the Oil: Then take a Sheeps Gut above an inch long for a Falcon and
Goshawk, but of a less length for lesser Hawks, and fill it with this Oil, and
fasten it with thread at both ends. Your Hawk having first cast, convey this
Gut into her Throat, holding her on the Fist till she make a Mewt; an hour
after she has done mewting feed her with a Calves Heart, or a Pullets Leg,
giving her every third or fourth day a Cotton-casting with Cubebs and Cloves. I
shall only add one Receipt more for the Pantas or Asthma, and that is the Oil
of sweet Almonds poured into a washed Chickens Gut, and given the Hawk; which is
of great efficacy in the cure of this Disease.

CHAP. IV. Of Worms.
THere are a sort of Worms an inch long which frequently afflict Hawks,
proceeding from gross and viscous Humors in the Bowels, occasioned through
want of natural heat and ill digestion.

You may know when she is troubled with them by her casting her Gorge, her
stinking Breath, her Trembling and writhing her Train, her croaking in the
night, her offering with her Beak at her Breast or Panel, and by her Mewt
being small and unclean.

You may cure her of them with a Scouring of washed Aloes Hepatic, Mustardseed
and Agarick, of each an equal quantity; or the Powder of Hartshorn dried; or
lastly, a Scouring of white Dittany, Aloes, Hepatic washed four or five times,
Cubebs, and a little Saffron wrapped in some flesh, to cause her to take it the
better.

CHAP. V. Of the Filanders.
THere are several sorts of Filanders, but I shall speak but of one sticking to
the Reins. They are Worms as small as a Thread, and about an inch long, and lie
wrapped up in a thin Skin or Net near the Reins of a Hawk, apart from either Gut
or Gorge.

You shall know when your Hawk is troubled with them by her poverty, by
ruffling her Train, by straining the Fist or Perch with her Pounces, and
lastly by croaking in the night when the Filanders prick her. You must remedy
this Malady betimes, before these Worms have enlarged themselves from their
proper station, roving elsewhere to your Hawks ruin and destruction.

You must not kill them as other Worms, for fear of Impostumes from their
corruption being incapable to pass away with the Hawks Mewt; but only stupefie
them, that they may be offensive but seldom: And that is done thus; Take a head
of Garlic, taking away the outmost rind; then with a Bodkin heated in the fire
make holes in some Cloves, then steep them in Oil three days, and after this
give her one of the Cloves down her Throat, and for forty days after she will
not be troubled with the Filanders. Wherefore a Falconer will show himself
prudent, if, seeing his Hawk low and poor, he give her once a month a Clove of
this Garlic for prevention of the Filanders.

CHAP. VI. Of Hawks Lice.
THese Lice do most infest the Head, the Ply of a Hawks Wings, and her Train.
In the Winter you may kill them thus: Take two drachms of Pepper beaten to
powder, and mingle it with warm water, and with this Lotion wash the places
infested with these Lice or Mites: Then set your Hawk on a Perch with her Back
and Train against the Sun; then hold in your hand a small stick about a handful
long, with a piece of soft Wax at the end of it, and with that (whilst the Hawk
is weathering her self) take away those Vermin crawling upon the Feathers. You
may do well to add to the Pepper and Water some Stavesacre.

In the Summertime you may kill the Lice with Auripigmentum beaten to powder,
and strowed on the places where they lie.

CHAP. VII. How to keep and maintain all manner of Hawks in health, good
plight, and liking.
IN the first place, never give them a great Gorge, especially of gross meats,
as Beef, Pork, and such as are hard to be endewed and put over.

Secondly, never feed them with the flesh of any Beast that has lately gone to
Rutt, for that will insensibly destroy them.

Thirdly, if you are constrained to give your Hawk gross food, let it be well
soaked first in clean water, and afterward sufficiently wrung; in Summer with
cold water, in Winter with lukewarm water.

Ever observe to reward your Hawks with some good live meat, or else they will
be brought too low: However by serving them with washed meats is the way to keep
them in health.

I shall conclude how to keep Hawks in perfect health with this most excellent
Receipt. Take Germander, Pelamountain, Basil, Grummel-seed, and Broomflowers,
of each half an ounce; Hyssop, Sassifras, Polypodium, and Horse-mints, of each
a quarter of an ounce, and the like of Nutmegs; Cubebs, Borage, Mummy, Mugwort,
Sage, and the four kinds of Mirobolans, of each half an ounce; of Aloes
Succotrine the fifth part of an ounce, and of Saffron one whole ounce. All
these you must pulverize, and every eighth or twelfth day give your Hawks the
quantity of a Bean thereof with their meat. If they will not take it so, put it
into a Hens Gut tied at both ends, and let them stand empty an hour after.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Formica.
THis is a Distemper with commonly seiseth on the horn of Hawks Beaks, which
will eat the Beak away: And this is occasioned by a Worm, as most men are of
opinion.

You may perceive it by this, the Beak will grow rugged, and it will begin to
separate from the Head.

To remedy this Malady, you must take the Gall of a Bull, and break it into a
dish, and add thereto the powder of Aloes Succotrine: Mingle these well
together, and anoint the Clap or Beak of your Hawk therewith, and the very
place where the Formica grows, twice aday; but touch not her Eyes or Nares:
continue thus doing till your Hawk be perfectly cured, and bath her with
Orpiment and Pepper to keep her from other Vermin.

CHAP. IX. Of the Frownce.
THe Frownce proceeds from moist and cold humors which descend from the
Hawks Head to the Palate and root of the Tongue, by means whereof they lose
their appetite, and cannot close their Clap. This by some is called the
Eagles-bane; for she seldom dies of age, but of the over-growing of her Beak.

You may know if your Hawk be troubled with this Distemper by opening her Beak,
and seeing whether her Tongue be swollen or no: If it be, she has it.

There are several ways to cure this Distemper, but the best that ever yet I
could find for it is, only to take the powder of Alum reduced to a Salve with
strong Winevinegar, and wash the Hawks mouth therewith.

CHAP. X. Of the Pip.
THe Pip frequently troubles Hawks, as it does Chickens, and proceeds from
cold and moistness of the Head, or from feeding on gross meat not well washed in
warm water in the Winter, and cold water in the Summer.

The Symptoms of this Distemper are the Hawks frequent Sniting, and making a
noise twice or thrice in her Sniting.

For the Cure hereof, you must cast your Hawk gently, and look upon the tip of
her Tongue, and if you find the Pip there, you must scour her with a Pill made
of Agarick and Hierapicra given two or three days together with her Casting at
night; this will cleanse her Head, and the sooner if she be made to tire
against the Sun in the morning: Then bind a little Cotton to the end of a
Stick, and dipping it in good Rose Water wash her Tongue therewith: After this
anoint it three or four days with Oil of sweet Almonds and Oyl-Olive well
washed as before said. Having so done, you will find the Pip all white and
soft: Then take an Awl, and with the Point thereof lift up the Pip softly, and
remove it, as women pip their Chickens, but remove it not till it be thoroughly
ripe; and wet her Tongue and Palate twice or thrice a day with the aforesaid
Oil, till she be thoroughly cured.

CHAP. XI. How to remedy that Hawk which endeweth not, nor puts over as she
should do.
THis happens either by being foul within, or by a Surfeit; or else when she
was low and poor her Keeper over-gorged her, by being too hasty to set her up,
and she being weak was not able to put over and endew, and furfeited thereupon.

The Cure whereof is this: You must feed her with light meats, and a little at
once, as with young Rats and Mice, Chickens or Mutton, dipped in Goats milk or
otherwise; or give her a quarter of a Gorge of the Yolk of an Egg.

If you feed her with the flesh of any living Fowl, first steep it well in the
blood of the same Fowl, so shall your Hawk mount her flesh apace; if you also
scour her with Pills made of Lard, Marrow of Beef, Sugar, and Saffron mixed
together, and given her three mornings together, giving her also a reasonable
Corgo two hours after.

CHAP. XII. How to make a Hawk feed eagerly that has lost her Appetite,
without bringing her low.
A Hawk may lose her Appetite by taking too great Gorges in the Evening, which
she cannot well endew; or by being foul in the Panel; or sometimes by Colds.

To remedy which, take Aloes Succotrina, boiled Sugar and Beef marrow, of each
alike, only less of the Aloes, incorporate these, and make them into Balls or
Pills as big as Beans, and give of them to your Hawk, and hold her in the Sun
till she has cast up the filth and slime within her, then feed her not till
noon, at which time give her good meat; and three days after for the same
Disease it is good tiring on Stock-doves, small Birds, Rats or Mice.

CHAP. XIII. How to raise a Hawk that is low and poor.
THe Poverty of a Hawk happens several ways: either by the ignorance of the
Falconer of some later lurking Distemper; or by her soaring away, and so being
lost four or five days, in which time finding little or no Prey, she becomes
poor and lean.

To set her up you must feed her, a little at once, and often, with good meat
and of light digestion, as small Birds, Rats, Mice, etc. Or thus: Take two
spoonfuls of Honey, four of fresh Butter, and boil them together in a new
earthen pot of water; then take Pork well washed, and steep it in that water,
giving your Hawk a reasonable Gorge thereof twice a day, warming the said water
when you intend to feed your Hawk: And get some Snails that breed in running
waters, and give them her in the morning, and they will not only scour away the
gross slimy humors which are within, but also nourish her exceedingly.

CHAP. XIV. How to remedy a Hawk that is slothful, and is averse to flying.
A Hawk frequently has no mind to fly, either by reason of her ill keeping,
that is, when she is kept by those who know not how to give her her Rights, as
bouzing, bathing, etc. or because the Hawk is too high and full of grease, or
too poor and low: By the first she becomes proud and coy, and by the latter so
weak that she wants strength and spirit to perform it.

For the curing of which Distemper, she ought to be thoroughly viewed by some
skilful Falconer, by whom such Remedies should be administered to her as are
needful for her: But above all there is nothing like giving her in a morning
three or four Pills of Celandine well washed.

CHAP. XV. Of Swollen Feet in a Hawk.
HAwks have Swelling in their Feet upon several accounts: Sometimes by chasing
their Feet in flying their Prey, striking it, and taking cold thereupon;
sometimes for want of rolling or lining the Perch with some soft warm cloth;
or else through gross Humors and Foulness within, which through exercise drop
down into their Feet, and so cause them to swell; lastly, this Swelling happens
by pricks when they fly fiercely into Bushes after Game.

For a Remedy, you must scour your Hawk three mornings together with the Pills
of Lard, Marrow, Sugar, and Saffron, and set her in the Sun; two days after
this feed her with good meat; then take Bole-Armoniack, and half the quantity
of Sanguis Draconis, and having made them into powder, temper them well
together with the white of an Egg and Rose Water, and anoint her Feet twice a
day three or four days together, setting her on some Cloth to keep her Feet
warm.

CHAP. XVI. How to scour Hawks before you cast them into the Mew.
WHen Mewing time is come, you must scour and cleanse your Hawks; for in luring
and flying-time by foul feeding they engender Filanders and other Distempers,
whereof they die for want of timely care and cure.

The best way is, (when you mean to cast a Hawk into the Mew) first to scour
her well according to former directions, to cope her, and set her up well in
flesh, to discharge her, as near as you can, of all Diseases, also to free her
from Mites and Lice to set her water, sometimes to feed her with young Rats,
Mice, Dogs-flesh, Pigeons, Rabbets, and now and then with some liquid thing and
meats laxative.

Take notice of this special Observation: A Haggard is not to be cast in loose
to the Mew, but is to be mewed on the Fist, for otherwise she will become too
coy and strange: And if she fall to bating and beating her self for heat, then
must you hood her up, or bespout her with cold water, which is the readiest way
to make her leave Bating.

You must continue her on the Fist till she begin to shed her Feathers, then
set her down and tie her to a Stone or Perch, as you do the rest; and after
she has mewed and comes to fly, then let her stand on a Block or Billet cased
or rolled. In the same manner mew Goshawks, Tiercels, and Sparrow-hawks; only
they will not be born on the Fist, but be at liberty in the Mew, and very
clealy served.

Fifteen or twenty days before you draw your Hawk out of the Mew you must begin
to abate her of her diet, the sooner and better to enseam her.

Many more Diseases there are incident and Accidents happening to Hawks, of which
with their Cures there are large discourses written in Italian, French, and
English, and therefore I thought fit to insert in this place no other Maladies
than what most usually occur: If you desire to be farther satisfied, I shall
refer you to those larger Volumes.

An account of some Sea-fowl out of the Description of the Foeroe Islands.
IN the Description of the Foeroe Islands, written by Lucas Jacobson Debes, I
find an account of the manner of breeding and taking of some Waterfowl
described by us, Book 3. Part 3. Sect. 1. Chap. 2, 4, 5. and Sect. 3. Chap. 2.
which because it confirms and illustrates what we have there delivered, I shall
here subjoyn. The names by which these Birds are known in the Foeroe Islands
are the Skrabe, the Lunde, the Lomwifve, and the Sea-Daw. The Skrabe, that is
our Mank Puffin, comes in February about St. Matthias day, and fares away
about St. Bartholomew tide [Aug. 24.] The Lomwifve, that is our Guillemot; and
Sea-daw, that is our Razor-bill, come about St. Gregory's tide, [March 12.] and
fly away at Mary Magdalens [July 22.]

The aforesaid sorts of Birds lay every one but one Egg, and get but one Young
The Skrabe or Puffin.
every year; and though they be those that are chiefly fought for, and there be
taken of them 100000 every year, there is nevertheless more of them than of any
other sort; yea, by the admirable providence of God, they are so plentiful,
that in clear weather they can darken the shining of the Sun, as it were with a
thick cloud, making such a terrible noise with their Wings in flying, that they
who hear it, and do not know the cause thereof, would not think otherwise than
that it were Thunder.

The Skrabe [Puffin] builds on the Land under the earth; scraping with its Beak
and Claws, lying on the back, (whence it is called a Skrabe) it diggeth a hole
in some places a foot deep, in some other eight or ten foot in several
turnings, seeking especially to dig it self behind a stone, where it thinks
to lie securest. It is very remarkable, that this Bird is the whole day away
from its Young and never comes to it but in the night to feed it; and if it
flies not from its Young at the dawning of the day it stays with it the whole
day over, and then flies out to Sea till the other night comes: And though
the Young be fed but once a day, yet it is so fat, that no Goose, though it
has been three weeks fed, can be fatter. These young ones they call Liars, and
by reason of their fatness they do not make present use of them, but salt them
to eat them in Winter, melting their fat, which they burn in Lamps. They have
to take them out several hooks half an Ell, or an Ell long, wherewith they
pierce them through and draw them out. They do not usually take the Dam her
self, except she be sometimes hurt with the hook that she cannot live. If they
cannot get the young one with their hook, or by thrusting their arm into the
birds Nest, by reason of the many turnings, they dig a hole down to it, as near
as they can guess, and then thrust about with their hooks till they can get it:
Which hole they must again stop so close, that not one drop of water can come
into it, for else she will forsake her hole, and never come thither more; which
otherwise she does every year in the wonted place; so that the Inhabitants know
where under the earth to find that Birds Nest yearly.

The Lunde, so called also by Hoier in his Epistle to Clusius, and by Clusius
Anas The Lunde or Coulterneb.
Arctica, by us Coulterneb and Mullet, has a strong crooked Beak, so that if
it biteth a man by the hand it teareth off the flesh. It wageth war with the
Raven, that comes to take it away and its young ones: It being a wonderful
spectacle to see their fight; for as soon as the Raven comes near, the Lunde
catches it under the Throat with its Beak, and graspeth it about the Breast
with its Claws, so that the Raven cannot hurt it, but must fly away with a
great crying. The Lunde holds it fast in the mean time without letting it go,
till they come into the Sea, where slipping it is drowned. Yet the Raven does
often take the Lunde at unawares, rusheth into its hole, takes and eats it up.
I suspect there is something of fabulous in this Narration. The said Bird, the
Lunde, builds its Nest sometimes on the Continent, far from houses, digging
it self two or three yards, according to the nature of the place, under ground;
sometimes in Ures (that are places under high Cliffs, full of great and small
stones, that fall from the Cliffs, and by length of time are filled between
with earth, and covered with grass) in which places they dig themselves into
the earth, or build, where there is no earth, their Nest under and between
stones, where they can come to breed their Young with most security. The most
part being taken in such places, so that a man may often take above a hundred
Lundes in one Ure. Some of them build on the side of Promontories, where they
find great tufts of earth in flat places, and when they fly from their Nests,
they first make them clean, scraping all the dirt and old roots out of the
holes, and putting fresh grass in them again. The Lundes that make their Nests
in the fields are taken as is said above of the Skrabe: But for such as are
under those many stones, they let run unto them some little Dogs, that are so
taught, as to bring out both Bird and Egg to their Masters: But when the Birds
are flown, the men take them flying; which is done in this manner. They have a
long pole, at the end of which there is a Hoop drawn over with a Net, whereof
the Mashes are almost are almost as big as the quarries of a glass-window,
being like the Net wherewith they take Shrimps in some places, and this they
call a Stang or Staff, with this Staff the Fowler sits on the Cliff, or in
the Ures among the great stones, where he knows most Fowl to come, which they
call flight-places, and when the Lunde comes flying either from or to the
Land, he lifts up the Staff and the Net against the Fowl, and when he has got
it into the Net, he turns the Staff about, that it may entangle it self the
better therein: A man being sometimes able to take two hundred Lundes in that
manner in a very short time.

The Lumwifve, that is Hoiers Lomwia, and our Guillem or Skout, lays her Eggs
The Lumwifve or Guillem.
on the bare Points and Cliffs of high Rocks and Promontories, there lying on
these Cliffs some hundred Eggs, according as the place is large, but three
fingers breadth from one another, and when the Birds fly away the Eggs roll
often down into the Sea. But laying but one Egg she sits straight thereon,
and continues so a months time, never stirring from the place till her young
one be hatched; in the mean time the Cock brings her to eat. They lay in this
manner, sitting close one to another, Bird by Bird all over the place, so that
the Cliff seems quite black, and the young one being hatched, she remains yet
three weeks with it, and then takes it on her back and carries it to Sea.
When the Fowler comes to that place, if there have not often been men there
before, it happens sometimes that the old will not leave their young ones, and
therefore are taken with the hand as many as they are and killed; but where
they are grown wild by reason of men's continual hunting after them, they fly
away, the young ones running together in a flock, and when the Hen comes
again, she seeks the same place where she sat before, and clacketh so long
till her young one comes to her, being very well able to discern its own Dam,
though they be all shaped alike, and when she gives her Young to eat she
puts her head back under her Wing, giving it so to eat backwards.

The Daw, that is Hoiers Alka and our Awk, (whence I guess the Author was The
Daw or Razor-bill.
mistaken in the name) hatcheth its young ones in holes and chinks of high
Promontories. That Hoier was not mistaken in the name of this Bird I conclude,
because it is called by the very same name, viz. Auk, in the North of England;
so that it is manifest either our Northern men borrowed it of the Ferroese, or
the Ferroese of them, it being very unlikely that by chance they should impose
the same name upon it. But that ours borrowed this name of the Ferroese seems
to me more probable because in other parts of England, farther distant from the
Ferroyer Islands this Bird is called by other names. And yet possibly it may be
also called a Daw in those Islands, as either it or the Guillem is in Cornwall.
Why they should call it a Daw, I cannot imagine unless from its bigness, and
the color of its back.

It cannot be expressed with what pains and danger they take these Birds in those
high and steep Cliffs, whereof many are above two hundred fathoms high, there
being men apt by nature, and fit for that work, called Fowlers, who take them
usually in two manners: For either they climb from below up into these high
Promontories, that are as steep as a wall, or they let themselves down into
them from above, with a thick, strong, hemp-rope, when they climb from below,
they have then a pole five or six Else long, with an iron hook at the end,
which they that are below in the Boat, or on the Clift, fasten unto the man's
Girdle, or another Rope that the Fowler has about him, helping him thus up to
the highest place, where he can get footing: afterward they also help up
another man, and when they are so several come up, every one with his Fowling
Staff in his hand, and the long Rope between them tied to each others waste,
they climb so as high as possibly they can; and where they find difficulty they
help each other up by thrusting one another under the breech with their Poles:
And when the first has taken footing, he draws the other up to him by the
Rope fastened to his waste, and so they proceed on till they come to the place
where the Birds build; going then after them about the hill as they please, and
there being many dangerous places to climb about, having bound themselves at
the Ropes end, the one seeks a convenient place where he can stand sure, and
hold himself fast, whilst the other goes about these dangerous places; if it
then happen that he chances to fall, the other that stands firm keeps him up,
and helps him up again: But if he passes safe, he likewise fastneth himself
till the other has passed that dangerous place; and so they go about the
Clifts after Birds as they please; though it often happens, the more is the
pity, that when the one does not stand fast, or is not strong enough to hold
up the other in his fall, that they both fall down and kill themselves; in
which manner some do perish every year.

Mr. Peter Clauson in his description of Norway writes, that there was
anciently a Law in the Country that whosoever climbed so on the Clifts, that he
fell down and died, if the body was found to be buried, his next Kinsman should
go the same way; but if he durst or could not do it, the dead was not then to
be buried in Sanctified earth, as one that had been too full of temerity, and
was his own bane. But there is found nothing of that Law now adays.

When they then are come, in the manner aforesaid, to the birds, within the
Clifts where they seldom come, the Birds are so tame that they can take them
with their hands, for they will hardly leave their young ones; but where they
are wild, they either cast the Net over them on the Clift; and against those
that either fly from thence or thereunto, they oppose the Fowling Staff with
its Net, and entangle them therein. In which manner they take a great multitude
of Lumwisves, Daws, and Lundes. In the mean time there lies a Boat beneath on
the Sea, wherein they cast their Birds killed; and in this manner they can in a
short time fill a Boat with Fowl. When it is pretty fair weather and there is
good Fowling, the Fowlers stay in the Clifts seven or eight days together, for
there are here and there holes in the Rocks, where they can safely rest, and
they have meat let down to them with a line from the top of the Mountain. In
the mean time some go every day to them to fetch home what they have taken.

Some Rocks are so difficult, that they can in no manner get unto them from
below, wherefore they seek to come down thereunto from above, which they call
to Sie, and is the second manner to pursue birds, being performed in this
manner: They have a Rope eighty or a hundred Fathoms long, and three Fingers
thick, the Fowler makes the end thereof fast about his Waste, and between his
Legs, so that he can sit thereon, and thus is let down, with the Fowling Staff
in his hand; six men hold by the Rope and let him easily down, laying a piece
of wood on the brink of the Rock, upon which the Rope glideth, that it may not
be worn to pieces by the hard and rough edge of the stone: They have besides
another small line that is fastened to the Fowlers body, on which he pulls, to
give them notice how they should let down the great Rope, either lower or
higher, or to hold still, that he may stay in the place whereunto he is come;
here the man is in great danger, because of the Stones that are loosened from
the Clift by swinging of the Rope, which often fall upon his head, and he
cannot avoid it, wherefore he has usually on his head a Sea man's Cap, that is
thick and very shaggy, to defend him in some measure from the blows of the
Stones, if they be not too big, otherwise it costeth him his life. They put
nevertheless themselves continually in that danger, for our wretched bodies
foods sake, hoping in Gods mercy and protection, unto which the most part of
them do also devoutly recommend themselves, when they go to that work.
Otherwise they say there is no other great danger in it, but that in it self it
is a toilsom and artificial labor; for he that has not learned to be so let
down, and is not used thereunto, is turned about with the Rope, so that he
grows giddy and troubled in his head, and can do nothing, but he that has
learned the art takes it for a sport, knowing how to swing himself on the
Rope, to set his feet against the Rock, casting himself some fathoms from
thence, whence he shoots himself again to what place he will, and knows
where the Birds are; he knows also to sit on the line in the Air, and how to
hold the fowling Staff in his hand, taking there with the birds that come, or
fly away, and when there are holes in the Rock, and it stretches it self out,
making underneath as a sieling, under which the birds are, he knows skilfully
(which is the greatest art) to shoot himself a great way from the Clift, and
swiftly to swing himself under the roof, and there take footing, making
himself, when he is in these holes, loose of the great Rope, which he fastens
to a stone of the Rock, that it may not slip from him to the outside of the
Clift; and then he goes about in the Rock, taking the Fowl either with his
hands, or with the Fowling Staff; according to the manner aforesaid; and when
he has killed as many Birds as he thinks fit, he ties them in a bundle, and
fastneth them to the little Rope, giving a sign by pulling, that they should
draw them up, working thus the whole day: And when he will get up, he sits
again upon the great Rope, giving a new sign that they should pull him up, or
else he works himself up climbing along the Rope with his Girdle full of
Birds. It is also usual that where there is not folks enough to hold the great
Rope, the Fowler drives a post sloaping into the earth, and makes the Rope
fast thereunto, letting so himself down without any bodies help, to work in the
manner aforesaid; some Rocks are so formed that one can go in them from the
Land, and there he takes his Comrades with him, proceeding in the manner
aforesaid, each taking as much Fowl, as the Girdle about his Waste can hold,
and as much as he can carry in a bundle on his back, carrying them in that
manner home. There are also in some places high steep Clifts, under the Land,
that arise above an hundred Fathoms from the Sea, that are almost as bad to
come unto as the Rocks, whereunto they help also one another in the aforesaid
manner, taking a strong Rope with them, which they fasten here and there about
the Clift, and let it hang there the whole Summer, by which they nimbly climb
up to take Fowl when they please.

These manners are more terrible and dangerous to see, then to describe,
specially if one considers the steepness and height of the Rocks, it seeming
not possible that a man could come to them, much less climb or be let down into
them. They go also in some places where they can only fasten the ends of their
Toes and Fingers, not shunning such places, though there be a hundred Fathoms
height between them and the Sea.

It is a dear Meat for these poor people, for which they must venture their
Lives so extremely, and many after long venturing at last do perish therein.

When that Fowl is brought home, a part thereof is eaten fresh, another part,
when there is much taken, being hung up to dry for Winter provision. The
Feathers being gathered to make Merchandise of for other expenses.

The Inhabitants get a great many of those Fowls as God gives his blessing,
and fit weather. Yet this is not every where in the Land, but only in the
Islands that lie toward the Sea, and have great Promontories, as the Northern
Islands, Myggyness, Waagoe, Skuo, the Diemens, and Suderoe.

And when it is dark Weather, they take most, for then the Birds stay in the
Rocks, but in clear Weather and hot Sunshine they seek the Sea, and against
their flying away, they keep themselves most there, sitting on the Clifts
toward the Sea side, where people go also sometimes to them with Boats, and
take them with Fowling Staves.

THE INDEX.
A
ACacacahoactly, or the hoarse bird Page 388 Acacalotl 296 Achalalactli 390
Acitli, a sort of Douker 339 Acolchichi 391 Acolin, or Water-Quail 387, 393
Acototloquichitl 388 Aguapocaca, a sort of Water-hen 317 Aiaia, the Brasilian
Spoon-bill 289 An Alp or Bulfinch 247. T. 44. Alluco, a kind of Owl 104. T. 13
Amadavad bird 266. T. 46 Amalozque 390 Anhima, a Brasilian Bird 276. T. 47
Anhinga, a Brasilian Diver 332. T. 72 Aracari, a Brasilian Woodpecker, 140. T.
22 Artenna, Diomedean bird 332 Atinga guacu mucu 198. T. 38 Attagen, a kind of
Heathcock 174. T. 31 The Auk or Razor-bill 323. T. 64 Avosetta 321. T. 60 Aura
v. Urubu.
B
BArge, a sort of Godwit 292 Barley-bird, i. e. Siskin 2 h1 Barnfiard 395
Beccofigo or Fig-eater, 216, 226, 227. T. 23, 41 Bee-eater 147, 148. T. 24
Bernacle or Clakis 359 Bill-cock or Water-Rail 314 Bitour or Bittern 282. T.
50, 52 Blackbird 190 Black-cap 226. T. 41 Brasilian Blackbird 193 Red-breasted
Indian Blackbird 194 Blue-bird 192 Boarina 217 Brambling 254. T. 45 Great pied
Brambling 255. T. 77 Brent-goose 359. T. 69 Bulfinch 247. T. 44 American
Bulfinch Ibid. Bunting 267. T. 40 Bustard 178. T. 32 Butcher-Bird the greater
87. T. 10 The lesser 88. T. 10 Bald Buzzard 69. T. 6 Common Buzzard 70. T. 6
Honey Buzzard 72. T. 3 Moor Buzzard 75. T. 7
C
CAbure, a Brasilian Owl 107 Calandra, a kind of Lark 208 Canary-bird 262. T.
46 Canne-petiere 179 Capon 154 Caracara or Brasilian Kite 76. T. 9 Cardinal
bird, vide Virginian Nightingale. Cariama 276. T. 51 Caryocatactes or
Nut-breaker 132. T. 20 Cassowary 151. T. 25 Catarracta 349. T. 67
Cencontlatolli 394 Cenotzqui 394 Ceoan 394 Cepphus 351. T. 67 Chaffinch 253. T.
45 Chatterer of Bohemia 133. T. 20 Chicuatli 395 Cinclus T. 56 Citril 265. T.
46 Cornish Chough 126. T. 19 Churn-owl 107. T. 14 Cirlus stultus 271 Clakis or
Bernacle 359 Cock 154. T. 26 Cock of the Wood 172. T. 30 Cocoi, a kind of Heron
284. T. 51 Cocotzin, vide Barbados Turtle Coddymoddy 350. T. 66 Colivicuiltic
393 Coldfinch 236 Colin 393 Cole-mouse 241. T. 43 Coot 320. T. 51, 59 Cormorant
329. T. 63 Cornet-Duck 387 Coulterneb 325. T. 65 Coyalcozque 393 Cozcaquautli
390 Water-crake 149. T. 24 Crane 274. T. 48 Balearick Crane 275. T. 48 Indian
Crane Ibid. Crex 297 Creeper 144. T. 23 Wall-creeper or Spider-catcher 143. T.
23 Cross-bill 248. T. 44 Crow 122. T. 18 Royston Crow 124. T. 18, 77 Cuckoo 97.
T. 10, 77 Culver or Dove 180 Curicaca, a Brasilian Curlew 295. T. 54 Curlew
294. T. 54 Indian Curlew 296 Stone Curlew 306. T. 58, 77 Curucui 140. T. 22
Curwillet 302 Cyprus bird 227
D
Day 385 Daker-hen or Rail 170. T. 29 Didapper or Dobchick 340. T. 61 American
Diver T. 42 Dint-Diver 333. T. 64 Black-Diver 366 Lesser crested Diver T. 64
Dodo or Dronte 153. T. 27 Dottrel 309. T. 55, 57 Sea-Dottrel 311. T. 58 Doucker
338. T. 59 Great crested Doucker 339 Crested Mexican Doucker Ibid. Crested and
horned Doucker 340. T. 61 Small Doucker, vide Didapper. Greatest speckled
Doucker 341. T. 62 Gesners greatest Doucker 342. T. 61 Wormius's Northern
Doucker 343. T. 62 Dove or Pigeon 180, 181, etc. T. 33, 34 Greenland Dove 326
Drake 361 Duck Ibid. Black Duck of Aldrovand 363. T. 70 Burrow Duck Ibid. T. 70
St. Cuthberts Duck 362. T. 76 Red-headed Duck the greater 364. T. 72 The lesser
367. T. 73 Moscovy Duck 381. T. 75 Cairo Duck of Aldrovand 381 Gesners Indian
Duck African Duck or Guiny Duck 381 Scaup Duck 265 Sharp-tail'd Duck of Island
364 Common sharp-tail'd Duck 376. T. 73 Common tame Duck 380. T. 75 Common wild
Duck 371. T. 72 Hook-bill'd Duck 381. T. 75 Tufted Duck 365. T. 73 Bellonius
his Field Duck 179 Brasilian wild Ducks 378, 379 Dunlin 305
E
BLack Eagle 61. T. 2 Crested Brasilian Eagle 63. T. 4 Golden Eagle 58. T. 1
Sea Eagle 59. T. 1 Vulturine Eagle 64. T. 4 White-tail'd Eagle 61 Eider, a sort
of Duck 362 Elk, i. e. wild Swan 356. T. 69 Emew or Cassowary 151. T. 25
Erand-gaas 395
F
FAlcinellus 295. T. 54 Falcon Gentle 79 Ger-falcon and Jerkin 78. T. 8 Haggard
Falcon 80. T. 8 Red Indian Falcon 81. T. 9 Crested Indian Falcon 82 Mountain
Falcon 78. T. 9 Peregrine Falcon 76. T. 8 Red Falcon 81 Stone Falcon 80 Tree
Falcon Ibid. Tunis or Barbary Falcon 81 White Falcon 80 Fallow-smich 233. T. 41
Francolinus 174. T. 31 Fieldfare or Feldefare 188. T. 37 Mountain Finch or
Brambling 255 Chaff-Finch 253. T. 45 Gold-Finch 256. T. 46 Green Finch 246. T.
44 Flammant or Phenicopter 320. T. 60 Flusher 88. T. 10 Francolin T. 31
G
CAdwall or Gray 374. T. 72 Gambetta 300 Gannet 348. T. 67 Garganey 377. T. 74
Garragay 391 Giarola 209 Gill-hooter or Owl 99, etc. Glareana 211 Glead or Kite
74. T. 6 Goatsucker or Churn-owl 107. T. 14 Godwit 292. T. 53 Golden-eye 368.
T. 73 Goldfinch 256. T. 46 Goligod, i. e. Sea-Lark 311 Tame Goose 358. T. 75
Wild Goose Ibid. T. 69 Brent Goose 360. T. 66 Swan Goose Ibid. T. 71 Canada
Goose 361. T. 70 Gambo Goose 360. T. 71 Rat or Road-Goose 361. T. 76 Goosander
333. T. 64 Gor-cock 177 Goshawk 85. T. 3, and 5 Green-finch 246. T. 44 Griffon
a fabulous bird omitted. Grinetta 315 Grisola 211 Grosbeak 244. T. 44 Grous or
Heatheock 173. T. 31 Guara 296. T. 54 Guarauna 292. T. 53 Guillem and Guillemot
324. T. 65 Guiny Hen 162. T. 26, 27 Guira acangatarae 140. T. 22 Guira coereba
239 Guira guacuberaba Ibid. T. 41 Guira guainumbi 148. T. 24 Guira querea 108.
T. 14 Guira perea 256 Guira punga 199. T. 38 Guira nheemgheta Guiraru nheemgeta
235 Guiraienoia 241 Guira tinga 285 Guira tangeima 141. T. 23 Guira tirica,
American Bulfinch 247 Guitguit 385 Greatest black and white Gull 344. T. 67
Herring-Gull 345 Ash-colored Gull 346. T. 66, 67 Bellonius his white Gull 348
Great gray Gull 349. T. 66 Aldrovands greater Gull 351 Brasilian Gull 352
Cloven-footed Gulls 354. T. 68
H
HAsshert of Hoier 395 Hang-nest of America 141. T. 23, 77 Havelda, a kind of
Duck 364 Harpye, a fabulous bird omitted. Hawk 68 Haw-finch 244. T. 44
Long-winged Hawks 69, etc. Short-winged Hawks 85 Hazel-Hen 175. T. 31 Heathcock
173. T. 31 Heatototl 339 Hedge-Sparrow 215 Helsingagaas 395 Hen 154. T. 26
Indian Hen 161. T. 28 Mozambique Hens 387 Hen-harrier 72. T. 7 Heron common
ash-colored 277. T. 49 Lesser ash-colored 279. T. 49 Greater white 279. T. 49
Lesser white 280 Red-leg'd 282. T. 50 Bow-bill'd Ibid. T. 50 Speckled or red
283 Brasilian 285. T. 51
Heyhoe 135. T. 21 Hickwall 138. T. 21 Himantopus 297. T. 54 Hirngryl or Serin
265. T. 46 Hoactli 389 Hoacton 391 Hoactzin 389 Hobby 83. T. 7 Hoitlallotl 393
Hooper, i. e. wild Swan 356. T. 69 Hoop or Hoopoe 145. T. 24 Hortulane 270. T.
40 Howlet, vide Owl 99, etc. Humming bird 230. T. 42
I
JAbiru or Negro 275. T. 47 Jabiru guacu 276. T. 47 Jacamaciri 139. T. 22
Jacana 317. T. 59 Jacarini 258 Jackdaw 125. T. 19 Jacupema 165. T. 28 Jaguacati
guacu 147. T. 24 Jamacaii 239. T. 42 Japacani 240 Ibijau, a Brasilian
Goatsucker 108. T. 14 Ibis of Bellonius 288. T. 49 Jay 130. T. 19 Jerfalcon 78.
T. 8 Jerkin Ibid. Ipeca guacu, a Brasilian Duck 383. T. 62 Ipecati apoa 379. T.
75 Ipecu 138. T. 22 Judcock or Jack-snipe 291 Junco 313. T. 58 Jupujuba 142. T.
23
K
KEstrel or Stonegall 84. T. 5 Kingfisher 146. T. 24 Kite 74. T. 6 Brasilian
Kite 76. T. 9 Knot 302. T. 56
L
LAnd-Hen 316 Lanner and Lanneret 82 Lapwing 307. T. 57 Lark 303. T. 40
Skie-Lark Ibid. T. 40 Wood-Lark 204. T. 40 Crested Lark 208. T. 40 Sea-Lark
310. T. 57, 58 Titlark 206, 207 Laughing Bird 387 Common Linnet 258. T. 46
Red-headed Linnet 260. T. 46 Mountain Linnet 261 Loon vide Doucker T. 61 Lumme
of Wormius T. 61
M
MAccaws of several sorts 110, 111. T. 15 Macucagua 163. T. 26 Magpie or Pianet
127. T. 19 Maguari 287 Maia 386 Maiague 334. T. 62 Sea-Mall T. 76 Maracana 112
Mareca 379 Bank Martin 213. T. 39 Martin or Martlet 213. T. 39 Black Martin
214. T. 14, 39 Mattagesse, vide Great Butcher-bird Matkneltzel 304. T. 56
Motuitui 199. T. 38 Mavis or Throstle 188. T. 37 Mergus Rheni 337 Merlin 85. T.
3 Sea-Mew, vide Gull. Mire-crow, vide Pewit. Mire-drum, vide Bittour
Missel-bird or Thrush 187. T. 36 Mitu 160. T. 28 Mituporanga Ibid. T. 28 Indian
Mockbird 193 Momot 386 Morehen 312. T. 58 Moretitling 235. T. 41 Morillon 368
Morphnos, a kind of Eagle 63. T. 2 Moucherolle 217 Muggent 375 Murre 323. T. 65
M
NIghtingale 220. T. 41 Virginian Nightingale 255. T. 44 Night-raven 279. T. 49
Noctua, a kind of Owl 106, 107. T. 13 White Nun 337 Nun, i. e. Blue Titmouse
242 Nuthatch 142. T. 23 Nhanduguacu, vide Ostrich.
O
OSprey or Sea-Eagle 59. T. 1 Ossifrage Ibid. T. 1 Ostrich 149. T. 25
Water-Ouzel Ibid. T. 24 Rose-Ouzel 194 Ring-Ouzel 194 Rock-Ouzel 195, 197. T.
38 Great Eagle-Owl 99. T. 12 Horn-Owl 100. 101. T. 12 Brown or Ivy Owl 102. T.
14 Gray Owl 103. T. 13 White or Church Owl 104 Little Owl 105. T. 13 Screetch
Owl 102. T. 14 Fern-Owl. vide Goat-sucker Ox-eye 240 Ox-eye-Creeper, vide
Creeper.
P
BIrds of Paradise 90, 91, etc. T. 11, 77 White crested Parrot 112. T. 15
Common green Parrot 113. T. 16 Parrots of several sorts 113, 114, etc. T. 16
Parrakeets 115, etc. T. 16 Partridge common 166. T. 28 Brasilian 167 Damascus
Ibid. and 178. T. 29 Red-leg'd 167. T. 29 White 176. T. 32
Peacock 158. T. 27 Penguin 322. T. 65 Pelecan 327. T. 63 Pettichaps 216
Petronia marina 267 Pewit 347. T. 66 Pheasant 163. T. 28 Sea-Pheasant 376. T.
73 Phoenix, a fabulous bird omitted. Phenicopter 320 Pie 127. T. 19 Sea-Pie 297,
132. T. 55 Brasilian Pie 128. T. 20 Persian Pie 132 Pianet, vide Pie. Picicitli
394 Picuipinima, a Brasilian Pigeon. Pigeons wild and tame 180, 181, etc. T.
33, 34 Pitanga guacu 198. T. 38 Great Pluver or Klut 298. T. 55 Green Plover
308. T. 57 Gray Plover 309. T. 57 Bastard Plover, vide Lapwing. Pochard or
Poker 367. T. 72 Porphyrio 318 Puffin 325. T. 65 Manks Puffin 333 Purre, i. e.
Stint 305 Puttock or Buzzard 70. T. 6 Pygard or white-tail'd Eagle 61
Q
QUachilto 319 Quapachtototl 387 Quail 169. T. 29 Indian Quail 171. T. 29
Quatotoni 390 A Queest, vide Ring-dove. Quetzaltototl 391
R
RAbihorcado 395. T. 77 Rail 170. 29 Water-Rail 314. T. 58 Rain-fowl 135. T. 21
Raven 121. T. 18 Water-Raven 196 Indian Raven 126. T. 17 Horned Raven 127. T.
17 Razor-bell or Awk 323. T. 65 Red-game 177 Redshank 299. T. 55 Redstart the
greater 197. T. 36 The lesser 218. T. 39 Redwing or Swinepipe 189 Reed-Sparrow
the greater 143 The lesser 144, 269 Rhinocerot-bird 127. T. 17 Ring-dove 185.
T. 35 Ring-tail 72. T. 7 Robin-red-breast 219. T. 39 Rock-Pigeon 186 Roller
131. T. 20 Rook 123. T. 18 Roth bein lein T. 42 Rotknussel 304. T. 56 Ruff and
Reeve 302. T. 56 Velvet Runner 315
S
SAcre 77 Sand Martin 214. T. 39 Sanderling 303 Sand-piper 301. T. 55
Scarecrow 353. T. 68 Scurvogel or Jabiru 276. T. 47 Sayacu 256 Scoter 366. T.
74 Serin 265. T. 46 Sguacco 281 Shag 332. T. 63 Sheld-dapple 248. T. 44
Sheldrake 363. T. 70, 71 Shore-bird i. e. Sand-Martin. Shoveler 370. T. 74
Shrike, vide Butcher-bird. Shrite, vide Missel-bird. Siskin 261. T. 46 Smew
337. T. 64 Hoiers Skua 348. T. 67 Soco, a kind of Heron 284. T. 51 Snipe 291.
T. 53 Jack-Snipe Ibid. Snow-bird 394 Soland Goose 328. T. 63 Sparlin Fowl 335
Sparrow-Hawk 86. T. 5 House-Sparrow 249. T. 44 Long-tail'd Indian Sparrow T. 45
Foolish Bononian Sparrow Ibid. T. 45 Foolish Sparrow 385 Solitary Sparrow 191.
T. 36, 37 Brasilian Sparrow 253 Reed-Sparrow 269 Water-Sparrow 388 Sparrows of
several sorts 250, 251, etc. T. 45 Spipoletta 209 Spipola 210 Spoon-bill 288.
T. 52 Squaiotta, a kind of Heron 281. T. 50 Stannel or Kestrel 84. T. 5 Stare
or Starling 196. T. 37 Indian Stare Ibid. T. 38 Stella T. 32 Stint 305. T. 58
Stock Dove 185. T. 35 Stonechatter or Stone-Smich 235. T. 41 Stopparola 210
Stork 286. T. 52 Black Stork Ibid. T. 52 American Stork 287 Stormfinch 395
Strapazino 233 Sula 331 Swallow 211. T. 39 House-Swallow 212. T. 39 Sea-Swallow
214, 352. T. 68 American Swallow 214 China Swallow 215 Swan tame 355. T. 69
Wild 356. T. 69 Swift or black Martin 214. T. 14 Swine-pipe, vide Redwing.
T
TAmatia 190. T. 59 Tangara 243, 244 Tarrock 346. T. 68 Teal 377. T. 74 Summer
Teal 378. T. 76 Teitei 266 Tempatlahoac 387 Tern 351 Thistle-finch, vide
Goldfinch. Throstle or Mavis 188. T. 37 Thrush 186, etc. T. 37, 37 Song-Thrush,
vide Mavis. Wine Thrush, vide Redwing. Tijeguacu 218 Tijeguacu paroara 256. T.
41, 45 Tijepiranga 251 Titmouse 240. T. 43 Marsh Titmouse 241. T. 43 Blue
Titmouse 242. T. 43 Crested Titmouse Ibid. T. 43 Long-tail'd Titmouse Ibid. T.
43 Wood Titmouse 243 Totano 299 Tlauchechul 289 Tleuquecholtototl 390 Topan
127. T. 17 Totoquestal 392 Toucan, or Brasilian Pi^ 128. T. 20 Tringa 300. T.
56 Trochilus 321. T. 60 Tropic bird 331. T. 75 Tuputa 386 Turkey 159. T. 27
Turn-stone 311 Turtle-dove 183. T. 35 Indian Turtle 184. T. 35 Least Barbados
Turtle Ibid. T. 36 Sea Turtle 326 Tzinitzian 392
V
VErminous bird or Tuputa 386 Urubitinga 64 Urubu 68. T. 3 Urutaurana, vide
crested Eagle 63. T. 4 Vultures of several sorts 66. T. 4 Brasilian Vulture 68.
T. 3
W
WAgel 349 Wagtail white 237. T. 42 Yellow 238. T. 68 Gray Ibid.
Wall-creeper 143. T. 23 Water-hens several sorts 312, 313, etc. T. 58
Wheat-ear, i. e. Fallow Smich 233. T. 41 Whewer, vide Wigeon 375 Whimbrel 294
Whin-chat 234 White game 176. T. 32 White Nun 337 White-tail 233. T. 41
White-throat 236 Wigeon 375. T. 72 Willow-bird 217 Winter-mew 250 Witwall 137,
198. T. 36, 38 Woodcock 289. T. 53 Woodpecker great black 135. T. 21 Green
Ibid. T. 21 Greater spotted 137. T. 21 Lesser spotted 138. T. 21 Mexican 390
Persian 141
Wood-Pigeon T. 35 Wren 229. T. 42 Golden-crown'd Wren 227. T. 42 Wren without
a crest 228. T. 42 Wryneck 138. T. 22
X
XOchitenacatl 386 Xomotl 395
Y
YAyauhquitototl. 386 Yarwhelp or Yarwip 292. T. 53 Yellowhammer 268. T. 40
Yztactzon Yayauhqui 387 Yzquauhtli 388
FINIS.
TAB. 1.
Chrysaetos Gesneri. The Golden Eagle.

Haliaetus Clufij Ossifraga Aldrov. The Sea Eagle or Osprey.

TAB. II.
Morphno congener Aldrov.

Melanaetus seu Aquila Valeria Aldrov. The Black Eagle.

TAB. III.
Accipiter Palumbarius a Goshawk.

Vrubu Marggrau.

Aesalon a Merlin.

Buteo Apirorus The Honey Buzzard.

TAB. IV
Vultur. The Vulture.

Vrutaurana Marggr.

Gypaetos Aldr.

Vultur aureus. The golden Vulture.

TAB. V.
Tinnunculus The Kestrell

Accipiter fringillarius The Sparrow Hawk

Accipiter Palumbarius The Goshawk.

TAB. VI.
Balbusardus Anglorum.

Anataria seu Morphnos Gesri. The Bald Buzzard.

Buteo. The Buzzard.

Milvus cauda forcipata. The Kite or Glead.

TAB VII
Milvus aruginosus Aldrov. The moor Buzzard

Pygargus The Hen harrier

Subbuteo Aldrov The Hobby.

TAB. VIII
Falco peregrinus. The Peregrine or haggard Falcon.

Gyrfalco. The Gerfalcon.

TAB. IX.
Falco montanus secundus Aldrov. The mountain Falcon. f.2.

Falco ruber Indicus. prior Aldrov. The Red Indian Falcon.

Caracara Marggrav

TAB. X.
Lanius cinereus major The greater Butcher bird.

Collurio Seu Lanius minor The lesser Butcher bird

Cuculus The Cuckoo

TAB. XI.
Birds of Paradise of Several Sorts.

Manucodiata 1a. Aldrov. The Bird of Paradise.

Manucodiata 2a. Aldr.

Manucodiata Wormij.

Manucodiata altera Nieremb:

TAB. XII.
Bubo. The Great Eagle Owl.

Otus sive Asio. The Horn-Owle.

Scops Aldrov. The little Horn Owl.

TAB. XIII.
Aluco.

Ululu The Gray Owl

Noctu minima.

Noctua.

TAB. XIIII.
Strix Aldrov. the Brown or Screech Owl.

Cuprimulgus The Goat sucker or Churn Owl.

Ibijau sive Noitibo major and minor Marggr.

Guiraquerea Marggrav.

Hirundo apus The black Martin or Swift.

TAB. XV.
Psittacus albus cristatus. The white crested Parrot.

Psittacus maxcyanocroceus Ald. The Macao.

TAB. XVI.
Psittacus mediae magnitudinis. A common Parrot.

Psittacus A Parrot.

Psittacus minor macrouros. A Perocheeto.

TAB. XVII.
Rhinocerotis avis Rostrum 1a. varietas.

2a varietas.

Rhinocerotis Aldrov. caput.

Corvus Indicus.

TAB. XVIII.
Corvus. The Raven.

Cornix nigra The Crow.

Cornix frugilega. The Rook.

Cornix cinerea. The Royston Crow.

TAB XIX
Lupus sive Monedula The Jackdaw

Coracias Aldrov The Cornish Chough

Pica varia seu caud^^^ The Magpie or Pianet

Pica glandaria. The Jay.

TAB. XX.
Garrulus Argentoratensis The Roller.

Garrulus Bohemicus.

Pica Brasiliensis Touam.

Caryocatactes.

TAB. XXI.
Picus maximus niger The great black Woodpecker.

Picus viridis The common green Woodpecker or Woodspite.

Caput Pici dissectum.

Picus varius minor The lesser spotted Woodpecker.

Picus varius major The greater spotted Woodpecker.

TAB. XXII.
Iynx sive Torquilla. The wryneck.

Ipecu Marggrav.

Iacamaciri Marggr.

Curucui. Marggrav.

Iyngi congener.

Guira acangatara. Marggrav.

Aracari Marggr.

TAB XXIII
Guiratungeima Marggrav.

Iapu Seu Iupujuba Marg:

Sitta seu Picus cinereus The Nuthatch.

Ficedula cannabina.

Picus murarius Aldrov. The wall-creeper or Spider catcher.

Certhia The Ox-ey Creeper.

TAB. XXIV
Merula aquatica The Water Ouzell.

Upupa The Hoopoe.

Ispida. The Kingfisher.

Merops. The Bee-eater.

Guira guainumbi.

Iaguacali guacu.

TAB. XXV.
Struthio camelus The Ostrich.

Emeu The Cassowary.

TAB XXVI
Gallus gallinaceus. The Dunghill Cock.

Gallus ex Persia. A Rumkin.

Gallina domestica. The Hen.

Gallina Guinea The Guiny Hen.

Gallina pumilio. A Dwarf hen.

Macacagua. Margrav.

TAB XXVII
Dodo.

Pavo The Peacock.

Gallo pavo. The Turkey.

Gallina Africana.

TAB XXVIII
Phasianus mas A Cock Pheasant.

Mitu.

Mituporangae caput.

Jacupema

Perdix cinerea The Com^on Partridge

TAB. XXVIIII.
Perdix Damascena. The Damascus Partridge.

Perdix ruffa. The red-leg'd Partridg.

Ortygometra. The Rail or Daker hen.

Coturnix. The Quail.

Coturnix foemina. A Hen Quail.

Coturnix Indica Bontij.

Perdix rubra.

TAB XXX
Vrogallus Seu-Tetrao major mas. The Cock of the wood or mountain

Vrogallus foemina The Hen of ye wood or mountain.

TAB. XXXI.
Urogallus sive Tetrao minor The Black game Heath cock or Grows

Attagen Aldrov.

Francolinus Olinoe.

Gallina corylorum. The Hasel hen

TAB. XXXII
Lagopus avis.

Otis sue Tarda avis. The Bustard.

Stella avis Aldrov.

TAB. XXXIII.
Columba domestica major. The great house Dove or Pigeon.

Columba hirsutis pedibus. A rough footed Dove.

Columba Cyproa cucullata. A Iacobine Pigeon.

Columba Turcica seu Persica. A Persian or Turkey Pigeon.

TAB. XXXIV.
Columba gutturosa A Cropper dove.

Columba hirsutis pedibus A rough-footed Dove.

Columba tabellaria A Carrier-Pigeon.

Columba Numidica seu Cypria a Barbary Pigeon.

Columba domestica major a Runt.

Columba tremula laticauda A broad-tail'd Shaker.

TAB XXXV
Turtur The Turtle Dove

Turtur Indicus Aldrop The Indian Turtle

Palumbus torquatus The Ring Dove

Oenas Aldr The wood Pigeon

TAB. XXXVI
Turtur minimus Barbadensis. The least Barbados Turtle

Turdus viscivorus The Missel-bird.

Merula The Blackbird.

Passer solitarius. The Solitary Sparrow

Merula Saxatilis. The greater Redstart.

Galbula juvenis.

TAB. XXXVII.
urdus simpliciter dictus. The Mavis or Song Thrush.

Turdus pilaris. The Fieldfare.

Merula. The Blackbird.

Passer solitarius mas Aldrov.

Mreula torquata. The Ring Ouzell.

Sturnus. The Stare or Starling.

TAB. XXXVIII
Merula Saxatilis Aldrov. The Rock Ouzell.

Sturnus Indicus Bontij. The Indian Stare

Guira punga.

Oriolus Seu Galbula.

Pitangaguacu Marggr.

Atinga guacu mucu Marggrav.

Matuitui Marggr

TAB XXXVIIII.
Hirundo apus. The black Martin or Swift.

Hirundo domestica. The common house Swallow.

Hirundo agrestis seu rustica. The Martin or Martlet.

Hirundo riparia. The Bank Martin.

Ruticilla. the Redstart.

Rubecula. The Robin-red Breast.

Hirundo domestica

TAB XL
Emberiza Flava The Yellow hammer

Emberiza alba The Bunting

Hortulanus

Alauda vulgaris The Como^n Lark.

Alauda cristata major The crested Lark.

Tottovilla Olinoe The wood Lark.

TAB. XLI.
Luscinia The Nightingale.

Atricapilla The Black-cap.

Tijeguacuparoara Marggr.

Oenanthe sive vitiflora The white-tail.

Muscipeta 3a. Oenanthe tertia. The Stone-chatter

Guiraguacuberaba.

TAB XLII
Roth beinlein Baltner.

Motacilla alba. The white water wagtail.

Regulus cristatus. The copped wren.

Iamacaii Marggrav.

Passer troglodytes. The wren.

Regulus non cristatus.

^urissia sive Tomin^io

Mergus Americunus.

Guainumbi The Humming bird

TAB. XLIII.
Parus major seu Fringillago The Great Titmouse or Ox-ey

Parus ater The Colemouse.

Parus coeruleus The blew Titmouse or Nun.

Parus palustris The Marsh Titmouse.

Parus cristatus The crested Titmouse

Parus caudatus The long tail's Titmouse

TAB XLIIII.
Coccothraustes The Grosbeak or Hawfinch.

Coccothraustes Indica cristata. The Virginian Nightingale.

Chloris. The Greenfinch.

Rubicilla. The Bullfinch.

Loxia. The Crosse-bill.

Passer. A Sparrow.

TAB. XLV.
Passer Stultus Olin The Foolish Sparrow

Passer montanus. the mountain Sparrow

Passer Indicus macrourus Aldr. The Long-taild Indian Sparrow.

Fringilla The Chaffinch.

Montifringilla The Brambling

Tijeguacu parvara

TAB. XLVI.
Carduelis The Gouldfinch

Linaria The Linnet

Linaria rubra The Red Linnet.

Ligurinus. The siskin.

Passer Canariensis The Canary Bird.

Avicula Anadavadensis. The Anadavad Bird.

Citrinilla.

Serinus Gesn.

TAB. XLVII.
Iabiru Marggrau.

Iabiru guacu Scurvogell Belgarum.

Anhima Marggrav. 2.

Iabiru rostrum Ibidis falso dictum

TAB XLVIII
Grus The Crane

Aspera arteria in sternu ingressa and reslexa

a. Caput b. divaricatio

Grus Balearica

TAB XLIX
Ardea cinerea major The Common Heron.

Ibis Bellon.

Ardea alba major. The Great white Heron.

Ardea cinerea minor The Night-raven.

TAB. L.
Ardeae haematopus. Aldr.

Ardeae Stellaris. The Bittern.

Ardeae congener

Squaiotta Aldr.

TAB. LI.
Soco Marggravij

Cocoi Marggravij.

Cariama Brasiliensis Marg.

Ardeola Brasiliensis Marg.

Fulica Major The greater Coot.

TAB. LII.
Ciconia alba The Stork.

Ciconia nigra The Black Stork.

Plutea seu Albardeola The SPoon bill.

Ardea stellaris. The Bittern.

TAB. LIII.
Guarauna.

Scolopax. The woodcock.

Gallmago minor The Snipe.

Totanus. The Godwit.

Fedoa altera The Yarwhelp

TAB. LIIII
Arquata. The Curlew.

Curucaca.

Falcinellus Aldr.

Himantopus

Guara

TAB. LV.
Glottis seu Pluvialis major Ald.

Haematopus Bellonij.

Gallinula erythropus major. The Redshank.

Morinellus. The Dotrell.

Tringa minor. The Sandpiper.

Tringa.

TAB. LVI.
Rotknussel. an Avis pugnax foem.

Callidrys nigra. The Knot.

Cinclus Bellonij.

Avis pugnax mas A Ruff

Matkneltzell.

Avis pugnax foemina. The Reeve.

TAB. LVII
Pluvialis virulis The green Plover.

Vannellus. The Lapwing.

Pluvialis cinerea. The gray Plover.

Morinellus The Dottrell

Charadrius alter.

Charadrius. The Sea Lark.

TAB LVIII
Morinellus marinus The Sea-Dottrell.

Oedicnemus The Stone Curlew

Gallinula chloropus The waterhen or more-hen.

Iunco avis.

Peliopus Gallinula minor.

Rallus aquaticus. The water Rail.

TAB. LIX.
Iacana.

Tamatia.

Colymbus major The greater Loon or Diuer

Fulica The Coot.

Mergulus melanoleucos rostro brevi.

TAB. LX.
Phoenicopterus The Flammant

Trochilus Aldrov.

Rocurvirostra Avosetta Italorum.

TAB. LXI.
Colymbus maximus caudatus. The greatest Loon.

Colymbus cristatus. The crested Diver or Loon.

Colymbus minor. The Didapper or Dobchick.

Colymbus seu Podiripes cinereus. The ash-colored Loon.

TAB. LXII.
Colymbus maximus stellatus The greatest Speckled Diver or Loon

Os cruris Colymbi The Leg bone of a Diver

Colymbus Arcticus Lumme dictus Worm.

Ipeca guacu.

Majague.

TAB. LXIII.
Corvus aquaticus. The Cormorant.

Graculus palmipes. The Shagge.

Onocrotalus. The Pelecane.

Anser Bassanus. The Soland Goose.

TAB. LXIV.
Mergus longiroster.

Alca Hoieri The Auk or Rasor-Bill

Merganser. The Goosander.

Mergus cirratus minor.

Albellus. The Smew.

Mergus Bellonij.

TAB. LXV.
Penguin Worm.

Alka Hoieri. The Razor-bill or Auk.

Anas Arctica Clus.

Lomivia Hoieri. The Guillemot.

TAB. LXVI
Larus hijbernus. The Coddy moddy.

Larus griseus maximus. The great grey-Gull.

Larus albo-cinereus torque cinereo

Larus cinereus rostro and pedibus rubris The Pewit.

TAB. LXVII.
Catarracta Aldrov.

Cepphus Aldrov.

Larus major cinereus Balt.

Skua Hoieri.

TAB. LXVIII
Hirundo marina major The greater Sea Swallow

Larus nigro-cinereus palustris.

Motacilla flava. The yellow water wagtail.

Larus niger The Sacre-crow

Larus cinereus Bellon. The Tarrock.

Larus niger sidipes.

Hirundo marina minor. The Lesser Sea Swallow.

TAB. LXIX.
Cygnus. The Swan.

Cygniferi caput. An Elks head.

Brenta. The Brent-goose.

Anser ferus. The wild Goose.

TAB. LXX
Anser Canadensis The Canada Goose.

Tadorna Bellonij The Sheldrake.

Anas niger major The great black Duck.

TAB. LXXI.
Anser Gambensis The Gambo-goose.

Anser cygnoides. The Swan-goose.

Tadorna Bellonij The Sheldrake or Borough Duck.

TAB. LXXII
Boschus major The would Duck or Mallard.

The Gadwall or Gray.

Anas fera fusca Penelops veterum. a Pochard.

Penelope Aldr The wigeon.

Anhinga Marggrav.

TAB. L XX III.
Anas caudacuta. The Sea-Pheasant.

Capo rosso. Anas fera fusca min.

Anas Fuligula prima Gesn.

Clangula aspera arteria.

Clangula Gesn. The Golden eye.

TAB LXXIIII
Anas dypeata Germ. The Shoveler.

Anas niger minor. The Scoter.

Querquedula. The Teal.

Querquedula altera. Garganey.

TAB LXXV.
Anser Domesticus The tame Goose.

Ipecati Apoa.

Anas Domestica. The Common tame Duck

Anas Moschata an Cairana Aldrov. The Moscouy Duck.

Anas rostro adunco The Hook-bill'd Duck

TAB. LXXVI.
Anas circia Gesu: the Summer Teal.

Avis Tropicorum the Tropic bird.

Anas S. Cuthberti St. Cuthberts Duck.

Larus cinercus minor the Common sea mew or Gull.

TAB LXXVII
Cuculus Prior. the Cuckoo.

Cornix cinerea frugilega, the Royston Crow.

Montifringilla major. the Greater Brandling.

Oedicnemus Bellon. the stone Cerlew.

Manucodiata Rex Clus The King of birds of Paradise.

Nidi e ramulis suspensi The 2 Hang-nests

The Rabihorcado.

TAB: LXXVIII
Anas marina cauda forcipata. The Swallow-taild Sheldrake.

Tamatia Marggravij. An American Waterhen.

The Sheare-Water.

Columba Groon landica. The Greenland Dove.

Corvi Indici rostrum. The bill of an Indian Raven.



Snares for Wood-cocks.

The Crow-nett.

The Italian Lanciatoia

A pair of Day-netts.



The Pantiere Nett.

A Trap Cage for Night-ingales.

The Sparrow Nett.

Catching birds with a setting Dog, and Nett.

A Tunnelling Nett for Partridge.

Tunnelling for Quails.



The Explication of the Letters added to the Figure of the Day-Nets.

A A Shows the bodies of the main Nets, and how they ought to be laid.

B B The tail-lines or hinder-lines staked to the earth.

C C The fore-lines likewise staked to the earth.

D The Knitting-needle.

E The Bird-stale.

F The Looking-glass-stale.

G The Line that draws the Bird-stale.

H The Line which draws the Glass-stale.

I I The drawing double Lines of the Nets, which pull them over, twelve fathom
long at least, but not double above two fathom.

K K K K The stakes which stake down the four nether points of the Nets, and
the two Tail Lines.

L L The stakes which stake down the fore-lines.

M The single Line with the wooden Button to pull the Net over with.

O The Mallet of wood.

P The Hatchet.

Q Q The Giggs.


