THE SPEECHES (...) Cap. Walcot, Jo. Rouse. and Will. Hone. one Friday the 20
th of July 1683.
^Aptain Thomas Walcot being drawn to Tiburn in one Hurdle, John Rouse and
William Hone in another, and there put into a Cart, the Reverend Dr. Thomas
Cartwright, Dean (...) upon, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary,
with Mr. Smith the Ordinary (...) ^gate, began to acquaint Captain Walcot, That
this was the last time he had to spend (...) World, and therefore desired him
to make a good use of it, telling him, that as death (...) him Judgment will
find him; and earnestly exhorted him to make an ingenious Disco^ and Confession
of what he knew touching the Conspiracy and Treasons of which he (...) found
guilty, and received sentence to die.

(...) this Capt. Walcot replied, That he had some Papers in his Pocket of what
he had ^ed to say in writing, because his memory was bad; therefore he desired
they might (...) ^ed: out, and he would read them.

(...) Dr. Cartwright and the Ordinary spoke to Hone and Rouse to the effect
before ^ioned, earnestly desiring them to confess the whole of what they knew;
instancing (...) places of Scripture to them, as Joshuah's advice to Achan,
etc. my Son confess and give (...) to God whom you have dishonored etc.
telling them they would have imbrewed (...) ^ands in the blood of a merciful
and good Prince who had often pardoned and gave (...) Acts of Oblivion and
indemnity to his Subjects; and whose Reign has preserved the ^ty of the
Protestant Religion amongst us; That we cannot enjoy more than we do en^ ^th
other good admonitions for them to make clear discoveries of the truth of what
(...) knew.

Captain Walcot in the mean while was prepared to read his Speech.

(...) Cartwright asked him if be could discover any more than he had done
already.

(...) I Have not in the general. I told the King the thing was laid very deep:
There was a ^eman with me last night, I told him what I told the King and that
was all* I told (...) I thought an Act of indulgence would be very necessary,
because he had a great many (...) to take Judgment of. I know not the
particulars of the Design but the King has the (...) Howard* Mr. west, and
others that know more than I. I was never in Council (...) them, nor never with
them above four, five, or half a dozen times.


^en looking upon his Paper, he began his Speech as follows,

^is great concourse of people do not only come here to see me dye, but also to
hear (...) I shall say; and because I would not be reproached; and thought to
be an Atheist (...) I am gone, I have two or three words to speak for my
Religion. I do believe in ^e persons, and one God and I expect and hope to be
saved by the Merits and Righ^ness of his Son Christ Jesus, without the hope of
an advantage by any Merits or ^teousness of my own. and I believe that the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament (...) the word of God; that they were
not written according to the will of Man but holy men of (...) writ them as
they were inspired by the holy Ghost.

^ believe that these Scriptures ought to be the Rule of our Faith, and the
method of our ^hipping of God: I believe that as Christ is the head of his
Church, so he is their Law^, That it is not in the power of any Council or
Conclave of Cardinals, or power upon (...) whatsoever to set up the Precepts
and Traditions of men, and to make, them of equal ^ty with the word of God. I
believe it was not because the Jews rejected, and Cru^d Christ, that he
rejected them, but because they rejected his Word; which appears by (...) Three
thousand that God by one Sermon of Peter's Converted; they being pricked in
their (...), and touched in their Consciences cried out Men and Brethren what
shall we do? and they were that day added to the Church. It was certainly
because the Jews rejected the Word and Gospel of Christ, that the things were
hid from their eyes which belonged to their peace. It is a dreadful thing to
reject the Word of God; and it is a dreadful thing to live in a sinful course
of life, till God withdraws his Spirit from us: For it is said, it shall not
always strive with man Death is the wages of sin, I believe had not Adam
sinned, he and we his posterity had not dyed. Death is said to be the King of
Terrors, but it is only so to those that are terified with a terrifying
Conscience, that have the arrows of the Almighty sticking in them from
convictions of great guilt, and see no hopes of mercy, have no assurance of
Pardon; but those that are Christ's, he takes away the terror and horror, and
sting of Death, he enables them to say with Paul, To me to live is Christ, and
to die is gain: he enables not only to get unto Christ, but into Christ; and so
they have Communion and Fellowship with the Father and the Son, It is no hard
matter to get the notions of the promises of the Gospel into our heads but
unless the Lord is pleased to apply them to our hearts, we cannot believe
except We be in Christ as branches in the Vine, we are not Christians indeed.
It was the case of poor Francis Spira; he was certainly a knowing man, but
notwithstanding he had not ^aith to apply the promises. Christ has said, that
he that believes in him, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and he that
lives and believes in him, shall never dye. So if we be able to apply the
promises by the Spirit of God, we may have comfort through Faith; but then
Faith is the gift of God, and Faith comes by hearing the Word of God, and
receiving it in the love of God.

I shall not be tedious, Mr. Sheriff, I shall be very short.


Mr. Sheriff. take your own time.


Walcot, As to the present occasion of my death, I do neither blame the Judges,
nor the Jury, nor the Kings Council: I only blame some men that in reality and
in truth were deeper concerned, and more engaged than I, that came in as
Witnesses against me who swore me out of my life to save their own, and who for
fear they should not do it effectually; contrived that, That I will appeal to
you all, whether there be a probability in it or not for they said that I made
it a scruple of Conscience, to have a hand in killing the King or to embrue my
hands in his blood, but was so generous as to undertake the Charging his Guards
whilst others did it and to the end another might do it Truly I will appeal to
all that know me, whether they believe me so much an idiot that I should not
understand it was the same thing to engage the Kings Guards, whilst another
killed him as to Kill him with my own hands. But however by their swearing
against me, they have secured their own Lives and Estates, and made my blood
the price of theirs, I confess I was so unfortunate and unhappy as to be
invited by Colonel Rumsey, (one of the witnesses against me) to some meetings
where some things were discoursed of in order to the asserting our Liberties
and properties which we looked upon to be violated and invaded But it was he
and Mr, West and some gentlemen that are fled who were the great promoters of
those Meetings I was near a quarter of a year ill of the Gout, and during that
time Mr: West often visited me, and still his discourse would be, concerning
Lopping the Two Sparks, That was the word he used, meaning the King and the
Duke; and proposed it might be done at a Play; This was his frequent discourse;
for he said, Then they would dye in their calling; it was his very Expression.
He bought Arms to do it with, without any direction of mine; I never saw the
Arms nor I never saw the men that were to do it; though they said they had
fifty employed to that end. I told several of them That the Killing the King
would carry such a blemish and stain with it, as would descend to posterity;
that I had Eight Children, that I was loath should be blemished with it, and
withal, I was confident the Duke of Monmouth would revenge his Fathers Blood;
if it were but to vindicate himself from having any hand in it. Mr. West
presently told me, that the Duke of Monmouth did not refuse to give an
Engagement, that he would not punish those that should kill the King.

And now I desire to forgive all the World from the very bottom of my heart,
and I pray God of his mercy from my heart to forgive them, even Mr. Shepherd,
who delivered me up, who promised to carry me into Holland, but instead of
that, he brought me into the condition wherein I now am. I do desire with all
my heart to forgive the Witnesses, and withal do earnestly beg that they may be
observed, that some remarks may be set upon them, whether their End be Peace,
and that they die the common death of all men. Certainly, though it be the Law
of the Land I ought to die, and the King may justly and reasonably put me to
death for being in those meetings where a War was debated; yet I think these
men are guilty of my Blood, that were as deep in as I, and have betrayed me,
and taken it away. Then in the next place I beg leave, Mr. Sheriff, to speak
one short word of Advice to my Friends, that has been often given to me,
though I was not so fortunate and so happy as to take it, and that is, That
they would neither hear any man speak, nor speak themselves, that which they
would not have repeated; for there is no such thing as Faith in man to man,
whatever there is in man to God: either the Tears of a Wife, or a Family of
little helpless Children, something or other will tempt and provoke men to
betray one another. When God has a work to do, he will not want Instruments,
for he can make them; nor will he want a way to do it, for he can contrive it,
and bring it to pass. And I do most heartily desire, and my earnest Prayer to
the Almighty is, That this may be the last Blood spilt upon this account. I
know Acts of Indulgence and Mercy in the King would make him much easier in his
Government, and would make his people sit much easier under it; and that the
Lord may incline his heart to mercy, ought to be the Prayer of every good man.
What has happened, and what has been the present occasion of our Calamity, I
suppose every man knows; what provocations have been on the one hand, fears and
necessities, jealousies and sufferings of the other, I will not intermeddle
with, resolving to use my utmost endeavor to make that Peace and
Reconciliation with my God which is impossible for me to make with man; and to
make it my hearty Prayer to the Great God, before whom I am in little time to
appear, That he would stench this issue of Blood; and find out some other way
to preserve these Kingdoms in Unity and Peace; to the Honor and Glory of his
Great Name, and the eternal comfort of his people.

One word, Mr. Sheriff, I desire leave to speak as to Ireland, because the King
pressed it hard upon me, and several people have been with me about Ireland, how
far Ireland was concerned in this matter. I do averr here, as in the presence
of God, before whom I am now going to appear, That I do not know an
Englishman, nor Protestant in Ireland engaged in it. What I did know was only
of one Scottish Gentleman in the North; and the King knows it, but he says he
does not believe it. For they that were concerned, I was never in any of their
Councils; I never saw any of those Lords but the Duke of Monmouth, and that was
I believe above six months ago. I never saw nor spoke with one Lord, only my
Lord Howard; I heard my Lord Howard say, that they did not value Ireland, for
it must follow England.

I have not more to say, Mr. Sheriff: But truly you will do an act of a great
deal of Charity, if you will prevail with the King for an Act of Indulgence and
Liberty to his people; I think so, and so the Lord have mercy upon me.


Dr. Cartwright. You blame them for that which is their Virtue, and not their
Crime; that they have been Witnesses for the King.


Walcot. I was not for contriving the death of the King, if you will believe me.


Dr. Cartwright. You blame them for betraying of you in contriving the War,
upon which the Death of the King must have followed, if your Treason had gone
forward, for else you could not have defended your self from that Justice to
which he has brought you; and therefore for you to lay that as a Crime upon
your Witnesses, is indeed very strange.


Walcot. Sir, I think it was but reasonable that I should suffer that is due
from Justice, and reasonable by the Law; but these men, they did not come in
against me till they did it to save themselves.


Dr. Cartwright. Better late than never: a man had better save his soul and
body too, than die as now you do, for Crimes that ought to make every good man's
heart relent; and therefore for your blaming them, it was for that which was
their duty to do; they have not committed a Crime in that, but a very
meritorious act.


Walcot. They have revealed it with that aggravating circumstance, which I
think no rational man will be guilty of.


Dr. Cartwright. That circumstance which you call aggravating, is no
aggravation at all; That is rather a mitigation of your Crime, to make them
believe that you were tenderer of the Kings person than to shoot him when he
was not armed. But you confess you were consulting this Crime.


Walcot. I was not to have a hand in the Kings Death.


Dr. Cartwright. But it was proposed when you were there.


Walcot. It was so.


Dr. Cartwright. And it was agreed to be done.


Walcot. Truly I do not know how far it was agreed; I was there many meetings.


Dr. Cartwaight. These very meetings you could not but be sensible of.


Walcot. There were several meetings wherein the business of the Kings life was
never spoke of.


Dr Cartwright. That was agreed in those meetings; but you had a tenderer
Conscience.


Walcot. I say they were for asserting our Liberties and Properties.


Dr. Cartwright. I would fain have you explain that.


Walcot. Truly Sir, since you do press me to speak, we were under general
apprehensions, and so were those Lords that are likely to suffer, as I have
heard; they were under general apprehensions of Popery and Slaveries coming in.


Dr. Cartwright. What sign was there of it? you had no persecution at all; you
were allowed by the Law to meet five in a house, besides th^e of the Family. It
is true, the Conventicles have been disturbed of late; and I would (...) you
look upon it as a Judgment of God, to bring you to this for forsaking the Chur^
of England: You have forsaken Communion with that Church in that way you were
instructed from your youth.


Walcot. I do not come here to dispute of Religion, but I come here to die
religiously, if it p^ease God to enable me.


Dr. Cartwright. I pray God enable you: But I would not have you charge that as
a Crime upon the Witnesses, which was their duty.


Walcot. I cannot tell how to excuse my Witnesses for aggravating things against
me, and making them worse than really they were.


Dr. Cartwright going to reply;

Walcot. Pray, Sir, give me leave; for a man to invite a man to a meeting, to
importune him to this meeting, to be perpetually soliciting him, and then to
deliver him up to be hanged, as they have done me --


Dr. Cartwright. It was a Crime to solicit you to those meetings; but when you
were in, it was a duty in you and in them to reveal it; if God had given you
the grace to reveal them, the turn had been theirs which now is yours. And
whereas you say you cannot excuse them, that is uncharitable.


Walcot. I do forgive them, and I desire with all my heart God would forgive
them.


Dr. Cartwright. You confess you were guilty enough to take away your life.


Walcot. I was so. The same measure we mete to another, that measure God will
mete to us. Then, Sir, I do leave it to God.


Dr. Cartwright. Then you pray this may be the last Blood spilt upon this
account.


Walcot. I do so.


Cartwright. Would not you have Traitors brought to their end? You talk of
spilling Blood, as if it were innocent Blood now spilt, when you do confess and
own the guilt. But I shall give you no further disturbance, but my Prayers to
Almighty God for you, that God would give you mercy.


And then turning to Hone.

Dr. C. Mr. Hone, give glory to God, and unburthen your Conscience, for you
have but a short time to stay here.


Hone. I have nothing further to say, but that I have been guilty of the Crime.


Dr. C. You are so


Hone. Yes, I am guilty of this Crime according to the Law of the Land.


Dr. C. I, and according to the Law of God.


Hone. Yes.


Dr. C. You say according to the Law of the Land, a man may be sworn out of his
life by false Witnesses, but you were guilty of conspiring the Death or the
King, and raising an Insurrection.


Hone. Truly I must say as the Captain well minded, I was drawn in. Thou saw
a Thief, and thou consentedst with him: So I say, that I was drawn in, I saw
the Thief, and consented; I have looked upon my self since to be the more
guilty of Blood, and my circumstance was to be drawn in, and ensnared; for I
never was at any of their Meetings, none of their Cabals, but in a pub^ick
Coffee-house or Tavern, where they discoursed the matter of Fact; and I was to
meet the K. and the D. of York; but I did not know at that time when, or where,
nor what was my business.


Dr. C. But you were to assist?


Hone. Yes, I promised that, to assist.


Dr. C. Do you beg God and the Kings forgiveness for it, from the bottom of
your heart, that you have been guilty of this; For if the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch, as well he that leads, as he that is led,
although he that leads may fa^ dee^er: There are circumstances make one man's
Crime greater than another; The greatness of theirs does not lessen yours.


Hone. I believed, that then I was very near another snare; I was resolved to
go down into the Country, and not meddle in the thing at all, and had been in
the Country, but meeting with Keeling, (I freely forgive him for whatsoever is
done,) he called me, and discoursing with him, I did say I ^as for killing the
King, and saving the Duke of York.


Dr. C. Why was you for ^ng the Duke of York?


Hone, I do not know wh^ to say as to that; there was no reason.


Dr C. What was your own private reason for killing the King, and saving the
Duke of York?


Hone. As to that, I think this, that the Duke of York did openly profess
himself to be a Roman Catholic, and I did say I had rather dispose of the K
than the D.


Dr. C. Had you rather a Papist should Reign over us, as you take him to be,
than the King?


Hone. I do not know what to say to that?


D. C. That does deserve a reason, Mr. Hone; you ought to give some reason of
that, you cannot but have some reason; if you had had a design to kill the
Duke, and save the King, then it might be to prevent Popery; but you say the
quite contrary. God in Heaven forgive you for your murderous design.


Hone. I know as little of this as any poor silly man in the World; I was fain
to gather it, I had it not so down right, I was drawn into it, however I am now
to die; as for the Witnesses I desire the Lord to forgive them.


Dr. C. They have not wronged you, they have done their duty.


Dr. C. Rouse, What say you?


Rouse. As a man, and a Christian, in the first place, as God has made me a
Christian through his Grace, that the World may understand that I do not dye as
Captain Walcot says, an Atheist; I do here declare in the presence of God, and
this vast number of people, what Faith I die in: In that very Faith which was
once delivered, and in the Belief of that Doctrine which the Church of England
makes profession of, and is agreeable to the Word of God, being founded upon
the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, whereof Jesus Christ is the Corner
Stone. There have been very various opinions concerning me, upon the account of
the various employments that I have been exercised in, both here and beyond
Sea: It has been my lot to fall under such circumstances, and to fall under
such misrepresentations and censures, upon the account of some public
employments that I have been in for the King, and after I returned from
Flanders, upon the account of Di^banding, it was almost morally impossible for
such a one in my capacity, to stand right i^ the affections and opinions of all
people. When I was employed in Flanders, in the payment of that Army, I was
then between two Rocks; I will leave it to the judgment of a^ sorts of people,
you know the Country, I need not particularise, nor reflect upon opinion^ and
the like. But, I having been bred up in England, and had that education it
pleased Go^ to give me, I was not fond of, nor carried off with that,
debauchery in those times: and some times more than once or twice, it was my
lot that I was like to have been murdered for pleading for, and justifying the
actions of the King of England: Since my return, and being employed under Sir
Tho: Player, and some others about disbanding, there it came t^ my Lot, because
I could not humor some Gentlemen, who neither ^eared God, nor ho^oured the
King (I will not say so of all for I know some were very worthy Gentlemen, the
scorned any of those actions, which some would attempt. There is one worthy
Gent. I ca^ speak very honorably of) that so they might have their pockets
full of money, did not value how the Accounts were stated, and at the very same
time I was under many temptations of hand fulls of Guineas in my hand to do so
and so, to cheat the King and because I would not do that I was looked upon as
a Jesuit. I did wave all these things under tho^ circumstances, it has been my
lot likewise being employed by Sir T. P, and the rest of the Commissioners to
fall into those Companies and places where my Lord Shaftsbury and others have
been, and have had some kind of Discourse, which was not Treason, but rather a
thing that I ever abhorred, and declared a detestation of: since these hurly
burlys, concerning Parliaments going off and coming on did discontent the
people upon one account or another, I confess I have been a hearer and have
understood too much of some kind of meetings, which I pray God forgive them for
and especially those that call themselves Protestants being 10000 tims worse
than any others* That ther^ have been such kind of Designs and Meetings and
Clubbs, I have not been ignorant of; God forgive me that I have not been as
careful and as diligent and as ready and forward to discover it a great while
since That I ever had a hand in it or the least thought or resolution, or
intention to appear in it but rather on the contrary have declared my opinion
against it both in the sight of God and man as a breach of the Laws of God and
the Laws of the Land and contrary to our duty who are bound to pray for the
king and all that are in authority I do declare in the presence of God I am a
perfect stranger and I thank God my Conscience is clear I have accquainted his
Majesty in Council and I have had the honor to be admited into his Majesty's
presence in private almost half an hour on Saturday was seven night, where I
was as clear and above board and as faithful to his Majesty as I could be in
an humble manner, according to my duty; where I offered to have some time, and
place allotted that I might give him a whole Scheme of the business: For there
were a great many Gentlemen that had a respect for me, it was their opinions
that I had a general Knowledge of all the Clubbs, and all the Designs that ever
were since the King came in, but they were under a mistake. I gave his Majesty
an account to the best of my knowledge, and when I had done his Majesty seemed
to be pleased, and to thank me for it; but before I had power to put it in
writing and wait upon his Majesty the Providence of God did so order it, the
Council thought it fit that I should be committed to Prison where I was some
days; I have had more kindness among Heathens and Indians, I pray God to
forgive them for it, I had not liberty to send to my wife big with Child in two
days where I was.

Sir I shall not hold you in suspense, and multiply words but what is most
proper to this occasion. What I have given to his Majesty in Council and what I
have spoken to his Majesty, in private is nothing but the naked truth to clear
my own Conscience that I may not go out of the world with any thing upon me I
wish those that call themselves Protestants would discharge their duty better to
God and the King, than either I or the best Subject ever did. I have looked
upon it as an obligation ever since I knew what it was to be a man to carry my
self obedient to those that, God has set over me, especially the King, and
those that are in Authority; and I have made it my practice to Pray for the
King, as for my own soul, That it has been my lot to be acquainted with those
vanities of Clubbs, and persons, no rational man will wonder, considering the
Circumstances and places I was called to. There is one particular Gentleman,
Mr. Sheriff; I must desire the favor to clear my self by something that I took
occasion to speak of yesterday. I did acquaint you Mr. Sheriff, with what I had
spoken to the King, how I was interrupted in the further discovery of what I
had a mind to say; What was further said yesterday, it was nothing but the
naked truth: In the first place, as to what was afterward discourst of, as to
some particular persons, namely and particularly Sir Thomas Player I must do
justice to all the world. That he has been acquainted with the Lord Shaftsbury
none, here, will wonder; but that he has been very shy of his Company since he
came out of the Tower: for he told me many times, he never was in his company
but once, for he did not like some things, and saw some designs that he was
afraid were going on; and thereupon Sir Thomas Player was so ingenuous and
honest to the King, as to break off* I always looked upon him as a very Loyal
subject, and I must declare in the presence of God and all this people, I never
heard him speak one dishonorable word of the King, what he may have had with
others is best known to himself, I have been in several Clubbs eating and
drinking, where it has been discourst to accommodate the Kings Son, the D. M.
That there was a design to set up the D. of M. I will not say while the King
raigns, though some extravagant hotheaded men have taken upon them to
discourse these things, but not any worthy man: I know those that were worthy
to be called by that name, have declared in my hearing, that in opposition to
the D. of Y. if the King be seized, they would stand by the D of M. There are
others, (I will not give nicknames to any, you are wise men, and know what I
mean by speaking in the general,) that were for a Commonwealth, and some there
were, two or three persons I shall be as plain as I can, and I hope you will
bear with me since it came to my lot to come to the knowledge of it, Some were
for the D. of M. some for a commonwealth, and some, but very few, not worth
naming, were for the D. of Bucks: But that I think fell at last between these
two, being the greater part, as far as I did apprehend by discoursing here and
there in the City, which I did very frequently do. But the way of these
Gentlemen's discoursing these things was only one at a time, especially a very
industrious Gentleman that has made it his practice a long time (for it has
been my lot to be acquainted but two months and that too long,) which is the
Witness that comes against me, and I pray God to forgive him, and I blame him
nor for discovering me, but for the words he spoke himself, by way of
instigating me to enter into a design against the King* they were his own words
and not mine, I blame him not for discovering any thing whereby the King may be
served, He did tell me several times there were Clubbs in London, but I could
never get out of him the places where the Clubbs were, Yet I endeavored what
p^bly I could to come to the bottom of that design; for my intent was to make a
faithful and true discovery, that I might not go to Whitehall or a Justice of
peace, with an idle story, or a sham: but at last I got out of him that Rich.
Goodenough was chiefly instrumental. This was a very few days before notice was
given, this certain person Thomas Lee the Dyer, that he was sworn against by
one How: I asked him the meaning. He told me that that How was a very Rascal. I
asked Lee Sir. what course shall be taken? for What by the Doctors Commons of
the one hand, and what by the persecution of the other, we must think of a way
how to relieve it. There is some design in hand, says Lee, don't you know; no,
said I, I would be glad to hear; There is an invasion, said he, going on, a
design a against the King and the Government, but that was only a fallacy; but
he discovered afterward to me that there was a resolution, and a certain
number of people about the City and the Nation, to make an attack upon the
Tower of London, upon the City of London upon Whitehall, and upon St. James I
said what do you design then? have a care that you don't shed more innocent
blood, for the Land is stained with blood too much already. No, says he, the
resolution as Mr. Goodenough says, is not to spill a drop of blood, but only
to secure the Kings person, that the papists do not kill him, and then says he
we will deal with the D. of Y. as we please. They were his own words to the
best of my remembrance. Afterward this Gentleman was sworn against by one Mr.
Keeling in East-Smithfield, says he, he is a Rogue and a Dog, and I have seen
him but once these nine Months, and I had no discourse but only drunk a glass
of drink which proves since to the contrary. Being then in Company at the
Kingshead Tavern in Swithens-Ally near the Exchange, news was brought he was
sworn against, he did not know what to do, but found out a place near
London-wall, and desired me to go to one or two about the matter, he knew not
how to obscure himself, his house was beset. Messengers after him, and likewise
a kind of Judgment or Execution; how to put both ends together he knew not. I
told him, if he would I had a bed, he might go to my house. I never heard a
word from Rich: Goodenough one way nor another of any design against the K. and
the Government, whom I have known this seven years only this Lee told me, his
hand was as deep as any other. Its true this Gentleman comes and swears against
me, that I should be the only person to engage in taking the Tower of London,
Sir John you know very well in what capacity I have been, and how very
incapable I was in my person to take the Tower of London. I speak in the
presence of God, before whom I am to appear in a few minutes, I never had any
such thought, never had any such desire, never consulted ^ith any persons of
Quality, never discoursed of any Arms in order to it, but only this I was
saying. This fellow being set on (and I think a more proper person than any man
in the world) for that he was a little low in the world, he was under a
temptation of being thrown out by an Anabaptistical Church, for some kind of
failings, he was under a temptation to make himself somebody, therefore he did
close with Mr. Goodenough and some others; and when the first Proclamation came
forth, he himself told me, I never knew it before, that Rumsey Captain Walcot,
Nelthrop and Goodenough and West were concerned in this design, he was the man
told me: and when the second Proclamation came out, then he ^ould tell me of
those too; I told him he was a wretch he had not discovered it be^mes, as to
his swearing against me for which God forgive him, that I had a hand in taking
the Tower of London, the thing is this. He knew I was intimately acquainted
with a certain Captain, one Blage, who was my sevant, 21 years ago in Virginia;
he has been a very faithful and honest servant, I believe to his Majesty for
these 15 years, particulary five years in three of his Majesty's Men of War. I
know very well the man is of such a principle that he abhors to engage in any
wicked design. But only Lee discoursing at random about taking the Tower
Captain Blage gave this answer, (for he is a very jocular man*) if I were of a
mind to take it, were it for the service of the King, if there were an enemy
coming in, says he, I would with six Ships well manned and armed with Guns
undertake to take the Tower: upon what account he said it, I don't know, but I
believe in my Conscience he had no more design to put such a thing in practice,
than I have to cut my own throat at present; Captain Blage had heard these
discourses pro and con, says he 2 or 300 men would do it, it is weak in such a
place, I wonder his Majesty dos not make it stronger. Now when he came to swear
as soon as he was taken up, he took occasion to swear against me, all the
discourse he used in pressing me to under take this design.


Sheriff Rich. Pray if you have any thing that was not told in Court, Discover
it, but you need not go over that which was in Court.


Rouse. Mr. Sheriff, I have nothing at all to say, either to blame the Judges,
or the Jury, or the Witness themselves, the greatest of all. I thank God I was
not any way to have had any hand in it: but the very words themselves that came
out of his mouth he makes me the Author of, but I freely forgive him as I
desire God would forgive me though he did tell me positively there were five
hundred Arms to be brought out of the Country. I heard of such a thing, I
confess, here and there but could never know the Authors of it, nor the Clubbs
where it was discoursed. it was lately that he told me, Goodenough told him,
That the King was to be taken off as he came from Windsor* That there was
several things to be done in order to it, That they wanted a place of meeting
and some thought of Salisbury-Plain, and some of Black Heath but the most
convenient place pitched upon was Black Heath* They were discoursing how to
gather the People together; Some were for comunicating it privately, others for
a B^ll. They asked my Thoughts, I said the best way will be (...) you throw up
a Silver Ball, to get the people together: for my design was to get what ^
could out of them. Thereupon he went to Mr. Goodenough, and discoursed him and
told ^m, that my Opinion was, to throw up a Silver Ball and declare, all those
that will come ^d drink a Bowl of Punch, shall be welcome, and that by this
means they would have ^thered thirty or forty thousand men in two or three days
time, which otherwise would ^ave been a fortnight a doing; but for himself, I
will not blame him; nor lay any ^ing to his charge of which he is not guilty. I
must needs give him his due. I do not ^emember that ever he insisted upon
shedding of Blood, but that he has discoursed in very ^pprobrious terms and
base Language of the Duke of York; by calling him Rogue, and Dog and such
things: and that We will do his work: That is true. And, that after the King's
de^ease, the Duke of Monmouth, having a Vogue with the People, must of
necessity succeed; I cannot tell what I can say more as to that; that is the
chief thing I have to say, if I have not forgot any thing.


Mr. Sheriff Rich. Mr. Rouse, you would do well to na^ those Persons that were
with you in that Consultation.


Rouse. There was no Consultation at all, Sir That I had was from this Thomas
Lee's mouth himself, That there were five hundred Arms to be brought in; That
he had it from Richard Goodenough, and Nelthrop, and Mr. West, and that Mr.
West particularly knew from whom these Arms were to come, for he gave me a hint
that part of the Arms were brought by Mr. West.


Mr. Sheriff Rich. Who proposed the way of the Ball?


Rouse. Sir, he was saying, there was several propositions made in the Club
where Goodenough was, and some thought of one way and some another, but they
could not find out a proper way; Says he, what do you think? said I, if the
People meet together they may throw up a Ball, just in that careless way, I
said so. So he came to me afterward and said, that he had discoursed with Mr.
Goodenough, and Mr. Goodenough told him, that there was forty thousand pounds
in Bank, and if such a Ball cost thirty or forty pound, it mattered not, to
carry on such a Design as that was.


Here Captain Walcot spoke.

Captain Walcot. Sir, I desire you to take notice of this, among other things,
that so far as I ever heard of this business, it is of no longer a date than
August or September last. I would not have this consequence of it, so as to
stifle the Popish Plot.


Mr, Sheriff. Do you know any thing of the Popish Plot that has not yet been
discovered.


Capt. Walcot. No Sir.


Hone. I had but the knowledge in March last of this business.


Cap. Wall. I do not know nor ever heard, that it was older than August or
September last.


Mr. Sheriff. Ordinary, do your Office.


Ordinary to Walcot. have you fully discharged yo^ conscience


Cap. Wall. I have


But it being said that Rouse was interrupted,

Mr. Sheriff North. If you have any thing to say, Mr Rouse, go on, but do not
make Repetitions


Who pulled his paper out of his pocket and looked on it.

Rouse. He declared further, Mr Sheriff, That when once the thing come so far
that the Tower and City was taken and so many men gathered together, they would
quickly increase and the method was, to go to Whitehall with Swords in their
hands, and to demand Privileges and Liberties, not to take away the Kings
Life, but only let the D. of Y look to it: for he was resolved upon it that he
should not succeed the King.


Then he delivers another Paper, being his Petition to the King, and some more
Notes in Shorthand.

Ordinary. Have you fully satisfied your Conscience.


Rouse. I have Sir a Word or two to speak to the People. I have discharged my
conscience as to any thing as to what I was acquainted with. It had been happy
for me if I had not heard of it; but that I had a hand in it I thank God I am
free.


Dr. C. You had a hand in, the concealing,


Rouse. That I had.


Dr. C. And in maintaining the Correspondency without discovering it; and you
do diminish your Crime.


Rouse. No Sir, I don't desire it. Mr, Sheriff, I do freely acknowledge and
confess that it is j^ in God in the first place, and righteous and just in the
King, that I die; and that I die just^ for concealing it. I would lay no blame
upon the King nor any other Person in the Wor^ I did not conceal it upon any
Account to his Majesty's Prejudice nor any Man in the Nation; and I hope God
will give more Grace to those Persons that do succeed, I beg a Wor^ or two I
had almost forgot; as a man and as a Christian, that it is a thing of such evil
Consequence I have found it by bitter Experience how for such and such public
places to b^ visited especially, by those that are professors of the Protestant
Religion and particularly Coffee-Houses, where it is very well known too much
time is spent, and Families an^ Wives, and Children, suffer too much: I pray
God the People may take notice of it and la^ it to Heart that spend their time
so, thinking it is but a penny and a penny; and so discours^ of State Affairs
as if so be they were Gods Counselors in the Government of the World, running
from the Coffee-House to the Tavern and from the Tavern to the Coffee-House,
which has been the Debauchery of this Age; and to bring them into this Dilemma
to discourse of those Things neither pleasing to God nor the King, nor
themselves, but their prejudice. The profanation of the Sabbath Day is commonly
discourst of in this place; God forgive me for not observing it as I should. I
pray God those that follow me may be more careful of their Duty to God and man,
for the good of themselves, their souls, and their families; those tha^ are
young especially and coming up; that they may chiefly mind their Concerns for
Eternity, and that they would pay their Duty and Homage to the King and those
that God has set ove^ them, and not neglect that great Command to pray for the
King and all that are in Authority.


Being asked if they had any thing more to say, they said No Mr. Ordinary then
prayed with them and sung a Psalm; and then they desired to Pray themselves;
which was granted.

Captain Walcot Prayer
O Lord our God, Thou art the God of present help in time of trouble, a God,
that have promised to be with thy people, in the Fire and in the water. O Lord,
we pray thee, that thou will afford thy presence to thy poor suffering Servants
at this time, that thou will enable us to pray with faith, to trust in thee, to
be in expectation and hope of Mercy from thee. O Lord, thy Servant that
speaks does confess, that the Iniquities at his ^eels have justly overtaken
him, that just and righteous art thou in all thy Judgments, that he has reason
to bear thy Indignation because he has sinned O Lord, we beg, even for thy Son
Christ Jesus's sake, that our sins may not be brought to our remembrance in
order to our despondency or discouragement, or our despairing in thy Mercy, but
rather, O Lord in order to an assurance that our great God has pardoned and
forgiven them in the Blood of his Son. O do thou bath each of our Souls in that
Fountain set open for sin and for Uncleanness. Give us, O Lord, inward Spiritual
strength from thy self, and give us cause to bless thy name for inward
supporting Graces, for inward assistances, O let us find an increase of
spiritual strength, let us be assured that our sins are done away, and let us
also be assured that our names are written in the Book of Life, and let it be
such an assurance as may be matter of joy and rejoicing to our Souls. O do thou
enable every one of us, from the inward evidence of thy spirit, to say with thy
Servant Job That we know and are assured that our Redeemer lives. O do thou
give us such an assurance of an Interest in thee, that we may be enabled in
deed, in reality, and in truth, to say, that we have run our race, and we have
finished our course with Joy. O let us now receive the fruit of those many
Petitions that we have put up unto the. O let us now find the Spirit
influencing our hearts to a yielding patience, and a through subjection to the
will of God. let us find thy Spirit assuring us that we are thine, O let us
have stronger Evidences of thy Love stronger Testimonies of thy Affection. O
give us some inward Tastes of those heavenly Joys that we hope through the
Mercy of Jesus Christ in a little time to have a more full Fruition of. O Lord
do thou speak peace to every one of our Consciences; enable us to take hold of
thy Strength that thou may make peace with us, and let us not be discouraged,
O Lord, since we have a High Priest that can be touched with our Infirmities.
let us with Boldness have access to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain
Mercy and grace to help in time of need. O take away the sting and Terror that
is in Death in any one of us, by assuring us of our Interest in thee, by
assuring us that our names are recorded in the Book of Life; tho we lie under a
Sentence of Death from Man, we beg that we may have a Sentence of Life eternal
from our God; and tho we meet thee, O Lord in a Field of Blood, we beg that
thou will come to meet with us in a Field of Mercy O Lord Extend thy mercy,
than Lord whose Compassions fails not, cause the Bowels of thy tender Pity to
yearn with Compassion toward us: enable every one of us, O Lord, to die
believing in Jesus Christ to die hoping in his. Mercy to die, relying upon him
for Justification for Sanctification, and for Adoption. O Lord though we have
been Prodigals, we desire to return to our Fathers House where there is Bread
enough. O enable us to come unto thee as Children to their Parents. O let our
Prayers be offe'rd with so much Fervor in Christ Jesus, that thou may think
it reasonable to assure us of thy love, O let the Intercession of Jesus Christ
be accepted. O Lord we beg that he may be our advocate: if our advocate be our
Judge, certainly we cannot miscarry O let Jesus Christ be the hope of every oe
of our Souls; and Lord let not our hope be like that of the Hypocrite, but let
our Faith be built upon the Rock of Ages; and let us not fail from the
apprehension of Affliction and Punishment from men. Yet O Lord do thou so order
our hearts and our Spirits aright: that thou may be the Lot of our
inheritance and our Portion for ever O do thou interest us in thy self; Lord
carry on thy own Work; We desire to come unto thee that we may have life. Lord
p^t to thy helping Hand, Lord teach us truly to leave no Sin unrepented of in
any one of our Hearts And O Lord, we beg that with us thou will give us leave
to recommend unto thy Care our poor Wives and, Children: Thou have promised to
be the Father of the Fatherless and the Husband of the Widow; and thou have
commanded us to cast the care of them upon thee O do thou make Provision for
them, deal kindly with them, imprint thy own image upon them, and enable them
to bear this severe strocke with Patience. O Lord, stand by and support them;
let their Ways be found so pleasing and acceptable unto thee, that thou may
think it reasonable to make all their Enemies at Peace. Lord interest them in
thy Love, and do thou favor them with thy Mercies and loving Kindnesses. O
Lord, we also beseech thee in the behalf of these poor Kingdoms wherein we are,
that thou will be merciful to them, prevent Divisions among them, heal all
their Breaches, compose their Differences make all that are thine of one Heart
and Mind in the things of our God. And Lord if it be thy Will, do thou rule in
the Heart of the King, that he may rule and reign for thee, and for the good of
thy Church and people. Lord favor us with thy mercy, assure us of thy love,
stand by us in the difficult hour, take us into thine own Care, cause thy
Angels to attend us, to convey our Souls as soon as they are divided from our
Bodies, into Abraham's Bosom, into the Paradise of our God. And Lord we beg
that thou will be with us, with thy extraordinary Presence, helping us to trust
in thee, doing for us beyond what our narrow Hearts are able to ask or think.
All which we beg for the sake of thy Son Jesus Christ, in whom, O Lord this
little time do thou give us Hearts to give thee all Glory, Honor and praise,
now and for evermore Amen. Sweet Jesus Amen;


HONE's Prayer.
GLorious Lord God, ^hou art the God of the whole Creation* and the God that
created the Heavens and the Earth in six days; by thy power we stand here
before thee: Lord help us to be looking up unto Jesus Christ, who is exalted to
be a Prince and a Savior to give Repentance to Israel, and Remission of sins:
Now Lord; for thy mercies sake we would be helped to say, That Power that r^d
up Christ from the dead, that is able to raise up our poor Souls before thee
from Death to Life. O Lo^d for thy mercies sake wash all our Souls in the Blood
of Jesus Christ, which speaks better things than that of Ab^ and Lord, for
thy mercies sake pardon a^ our sins, from our first, our Original sins, of
Sabbath-breaking and our sins of Transgression, and the sin for which we are
condemned; O Lord pardon it, and let us not, go out of the World with one sin
hid in our Souls. For thy mercies sake pardon all our sins; Lord do thou
preserve this Nation, and put it into the heart of the King to be merciful,
and to rule in truth and Righteousness. And for thy mercies sake, rule the
Affairs of this Nation, and help to (...) and govern all things for the
government of our Souls and our Spirits, for thy mercies sake, and help us that
with joy we may be received into Glory, into the eternal Habitations: for
Christ is sent into the world to that purpose to save sinners, of whom we are
chief, And, Lord, for thy mercies sake, let me have a true belief in Jesus
Christ aright, to be Looking up to him for Life and for Salvation. Oh that we
might Perish if we perish, and be found doing thy will to the utmost of out
power, Lord accept of us, and help us and be with us this little time we shall
be in this world, all which we beg for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ to
whom be Glory with the Kingdom both now and for evermore.


Mr. ROUS's Prayer
O Lord our God, who art nearer to each and every one of us, than we are to our
selves: It is not all the Confessions to men in the world; were it confessed by
the Tongues of Angels, those glorious Spirits above, that can avail any thing
with the great God, against whom we have sinned, or that can proccure pardon
for the least transgression which dele^es eternal wrath. And therefore for the
si^s that (...) have been guilty of, either against the first or the ^cond
Table, either against God as our Creator, C^ as our Redeemer, or the Holy and
blessed Spirit a^ our Sanctifier, the sins that we have committed ag^ thy Holy
Church and that says that I hope we die in the belief of, the sins that we
have been guilty of against our Neighbors, upon one account and another, the
sins that we have been guilty of against our ^vernours and Rulers, to whom thou
have obliged us under manifold obligations both as men (...) Christians, the
sins that we have been guilty of in our several places, Relations and
Capacities whatsoev^ whatever have been their Circumstances and their
Aggravations, the least whereof deserves everla^ death, without the Merits of
Jesus; for all those greater or lesser sins, whether that original sin (...)
brought into the world with us, that source and fountain, and foundations of
all other sins, those act^ sins and transgressions against any of those that
thou have set over us, or those that have been equal w^ us those relation sins,
as Husband and wife, as Master and servant, in every relation and Capacity; I
(...) forgive them, and wash them away in the blood of the Lamb of God, that
stands at the right ^and of (...) Majesty on high. And because we have no
worthiness of our own to recommend us to thee, therefore we (...) thee for thy
Sons sake to fetch arguments from thy self. Our righteousness is as filthy rags
and the (...) of us are as a mens^rous cloth. Fetch Arguments from the riches
of thy Grace, from the goodness of (...) nature, from the multitude of thy
mercies, from the blood of thy Son, from that blessed; eternal in ^cession that
we hope he is making for us, and for all that belong to the election of Grace,
and shall (...) brought) to glory, Remember thy Churches, (...) the fulfiling
of thy promises, the accomplishing (...) thy prophe^es through the world the
downfall of the man of sin, and the destruction of all thy (...) Churches
implacable enemies, Lord hasten the day of the calling the Jews, and the
fullness of the G^tiles: put an end to Wars and Rumors of Wars let the desire
of all Nations come. Dwell in the three Nations, be a wall of fir^ round about
them; Prevent any kind of Insurrection at home, all ^ner of Invasion from
abroad; let those that tarry behind enjoy peace and truth, and righteousness d^
in and reign in the heart of the King, Lord bless and prosper him in his
person, give him a l^g, a ^perous, and an happy Reign. Good Father we pray
thee, let him live here with a flourishing Crown (...) on his head till thou in
thy due time shall receive him to an eternal, Crown hereafter. Bless him in
(...) Royal Family and Relations in his Royal Brother. Bless him in his Royal
Confort make the Ki^ (...) Nursing Father, and the Queen a Nursing Mother
Con^ound all hatred, malice and envy all evil speak^ every thing that is
contrary to sound Doctrine, and give thy people that live, under him to ^ew
that ^^fulness and respect as becomes Christians and as becomes Loyal Subjects,
Bless the Clergy, by wha^ever Names or Titles distinguished, make them sound in
their Doctrine, and make them useful and (...) blameable in their Lives and
conversations, help them to mind the Souls committed to their Cha^ and help
them to do their duty that they may be able to say behold here are we and the
Children wh^ thou have given us; now Lord bless all the Nation from the highest
to the lowest from the Prince to (...) ^easant of all sorts ranks and degrees.
Give Loyalty toward our dread Sovereign, who is a merciful a^ gracious Prince,
whom thou ha^ set as thy Vicegerent to Reign over us who can do nothing but wh^
is just and equal before thee to whom he must give an account of all his
Transactions even to thee (...) King of Kings. And Lord grant peace and love
and unity one among another and the practical obser^tion of thy holy day, and
those duties that relate to God and man, Grant that those that follow after
(...) may take particular Example by us. We must needs acknowledge and smite
upon our thighs, that we (...) Justice are brought hither, that we having
nothing to do but to condemn our selves, and justify the j^ice of all the
Land, and to pray God to bless his Majesty to Reign in these Nations and those
that (...) succeed him upon the Throne. All which we beg upon the account of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who (...) dead and behold he lives, to whom with thy
self and eternal Spirit, we desire to ascribe, as is due. (...) honor praise
and glory everlasting. Amen.


There was these Lives more in the Paper delivered by Captain Walcot, than what
you have before seen.
AS to Ireland, I am very inclinable to believe, could I have charged anybody
there with being Engag^ in the matter for which I suffer, I might have had my
life but by the blessing of God, I will Charge (...) man wrongfully, no not to
save my life and these being some of the last words I am to speak, I do aver^
knew not an English man, or Protestant in Ireland any way engaged in it.
Besides I was told they the were mostly concerned, did not value Ireland, and
said it must of course follow England. Something I hea^ of one Gentleman in the
North, and whether it be true or false I will not determine.

FINIS.

