Infant Baptism ASSERTED and VINDICATED By SCRIPTURE And ANTIQUITY: IN ANSWER
To a Treatise of Baptism lately published by Mr. HENRY DANVERS: Together with a
full Detection of his Misrepresentations of diverse Councils and Authors, both
Ancient and Modern. WITH A Just Censure of his Essay to Palliate the horrid
Actings of the Anabaptists in Germany. AS ALSO A Persuasive to Unity among all
Christians, though of Different Judgments about Baptism.

By OBED WILLS, M. A.

Vt Christus Infantes ad se venire jussit, ita nec Apostoli eos excluserunt a
Baptismo, and quidem dum Baptismus Circumcicisioni aequiparat, Paul. Col. 2.
aperte indicat, etiam Infantes per Baptismum Ecclesiae Dei esse inserendos, etc.

Magdib. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. p. 354. LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at
the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1674.

THE PREFACE.
THere is a New Treatise come forth concerning Baptism; the Design whereof is
to prove the Baptism of Believers, and to disprove that of Infants. There is
great Cracking about it, and some cry it up for a Nonesuch; that it is
unanswerable, and as I hear the Author himself, Ixion-like, falls in love with
his own shadow, and being Philautia nimis inflatus, puffed up with the
excellency of his performance, glories much, and pretends that he has not only
proselyted many of the Vulgar sort, but some also of the Ministry. And it is
very certain, that at its first appearance last Summer, diverse persons were
Dipped in these parts, and as I have been informed, 7 or 8 in a day in the City
of Bristol; and in all likelihood we may hear of many more this Summer: for
those who are inclinable to the Way, are now grown so politic as not to
profess their Faith till warm Weather. This I do assure the Reader, that the
Book (as to any thing material in it) has been many times answered before ever
it came forth, and that is the reason belike we have heard of no Reply since it
has seen the light, which is now about twelve Months. All the Mediums he uses
to maintain his Opinion, are such trite and out-worn things, that they have
been in effect trampled upon, and confuted again and again. Nevertheless such
is the Clamorousness of some men, that they affect to have the last word, when
in modesty they ought to be silent, and consider, that it is their duty to
unlearn a darling Error, and no dishonor to strike sail to convincing Reason.
Great Endeavors have been used to undeceive the Antipaedobaptists; and it is
the unhappiness of many Godly and Learned Divines, instead of meeting with
answerable success, to have their Pains contemned, and their Persons loaded
with Aspersions. The Author of the Treatise I am to examine, has only affixt
H. D. to the Title Page, that is, as appears by a Second Edition lately come
forth. Henry Danvers; although in regard of the principal Materials, the Book
has more reason to pretend to J. T. that is, John Tombs, for its Author. For
although H D. has for some years lived a solitary contemplative Life, and has
had opportunity for study, yet owneth he not so much Scholarship (if they say
true that know him) as to compose such a Piece; nor is he so well acquainted
with Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, had not most of it been prepared to his
hand. Indeed I find he is somewhat versed in the Magdiburgensian History,
though he has made very ill use of it; But for the Argumentative part,
especially the Opposition made against Infant Baptism, both the Method and
Matter of his Treatise declares where he has been fishing; for I find very
little in it, besides what is borrowed from Mr. Tombs his Exercitation and
Examen, long since answered by M. Marshal, Dr. Homes, Mr. Gerce, Mr. Blake, Mr.
Baxter. But forasmuch as the Contest has taken a Nap for about 20 years, it
was thought fit to give it one lusty jog more, and awaken it again. And in
regard those Polemical Discourses are rarely found in Vulgar hands, but are
thrown aside into Corners, and lie solitary, as neglected things, in Studies,
and Booksellers Shops; the Author, and his Coniederates (out of their dear love
to their Darling Opinion) thought meet to make some good improvement of the
late Liberty granted by his Majesty's gracious Declaration, and to take up the
Gantlet again, and fall to the old Trade of Wrangling. For some men are of a
restless Spirit, and if their Hands be tied up from fighting, they will do it
with their Tongues and Pens. The Preface is made up of Invectives against the
Assertors of Infant Baptism, but mostly against Mr. Baxter, by reason of some
Passages of his in a late Book called The Christian Directory, against which he
seems to have a very great zeal, but I fear his envy against his Person does
exceed it. For do but compare the Preface, with the Epilogue of our Authors
Treatise,, and you will find he seems to entertain a better opinion of John of
Leyden, then of him. I understand Mr. Baxter will speedily write something for
his own Vindication, and I long to see it, that so nothing that he has said in
his Christian Directory may prove a Stumbling Block to the Weak, and more
confirm the Antipaedobaptists in their Error. The truth is, those people are
very sensible how much he has wounded their Cause, and are glad with an
occasion of wounding his Reputation. But I profess, I could not but smile, to
observe how he seems to bewail the Indiscretion of Mr. Baxter, and rebukes him
for Printing his Judgment in some Points that refer to Baptism, and other
things, at such an unseasonable time; as if he had hit upon the (...), or the
fittest opportunity to declaim against Infant Baptism. But does he take this to
be a fit time of the day (to use his own Phrase) to widen Differences, and set
us at farther distances, when we are almost sinking under fears and daily
expectations of troubles? Is it a fit season for us to be wrangling, when Gods
Rod is shaking over all our Heads? Must he at such a time enter upon the old
Obfolete Controversy, and inveigh against Childrens Baptism, which evermore
has occasioned heart-burnings and fruitless contendings, especially when it is
disputed against with a lofty, bitter and disdainful Spirit, of which we
perceive too much in this last attempt. Ah! what a restless Genius is there
attending some Opinions, and how careless of the Churches Peace are the
Abettors of them? What the Author himself speaks, page 308. from Clopenburg's
Epistle, of the Anabaptists, heretofore in Germany is too true of some of those
in England, viz. That they suffer not the pure Reformed Churches to be edified
without daily conflicts. For not only heretofore in times of Liberty, but even
now under restraint, some hot-spirited Persons, publish their Tenants, with
such a rigid and condemning Spirit, that it proves the greatest hinderance of
Union and Conjunction amongst us in this Nation. The Opinion of
Antipaedobaptism, having been (as Mr. Sydenham observes) always Ominous, and of
a wondrous strange influence to destroy Unity, and Peace amongst Christians,
accompanied also with the most Retinue of Errors, since the first Embrio of it
was brought forth; Whether by a secret Judgment of God, or from the natural
and secret Connection with other Principles of Darkness, I will not, says he,
determine: Only God has showed some black Characters of it in every Nation
where it has prevailed; though we cannot but say many Saints are under the
power of it. Yea, and I do also farther attest, that there are some very worthy
Persons, and eminent Christians of that way, whom I exceedingly honor for
their Gifts and Graces, Moderation and sweetness of Spirit, and Liberality
toward all Christians; such as these I prize as much as any Christians in
England that are Paedobaptists, and could as willingly embrace them and
entertain Christian Fellowship with them, as with any that are of my own
Judgment in the point of Baptism. We ought to put a difference between humble
and heady Men, between factious Persons that affect Singularity, and decline
Communion with us, because we differ from them in some Circumstances about an
External Administration; and such as disown Infant Baptism out of simple
Persuasion, looking on it as a Corruption, and without Scripture ground, Mr.
Gerce Vind. Paedobaptismi.
and so cannot submit unto it, lest thereby they defile their Consciences (as
they conceive) with Will Worship: when notwithstanding, if other Christians be
of another mind, they can own them as Brethren, and not divide in regard of
Christian Affection and Communion. Some such there are, though few: and such a
frame of spirit was there in that Man of God (Mr. Jessey) as may be seen in his
Book entitled A Storehouse of Provision in sundry Cases of Conscience. He, to
my knowledge, was an Antipaedobaptist of long standing, as holy, I conceive, as
any of that Judgment, of good Learning, and of a very tender Conscience, and
of so healing and uniting a Spirit, that he esteemed it his Duty (and pressed
others to it) to keep up Christian Communion with those that feared God though
they differed about Baptism: We have his Arguments for the same published in
Print, and grounded upon Romans 14.1. which are so clear, and have in them such
strength of Evidence, that I never yet could hear them answered, nor do ever
expect it. I wish there were more such Antipaedobaptis as he, and have good
ground to believe many of them would come off from their Rigidness (were they
not afraid of offending their weak Brethren, and fettered with some engagements
at first entrance into their Churches) and would readily afford us the right
hand of Felloship. I know what a dangerous thing it is to be (...), an accuser
of the Brethren, and whence that Spirit comes, and can appeal to Heaven that I
now appear in the defense of what I conceive to be the Truth, without a
malevolent mind against any of our Dissenters. I have had an intimate and
friendly Correspondency with many Antipaedobaptists, both in this place where I
now inhabit and elsewhere; by reason of which some have thought I comported
with them in their Opinions: But this is a mistake: I own what I see of God in
them, and in all Professors of Religion whatsoever, and would have none to
engross Religion to themselves. And if I know my own heart, where ever I see
aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ, it attracts my Affection; God's People
being all alike equally dear to me, as they are his, and have a Conversation
becoming the Gospel. My Love is not confined to a Party, but extensive to all
Saints. And though some may count me an enemy for telling them the truth, and
withdraw their Affection, it is no more than I expect, and shall encourage my
self with what I long since learned from a Heathen, viz. Amicus Plato, amicus
Socrates; sed magis amica Veritas. I foresee how likely I am to purchase the
displeasure and dispraise of those that cannot endure to have their Opinion
spoken against; at which I hope to be no more dejected, than elated, if others
shall own my poor performance under the Notion of Approbation: well knowing
that all Polemical and Controversial Discourses carry a face like that of a
Picture, suitable to the situation and light the Beholders stand in, or are
guided by.

Nor do I so much as hope to reduce any of our Opposites: for the men of their
Way are inflexible, and seem to be as much assured the Truth is on their side,
as they are of the divine Athority of the Scriptures. I have heard of some
Quakers that have been turned, but could never yet hear of one of them that
changed his Opinion, unless he happened to fall into some worse Error.

And certainly it is a strange Presumption, no less Unchristian than
Prodigious, for men to assume a Prerogative of judging those to be in the dark
(as is the common humor of our Opposites) that differ from them in this point
of Baptism, when they cannot but confess, that in other things they are of more
clarified Intellectuals than themselves, and have a deeper inspection into
Scripture: And yet their Understandings at least must be condemned, whilst they
impose the scanty Measure of their own, as an unquestionable Standard, for
others to submit to. Forgetting in the mean while, that many who were of their
own Judgment, have (at the long run) espoused some gross Errors, and renounced
Water Baptism, as a low, contemptible Ceremony, and owned no other Baptism but
that of the Spirit. It was long since observed that some of the hottest Zealots
against Infant Baptism, have grown so cold, as to turn Seekers, and to deny the
lawful Administration of Ordinances. So common is it for men to run from one
Extreme to another.

But though I despair of gaining over to us any of those who are so rivetted in
their Opinions (considering withal how succesless politer Pens have been) yet
do I hope, by what shall follow, to put some Remora and stop to weak and
wavering Souls, that they be not overhasty in coming over to the Tents of our
Opposites: and to establish and confirm others that are at present satisfied in
the practice of Infant Baptism.

And because some of both Parties may take offense at what I have done; for as
Aristotle says, (...). It is difficult, if not impossible, to please all, I am
obliged to signify some Reasons amongst others that moved me to enter the
Lists of a public Dispute.

1. Because the Pompous Treatise of my Antagonist being put into my hand, by
one of his Judgment, and cried up for an incomparable and unanswerable Piece. I
read some part of it cursorily, and confess I was amuzed at the Multitude of
Quotations, from Fathers, Councils, ancient Doctors of the Church, Schoolmen,
besides Modern Writers; together with the Testimonies of Waldenses and Old
Britains; and all against Infant Baptism, and being shortly after upon some
occasion at Oxford, I took the opportunity to examine his Quotatitions in the
Public Library, and upon searching found it so fallacious a Piece, that I
thought my self bound in Conscience, for the honor of Truth, and Love to my
Country, to make discovery thereof, that the Credulity of illiterate and
well-meaning Persons might not be imposed upon by such Forgery.

2. I have been somewhat provoked to bear Testimomony to the Lawfulness of
Baptizing the Children of Believers, by the Audacity of one, that sometimes
preaches amongst the Antipedobaptists who told me to my Face, that I could say
nothing for Infant Baptism, to whom I said but little, as judging him incapable
of understanding the strength of an Argument.

3. After I had communicated a few Sheets to some Learned Men, they did album
calculum addere, and incired me to proceed.

4. Because no body else had published any thing to confront this daring
Champion; and I see no cause to repent of my Undertaking, unless it be that I
have not defended the Truth as it ought to be.

I was never before engaged in these Olympian Games, nor do I delight in such
Exercises, and do find by experience that these Polemical Contests are but
barren things, and cannot but much approve of the Saying of Zuarez, who (though
a Jesuit) professed he found more benefit in that time which he did every day
set apart for the examining the State of his Soul, than in all the Voluminous
Books of Controversies which he had written.

I would now advertise the Reader, that my Answer refers to Mr. Danvers his
First Book, it being in the Press before his 2d. Edition came to hand; in which
I find no Retracting or Rectifying Mistakes, but in stead thereof a numerous
Addition of more: some of which, I have taken notice of in the Recapitulation
of the Magdeburgensian History, concerning Infant Baptism, affixt to my Answer.

There are many egregious Faults I charge Mr. Danvers with, which are made good
in the Answer. For I quote the Chapter and Page of the Authors that he abuses;
that so those who are Scholars, if they please, may see whether I wrong him.
The Books are extant, and we have no Index Expurgatorius here in England to
relieve him.

1. He has much injured that famous History of the Magdiburgenses in very many
places, by misrepresenting what they say; as that they tell us that in the
first Century, the Apostles baptized Only the Aged, which is false; for he has
himself added the Word [Only] as is shown Capt. 7. Part. 1. page 2. of our
Answer. Then he says they tell us that the Custom of Dipping the whole Body
into water was changed into Sprinkling in the 3. Cent. See this page 113. and
cites the Magdeburgenses for it, Cent. 3. page 125, 126. where they say no such
thing, but the contrary, and gives Cyprian's Testimony for it (who is
calculated to live in the days of those that saw the Apostles) that Baptism is
valid whether it be by Immersion or Sprinkling Cent. 3. c. 4. and Chap. 7.
part. 1. page 8. of the Answer. Look the Examination of the Magdiburgensiam
History and there you have the rest of his Misrepresentations.

2. After the same manner has he served the Fathers both of the Greek and
Latino Churches; Quoting some Passages out of them as if they had been for
Believers Baptism, in opposition to that of Infants, when not one of them was
so, no not Tertullian or Nazianzen absolutely, but both for it in case of
danger of death; yea, the latter without respect to that. See Chap. 7. Part. 1.
page 13. of the Answer, and the 3. Century in the Recapitulation at the end of
the Answer.

There be two ways he takes to blind the Reader with respect to the Fathers.

1. By Traducing that which is spoken in reference to Pagans, and misapplying
of it against Infant Baptism: thus he serves Chrysostom and Austin, p. 76. of
his Treatise, whom he brings for his eminent Witnesses for Believers Baptism;
and then again the same men to be for Infant Baptism, page 121. of his
Treatise. See how this Contradiction is reconciled in our Answer to his 2d.
Chap. part. 2. About Infants Baptism. 2. By curtailing and leaving out part of
the Sentence, as page 65. where he cites these words of Bazil; Must the
faithful be sealed with Baptism? -- Faith must precede and go before. There Mr
Danvers stops whereas he should have gone on with what follows, Quid de
infantibus ais? -- number and illos baptizemus? Maxim -- These are the next Lines
to what we have above. -- What say you to Infants which know nor good nor evil,
must we baptize them? Yea, etc. See Chap. 7. part. 1. p. 13. of the Answer.

3. The Councils have no better measure from him; for he quotes those 3. the
Bracaren, that of Constantinople, (he writes it Constance) and that of Toletan.
All which, he produces for Believers Baptism in opposition to that of Infants,
p. 78. of his Treatise, and quotes the Magdiburgenses for it, Cent. 7. p. 146.
Whereas they give us to understand that they were for Infant Baptism, Chap. 7.
part. 1 page 29, 30. of our Answer. See this more fully in the Recapitulation
affixt to the Answer, under Century 7.

4. He brings in the Doctors of the Romish Church very ridiculously, as eminent
Witnesses for Believers baptism, that is, in opposition to Infant Baptism, or
else he says nothing; As for Instance, Haimo, Rabanus, an Abbot, Remigius a
Monk, Smarugdus, etc. See how little truth there is in this, Chap. 7. part. 1.
p. 33. of the Answer, and much more fully in the Recapitulation at the end of
the Answer, under Century 8, 9, 10. Here our Author has used his wonted
subtilty in quoting some passages out of these Popish Doctors for Believers
Baptism, meant by them only in respect of Pagans.

5. By the same Artifice are ignorant persons deluded with the sayings of the
Schoolmen, which were so great and stiff assertors of Infant Baptism, that they
ascribed too much to it. See how we have discovered the Authors Sophistry,
Chap. 7. part. 1. page 34. of our Answer: But more fully this is spoken to, in
the Recapitulation under the 12th Cent.

6. His great Witnesses against Infant Baptism, namely Waldenses, Novatians,
and Donatists, and Ancient Britains fail him.

1. For the Waldenses, he has brought 4 Confessions, as against it, when they
have not a word of that import, as any ordinary Reader may perceive. See page
282, 283. of his Treatise; and how fully we have made it appear by other
Confessions that they were expressly for it: See Chap. 7. part. 2. of the Answer.

2. Neither were the Novatians for it, though they denied Original Sin, and
were for Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics (though there were
few greater than themselves;) and therefore Novatus the Head of them was
condemned by 66. wishops, in the year 255. Fox, Act. Monum. vol. 1. So the
Magdiburgenses speak of his being condemned by a Council at Rome for his
Heresies, Cent. 3. c. 9. p. 193. They write of his Heresies, and among others,
that he did de Deo prophanissimam doctrinam subintroducere, introduce most
profane Doctrines concerning God; but not a word of his denying Infant
Baptism, Cent. 3. cap. 5. p. 99. De Haeress Novatiorum. Neither does Danaeus,
in Austin's Catalogue of Heresies, make mention of any such thing, Danaei
Opusc. p. 678.

Nor did the Donatists deny Infant Baptism, as appears from the Magdiburgs,
Cent. 4. cap. 5. p. 375. De Donatistarum haerefi; though they were for
Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics, yet there is not the least
hint of their being against Infant Baptism.

3. The Ancient Britains were not against it; and the Mistake of the Author is
grounded upon Fabian's paraphrastical Translation of Bid, as is shown in our
Examination of the History of the Britains.

7. He has manifest Contradictions to himself; first showing such persons to
be for Believers Baptism, and then afterward citing the same men for
Infant Baptism: thus we have him mentioning Bid Pro and Con p. 7. and p. 78.
of the first part of of his Treatise compared with p. 130. Thus he served
Austin and Chrysostom, as was noted before. And so he leaves them to clash, and
his Reader, in the dark; whereas the Distinction of Ecclesia Collecta and
Colligenda would reconcile all very well. In the same manner has he dealt with
many of our Modern Divines, as Calvin, Piscator, Perkins, Paraeus, etc. as we
have shown Chap. 1. part. 1. p. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. of the Answer.

8. Notorious Plagiarism; for I have noted him borrowing from Mr. Tombs his 2
Books, Exercitation and Examen in no less than 49 places, and all the while
concealing his Name, contrary to the Laws of Ingenuity. But that which is most
prodigious, and for which he deserves to carry away the Bell from all
Plagiaries, is (as we have noted, p. 154. of the 2. Part. of our Answer Chap.
2. beginning at his Exceptions against our Argument from Federal Holiness) that
for 43 pages together he has taken the Substance of it all out of Mr. Tombs
his Exercitation and Examen, excepting what he quotes from Dr. Owen and Dr.
Tailor. And I must acquaint thee, Reader, that he has served others in the
same manner, transcribing out of their Books very la6rgely, without taking the
least notice of their names: for I have met lately with a Terra incognita,
since part of my Answer was printed; one Book put out by William Allen called
Some Baptismal Abuses newly discovered, and the other by Henry Haggar, named
The Foundation of the Font: but I must spare him for the present, or my Preface
will be too large. I see if every Bird had his own Feathers, Mr. Danvers would
be left naked.

9. Shameful Oscitancy, such I think as the like was never known: We have it p.
209. of his Treatise, where he brings Calvin, upon Genesis 17.7. interpreting the
Seed to whom the Promise was made, to be the Spiritual, and not Carnal; when he
speaks no such word, but all along to the contrary; as, Clara est Pauli
doctrina de naturalibus Abrahae filiis -- St. Paul 's doctrine, Romans 11.16. is
evidently to be understood of the Natural sons of Abraham: and again; Nihil
certius est, quam Deus foedus suum pacisci cum filiis Abrahae, qui naturaliter
ex eo gignendi, Nothing is more sertain, than that God's Covenant was made with
the Natural Offspring of Abraham. And indeed the words which he fathers upon
Calvin, are Estius the Jesuite's, spoken against the Interpretation of Calvin
upon Genesis I have showed how Mr. Danvers came to be guilty of the mistake, page
196. of the 2d part of my Answer.

10. He does vilify and contemn all that stand in his way, Episcoparians,
Presbyterians and Independents, yea fearfully reproaching those who are
Antipaedobaptists that are come off from their former Rigidness, and for a
large Communion with all Believers as Believers. As appears by his dealing with
Mr. Bunion, Mr. Allen and Mr. Lamb in his Postscript.

Notwithstanding all these Piacula, and more that may be named, the Credulous
Party will believe nothing against the supposed Incomparable and most
Authentic Piece of Mr. Danvers: I must prepare for their Censures, and begin
to hear already the insultings of some of them over me, that I should dare
presume to encounter such a Goliath; they are many of them illiterate, and
incapable of examining the things written in the Latin Tongue, and it cannot be
expected they should believe me before such an Antesignanus. But since it
cannot be remedied, I shall leave them to their Credulity, to be edified by his
Melody. I know the Learned, upon search; will acquit me from Slander, and for
the rest I am of Austin's Mind, Non curo Ceusores, qui vel non intelligendo
reprehendunt, vel reprehendendo non intelligunt. Reader, I have only two things
more to advise thee of.

1. That having received some Sheets, I find the Printers Errata are many,
which I hope thou will (...) charity correct, some of which thou will find
taken notice of. I hope thou art not of Mr. Danvers ^is mind, who taking the
Printers Errata to be Mr. Baxter's, and not taking notice that Mr. Baxter
desired the Reader to correct them, reflects odium upon him, and makes this
ingenious Apology for himself being told of it, viz. That no man is bound by
any Law that he knows, to read and study Errata's; you have it ^n his 2d.
Edition, page 383. I shall therefore be beforehand with him; (for I hope he
will read my Preface if he makes a Reply) and do hereby signify that ^here is
a great Error page 7. of the first Chapter of my Answer, where the word [only]
is wanting; for it should be thus -- It can never be proved that this was the
Only manner of the Jews Baptizing. This by the way ^o prevent Carping. Likewise
the Sheets are not rightly paged, ocasioned by being Printed at two Houses.

2. That notwithstanding all the Flourishes Mr. Dan^ers makes, and the numerous
Quotations he has ^etched from the Magdiburgensian History, Chapt. 7. From the
first Century to the end of the 12th, there are but two Persons to be found
against Infant Baptism, Adrianus and Hincmarus; the latter appears to have
recanted, and was again restored to his Bishopric: and for the understanding
of Church History about infant baptism, I refer thee to the Recapitulation at
^^e end of the Answer, which contains some things ^^at were omitted in the
Answer, and I assure thee is ^^ithfully collected.

Farewell. O. W.
^vizes, June 20. 1674.
Mr. BAXTER'S EPISTLE.
Christian Reader,
THough thou art entertained with these Contoversies, which are unpleasing to
many good and peaceable men, it must be considered, 1. How far they are
Necessary; 2. And who makes them so. This kind of work is more costly and
bitter to peaceable Authors that are forced to it, than it is to the Readers.
And it is pity that the Ministers of Christ should, for 1500 years be taken up
so much with a work that is so unpleasant to almost all. It is unpleasant to
the Adversary, to have his Ignorance, Errors, Falsehoods and Injuries to the
Truth and Church, made known to his disgrace; and to have that proved an odious
Error which he takes to be a Beam from Heaven, and of a Divine Offspring, and
perhaps necessary to Salvation, or at least some excellent thing which the
Church cannot spare. It is unpleasant to the sober pious Writer, to think that
he must thus displease and exasperate his Brother, and all that are of the way
which he oppugneth: and that thereby he must provoke so many to esteem and
defame him as an enemy to the Truth. And it is not pleasant to think, what hard
study and labor it must cost us to procure this bitter fruit, when by
Ignorance, Sloth or treacherous Silence, we could have kept our peace, and such
men's Love. And it is unpleasant to the best of Readers, to find men's Minds thus
manifesting their dissensions, and to think of the Exasperations and wrath that
will ensue, and to see such Wars kept up among those who should be notified to
the World by an Eminency of Love: But it will be pleasant to those Hypocrites,
whose Religion consists in Opinions, Parties and Disputes, if they be of his
mind whose Works they read; and it will be bittersweet to those wise and pious
men that find it Necessary.

For Necessary it may be, and too often is: It Is hard keeping our own or the
Churches Peace, unless both Parties will consent: As much as in us lies, and
if it be possible, we must live peaceably with all men: But when it is not
possible, we must lament the want of what we are not able to obtain. For all
Christ's Ministers to stand by and see well-meaning ignorant people, called as
in God's name, to sin against him, and flattered or frightened from Truth, Duty
and Privileges, and to let such work go on to the danger of Souls, and
distracting of Christ's Churches without contradiction, will hardly consist
with our Ministerial Fidelity.

Therefore as unnecessary Wars, are the greatest complicate sins in the World,
and yet necessary Wars are the means of Peace; so it is in these Theological
Wars: And as the valiant Defenders of their Country in necessary Wars, have
right to the praises given them by all; so those that necessarily defend God's
Truth and his Churches Rights, deserve acceptance. Among whom I judge the
Reverend Author of this Treatise to be worthy of the Churches thanks, on
several accounts. It is no contemptible Privilege which he vindicateth. The
Interest of all Christians Children in the World, in the Covenant and Visible
Church of Christ, is a matter of greater moment, than most that acknowledge it
do duly lay to heart, much more than the unthankful Rejecters of it understand.
The Title given to the Pelagians was Ingrati, the Unthankful, because they
disputed against God's Grace, which they themselves did need as well as others:
Such Cicero thought those Philosophers that disputed against the Immortality of
Man's Soul: And Mr. Tombs was long ago angry with me, for giving that Title to
them that so vehemently dispute all Infants out of the visible Church and
Covenant. But let the Evidence of the Cause well considered inform us, and it
will be too sure, that Public Repentance would far better beseem such Writers
as Mr. Danvers, than stiff persisting in this unthankful Error.

I have written somewhat my self, upon Mr. Danvers vehement instigation, once
more on this Subject, partly in answer to Mr. Tombs and partly to himself. But
let not the notice of that hinder you from reading this Treatise: For I have
dealt with Mr. Danvers only on the account of his pretended Witnesses for a
thousand years after Christ, and his quarrels with my self; having neither
leisure, nor will, nor patience (all things considered) to meddle with his
Arguments (or the rest of his History) while I know how sufficiently they stand
confuted in my own and many other men's Writings long ago.) But this Reverend
Author has dealt with him more particularly, and answered his Arguments
satisfactorily, and searched into those and all the rest of his pretended
Antiquities, and not only done that which I have passed by, but the same also,
in a full Confutation.

And it is so sad a Case, that after all our dreadful Warnings, we should still
be haunted with this unquiet Spirit which has been exorcised or laid so often;
and that under all our other Trials, we should have the addition of these
vexatious dividing Wranglings, to turn men's hearts against each other, that we
owe the more thanks to such as the Author, for bringing so much water to quench
these flames: especially in a time when so many disaffected Persons are ready,
to impute to Presbyterians, Independents or any such other, that they desire to
defame, the Errors of all about them, whom they do not confute; yea too often
also those that they do confute; while some others betray the Cause by silence,
or silly unsatisfactory Arguings. Pardon (or choose) a man that offends all
Sects by plain dealing, for telling the World, That if the Anabaptists had been
no better confuted, than the Papists and the Silencers have confuted them, I
verily think that so great a part of the conscientious (though injudicious)
Vulgar would have followed them, as would have made work and trouble for us
all. Farewell.

At the door of Eternity, Rich. Baxter.
June 24. 1674.
CHAP. I. The Authors first Argument, That Believers Baptism is the only true
Baptism, drawn from Christ's positive Institution and Commission. Mat. 28.18,
19. Mark 16.16. Examined and Confuted.
THese are the prime Texts, upon which Antipaedobaptists lay the greatest
stress, as conceiving they have sure warrant from hence, for their practice,
and that from the same places Ours is condemnable. Out of this Armory do they
fetch their keenest Weapons and most triumphant Arguments; And indeed all that
they say besides is, vox and praeterea nihil, a great sound of words to little
purpose. This is the Palmarium argumentum, their victorious and unanswerable
Argument, as they imagine so; None are to be Babtized, but those who are first
taught, but Infants are not teachable, Ergo they ought not to be baptized; and
again, he that Believes and is Baptized, Infants cannot believe, therefore
must not be Baptized. We (say they) follow the Rule of Institution, you who are
Paedobaptists cross it, and cannot acquit our selves of Will Worship. And I
confess this is a plausible way of arguing and very taking with Vulgar
capacities, and I wonder, no more of weak understanding and tender consciences
are proselyted to their way. They have the advantage of us, to gain upon such.
Yet notwithstanding their great confidence, that they have both Scripture and
Reason on their side, I hope, to make it appear to those who are not overgrown
with Partiality and Prejudice that their Arguments weigh light in the Balance
of the Sanctuary. For as Mr. Sydenham observes the words of Christ in both
these places of Matthew and Mark, Sydenhams Christian sober and plain
Exercitation on Infant Baptism.
do not hold forth the proper Subjects of Baptism, or the form or manner of
baptizing, being delivered in general, and indefinite terms -- As all Nations,
every creature by transitive words, Teach them, Preach the Gospel. Wherefore if
these be the prime Institution of Baptising, from which they exclude Infants,
when Christ uses such universal and comprehensive expressions, we shall desire
(says he) but to deal with them, on their ground, and the same Text will serve
to prove our positions more demonstratively then theirs. But that we may the
better understand the import of both places, I shall a little explicate them by
way of Paraphrase, premising only this, that neither of them do contain the
first institution of Baptism, but only an enlargement of the Commission in
reference to the Gentiles, upon the Resurrection of Christ.

First for that in Matthew -- Go ye therefore and teach all Nations. Beza
observes that in the ancient Copies [therefore] is wanting and instead of it he
finds the particle [(...)] now, in one of most Ancient date, which Circumstance
of time is of great remark. For now the Commission of baptizing the Gentiles
was to be broken up, now Christ was risen, Circumcision, which was the old seal
of the Covenant of grace, under the former Administration, was broken and
abolished, and the Lord ordains a new one, viz. Baptism, to take place instead
thereof, under the Gospel-Administration [go now] Now I am risen, before which
time neither Gospel nor Baptism was to be offered them; For the command was, Go
not into the way of the Gentiles. [And teach all Nations] (...). Discipulos
facite, Disciple them as Antipedobaptists will have it, and we own it as the
right Translation of the word, for it is not (...), which properly signifies
Teach ye; and so the Participle, (...), is rightly rendered in the following
words added to the charge [Teaching them to observe] Let us now come to see
what improvement our opposits do make from hence to exclude the Infants of
believers out of Christ's Commission to be Baptized, and that the Baptism of
Believers is the only true Baptism. Their Argument in form runs thus, viz,
Ministers ought to follow their Commission: But to make Disciples before
Baptizing, is the Ministers Commission. Ergo.

To this we answer, That the Assumption is Ambiguous; for making Disciples may
be taken two ways.

First, For an immediate present making only; and so it is not Christ's
Commission, If you take it exclusively, as if none must be baptized but those
who immediately in their own persons are made Disciples.

Secondly, For a Mediate remote making also; and thus must the Commission be
understood. The meaning is, Baptize those whom you find to be in a State of
Disciples, whether presently by you, or formerly by some body else, whether
personally by themselves, or Seminally by and in their Parents. Let them be in
State of Disciples, and then, if not baptized before, baptize them. It is the
State of a Disciple, not the time when, nor manner how, which the Baptizer is
to look on. Ananias finding Saul in the State of a Disciple must baptize him,
though neither he, nor any Minister else before did make him so; however he
being a Disciple, though not made by man, must be baptized. Thus then take the
Assumption, as it ought to be taken, and we grant the Argument; for it
concludes not against Infant Baptism, for they are Disciples not of man's, but
Gods making, vouchsafing graciously in their believing Parents to accept them
also into his Covenant, and so into the State of Disciples, and consequently by
Christ's own Commission they are to be baptized.

That infants of Believers are Disciples is evident.

1. Because they were so under the old Testament-Administration, and why not
then under the new? The Proselytes in the Jewish Church coming in, brought
their Infants into the same capacity or state of Proselytes; therefore
believers coming in to be Disciples, bring in their children to the same state
too, or else the state of the Gospel is worse in regard of outward privileges
then the Law.

2. By conferring that of Mat. 10.42. with that of Mark 9.41. it appears, that
to belong to Christ, is in Christ's dialect the same with being a Disciple, but
Infants of Believers do belong to Christ.

3. To put all beyond doubt, we have an express word for it, Act. 15.10. Where
the Pharisees pressing that it was needful to Circumcise the Gentiles after the
manner of Moses, (that is, to be Proselyted by Circumcision) is called a
putting a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples. And since the manner of Moses
was to circumcise Proselytes, both Fathers and Children, and the pressing the
continuance thereof among all Gentiles Proselyted to Christianity, is termed
the putting a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples, the children as well as the
Fathers must be meant by the Disciples. There is no evasion of this, though I
find Mr. Tombs keeps a great stir about it; for as Mr. Sydenham argues, if
they say it was meant of the Fathers, and of the Doctrine of Circumcision, yet
they must grant the Yoke was on their Children as to the Act, and if the
Doctrine was so burdensome, much more the Practice, which the poor Infants are
under; And they are called Disciples indefinitely, either by themselves or with
their Parents; if any distinction be made, it must be in the manner of laying
on the Yoke, viz. on the Parents Doctrinally, on the Children actually, but
there can be no Restriction of the word Disciple from these, on whom that Yoke
was laid, as is expressed in that Chapter.

But it may farther be objected, The Commission it self shows what kind of
Disciples Christ means in these words [Teaching them to observe] so as Infants
are not concerned as Disciples in it, being in no capacity to be taught or to
observe. But let it be withal considered, That Christ adds those words to his
charge in regard of the condition of the persons, to whom he was sending his
Apostles, viz. to Nations, All Nations, that is, the Gentiles who were Aliens;
All Nations here, being put in immediate Opposition to that one Nation of the
Jews. They were sent to them that were not in a State of Disciples, and
therefore they were to be made so, by present actual teaching. As the Nation of
the Jews and the Proselytes that came into them were first taught and then
Circumcised, but their children were circumcised before they were taught. So
then in this commission we must distinguish the substance from variable
circumstances. The substance is to baptize Disciples, but whether by Precedent,
Teaching, or not, depends on variable circumstances of the State of the
Persons, to whom Christ's Ministers are sent, be they such as the Apostles were
then sent to, they must be Discipuli facti, made Disciples by Preaching, and
then be Baptized: But be they the seed of Disciples, they are Discipuli nati,
born Disciples by the Relation of the covenant, and so may have the seal set on
them, without any preceding teaching.

4. Lastly, not to insist upon that, that Infants are Christ's Disciples,
because all Nations must be Discipled, and Infants are included in those
Nations; we conceive we have no obscure ground for the Baptizing the Children
of Believers, because as Mr. Ainsworth on Genesis 17. Mr. Tombs says in his
Examen, page 89. That it is well known, Baptism was in use among the Jews in
the initiating Proselytes for many years together, with Circumcision; and
quotes Seldom and Ainsworth for it.
and Mr. Godwyn in his Moses and Aaron, lib. 1. cap. 3. page 10. do inform us,
Baptism was in use as a kind of Initiation among the Jews, though it was not a
Sacrament till Christ his Institution, and therefore this Rite seemed no
strange thing unto them, as appears by their coming to John, questioning not
so much his Baptism as his Authority, by what authority he Baptized, John 1.
25. For (as the Learned Dr. Hammond observes) the Institutions of Christ (who
came first Messiah to that people, was born of that Nation, lived regularly
under their law, and observed their customs) were by him drawn from their
former practices in the old Testament, and so were lightly changed and
accomodated to his own purposes; he instanceth in diverse things, and at length
comes to this of Baptism, or Washing; a known right for initiating the Jews
and Proselytes into the Covenant of the Lord. For he does abundantly show out
of the Talmud and Rabbis, that the way of entering into the Covenant, was by
Circumcision and Baptism: so says Mr. Godwyn also in the place before
mentioned. And as the Natural Jews were thus entered, so were the Proselytes,
and as the Proselytes of age, so also were their Infant-Children Baptized. So
the Gemara Babyl. tit, Chetub. c. 1. They baptize the little, or young
stranger, or Proselyte, as the Hebrew has it: And Maimonides in tit. Isuri
bia. c. 13. They Baptize the Infant or little Stranger, upon the knowledge of
the house of judgment. i.e. on their desire in behalf of their Children. From
all which it appears that the Jewish Ceremony of Baptizing, was accomodated by
Christ to the Right of our initiation of the Profession of Christ; whereof
(says he) we have as little reason to doubt, as that a Picture was taken from
that Face, which it resembles to the life. And from hence we have (as he
conceives, and that very rationally) a clear foundation for our practice,
namely, to baptize, not only those who make a profession of their Faith in
Christ, but likewise their Children with them. And though some men of late
years have denied the warrantableness thereof, and darkened the truth by their
arguings against it; yet one may well suppose it was clear and obvious enough
to the Apostles (from the knowledge they had of the former administration,
which took-in the Children with the Parents into Covenant) for if it had not
been Christ's mind, believers Children should be sealed with Baptism under the
new administration, he would certainly have given some intimation thereof, and
given his Apostles some such caution as this (when he sent them to Disciple all
Nations, and Baptize them) See that you do not baptize Children. Lastly, we may
from hence also gain light, that the Essence of Baptism does not lie in being
immerst or plunged under water, for it can never be proved that this was the
manner of the Jews Baptizing persons or things. I shall shut up this with a
passage of the Learned and Godly Bucer, upon these words, Sane dum non habent
locum quo praecipitur tantum doctos baptizari nihil, roboris suae sententia
hinc adferent; etenim nos docemus antequam baptizemus. Ne quid vel his, vel
iospiam alibi Scripturarum habetur neminem baptizari debere, nisi ille
Doctrinam Christi per se quoque perceperit. Bucer in locum.
Go teach all Nations Baptizing them. Since the Anabaptists (says he) have no
place of Scripture that commands us to Baptize none but those that are taught,
they cannot strengthen their opinion from this Text: For we our selves do teach
[i.e. Adult-Aliens] before we do baptize, neither can we from hence or any
other Scripture prove, that no one ought to be Baptized, unless he shall
understand or learn the Doctrine or Christ.

The Evangelist Mark varies the words of the Commission thus; Go ye into all
the World and Preach the Gospel to every Creature: The one has it Nations, the
other World, and the terms are equipollent, signifying the same, Romans 11.15.
But what must they do in all the World? preach the Gospel, i.e. publish abroad
to all without exception, the freeness and fullness of Gods rich Grace in the
New Covenant, even that same Gospel that was preached long before to Abraham,
Gal. 3.8. And this blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles, ver. 14. And
this is to be Preached, (...), to every Creature, i.e. with a distinction to
every humane creature, which the opposers of Infant Baptism may do well to
consider, since they stand so rigidly upon the Syllabical Letters of every word
in the Commission, so as they will not allow us liberty to draw out the sense
of some places that relate to Infant Baptism, from the Letter, by rational
deduction and consequence, and according to the Harmony of Scripture, but we
must superstitiously adhere to the very Syllables of the Text, whereas
whatsoever appears truth, from the Analogy of Faith, or by just consequence is
as practicable and obliging, as if it were written with a Sunbeam, in so many
Capital Letters. It would be a senseless undertaking indeed to Preach the
Gospel to every individual creature in the World; and therefore it is to the
understood restrictively of mankind, poor lost man for whom Christ dyed.
Lastly, the Connection too, he, he that believes and is Baptized, shall be
saved; has some difficulty in it, and the sense is not so obvious to every
capacity: for if it had, many of those controversies between us and the Papists
had never been, as, Whether Baptism be of absolute necessity to salvation;
which Protestants deny, and many Papists affirm. And let the Antipaedobaptists
well consider that this Evangelist does as closely conjoyn believing and being
Baptized, to Salvation as the other does, teaching and being baptized; and if
we must so exactly stand upon the Order of words to prove the Institution. We
may (says Sydenham) argue from Mark, as well as they from Matthew, as none
must be baptized but they who are taught, so none but those who believe and are
Baptized shall be saved; and consequently our Children cannot be saved, because
they cannot believe. The same condition being required to precede Baptism, that
is required to precede Salvation. You see whether the Argument may be carried,
and what little ground of comfort such doctrine affords in the death of our
children. To conclude then, whereas they argue from this place of Mark, we must
believe and be baptized, but Infants cannot believe, therefore may not be
Baptized; will it not as directly follow, that since they cannot believe, they
must be damned; let them frame an answer to the one, and then they have
answered both; for look (says Mr. Marshall) by what distinction they will
maintain the Salvation of Infants against this Argument, by the same will I
more clearly justify the Baptism of Infants against this Argument.

Having thus cleared the Texts from the false glosses, Antipaedobaptists put
upon them, we shall next examine the passages out of Authors, which my
Antagonist quotes for his opinion.

The first he brings is Mr. Baxter, who having so notably wounded their cause
in his plain Scripture proof, for Infant Church Membership and Baptism, is
become the man of their indignation; and Indeed I fear the Author, with whom I
have to do, is possessed with a malevolent spirit against that Learned and Godly
Divine, and is glad of any occasion to wound his reputation, as appears by his
dealing with him in his Preface, and diverse other places in the Treatise. Mr.
Baxter (says he) does fully acknowledge in his Book called, the second
Disputation of Right to Sacraments, page 149, 150. Where he says, This
(speaking of the Commission of Christ to his Disciples) is not like some
occasional mentioning of Baptism; but it is the very Commission it self of
Christ to his Disciples, and purposely expresses their several works in their
several places and orders. Their first Task is to make Disciples, which are by
Mark called Believers. The second work is to baptize them, whereto is annexed
the promise of their Salvation. The third work is to teach them all other
things, which are after to be Learned in the School of Christ; to contemn this
order (says he) is to contemn all Rules of Order, for where can we expect to
find it, if not here. I profess my Conscience is fully satisfied, that the
Minister must expect a profession of Faith before Baptism.

To discover the Craft, and Sinister dealing of our Opponent, I must first
acquaint the Reader that Mr. Baxter disputing with Mr. Blake, who was for a
large Admission to the Sacraments, explains the Thesis in his second
disputation thus, viz. That Ministers must not Baptize the Children of those
that profess not saving faith, upon profession of any Faith that is short of
it; these are his very words, page 53. And after it, nine lines lower, that he
might not be mistaken, has this by way of caution, viz. That he would have the
Reader to understand that all along in the discourse of the whole Book, the
dispute is about the aged themselves, whether they may be baptized; so that it
is none of our work at this time (says he) to defend the Subjects [as to their
age] against the Anabaptists, but our present business is to enquire what that
faith is, that quallifieth persons to be just subjects of Baptism, or to be
such whose children may receive it upon the account of their faith or
profession; Disp. 2. p. 4. Moreover in his fourth Disputation he has this
passage; We take it for granted that the Right of Infants is upon the account
of their Parents Faith, therefore we manage this discourse with respect to the
Adult. P. 351. What could any man in the World say more, to prevent the Cavils
of unworthy persons? And certainly he had not said so much unless he had known
how our opposites lie at the Catch, and yet we see this would not do, for we
have found a man of so much dis-ingenuity as to traduce and pervert the sayings
of this worthy person to countenance his error. I have been the larger in
setting down Mr. Baxters words, that it may leave some impression on the
Readers Memory, when he finds any thing quoted out of Mr. Baxters Disputations,
about the Right to Sacraments, that so it might be as a Key to open his
meaning, in all those numerous passages the Author has pikt up out of that
Dispute, which indeed fills up many pages of his Book.

Next we have Mr. Calvin, introduced as speaking something in favor of their
opinion, Ergo ut se rite ad Baptismum offerant homines, peccatorum confessio ab
illis requiritur; alioqui, nihil quam inane esset ludicrum tota actio. Notandum
est de Adultis his verba fieri, Calv. in Mat. 3.6.

Verum quia docere prius jubet Christus, quam baptizare and tantum credentes ad
Baptismum vult recipi, videtur non rite administrari baptismus, nisi fides
praecesserit, etc.

Eos qui fide in Ecclesiam Dei ingressi sunt videmus, cum sua sobole censeri in
Christi membris, and in salutis haereditatem simul vocari. Nec modo seperatur
hoc modo Baptismus a fide and Doctrina, quia licet pueri Infantes nondum per
aetatem fidem babent, Deus tamen eorum parents compellans. etc.


whereas few ever wrote so smartly against them; it is from that same passage
of his, on Mat. 6. etc. Therefore that men may rightly offer themselves to
Baptism, Confession of sin is required, otherwise the whole action would be
but Sport.

The words indeed are Mr. Calvin's, so that I confess my Antagonist speaks
truth, but he should have done well to have spoken the whole truth, For Mr.
Calvin also cauteously adds, -- It is to be Noted, that these words are spoken
of Adult persons. And that we may see his judgment, fully take notice of his
Paraphrase upon the 28. of Mat. 19. and that other Text, Mark 16.16. But
because (says he) Christ commands us to teach before he commands us to
Baptize, and he would have believers only admitted to Baptism; it seems Baptism
is not rightly administered, unless faith goes before. From this place (says
Calvin) the Anabaptists oppose Infant Baptism. To which he presently answers,
That those whom we see by a Profession of their Faith, to be admitted into the
Church, we are to look upon them (together with their offspring) as the
members of Christ, and to be jointly called to the inheritance of the Saints,
neither is Baptism hereby separated from Faith, and Teaching; because though
children have not yet faith by reason of their Age. Nevertheless God taking
their Parents into Covenant, they themselves are also to be embraced in the
same Covenant.

After Calvin, comes Piscator, to as little purpose, whose words on Mark 1.4.
are these; It is called the Baptism of Repentance, because John Preached
remission of sins to the penitent Believers. But why should this worthy Author
be thus curtailed, whenas he farther expresses himself thus, Baptismus nulli
adulto conferendus est, nisi prius ediderit confessionem peocatorum, i.e. We
must not Baptize any person that is grown up, unless he first make a Profession
of his Faith, etc. If we would know his mind more fully, we may see it in his
Comment upon the 28. of Mat. 19. It was (says he) the Duty of the Apostles to
Preach the Gospel all abroad throughout the World, to all Nations, Apostolorum
officium fuit Evangelium-praedicare passim in orb terrarum, etc. Vero^
pastorum illis suceedentium est Evangelium praedicare apud certam Ecclesiam a
quae peculiariter sunt vocati; and praterea Infantes qui in illa Ecclesia
noscuntur, per Baptismum Deo consecrare. Piscat. Observe. in Mat. 28. p. 746.
Edit. 2. Herbornae Nassoviorum

Porro ad Ecclesiam pertinent non solum adulti Credentes ac fidem profitentes,
sed etiam ipsorum liberi, ut patet ex verbis Apost. 1 Cor. ^. Quare dubium
videri non debet quin illi quoque (liberi inquam and Infantes fidelium)
baptizandi sint, etsi fidei non sunt capaces.


and by Baptism to incorporate them into the Church, who make Profession of
their Faith, etc. And it is the duty of all Pastors that succeed them, to
preach the Gospel to that particular Church, whereunto they are called, and
farthermore to consecrate to God by Baptism, those Infants which are born in
that Church; And then adds -- Not only Adult persons, that do believe and
profess their Faith, belong to the Church, but also their Children as appears
from the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. else were your Children unclean, but
now are they holy, where (says he) the Apostle calls their children holy that
were born, though but one of the Parents were a Believer, forasmuch as they
belong to Gods Covenant made with his Church, and by consequence they belong to
the Church; wherefore we need not doubt, but they also, (I say the Children or
Infants of Believers) are to be Baptized, although they are not capable of
Faith, even as the Infants of the Jews were circumcised, belonging likewise to
the Covenant and to the Church.

And as if all our eminent Divines had heedlesly spoken something in favor of
their way, he has the confidence to bring in more still. Mr. Perkins (says
he) in concurrence here with these words, Teaching all Nations, Baptizing them,
says, I explain the terms thus; Mark, first of all it is said, Teach them,
(1.) make them my Disciples by calling them to believe, and repent. Here we are
to consider the Order which God observes in making with men a Covenant in
Baptism. First of all he calls them by his word, and commands them to believe,
and to repent. Then in the second place, God makes his promise of mercy and
forgiveness. And thirdly be seals his promise by Baptism. They that know not,
nor consider this Order which God used in Covenanting with them in Baptism,
deal preposterously, over-slipping the Commandment of Repenting and Believing.

Who would not think by this, that the Renowned Perkins were of his side, a
down right Antipaedobaptist; whereas not a word of what he says is intended
against Infant Baptism, but only to show in what order Baptism is to be
Administered to Aliens and Pagans, as appears by what he says upon the same
Text. Mat. 28.29. Which is disingeniously concealed by the Author, Go teach all
Nations, Baptizing them, etc. In these words (says Mr. Perkins,) the Baptism
of Infants is prescribed, and the Apostles by virtue of this Commission
Baptized whole Families, Act. 16.15, 33. As knowing Gods former Administration
to his people, the Children were taken into Covenant with the Fathers, as the
Israelites, both Old and Young, were baptized into Moses in the Cloud, 1 Cor.
10.4. As the Nation of the Jews were first taught, and then they and their
Infants, being confederates, were circumcised; so says our Savior, Do you go
Teach and Disciple the Nations, and then Baptize them.

The last quoted in this Chapter is the famous Paraeus: and what says he? he
tells us (says the Author) in his Comment on Mat. 3.5. That the Order was,
That confession as a testimony of true repentance go first, Hoc enim damus
Anabaptistis in Ecclesiam fuscipiendos non esse nisi praevia confessione fidei
and paenitentiae, quem morem, and vetus servavit ecclesia, and nostrae hodie
observant si vel Judaeus, vel Turca Adultus, etc. Paraeus in Mat. 3.5.
and then Baptism for Remission of sins afterward. Very good, but is this all?
No certainly, for he presently adds, this we grant to the Anabaptists, that
persons are not to be taken into the Church, and be Baptized (speaking of
Aliens, or those that are without as the Apostle phraseth it,) unless a
Profession of Faith and Repentance has gone before; which custom (says he)
the Ancient Primitive Church kept, and ours at this day still observe, when a
Turk or a Jew that is grown, is to be initiated by Baptism. Thus Reader, I have
given thee a taste of the ingenuity of my Antagonist, and I leave thee to judge
of it.

CHAP. II. Containing his second Argument to prove the Baptism of Believers
the only true Baptism, and that is (if we will believe him) from the Apostles
Doctrine teaching the same.
Reply.

ALthough what we have before said to invalidate his main Argument drawn from
the Institution of Christ, be sufficient to overthrow whatsoever is brought in
the two following Chapters; yet we shall further add, that it is not to be
denied, that the Apostles assert Believers Baptism to be a true Baptism, but
that they teach us that it is the only true Baptism is utterly false, and we
have only the Authors word for it. The Texts cited out of Act. 2.37. Act. 8.36,
37. Act. 10.42. Act. 16.29. prove, that grown persons unbaptized ought to be
required to believe before their Baptism, which we grant; but to infer thence,
that the Children of Baptized Believers are not to be Baptized, is more then
these Texts (or any else that I know) can yield. We read of none de facto that
the Apostles Baptized, A non dicto ad non factum, non valet consequentia:
Because it is not expressed in so many words therefore it was not done, is not
Logical.
but Believers; therefore none but such, de jure ought to be Baptized, is a
sorry way of arguing. The words of Dr. Tailor in his Discourse of Baptism,
part 2. page 34. are very weighty, viz. A Negative argument for matters of fact
in Scripture, cannot conclude, etc. And therefore supposing that it be not
intimated that the Apostles did Baptize Infants, it follows not (says the Dr.)
that they did not: and if they did not, it does not follow that they might not,
or that the Church may not. The Scripture speaks nothing of the Baptism of the
Virgin Mary, and of many of the Apostles; therefore they were not baptized, is
a weak arguing. The words and deeds of Christ are infinite which are not
recorded, Joh. 20.30. and 21.25. Many things Christ did, that were not written;
and of the Acts of the Apostles we may suppose the same in their proportion;
and therefore what they did not, is no rule to us, unless they did it not,
because they were forbideen: So that it can be no good Argument to say, The
Apostles are not read to have Baptized Infants, therefore Infants are not to be
baptized; but thus, We do not find they are excluded from this Sacrament and
Ceremony of Christian Institution; therefore we may not presume to exclude them.

Now since all contradiction against Infant Baptism, depends wholly upon these
two grounds; The Negative Argument in matter of fact, and the pretenses, that
faith and repentance are required to Baptism; since the first is wholly
nothing and infirm, upon an infinite account; and the second may conclude that
Infants can no more be saved then be baptized, because faith is more necessary
to Salvation then to Baptism; it being said, he that believes not shall be
damned; and it is not said, he that believes not shall be excluded from
Baptism; it follows, that the Doctrine of those that refuse to Baptize their
Infants is upon both its legs weak and broken, and insufficient. Thus far the
Learned Doctor. To conclude this, whereas the Apostles Preached up faith and
Repentance before Baptism, it was requisite they should do so, according to
their Commission, having to do with Aliens grown up, (as not only the Gentiles,
but the Jews were; in reference to the new Administration;) for these being the
first subjects of Baptism, it was necessary they should make profession of
their faith before they were admitted to it, but not so in their Children to be
Baptized, no more then in Isaac and the Children of the Proselytes to be
Circumcised. Abraham believed first, and afterward was Circumcised; Genesis 17.24.
And why so? Because he was the first subject of that Ordinance, and therefore
could not be admitted to it, but by his own faith. But as for Isaac his Son, he
was Circumcised before believing, and so was it with the Proselytes and their
Children; when any Gentile was converted to the Jewish Faith, he had a personal
Right to be circumcised, and his Child likewise was Circumcised at eight days
old, as was the custom of the Jewish Church, by virtue of Gods Covenant,
giving it a parental Right.

The Author is very unhappy at Citations, for usually they serve not his
purpose. He acquaints us out of Bid, that men were instructed into the
knowledge of the Truth, then to be Baptized as Christ has taught, because
without Faith it is impossible to please God. Magdeburg. Cent. 8. page 220. But
this, Bid himself tells us was the method used amongst the Inhabitants of this
Island, when Paganish -- In initio nascentis Ecclesiae apud Britannos, Beda
lib. 2. Angl. Hist. cap. 14. When a Church first of all began to be planted
amongst the Britains; and he tells us it was at that time when Gregory sent
from Rome, Austin, and forty other Preachers, and afterward Paulinus, who
converted Ethelbert the Saxon King; but of this we shall speak more hereafter,
when we shall show how Bid himself was for Infant Baptism, notwithstanding
the Author so perverts his words.

His other Citation is Erasmus, who in his Paraphrase upon Mat. Observes (and
it is a great Observation indeed,) That the Apostles were commanded first to
teach, and then to baptize, etc.

Every Child that can read observes the same; Probabile est tingere Infantes
institutum fuisse ab Apostolis, etc.
but if you would know his judgment about Infant Baptism, you may read it in
his Ratio concionandi, lib. 4. where he conceives it probable, that the
Apostles ordained and practiced it.

And truly amongst other probable reasons this seems to be one, if it be not a
Demonstration; namely, because we do not read of any children of believing
Parents who were Baptized when they came to years of discretion. That they were
Baptized I presume (says Brinsley) our Adversaries will not deny; and if so,
Note, No Children of Believing Parents Baptized afterward to be found from
John the Baptist to John the Evangelist ending his Ministry, which was about
60. years. An Argument sufficient, if not to convince the Adversary that they
were Baptized in Infancy, yet to stop their mouths: Brinsley Doctrine and
Practice of Paedobaptisme, page 75.
let them show where, and when. For this let all the Sacred Register be
searched, from the time that John the Baptist began his Ministry, to the time
that John the Evangelist ended his, (which was about 60 years, during which
time thousands of Children of Believing Parents were grown up to maturity;) and
if in all that time they can but show any one instance of any child born of a
believing Parent, whose Baptism was deferred till he came to years of
discretion, and that then he was Baptized, we will then acknowledge there is
some strength in their Negative Allegation, viz. We read of no children
Baptized, therefore There were none.

CHAP. III. Containing his Argument, that Believers Baptism is the only true
Baptism, from the example of Primitive Saints.
Reply.

TO this there needs no more then what we have before said. Sydenhams Christian
Exercitation, page 7.
For as Mr. Sydenham says, all that they urge as to Examples of actual
Believers, being baptized all along the new Testament, especially the Acts,
(and that if thou believe thou may,) We can freely grant without any damage
to Infant Baptism: For,

1. We say as they, Professing Believers, grown men were first Baptized, and so
they ought to be who are to be the first subjects of the Administration of an
Ordinance; instancing as before in Abraham, etc. he was 99. years old when
circumcised, and he must be first Circumcised before he could convey a right to
his seed; now you may as well argue, Abraham was first circumcised, when so
old, therefore old persons are to be Circumcised and none else; as because
grown persons were Baptized, therefore not Infants, when they must be first
Baptized themselves; for children are Baptized by the promise first to them,
and in them to their seed.

Now, for as much as all the Examples brought by the Author out of Act. 8.12.
and 18.8. and 22.14. Speak of grown persons that were the first subjects of
Baptism, and Jews that were Aliens too, as well as the Gentiles, in regard of
the new Administration; it makes nothing against Infant Baptism, that being of
another circumstance, and the disagreeing of it from them, argues not the
unlawfulness of it, and as the same Author farther argues.

2. An Affirmative Position is not exclusive of subordinates; because Believers
were said to be Baptized; Ergo, not their Seed, is not true reasoning; for
their seed were comprehended with them in the same promise as before, and as we
shall more fully show hereafter.

Let us now see what his Quotations of Authors or Testimonies will amount unto
in this Chapter.

His first Testimony is from Luther, de Sacrament. Tom. 3. fol. 168. where he
says Luther has these words, viz. That in times past it was thus, that the
Sacrament of Baptism was Administered to none, except it were to those that
acknowledged and confessed their faith, etc. The which when I read, I was not
well assured, but that my Antagonist might be guilty of Forgery, knowing Luther
to be a most fierce and zealous opposer of their way, wherefore I did very
carefully examine the third Tome of Luther concerning Sacraments. I read the
168. page and read it again with a friend, and do profess that there is not one
syllable to the purpose, for which the Author brings him, no nor in any page
thereabout. The next that he Cites, is Bullinger, who (it ^^ns) has such words
as these in his house^^k: 48 Sermon. Baptism has no prescribed ^e by the Lord,
and therefore it is left to the ^ choice of the Faithful.

I have not the book by me to examine the ^^th of this, but however I am
certain there nothing in that passage against Infant Baptism, that this
testimony can do us no hurt; and we ^^w very well how large a book Bullinger
has (...), Contra Anabaptistas, against the Anabaptists. that I wonder the
Author should bring him (...) The Reader may observe how zealous an ^rtor of
Infant Baptism this Learned and ^^ly Divine was, by that one passage of his in
(...) Compendium of the Christian Religion. de ^cto Baptismo, ac de Infan^s
Baptizandis, lib. 8. page (...) viz. Quoniam autem Christianorum liberi, in
faedere Dei suni, and Christus etiam Infantium salvator est; cumque ad ipsos
pertineat ut, veteris ac novi Testamenti literae testentur-Baptismus (Faeperis
figillum) iis negari non debet.
That because the ^dren of Believers are in ^^nant with God, and (...) is their
Savior, and ^romise also belongs to (...) (as both the Old and (...) Testament
do wit^^^^ Baptism (which is the (...) of the Covenant) is not to be denied
them, (...) And after this, concludes, Hortor autem and ^^omnes pios ac vere
Christianos, ut studiose ^^terque sibi, a contentiosa and venenata Ana^^ arum
secta caveant, quae externa specie qui^^ and Hypocrisi splendet, revera autem
paestilen^^ est haeresis, atque plurimas baereses quibus o^^te aliquot secula
Ecclesia Chrsti turbata, and lacerata fuit, in se complectitur, illisque
plurimos homines inficit; I forbear to English it, out of respect to some which
I believe are Godly, and yet opposite to the Baptism of believers Children.

Lastly, The Author quotes a great deal out of Mr. Baxters Disputations with
Mr. Blake, about Right to the Sacraments; but we have before spoiled his
Market, by giving the Reader a Key out of the same Book, by which he may
understand him. So that all those Examples from John, the Samritans, the
Eunuch, Paul, Lydia the Jailer, Crispus, etc. does but mind us again of the
Authors dis-ingenuity in traducing that Worthy Divine.

CHAP. IV. Wherein he labors to prove Believers the only Subjects of Baptism,
from the Spiritual ends of the Ordinance; where he gives us an Induction of the
particular ends of Baptism, as follows.
1. THe first end of Baptism (says he) is, that the Baptized might have that
represented in a Sign or Figure, and Preached to his Eye, in the Ordinance,
which had been Preached to his Ear and Heart by the word and Spirit; respecting
the whole Mystery of the Gospel, and his duty and obligation therein. A Sign
being (as Paraeus observes) some outward thing appearing to the sense, through
which some inward thing is at the same time apprehended by the understanding.

Repl. I.

I deny this to be the primary end of Baptism. For not to insist upon that
which has given too great advantage to Antipaedobaptists, That the first end
of Baptism is to give a solemn entrance or admission into the Church, I
conceive it to be more true to affirm, That the first and chief end of Baptism
is to be the Initiatory sign or seal of Gods Covenant and favor to us in
Christ. For as Dr. Ames observes in his Bellarminus enervatus, Tom. 2. lib. 2.
unless persons are to be reputed Members of the Church, Nisi habendi tales
essent ( viz. fidelium infantes) pro membris ecclesiae, non deberent Baptizari:
Baptismus enim sua natura est sigillum insitionis jam factae in Christum, atque
adeo in Ecclesiam. Act. 10.47, 48.
they ought not to be Baptized; for Baptism in its own nature is the seal of
our being already ingrafted into Christ, and so consequently into the Church,
Acts 10.47, 48. He speaks concerning the Baptism of the Children of Believers,
and affirms they ought not to be Baptized but under this consideration, that
they are members of the Church, which we shall hereafter make good in its
proper place.

2. I acknowledge that to Adult persons Baptism reprefents (in a sign) that to
the eye which is Preached to the ear, respecting the Mysteries of the Gospel,
etc. Although I see not how it can be so in the way of Dipping, for how can
persons under water see, apprehend, or hear any thing during that time, when,
and whereby the Senses and Understandings of men are so confounded, that they
have no power to exercise their faith, or reason as they should; and since
plunging over head and ears puts people into such an amazing condition, not
without frights (especially in the more tender Sex) some being near throtled or
drowned, it is to be susspected to be none of Christ's appointments; for one
would think, that at such a juncture of time, especially, when an Ordinance is
celebrated, representing so many Gospel Mysteries, it is requisite the mind
should be in a more omposed posture then theirs are like to be in, whose heads
are under Water. We grant Baptism to be a sign of spiritual Mysteries
represented to the eye of such as are grown up, and rightly Baptized. As
Circumcision was a sign of the same import to Abraham, and it is of present and
immediate use to the aged, Romans 4. Abraham reeived the sign of Circumcision, as
the Seal of the righteousness of Faith, and we acknowledge also both the
Sacraments are of immediate and present use to the aged, and in this sense we
are to understand Paraeus, speaking of Sacramental Signs: but let it be
considered that the children of Abraham received the sign of Circumcision as
well as Abrabam, and yet they were void of understanding and judgment, and knew
no more of the spiritual Mysteries represented therein, then our Infants do in
the Ordinance of Baptism. Circumcision represented the same Mysteries that
Baptism does, and yet those poor Israelitish Babes that were Circumcised, knew
not that the cutting-off the foreskin, shadowed out the corruption of nature,
and the nature of Mortification, the blood shed in the act also held out the
mystery of Redemption by Christ's blood, of all which Baptism is as proper a
sign, when given to our Infants, as Circumcision was to theirs.

3. What though Infants are incapable of understanding Gospel Mysteries figured
in Baptism, as they were heretofore of the same shadowed forth in Circumcision,
yet their Baptism is a Sign of what God will do for the future (to as many of
them as belong to his Election,) if they shall arrive to years of discretion.

4. Though it be no Teaching sign at the present, yet if the Infant live, and
be instructed in the use and ends of his Baptism, it may prove as Operative
and Beneficial to him, as if it had been delayed till he came to full age.

Thus David, who though Circumcised in Infancy, yet strengthened his faith by
it, when he came to years of discretion, 1 Samuel 17.26.

5. Though Baptism be not for the present a Teaching sign to Infants,
neverthelses it is a distinguishing fign to distinguish those that are Within,
from those that are Without, as the Apostle phraseth it, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. And
it is even to Infants a sign of Gods Covenant as before is hinted (as
Circumcision was to Infants under the Law, and for this reason it is by a
Metonimy called by the name of the Covenant, and did distinguish the Jewish
Infants from Gentile ones, that were without the Covenant, or strangers to the
same, Genesis 17.20. Act. 7.8.

5. It is also an Engaging sign (as Circumcision was to the Jewish Infants,
though they undertood it not when they were the Subjects of that Ordinance)
whereby our children are obliged to the Profession of Christ, into whose name
they have been Baptized. I shall shut up this with those weighty words which I
find in Mr. Baxters Scripture proof for Infants Church Membership and Baptism.
page 112. Tell me (says he) what operation Circumcision had on all the Infants
of Church Members formerly. It was a sign of the Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, etc. and yet they had no more Faith, nor Knowledge of the Significancy,
than ours have now -- Christ himself was circumcised in Infancy, when by the
course of nature he was incapable of understanding it is Ends and Uses. Not
(says he) that I am now arguing for Baptism from Circumcision; but this fully
answers their Objection [that Infants should not be baptized, because they
are not capable of understanding its Use, and so being wrought on by it.] They
are as capable of Baptism, as they were of Circumcision, and its Ends: They
therefore that will yet say, It were better let it alone till they are more
capable, do but exalt their own reason against Scripture, and speak as men that
would teach God.

The Second End, hinted by the Author, is, That the party baptized might
thereby witness his Repentanee, Matthew. 3.11. called therefore the baptism of
Repentance, Mark. 1.

Repl. 1.

It cannot be proved from these places, that all those whom John Baptized, did
manifest their Repentance; and we do not find those Pharisees and Sadduces that
are branded with the name of Vipers, gave the least indications thereof, which
if they had the Baptists would not have spoken so harshly of them, and yet
these (for ought we can learn to the contrary from the Text,) were baptized.

2. Grotius in his Annotations upon the nineteenth of Matthew 14. Speaks well
to this, whose Words are these -- Neither ought that to be any hinderance to
the Baptism of Infants, Neque obstare debet quod non omnia quae itidem per
baptismum significari solent, in istam aetatem proprie congruerint, etc.
that all things which in like manner are fignified by Baptism cannot agree
properly to that Age; for Repentance also (which we know is signified by
Baptism, etc.) had no place at all in Christ, when John baptized him; who as
Tertullian notes, was not baptized as a Debtor to Repentance, because he never
sinned.

3. The End of Baptism nominated by the Author, is, to evidence present
Regeneration, whereof Baptism is a Sign, Titus 3.4. John 3.

Repl.

If this Argument were good, it would have overthrown the Circumcision of
Infants; for that also was a lively Sign, or Symbol of Regeneration, and it
might have been objected (according to our Antagonists phanfie,) Infants are
not regenerated, or show no signs thereof; and (Regeneration being the end of
Circumcision) therefore They ought not to be circumcised.

2. According to such arguing, none ought to be admitted to Baptism; for none
know by a judgment of certainty and infallibility, who are regenerated; for
Simon Magus made a great show, and yet was in the Gall of bitterness and no
doubt many come up out of the water as rotten hypocrites as they went in.

Thirdly, Mr. Tombs himself grants that Infants may be regenerated (as John
was in the Womb;) and faith, Pet. Martyr. loc. commun. cl. 4. c. 8. page 821,
823. Non excludimus eos (Infantes) ab eccle sia, Sed ut ejus parts
amplectimur, been Sperantes, quod ut sunt secundum carnem semen sanctorum, ita
etiam sint Electionis divinae participes and spiritum sanctum habent. Neque
audiendi sunt qui hac de re movent scrupulum, ac dicunt, quid si Minister
fallatur? quia idem cavillus esse poterit de adultis.
that if he knew such or such an Infant were regenerated, he would not scruple
to Baptize it, according to which arguing, he must also forbear Baptizing grown
persons upon profession, for he knows not that they are regenerated.

4. If the whole Species of Infants be excluded from Regeneration, then are all
Infants (so dying) certainly damned; for all Infants are born in Original sin,
and by nature unclean, and no unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, But I suppose our opposites dare not exclude all Infants from
Salvation: Well then, I conclude some Infants are elected, Regenerated, and in
Covenant with God, or else they are saved without Election, Regeneration,
Christ or Covenant; which is most absurd.

5. And whereas nothing can be said against us but this, de occultis non
judicat Ecclesia, the Church cannot judge of secret things, but is to act
according to appearance, and it is unknown whether such particular Infants are
regenerated, they cannot make any profession, and Baptism is to be given upon
that. I answer, we have as much reason if not more, to look upon the Infants of
Believers to be sanctified, then we have to esteem grown Christians to be such;
because our owning of these, as such depends upon their own testimony only in a
visible profession, which may be counterfeit. But such Infants are to be
accounted Saints upon a Divine Testimony, for we have the word for it, 1 Cor.
7.14. else were your children unclean, but now (...), they are Saints or holy,
it being the same word the Apostle uses in his Dedications and directions of
his Epistles to the Churches of Rome, Corinth, etc. where he styles them
Saints, and our Savior tells us that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, and
they are to be no other then Saints, and we are warranted by a Divine Testimony
to look upon them as such, which in their present Infant-state they cannot be
liable to any suspicion of defeating by Hypocrisy, as grown persons may.

The Author brings in Dr. Tailor (whom he looks upon as his dear friend, and he
has reason for it, having helped him to a great part of his Book;) The said Dr.
(says he) tells us very elegantly in his Lib. of Prophecy, page 242. That this
is truly to be Baptized, whatsoever is less then this, is but the Symbol only,
a mere Cere money, an opus operatum, a dead Letter, an empty shadow, an
Instrument without an Agent to manage, or force to actuate it.

Repl.

The Dr. wants not words, but this signifies nothing against Infant Baptism,
for all this may be as truly said of those that are Baptized when grown up,
that have not truth of grace. But because I observe with what Reverence this
Doctor is mentioned (as if all were Canonical which he says in their behalf,
and I find the Authors Book to swell with his Sesquipedalia verba,) I shall
(for prevention of delusion) inform the Reader with some news which may be
worth his hearing. Know therefore that the said Doctor put forth a Book about
20. years since, entitled, The Lyberty of Prophecy, in which he pleads for a
Toleration, as for others, so also for those that dissent from Infant Baptism.
There he personates an Anabaptist, and tells us he will draw up a Scheme or
Plea for them, and (says he) though they be deceived, yet they have so great
excuse of their side, that their Error is not impudent, lib. of Proph. p. 223.
and therefore may be tolerated. Then does he show what they may say for
themselves -- and concludes, Thus far the Anabaptists may argue, and they have
been encouraged in their Error, more by the accidental Advantages we have given
them by our weak arguings, then by any Truth of their cause, or excellency of
their wit. The Doctor therefore having a mind (it seems) to show the excellency
of his own wit, A worthy Testimony to be brought against Infant Baptism.
has said more for them then ever they could before or since say for
themselves: so that his strong arguings for them, has eventually proved a
greater encouragement to them then ever any of our weak arguings did before.
And yet after all the goodly Harrangue he makes in their behalf, he at last
shuts up with this, viz. The use I make of it (never dreaming what use H.D.
would make of it) is, That since there is no direct impiety in their opinion,
they are by all means Christian, fair, and humane, to be convinced and
instructed; but if they cannot be persuaded, they must be left to God, (and I
am of his mind.) And lastly adds, for his own part he believes Infant Baptism
to be a truth; but because some have thought the Doctor had spoke more in their
behalf, then he himself could well answer (as Conjurers sometimes raise spirits
they cannot lay,) he has since put forth an Excellent piece, styled, A
Consideration of the practice of the Church in Baptizing Infants of Believing
Parents, and the Practice justified: Printed by J. Elesher, for R. Royston, at
the Angel in Ivy-lane, M. DC. L. II.
in the Preface to which we have this account, That as for those Arguments
which in The Liberty of Prophesying, Sect. 18. are alleged against
Paedobaptisme; and in the opinion of some, do seem to stand in need of
answering, he had it once in thought to have answered them: but upon these
considerations he forbore.

1. Because those Arguments are not good in themselves, or to the question
precisely considered, but only by relation to the preceding Arguments there
brought for Paedobaptisme, they may seem good one against another, but those in
the Plea for the Anabaptists, have no strength but what is accidental (as he
conceives.)

2. Because in this Discourse (for Infant Baptism) he has really laid such
grounds and proved them, that upon their supposition, all those arguments in
the Liberty of Prophecy, and all other which he ever heard of, will fall of
themselves.

3. Because those Arguments to his sense are so weak, and so relying upon
failing and deceitful Principles, that he was loath to do them so much
reputation as to account them worthy the answering,

4. Because he has understood that his very worthy friend Dr. Hammond, Dr.
Hammonds Letter of Resolution to 6 Quaeties, Printed by J. Elesher for R.
Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane, 1653.
has in his Charity and Humility descended to answer that Collection. I have
transcribed all this, that the Reader may mind this Information when ever he
meets with any thing quoted out of Dr. Tailor, as he shall at least eighteen
times, and sometimes very largely whole pages, nay two pages and more at a time
by our Antagonist in his Treatise of Baptism. And truly a man would wonder at
his weakness, that since the Doctor in his Lib. of Proph. does profess himself
for Infant Baptism, notwithstanding all that he says against it, personating
an Anabaptist as he confesses, and since he does so villifie them for their
error and weakness, the Author should undervalue his cause so much as to make
use of such fallacious reasonings, as the Dr. himself calls them.

Next, we have him again at Mr. Baxter, wronging both him and his Reader in
what he cites out of his Disputation with Mr. Blake as formerly; Mr. Baxter
(says the Author) in his [10 Argument, page 117, 118. speaks to the same
purpose, viz. Christ has instituted no Baptism, but what is to be a sign of
present Regeneration, etc. Here he curtailes Mr. Baxters words on purpose to
blind the Reader, for Mr. Baxter adds [at least to men of age.]

The 4. End is signally to represent the Covenant and promise that the Believer
enters into hereby, viz. to dye to sin, and live to Christ, for which he cites
Mr. Perkins, Baxter, and Dr. Tailor; the two former we have spoken enough of,
in the first Chapter, where we find them most professedly for Infant Baptism,
and have condemned the Author for wresting their sense, they speaking of Adult
persons or Aliens, and not in opposition to the Baptism of Believers children,
and for that of Dr. Tailor, That Baptism is called the answer of a good
conscience toward God, 1 Pet, 3.21. which says he, can by no means be applied
to the Infant, since they are not capable thereof, till they know to refuse the
evil, and choose the good.

Repl. I.

To this Dr. Hammond answers, namely, This is as true of that Baptism which
belongs to children as to any other, only the duty of it is not required till
they come to years and ability to perform it, and then if they keep not a good
conscience it will be little available. And if this be of any force against
Baptizing Infants, it will be of the same force against Circumcising them,
since S. Paul, Romans 2.28. does as much invalidate the external part of
Circumcision, as St. Peter here does that of Baptism.

2. It Is therefore a mere Parologisme so to argue; for the Apostle Peter speaks
of the Adult that could give a reason of their faith, and not of Infants; for
the Apostle had then to deal with such, who upon their being Baptized were to
make profestion of a good Conscience. And this (as we shall hereafter show out
of the Magdeburgenses) was the practice of the Primitive Church in this Case;
for having to deal with Infidels, they first Catechized and Taught them the
first Elements and Principles of the Christian Religion, whereupon they were
called Catechumeni ( i.e. persons that were to be Catechized;) that being done,
and they brought to some competency of knowledge, they then openly declared and
testified their Repentance and Faith, before the Congregation where they were
to be baptized: And this they did by answering to some questions proposed by
the Minister. To this the Apostle seems to allude when he calls Baptism, (...),
i.e. The answer of a good Conscience toward God, so our Translation renders
it, though (as Beza notes upon the place) not so fully expressing the force of
the word, (...), which properly signifies an Interrogation or questioning; so
the vulgar Latin renders it, Interrogatio bonae conscientiae, The Interrogation
of a good Conscience. Beza translates it, Stipulatio bonae conscientiae, The
Stipulation of a good Conscience. Now Stipulation is properly an Answer to a
Question, when one being demanded concerning a thing, he returns Answer, and by
his answer engages himself to do somewhat that is required. Now this practice
of giving an account of ones faith, by way of answering to questions (as Beza
notes upon this place of Peter) was drawn from the Primitive use in after ages,
out of a (...), Beza Annotat. in 2. Pet. 3.21.
a perverse imitation, and applied to the Baptism of Infants, not so fitly (as
he conceives,) they being not able to answer for themselves.

3. Nevertheless though children cannot personally and actually answer for
themselves, I see no reason to the contrary why they may not be said to
Stipulate passively in and by their parents who accept the Covenant, not only
for themselves, but for their little ones. The people of Israel did by Gods
appointment enter their children into Covenant with God, as appears from Deuteronomy.
20.10, 11, 12. and doubtless the interest of Believing Parents in their
Children, Dr. Taylorr consideration of the Church in Baptizing Infants.
is as great now as then, and God as gracious to accept such covenanting under
the Gospel, as he was under the Law.

4. In Civil Contracts it is usual with Parents to Covenant and engage for and
in behalf of their Children, and they are obliged to the performance of the
Agreement when they come to years of discretion, though they did not give their
actual consent whilst in their Minority, when the Agreement was made. The very
law of Nature teaches Parents to Covenant for their Children, when it is for
their good. Mr. Eaxter.


5. Let Dr. Tailor in his latter discourse, wherein he justifies the practice
of Baptizing Infants of Believing Parents, confute what himself says in his
Liberty of Prophecy. He speaks his judgment concerning the point, page 53, 54.
thus. It were well says he, speaking of the engagement or promise made for
Infants in Baptism,) if men would rather humbly and modestly observe that
constitution of the Church, then like scorners deride it, in which they show
their own folly, as well as immodesty; for what undecency or incongruity is it,
that our Parents should stipulate for us when it is agreeable to the practice of
all the Laws and Transactions of the World, an effect of the Communion of
Saints, and of Christian Economy: For why may not Infants Stipulate as well as
we? All were included in the Stipulation made with Adam, he made a losing
bargain for himself, and we smarted for his folly: And if the faults of
Parents, and Kings and Relatives, do bring evil upon their Children, and
Subjects, and Correlatives, it is but equal that our children may have benefit
also by our Charity and Piety.

But concerning making of an agreement for them, we find that God was confident
concerning Abraham, that he would teach his Children. Further Joshua did
expressly undertake for his household, I and my house will serve the Lord. And
for children we may the better do it, because till they be of perfect choice,
no Government in the world is so great as that of Parents over their children,
in that which concerns the parts of this Question. And it is a rare art of the
Spirit to engage Parents to bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the
Lord; They are persons obliged by a superinduced bond, they are to give them
instructions, and holy Principles as they give them meat, etc.

The 5 End of Baptism, is to be a Sign of the Covenant of Gods part of washing
away a Believers sin, by the Blood of Christ, and to give spiritual Life and
Salvation, Act. 2.38, 39. Act. 22.16. 1 Pet. 3.21.

This also is as true of that Baptism which belongs to the Children of
Believers, as that which is given to Believers themselves. Repent and be
Baptized every one of you, for the Remission of sins, for the promise is to you
and to your seed, etc. And Baptism (even to Infants) is a seal of Gods
pardoning grace in doing away the guilt of Original sin, in regard of those
that belong to Gods Election (if not also actual, which afterward shall be
committed if they live to age.)

The 6. End mentioned by the Author is, That it might be a signal
Representation of a Believers Union with Christ, called therefore, a being
Baptized into Christ, and a putting on of Christ; for which we have Dr. Tailor
quoted, Which cannot be, (says he) of those who remain in their incapacities,
etc. Which he says, is the case of Children. But we shall see by and by the
said Dr. confuting himself in his latter discourse of Baptism.

1. To this I reply in the words of Wendeline, Wendelin Christ. Theo. lib. 1.
c. 12. p. 166.
upon the Text, viz. Apostolus loquitur tantum de Baptizatis fidelibus tum enim
Adulti, ex Judaismo; and Gentilismo recens conversi baptizabantur; i.e. The
Apostle speaks this of Believers that were Baptized; for then Adult persons,
newly converted from Judaism and Paganism were Baptized.

2. Though children cannot put on Christ by an external Act, yet they may be an
infused seed of grace, and we have good ground to believe all elect Infants
dying, have in their infant-State, done so. And farther, if Adams sin be
imputed to them for sin, why may not Christ's Righteousness be also imputed to
them for Righteousness? Surely it must be so, or else there is no way how
Infants can be saved.

3. Dr. Tailor in his last discourse of Baptism, gives a good Rule for the
understanding Scriptures of this sort, which if attended to, would bring us and
Antipaedobaptists a little nearer together: which is this, viz. That when the
Scripture speaks of the effects of, or dispositions to Baptism, it speaks in
general expressions, as being most apt to signify a common duty, or general
effect, or a more Universal event, or the proper order of things: but those
general expressions do not supponere universaliter; that is, they are not to be
understood exclusively to all suscipients, or of all the subjects of the
proposition. And he makes it clear by diverse passages of Scripture. There are
many Synecdoches in the word, where many only are to be understood, when it
speaks of all. The secret effects of Election, and of the spirit are in
Scripture attributed to all that are of the outward Communion. 1 Pet. 1.2.
So Peter calls all the Christian strangers of the Eastern dispersion, Elect,
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father. And Paul says of all the
Roman Christians, and the same of the Thessalonians, that their Faith was
spoken of in all the world, and yet among them it is not to be supposed, that
all the Professors had an unreproveable faith, or that every one of the Church
of Thessalonica was an excellent and charitable person; and yet, says he, 2
These. 1.2.
your faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all
toward each other abounds. So to the question before us. As many of you as
are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. That is, so it is regularly, and
this is the designed event: but from hence we cannot conclude of every person,
and in every period of time, This man has been baptized, therefore, now he is
clothed with Christ, he has put on Christ; nor thus, This person cannot in a
spiritual sense, as yet put on Christ, therefore he has not been baptized;
that is, he has not put him on in a Sacramental sense.

To conclude, We cannot understand the Apostle in those words of putting on
Christ, to intend a saving union to Christ, or a putting on of Christ
spiritually and effectually, in regard of all that are Baptized; for all these
Galathians did not so put him on, and innumerable persons that are Hypocrites
(when baptized at age,) do not so put him on. Wherefore the words are to be
understood Sacramentally, as 1 Cor. 10.4, 5. Heb. 10.29. And thus Infants put
on Christ as well as grown persons.

7th. End of Baptism (says he) is, that the Baptized person may orderly
thereby have an entrance into the visible Church, etc. For as Circumcision
heretofore was the visible door of entrance into the old Testament-Church -- So
also was Baptism such a door, and visible entrance into the New
Testament-Church, etc. Act. 2.41, 42. They who gladly received the word were
baptized, and the same day there was added to them about 3000. souls; and they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayers. So that after baptism, not before, the believers
were said to partake of all the Church Priviledges.

Posito uno absurdo mill sequuntur. Upon this false Hypothesis do our
Opposites build their dividing Practices. Wherefore we deny that Baptism does
give formality, or make a man a member of a Visible-Church; it is not that
which gives entrance into it, as the Author would have it: so, as if only by
its Administration, and in their own way too, persons must be Baptized, or else
they are not to be reputed Church Members, or to be admitted into the
participation of Church Priviledges. But for this we have diverse of our Divines
quoted; as Vrsinus, The Assembly in their Catechism. And lastly, Mr. Baxter,
with whom he is again at Hocus Pocus. Mr. Baxter (says he) in his plain
Scripture proof, page 24. As a Soldier before listing, and a King before
Corwning, and taking his Oath, so are we Church Members before Baptism. But as
every one that must be admitted solemnly into the Army, must be admitted by
listing, as the solemn engaging sign; so every one that has right to be
solemnly admitted into the visible Church, must ordinarily be admitted by
Baptism. But mark (Reader) the Authors ingenuity. Baxters words are, So are we
and Infants Church Members; But being quite out of charity with those Innocent
Babes, this man leaves out Infants, and one would think by the partial
Citation, that Mr. Baxter also did shut the Church-door against them. It cannot
be denied that Orthodox Divines have frequently termed Baptism, the Sacrament
of our initiation into the Church, and have ascribed our Admission or entrance
into it thereunto, and hereby have given the Antipaedobaptists some seeming
ground for their rigidity. And yet I find that they are not agreed among
themselves about the point; for Mr. Paul a great Zealot against Communion with
any that are not Baptized in their way, does in his serious reflections disown
the Position, That Baptism is an initiating Ordinance, and tells us in that
Diminitive Volume of his, p. 3. That he knows none that asserts it to be the
inlet into praticular Churches, though it prepares them for Reception. Mr.
Kiffin it seems is of the same judgment, for he bestows an Epistle upon the
piece. Of the same judgment is John Bunyan a more moderate Antipaedobaptist,
that is, for Union and Communion with Saints, as Saints, and condemns the
Rigidity of his Brethren, and maintains in his Answer to the scurrilous (not
serious) Reflections of Paul, That differences in judgment about
Water-Baptisme, ought to be no Bar to Communion, Printed for John Wilkins in
Exchange Alley.
which is the Title of his Book, and sees no cause to repent after severe
checks from his Brethren, to call them Babes and Carnal, that attempt to break
the peace and communion of Churches, though upon better pretenses than Water,
and declares God never made Water Baptism a Wall of Division between us. And
whereas Paul denies Baptism to be an initiating Ordinance, he retorts very
rationally upon him, that if it be not that, but another, and if visible Saints
may enter into Fellowship by that other, and are no where forbidden so to do,
because they have not light into Water-Baptisme, it is of weight to be
considered by all unprejudiced persons. Mr. Tull also, a moderate and very
ingenious Antipaedobaptist, is of Mr. Bunyans judgment; But Mr. Henry Jessey
(of precious Memory) has published his judgment to the same purpose, grounding
it upon Romans 14. v. 1.3.7. such as are weak in the faith, receive you, etc.

From whence he argues most strongly and convincingly, that it was the duty not
only of the then present Church at Rome, to whom the Epistle was writ, as also
to all beloved of God, called to be Saints at that time, ver. 7. But also of
all Churches and Saints, Beloved and called, throughout the world in succeeding
ages, to receive into Church Communion and Fellowship, such whom we have ground
to believe God has received into Communion with himself. For that is the
Argument or Motive verse 3. God has received him, and says he, if it be a
good Argument to receive such as are weak in any thing whom the Lord has
received; Then there can be no good Argument to reject for any thing for which
the Lord will not reject them. The like argument we have chap. 15. ver. 7. of
Christ's Receiving, Receive you one another as Christ has received us, etc.

Then that holy man breaks out into pathetical strains, Oh! how is the heart of
God the Father and the Son set upon this to have his children in one another
hearts as they are in his, etc. and it is the work of the Devil (says he) to
divide them: Thus much to show how they differ amongst themselves about this
Position, that Baptism gives formality, or makes a member of a visible Church,
which the moderate party amongst them utterly deny; now that it gives neither
essence or being, either to a Church or Membership, further appears by these
Arguments.

1. If there be a Church, That dividing Principle, That Baptism forms a Church
or makes Church Members, refuted.
and so Members before Baptism, then Baptism cannot give the formality or
essence, because forma is causal, and so is in nature before formatum.

But the Church considered as totum essentiale, is before Baptism, for
Ministers are before baptism. And there must be a Church of Believers to chose
a Minister lawfully; for none but a Church can give him a call, and without a
call he cannot administer, as Mr. Hooker argues in his survey of the sum of
Church Discipline, cap. 5. part. 1. page 55. adding moreover, that if Baptism
cannot be without a Ministerial Church, nor that before a Church
Congregational, which must make choice of a ministry, then such a Church is
much before Baptism. Besides let it be supposed (says he) that at the coming
of some Godly Zealous Christian and Scholar into the Country, and a company of
Pagans (many) are converted to the Faith, I ask whether these may not join in
Church Fellowship, and choose that man Pastor, and whether that choice was not
lawful according to God? Therefore here is a Church before a Minister, and so
before Baptism. The demand which Mr. Jessey makes upon the same arugments is
somewhat like this; if Baptism (says he) be the manner of forming Churches,
how would it suit a Country, where many are converted and willing to be
Baptized? but there being no Church to be baptized into, how shall such a
Church State begin? The first must be baptized into no Church [that is
particular] and the rest into him as the Church, or the work stand still for
want of a Church.

2. A Church may be without Baptism, and yet as real a Church as the Israelites
were so long in the Wilderness without Circumcision, which without dispute was
the initiating Ordinance, according to Divine Institution, Genesis 17.13.

3. One Argument I shall borrow more from Mr. Hooker, and that is, If Baptism
give the form to visible-membership, then while that remains valid, the party
is a visible Member; for where the form is, the formatum must needs be, if the
principles of reason may take place.

But there is true Baptism resting in the party who has no visible Membership:
as in an Excommunicate, in him that renounceth the fellowship of the Church, or
when the Church is utterly dissolved, then all Church Membership cease; for
Relata mutuo se ponunt and tellunt; And yet Baptism is valid. And as it is an
undeniable position, That, that which gives the form or being to a Church, must
cease when the Church cease, or when a member cease to be a member, it must
cease with it; so it follows that that must be renewed, namely Baptism, as
often as Membership is renewed, so shall we have a multiplication of Baptisms,
as often as the person is cast out of the Church and taken in again upon his
repentance.

As for those two Scriptures which the Author brings for his opinion, they will
hardly be found to serve his turn.

1. The main place stood upon is, Act. 2.41, As many as received the word
gladly, were baptized, and there was added that day about 3000. souls. Hence
they conclude they were added by Baptism, and that they were only added this
way.

Sol. 1. It is more then the Text affords for to conclude that they were added
by Baptism, much less can it be argued from thence, that they were only added
this way, the words say not, they were added by Baptism, but puts a full point
or stop after that sentence, As many as gladly received the word, were
baptized. There that sentence ends, as Mr. Sydenham notes upon the place: And
the Apostle goes on a new account, and says, There were added that day 3000.
souls, but does not at all show the manner of their adding; so that these words
are rather a recapitulation and summing up the number of Church Members added
that day, then any description of the way of their taking into the Church, and
the former reasons prove it cannot be interpreted as our Author would have it.

The other place that he urges for his opinion is, 1 Cor. 12.13. We are all
baptized into one body; hence it is concluded Baptism imbodies Members.

1. In answer to this, let it be considered what those of their one party say,
that are for Dipping. The Text (says Mr. Bunyan, that treats of our being
baptized into one body) tells us expressly it is done by the spirit. For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one body. Here is the Church presented as under
the ^^tion of a Body; here is Baptism mentioned, by which they are brought or
initiated into this body; Now that this is the Baptism of Water, is utterly
against the words of the Text; For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one
body. So Mr. Jesse, The Baptism intended in the Text is the Spirits-Baptism,
and not Water Baptism, and the Body the Text intends is not principally the
Church of Corinth, but all believers, both Jews and Gentiles, being Baptized
into one Mystical Body, and the reason why it cannot be meant of Water Baptism,
is, because all the Body of Christ, Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, partook
not thereof. Thus here we see how they clash amongst themselves as touching the
sense of the place.

2. We add, That, (as we conceive) the Apostle speaks there primarily of the
Baptism of the Spirit, not of Water; so by one spirit we are baptized into one
body, is not so much of Baptism by Water; and yet supposing it to be meant of
Baptism by Water. Yet (as Mr. Sydenham observes)it proves nothing that Baptism
is the form of that body, Sydenhams Christian Exercitation, cap. 20. page 168,
169.
which has its matter and form, holiness and union before Baptism; baptized
into one body, does not here show the essential constitution of a Church, but
the confirmed union, and the argument is inserted more to prevent Schism, then
to express the way of first imbodying or constitution of Churches, as the whole
context demonstrates.

CHAP. V.
Containing his fifth Argument; That Believers Baptism is the only Baptism,
from the New Testament-dispensation, so differing from that of the old.

THe Argument is taken from the New-Testament-Dispensation, so different from
the Old. The Old Testament-Church (says the Author was National, consisting of
the Natural and Fleshly seed of Abraham, therefore were Infants by Circumcision
added thereto; but the new Testament-Church was by Christ's appointment to be a
separated people out of all Nations, consisting only of the spiritual seed of
Abraham, and therefore Believers upon profession of Faith by the Ordinance of
Baptism were added thereto.

Repl. 1.

What of all this? If there any ground from hence that Believers Baptism is the
only true Baptism? It Is true, the Church Dispensation is altered, Mr. Baxters
plain proof for Infants Church Membership and Baptism.
but the Covenant of Grace is not altered. The Dispensation differs under the
new Testament, only in regard of Ceremonial accidents, as Temple, Priesthood,
Sacrifice; but the Essentials of the Covenant still remain, viz. I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed, and this is the grand Charter of
Church Membership, which takes in the Child with the Parent, and consequently
entitles it to Baptism, as shall be hereafter shown; for if their Church
relation can be made good, their Baptism will follow upon it. If therefore the
Author could have proved that the covenant had been altered as to its
essentials, he had said something worth a hearing.

2. Whereas he says the old Testament Church was National, it is a Truth; and
yet the Nation of the Jews was not the Church of God, as they descended from
the Loins of Abraham by Natural Generation, according to the Flesh, but only
with reference to Gods gracious Covenant, made with Abraham and his seed,
(which I wish the Opposers of Infant Baptism would consider:) and as this
Covenant was made with Abraham and his seed after the flesh, so likewise is it
still the same with Believers, and their natural seed under the
Gospel Dispensation, by virtue of the same gracious covenant made to them and
their seed, Act. 2.39. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and
to all that are afar off: [the Gentiles.]

3. Antipaedobaptists may do well to consider yet farther, what Mr. Baxter
makes good in his plain proof, viz. That Infant Church Membership did take
place as an Ordainance of God, before Cirscumcision was enjoined, or the
Ceremonial law Instituted, and why then it should cease with it, is more then
ever yet could be shown. He makes it appear it was no part of the Typical
Administration of the old Testament; but a moral Institution of God, even from
the beginning of the World. God ever made a distinction between the seed of the
faithful, and the seed of the wicked, as visibly belonging to two several
Kingdoms, the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of Satan, Mal. 2.15. therefore
are they called a Holy Seed, and a Holy Seed are Members of the Church, and so
consequently the Subjects of Baptism, the Seal of Admission thereunto.

4. Notwithstanding the Dictates of H. D. that the Baptism of Believers is the
only true Baptism; we shall retain our practice in Baptizing our children, and
thankfully own and acknowledge it as a Gospel-priviledge, till the opposers
thereof can produce some clear proof out of Scripture, that the Old Ordinance
of the Church Membership of Believers is repealed. We see how imperiously
another sort of people do impose their conceits, and how confidently they call
for our subscription to their Light as they term it, as if it were a duty to
deliver up our Reason captive to their absurd imaginations. We respect
Antipaedobaptists as a more sober people, yet strangely overgrown with
self-conceitedness, as if the word of God came out from them, and it came to
them only in regard of the true knowledge of the spirits mind in it. -- Let
them produce but one plain Scripture that. God has made void the Ancient
Charter and Grant, and we will readily yield up the cause. But we have
Scripture and reason, as well as they, and are the more confirmed in what we
hold by observing how weakly they dispute against it.

All the Reason the Author brings to make good his Assertion is, -- Because
under the New Testament dispensation, Christ has appointed the Church to be a
separated people out of the Nations, consisting only of the spiritual seed of
Abraham, and therefore believers only upon profession of faith are to be
admitted to Baptism, and so added to the Church.

To which I answer, First, That under the New Testament-Dispensation, Christ
has appointed the Church to be a separated people out of the Nations, is a
certain truth; but that this Church consists only of the spiritual seed of
Abraham is false. Qui been distinguit, been docet, He that distinguishes well,
teaches well. What our Antagonist says is true, in regard of the Invisible
Mystical Church of Christ, which is a company of real Saints, that have
spiritual Union and Communion with Christ, and with one another, but not so
with respect to the outward visible Church, which is the Society of those that
profess true faith, for the exercise of Churchunion and Communion among
themselves, and many of these are Hypocrites and shall perish. Dr. Ames (an
excellent person that understood what the New Testament-Church was, a little
better then our Author) Med. lib. 1. c. 32. art. 9. tells us the same. And
such, says he, was the Church of Corinth and Ephesus, wherein all held not
Communion for life, and of such Christ speaks, Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me
that bears not fruit. And has these words in Opposition to what Bellarmine
falsely charge on Protestants, viz. Falsum est internas virtutes recuiri a
nobis ut aliquis sit in Ecclesia, quoad visibilem ejus statum; It is false that
inward virtues [Grace] are required of us to put a man into the Church,
according to the visible state of it. The Lord Dupless is in his Excellent
Treatise of the Church distinguishes aright -- The Invisible Church,
contains none but good [or in the Authors Dialect, the Spiritual seed of
Abraham] The Visible both good and bad; that only the Elect, this all those
indifferently that are brought into her by the Preaching of the Gospel. By all
which it is evident that the Author stragles out of the Road of Protestant
Divines, and is fallen upon the confines of Thomas Colliers General Epistles.
or the wild Notion of Mr. Dell, who in his Book entitled, The way of Peace,
page 6. gives this definition of the Church, viz. The New Testament-Church is a
spiritual Invisible Fellowship gathered up into the Unity of Faith, Hope, and
Love, and says, it is no outward visible society gathered together into the
consent and use of outward Forms and Worship. Now although both are out, yet I
acknowledge the Author is more sober then Dell, for he is for an External
Visible Church under the New Testament-Dispensation; for he tells us, Believers
upon the profession of faith are to be Baptized, and added thereunto, and yet
take him in his own sense he cannot be excused from error and confusion, for by
Believers, he means the Spiritual seed before mentioned, not such as are
Believers Equivocally, or Analogically, by profession only, but in reality, or
truth, as appears by the following words [upon Profession of Faith, by the
Ordinance of Baptism were added to the Church] As if when mention is made in
the Acts of so many thousands that believed, it did imply they were all of the
Spiritual Seed Regenerated persons, Annanias, Saphira, Simon magus, [who is
said to believe;] whereas it denotes no more then a visible profession of
faith, which is all that the Apostles and Primitive Churches had cognizance of,
and this is seen in Hypocrites who are not the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. And
this H. D. might have learnt as well as other things from Mr. Tombs, who in
his Examen, page 159. tells us, Profession of Faith and holiness is a sufficient
warrant to Baptism. And in good earnest one would think (by observing the lives
and conversations of some of their Proselytes) they took them in upon easier
terms.

2. Sydenhams Exercitaon, c. 3.p. 25.
We further argue, That if none but the spiritual seed of Abraham be the
subjects of Baptism, then visible believers, or such as make a profession of
Faith are not the Subjects of Baptism; for they may not be more the spiritual
seed; i.e. Godly, then infants.

3. Nay according to this Reasoning none must be Baptized at all, for who can
tell who are the spiritual seed, who belong to Christ according to Election and
saving Faith. Nor will that evasion serve their turn, we have charitable ground
to believe they are such, because of their profession, which is enough to
satisfy the Church; for if according to the Author the New Testament-Church is
made up only of a spiritual seed, it is necessary the Church should not only
have a judgment of charity, but infallibility to determine who are the
spiritual seed.

4. And since the Author and those of his way disclaim all pretense to
Infallibility, and are contented with the judgment of charity, to distinguish
of the spiritual seed, knowing nothing to the contrary, Hanc veniam petimus,
pray give us leave to act a like charity toward the children of Believers. For
first, they may be capable subjects of Election, Jacob was such a one in his
Mothers Womb, Romans 9, 11, Neither was it his singular privilege, but what is
common to all that are Objects of Election, which is free without respect to
any thing wrought or to be wrought. 2. They may be capable of sanctification;
Christ himself whilst in the Womb is termed [The Holy thing] which proves the
nonage of Infants makes them not incapable of grace, supposing Gods will, and
it shows God would have it so, that some of them should be sanctified because
Christ passed through each age to sanctify it to us. Ideo per omnem venit
aetatem, and infantibus infans factus sanctificans Infantes, in parvulis
parvulus sanctificans hanc ipsam habentes aetatem, simnl and exemplum illis
pieatis effectus, and justitiae, and s bjectionis.
As Irenaeus that lives near the Apostles, speaks; John was filled with the
Holy Ghost, and what is that but the graces of the spirit, although he was no
more enabled to exert or put forth any act of Grace, then he was able to put
forth an act of reason, nevertheless his soul wanted not the faculty of reason,
from his Mothers Womb; and what though we may not say all Infants of Believers
are a like filled with the Holy Ghost, as John was, yet may we truly say that
are all as capable thereof as John. 3. They are also capable of Glory, of
Salvation, or else it would be sad, but Christ has told us of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven; that is, Specifically as you shall see proved hereafter. 4.
God calls them holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. and so may we. By what has been said I
suppose it is evident to the impartial Reader, that the Infants of Believers
are as much the spiritual seed of Abraham, as visible professing believers, and
we have as much ground if not more, to look upon them as such, as we have for
grown Christians, until they manifest the contrary; for as for the former we
own them as Godly, and admit them into the Church upon their own Testimony only
in a visible profession, which may be deceitful; but the Infants of Believers
are taken into Covenant with their Parents, and are visible Church Members, and
hereby come to have right to Baptism.

For the two former, we have an express Divine Testimony, and that they were
once accounted such, and the Covenant being the same as to the essential
spiritual privileges of it, none of which can be made appear to be repealed;
It will follow that Believers Children must not be denied the sign and seal of
the Covenant, they having altogether as warrantable a Right thereunto as grown
Christians or Believers. This is Bucers arguing on Mat. 19.13, 14. Si jam ad
Ecclesiam pertinent, etc. Cur eis signum Baptismi, quo in Ecclesiam Christi,
qui ad eam pertinent, recipi solent, negaremus? Bucer an Mat. 19.13, 14.


Let us now hear what is said to the contrary, in what follows. He conceives
the seed of Believers have no right to Baptism; Why?

Because, (says he) Though the Jews had right to circumcision, as Abraham's
natural seed under the old Testament, yet this would not serve the turn under
the new, Mat. 3.9. John Baptist discharges them of that privilege ( of
Abraham's Natural Seed) that admitted into the Old Church, from any such right
in the new. Think not to say that ye have Abraham to your Father, that ye are
the Children of a Godly Parent, That which served their turn under Moses, would
not avail under Christ. Nothing now but the fruits of Repentance give right to
the Bapisme of repentance, etc.

And must we take all this for Gospel? We shall upon examination find no weight
in it, and nothing prejudicial to the Baptizing the children of Believers. For

1. Let it be considered, that these Jews to whom John spoke were to come under
a New Administration of the Covenant, and the first subjects of this
Administration must be persons able to give an account of their faith and
repentance, and Christ the Messiah was now come who was the chief blessing of
the Covenant, yea the substance of it; and therefore 'twas necessary that as
these Jews relied on the Covenant of Abraham, so they should hold forth their
relyance on Christ in whom the Covenant was confirmed to them and their seed.
Cottons Dialogue of Childrens Baptism. p. 130.
For as Mr. Cotton observes, The Axe was laid to the Root of the Tree, even to
the stock of Abraham, and all the Branches that grew upon it, and were
ingrafted into it, so that now if they brought not forth this good fruit, to
believe in Christ who was then come (whom the Jews generally rejected as an
Impostor) they and their children were cut off from the Covenant of Abraham,
and must say no more, We have Abraham to our Father, but if they held forth
Repentance and Faith in Christ, then the Covenant that was made to them and to
their Children before, did still continue to them and to their children; and
that's the ground and meaning of Peter's exhortation, Act. 2.38, 39. Repent and
be Baptized every one of you in the Name of the Lord, for the promise is to
you, etc. Now what prejudice can this be to the Baptism of Believers Infants,
who are admitted in the right of their Parents, laying hold on the Covenant for
themselves and their seed, now under the new Administration, as Members of the
Church of Christ and in Covenant with God.

2. Neither will we take the Authors word, for what follows, -- Nothing now but
fruit meet for Repentance gives right to Baptism, without some qualification.
For first, I demand what fruit of Repentance John saw in that great multitude
which he then Baptized, viz. Jerusalem, Judea, and all the Regions round about
Jordan, ver. 5. which could not be less then some thousands of whom he could
have no cognizance, as to their fruits of repentance. 2. I farther demand
whether he could judge this great multitude which were strangers to him to be
all the Spiritual seed of Abraham? And since the Author observes from John's
words, they had no right to Baptism from being Abraham's natural seed, neither
could he look upon them all as the spiritual seed; let him tell us on what
account he baptized them? 3. It is like he will tell us they confessed their
sins, ver. 6. and so were Baptized. But will any man think they did all do so,
or is it said he baptized no other but such? It will be hard for any man to
prove that John did impose this upon them. We find, as Mr. Marshal notes, that
he Baptized them, (...), to Repentance, not (...), as state in Actual
Repentance, and his calling upon them for Repentance, and Preaching the Baptism
of Repentance, shows, that this was the lesson which they were all to learn,
not that they all manifested it before he Baptized them. For ought we can find
from the Text, the Pharisees and Sadduces were Baptized by him, and had they
been such Penitents, it had been great uncharitableness to call them Vipers.

We have the Author over-lashing again in the next words, for he lies open
every where. Nothing (says he) short of the spirits birth can orderly admit to
Water-birth, and Spiritual ordinances.

But since you are not Infallible, let it be supposed you have been mistaken in
your judgment, and have baptized a person, which afterward appears to be
unregenerate. Did you admit him orderly or no? you will say you did, because he
was Baptized under the apprehension of being regenerate: The Church looked upon
him as such, and saw nothing to the contrary. Very good, now you are come about
to what I would have; and indeed if the New Testament-Church did consist only
of the spiritual seed [real Godly ones] how abominably is the Ordinance
profaned, when it so happens (as it often does) that any Hypocrites are
Baptized, and when it appears that the Title which they had to Baptism was but
seeming, will it not follow that all that was done in reference to them was a
Maladministration, and Null ab initio; Mr. Blakes Covenant sealed.
and as God looks upon them as unbaptized (though they have been dipped) so ought
the Church to look upon them, and if these Hypocrites shall repent and be
converted, are they not bound to offer themselves a-fresh to Baptism, and can
the Church refuse them, and thus according to the Authors principle there will
be need of a Multiplication of Baptisms.

He concludes this Chapter with the sayings of two Doctors as wide in judgment
from each other as the two Poles, yet it seems he can make them meet to serve
his purpose. The first is Dr. Owen who is much engaged for his Elogy, but
nothing at all for wresting his sentences from his intention. It Is well known
the learned Dr. (like to the rest of his Brethren of the Congregational way) is
a zealous Assertor of Infant Baptism, and the import of what he says in his
Catechism, is no more then what all Congregational men hold; namely, That the
matter of the Church is a Society or Fellowship of visible Saints, and this,
according to the singular dexterity of this Antagonist, (who beats us still
with our own Weapons) is found to be point blank against Infant Baptism. But we
shall clear this point in the next Chapter, under which it falls properly to be
spoken of. The other Gentleman is Dr. Tailor: we have said enough of him
before, how much he was for Infant Baptism, notwithstanding he plays the
Orator, and tells us he will act the part of an Anabaptist, and show what may
be said for them though they are in an Error; but let us hear what he says,
for according to the Author he does rarely accomodate that which he thinks is
truth, when as it is only by bestowing a few complements upon an error; we
shall seldom meet with such a parcel of affected words, delivered in such a
strain as did notably fuit with the Genius of the times when he writ them; that
is, before the turn of times, when men were high flown, and above Ordinances.
The Baptism of Children (says he) is an outward duty, a work of the Law, a
Carnal Ordinance; it makes us adhere to the Letter without regard to the
spirit, to be satisfied with shadows, to return to Bondage, to relinquish the
mysteriousness, the substance, the spirituality of the Gospel, etc. This is
brave stuff indeed, high towering language; I never met with the like, unless it
were in Mr. Saltmarsh his shadows flying away, and beams of Glory. And is not
the Baptism of Believers think you bravely accomodated with these Rhetorical
Flowers? Is there one grain of Logic or Reason in all he says? And then at
last the Doctor does so well accommodate that which H.D. calls the truth, that
he attempts to maintain it by two gross errors delivered in one breath; for,
says he, if the Mystery goes not before the Symbol, yet it always accompanies
it, but never follows it in order of time. But first I would fain know who told
the Doctor that Grace always accompanies Baptism? (for that I take to be the
plain English of Mystery and Symbol without the help of a Dictionary.) No doubt
he learnt this good Doctrine from the Schoolmen, who maintain, that Baptism
conferrs grace: We may know the mind of them all by that passage of Suarez,
Suarez in tertiam partem Thom Tom. 3. quest. 68. Disp. 24. Art. 4. sect. 2.
page 250.
Per Baptismum datur gratia, si aliquis est recte dispositus ad effectum
Baptismi consequendum, in instanti quo receperit Baptismum recipiet gratiam. By
Baptism grace is given, if any man be rightly disposed to receive the effect
of Baptism, in the instant that he receives Baptism he shall receive grace.
These men speak as if they were acquainted with the Cabinet Council of Heaven.
They can tell (if you will believe them) the Punctum temporis, the very moment
when the spirit will breathe, and quicken a soul. And then again the Doctor is
as peremptory in that which follows -- Grace, (says he) never follows Baptism,
which at first found is enough to scare tender souls from meddling with it; for
if the Doctor says true, you that are for Dipping upon the profession of Faith,
look well to your selves: for, if you have not grace when you are baptized, you
are never like to have it afterward; grace, says he, never follows it, you are
like to live and die graceless.

This we deny not but God may (if he please) make use of Baptism to confer
grace; but look upon it as a Popish error, that grace is in separably annexed
to it, and a grosser one that Baptism confers grace ex opere operato. The
Ancients themselves as highly as they speak of it, did not hold that grace was
an inseparable companion of it. Austin lib. 4. contra Donatistas, has this
saying -- Quid prodest Baptismum, etc. What profits Baptism to them that
receive it, unless they be inwardly changed? And yet though it may not profit
at the present, yet it may for the future, and not only the Adult, but Infants
too may receive good by it.

To conclude this, I shall oppose to what the Doctor speaks in derogation of
Infant Baptism, the judgment of a more Orthodox Divine, viz. Mr. Daniel
Rogers, who speaks more warily thus -- I see no cause to deny that even in, and
at, and by the Act of Baptism the Spirit may imprint grace on the soul of an
Infant.

CHAP. VI.
Containing his sixth Argument, That Believers Baptism is the only true
Baptism, from the constitution of the Primitive Churches, which were not (says
he) formed of ignorant Babes, but professing men and women, with an answer
thereunto.

LEst we should contend in the dark, it is necessary we agree upon the terms.
By [Constitution] must be meant the essential nature of the primitive Church,
and in this I suppose we are one; and whereas he says these Churches were not
formed of ignorant Babes, that is, of those alone; for so we must understand
him, in regard of the Antithesis which follows, viz. [but of Men and Women] it
is very true, the primitive Churches were not of this make, that is, formed
only of ignorant Babes; for if they had, they would have been but sorry
Churches. But whatever sense his words may bear, we know his meaning is, that
Children are not included as Church Members in the Constitution of the New
Testament-Churches, these being formed (as he imagines) altogether of
professing men and women; which he attempts to prove by Christ's Commission,
where Teaching goes before Baptizing: By the practice of the Apostles in
planting Churches, and by the Dedications and Contents of the Epistles, etc. To
which I reply.

1. That we must mind the Author with what is before said in the first chapter,
namely, That the import of Christ's Commission to his Apostles was, de Ecclesia
colligenda, to direct them how, and in what manner they should gather Churches;
they being at first sent out to preach only to such as were Aliens in respect
of the New Administration: And we acknowledge all persons under such a
Circumstance, are to be Taught before they are to be Baptized, or admitted into
the Church. But in Ecclesia collecta, a Church actually gathered, wherein there
are Infants, the Case alters; for such are to be esteemed as Portions of their
Parents, as being one with them in a moral account, and belonging to the
Church, of which their Parents are Members. And to avoid repetition, the same
answer may serve for what is urged from the example and practice of the
Apostles, in planting the New Testament-Churches at Jerusalem, Acts 2.41.
Samaria, Act. 8.12. Caesarea, Act. 10.47, 48. Philippi, Acts. 16.14. and
elsewhere. But I must follow him, having to deal with a sort of people, who
take all of theirs, which is not particularly answered, for unanswerable.

By which Scriptures (says he) it manifestly appears, that the New
Testament-Churches were formed only of Baptized Believers, wherein we neither
find one ignorant Babe, etc.

But what demonstration does he bring to make this good? The Argument (if he
had used any) must have run in form thus, viz.

If we have no examples of any other that were Members of Churches, under the
New Testament-Dispensation, but professing believers, then no others are to be
accounted Church Members but such: But we have no examples of any other, etc.
Ergo.

The consequence of the Major proposition is unsound, and the Minor proposition
is false.

1. The consequence is not sound; for, suppose it be granted under the Gospel,
the Scripture makes no mention of any childrens being Church Members: Yet to
conclude from thence there were none, is no good argumentation. Because mention
is made of the Apostles taking in professing men and women into the Church,
Act. 8.12. to argue thence that therefore the children of such belonged not to
the Church, is childish arguing. But this is a more Masculine, or Logical way
of argumentation, namely, The children of the faithful were Members of the
Church before Moses time, before the law, and why not after Moses, now under
the Gospel? God took them into his Covenant with their Parents, and for the
space of 2000 years, from Abraham to Christ, they were Church Members, and
since Christ is come in the flesh, we find not this gracious Ordinance
repealed. There is not the least hint of any such thing in the New Testament,
therefore it is not repealed, and the children of Believers continue Members
still.

2. The Minor also is false; for we have intimation given us, that the children
of Believers are Church Members, and the Apostle writes to them as such, as
appears Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3. Col. 3.20.

And to make this yet more evident, I shall produce an Argument or two. The
first shall be that of Mr. Baxter, in his plain Scripture Proof of Infant
Church Membership, and Baptism, viz. If God have repealed the ordinance, and
revoked this merciful gift of Infants Church Membership, then it is either in
mercy or in justice, either for their good, or for their hurt. But he has
neither repealed it in mercy for their good, nor in justice for their hurt,
Therefore he has not at all repealed it.

The sufficiency of the enumeration in the major Proposition, even Mr. Tombs
himself could not deny in that famous dispute at Kederminster; for it must
needs be for the good or hurt of Infants that they are put out; and so must
needs be in mercy, or justice; for God makes not such great alterations in his
Church and Laws to no end, and of no moment, but in mere indifferency.

The minor, Mr. Baxter proves in both parts: 1. That God has not repealed this
to their hurt in justice: for, if God never revoke his Mercies, nor repeal his
Ordinances in justice to the parties hurt, till they first break Covenant with
him, and so procure it by their own desert; then he has not in justice revoked
his mercy, to the hurt of those that never broke Covenant with him. But it is
certain God never revoketh a mercy in justice to the hurt of any that never
broke Covenant with him: Therefore to such he has not revoked it.

1. That Church Membership is a mercy, and of the Covenant, is plain: Deuteronomy.
29.10, 11, 12.

2. That God does not in justice revoke such to any, but Covenant-breakers, may
be proved. 1. From the merciful nature, and constant dealing of God, who never
casts off those that cast not off him. 2. From his truth and faithfulness,
for else we should make God the Covenant-breaker, and not man, which is horrid
blasphemy. 3. His Immutability and Constancy, his gifts and calling being
without repentance. Now this is also certain that many Jews did believe and not
forsake the Covenant of God, even most of the Apostles themselves, and many
thousands more: and how then can these or their Infants be put out of the
Church in justice to their hurt, who did not first break Covenant with God. Mr.
Tombs was hard put to it, how to extricate himself from the difficulties of
this Argument, although a man of great Dexterity, and a very Oedipus in the
controversy, yet it is said he was near to a ne plus ultra, but at length took
Sanctuary in this Answer; and mark it well, Reader, viz. [That the Ordinance
was in mercy repealed for their good.] To which Mr. Baxter gives a neat reply
-- It can be no mercy, to take away a mercy, except it be to give a greater
instead of it: But here is no greater mercy given to Infants instead of
Church Membership: Therefore it can be no mercy to them that it is revoked.

Other Arguments besides this, that are invincible, may be drawn from that
place, Romans 11.17. A Scripture, which I perceive was too hot for the Authors
fingers to meddle with, and therefore he gives not one touch upon it,
throughout all this Treatise of Baptism; whereas he knows very well, that this
is the principal Text that gives clear evidence that Children are yet
Church Members with their parents; and if they have a Church-relation, they
must not be denied Baptism: because the same thing which qualifies any persons
for Church Membership, qualifies them also for Baptism. But to the Text before
us.

There are three things which the words do plainly hold forth.

1. That though the Collective body of the Jews or the generality of that
people were broken off from the Church through unbelief, yet all of them were
not broken off; for it is said, [If some of them were broken off] not all of
them: for as was said before, most of the Apostles and thousands of Jews
believed.

2. The Believing Gentiles are ingrafted in their place -- (...), in amongst
them, so Grotius has it, positus es inter ramos illius arboris, thou art set
amongst the branches of the Tree, referring to those words, if some be broken
off. implying that some remained still, and the believing Gentiles were
inoculated amongst them, or (...) according to Beza and Piscator, pro ipsis,
instead of them, or in their place and room, in ramorum defractorum locum, into
the place of the branches broken off.

3. The Jews shall be restored again to the Church at the latter end of the
world, they shall be in statu quo prius, become the Church and people of God
again, as formerly, but in a more glorious manner. From all which issues three
unanswerable Arguments for the Church Membership of believers Infants still
continued.

The first we have already insisted upon, namely, That the same Jewish children
which were visibly of the Church immediately before their Parents became
Christians at the first, continued to be so after. And the reason is, because
they were not under the dis-churching Cause of as many of the Jews as were
discharged, and that was unbelief, of which they could not be guilty by any Act
of their own, More of this may be seen in a late Book called A Persuasive to
Peace and Unity among Christians. Sold at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.
or of their Parents, as imputed to them. Because of Unbelief, says S. Paul,
they were broken off. If it be said (says the Author of that ingenious and
pious piece, entitled A Persuasive to Peace and Unity) they were dis-church'd
in the dissolution of the Jewish Church State in general: it is but an evasion
which will not help them: for the forecited Text is flatly against them. For
all that were not broken off by unbelief, did continue unbroken off; that is,
they still kept their place and standing in the Church of God. And therefore to
assign any other cause of dis-churching any, than the Scripture has assigned;
or at least, any other without this here assigned, and determined by the
Apostle, is too great presumption, and such as will not satisfy an impartial
mind; and, as Mr. Baxter enforces the Argument very strongly, They who kept
their Station, kept also their privileges for themselves, and their children,
if they were not broken off, their children were not broken off; for, as the
Infants came in with their Parents, so they are not cast out whilst their
Parents continue, except when they are grown up they cast out themselves by
their own personal unbelief. It is not to be conceived, that God should cast
out the child that came in for his fathers sake, while the Parents remain in
the same Church.

2. Those Jews who were broken off from the Church, their children also being
before Members, were likewise broken off; therefore it follows, Believing
Gentiles and their children are ingrafted in: for the ingrafting must be
proportionable to the breaking off; they succeeding in the place of the former,
must enjoy the privilege they lost.

3. If after the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, the Jews shall be grafted
in again, not with a diminution, but addition to their glory, and one part of
their glory was, that they and their seed were Gods visible Church, then so
shall it be with them when they are called. This we have ver. 26. All Israel
shall be saved. Which cannot be understood but from their broken off State,
they shall be grafted into the Church again as before; for as Mr. Marshall
notes in his Defense of Infant Baptism, page 134. At their first grafting in,
they and their children were grafted in: at their casting out, they and their
children were broken off; and when they shall be taken in again, they and their
children shall be taken in. This Mr. Tombs himself grants, that the Jews and
their seed were rejected together, yea, and that they shall be taken in
together, page 66. of his answer.

Thus then we argue, if it must be so with them, it must be so with believing
Gentiles now, or else there will be a Schism between Jew and Gentile in point
of privileges; else there will be too distinct estates in the Christian
Churches; one of the Jews, holy Fathers and children; another of the Gentiles,
who have only personal privileges, none for their seed, which is an absurd
conceit (as Mr. Geree speaks) and would set up or keep up a partition wall
still, contrary to that, Ephesians. 2. I shall say nothing of other absurdities,
which are very numerous, which come from the denying the Church Membership of
the Infant seed of believers.

The Author adds; It is incongruous to reason and sense to imagine, that little
Children are any way concerned as Church Members, either in the Dedications of
the Epistles sent to the Churches, or the Epistles themselves, for they were
dedicated to those who were called to be Saints, etc.

I answer, First, that this is a mere Paralogism; for what if we confess the
Apostle directed his Epistles to such as were professed Believers and Saints by
calling, were none other but those, or such like them, concerned in the
Epistles? What shall we think of carnal persons and unbelievers, are they
unconcerned in them? This minds me with a passage in Mr. Paul's serious
Reflections, such another rigid Antipaedobaptist as our Antagonist. He tells us
page 9. That the Epistles were writ to particular Churches, and that it will be
difficult to prove they were also directed to particular Saints; but says
Bunian, a more moderate man (although an Antipaedobaptist) If this be true,
there is virtue indeed, and more then ever I dreamed of in partaking of
Water-Baptisme. For if that shall take away the Epistles, and consequently the
whole Bible, from all that are not Baptized (he means, after their mode of
dipping, being grown Christians) then are the other Churches and also
particular Saints in a very deplorable condition. Would to God (says he of his
Brethren) they had learnt more modesty then thus to take from all others, Ne
autem existiment Corinthii, hanc Epistolam, ita ipsis propriam esse, ut ad
alios non pertineat; addit, Cumomnibus qui invocant nomen Domini nostri Jesus
Christi in quovis loco tum ipsorum tum nostri. Piscator in locum.
and appropriate to themselves, and that for observing a circumstance, etc. But
he better instructs Mr. Paul, and turns him to St. Paul, Romans 16.5. and to the
first Epistle written to Corinth, and shows that the first Epistle of John was
wrote to some who at that time were out of Fellowship, that they might have
fellowship with the Church, Joh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, we grant the Epistles were directed (some of them) to professing
Believers joined in Fellowship, directly and immediately, and to their children
(if they had any) and the children of all Believers in succeeding ages,
remotely; and the contents of the Epistles concern both the Parents at present,
and the children when come to years of discretion. A Father that has several
children, some grown up to understanding, others Minors or Babes, may direct a
Book or Epistle to them all. Whatsoever was writ, was written as much for our
instruction as the Primitive Christians, We know Moses and the Prophets
directed what they writ to the Church under that Administration, whereof their
Children were a part, and yet they were ignorant Babes, and could not
understand any thing or perform any duties. But let it be considered, that
though they understood nothing of those divine Exhortations, yet being within
Gods Nursery and School, they were in a nearer capacity to be taught their
duty, than Aliens; and their Parents were enjoined to teach them the Ordinances
of God, and God gave this Testimony concerning Abraham, that he knew he would
teach his children: and in the New Testament it was the commendation of Lois,
that she had instructed Timothy (...), ab Infantia, when he was an Infant or
little Child.

3. Whereas the Epistles are inscribed with those Titles [To the Saints, Saints
by calling, sanctified in Christ Jesus, chosen, adopted] which cannot (says
our Author) be spoken of Infants. To this it may be thus replied,

1. Some of those titles may be predicated of children, some not.

2. The Apostle calls the Churches Saints, either as looking upon them all as
such. i.e. truly regenerate; for this is the famosius significatum of the word
Saint: but this could not be, for he pointed at some that were sad Saints in
the Church of Corinth and Galatia, or else he calls them Saints
Synechdochically, because he judged the most of them to be such, and so the
whole Communion were judged Saints a Potiori, from the better part.

3. He calls them Saints by calling, i.e. by the preaching of the word, and so
we acknowledge Infants are not, and yet the same Apostle calls the Infants of
Believers Saints. 1. Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean, but now (...)
they are Saints, or holy: and it is the same word the Apostle uses in his
inscriptions of the Epistles to the Churches [(...)] [to the Saints:] and being
he makes use of the same word applying it to the children of believers, it
hints thus much to us, that in Saint Paul's account (who was guided by the
Spirit of God in what he speaks) the Infant seed of Believers are as much
Saints as any who are such by calling. Nor are they only foederally holy, but
they may be also inherently sanctified, says Mr. Tombs in his Examen. They may
receive the new birth, and we say more, they must receive it, if saved, Job.
3.5. It is much controverted concerning the Text, whether it intends grown
persons, or any persons of whatsoever age or sex; but the Original, if heeded,
would put an end to it. (...), Except one be born, including all ages, all
sexes. Children are so polluted in their first birth, that they can never get
to Heaven by that, and therefore what the first birth cannot, a second must,
says Dr. Tailor. And if it be objected, that to the new birth is required
dispositions of our own, which are to be wrought by, and in them that have the
use of Reason: besides that this (as the Learned Doctor speaks) is wholly
against the Analogy of a New Birth, in which the person to be born is wholly
passive, and has put into him the Principle that in time will produce its
proper Actions. It is certain that they can receive the new birth, and are
capable of it. The effect of it is salvation, if infants can receive this
effect, then also the newbirth, without which they cannot receive the effect;
and he illustrates the point by a Similitude thus.

As the reasonable soul and all its faculties are in children, Will and
Understanding, Passions and Powers of Attraction and Propulasion, yet these
faculties do not operate, or come abroad, till time and art, observation and
experience have drawn them forth into action. So may the spirit of grace, the
principle of Christian life be infused, and yet lie without action, till in its
own day it is drawn forth -- and then he goes on -- Who is he that understands
the Spirit so well as to know how or when it is infused, and how it operates in
all its periods, and what it is in its Being and proper Nature, or how, or to
what purpose God in all varieties does dispense it?

Then again, if Nature, says he, has in Infants an evil principle, which
operates when the child can choose, but is all the while within the soul; Why
cannot Infants have a good principle through Grace, though it works not till
its own season, as well as an evil principle?

4. Though Infants are incapable of performing such duties as are incumbent
upon professing men and women, yet this hinders not but that they may be
Church Members. Pray tell us what duties could those Israelitish Babes perform,
who notwithstanding their incapacity, were, asis before, Members of the Church
with their Parents. And though they answer not all the Characters Christ gives
his Adult Disciples (which the Author objects against them) yet they are
capable of union to the Church, and Fellowship in the privileges thereof. They
are capable of her prayers and other pious offices, and for whom the Church
has a more special care and obligation of tenderness for their souls, than for
others that are Without; and why should this seem strange? since they are
Members of the Commonwealth, and of the family, and are capable of union with
both estates, and the privileges thereof, and yet cannot perform obedience to
the State and Orders of either. In like sort, Infants are admitted Tenants, but
the Fealty or Homage is respited till they are of age.

5. Lastly, Christ himself (as Mr. Baxter notes) was head of the Church,
according to his humane nature in his infancy, and this proves that the nonage
of Infants makes them not incapable of being Members. And let any judge whether
it be his will that no Infants should be Members. For my part, says he, when I
consider that Infant State of Christ our head, and the honor done to him
therein, it strongly persuades me that they know not his will, who say they
will not have Infants to be visible Members.

He farther Objects the Church of England, who in their 19th. Artiele do
acknowledge that the visible Church is a number of Christians by profession.

This is down right Mr. Tombs's Examen, part. 3. page 41. only Tombs has more
charity for the Infants of Believers, though not without some contradiction.
For he there acknowledges that in facie Ecclesiae visibilis, Infants of
believers are to be accounted Gods, to belong to his Family and Church, and not
the Devils; And what do any of us say more? But mark Reader how Mr. Tombs does
esteem them such; why, says he, it is so, as being in a near possibility of
being Members of the Church of God, by an act of opinion grounded on probable
hopes for the future. But to make them actual members of the visible Church is
to overthrow the definitions of the visible Church, that Protestant writers
give, particularly the Church of England, Art. 19. To which Mr. Marshall
answers, If overthrows it not at all for they all include the Infants of such
Professors; as Infants Male and Female too (least you say that Circumcision
made them Members:) I add also says he, Baptism now (as well as Circumcision
of old) is a real, though implicit profession of the Christian Faith.

Next we have Dr. Owen (whom he cites no less than four times in what follows
in this Chapter) whose judgment is sufficiently known to be against our
Opposites. And notwithstanding the misinterpretation the Author puts upon some
passages in the Doctors Catechism, we have a particular account of his
judgment in Print, in a Book called, A Declaration of the Faith and Order owned
and practiced in the Congregational Churches agreed upon and consented unto by
their Elders and Messengers in their meeting at the Savoy, October. 12. 1658.
where to my knowledge he was present, and the principal man of that Assembly,
and concerning the point before us, we have it chap, 29. Art. 4. thus expressed,
viz. Not only those that do actually profess Faith in and obedience unto
Christ, but also the Infants of one or both believing Parents are to be
Baptized, and those only. And in compliance herewith, we have the judgment of
the Synod of Elders Assembled at Boston in New England, appointed by the Court,
1662. who strongly maintain by several Arguments in that printed piece, That
the Insant Seed of Believers are Church Members, and that being according to
Scripture, Members of the visible Church, they are consequently the Subjects of
Baptism.

See also the Presbyterian judgment upon the point in the larger Catechism of
the Assembly of Divines. Baptism, say they, is not to be administered to any
that are out of the visible Church, and so strangers to the Covenant of
promise, till they profess their Faith in Christ, and obdeience to him. But
Infants descending from Parents, either both or but one of them professing
Faith in Christ and obedience to him, are in that respect within the Covenant,
and to be Baptized. we see here who they take to be of the visible Church, and
within the Covenant, and to be baptized.

As for the Authority of particular Authors we have them on our side in great
abundance. Piscator has it thus on the 28. of Matthew; Porro ad Ecclesiam
pertinent non solum adulti, fidem profitentes, sed etiam ipsorum liberi; Not
only grown persons who profess the Faith appertain to the Church, but also
their Infants.

Theodore Beza in his Absters, Cat. Heshuii page 333. has this passage --
Merito arbitramur Infantes fidelium in peculio domini censeri; We rightly judge
the Infants of the faithful to be of the Lords Flock; and he speaks of them
there before Baptism. And in our Margent Bible we have this Note upon the
first of Corinthians 7.14. They that are born of either of the Parents
faithful, are also counted Members of Christ's Church, because of the Promise,
Act. 2.39.

Peter Martyr. loc Commun. cl. 4. c. 8. p. 821, 823. Non excludimus eos
[Infantes] ab Ecclesia, sed ut ejus parts amplectimur, etc. We exclude not
Infants from the Church, but embrace them as parts.

John Calvin, (to whom we should have given precedence) upon Acts 22.16. [ Eos
qui fide in Ecclesiam Dei ingressi sunt videmus, cum sua sobole in Christi
Membris, etc.]

The Episcopal Divines fall in with the rest, I will name but one, instar
omnium, and that is the famous Doctor Usher in his Body of Divinity, page 415.
The outward Elements (says he) are dispensed to all who make an outward
profession of the Gospel; for Infants, their being born in the Church is
instead of an outward profession, etc.

Lastly, the Author is at Mr. Baxter again, quoting something out of his tenth
Argument to Mr. Blake, as if he had intended those words against Infants
Church Membership, when he clears himself so fully in the point, as when he
stated the Thesis in the said Book of Disputations, and has written
particularly a large piece whose Title is Plain Scripture Proof of Infants
Church Membership and Baptism.

To conclude this, I cannot but pity the Author, because of that
self-conceited scornful Genius that appears in what follows, altogether
unbecoming a Christian; and I think all modest and sober spirits, cannot but be
extremely scandalized to see a man (pretending to be for the truth of Christ)
so proudly to trample upon all that differ from him. Surely he must needs be
furnished with more than an ordinary measure of self-conceit, that does so
Magisterially condemn not only the Ancients, but those of the Protestant
Reformation of latter days, sparing none, neither Prelate, Presbyter, nor
Independent. Have patience Reader, and thou shall hear a little of it.

How childishly ridiculous it was in those first Inventors of Baptism, for six
hundred years, etc.

Have a care Sir, since you swell at this rate least you burst. Austin tells
you Ecclesia semper habuit semper tenuit, The Church always had it, always held
Infant Baptism. And Doctor Tailor, a person whom you seem to honor much, says
there is no Record extant of any Church in the World, that from the Apostles
days inclusively to this very day, ever refused to baptize children, excepting
of late amongst your selves.

So well to observe the Order, [viz. first to Baptize, and then to Communicate]
and yet so miserably to miss it in the Subjects, applying the Spiritual
Ordinances to ignorant Babes.

This of the six hundred years giving the Communion to Infants, he has taken
from Master Tombs his sixth Argument against Infant Baptism, Exercitation,
page 29. for there it is, and Tombs as is conceived took it up from Maldonate
the Jesuit, who reports that the giving of the Communion to Infants continued
six hundred years in the Church. But Master Geree well observes, that is not,
nor ought to be taken of the first six hundred years, for it appears. by
Maldonate's expression, calling it Sententiam, the opinion of Augustine and Pope
Innocent, that it had, if not its rise, yet its force to become common from
them. Not only Protestants but Papists themselves condemn that of communicating
Infants as an error, yea (as I remember) the Council of Trent it self. And yet
Doctor Tailor does profess in his discourse of Baptizing the Infants of
Believers; that, page 59. certainly there is infinitely more reason why Infants
may be communicated then why they may not be Baptized.

The Protestant Reformers are more blind, and do worse in his opinion then
those who gave Infants the Lords Supper --

And how much worse, says he, in the Protestant Reformers, that so lamentalby
miss it, both in the due Order and right Subjects also, which the Prelate and
Presbyter do in admitting children to Baptism and Membership, but not to the
Supper?

A little more modestly would do the Author no hurt, and let him know, that
neither their Baptism or Church Membership, are inconsistent with the Word, but
so is Infant-Communion, not only because God requires a particular
qualification to the Ordinance which Infants are not capable of, namely, the
exercise of actual grace in examination, discerning the Lords Body, and
remembering the death of Christ; but because they are not capable in any certain
way of the Elements used in that Sacrament, as to take and eat the Bread, and
drink Wine.

Lastly, this Hagio-Mastix lasheth the Independents, which do worse than all
the rest, and does more grossly err in point of Order, in admitting them to
Baptism, but neither to Membership nor the Supper.

But I find the Proverb is true, Bernardus non videt omnia, even that great
Doctor called Saint Bernard, is ignorant of some things.

Wherefore I crave leave of the Author to tell him he is ignorant of the
grounds or principles by which the Independents walk. And for his better
information I refer him to Doctor Nathaniel Holmes his Answer to Mr. Tombs his
Exercitation and Examen, where he shall find the Independents Judgment jump
with Master Jesseys, in his discourse upon Romans 14.1. you have it reprinted
at the end of Master Bunians last piece in answer to a Book entitled, Some
serious Reflections on that part of Master Bunyans Confession of Faith,
touching Church Communion with unbaptized Believers.

Consider says Master Jessey, whether such a practice has a command, or
example, that persons must be joined into Church Fellowship by Water Baptism;
For John Baptized many, yet he did not Baptize some into one Church and some
into another, nor all into one [particular] Church. And then afterward into
what Church did Philip Baptize the Eunuch, or the Apostle, the Jailer and his
house? This he speaks in opposition to those who hold that a particular Church
is constituted by Baptism, and formally united as Master K. did many years
since in his answer to Doctor B. and is no changeling, as appears by his
Epistle to Master Paul's sorry Reflections, lately Printed. So Master Tombs of
old in his sixth Argument, Exercitat. where he inveighs against the
Independents, as the Author does here; and says, That by Baptism a person is
exhibited a Member of Christ and that Church. To which Doctor Holmes an
Independent Pastor makes this reply, -- viz. But what Church does Master Tombs
mean? If he means of the Universal Church I yield, that he is exhibited a
visible Christian. But if he means a Member of any particular rightly
constituted Church, according to the platform of those in the New Testament and
ancient antiquity, I altogether deny it, for these reasons.

1. Those Baptized, Matthew 3. were in no particular Christian Church, there
being none gathered till a good while after that Christ had given the Holy
Spirit to the Disciples.

2. Cornelius his, and the Jaylors Families, after the gathering of Churches
were not by that numbered to any particular Churches, or thereby made particular
Churches that we read. Now that which exists before, or after a thing without
that thing, cannot be the form of that thing.

3. That which is common cannot be proper and peculiar: But Baptism is common,
to make men only visible Christians in General; Therefore it is not proper and
peculiar to make them of this or that particular Church, And then he farther
adds, therefore though Godly men or Infants have been Baptized, yet the
Churches think according to Scripture, there must be somewhat more expressed to
make such to own this or that Preaching Officer, to be their Pastor or Teacher,
Whom they must obey in the Lord, and have in singular respect for the works
sake, Heb. 13. And to cause the Minister to own them as his Flock, Acts 20. if
he mean not to take upon him a power Apostolical for Latitude, to extend to all
Baptized one. Doctor Homes's answer to Master Tombs.
So page 193. The same Author says, several Churches of us do hold, that we
may Baptize them [the Infants of the Godly] though neither of their Parents be
of our particular Churches, Baptism being but as we conceive an Admission into
the Universal visible Church. We shall add for a conclusion, That as Baptism is
no actual admission into the Communion of a particular Church, as before
appears in the examples of the Eunuch, Cornelius, etc. who were Baptized
without any relation to a particular Church. 2. It is into Christ, and so into
the privileges of the Body of Christ in general. No mention being made in
Baptism of any restraint to this or that particular Church. 3. One act of
Communion in the Lords Supper, does not state a person admitted as a Member of
that particular Church; no more does Baptism, which is but one act of Communion.

4. By Baptism a person being exhibited a Member of Christ, and of the Church
in general, and so consequently to all the privileges of Christ, whereof
Church Communion is one: it follows that when a Child is Baptized, he is
thereby acknowledged or declared to have a right to Church Communion in
particular, [that is, in breaking bread with a particular Church] when he
becomes capable thereof. For, Omne Universal continet particulare, Every
general includes all the particulars. Nor can any particular Church deny it,
when such a one actually desires admittance into her, and undertakes to walk in
it in performance of all duties, as a Member thereof, provided he be free from
scandal, and visible crimes committed since his Baptism to the time of his
desired admittance: for whatsoever may be just ground to cast out of
Church Fellowship and Communion, is also sufficient to keep him out that was
never in.

CHAP. VII.
The Authors Quotations out of the Magdeburgensian History corrected and
rectified, wherein is farther shown his Praevarication, in relating some things
partially, others falsely, and for the most part contrary to the intention of
the Writers.

HE begins thus; The Magdeburgenses in their Excellent History, do tell us,
that as to the Business of Baptism in the first Century, they find only the
Adult or Aged whether Jews or Gentiles that were Baptized, and give instances
in the 2d, 8th, 10th, 16th, 19th, Chapters of the Acts, and have no Examples of
Infants being Baptized. Cent. 1 Lib. 2. Page 496.

1 first In examining this Century, Vt Christus Infantes ad se ven^re jussit,
ita nec Apostoli eos excluserunt a Baptismo and quidem dum Baptismus
circumcisioni aequiparat Paulus, Colos. 2. aperte indicat, etiam Infantes per
Baptismum Ecclesiae Dei esse inserendos sicut in veteri Testamento Infantes
circumcidi oportebat, ut in Dei faedere essent. Cent. 1 L. 2. C. 4. P. 354.

Baptizatos esse aedultos, tum Judaeos tum Gentes, Exemplae probant.

Infantibus Baptizatis Exempla quidem annotata non leguntur, sed Origenes, and
Cyprianus, and alii Patres autores sunt Apostolorum etiam tempore Infantes
Baptizatos esse, Cen. 1. L. 2. C. 9. P. 496.


I find Lib. 2. Chap. 4. Page 354. that touching Baptism they say, that as
Christ commanded Infants to come unto him, so the Apostles afterward did not
exclude them from Baptism: and truly since Baptism is compared by Paul to
Circumcision, Col. 2. it plainly shows that Infants are to be admitted to the
Church by Baptism, as in the Old Testament they were by Circumcision.

2 In Century the first Lib. 2. Cap. 6. Page 496. which is the place the Author
refers unto, they do not say, that the Apostles Baptized only the Adult or
Aged, but only this; We have Examples of Adult persons both Jews and Gentiles
that were Baptized-Farther they say concerning Infants, we have no particular
notice given us, or Examples that they were Baptized; yet presently add, that
Origin and Cyprian and others of the Fathers that lived near the Apostles, do
affirm that even in the Apostles times Infants were Baptized. But let it be
supposed that they did not Baptize any Infant, yet it follows not that it is
unlawful for us to Baptize them, because they did not; for (as Dr. Tailor says,
whom the Author so much admires,) a Negative Argument as to matter of fact
cannot conclude; and therefore supposing that it be not intimated that the
Apostles did Baptize Infants, it follows not that they might not, or that the
Church may not. The words and deeds of Christ are infinite; and the Acts of the
Apostles we may suppose the same in their proportion: And therefore what they
did not is no rule to us, unless they did it not because they were forbidden.

3. Moreover the Magdeburgenses speaking of the subject of Baptism, answer an
Objection which might be made against Infant Baptism, Cent. 1. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
Page 154. Whereas it is said they were Baptized in Jordan confessing their
Sins, Mat. 3. and John Preached the Baptism of Repentance, Mark. 1. and Luke 3.
therefore only they that repent are to be Baptized (which is the sum of all our
adversaries can say;) To this Objection they thus reply; such Confession was
necessary from those Adult Persons (being as before the first Subjects of the
Ordinances.) And then they come to state the Question; An sint Infantes quoque
Baptizandi, are Infants also to be Baptized? Which they hold affirmatively,
giving several Arguments for it, one of which is grounded upon Matt. 19 viz.
They to whom the Promise of the Kingdom of Heaven does belong, to them belongs
the Ceremony or Seal of the Promise. And then they roundly tell us, that
although the Apostles (before they were rectius edocti, better learned) would
have kept Infants from Christ's Benediction; yet being so severely rebuked by
Christ, and guided or directed by his Spirit, they did (say they sine dubio)
without all doubt Baptize them: informing us again, that the Fathers who lived
near to the Apostles, do witness that the Practice of Infant Baptism was
derived from the Apostles, and transmitted to Posterity. Cent 1. Lib. 1. Cap.
4. Page 153.

4. The Author fathers that upon the Century-Writers, which they speak not.
They (says he) tell us, that the Custom of Dipping the whole Body in Water was
changed into Sprinkling a little Water in the face, whereas there is not the
least hint of this matter in this Century, nor the following; but they tell us
that the word [(...)] signifies abluo, luo, i.e. to Wash, and that the
Christian Baptism was taken a judaica lotione, from the Jewish Baptism, of
which the Apostle speaks Heb. 9, 10. (...) i.e. Diverse Baptisms, it is rendered
Washings, and these Baptisms we know, were not Dippings. Moses in the
Ceremonial Law did not prescribe different kind of Dippings, though he did
several kind of Washings, or Baptisms as it is in the Original.

CENT. II.
HE says, the Magdeburgenses tell us, that they find nothing in this Century
different from the former, that is in reference to Baptism: And that they make
mention of Justin Martyr's words, in his Apology to Antoninus Pius the
Emperor, which are repeated as we have it translated by Mr. Baxter in his
Saints Rest. The import of which is only to show what order they took with
Pagans, upon their conversion to the Christian Faith, before they were admitted
to the Sacraments. And although this be wide of the matter, and insignificant
to the Question under debate, which is about Baptizing the Infants of
Believers, yet this will serve well enough to blind an ignorant Reader. And as
it this were some great matter, he glories in it, and concludes with a jeer.
They (says he) that shall consider the manner that Christians, (he should have
said Heathens) were admitted into the Churches in those days can hardly, I
presume pick out any good, warranties for Infant Church Membership or Baptism,
out of the same; to which there needs no more to say, than this even just as
much as he can pick out from thence against it. Nor do I see any reason he has
to pick a quarrel with our Practice, from any thing in that Fathers Apology,
who, (as Mr. Baxter notes) gives such hints, by which his Judgment and the
Practice of the Church in those days may be discerned to be for it, though we
cannot expect that he should speak expressly to the point, both because he is
brief, and treats on other Theams, to which this did not belong, and because
the Church then living among Heathens, had so much to do in converting and
Baptizing the Aged, that they had little occasion to treat about Children;
especially it being a point not controverted, but taken for granted by the
Christians, who knew God's dealing with the Jewish Church, that Children were
Members with the Converted Parents; especially when the very Gentiles Children
were members before Christ: With more to this purpose. Plain Scripture Proof,
Page 155.

CENT. III.
IN this Century (says the Author) they tell us the Rites of Baptism in the
Asiatick Churches continue the same as before, but concerning the African
Churches they give some account of great Corruption, creeping into the Church,
as to Subject, Time, Manner and Ceremonies. Cent. 3. Cap. 6. Page 123, 124, 125.

They do indeed charge this Age with corruption as to the Time and Manner of
administering Baptism; but not a word in derogation of Infants being the Subject
of it; and it is strange they should have reckoned that a corrupt innovation,
which they had a little before so well maintained for a Truth. They tell us
indeed that Tertullian in this Age, opposed himself to some that Asserted
Infant Baptism, affirming that the Adult were the only proper Subjects: But how
weakly he does it may be seen afterward, when we come to examine the witnesses,
of which Tertullian is the Van; and as Estius and Junius conceive with others,
the said Father intends only those Infants [quorum Parentes] whose Parents were
Infidels, or if he meant the Children of Christians, he speaks nothing
absolutely against their Baptizing: For his Words are [Cunctatio utilior] it is
more profitable to defer their Baptism, as it was also best in his opinion for
young men that were [Innupti] unmarried, Quin and innuptie Baptismum
procrastinandum art esse, quia eis praeparata est tentatio. Magde burg. Cent. 3.
so to do; and it was his advice to young Widows to forbear Baptism, until the
lust of concupiscence was quite extinguished. Is not this good Doctrine think
you? yet this is the man (as the Author says) who opposed Infant Baptism,
affirming that the Adult were the only proper Subjects; yet it seems not all
they neither: for he advised all unmarried persons to delay Baptism, not
sparing young-Maids, and that upon a very corrupt ground. What sport would my
Antagonist have made with this man, and how much would he have disparaged him
had we brought him in for a witness on our side. One would think the more
temptation any state is Subject to, the more does it stand in need of helps,
especially such as lay engagements on us to holiness, and may be a means to
convey it. But Tertullian was very corrupt and superstitious, and turned
Montanist, when he wrote his Book of Baptism; and shows himself to be somewhat
near the judgment of the Clinici, who, as Dr. Hammond notes, would not be
Baptized till their Deathbeds; and the reason was, because being to be
Baptized but once, and attributing so extremely much to that Ceremony, and
hoping so little for pardon of sin from any other instrument, they durst not be
Baptized too early, lest they should sin again, and have no remedy. And the
deferring Baptism till thirty or forty years old, was a spice of this fancy;
but then they that did so, were the most impatient of any to miss Baptism, when
they thought they were near their last and would let no Christian Infant die
without that Viand; and so doing what they did upon a score so contrary to the
Anabaptists, it is strange (...) should be producible in favor of them, as he
tells Dr. Tailor.

But to return to the Magdeburgenses, who do indeed inform us, that in this Age
the Doctrine of Baptism began to be defiled with Ceremonies, without any
reflection upon Infant Baptism, and it is very well known that Tertullian
himself was the man that introduced that filthy greasy one, of anointing the
Baptized, which he borrowed from the Montanists. They also tell us that in this
Age [Baptismus Infantibus datur] Infants were Baptized, and cite Origin in his
8th. Homily upon Leviticus affirming that Baptism is to be given to Infants,
[secundum Ecclesiae Observantiam] according to the custom of the Church; adding
also another passage of his upon the 14th of Luke, to the same purpose. Cent.
3. Cap. 4. Page 57.

Moreover they give us the Testimony of Cyprian in his 4th Book, Cyprianus L.
4. Epist. 7. Recte disputat, Baptismum valere sive aqua perfundantur, sive toti
immergantur qui Baptizantur.
and 7th Epistle, and approve his arguing, that Baptism is valid, whether it be
by Immersion or Sprinkling, for these two Reasons:

First, Because they signify one and the same thing: idem sit aspersio quod
Lavacrum. Sprinkling holding forth the Mystery, as well as Dipping according to
that in Ezekiel. 36. I will Sprinkle you with Water.

Secondly, Because they that were sprinkled in their Beds, (as sick Persons
were in those days) ought not to be rebaptized: It seems by the way Sprinkling
is of ancient date. They tell us farther that Cyprian in his 3d Book, 8th.
Epistle, has this Argument for Infant Baptism, viz Infantes Circumcidebantur,
ergo Baptizandi, Infants were Circumcised, therefore they may be Baptized.
Cent. 3. Cap. 4. P. 57. Which passage may shame the Author and his party, who
usually object that Tradition is the main Argument, which we take up in defect
of others, to justify our Practice, and that this is all the ancient Fathers
say for it, in want of Scripture-ground.

Lastly, The Magdeburgenses wonder at Tertullian's Simplicity, for he held (say
they) Miram Opinionem, Se ntit Tertullianus mira Opinione. etc.
a strange Opinion, that Children should not suddenly be Baptized; and then set
down his reasons in opposition to those words, Math. 19. Veniant dum Adolescunt
veniant dum discunt, dum quo veniunt, docentur.

Fiant Christiani cum Christum nosse potuerint. Quid festinat innocens aetas ad
remissionem peccatorum. etc.


Suffer little Children to come to me, and forbid them not. viz. Let them come
(says Tertullian) when they grow elder, when they learn, when they are taught,
when they come; according to which Dotage the Disciples did wisely in
forbidding Children to come, and Christ did weakly in rebuking them for so
doing, and inviting them to come. What follows is fetched from Mr. Baxter
concerning Origin and Cyprian, that in the Primitive times none were Baptized
without express covenanting, etc. is still meant of Aliens, so is that of
Origen's being a Teacher of the Disciples at Alexandria, and others that
succeeded him in that work: so that to bring instances of this Nature is but
trifling, and not to the question before us; yet we cannot but observe the
Author's humor, who, when we quote any thing for Infants Baptism out of the
works of those Fathers, he brands it for spurious, but when he pleases to make
use of any of their sayings, which he would have interpreted against the same,
then they are authentic, and must pass for current.

CENT. IV.
HIS discourse upon this Century is veryinjurious to the Magdeburgenses, who
have not a word of very many things which he fathers on them; as

First, That it was the universal Practice of this Age, to Baptize the Adult
upon Profession of Faith; as if Infants had been excluded, for so we are to
understand him, or else he speaks nothing: wherefore I desire the Reader to
observe what the Century-Writers speak concerning the matter, and I shall give
him a just account thereof.

We have before shown (say they) out of Cyprian and Origin, Infantum Baptismum
in Ecclesiis Africanis in usu fuisse supra ex Cypriano and Origene demonstratum
est, hoc vero seculo eundem durasse ex Athanasii questione 124. Constat.
that Baptizing of Children was in use in the African Churches, and that the
same continued in this Age is evident from the 124th Question of Athanasius.
Besides Nazianzen (speaking of the Churches of Asia) says, that Infants ought
to be Baptized in case of danger of death, De Asianis Ecclesiis Nazianzenus
loquens Infantes Baptizandes esse ait.
and the said Father also grounds it upon Circumcision; but if they were not in
eminent danger of death, he advised they should delay Baptism for three years
or there-about, till they could be taught some of the Mysteries of Religion. We
must look upon this (say the Magdeburgenses) as his peculiar Opinion. Nazian.
Orat. 3. in S. Lavacrum. Cent. 4. Cap. 6. Page 417. And verily Nazianzen's
delay for three years, that they may be taught Mysteries, is a weak conceit;
for what can a Child be capable of at that Age? or if he be taught to say
something, it is like that of a Parrot without understanding. But the same
Gregory Nazianzen in his 40th Oration is for Baptizing Children, (...).
not only in case of danger but absolutely. Have thou a Young-Child, -- let it
be Baptized from an Infant, let it be early Consecrated by, or to the Spirit.

Secondly, He puts a gross abuse upon the Magdeburgenses, in representing them
to affirm that all the Eastern Churches did only Baptize the Adult, or Aged. We
may judge what credit to give him by these following instances.

First, he perverts the saying of Athanasius, as if it were directed against
Infant Baptism, when meant only of Infidels, who according to Christ's
Commission must first be taught, then Baptized. Athanasius was for
Infant Baptism and it was Practiced in his days, Athan, ad Antioch. qu. 114.
as appears by that passage of his to Antiochus 114th Question; Where he
resolves a doubt that might arise from the death of Infants, whether they go to
Heaven or no. -- seeing, says he, the Lord said, Suffer little Children to
come to me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: And the Apostle says, Now
your Children are Holy, it is manifest, that the Infants of Believers which are
Baptized, do as unspotted and faithful enter into the Kingdom. Where mark again
how unworthily Antipaedobaptists abuse the Fathers, in saying their strongest
Argument for Childrens Baptism is from Tradition, which they fly to for want of
Scripture.

Next he cites Hilary, and we are of his mind, that confession and profession
is requisite to precede the Baptizing- Aliens, but what is this to exclude the
Infants of Believers from that Ordinance?

And whereas he says the Eastern Churches did only Baptize the Adult, this is
abominably false. His first instance is of a saying of Basil contra Eunomium,
Lip. 3. Must the Faithful be fealed with Baptism-Faith must needs precede, and
go before. And in his Exbortation to Baptism, he says, that none were to be
Baptized but the Catechumens, and those that were duly instructed in the Faith.

Now this is sufficient to impose a fallacy upon any Ordinany Reader, that has
no acquaintance with that Father, and understands not in what sense he speaks,
who would hot think that this Ancient Dr. was against Infant Baptism, and that
no such thing was owned in the Church in his days? Whereas the same Father, in
the very next lines to what the Author has above cited, speaks thus, -- What
then say you of Infants, Quid vero de Infant ibus ais? qui neque, quid gratea
quidve sit paend dognorunt? number and illos Baptizeious? maxim quidem, idque
nobis designat post octavum diem Circumcisio illa, etc.
which neither know good, nor evil, may we Baptize them? Yea, (says he) For so
we are taught by the Circumcising of Children etc. Hence forward, have a care
Reader, how you trust the Authors Quotations, for the palpable abuse done to
this Father.

The next is Nazianzen, that the Baptized in his time used in the first place
to confess their Sins; but I am before hand with them in respect of this
Ancient Dr. of the Church, and love not to repeat. Nazianzen (says he) advised
that the Baptism of Infants be deferred, quoting it out of Dr. Tailors Liberty
of Prophesy. Besides what we have said of Nazianzens judgment, that he
dissuaded not Infant Baptism as unlawful, but as conceiving delay for three or
four Years more expedient; but if there were Aliquid periouli, any fear of
death, then he allowed of it: I shall mind the Reader that when the Learned Dr.
Tailor brought in Nazianzen against Infant Baptism, he personated an
Anabaptist; but in his latter discourse you have his Judgment very fully for
Infant Baptism confuting his former piece; and particularly he quotes the
following passage out of Nazianzen for Infant Baptism, viz. What will thou say
of Children which neither are sensible of the loss nor the grace? shall we
Baptize them? yes, by all means in case of urgent danger, for it is better to
be Sanctified [ i e Baptized] without their knowledge, than to dye without it;
for so it happened to the Circumcised Babes of Israel etc. I conclude this with
what Vossius says of him in his Thesis de Baptismo -- non igitur Nazianzenus
etc. Nazianzen was not against Infant Baptism.

After him comes Ambrose, who in his 3d Book de Sacramentis. Cap. 2. has this
saying, That the Baptized did not only make confession of his Faith, but was to
desire the same.

I perceive he is still sick of the old disease, for that this Father speaks of
the Pagans, in what order they were taken into the Church, and not in
Opposition to the Baptizing Infants needs no other proof, than that he himself
was for it. Quia omnis aetas peccato obnoxia, ideo omnis aetas Sacramento
idonea. (i.e) Because every Age is Obnoxious to sin, therefore every Age is fit
for the Sacrament.

There is one or two more, but I will leave them for we have enough of it.

After this small Shot, the Author lets fly Canons and Decrees of Councils, for
Baptizing such as were of years of discretion, and were able to rehearse the
Articles of the Creed; as also we have an Enumeration of several persons born
of Christian Parents, that were not Baptized till they were of Age and able to
give account of their Faith.

To which I Reply, first Grant that some Councils were against Infant Baptism
which we shall not yield) yet if we must go by number of Councils, we shall
carry it. He names three which he would have thought to be against
Infant Baptism, and I think I shall not exceed in saying we may name ten times
three for it: and mark Reader, he takes the privilege of citing Councils, but
if we do it, they are slighted and condemned for Popish and Superstitious. 2.
We conceive those Councils he names, had also respect to Pagans in their
Decrees, and we have good reason for it: because the Canon of Neocaesaria
speaks plainly of the Children of such Women as come out from amongst Infidels,
being proselyted to the Christian Religion in their Pregnancy, as Mr. Marshal
tells Mr. Tombs, This is taken out of Mr. Tombs Exercitation and Examen.
when he Objected the same thing. The Author has taken the whole Story out of
him and all the rest upon the matter, which follows in this Century is fetched
from his Exercitation and Examen printed 27. years since, and Answered by that
Reverend Divine Mr. Steven Marshal, in his Defense of Infant Baptism. I would
make a parallel betwixt the Author I have to deal with and Tombs, but that it
would be tedious, wherefore instead of that I will transcribe the same things
out of Tombs, which the Author has brought again upon the Stage: If the
Reader compare them he will find, never two Eggs more alike.

Mr. Tombs in his Examen Page 10. has it thus: Grotius (says he) in his
Annotation on Matt. 19.14. adds, That the Canon of the Synod of Neocaesaria
held in the year 315. determins that a Woman with Child might be Baptized,
because the Baptism reached not the fruit of her womb, because in the
Confession made in Baptism each ones free choice is showed. From which Canon
Balsomon and Zonaras do infer, that an Infant cannot be Baptized, because it
has no power to chase the Confession of Divine Baptism. This is according to
what we have in H. D. to a tittle: what impudence then is it to trouble us with
this filly and ridiculous Story, when Mr. Marshal proved to Tombs that the
inference brought from hence against the Baptism of Believers Children was
altogether invalid. For the Canon there speaks of the Children of Women come
out from among Infidels, and come over to the Christian Faith, during the time
they were with Child. For Balsomon says, such Women as were with Child and
come from the Infidels, and what is this to our Question? (says Mr. Marshal)
which is about Children born in the Church of believing Parents; and Balsomon
the Glossator distinguishes of Children, some in the womb and some born, for
the first (faith he) no man can undertake (he means in Baptism;) and for the
other, they answer by such as undertake for them: which words (as Mr. Marshal
observes) are not mentioned by Mr, Tombs, (for he says no more than what he
found in Grotius,) and for the partial relation, he is sharply rebuked for
wronging the Truth, and laboring to deceive people, and yet the Author I
conflict with persists in the same course.

Next the Author speaks big words, telling us, That in farther Assurance and
Confirmation of this great Truth, we have most remarkable Instances of several
of the most Eminent persons of this Century, that were not Baptized till Aged,
though the Offspring of Believing Parents, viz. Bazil, Gregory, Nazianzen,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Austin, Constantine.

This also is Mr. Tombs again, Examen p. 9. And that People may not be
startled with these great names, Reply Tombs his Examen, P. 9.
and be made to think, that Childrens Baptism, was not practiced in the Church
in those days, wherein they lived, I shall acquaint the Reader out of Mr.
Marshal, upon what grounds Christians heretofore deferred their Baptism;
namely, sometimes they would do it in imitation of Christ who was not Baptized
till about thirty years of Age. Constantine the Great put off his Baptism till
he came to the River Jordan, in which Christ was Baptized, some deferred it,
till they had contracted a great deal of sin, out of an erroneous conceit, that
by Baptism it would be all washed away: Much more we have of this in Marshal's
Defense of Infant Baptism, Page 27.

Now for the Instances, I find Tombs begins with Constantine, and then comes
on Nazianzen, but the Author here ends with Constantine. This argues
nevertheless it was taken thence: I shall trouble my self no further to seek
after any other reason why the Baptism of these men was delayed than what Mr.
Marshal gives Tombs.

For Constantine the Great (though the Son of Helena, who is reported to have
been a zealous Christian) not Baptized till he was Aged: it does not appear
that his Mother was a Christian when he was born, and for his Father
Constantine, every one knows he was none, though he favored the Christians.
Furthermore, Mr. Marshal conceives the reason why he received not Baptism in
his Infancy was thus as follows; viz. Constantine his Father, albeit a man of a
sweet temper, and tender of his Subjects: first out of the mildness of his
nature favored the Christians (seeing their unblameable Conversation and
Faithfulness in all their employments) therefore he did not in a hostile way
pursue their Religion, as other Emperors did: yea at length he grew to a good
esteem of it, especially toward the end of his life: in this time his Son
Constantine the Great, lived in Dioclesian his Court, from whence (his life
being twice in danger) he suddenly escaping, came to his Father then sick, and
presently upon his death was saluted Emperor. These things considered it is no
marvel if he were not Baptized in his Infancy, when for ought we read neither
of his Parents had then embraced the Christian Religion: When he was returned
at his Father's Death he was thirty years of Age, and whether ever his Father
was Baptized, the Story is silent. Neither is Helena her affection to Religion
in his Infancy related in the Story, though afterward it is often mentioned.

Tombs.

Nazianzen (says Tombs for we have to deal with him almost everywhere in H.
D. (...) Treatise) was the Son of a Christian Bishop. But how does that appear
(faith Mr. Marshal)? there was a time when he was a Heathen, whether he was
Converted before his Son was born, is not expressed: whilst he was young he went
with Basil to Athens to be bred in humane Literature, and from thence to
Antioch, but not a word is mentioned of his being addicted to Christianity:
Having spent thirty years in the Study of Humane Literature, he returns to his
Father; and if his Parents were Christian when he was born, they showed no good
sign of it in sending him to Athens to be trained up among Idolatrous Heathens:
so it is aquestion whether Bazil's Father was achristian when he sent him
likewise to Athens, to be there bred in humane Literature, though afterward he
became Bishop of Nisen.

Tombs.

Then for the Story of Chrysostom, it is verbatim out of Tombs his Examen page
9. who says (out of Grotius upon Matt. 19.) That he was born of Christian
Parents and educated by Meletius a Bishop, yet was he not Baptized till past 21
years of age.

It is well replied by Marshal, That this is taken up purely upon the credit of
Grotius, who gives no account from whence he fetches the relation; which is
the more to be suspected, because the Magdeburgenses speak not a word of it:
And the Ecclesiastical Historians, that set forth the place of his Birth and
Parentage, and likewise his Call to his Ecclesiastical Dignity, are silent in
this, and give not the least hint of his Religion or Baptism. Others speaking
of him and of his Parents, say they were both Heathens, and his Father dyed
within a very short time of his birth. It appears ( says Mr. Marshal) from his
own Writings, that when he was twenty years of Age his Mother was a Christian;
but whether Father or Mother were so at his birth is uncertain; and not likely,
because his Education in his younger-time was under Libanius, a great Enemy of
the Christians; by which it appears, that it is falsely suggested, that he was
Educated by Meletius.

Lastly for Austin, (for he is the last we will speak of, and we may judge of
the rest by these) he was not Baptized says Tombs, Tombs Examen, Page 14.
Examen Page till about 30. though Educated as a Christian by his Mother
Monica: To which Mr. Marshal thus replys, viz. I will not take upon me to
determine what the particular reason was of his not being Baptized in his
Infancy, but from hence there is no cause to say that Children of Christians by
profession in that Age were not Baptized in Infancy. For first it must be
proved that Austin's Parents were Christians at his Birth; otherwise whatsoever
is said of him, is not to the Question. Austin himself tells us in his
Confessons: That when he was [Puer] a Child, he was extreme sick like to dye,
and he and his Mother were both troubled for not being Baptized, and for his
Father, he says at that time, he was an Infidel etc. But enough if not too
much of this, they that would know the full Story of his Fathers Conversion,
may find it in Austin's Confessions Lib. 2. c. 6. And Austin himself confesses
he put off his Baptism till about the 30th year of his Age, being poisoned with
the Manichean Heresy, in which he continued nine years, Confess. Lib. 3. c.
11. and during which time he says, he derided Baptism. Reader, I am not
willing to make Ostentation of greater skill in History than I have, and
therefore know I am beholding to Mr. Marshal who has made these Relations
ready to my hand.

After this we have a plausible Story of one Walfridus Strabo an Ecclesiastical
Historian, and what is brought from him the Author borrows from his good friend
Mr. Tombs: you shall have it in his very words, that you may know where the
Author has been fishing. Tombs in his Exercitation Printed 1646. Page 27.
has it thus. Tombs his Exercitation, Page 27.
The words of Walfridus Strabo who lived about the year 840. in his Book De
Rebus Ecclesiasticis Chap. 26. are these: We are also to note, that in the
first times the grace of Baptism was wont only to be given to them, who by
integrity of body and mind were come to this, that they could know and
understand what profit is to be obtained in Baptism, what is to be Confessed
and Believed, what lastly is to be observed of them that are born again in
Christ, and confirms it by Austin 's own Confession of himself, continuing a
Catechumenus long before Baptized: but afterward Christians understanding
Original Sin ne perirent parvuli [Tombes has it in Latin, but the Author in
English] and lest Children should perish without any means of Grace, had them
Baptized by the Decrees of the Council of Africa, and then adds how Godfathers
and Godmothers were invented.

To this I Answer, That Strabo is condemned by many Learned men, for a false
and heedless Writer, and they have shown his errors in diverse things. Vossius
charge him with no small faults in relating matters of Fact. As,

First, he said, Austin in his Confessions tells us, he continued a
Catechumenus till he was 25 years old. [ Tombs mentions not this as knowing
Strabo was out in his reckoning:) Now Austin himself tells us in his
Confessions, that he was not converted till about the 30th year of his Age; and
after that continued a Catechized Person two years, and in the 34th year of his
Age, he was Baptized at Millain by Ambrose.

Secondly, whereas he makes as if Infant Baptism were an Innovation, and not in
use in the first times, he goes about to prove it very simply, from Austin's
being Baptized at full years: as if Austin's times had been the first times,
whereas we have shown before it was in practice many hundred years before he
was born; and Austin himself (that lived many hundred years before Strabo was
born), affirms, That the Church always had it; always held it. It was a solid
Observation of Mr. Geree in his Vindiciae paedobaptismi, That if the Antiquity
of Infant Baptism had been dubious amongst the Ancients, surely some of the
Latin or Greek Churches that held the delay of Baptism more convenient, and
persuaded it, would have been the more persuaded against the use of it, from
its Novelty, and given at least some hint of that in their Arguings.

Thirdly, I observe a pitiful escape in Walfridus Strabo, who says
Infant Baptism took its rise and foundation afterward, when Christians came to
understand Original Sin; and when was that I pray, does he think never till
Austin's days? I suppose Christians understood this as soon as ever Baptism was
enjoined; the Scripture is so express touching Original corruption: Nay the
very Heathens by the light of Nature knew, that we were Originally depraved,
although they could not tell which way it came about, as Duplessis largely
shows in his Verity of Christian Religion. This also was shadowed forth to the
Jews in Circumcision: In sin was I conceived says David, etc. What a strange
imagination then is it in this Writer, That the Baptism of Infants was an
Invention found out in Austin's time, to wash away Original Sin, of which
Christians till then had been ignorant! It is very true the Fathers were of
opinion that it was of use for that, and that long before Austin. They knew
Infants were defiled, although they had lived but one day upon Earth as Origin
speaks, Hom. 8. in Luke although Origin mistakes as to the manner how they came
to be defiled. For this fancy of Strabo, minds me with another of Origen's, a
little more extravagant, who thought Baptism served to wash away those sins
which the Soul was guilty of, whilst it was in some other Body (a Pythagorean
fancy,) before it entered into the body of the Child; whence it appears that
Origin was not for the Traduction of Original Sin from our Parents, but a
patron of the Pelagian heresy, (afterward so called.)

Fourthly, Strabo is much out too about his Godfathers and Godmothers, which
were in use in the Church many hundred years before Austin was born, even in
the 3d Century in Tertullian's days and yet he tells us, they were first
invented in Austin's days.

Fifthly; Lastly this Srabo does at last kick down the good pail of Milk, which
he before gave our Adversaries; for declaring his own Opinion upon the matter
he says, that it was a sign of the growth of Religion after a diligent search)
to take up the practice of Infant Baptism, and amongst other Testimonies cites
the Fathers in general for it, in opposition to the prolonging of Austin's
Baptism, till he was Adult: And concludes at last thus -- Wise Christians
Baptized their Infants, being not as some heretical persons, opposing the Grace
of God, and contend that Infants are not to be Baptized.

Some others my Antagonist brings, and quotes Authors for persons not Baptized
till grown up; which whether true or no, I shall not enquire nor undertake to
determine of the reasons why their Baptism was delayed, which very likely may
be the same with those beforementioned, or ^or other causes which shake not
the Basis, upon which Infant Baptism is settled, nor strike at the general
Practice of the Church.

CENT. V.
HE tells us again, That in this Age, Believers Baptism was Asserted, and the
grounds thereof by many learned Writers: and here take notice Reader how
egregiously he Faulters, for he instanceth only in two, Chrysostom and Austin:
the former saying, That the time of Grace and Conversion was the only fit time
for Baptism; which was the season the three-thousand were Baptized in the 2d.
of the Acts, and the five-thousand afterward, Acts 4.

The latter, that is Austin, in his Book de fide and bonis Operibus, Cap. 6.
says, That none without due Examination, both as to Doctrine and Conversation
ough to be admitted to Baptism.

In these Quotations the Author seems to have forgotten himself; for see what
he says in his Treatise Page 121. there he gives an account of the Doctors of
this Age [ Cent. 5.] that approved Infant Baptism, the first is Chrysostom, the
words cited by him are these: That Infants ought to be Baptized, as universally
received by the Catholick-Church: And again, That which the Church throughout
the World unanimously teaches and practices about the Baptizing of Children,
ought not carelessly to be slighted. Magdeburg. Cent. 5. Page 375. Then he
instanceth in Austin, who (says he) was as a great Patron, so a great Defender
of Infant Baptism, in his Contests both against the Donatists and the
Pelagians, and the Celestians; and then sets down some passages out of his
works for it: so that here we have these Fathers (according to the account he
gives of them) diametrically opposite to themselves, and how shall we reconcile
them? very easily, (even as we may do with the sayings of the rest:) for when
they speak of the Baptizing persons after examination as to Doctrine and
Conversation, they mean Pagans: and when they Assert Infant Baptism, The
Fathers Reconciled.
it is in the behalf of the Children of Believers born in the Church. And just
as the Author has served these Fathers, so has he constantly dealt with Mr.
Baxter, in all the Quotations taken from him, concerning a profession of Faith
which he maintained as necessary before Baptism, in his Disputation with Mr.
Blake; although Mr. Baxter did so cautelously advertise the Reader, that a
Profession which he so much insisted upon, was to be understood only in
reference to Adult Persons; and that the dispute had no reference at all to the
Children of visible Believers.

Let us now for a Conclusion of this Century, hear what the Magdeburgenses say,
concerning this Age -- Baptisati sunt porro tum Adulti tum Infantes. that is,
both grown Persons and Infants were Baptized, Cent. 5. Cap. 6. Page 654.

And they tell us how they dealt with the Adult in this Age; Ae Adultorum
quidem fuit ea conditio, ut prius in Catecheseos parti-bus recte and solid
instituerentur, unde ipsis nomen Catechumenorum fuit.
namely, First they were rightly and solidly instructed in the parts of the
Catechism, and from hence they were named Catechumenists, of which we have such
frequent mention in Ecclesiastical Writers.

CENT. VI.
IN this Age (says the Author) The Adult upon Profession of Faith, were
Baptized. This is no news: and yet it is observable he gives no instance of any
such that were Baptized; which if he had, it had been nothing to the purpose;
unless he could have proved that in this Age the judgment of the Church had
been against Infant Baptism, which is quite otherwise: for the Magdeburgenses
cite this saying of Maxentius, Propterea recentes ab utero parvulos credimus
Baptizari, that is: We believe Infants newly born are to be Baptized. The
Author is so straightened in this Century, that he knows not well what to say,
at length he pitcheth upon a speech of Gregory, and would have that interpreted
against us. Gregory says, Lib. 4. c. 26. That a Sermon was used to be preached
to those that were to be Baptized to renounce the Pomps etc. This argues
something, but it is only that our Antagonist is not yet recovered of his old
disease. For this of Gregory is certainly meant of the method the Church then
used in Baptizing the newly converted Pagans: for the Magdeburgenses signify in
the same Century Page 228. how Gregory was for Infant Baptism, by the doubt
which he resolved about Abortives. The question there put is this, what becomes
of Abortives, Nunquid Abortivi aeterna requie perfruuntur?
do they go to Heaven? they are not born again of Water etc. and so have the
guilt of Original Sin lying upon them, (this was the general opinion of those
times, that Baptism took away Original Sin): now Gregory he answers it thus,
That the Faith alone of others, may be as helpful to them, as Water is to
others. Truly Gregory seems to be no very good Testimony, either for or against
Infant Baptism, only we have this advantage, that as to matter of fact it was
in use in his days: it is strange the Author should pitch upon such a man for a
Testimony, but any body will serve the turn, if any thing drops from his pen,
that may be wrested against Infant Baptism.

The Magdeburgenses take notice of several unsound and ridiculous passages of
Gregory; as particularly what he says in Cantica Canticorum, viz. -- A
peccatis omnibus in Baptismo abluimur, that is, The guilt of all our Sins is
washed away in Baptism; for certainly (says he) The Mare Rubrum, the Red Sea,
was a figure of Baptism: and as Pharaoh and his Host was drowned therein, so
are all our sins drowned in Baptism. And it is a very sweet saying which the
Author cites out of the same place, Cent. 6. Page 226. That Baptism is the
Divine Fountain. wherein the Faithful have the new Creature brought forth. The
Author helps him a little in the Translation, for it is in novam Creaturam
regenerantur, are regenerated into a new Creature; and yet they were according
to this nonsensical sentence the Faithful before they were new Creatures.

CENT. VII.
THe Author begins this Century with the Bracarens Council held in Spain, which
decreed, That no Adult person but such who had been well instructed, and
catechized, and duly examined should be Baptized. Cent. 7. Page 146.

At the reading of which I could not but smile; for it minded me with what I
have heard related concerning a certain Thief, who having secretly gotten into
a Room, and being by himself, was observed by one not far from him, how
earnestly he looked about for something to fasten on, but finding nothing of
worth, stoopsdown, and filled his Pookets with Rushes: the Observer comeing in
upon him unexpectedly, demanded, what he meant; why says he, only to keep my
hand in action. If the Author could have found that it had been decreed in that
Council that none should be Baptized without being Catechized etc. this had
been ad rem. No body denis but the Adult, or Persons grown up, ought to be duly
examined before Baptism. The Magdeburgenses say, it was determined in this
Council, that none should be admitted to Baptism (ex Adultis) of Persons grown
up; where note, that this Decree has nothing to do with Children: but is still
to be understood of Aliens, newly come over to Christianity; for it was decreed
that for twenty days before Baptism, the Catechumenists should be convened
before the Clergy, and learn the Creed. And after the Magdeburgenses have said
this, they presently add -- Item in sexto Constantinop. C. 2 do. it is
ordained, that none shall be Baptized, unless he can say the Creed, and
Lords-Prayer, (Exceptis his, qui propter aetatem loqui nondum possunt;) except
those who by reason of Age are not able to speak: See here again, Reader, what
little integrity there is in this Authors Quotations.

He concludes this Century with the relation of one Paulinus, that Baptized in
the River, Trent here in England, a great number both of Men and Women at
noon-days. Bid L. 2. c. 16. Cent. 7. p. 145.

This will be found as little to the purpose as the rest, for nothing can be
hence inferred against the Baptism of Believers Children; forbid himself
tells us, that at that time the inhabitants of this Island were Pagans; for
'twas when Gregory sent Austin with forty others from Rome (whereof Paulinus
was one) to preach the Gospel; Sic in initio Ecclesiae apud Brittannos, ubi jam
cito templa non potuerunt extrui, passim ad Flumina turba Baptizata est. Beda
L. 2. Ang. Hist. Cap. 14.
and he says it was when first of all a Christian Church was planted among the
Britains, and before any Temples were erected, so that they were necessitated
to Baptize in Rivers. The Author pretermits all this in silence; if our
adversaries did or would but understand, the import of that distinction of
Ecclesia Constituenda and Ecclesia Constituta, that is a Church to be planted,
and a Church already planted, we should have no more trouble about this
Controversy.

CENT. VIII.
HE has not yet done with venerable Bede, for he quotes other passages out of
him, but I have no mind to repeat; only reader know, that Bid and we are of
one mind about the order of Baptism, in reference to Pagans. Teaching before
Baptism (says he) is rectissimus Ordo, a most right Order, which is intended
by him with respect to Pagans; for he declares himself for the Baptism of
Believers Children, else what interpretation shall we put upon those words of
his cited by the Magdeburgenses, Page 223, of this 8th Cent. namely, Christi
corpori per Baptismum tota Credentium Soboles adunatur, By Baptism the whole
Offspring of Believers are united to the body of Christ: and suppose Bid had
been against Infant Baptism, yet no body has any great cause to glory in his
Testimony, who in many things was very corrupt: and the Magdeburgenses also
take notice of several gross passages of his about Baptism. Cent. 8. Page 221.
As that in his comment upon the 14th Exodus Page 221. Diabolus in Spirituali
lavacro, id est, Baptismo, suffocatus est. In Baptism the Devil is choked,
which is not likely unless also his head could be got under water, and kept
there long enough; with much more such pitiful stuff there mentioned.

CENT. IX.
THe Magdeburgenses acquaint us that in this Century the Baptism of Infants was
Asserted, and grounded upon that Text Matthew. 19. Suffer little Children to come
unto me, and forbid them not; and they tell us of one Hincmarus a Bishop, how
sharply he reproved one that was against it: for the Bishop said, that in
denying it, he did that Quod nullus unquam Christianorum facere ausus est;
Which no Christian ever durst to do. Cent. 9, cap. 4. page 140.

CENT. X.
UNder this Century, in their 6th Chapter Circa ritus Baptismi, about the Rites
of Baptism, they have this passage that in this Age tam Insantes quam Adultos
Baptizabant, They Baptized both grown Persons and Infants. ^atrini adhibiti
etiam sunt. Magd. Cent. 10. p. 293.
Cent. 10. page 293. Besides, they give instances of several Infants Baptized,
and tell us, that Godfathers were in use in this Age, and that they strictly
enjoined, that they look to it, that the Children that were Baptized be
instructed in the Christian Faith, when they come (ad sustain et atem) to
ripeness of years, Cap. 6. Page 292. yet is not the Author ashamed to insinuate
as if they had been against Infant Baptism, even in this Age also. For first,
he brings in Auslbertus (the Magdeburgenses call him Ausbertus,) and what of
him? Why he has this expression (which the Author quotes out of the
Magdeburgenses) namely, That the Faithful are born, not of Blood, but of God;
viz. of the Word of God preached, and of the Baptism of God duly administered,
by which Sacraments God's Children are begotten, Cent. 10. page 189. Good
Doctrine indeed, and much to the purpose; Baptism is one of the Sacraments, and
the Word preached another.

The next is Smaragdus on Mat. 28. Ordo Baptizandi in Adultis a Smaragdo
traditur, say the Magdeburgs.
What, says he? why first, Men are to be taught, (that is, Heathens) afterward
baptized; That this is his meaning, take his own word for it, page 188. where
he thus expresses himself, Little Children are to be baptized, because it is
said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, etc.

Last of all the Author cites Theophylact, from the Magdeburgenses, and would
fain have it also believed that he was against Infant Baptism, because of that
saying of his, Whosoever is truly baptized, has put on Christ, page 189.

I cannot but think the Author does wilfully mistake, and sets himself on
purpose to blind the Reader; for he cannot but observe the Magdeburgenses
quoting that passage of his, on the 15th of Luke, Cent. 10. page 190. where
Theophylact lays down this Position, That an Infidel or Pagan must needs die in
his sins; Why? because he has not put off the oldman sacramentally; that is,
he has not been baptized. This Ancient Doctor speaks in that place only of
such, and what is this to the Baptism of Believers Children?

CENT. XI.
HEre Anselm is introduced by him, as if he were against us, because he says
Believers are baptized into the Death of Christ, Cent. 10. page 186. I perceive
the Author's pulse begins now to beat very low: For the Magdeburgenses do in
this Century bring in a passage most express for Infant Baptism, in the Comment
on the third of Matthew, Octavus dies in quo Circumciditur Infans dies est
Baptismatis, in quo Neophytus quisque exuitur labe pr^ae generationis. The
eighth day, in which the Infant was circumcised, is the day of Baptism. Also on
Romans 6 Anselm has this saying; Profecto and parvuli qui Baptizantur in
Christo, etc. page 260. They tell us farther, that in this Age they did baptize
not only Adult persons, but such as were newly born, page 260. and also give
instances of diverse Children baptized in this Age, citing a passage out of
Meginhardus de fide, That in this Age Sureties were in use, which answered for
the Children.

CENT. XII.
RVpert, Lombard, Aquinas, and the rest of the Popish Schoolmen were zealous
Asserters of Infant Baptism; and whatever they speak of Confession or
Profession, before it be administered, is meant, as before, of Pagans; and the
Magdeburgenses cite diverse passages of Lombard, how that Children, although
they have no Faith of their own, may be baptized in the right of others Faith
that present them to the Ordinance. Johannes Boemus, [the Author mistakes and
calls him Bohemius] is indeed of Strabo's mind, and besides these two I may
truly say, that from the beginning of the Centuries hitherto, this unfaithful
man has perverted the sayings of all the Authors which he has quoted; and
upon consideration of his carriage herein, I am confident of these two things:

First, That never did any Writer more prevaricate, and show more fashood than
he has done.

Secondly, That he would certainly have forborne it, if he had thought any man
would have been at the trouble to examine and search whether he spoke truth or
not.

PART II.
We now come to the Second Part of his Treatise, which is to disprove
Infant Baptism, under this Head, That the Baptizing of Infants is no Ordinance
of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. I.
Containing his first Argument against Infant Baptism, because there is no
Scripture for it; which is in form as follows.

If (says he) Infant Baptism had been any Appointment or Ordinance of Jesus
Christ, there would have been some Precept, Command or Example in Scripture to
warrant the same; but inasmuch as the Scripture is so wholly silent, there
being not one syllable to be found in all the New Testament about any such
Practice, it may well be concluded to be no Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

THe Argument consisting of two Branches, must accordingly be answered in
Parts. First then, to that which has ever been objected by them, there is no
Precept or Command; We answer:

1. A thing may be said to be commanded in Scripture two ways.

First, Expressly, or Liter thy and Syllabically, that is, totidem verbis, in to
many plain term, or words. Thus we acknowledge Infant Baptism is not commanded;
it is nowhere said, Go, baptize Infants: if it had, there would have been no
controversy.

Secondly, A thing may be commanded in Scripture Implicitly, and by good
consequence; and what is thus commanded, is as valid and obliging, as if it
were in so many letters and syllables; and thus we affirm Infant Baptism is
commanded. There are in Scripture clear Grounds and Principles. from whence by
just and warrantable Consequences it may be deducted, that the Children of
Believers have right to Baptism; for, if they belong to the Covenant, and are
Holy, if they are Members of the visible Church, etc. then they ought to be
baptized. So then the Argument against our Practice drawn from a want of
express Precept, is built upon a false Hypothesis; That no direct Consequences
from Scripture are mandatory and obliging, contrary to the Judgment of all
Orthodox Divines, and the Method of Christ and his Apostles in their Arguings.
Christ proved the Resurrection of the Body against the Sadducees not by any
express Text, but by Consequence, Mat. 22.31, 32. So Paul proved the
Resurrection of Christ by Consequence, Act. 13.33, 34.

2. There needed no express Command in the New Testament that Infants should be
signed and sealed by Baptism, when the Covenant is not abolished that took in
the Seed with the Parent: as there needs no express Command for the Lord's-
Day, or First Day Sabbath in the New Testament, because the fourth Commandment
for substance is still in force: So there needs no new Command for Baptizing
the Infant Seed of Believers, because the Command for sealing such, is for
substance still in force. It is also well noted by Mr. Gerce, that there is a
great difference between an Ordinance it self, and some particular
Circumstance, or Subject to which that Ordinance is to be applied. As for the
Ordinance it self the setting up of Baptism as a Sacrament of the
Gospel Covenant renewed by Christ, this requires express warrant in the Word of
God; but when we have such warrant for the Ordinance it self, to whomsoever we
find by grounds and principles in Scripture that it does of right belong, there
we may apply it, though we want express Command for it, if we have none against
it.

3. We farther add what is well argued by some Divines: That if the Children of
Believers have a right to be Baptized by the word of Promise, Mr. Stephens, and
Mr. Sydenham.
then they have a right to be Baptized by the word of Command; but the Children
of Believers, have a right to be Baptized by the word of Promise: therefore
they have a right to be Baptized by the word of Command. Now that Children have
a right to be Baptized by the word of Promise, appears from Act. 2.39. For the
Promise is made to you and to your Children, etc. The exceptions which the
Antipaedobaptists make against this Text shall be removed in its proper place.

Now for the other Branch, there is no Example of Infants being baptized;
therefore it is no Ordinance of Christ.

The Consequence stands upon a lame Leg: for, as is before shown, a negative
Argument in matters of Fact is not valid. For Christ did many things that were
not recorded, and so did the Apostles, whereof this was one for ought we know,
the Baptizing Infants: and it is the more probable upon a twofold account;
First, because we find such frequent mention of their Baptizing whole Families,
as Stephanus and his household, Lydia and her household, and diverse others, as
soon as we read of the head of the Family to believe, the whole household was
baptized. As when Abraham believed, he and his whole Family were circumcised;
and so when the Head of a Family became a Proselyte, ordinarily He and His were
Circumcised. Now in so many Families. as were baptized, it cannot rationally be
supposed that there were no Children, and if there were any, they were
baptized; for they are a part of the Family or Household. And secondly, Because
we never read in Scripture of any Children of Believing Parents who were
Baptized afterward. Our Opposits will not believe the Apostles baptized
Children, because we can give no particular instances of it; but this Negative
Argument may be thus retorted against themselves. The Children of Believing
Parents were baptized in their Infancy, for they cannot find in Scripture, any
of them that were baptized when they came to years of discretion, and not
before. I urge not this as a concluding, though probable Argument, that in the
Apostle's days Children were Baptized; however I am certain, that to say
Infant Baptism is no Ordinance of Christ, because we have no examples in the
Scripture of any that were Baptized, is a pitiful Argument.

Next, says he, That there is neither Precept nor Example for any such thing,
as Infant Baptism in the Scripture, we have the ingenuous Confession of the
parties themselves. The Magdeburgenses do say, That concerning the Baptising
the Adult both Jews and Gentiles, we have sufficient proof; but as to the
Baptizing of Infants, they can meet with no Example in the Scriptures.

Very good Sr. now you have learnt to set down things right, but why did you
say in the 56 page of your Treatise referring to the same place Cent. 1. L. 2.
page 496. That the Magdeburgenses as to the Subjects of Baptism tell us, that
in this Age they only Baptized the Adult; was that lapsus calami or mentis? And
do you not know that in the same place they tell us, notwithstanding particular
instances cannot be found, (as all the Paedobaptists confess); yet it is evident
from the Writings of the Apostles, that they did not exclude Infants from
Baptism, and then bring Arguments for the lawfulness of it, as before?

For that of Luther in his Epistle of Anabaptism, I have not the Book by me to
Examine it, yet I am sure by what the Author cites it hurts us not. The
Scriptures (says he) do no where clearly and plainly with these, or the like
words say, Baptize your Children for they believe: and we must needs yield to
those that drive us to the Letter.

This is still no more than what we all say: we all acknowledge it is nowhere
written, Children do believe (as Lutherans hold they do); and again we say as
Luther did, it is nowhere written clearly and plainly, with these words,
Baptize your Children for they Believe. Nor have Antipaedobaptists any command
in so many words, Go and Baptize actual and visible Believers. If they say such
were Baptized, we may reply with Mr. Sydenbam, that is not to the purpose: for
it is a verbal command, which they require to give warrant to an Ordinance, and
for ought we can learn from Christ's Commission, Matt. 28.19. Whosoever are
taught (be the parties never so wicked) they must be Baptized (if they will)
for there is no mention made of their entertainment of the Gospel.

Next he Fathers that upon Erasmus, which was never spoken by him in his
Comment upon Romans 6. Namely, That Baptizing of infants was not in use in St.
Paul's time. There is no such word, I assure thee, Reader, there.

Again, in his 4th Book de Ratione Concionandi, he says, That they are not to
be condemned that doubt whether Childrens Baptism were Ordained by the Apostles.

But why, Sir, did you not speak out all? You know Erasmus his words are these:
Probabile est tingere Infantes institutum fuisse ab Apostolis, non damnaretur
tamen qui de hoc dubitaret. It is probable the Baptism of Infants was
instituted by the Apostles, nevertheless if one doubt thereof he should not be
condemned. In this Erasmus speaks like an honest, moderat-Spirited man, that
would not have weak Christians Anathematized (as the Papists use to do) for
their dissent in Circumstantial and Disputable points.

Calvin in his 4th Book of Institutes, Chap. 16. confesses, that it is
nowhere expressly mentioned by the Evangelists, that any one Child was by the
Apostles Baptized: to the same purpose are Staphilus, Melancthon, Zwinglius
quoted; to which I only say, That whereas they all tell us, there is no express
Command or express Example, an Implicit one is sufficient; so that in this
long train of Authors which our Antagonist quotes, he does but magno conatu
nugas agere, take a great deal of pains in trifling. But that which he cites
from Mr. Daniel Rogers seems to have more weight, who in his Treatise about
Baptism, Part 29. Confesses himself to be unconvinced by demonstration of
Scripture for it. This is taken from Mr. Tombe's Examen, Tombs Examen p. 2.
page 2. To which I answer, one man may be fully convinced by
Scripture-demonstration, when another is not: but it is fit the Reader should
know all that Mr. Rogers says there upon the point; for it is unhandsome to
bring in scraps out of Authors. He tells us, he no less doubts of the
warrantableness of Infant Baptism, than he does of the Creed, saying that
sundry learned men have undertaken to stop their Schismatical mouths that
oppose it, and to answer their peevish Arguments; and though he says his scope
tends another way, yet gives his reasons for it.

1. Because Circumcision was applied to the Infants on the 8th day in the
Old Testament,

2. There is no word in the New Testament to infringe the liberty of the Church
in it: nor special reason why we should bereave her of it.

3. Sundry Scriptures afford friendly proofs by Consequence.

4. The holiness of the Child (External and Visible) is from their Parents,
therefore the seed being holy, and belonging to the Govenant, the Lord
graciously admits them to the Seal of it by Baptism.

Farther he brings a passage out of Mr. Baxters plain Scripture Proof for
Infants Church Membership and Baptism, Where he confesses, page 3. That
Infant Baptism is not plainly determined in Scripture.

Hear what he says Reader, and then judge what he gains from Mr. Baxter: all
that he says is as follows viz. The Scripture speaks fully of those particular
controversies that were on foot in those times, but more sparingly of those,
not then questioned, and then names diverse questions, which the Scripture fully
and plainly determines.

But (says he) many others as difficult, which then were no Controversies,
have no such determination: and yet [mark it] the Scripture is sufficient to
direct for the determination of these too; if we have wisdom to discern the
Scope of the Spirit, to apply general rules to particular cases: Such is the
Case of Infant Baptism, Afterward in the 9th page we have this, The grounds (
says he) upon which Infants are Baptized are very easy, and plain, though to
many it be difficult to discern how it is from those grounds inferred: and
therefore though some few learned, and Godly and humble Men, do doubt of it,
yet in the whole known Christian part of the World there is but few.

After this we have something brought out of Dr. Taylor's Lib. of Proph p. 239.
concerning Previous dispositions that are requisite to Baptism, of which
Infants are not capable. But to prevent transcribing I refer the Reader to his
latter Piece of the Consideration of the Practice of the Church in Baptizing
Infants; where he himself confutes what he had said in his Liberty of Proph.
you have it page 25, 26.

Here also we have a parcel of Authors introduced, who do all, are rolundo,
express fully their judgments: That nothing must be done in Gods Worship
without Scripture-Warrant. Mr. Ball is one of them whose saying our Antagonist
fetches out of Mr. Tombs. Exerc. page 9. M. Tombs Exercit. page 9.
so it is also in his Exam. p. 2. Tombs Examen p. 2.
joined to that of Mr. Rogers beforementioned. Mr. Balls words are, We must
look to the Institution, and neither stretch it wider, nor draw it narrower
than the Lord has made it: For he is the Institutor of the Sacraments
according to his own good pleasure; and it is our part to learn of him, both to
whom, how, and for what end, the Sacraments are to be administered etc. But why
does he not set down all that Mr. Ball has in that place -- Circumcision, and
Baptism ( says he) are both Sacraments of Divine Institution, and so they
agree in the substance of the thign signified, the persons to whom they are to
be administered, and the order of Administration, if the right proportion be
observed: as Circumcision sealed the entrance into Covenant, the Righteousness
of Faith and Circumcision of the heart, so does Baptism much more clearly. As
Abraham and his Household, and the Infants of Believing-Jews, were to be
Circumcised, so the Faithful their Families, and their Seed are to be Baptized.

At last he thinks to rout us quite with a saying of Bellarmin's, whose very
name gives us an Allarm and sounds Bellum and Arma, War and Arms. The
Anabaptists, says Bellarmine, call for plain Scripture Proof for the Baptizing
of Infants, and their Argument from defect of Command or Example, have great
force against the Lutherans, for as much as they use that Principle every where
viz. That the Rite which is not in Scripture, having no Command or Example
there, is to be rejected. Yet it is of no force against Catholics, who
conclude that Apostolical Tradition is of no less Authority with us, than the
Scripture; but that this of Baptizing Infants is an Apostolical Tradition etc.

To which I Reply, that the Author might well have omitted this of Bellarmin,
since it is but acunning insinuation of that Jesuitical Sophister, to set.
Protestants at greater distances amongst themselves and to advance the esteem
of their adored Tradition. And yet he himself speaking elsewhere of
Infant Baptism says, satis aperte ex Scripturis colligitur, etc.
Infant Baptism is plainly enough gathered out of Scripture.

CHAP. II.
The Historical Account which the Author gives of Iafant-Brptism in its Rise
and Establishment, Examined and Condemned.

In this Chapter he presents us with the History of Infant Baptism, and tells
strange news, if you will credit him of its Original since the Apostle's days.
Thus he begins:

1. From the learned Authorities before given, we have gained thus much; that
as there was no Precept in Scripture, for the Baptizing of Infants, so neither
was there the least Practice to be found thereof in the Apostles days, as was
so ingeniously before Confessed by the Magdeburgenses, Luther, Calvin, Erasmus,
Rogers.

1. BUt we have made it appear, Sr. that you reckon your gains too fast, and
have much erred in casting up the Sum, as the Reader may find in the preceding
Chapter. I question not if he be impartial he will conclude you have not gained
a farthing, but are rather a loser hitherto. For among all those Learned
Authorities before given, there is no passage (although never so much strained)
that says any more than this: There is no Express precept in Scripture for the
Baptizing of Infants, and this every Child knows, but in saying there is no
Express one, they intimate thereby, there is an Implicit one. I love not to
repeat, the Reader may, if he please, reflect upon what they say. And in as much
as the point relates to matter of Fact, notwithstanding the confidence of the
adverse party, unless they can produce one Express place of Scripture, where it
is said, No Infant was Baptized, or some Express Command not to Baptize them,
their calling for an Express Command, concludes nothing against our Practice.

2. Moreover we affirm against their Practice, that there is no Express Command
in all the Book of God, to plunge persons Head and Ears under water: nor can
they by any convincing Circumstance about the manner of Baptizing, make it
appear (though thousands were Baptized in a day) that any one was so severely
dealt with in the primitive times: we shall show, when we come to it, that the
word [(...)] among Heathen and Ecclesiastical Writers does promiscuously
signify to dip into, or wash with Water by pouring on of it; and in the
Scripture it is more frequently taken for Washing, than dipping.

3. They have no Express Command or Example to Baptize, or plunge themselves as
they do with their Clothes on; which is rather a Baptizing Garments, than
Bodies. Since they are so much for Express Command and Example, let them first
justify their own Practice by it, before they condemn us for want of it.

2. He tells us, That the approved Practice and known custom of the Primitive
Church was to Baptize the Adult, as all Ages acknowledge, and only they, at
least for the first, as is so fully attested by Eusobius, Beatus Rhenanus, Lud.
Vives, Bullinger, Haimo, the Neocaesarian Council.

Look back Reader to that saithful Account I have given from the
Magdeburgensian Century-Writers, and thou shall be able to judge of the truth of
what he speaks. I am necessitated to touch upon it again, what Eusebius speaks
of Origens being a Teacher before Baptism, refers to the Pagans; what that Old
Popish St. Beatus Rhenanus says of the Ancient custom which was to Baptize
those that were come to full growth, with the Bath of Regeneration, if it
relates to Heathens it is no more to purpose than the former out of Eusebius;
but if we are to understand him so, as if no Children were anciently admitted
to Baptism, no, not those of Believers, then we plead an older custom, even as
old as Origin and Tertullian, that Children were Baptized in the Church: and as
Mr. Calvin has it in his Instruction against the Anabaptists; The Holy
Ordinance of Infant Baptism has been perpetually observed in the Christian
Church, for there is no ancient Writer that does not acknowledge its Original,
even from the Apostles; which was the Reason why Austin has that Expression
concerning it, namely, Nullus est Scriptor tam vetustus, qui non ejus Originem
ad Apostolorum saculum pro certo referat. Calvini Instit. cap. 17. part. 8.
page 227.
Ecclesia semper habuit, semper tenuit. The Church always had it, always held
it. And for Lud. Vives his saying: That they Baptized the Adult in some Cities
of Italy, his Testimony has been always looked upon as very incompetent,
because he was but of yester-day, and we have nothing but his bare word for it,
and not to be compared with Austin's, a man of great integrity, and that lived
above thousand years nearer the Apostles, who affirms it was not only Practiced
in his day, but before, and quotes Testimonies for it. Then for Haim^, all that
he sais upon Matt. 28, will not prejudice us, his words are, Here is set down a
rule how to Baptize, that is, that Teaching should go before Baptizing etc.
which we confess ought to be so, when we have to deal with Pagans, and he
speaks of such. And as none of the Popish Schoolmen are for the Authors turn,
though we have many passages quoted out of them, to no other end but to blind
the Reader, and make the Book swell; so I am mistaken if that which he quotes
out of Albertus Magnus the Conjurer, be much for his turn: you have it in the
12th Cent. p. 85. of his Treatise. And lastly for the Neocaesarian Council,
that business is of a very ridiculous nature, and impertinent to the question;
for the matter under debate in that Council, was about a Woman that was
pregnant, who being an Infidel came to be Baptized, and the Canon speaks of
such a one, and not of a Woman that was within the Church, and of a Child born
of a believing Parent, as is fully shown before in Cent. 4.

3, Whereas, he says, not only the Children of, Pagans were to be Instructed,
and taught in the Faith, in order to Baptism; but the Children of Christians
also: as those famous instances given from the 4th Century. We have shown in
our discourse upon that Century, the corrupt and silly grounds upon which they
deferred Baptism till they were grown up, in those days, and some of the
instances there given had Parents that were Heathens, when they were born, and
so continued till they were come to Maturity, and that was the reason they were
Baptized, though it is true, their Parents were at last converted to the
Christian Faith.

4. He farther says, that as there was no Scripture-Authority for it, so no
Human Authority, till above 400 years after Christ; though to justify that
injunction, Apostolical-Tradition, to supply the want of Scripture-Institution,
was pretended.

I may almost say truly of this Quot dicta, tot maledicta; so many words, so
many foul reproaches, Calumniare fortiter and aliquid adhaerebit, said
Machiavel, and our Author follows the Rule exactly, he thinks he can never
throw dirt enough upon Infant Baptism, hoping some will at last stick. I shall
Reply to this,

First, To say there is no Scripture-Authority for Infant Baptism, and that
Apostolical Tradition was on purpose brought in to supply the want of it, are
presumptuous, weak, and false dictates: Since the same Men, viz. The Fathers,
that call it an Apostolical Tradition, do upon the matter all of them, plead
for it upon Scripture-grounds as Cyprian, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Ambros,
Epiphartius, who argue for Infant Baptism, because it came in the room of
Circumcision, and from the right the Infants of the Jews had to Circumcision;
and of latter days Protestants own nothing for truth that comes under the
notion of Apostolical-Tradition, Proinde necessario veniendum erat ad argumenta
ex Scripturis: quae si rem non evincant, frustra traditionem ad vocabimus Riv.
Animad. in annot- Grotii in Cassandrum. Art. 9. p. 71.
unless they see ground for it in Scripture; they are of Rivets mind, that
Tradition is in most points uncertain, and therefore^ if we will be certain of
a thing we must see the footsteps of it in the word.

And Mr. Calvin speaks to the same purpose in his Instructions against the
Anabaptists. Caeterum minime peto ut in eo probando nos Antiquitas ullo modo
juvet etc. I do not in the least desire to borrow help from Antiquity for the
proof of this point, any whit farther than the judgment of the Ancients shall
be found to be grounded on the Word of God. For I well know that as the custom
of men, does not give Authority to the Sacrament, so the use of the Sacrament
cannot be said to be right, because regulated by Custom.

2. What though there was no Human-Authority for it till above 400 years after
Christ, is this any Argument against it? The Author borrows this from Dr.
Tailors Lib. of Proph. p. 237. for he learns how to speak from him: the Drs.
Words are -- as there was no Command in Scripture to oblige Children to the
susception of it; so the necessity of Paedobaptism was not determined in the
Church, till the Canon that was made in the Milevitan Council. This Milevitan
African Council was Ann. Chapter 418. and belike the reason why it was not
established sooner by Councils under an Anathema, was because it was rarely, if
at all questioned or opposed till then, by any person of note, as to its
lawfulness. Hear what Dr. Hammond says in answer to Dr Tailor, about this
matter: It being granted by the Objecter, says he, that Paedobaptism was by
Canon Established in the Milevitan African Council, Ann. Chapter 418. yet, as long
as it is also confessed, that it was practiced in Africa before, there will be
little concluded against us. For what stood by Apostolical Practice and known
Custom, needed not to be prescribed by Canon, as that which prevails by force
of a greater, need not be assisted by a weaker Authority. And indeed while the
footsteps of so Authentic a Tradition were so lively and no Adversary, or
Disputer started upno question or opposition yet made against a Common usage,
'twere ridiculous for Councils to convene, and fortify it by Canons: and so the
only thing reasonably deducible from the lateness of those Canons, is, that all
that while it was universally received without Opposition: I mean not, says
the Dr, that no Infant, or any Christian was unbaptized through the space of
those first (4) Centuries, but that the extending of the Institution to
Infants, was not Opposed in the Church till about Pelagius's days, whose
opinion of Original Sin (utterly denying the guilt of it on Adam's posterity)
was such, as might consequentily produce some change in his opinion of
Paedobaptism: for in the 219 page he quotes out of the 5th Hom. of Eusebius
Emissenus, de Pasch, a passage intimating that Pelagius himself asserted the
Baptizing of Infants, though not propter vitam, for life, yet propter regnum
coelorum for the Kingdom of God (i. e.) entrance into the Church, as is
conceived.

3. Whereas he says Apostolical Tradition was pretended. Let not the Reader be
afrighted with this word Tradition, or because Origin, and Austin calls it a
Tradition of the Church; for when the Fathers so call it, they do not intend it
in such a sense, as if the Church were the Author, but the Subject of it,
Magdeburg. Cent. 1. L. 2. Cap. 6. p. 496. Origines and Cyprianus and alia
Patres Authors sunt Apostolorum etiam tempore Infantes Baptizatos esse -- both
Origin and Cyprian and other Fathers hold that Infants were Baptized in the
Apostles days: and Austin's Rule is a reason for, it little less than a
demonstration, quod universa tenet Ecclesia etc. that which is universally
received and practiced by the Church, and had not its first Institution from
some Council, but has been ever retained, may well be believed to be an
Apostolical Tradition. August. contrae Donat. L. 4. C. 24.
Moreover when the Fathers call thi^ ^n Apostolical Tradition ((...) do other
Opinions) it is (as our Divines usually answer the Papists) in regard points of
this nature are not expressly in terminis in the word, but may be fairly
gathered thence by consequence. Chemnit. Exam. Council. Triden. par. 1. p. 68,
69. To the same purpose we have Dr. Field of the Church Lib. 4. Cap. 20. The
4th head of Tradition is the continued Practice of such things as are neither
contained in Scripture Expressly, nor the Examples of such Practice Expressly
there delivered, Though the grounds, reasons, and causes of the necessity of
such practice, be there contained: of this sort is the Baptism of Infants,
which is therefore called a Tradition because it is not expressly delivered in
Scripture, that the Aposties did Baptize Infants etc. nor any Express Precept
there found, they should do so, yet is not this so received by bare and naked
Tradition, but that we find the Scripture to deliver unto us the grounds of it.
Thus we see, both the Fathers and Protestant-Writers take Tradition in a quite
different sense from that the Romanists usually take it in, who equalize the
Authority of Tradition with the Scripture, yea indeed give it the pre-eminence
above it. And now judge Reader, what the confident assertions of our Antagonist
do amount to, whether dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu; whether the
proverb be not verified in him viz. a great cry, and a little Wool.

Now follows the Historical Account he gives us of the Apostolical Tradition
pretended to (as he speaks it) for Infant Baptism.
IT is not worth while to search into so many musty Authors as are quoted by
him; and indeed I thought to have taken my leave of him, and to have met him
again in the 3d Chapter, because there we shall encounter the exceptions he
brings against those Authentic Testimonies we alledg from Antiquity for our
Practice; nevertheless having run over his History, usque ad nauseam, I shall
pass a few Remarks thereupon.

1. The multitude of Authors quoted, argues great ostentation of much Reading,
though much of it is prepared to his hand, and for certain, the most is rather
ad Pompam than ad Pugnum, rather for show than service.

2. Yet has he manifested some Artifice, and cunning;

1. In raking out of the Dung-hil, all the filthy Rites used by the Romish
Church in the Administration of Baptism, as Exorcism, Chrism, Salt, Albes, or
White-Garments, Milk, Honey etc. And his design herein is to dazzle the eyes of
the weaker sort, and to make them believe even Infant Baptism it self is also a
corrupt Innovation. But this will not take with the judicious who are able to
distinguish between the accidental Corruptions of an Ordinance and the
Ordinance it self. We know Antichrist has defiled most of the Ordinances of
Christ and annexed thereto many Superstitious Ceremonies: as in the other
Sacrament of the Communion, Adoration of the Elements is enjoined, and yet
these do not disparage the Ordinance it self, in the Institution and Substance
of it, but only defile the Communicants that so superstitiously use that Sacred
Appointment. Besides the Papists have affixt these corrupt Rites, not only to
the Baptism of Infants, but of those also who are grown up: and so the force of
arguing from them, if Infant Baptism were removed, will ly against Baptism it
self. We ought not therefore to impute these corruptions to God's Ordinance of
Baptizing Infants, and on that account deride and cashier it, but rather as the
Magdeburgenses do Cent. 2. p. 111. to the Mystery of Iniquity, Mr. Geree of
vind. Paedobapt.
which so works in the Church of Rome in their corrupting and contaminating the
simple form of Baptism. Indeed, says Mr. Philpot the Martyr. (to his
fellow-sufferer that scrupled Infant Baptism, and afterward was satisfied by
the strength of his Arguments) if you look upon the Papistical Synagogue only
which have corrupted God's Word by false interpretation, and has perverted the
true use of Christ's Sacraments, you may seem to have good handfast of your
opinion against the Baptism of Infants; but for as much as it is of more
Antiquity, and has its beginning from God's Word, and from the use of the
Primitive Church, it must not in respect of the abuse in the Popish Church be
neglected, or thought inexpedient. Nor has the Baptism of Adult Persons in
former times been free from many corrupt, and ridiculous Human inventions, as
Dr. Homes out of Binius and Epiphanius shows at large. The Council of Carthage
tells us, Bin. Ca. 34 de rebus. Eccles. Cap. 26.
that sick men lying speechless might be Baptized, upon the witness of men
touching their former condition.

The 4th Council of Carthage, orders, That those of ripe years to be Baptized
must be dyered, Bin. Cap. 85.
and kept from Fesh and Wine a long time, and after that, having been examined
several times must be Baptized.

Epiphanius declares that the Eunomians (called Anabaptists) do Rebaptize all
that come to them, Epiphan Anacephal. page 108. Edit. lat. Bazil.
turning their Heads downward, and their Heels upward.

Some of the Anabaptists called Hemerabaptists thought, that none could be
saved, unless they were daily-Baptized, whence they were called (...), Gerard.
Joh. Voffus de Anaebaptismo, These. 17.

Gastius de Anaebap. Exodus p. 50.


daily Baptists, and so were cleansed from their Sins. Singulis diebus
mergerentur, ita ut Abluantur and Sanctificentur ab omni culpa.

Secondly, Another small plot or piece of tunning lies in linking some spurious
Authors with those which are Authentic, to render also their Authority
Suspicious. There are some Ancient Writers which are very express for
Infant Baptism, and of great Authority in the Church of Rome, which are
rejected as spurious, or interpolate, by the Protestants; such is that of
Dimysius the Areopagite, and the Decretal Epistles, who notwithstanding have in
high account the Testimonies of those Ancients viz. Justin Martyr, Irenaus,
Origin, Cyprian, etc. which are reputed as Authentic and of undoubted truth.

3. There is much Impertinency in his Historical Account, that is not concerned
in the Question. As the Story of Constantine, Dedication, Consecration or
Baptizing of Churches and Bells, Exposure of the Relics of Saints for
adoration, Prohibiting Priests Marriages, with much more ejusdem farinae, But
what is all this to Infant Baptism?

4. There are some errors or falsities in it. As Tertullian's standing up
against. Infant Baptism in the 3d Century; when he stood up no more against it,
than he did against the Baptizing of Young Men that were unmarried, and
Young-Widows also, whose Baptism he would have delayed. It Is certain he argues
for the delay of Baptism in some cases ( praecipue circa paroulos, Tertul. de
Bapt. C. 8.
especially that of little ones) meaning the Children of unbelievers as is
conceived by Estius, Pamelins, and diverse others.

A Second Error respecting this Century, is, That the Magdeburgenses tell us,
they altered the form of Baptism, from dipping to sprinkling: referring us to
Cent. 3. page 129. where they speak no such thing nor any-where else in the
whole History of Baptism.

A Third Escape, is, That Infant Baptism was not in use in the greatest part of
the 4th Century either in the Latin or Greek Church. Now this is very false,
nor will that help him which he adds afterward, Scil. It is true (says he)
toward the latter end of this Century, it is said, that in some parts of
Africa they did Baptize Children as Magdeburg Cent. 4. p. 415. but they say no
such thing; it is only the Authors own saying: and really it troubles me to see
so much prevarication everywhere. Take Reader the true account of what the
Magdeburgenses say de Ritibus circa Baptismum, about Baptismal Rites. They are
large in this Chapter, and begin it thus, That the power of Baptizing was in
this Age in the Priests, and principally in the Bishops, and then in Presbyters
and Deacons, and then a few lines after they tell us, Baptizabantur autem
public in templis cujuscunque sexus, aetatis, and conditionis homines. Persons
of each Sex, and of all Ages and Conditions were publicly Baptized in the
Temples. Nor has this Chapter any such passage at the beginning, middle, or
latter end; that in some parts of Africa they did Baptize Children.

5. I will not say, there is a Tincture of profaneness, but am sure of
something like it, in that saying of the Authors page 128. of his Treatise viz.
In this [6th] Century (says he) we meet with a dreadful piece of
Infant Baptism viz. The Heads of 6000 Infants that had been murdered and buried
in a Warren near a Monastery, as testified by Vldricus to P. Nicolas, Cent. 6.
p. 338. But the Magdeburgenses are not so bold as the Author, to call such
horrid murder Infant Baptism. A tender conscience me thinks should be afraid
thus to play with Holy things.

6. This History of his affords some contradiction to himself, I mean to what
he has before written: for in the first part of his Book Cap, 2. page 7. he
quotes Bid for a Testimony, that the Baptizing of Believers is the only true
Baptism -- Bid says, That Men were first to be instructed unto the Knowledge
of the Truth, then to be Baptized, as Christ has taught etc. Cent. 8. p. 220.
Whereas in this his Second part of the Treatise, which is for disproving
Infant Baptism, page 130. Bid also concludes for the Baptizing of Infants,
Cent. 8. p. 218.

7. We observe too great a boldness in those scandalous Reflections which he
casts upon the Churches of the Reformed Religion, sparing none, neither
Lutherans, nor Calvinists, nor: Episcoparians, nor Presbyterians. But me thinks
it is a piece of great indiscretion to fly out so much against the Church of
England, for if she be contented to give the Antipaedobaptists indifferent good
quarter although they do not conform to her, why should any of them vilify her
in this manner? As for the Kirk of Scotland the Author may more securely mock
at it, and there is no danger in having a fling at the Directory, or at the old
Parliament's Ordinance of May 2d. 1648. which made it imprisonment to affirm
Infant Baptism is unlawful.

CHAP. III.
Containing his Exceptions against Infant Baptism, because built (as he says)
upon, 1. Fabulous Traditions. 2. Mistaken Scriptures, with an Answer thereto.

1. The first and Principal ground (says he) that has been asserted for this
Practice is Ecclesiastical and Apostolical Tradition.

THis is a false suggestion, and exceeds all modesty: for although the Church
of Rome ascribes too much to Tradition, as in many other things; yet the
Ancient Fathers, as Cyprian, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, with diverse others, as is
before shown, plead Baptism to come in the room of Circumcision, and that
Infants have right thereto, from the Infants of the Jews having right to
Circumcision, whereby it is evident that Tradition has not been primarily
asserted to be the ground of Infant Baptism.

2. He farther says, The Protestants since the Reformation, have chose to fly
to some consequential Arguments deducted, as they suppose, from the Scriptures,
to prove the same: both which in this Chapter are brought forth, and duly
weighed in the Balance of Truth.

We doubt not in the Process of the discourse to show, that after we have
weighed what she says, we shall find it too light, and to be but chaff in
stead of Truth. The Protestants, he says, have chose to fly to consequential
Arguments, deduced as they suppose from Scripture. But the Antipaedobaptists
are of another mind, and suppose themselves to be Men of deeper Reason, and
more piercing inspection into the sense of the Scriptures, than all the Godly
and Learned Protestants since the Reformation. They see the mistaken conceits
they have of Scripture, and how ungroundedly they draw their consequences from
thence. An Argument indeed it is of much modesty, for the Author to speak at
this rate: I would ask any of these Men, who are so highly conceited of their
Scripture-Knowledg, why Paedobaptists, that are humble, searching, praying
Christians, may not understand so much of God's mind in Scripture as they? Does
the Word of God come out from them? or does it come to them only? John 17.14. 1
Cor. 14.37.
or have they only the Spirit of Illumination? or are they the only Masters of
right Reasons? Or dare they say it is unlawful to make use of Consequences? Or
may not we be permitted to use them for Infant Baptism as well as they against
it? Do not they argue from Matt. 28.18, 19. and Mark 16.16. None ought to be
Baptized but such who are first taught, and consequently that no Children ought
to be Baptized, because they be not capable of teaching. Vide Tombs.
Is not this. their constant way of Arguing? Now how unreasonable is it for men
to practice that themselves, which they will not allow of in others. I remember
Mr. Staltmarsh in his shadows flying away, does much condemn Consequences, and
says Prudence and Consequence are the two great Engines of Will Worship: good
Doctrine indeed, and a fine preparative to an Implicit Faith! But Mr. Baxter
chastises the folly of these men in his Plain Scripture Proof etc. Position
10. page 8. Evident Consequences, Quae colliguntur ex Scripturi^ sacris,
perinde habenda sunt ac si in illis scripta essent. G^eg Naz^anzen. L. 5.
Thelog.
or Arguments drawn by reason from Scripture, are as true Proof, as the very
words of a Text -- would it not make a man pity such senseless, ignorant
wretches (says he) that will call for express words of Scripture, when they
have the Evident Consequences or Sense? Is Scripture-Reason no Scripture? If I
prove that all Church Members must be admitted by Baptism, and then prove that
Infants of Believers are Church Members, is not this as much as to prove that
they must be Baptized? I suppose no man of sound judgment will deny that the
sense, or meaning of Scripture, is Scripture as well as the Letters, and
Syllables in the Bible: For the sense, and meaning of the Letter of the Word
must be drawn out by rational Consequence, as the conclusion from a Proposition
by a fit medium; and if this were not so, the searching and studying of the
Scriptures were a needless undertaking, and so would all Preaching and
Expounding be. It is a good observation of Dr. Sclater in his Comment upon the
5th verse of the 4th Chapter of the Romans; That God's Spirit in Scripture
speaks as well what he implies, as what he expresses; as well what by
Consequence is deduced, as what in sum of Words he utters: And instanceth
in that of James, 4.5. says the Scripture in vain? etc. It is usual for our
Adversaries to cavil against this Theological Axiom. Say the Papists, and
Anabaptists (for in this like Sampson's foxes they are joined together by the
tayls, whilst their heads look several ways) where have we it taught, that
Infants should be Baptized in all the Scripture? To which we answer, we have it
not in Express terms, but by just Consequence. Where find we that Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us for Justification? says Bellarmine. Why, in
Express terms we have it not, but Virtually and by just Consequence we have it;
2 Cor. 5.21. In the Equivalent we have it, Romans 5.17, 18, 19. You are wont to
boast, says Bellarmine, of the Word of God, and to reduce all your Opinions to
this one head, but in the Case of Justification by Faith only, that help fails
you; for you were never able to show in the Scripture that particle [only]. To
this we Reply, that if we have it by Consequence from Scripture, and if we have
it in the Equivalency, we have it in the Scripture.

That Tradition has been the first and principal ground of Infant Baptism, he
would prove from Austin, and Chrysostom's sayings.

But how, and in what sense do they call it a Tradition of the Church? why
certainly not as if the Church had been the Author, but the Subject of it as
before, as continued therein all along down from the Apostles. And if any of
the Fathers speak too hyperbolically of Tradition, what is that to us who plead
Scripture as its primary ground for it? Besides Anciently the greatest points
of Faith were called by the name of (...) (i. e.) Divine Doctrines or
Ordinances, for so it is rendered 1 Cor. 11.2. and the same word is rendered
Traditions, 2 These. 2.15. So that Austin's Intendment by that expression of
Apostolical Tradition, is nothing else but Apostolical Ordinance, or Doctrine,
as appears from his own words; saying, The Custom of our Mother the Church in
Baptizing little Infants is not to be despised, nor to be judged Superfluous,
nor to be Believed unless it were an Apostolical Tradition Lib. 10. de Genesis c.
23. (i. e.) an Apostolical Ordinance.

What follows from 153 p. to the 155th, is mostly borrowed from Mr. Tombs his
Praecursor, Sec. 20. p. 86, 89.

As first, The Assertion of the Cardinal Ragusi, in his Oration in the Council
of Bazil. Tombs indeed has it in Latin, but the Author is at the pains to
translate it. And since it is so notorious, and intolerable a piece of
Plagianism, thus to take and conceal from whence he had it, contrary to the
Laws of ingenuity provided in that behalf, we shall make discovery thereof by a
Parallel.

H. D (i.e.) [The Author] In the Council of Bazil in the Oration of of the
Cardinal of Ragusi, It is asserted that in the beginning of this Sacrament of
Baptism, they only were to be Baptized, who could by themselves answer
Interrogatories concerning their Faith; and that it was nowhere read in the
Canon of Scripture, that a newborn Infant was Baptized, who could neither
believe with the heart to Justification, nor confess with the mouth to
Salvation; yet nevertheless, says he, the Church has appointed it.

H. D. Whereas some Object, that Bellarmine, and others do also bring Scripture
for it; Becan. Lib. 1. c. 2. Sec. 24. answers, that some things may be proved
out of Scripture, when the Church's sense is first heard about the
Interpretation (thereof; for so, he says, it is concerning Infants Baptism,
which is proved from John 3.5. But the sense whereby to prove it, is only
manifest by Tradition.

H. D. and it is confirmed in the Canon Law and Schoolmen, that Infant Baptism
was not reckoned perfect till the Bishop laid on hands which was called
Confirmation, viz. of the imperfect Baptism in Infancy: and therefore says
Caistans secundum Jewel, that an Infant wanting instruction in the Faith, has
not perfect Baptism.

H. D. Dr. Field. Lib. 4. p. 375. says, That Infant Baptism is therefore
called a Tradition, because it is not expressly delivered in the Scriptures,
that the Apostles did Baptize Infants or that they should do so. Here the
Author stops and goes no farther being afraid of the next lines.

H. D. Prideaux controv. Theol. Sec. 392. Infant Baptism, says he, rests upon
no other Divine right than Episcopacy. viz Diocesan Episcopacy in use in these
Nations. Here he adds as before he subtracted from what Mr. Tombs said out of
Field.

I. T. (i.e.) John Tombs. In the Council of Bazil, in the Oration of the
Cardinal of Ragusi, it is asserted, Item nusquam legitur in Canone Scripturae
S. quod parvulus recenter Baptizatus, qui nec cord credit ad justitiam, nec
ore confitetur adsalutem, inter fideles and credentes computetur; and
nibilominus, Ecclesia ita determinavit, and statuit etc. And, in principio
hujus Sacramenti Baptizabantur solum illi qui per se sciebant fidem
interroganti respondere.

I. T. And whereas it is Objected that Bellarmine, and others do bring
Scripture for it; Becan. Manual. Lib. 1. C. 3. Sec. 24. answers, aliqua possunt
probari ex Scriptura, quando constat de vero, and legitimo Scripturae sensu. So
he says, it is concerning Infant Baptism, which is proved from John 3.5. but
that the sense whereby to prove it, is only manifest by Tradition.

I. T. Which is confirmed in the Canon Law and Schoolmen; an Infants Baptism,
was not reckoned perfect, till the Bishop laid on hands, which act was called
Confirmation viz. of the imperfect Baptism in Infancy. Jewel alleges it as
Caistans Tenent, that an Infant, for that he wants instruction in Faith,
therefore has not perfect Baptism.

I. T. Dr. Field, of the Church 4th Book Chap. 20. of this sort is
Infant Baptism, which is therefore called a Tradition, because it is not
expressly delivered in Scripture that the Apostles did Baptize Infants, nor any
express Precept that they should do so. [ Tombs is so ingenious as to set down
the rest] yet is not this so received by bare, and naked Tradition, but that we
find the Scripture to deliver unto us the grounds of it.

I. T. Dr' Prideaux, Fasci. Controv. Theol. Loc. 4. Sec. 3. q. 2. Paedobaptism
rests on no other Divine right than Episcopaey.

Now to all this we have said enough before, as to the Substance of it, and I
love not needless repetitions: only let me mind you with this, That though
Papists and others, attribute too much to the custom of the Church, or
Tradition, yet all sound Protestants when they use that word they do it in
Sensu sano, quite different from the corrupt sense of the Romish Church.

And because the Author says Dr. Tailor does so fully and strenuously argue
against us in his Lib. Proph. p. 237, viz. Tradition, says he, must by all
means supply the place of Scripture, and there is pretended a Tradition
Apostolical, That Infants were Baptized: I think it not amiss to bring in Dr.
Hammond to cope with him, in his Letter of Resolution, Quaere 4th of the
Baptizing of Infants, Sec. 104. page 277. where, having before spoken of what
sort of Traditions, have been rejected by the Reformed Churches, he then adds,
Having no necessity to descend to any more minute Considerations, the whole
matter will be resolved into this one Enquiry, whether the Baptizing of
Infants, does sufficiently appear to be of the Institution of Christ, or
Practice Apostolical? And if it do, we have all that we pretend to, upon the
score of Tradition; and if it do not, we are obliged to disclaim that means of
maintaining our plea, or inferring our conclusion.

And because the way of satisfying this enquiry, is but the saying over again
all that has been formerly said on this subject, this whole Discourse having
laid the weight of all upon this one Basis, the Institution of Christ, and
Practice of the Apostles, it will be unreasonable to do this any farther, save
only upon a brief Recapitulation, to refer it to the judgment of any sober
Christian; Whether first, by Christ's founding of the Institution of this
Sacrament in the Jewish Custom of Baptizing of Proselytes, Baptism in use in
the Jewish Church and applied to Infants as well as grown men. The Learned Mr.
Seldom and Light-foot speak the same.
which appears to have belonged to the Infant Children of the Proselytes, as is
before shown out of Goodwin Ainsworth and others, Chap. 1. and Secondly, by his
being so far from excepting against the Age of Children as a Prejudice, or
hinderance to their coming to him (that is to their Proselytism) that he
affirms them to be the pattern of those, Though Children are brought to him by
others, yet they are said to come unto him in Mark 10.14. (...) the very words
of which Proselyte is made.
of whom his Kingdom is to be made up; and though he be not affirmed in the
Gospel to Baptize such (for he Baptized not at all) Mark 10.16. (Which being
the Ceremony usual in the Church, for those that were fitted for Baptism, and
distinctly Preparative to it, they that were by Christ afforded that, cannot be
thought by him less capable of ( Baptism than of that): And Thirdly, by the
express Words of the Apostle, that their Children are Holy, interpreted by the
Context, so as to infer from the Apostles way of Arguing, that it was the
Custom of those Apostolic times to Baptize the Children of the Christian
Parents, and so interpreted by the Christian Writers of the First and Purest
Ages; And Fourthly by the Testimonies of all the Ancients, that are found to
speak of this matter, without any one pretended to dissent, that this was the
Practice of the Apostles; Whether I say, these four things being put together
(the truth of each of which, has been before more largely evinced) it be not
sufficiently Evident, That the Baptizing of Children is of the Institution of
Christ, and Practice Apostolical. Thus far Dr. Hammond.

Next the Author says, he will give us some account of the insufficiency and
Weakness, if not wickedness of those first Authorities, that have been leaned
upon to prove this Practice to be an Apostolical Tradition etc. and he reduces
it to these following. Dionysius the Areopagite, the Decretal Institutions, or
Epistles of several Popes (as he calls them) Justin Martyr, Origin, and
Cyprian.

Concerning the two first of these we look upon them as broken Reeds and we
lean not on them at all: and to produce an Argument for the Apostolicalness of
Paedobaptism from these is (as Dr. Hammond speaks of some which he likes not)
to be look upon of the number of the Blind and the Lame, that are of more use
to betray and lose, than defend and secure that Fort in which they are placed.
Know then, Sir, that we except against them as much as your self, and you know
you have taken all your exceptions against these Romish Forgeries, from the
learned Pens of Paedobaptists. It Is by the elaborate pains of the
Magdeburgenses, Osiander, Perkins, Reynolds, Rivet etc. that they are detected,
who (as you observe) have laid open the Bastardy both of the one and of the
other. From these Mr. Tombs gleans what he has to say upon this point in his
Praecursor, Mr. Tombs his Praecursor.
where you have them collected to your hand, and from whence you fetch what you
present us with: and here I am tempted again to draw another Parallel, you do so
exactly tread in his steps, as first, beginning as he does, with Osiander, then
follows Rivet, afterward Perkins, then the Decretal-Epistles, which pass under
the name of Clement, Hyginus etc. All which are condemned as Spurious by Mr.
Perkins, and he gives undeniable Arguments for it.

But I observe your little design, to render Infant Baptism the more odious by
that appellation you give Clement, Hyginus, with the rest of them; namely, Pope
say you, the Decretals and Institutions of several Popes in this Second
Century, as that of Pope Clement, Pope Hyginus: and is it not strange that the
Pope should appear so early? It Is not handsome thus to impose upon the weaker
sort, that are not read in Church History: As for others that are more learned
they know that Hyginus, (the Verus or true one of that name) is numbered amongst
the first good Bishops that succeeded the Apostles; for so we find him in Dr.
Prideaux his Catologue, and to be the man that set Justin Martyr at work to
frame his Apology for the Christians, and was no Pope in the sense it is
usually taken, viz. An Oeconomical Bishop challenging unto himself, and
usurping Authority over the whole Church. Eusebius. Lib. 4. c. 9.
He is calculated to be the 8th Bishop of Rome, living in the days of
Antoninus Pius about a hundred and forty years after Christ and very near to
the Apostles.

Having thus discarded the feigned Dionysius, and the Personatus Hyginus (as
Mr. Tombs observes he is called by Ostander) with the rest of the cheating
Tribe; laying no stress at all upon what they say, as touching the
Apostolicalness of Infant Baptism, we shall notwithstanding, by the Author's
good leave, still retain a Venerable esteem of the other three that follow. For
honest Men are nevertheless honest, for being rankt with cheats, though I
confess, they are the more liable to suspicion, by such as do not examine
things.

First for Justin Martyr, we shall not altogether quit our claim to him, though
there be so little left of him, as Mr. Baxter notes, that we cannot expect that
he should speak expressly to the point, Justin Martyr, is supposed to have lived
in St. John's days. Scultetus says he flourished Anno 140.
both because he is brief, and treats on other (Theams, to which this did not
belong, and because the Church then living amongst Heathens had so much to do
in converting, and Baptizing the Aged that they had little occasion to treat
about Children, especially it being a point not Controverted, but taken for
granted by the Christians, who knew God's dealing with the Jews Church; yet
nevertheless, says Mr. Baxter, Justin Martyr gives such hints, by which his
Judgment and the Practice of the Church, Baxter, plaint Scripture Proof. p. 155.
even in those days may be discerned.

Touching what is said in Justin Martyr's Responses (against which the Author
levels his discourse) and especially what is said in his 56th Question ad
Orthodoxos, the Author says right, that many of the aforesaid Learned Writers
that are Paedobaptists do disown it as spurious -- And Mr. Baxter himself
Acknowledges the same that though the Book be Ancient, yet it was either
Spurious or Interpolate: True, but withal gives diverse passages for our turn
out of other Works of his, as that in his Dialogue with Tryphon, Part 2.
Propos. 3. Nos certe qui hujus open ad Deum accessimus, non carnalem istam
Circumcisionem, fed Spiritualem -- Hanc, nos per Baptisma, ut pote peccatores
nati, a Deo miserante accepimus; eam licet omnibus similiter accipere. (i. e.)
It was Lawful for all to receive the Spiritual Circumcision, which he says was
done by Baptism, and if all might receive it, even so Infants (who were the
subjects of the Legal Circumcision) for they must be a part of the All and not
excluded.

Another touch we have in that Passage of Justin, importing Baptism to be the
only way to Remission of Sins and Salvation; and he judged that Infants are
forgiven, and saved; therefore he judged that they might be Baptized. As for
the places, I refer the Reader to Mr. Baxter's Plain Scripture Proof, where we
have them quoted, page 155.

2. For Origin we shall with greater confidence adhere to him, notwithstanding
the frivolous Cavils of the Author which are reducible to these 6 Heads.

1. His First is, That Origin is but one single Testimony for the practice of
Infant Baptism to be Apostolical.

Reply.

This will not pass for a Truth, because we have also the Testimony of
Irenaeus, Irenaeus lived in the 2d. Century with Justin Martyr, in the Age of
those that saw the Apostles, and therefore could not be ignorant of their
Practice.
who lived in the Second Century with Justin, even in the Age of those that saw
the Apostles; within the first Century after them. Dr. Hammond in his Letter of
Resolution Sec. 40. page 212. where also we have quoted that Common, though
Famous passage of his Extant in Lib. 2 Adv. Haeres. C. 39. Omnem aetatem
Sanctificans per illam quae ad ipsam erat similitudinem. Omnes enim venit per
semet ipsum salvare, Infantes, and Parvulos and Pueros -- Omnes inquam qui per
eum renascuntur in Deum. (i. e.) Christ did Sanctify every Age, by his own
susception of it, and Similitude to it -- All I say, who by him are born again
to God: where the Infants being Regenerate, and born again into God, must needs
be interpreted after the Scripture-Notion of (...), being born again, or
Regenerate by that laver of Regeneration. 'Tit. 3.5. The Apostle ealls Baptism
(...): and Mr. Mede in his Diatribe says, none will deny but that he means by
the Washing of Regeneration, Baptism.
And as Vossius upon the place, says, to call Baptism Renasce^ia, is usitata
veteribus loquendi forma. By being born again all the Ancient Church-Writers
understand Baptism, and that they took it in this sense, is evinced from that
of Justin Martyr (noted by Mr. Marshal) who speaking of the manner of the
Administration of Baptism uses it in this sense.

The Baptized party, (says he) is brought to the place where the water is, and
Regenerated in the same manner, wherein we were Regenerated; And that he is
there speaking of Baptism under the name of Regeneration, Justin Mart. Ap.
(...), etc.
appears by what is added -- They are then Washed in Water in the Name of our
Lord God Creator of all things, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and
the Holy Ghost. This is taken out of Justin Martyr's Apology, which no man ever
questioned for Authentic.

2. A Second exception, is, That Origen's Writings are very Corrupt as the
Magdeburgenses do affirm.

And is there not much Corruption in the Writings of all the Fathers? and do
not the Magdeburgenses set down the Naevi or Errors of the rest of the Eathers?
and particularly is not Tertullian (one of the Authors Witnesses whom he cries
up as Opposite to Infant Baptism, when it is no such matter) branded by them,
for abominable foul errors concerning God and Christ? and do they not charge
him to be infected with Montanism, and to be the first inventor of that filthy
Ceremony of Chrysm? And notwithstanding Origen's errors, there are very
precious and Golden Truths in some of his Works, particularly in his Comment
upon the Galathians, which seem not to be coined in a Popish Mint: So that what
has been long spoken of him is very true, -- Vbi been nemo melius, ubi male
nemo pejus. Where he speaks right, none better, where wrong, none worse.

3. A Third charge against Origin (which the Author borrows from his old friend
Mr. Tombs) is that of Erasmus who passes this Censure on him, That he that
reads his Homilies, Mr. Tombe's Exercit. p. 28.
knows not when he reads Origin or Ruffinus: and Perkins puts his Homilies upon
the Romans among his conterfeit Works, Mr. Tombe's Examen, p. 7.
as Erasmus Censureth those on Leviticus.

To which we Reply,

1. It is to be noted that neither the Author, nor any one else has any thing
to say against Origen's Homilies upon Luke, where he is expressly for
Infant Baptism, even Mr. Perkins lets this pass without the Censure of being
spurious.

2. All that Mr. Perkins says of his Homilies upon the Romans is, That they
were not fideliter redditi a Ruffino (i.e.) not faithfully Translated by
Ruffinus, which comes not up to a concluding them spurious.

It was then in his account Origen's own work, but errors were committed in the
Translation, of which that of foisting in Infant Baptism is but a weak
conjecture; for why should that be thought? since it was so universally
practiced, and owned in those days.

3. He says, They may well be rejected as spurious if we consider the Story
the Magdeburgenses tell of this Ruffinus, Cent. 4. De illis quae ex Origin aeb
Hieronimo translata, (...) videantur Erasmo, Magd. Cent. 4. C. 10. de Episc.
and Doct. p. 1218.
c. 10. p. 1218, 1219. and I find there is something added to the Story in the
carriage. The Sum of all is that Ruffinus was a naughty man, whose wickedness
(says the Author) was discovered by Jerome, especially his abusing Origen's
Works, many of which he translated out of Greek into Latin, Sophisticating them
at his pleasure, and for which Jerome. writes several pieces to detect and
reprove him.

Reply.

This is something more than the Magdeburgenses speak of him, and they have
only Jerome's word for what they say; who was his mortal enemy, and they report
none of the best neither concerning Jerome, as they have it from the Pen of
Ruffinus. No doubt Ruffinus was no better than he should be; but for certain
the Author is too partial for an Historian, laying all the blame upon Ruffinus,
when the Magdeburgenses do condemn them both for their Enmity and
unchristian-like carriage to each other, and in some things do vindicate
Ruffinus and blame Jerome.

I shall therefore take the freedom partly for diversion, and to rectify the
Story, to give a brief account of the matter. In the first place the
Magdeburgenses do inform us, That there was at first a more than ordinary
friendship, and familiarity between these two, how they were as Brethren and
Companions in Study; but at length there happened to be vehemens dissidium, a
great breach between them, in so much that they became great enemies. But what
was the cause hereof cannot be found in any of Jerome's Writings: after this
they became friends again, at least in appearance.

But the wound was not thoroughly healed, but only skinned over, for a while
after there arose a new quarrel, and they were set at a farther distance than
ever; they fall to calumniating and writing bitter invectives against each
other, and they are both accused by the Magdeburgenses for the virulency of
their Pens.

First Ruffinus charge Jerome to be infected with Origen's Heresies, and put
him to the trouble of an Apology; and besides he accuses him that he had not
rightly translated the Scriptures, instancing in several places. Then Jerome
recriminats and accuses him for translating Origen's Works with his Naevi or
Errors, to the blemish of Origin, and danger of infecting the World thereby.
And here let me tell you the Magdeburgenses interpose and speak their sense of
the matter, that though Jerome charged him so highly, yet it was nimis languida
ut videtur ratione, without sufficient ground for ought that they could find:
For say they, Ruffinus, neither defended nor asserted Origen's errors, nor was
the first that translated his Works; nor did he undertake it arbitrio suo by
his own inclination, but ad Fratrum preces at the desire of his Brethren, as he
fully shows in the Apology which he made to Anastasius for his Faith, a
confession whereof they also set down, which is very Orthodox. Cent. 4. Cap.
10. p. 1202, 1203.

4. The Author is again out in saying, There is only a corrupt Translation of
Origin by Ruffinus, who ingeniously confesses that he took so much liberty in
his translation as to add and alter at his pleasure etc.

It is a great mistake to say there is only a corrupt Translation of Origin by
Ruffinus, and he might have learned the contrary from the Magdeburgenses Cent.
4. cap. 10. p. 1218, 1219. where they say -- extant inter Origenis opera Latina
facta quaedam, quorum interpres fuit Hieronimus, Erasmi judicio; Diverse of
Origen's Works are Translated by Jerome. This is the judgment of Erasmus, as his
Homilies upon Jeremy, Ezechiel, his Homilies upon Luke and the Romans, to both
which Jerome affixeth his own Preface as Erasmus observes, and in both these,
have we the point of Infant Baptism asserted; and so we see the Author might
have spared the pains of telling such a Story of Ruffinus, for we give the
places which are for our turn out of Origin according to Jerome's version, and
if Ruffinus has no credit with him, I hope he will allow a little to Jerome.

3. Lastly, for that other ancient Father Cyprian, he cannot let him pass
without some exceptions such as they are, though me thinks that of Vossius
should silence all Cavils viz, That the Testimony of Cyprian for
Infant Baptism, both in his time and before, is beyond all exceptions. And
Grotius likewise tells us that the Epistle of Cyprian to Fidus, makes the
matter plain that there was then no doubt of Infant Baptism, for Fidus did not
deny their Baptism, but only denied they ought to be Baptized before the eight
day. But let us hear what he has to except against Cyprian, which is;

1. Because he does not urge the Practice from any Apostolical Tradition or
Precept, but from his own and the Council of sixty six Bishops Arguments.

Reply.

But what though no mention be made here of Apostolical-Tradition, Origenes and
Cyprianus Authors sunt Apostolorum etiam tempore Infantes Baptizatos esse.
Magdeburg. Cent. 1. Lib. 2. c. 6. p. 496.
yet it follows not that he held it not as such, and the Magdeburgenses have
before told us that both Origin and Cyprian that lived near the Apostles affirm
that even in the Apostles time Infants were Baptized.

But to see how inflexible and stiff this Antagonist is -- if says he, he had
Asserted it for an Apostolical Tradition, his word would have been no sooner
taken than when he tells us that Chrysm was so.

To which I Reply,

And why then shall Tertullian's supposed Word against Infant Baptism be taken,
and pass for current, who was as the Magdeburgenses inform us the first
inventer of Chrysm; and Cyprian it is like learned it of him who was as the
Author calls him his great Master. Judge Reader whether this be fair and equal
dealing.

2. His other Exception, which he never learned from his great Master Mr.
Tombs, (who was too wise to urge it when he opposed the Testimony of Cyprian.
Examen, Sec. 7. page 10.) is, because there is good ground to question whether
this was Cyprian's and sixty-six Bishops Conclusion.

And why so?

1. Because we meet with no such Council, (and that is strange for one that
has launched as he has done into the vast Ocean of Antiquity) neither yet can
it appear where it was held.

Something must be said, though it be but mere wrangling; Well I perceive the
Ancient Fathers that lived next after Cyprian were dim-sighted, and could not
see what good ground there was to question, whether ever Cyprian had such a
Council. Had they had the perspicacity of this Author, they would never have
retained so venerable an esteem of it, as is evident they had in their frequent
and respective quotations of it. As Nazianzen Orat. 3. in S. Lavacrum.
Chrysostom. Hom. ad Neophit. Ambros in Luc. and Hieronimus Lib. 3. Dialog. Contr.
Pelag. and Austin in very many places; and no less weakness is there in what
follows, viz.

And if Austin's Argument before mentioned be good to prove an Apostolical
Tradition, because no Council had determined it, it concludes against any such
Council.

Reply.

A pitiful mistake, or misunderstanding Austin's Words, which are, Quod
universa tenet Ecclesia etc. That which is universally received, and practiced
in the Church, and had not its first Institution from some Council: (The Author
should have marked that) but has been ever retained, may be believed to be an
Apostolical Tradition: which indeed is an undeniable Position, and being
applied by Austin to the point in hand seems to be a Demonstration of the
Apostolicalness of Infant Baptism: Austin therefore calls it an Apostolical
Tradition, because it was always practiced in the Church, and had not its
first Institution from Councils, neither in Cyprian's Council nor any one else,
being of greater Antiquity than any of them. Neither can any man name when it
began since the Apostles: and for that reason we cannot otherwise conceive
rationally of it, than that it had its first Original from them.

I shall only add those remarkable Words of Mr. Philpot, the Martyr, in his
Letter to his fellow-sufferer that scrupled Infant Baptism; which with the
Scripture-Arguments he used, proved so effectual, that (as Mr. Fox in his Book
of Martyrs tells us) the dissatisfied Person came thereby to be established in
the doctrine of Infant Baptism, and dyed in the Belief of its warrantableness.
I can declare (says Mr. Philpot) out of Ancient Writers, that the Baptism of
Infants has continued from the Apostles time unto ours; and then cites Origin
and Cyprian out of Austins 28th Epistle to Jerome: where are these words viz,
Cyprian did not make any new Decree but firmly observing the Faith of the
Church, judged with his own fellow-Bishops, that as soon as one was born, he
might be lawfully Baptized -- These Authorities (says that famous Martyr a
little before his death) I do alledg not to ty the Baptism of Children unto the
Testimonies of Men, but to show how Men's Testimonies do agree with God's Word,
and that the verity of Antiquity is on our side, and that the Anabaptists have
nothing but lies for them, and new-Imaginations, which feign the Baptism of
Children to be the Pope's Commandment. And so I shall leave the Author to his
Boasting in what follows, and the impartial Reader to judge whether our
Testimonies from Antiquity be forged and fabulous as he would render them; only
I must not let pass an Objection which he starts, and which is usually made by
us, which he had better have left Dormant than to give so slight an Answer to
it.

Objection.

It is said, That by Tertullian's opposing it, it may seem that there were some
that practiced it in the 3d Century, and can it be supposed that any did so,
except it had been warranted by such Apostolical Tradition. Observe, Reader,
the answer which he gives.

Answer.

It is granted, Tertullian did oppose it. But who it was that did assert it,
and whether upon any such account as supposed, is not mentioned, it will be on
their part to prove the one and the other.

Reply.

1. We gather from this Answer that the Author cannot have the face to deny it
was practiced in the 3d Century, for if Tertullian did Oppose it, it must be
supposed it was Practiced, else how could he oppose it.

2. But we must give the names of those that were for it, as before he must
know where Cyprian's Council was held, or else he could not assent to the being
of it: But how many names will suffice him I know not. What if I say Origin was
one, for I hope by this time he may stand rectus in curia and not be excepted
against for a Witness, he speaks point blank to the Case. Ecclesia ab Apostolis
Traditionem accepit parvulis dare Baptismum. The Church has received a
Tradition from the Apostles, to give Baptism to little Children; as we have it
in his Comment upon the sixth Chapter of the Romans. And though Ruffinus
riffled his works as is said, yet Jerome Translated that out of Greek, and so
also his other Comment upon Luke, where he is express to the same purpose; and
this is attested by Erasmus, and Jerome's Prefaces to both Books puts it beyond
doubt. Let me add what I find in Mr. Baxter for farther satifaction. You, says
he, Baxter plain Scripture Proof. p. 157.
to Mr. Tombs think the worse of it, because it is pleaded by Origin as a
Tradition, from the Apostles; I think very much the better for it, both because
it the more fully resolves the question concerning the matter of fact, and
Apostolical Custom, and shows that it was no late invention, or Innovation. And
the Fathers (as is hinted before) took not the word Tradition in the Popish
Sense, for that which has been delivered in Doctrine from Age to Age, above
what is delivered in Scripture, as to supply the supposed defect of Scripture.
But for the very written word it self, by which the Apostles delivered the
Truth, and for their Examples and the report of it, and of some other passages,
especially in matter of Fact, tending only to the explication of their
Doctrines, and not to the adding of new-Doctrines, as if the former were
defective.

What if I name once more Irenaeus; Qui proximus fuit temporibus Apostolorum,
S. Basil de S. Sto. Cap. 25. That was next to the Apostles; who is calculated
to live within some fourty-three years of St. John.

I find the Author has passed him by, and yet as has been before shown he was
for Infant Baptism, otherwise what sense shall we put upon those Words of his,
Lib. 2. C. 39. which are before spoken to; and which occasioned Dr. Tailor to
say, The Tradition of Infant Baptism passed through his hands, in his
Consideration of the Practice of the Church in Baptizing Infants. Sec. 29. page
55.

3. We shall by no means grant that Tertullian was against Infant Baptism, we
have given some hints why already. But shall reserve our discourse about that
till we come to its proper place, that is, the Examination of the Witness
produced against Paedobaptism, whereof Tertullian is the first.

The AUTHOR's Exceptions against Scripture-grounds for Infant Baptism, Examined.
NExt he falls upon Scripture-grounds usually produced for Infant Baptism,
which he is pleased to select for us (leaving out that in Romans 11.17. which is
the most principal place of all) and so to encounter them in that way and
manner as he sees best. And herein he has showed cunning, not much unlike to
that before, in conjoyning the condemned Ecclesiastical Authorities for
Infant Baptism, with those which Protestants own for Authentic.

Reply.

1. Had I been to choose my own Weapons, I would have let alone some of those
the Author pitched upon.

Secondly, Neither would I have ordered the the Proofs from some of the Texts
in so flight a manner, as he does; for if a Weapon be sharp and keen, yet if an
Enemy have the handling of it how can we expect, unless he be the more
ingenious, but that he will blunt the edg of it. And that Adversary shows but
sorry valor, which knocks in the head some Arguments of straw, which he has
framed to show his skill on.

In my Opinion it had been more ingenuity in the Author,

(1) To have chosen for usonly the pertinent places that carry the clearest
evidence, and to have pretermitted the rest: For if the chiefest places will
hold good, the rest which are dark and disputable whether they belong to the
point, may well be let alone; and if the chiefest will not carry it; much less
will the other: yet this is certain that if the strength of every one of those
Texts which he produces for us, were eluded, save one, yet that one would
carry it; for though two Witnesses be needful for men, yet one single one is as
valid for God, as if there were many thousands.

2. To have pitched only upon those Texts, wherein all Protestants both
Lutherans and Calvinists ( i.e. Paedobaptists) concur in, as pertinent to the
point; whereas he knows it is controverted among them, whether some of the
Scriptures produced have any thing to do with Infant Baptism, as both the
second and third Texts instanced in: Nay the third which contains Christ's
Commission for Baptism, is that which the Author and his party judge to be the
main ground for Baptizing Believers, and excluding Infants. And we know that
this is their main Argument, that Infants are not to be baptized, because they
cannot believe, and truly we were very sparing of places to prove childrens
Baptism, if we should pitch upon Mark 16.16. for it. And here I profess my self
to be of Mr. Baxters mind, Pos. 7. page, 7. of his plain proof -- I cannot deny,
says he, but that some Divines have brought some mis-applyed Scriptures for
Infant Baptism: Now it is easy to write against these and seem to triumph, and
yet the cause be no way shaken: some silly people think, when they hear an
impertinent Text put by, that all is done: when it may be all the most plain
Scriptures and best arguments have never been answered with sense or reason.
Having said thus much, I come now to his exceptions.

1. The first is against that place, Mat. 19.15. Suffer little children to come
unto me, and forbid them not, etc.

To this our Author Objects -- May we not say, How does Baptism come to be
concerned in this Text, etc.

To which I reply, First, I conceive none did ever bring this place as of it
self, a full and direct proof for Infants Baptism. But secondly it does prove
two points, which lay a good ground work for the same.

First, That the Kingdom of God is made up as well of Infants as of grown
persons: if any by Kingdom of Heaven, will needs understand it of the Kingdom
of Glory; let him consider that none are of that Kingdom, who were not first of
the Church, first of the Kingdom of grace here, and so it comes all to one,
understand it, of which you please. The Kingdom of God is made up as well of
Infants as Adult persons: Quum jubet Infantes ad se accedere, nihil clarius
quam veram Infantiam notari.

Instit. Christ. Relig. Calv. compend. per Launeum, cap. 17. p. 325.


for Christ says, it is of such (i.e.) Children: not of grown men resembling
Children. For first, That had been no good reason why such should come to him
and be blessed of him.

2. That had been no reason why Christ should manifest so great displeasure
against his Disciples, for going about to hinder them. The word is [(...)]
rendered in the New Translation, much displeased; The vulgar has it indigne
tulit. he took it ill at their hands, indignatus est, says Beza, be looked upon
it with indignation.

Second, The second point which it proves, which is also a good groundwork;
for the same, is, That Infancy is no bar or exclusion of any from coming to
Christ, and receiving a Blessing. Infants are capable of benefit by Christ,
although they do not actually believe; though they cannot lay hold on Christ,
yet Christ can lay hold on them.

Obj. But Baptism is not concerned in the Text, except it can be made out that,
that blessing was Baptizing.

Ans. 1. It is certain that Blessing is not Baptizing, but it is something more,
and Christ in blessing them vouchsafed that to them, which usually was an
Ordinance administered after Baptism, and which is of a higher nature, Acts
8.17, 18, 19. and 19.6.
and so we may argue from this to Baptism Inclusively, or a majori, from the
greater.

2. Though Blessing be not Baptism, yet in as much as they were of the Kingdom
of Heaven whom he blessed, it follows they were qualified Subjects for Baptism,
for grant to Infants a Church relation, and their Baptism will follow upon it;
if one stands good the other will, and this is all we plead for, from the Text.

For that which follows out of Dr. Tailor; Christ Blessed Children, and so
dismissed them, therefore Infants are not to be Baptized.

It is a very idle one. For, First, from a particular Omission to conclude an
universal unlawfulness, is most unreasonable, as Dr. Hammond speaks. It is as
if one should thus argue, [Christ when he Preached in the Mount, did not then
pray, but only preach, therefore it is not lawful to pray. Secondly Christ did
not that we know baptize any, John 4.2. And if an Argument drawn from his
Example Negative, be pressing, it would conclude as well against Baptizing
those of riper years, as children. 3. Since Christ did that for them which did
transcend Baptism, we may rather conclude; that certainly, if he had Baptized
any he would those children, since he shows more respect to them then any grown
persons. Mr. Sydenbam in his Christian and sober Exercitation.
Fourthly, Christ's Blessing them holds forth as much as if he had baptized
them: for in that outward rite the Holy Ghost was conveyed, and by laying on of
hands, others received it, as appears from Acts 8.17, 18, 19. and 19.6. And why
not in this Act of Christ, upon the Infants (as Mr. Sydenham argues) And if
this Act of Christ were not a complement only, but an outward sign of the
receiving the Holy Ghost, Who should hinder Water that Infants should not be
Baptized, seeing they have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Act. 10.47.
And the same Author farther adds -- What can be more then for Christ to take up
Infants in his Arms, lay his hands on them, as an outward sign to consecrate
them to himself, and to show their capacity of receiving the Holy Ghost, and
then to bless them? And yet we must with scorn deny them a little water, and
think it too much to have them named among the lowest sort of visible Saints,
and when Christ owns them publicly, and says, that of such is the Kingdom of
God. But I shall rather believe Christ's Testimony, then any man's forward
opinion. And to what intent should Christ do all this, but to confirm their old
state in the Church, and not to cast them out of it, and from the participation
of all outward signs of falvation? Let men's consciences, not gulph'd in
prejudice, judge: This Text, if there were no more, will fly, (says he) in the
consciences one day of the most confident contemners of Infants, and their
Baptism.

A Second Scripture instanced and excepted against is, that John 3.5. Second
Scripture. instanced and excepted against.
Except a man be born of Water, and the Spirit, he can in no wise enter into
the Kingdom of God. From whence (says the Author) it is concluded, That there
is no other way to Regenerate and save Infants, and add them to the Church, but
by Baptism.

But who are they that conclude thus from that Text? The Papists, as himself
confesses: And what I pray is that to us? who disclaim such inferences, as he
also acknowledges we do, and for very good reasons, and he might have done
well to have set them down for the benefit of his Reader, some of them I shall
name as,

First, Because as Calvin speaks in his Institutions, Instit. Christ. Relig.
Calv. Compend. p. 322. per Launeum edit. 2d.
Salus consistit in promissione, Salvation depends upon Gods Covenant, Genesis
17.7. which he cites, adding in the same place, Infants may be capable of
Salvation without Baptism, as the Israelites who dyed without Circumcision.
Though there be an absolute necessity that whoever are saved, they must be
saved by the Covenant, yet there is not an absolute necessity of the Seal.
Before the law the Covenant was made, for our comfort, in respect of our
Infants. The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. yet
there was no seal to it for 2000. years, nor was there such absolute necessity
afterward in the days of circumcision, for those that dyed before the eighth
day. The necessity of Salvation by the Covenant was absolute, but the necessity
of the seal only Conditional, so far forth as it may be had.

2. If Baptism be of absolute necessity to Salvation, that regeneration is
affixt to it, and none can be saved without it, then it is in man's power to
save, and to destroy, if they will baptize their children they may save them,
if they neglect it, damn them, which is a horrible absurdity to conceive.

Secondly, Now to the Text it self, we shall next enquire what it affords, with
great respect to the Learned, which may judge otherwise of it.

Either this Scripture is to be understood of Baptism or not? if of Baptism,
then either generally belonging to all men, Dr. Sclater on the 4. Romans ver. 9.
or limitedly to Infants only: If of Infants only, then says Dr. Solater, 1.
What meant Christ to propound it to Nicodemus an old man? Was it his purpose to
teach him; that in as much as he was not Baptized in his infancy, he could not
enter into the Kingdom of God? then sure, I shall not wonder, if Nicodemus
conceited a necessity, for an old man desiring to come to Heaven, to return
back into his Mothers Womb, and be born again. 2. Will they say, it must have
this gloss by limitation; if a man want Baptism by contempt and not otherwise?
why then should it stand in force against Infants in their own persons not
capable of contemning, and whose Parents desire it, but are prevented by
necessity? Alas! poor infants, that you, free from contempt in your selves, and
your Parents also, must yet away to Hell for bare want of Baptism; and yet
grown persons [as Papists themselves acknowledge] in the same want, have access
to Heaven, so they be free from contempt: Can we imagine bare want to be more
prejudicial to Infants, then to grown men.

But what Reader, if it appear that the place cannot be understood of Baptism
at all? I must leave it to thee to judge of what is offered, to show, that it is
only Regeneration and not Baptism that is concerned in the Text, for Water and
the Spirit here by an Exegesis are one, or if you will according to the
judgment of Dr. Tailor, by Water is meant the effect of the Spirit: Nor is
this the single judgment of Dr. Tailor, but very many others, who in their time
were the Magna Ecclesiae lumina, who so interpret it, amongst whom are Calvin,
Beza, Piscator; Calvin indeed acknowledges the ancient Expositors followed
Chrysostom, that the Text was to be understood of Baptism, yet professes
himself of another mind. Beza in his Annotations of the place declares himself
to the same purpose, that he understood by Water in that place is meant rather
the effect of the spirit then the Sacrament of Baptism -- sin vero malimus
Christum cum Pharisaeo disserentem Aquae nomine, ad externas ablutiones
allusisse, etc. I rather conceive Christ reasoning with this Pharisee under the
name of Water, does allude to those external washing, which were useless
without the cleansing of the Spirit. Et Spiritus nomen sit exegesis [that is, a
figure which signifies a dark speech made clear by another word, which here is
the Spirit] nominis aquae, sicut alibi spiritus and ignis in baptismo
conjunguntur, By the name of Water we are to understand by an Exegesis the
Spirit, as elsewhere the Spirit and Fire are joined, Though the Order be
inverted there, and he gives the reason of it. So Piscator, except a man be
born of Water, that is, ex spiritu sancto, exserente quasi vim aquae -- Of the
holy Spirit, which operates in the soul as Water does in the body, and he also
referrs to the same place, Mat. 3.5. Of being Baptized with the Spirit, and
with Fire. We have also the great Chamier arguing the same, seeing in this
sense the words bear an absolute truth without any limitation.

The Author concludes this with sporting himself at the different grounds upon
which the Assertors of Infant Baptism hold it out; as the Fathers upon one
ground, the Lutherans upon another, the Calvinist differing from them, the
Episcoparians one way, the Presbyterians another, and the Independents have a
peculiar ground varying from them all.

Now thanks be to Mr. Tombs his eleventh Argument against Infant Baptism, for
all this, Exercitation page 33. The Assertors of Infant Baptism little agree
amongst themselves, says he, upon what ground they may build it. Cyprian and
others draw it from the Universality of grace, and the necessity of Baptism to
Salvation. Austin brings the faith of the Church, others (the Church of
England) substitute the promised surety in the place of the Faith, and
Repentance of the Baptized: The Lutherans the faith of the Infant, others the
faith of the next Parent in Covenant in a gathered Church.

Reply.

This, says Mr. Geree unto him, has art, I will not say Sophistry in it; and
what though diverse men have let fall different grounds, yet none of those are
the main upon which they ground it (for that is the Covenant of Gods grace, that
takes in the Child with the Parent) if, (says he) I should from several ways
or Arguments used by the Antipaedobaptists, say, they did oppose.
Infant Baptism on several grounds, therefore their opposition were invalid, you
would think my answer unsolid, and so do I your Argument. Father I desire the
Author to reflect upon his own party who oppose childrens Baptism, by denying
that Covenant made to Abraham was a Covenant of Grace; some say it was
Temporary, some Typical, some mixed, and I know not what; So they much differ in
the foundation of their practice. Some build it on a bare confession of sin,
whatever the man be, as to grace, some on profession of Faith, some on signs of
grace, etc. Mr. Geree says well -- weakness in men's sight, variety of fancy
and principles, carry men into different ways of defending the same truth.

The Author now frames his exceptions against those Scriptures which hold forth
a Covenant-Right to the Children of Believeers, 4. Argument from federal
holiness excepted against.
and from whence we infer their baptizing, and thus he begins -- Paedobaptists
being loath to part with the Tradition, and yet seeing the rottenness of the
ancient ground upon which 'twas built, found out this new foundation for it of
Covenant-Holiness, of which Zwinglius about 120 years, for aught that he can
learn, was the first Founder and singular from all that went before him.

All this is from Master Tombs, The Author a notorious Plagiary having taken
all in his 43. pages following from Mr. Tombs his two Books of Exerc. and
Examen, I mean as to the substance of it, and most in his words and method,
only indeed he has two quotations out of Dr. Tailor, and one out of Dr. Owen.
Mr. Tombs Exercit. p. 11.
and so throughout to the endc of this Chapter, both Arguments Authorities,
Scriptures, and Cryticismes, with this difference, that he varies a little in
some things, and does not speak so warily as he. Mr. Tombs in his Examen part
3. page 35. begins the Argument (as framed by us) from the connection between
the Covenant and the Seal, but this man ends it with that, and the Scriptures
are in both one, viz. Genesis 17.7. Acts 2.39. I need not therefore much trouble
my self for an Answer to the Author, for the same, which Mr. Marshall gave
Tombs, does the work to a hair.

The Author tells us that for ought he could learn Zwinglius was the first
Founder of the Argument for Baptism from federal Holiness, and this indeed he
learnt from Mr. Tombs his Exercitation, page 11. whose words are -- Whether
any in the Ages before the last past expounded it of federal holiness, I am not
yet certain; and in the two last lines of page the 79. of his Examen, he has
it thus, viz. None that ever I met with expounded it of federal Holiness till
the controversy of the Anabaptists in Germany.

To this I will seek for no other answer then what Mr. Marshal gives him, the
cause (says he) I confess depends not upon this [whether such an
interpretation was then first put] But it discovers some defect in your
reading, and then shows Athanasius one of the most Ancient Greek Fathers, and
Tertullian one of the most Ancient of the Lattin Fathers, bring this Text to
prove the Prerogative of the Infants of Believers in such a sense as they could
not have done, if to their understanding it had not related to the Covenant of
grace. But to the Argument, and let us see what is excepted against it.

The Argument is this, viz. They who are holy with a federal or Covenant
holiness ought to be baptized, But the Infants of Believers are holy, with such
a holiness, Ergo, This is grounded on the Text, which says [else were your
Children unclean, but now are they holy.]

Against which it is excepted, that there are two things in the Argument
asserted, but not at all proved. First, that the holiness in the Text is a
Federal, or Covenant-holiness. Secondly, that federal holiness qualifies
Infants for Baptism, both which the Author positively denies upon the following
grounds.

First, because the Holiness in the Text be it what it will be, whether Moral,
Federal, or Matrimonial, is neither here nor elsewhere, assigned to be a ground
of Baptizing Children upon; it being only the ground laid down in the
institution that can warrant the same.

To which I reply, That in the first part of the Book, chapter the first, is
showed, how the Infant Seed of Believers are included in the institution, or
comprehended in the Commission as baptizable, and being not willing actum
agere, I must referr the Reader thither. We have also proved that they are of
the Church of Christ. chap. 6. of the first part, upon which account they are
likewise subjects of Baptism. Farther, if their holiness be a
Covenant-holiness, that is, a holiness of special separation to God; and he
owneth them as his peculiar ones, by virtue of his Cove nant-Relation, this is
virtual ly and implicitly a word of command for the Baptizing such In fants,
Antipaedobaptists are ever up with this note, where is your command? What word
of Institution have you to bear you out? To this we have spoken enough before,
in telling them we have an implicit command for what we do; and farther we
offer this Syllogism -- They to whom God is a God in Covenant, have a command
to receive the seal of the Covenant, Genesis 17.10, 11. If then the same Covenant
be given to Believers and their Seed, and if Baptism be given to Christians,
instead of Circumcision, as shall be proved in its proper place, then the same
command which obliged Abraham to be Circumcised, and his seed, does in like
manner, the faithful and their seed also.

Secondly, Because, says he, if it should be granted that Faederal holiness
were a ground to baptize Children upon, under the Gospel, as it was to
Circumcise them under the law -- yet it will appear from substantial Arguments
that no such holiness is intended here.

Let us hear what they are; namely,

1. Because there is no such Holiness in the New Testament, as Federal,
belonging to Children.

Well argued! this seems to be near of kin to idem per idem, it is not, because
it is not. So there is no such holiness intended in the Text; Why? Because
there is no such holiness in the New Testament, and the Text is in the New
Testament. The matter is well mended in what follows -- It is no where to be
found. This is only a Dictate, for he adds no reason; It is no where to be
found; But you must understand he means by himself and his party that have made
such inquisition and search into Scripture, that they only have found what is
there; what they judge to be the fence of Scripture is so, and we must all come
and learn of them what the Scripture contains, what it implies and what may be
inferred from it, what not. Away with this Popery. But what if I say the
Covenant holiness of Children may be found in this Text? I see no reason but my
word may be be credited as well as his. Nay, if we must go by an implicit
faith, we shall carry it, for almost all the Godly and Learned Divines in
Europe have found Covenant-holiness in the New Testament, not only in the 2
Cor. 7.14. But in Romans 11.15, 16, 17. where it is said, if the first fruits are
boly, so is the lump: if the root be holy, so are the Branches, which
demonstrates the Covenant-holiness of the children of believing Gentiles, now
under the Gospel, as much as of the Jewish children, that descended naturally
from Abraham, under the Law, but this must not be admitted, and why?

1. Because it contradicts the Gospel Dispensation as before, that is, I
suppose in the first part of his Book, chap. 5. and I referr the Reader to our
Answer of that Chapter, to which I add this by way of surplusage, that if our
Children be not federally holy, how could the Apostle press the Jews to embrace
Christianity, by telling them, The Promise is made to you and to your seed, and
to all that are afar off, even as many as our Lord God shall call. So that to
say the Doctrine of Federal holiness contradicts the Gospel Dispensation, is to
contradict the Gospel which expressly says the contrary, Act. 2.38, 39. Where
[mark the words are not the promise] [Was] to you, and to your Children, but
[is] intimating, that the Covenant is not repealed, but in force still, under
the Gospel Dispensation, as much as ever it was anciently to the Jews and their
posterity, and to them that are afar off, the Gentiles, and then to their
Children too. even their Infant Children, otherwise these two absurdities would
follow.

1. The grace of Christ under the Gospel Dispensation would be less then what
it was under the Law, for then the believing Parent with his Children were
federally holy, and if it were not so now, then should we be in a worse
condition under Christ, then under Moses.

2. It will render the Children of the Jews also in a worse condition, upon
their coming in to Christ, then they were in under the legal Administration,
contrary to that, Jer, 30.20. Ezekiel. 37.25, 26.

2. His second Reason is, Because such apprehensions intails Grace to Nature,
Regeneration to Generation, contrary to John, 3. That which is born of the
flesh is flesh, and Ephesians. 2. We are all the Children of wrath by Nature.

This has been before answered, and I shall only now say, that this is a false
and fraudulent insinuation to beget a prejudice in the weak against our
assertion of federal holiness, for he knows very well,

1. That our Divines hold that gratia non transfunditur per carnem, and that
grace is not extraduce, Grace is not hereditary, that is inherent Grace: We all
ways affirm that all Children are alike depraved, and all the posterity of Adam
are alike conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, all are Carnal and
unclean by nature.

2. We farther affirm that though all the Children of Believers are not holy
with an inherent personal holiness that accompanies Regeneration, yet the
Children of either believing Parent, are holy with a holiness-relation put upon
them, and separartion to God, as his peculiar people, by virtue of which, they
have a right to the external privileges of the Covenant, whereof they are as
capable as the children of the faithful Israelites.

3. It is acknowledged even by Mr. Tombs himself, that the Children of the Jews
were federally holy, for the whole body of that people (Parents and Children)
were called a Holy Seed, a Holy Nation, a peculiar people, and Jews by Nature,
distinguished from the Sinners of the Gentiles, Gal. 2.15. And yet this did not
intail Grace to Nature, or Regeneration to Generation under the Old Testament,
and how does it then do it under the New?

3. His third Reason is, Because it contradicts experience both of former and
later times, wherein Godly men have had wicked Children, and wicked men good
Children.

Although this be true, yet the Doctrine of federal holiness remains unshaken:
for children are not therefore holy, because born of believing Parents [for so
they are no better then others] but because they are taken with their Parents
into Gods gracious Covenant, and have therefore a right as proper subjects, to
the Seal thereof. Even as the Children of the Godly under the Law; Ishmael and
Esau, during their Infant-state, were comprehended in the Covenant, and did
partake of the external privilege thereof, Circumcision, the sign and Seal of
the Covenant, although afterward they degenerated, proving wicked, and so
discovenanted themselves.

4. He tells us, The Tenet of Federal holiness necessitates the owning the
Docirine of falling from grace; but this is his mistake: for the Doctrine of
Covenant-holiness in regard of the Children of Believers, consists very well
with perseverance in Grace. For we must consider Grace is either Common or
saving: The Elect and faithful Seed are only in a State of saving Grace, and
can never totally fall away, nevertheless persons may fall away from
Common-grace, (1.) From the External privileges of the Gospel and Covenant of
Grace. And though we assert this latter, yet cannot any man form thence infer,
that it necessitates the owning the Doctrine of falling from grace in the sense
of the Arminians. We read of some who are said to be false in Gods Covenant,
and to Apostatize from it, Psalm 44.17. Daniel 11.30, 31. And the Apostle
bewailes the Jews upon this account Kom. 9. Romans 11.

2. His second Argument is, Mr. Tomb's Exerc. fourth Arg. on 1 Cor. 7.14. p. 10.
Because the Text, he says, intends another, viz. a Civil or Matrimonial
Holiness, in Opposition to Fornication, Uncleanness, Bastardy, This is Mr.
Tombs again.

In answer to which, I might first except against the impropriety of phrase,
the Anthor uses, of Civil and Matrimonial holiness, I have read of Civil
honesty, but never of Civil holiness in any Orthodox writer. And Mr. Tombs
himself rejects it, I do not like says he, the calling it Civil holiness, for
it is not from the laws of men, but the institution of God, and therefore I
rather call it Matrimonial holiness; But neither of them are good.

It cannot possibly be meant of Matrimonial holiness, as if the sense were
this, your children are holy that is Legitimate,

1. Because, Holy, is no where so taken in all the Scripture.

2. Because it is such a Holiness as that Children could not have, if neither
of the Parents were a Believer, or had a sanctified use of the other, which
cannot be legitimacie, for that may be as well without that, as with it.

3. It is such a holiness as argues the unbelieving party to be sanctified in,
or to the other, but mere Legitimacy does not so.

4. It must be such a holiness as may answer the Corinthians doubt, which was
not whether when one party came to be a believer, the Marriage with the
Unbeliever were dissolved [as the Author falsely supposes, when he says the
Question was, Whether their Spiritual Relation to Christ, did not dissolve
their Carnal Relation entered into in Unbelief] But the doubt was, whether they
might still persist in so near a Communion with an Unbeliever as Marriage is?
Now it had been satisfaction to tell them they might, for their Children were
not bastards. They might displease God by such a Communion, though their
children were not Bastards. But says he, your Believing gives you a holy use of
your Wife, though an Unbeliever, as appears, because your children born of such
are holy, and owned by Christ as within his Covenant.

5. I might add. The Holiness in the Text is not put in Opposition to Bastardy;
for, that cannot be the sense of the Apostle which implies untruth, because
then, if one of the Parents had not been a Believer, and so by being a Believer
had Sanctified the Unbeliever, their children must have been Bastards, whereas
though both the Parents had been Infidels, yet the children were not Bastards,
that were begotten in lawful Wedlock.

His second Argument to prove it a Holiness of that kind as he supposes, and
not federal is, Because the Holiness of the Children is of no other Nature,
then that spoke of the Unbelieving Parent in the Text, and if one will entitle
to the Ordinance, so the other.

This the Author dictates, and since he brings no proof, for what he says, I
may as well deny it, and say no more. Nevertheless I shall give a reason to
prove the holiness of the children is other then that spoken of the unbelieving
Parent. Namely, because the children here are said to be holy in themselves,
But the unbelieving [Whether Husband or Wife] is only said to be sanctified in,
or to the believing Yoak-fellow, as all other creatures; the meat he eats, the
clothes he wears are sanctified; None of which are holy in themselves, but only
in reference to the believer -- quoad ejus usum, to his use and service, and
therefore cannot be called holy, but the children in the Text are said to be
holy in themselves and not sanctified or made holy to another. Mr. Cotton of
New England is full to the same purpose in his Dialogue about Baptism. Though
the word Sanctified and holy come of the same Root, says he, which is (...),
yet the Apostle uses them here in such a different phrase or manner of speech,
as puts a manifest difference in the sense or signification of them. For
when he says, the Unbelieving Yoak-fellow is sanctified, he does not leave it
so, without a limitation or restriction, but joyneth the Preposition (...) to
the Verb (...), (i.e.) Sanctified in or to the believer, and that limiteth the
sense to the Believers use, But when he speaks of Children he does it not
with such limitation, they are holy to the Believer, but Positively they are
holy.

The Author shuts up this with another mistake.

The Holiness spoken of the unbelieving Parent, and the Child being of the same
Nature, then if one will entitle to the Ordinance, so the other.

Posito uno absurdo mill sequuntur. One absurdity laid down, draws an
innumerable train after it. The Holiness is not one and the same as before, and
therefore cannot entitle to the same privileges. And besides, I add, the
Covenant was not made with the Believer and his Yoak-fellow, but with him, and
his Seed, and therefore the one has a right to the Ordinance of Baptism, the
other not.

The third Argument, (such as it is) is from the consideration that children in
the Text is not to be limited to Infants, Mr. Tombs again, Examen p. 73.
or such children that they might have since the Religious difference happened,
but of grown children, for a man's Child is his Child, though thirty, forty, or
fifty years old, etc.

It Is wonderful to behold the shifts of error, This is old Tombs again, Exam.
page 73. He says, Your children indiscriminatim, without difference, as well
those you had before, one when of you was a Believer. But this Muse is soon
stopped by these considerations. Quod enim nonnulli ad liheros ex utroque
infideli susceptos extendunt, qui non sint spurii sed legitimi, falso dici
apparet ex hypothesi pauli. Quor sum enim vel de spuriis, vel dc infidelis
utriusque naptiis dissereret? Bezae Annot. in locum.
First, That the Corinthians could not possibly be so filly as to doubt whether
those children which were begotten in their Infidel state were Bastards, before
this Religious difference happened; nor can we conceive the Apostle would have
suggested such a false thing unto them, as if those Children had been to be so
reputed, had not one of them turned Believer. Secondly, The Children then born
after one of them was turned Christian is unquestionably that which the Apostle
intends, and if so, then Children is most rationally to be limited to Infant
Children, such as should be or had been newly born upon their Parents
Believing, for we may well suppose the scruple arose presently after
conversion, about cohabitation and converse with their Infidel-Yoak-fellows,
and whether it were not irreligious (not Fornication as Antipaedobaptists very
weakly suppose) for the Believer to procreate with the Infidel.

His fourth Argument why it cannot be a new Covenant-Holiness that qualifies
and intitles to Baptism is --

First because that cannot be known; The fourth Argnment taken from Mr. Tombs
vide Mr. Baxters plain proof for Infants Church Membership and Baptism. p. 92.
for if the Parent professing faith, be a Hypocrite, and not in Covenant
themselves, then may you Baptize a wrong subject, as well as a right.

I perceive the Authors strength is almost spent. His reason runs low, and is
near come to the dreggs; for what does this his arguing amount to? shall we not
find those who are for Baptizing grown persons, upon the profession of Faith in
the same praedicament? may not these be Hypocrites also, and not in Covenant,
and if so, do they not Baptize a wrong subject? When therefore they have
cleared this difficulty for themselves they have done it for us, Farther if it
be the reality of Faith and Holiness in grown persons that qualifies for
Baptism, then none must be Baptized, because this cannot be known; but if it be
said a serious profession is sufficient [for, De occultis non judicat Ecclesia,
The Church judges not of secret or hidden things] Then the same also is
sufficient for the Infants of such so professing. The distinction which is used
by Divines may give light in this point, namely, there is an external being in
Covenant, in facie visibilis Ecclesiae, in the esteem and judgment of the
Church, and that is visible Profession or Holiness, and this gives right to
visible privileges, 2. There is an internal being in Covenant, in regard of
the spiritual faving benefits of it; and it is out of the reach of the Church
to judge of this latter. I shall shut up this with the words of Mr. Marshal in
his Defense of Infant Baptism, page 108. viz. When therefore I say they
[Infants] are visibly to be reckoned to belong to the Covenant with their
Parents. I mean look what right a visible Professor has to be received and
reputed to belong to the Visible Church, Qua visibilis Professor, as a visible
Professor, that right his child has so to be esteemed. Now I conceive the
Author himself will confess that the spiritual part and privileges of the
Covenant of Grace belongs not to visible Professors, as visible, but only to
such among them who are inwardly such as their external profession holds out,
but yet there are outward Church privileges, Mr. Blakes Covenant Sealed.
which belong to them, as they are visible Professors, As to to be reputed the
Children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8.42. Act. 3.25. And in this sense St. Paul
speaking of the Body of the Jewish people says, Romans 9.4.
To them pertains the Adoption, [Not the spiritual adoption, but the honor
of being separated, and reputed Gods Children, Deuteronomy. 14] and the Glory, and the
Covenants, etc.

Secondly he says, such an absurdity would follow, that no Unbelievers Child
is in Covenant or Elect, etc.

To this I answer, that no Unbelievers child is in Covenant in the sense before
mentioned, that is, in facie Ecclesiae, in the face of the Church, until he
make a Profession of his Faith. Nevertheless he may belong to the Election of
Gods Grace, but that's not to the point in hand, for Election is not a Covenant,
nor any in Covenant because elected.

Thirdly he adds the concurrent Testimony and Confession of many Learned
Commentators and parties themselves upon the place, that the Text is to be
understood of matrimonial, and not federal holiness. As Austin, Jerome, Ambrose,
Melancton, Musculus, Camerarius, Erasmus, to which says he, we may add many
more, as if these were collected by his own pains. Whereas he has only added
the last, the rest were all gathered and published by Mr. Tombs near thirty
years since. And that the Reader may not think I injure him, I shall parallel
them once more.

H. D. Jerome, says, because of Gods appointment, Marriage is holy.

H. D. Ambrose thus, The Children are Holy, because they are born of Lawful
Marriage.

H. D. Melancthon, in his Commentary on the place thus. Therefore Paul answers,
that the Marriages are not to be pulled asunder, for their unlike opinions of
God; if the impious person do not cast away the other: and for comfort he adds
as a reason, The unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the believing Wife; Meat
is sanctified, for that which is holy in use, that is, granted to Believers
from God; so here he speaks the use of Marriage to be holy, and to be granted
of God.

H. D. Musculus in his Comment upon the place confesses, That he had abused
formerly that place against the Anabaptists.

H. D. Camerarius in his Commentary upon the place, says, (for the unbelieving
Husband has been sanctified) an usual change of the Tense; that is, Sanctified
in the lawful use of Marriage, for without this he says, it would be, that
their Children should be unclean, that is infamous and not Legitimate, who so
are holy, that is during the Marriage, are without all blot of ignominy.

J. T. Hierome, says, because by Gods appointment Marriage is holy, Exerc. p.
12.

J. T. Ambrose, has it thus, the Children are holy, because they are born of
lawful Marriage Exercit. p. 12.

J. T. Melancthon, in his Commentary on the place, Therefore Paul answers, that
the Marriages are not to be pulled asunder, for their unlike opinions of God,
if the impious person do not cast away the other: and for comfort he adds as a
reason, The Unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the believing Wife. And
elsewhere he says, Meat is Sanctified, for that which is holy in use, so here,
he speaks the use of Marriage to be holy, and to be granted of God, Exer. p. 11.

J. T. Musculus on the 1 Cor. 7.14. has those words -- I have sometimes abused
the present place against the Error of the Anabaptists Exercit. p. 1. H. D.
leaves out Error, because that sounds ill and an ignorant Reader upon the
leaving that out, may judge Musculus was Proselyted to them.

J. T. Joachimus Camerarius, about this matter in his Coment [for the
Unbelieving Husband has been Sanctified] an usual change of the Tense, that
is, sanctified in the lawful use of Marriage, for without this, he says, it
would be, that their Children should be unclean that is, infamous and not
legitimat, who so are holy, that is, during the Marriage, are without all blot
of ignominy, Exercit. page 11.

By this the Reader may see that our Antagonist has little reason to keep such
a vaunting with things made ready to his hand. And in Answer to all the
Testimony of these Commentators, that it is to be understood of Legitimacy, in
opposition to uncleanness and Bastardy, besides the aforementioned Reasons
against it, I am of Mr. Marshals mind (as he told Mr. Tombs) that though some
Ancient and Modern do interpret this Text as he did, yet it is easy to bring
10 for one that interpret it for federal holiness, and this says he to Mr.
Tombs, you will confess although I forbear to bumbast my Book with them, no
ways desiring that this cause should be carried by number of voices -- only
because Camerarius is named as against us in the interpretation, and he is
joined and bound up at the end of Beza, I mean that which was Printed at
Cambridge, I shall acquaint the Reader how positive Beza is who carries the
Text for federal holiness; Sed quid si quis hoc negassot? Imo vero nemo id
potuit negare, cum constaret do promissione in qua semen quoque comprehenditur.
No man may interpret it otherwise, it being according to the Covenant which
comprehends the seed. Nec alia causa est cur sanctorum liberos ad Baptismum
admittamas, quam quia sancti sunt (id est in faedere comprehensi) ab ipso
utero. This is the only reason why we Baptize the Children of the Godly,
because they are holy, (that is comprehended in the Covenant) from their
Mothers Womb.

Now the Author is for answering our Objections against their interpretation of
the Text.

Object.

You give another sense of the word [Holy] then is to be found in Scripture,
for no where is holy, the same with Legitimat, but throughout the Bible in many
hundred places Holiness is taken for a Separation to God, says Mr. Sydenham
and Mr. Baxter.

And besides them, all know, holiness is taken for a special separation of
things, or persons to God and his use. Mr. Marshall, Geree, Blake, and all
latter writers as well as former, so take it in the present point, [and the
word (...)] in the Text rendered holy is most used to express the Hebrew word,
(...), which ever signifies what is usui Divino accommodatum, that which is
appropriated to a Divine use, which is the proper notion of the word in the old
and new Testament, as Sydenham notes, and never taken otherwise; and for the
proof of it, tells us, he had compared above 300 places (The Author speaks of
600) in the old Testament according to the Septuagint, and all the New
Testament places where the word is used.

Well, How does our Antagonist answer the Objection which he bring? -- Why thus
--

First suppose it be so [He is no farther yet then a suppose] that the word
signifies, that, in all those places but this, viz. 1 Cor. 7.14. [But now are
they holy) it follows not but it may have this sense properly enough here, the
scope of the place leading to it? as (...) signifies authority or power in all
other places, This is also borrowed from Mr Tombs.
yet in the 1 Corin. 11 15. is rendered a Vail, etc.

No wonder that Heretics are so inflexible when even good men, (such as I hope
both Mr. Tombs and this Author are) will wrangle at this rate, and somnem
movere lapidem, try every way rather then be thought to err in their conceits:
and where this humor is predominant, men were better be silent, and not
dispute at all, for it puts an abuse upon the Scripture, and renders Religion
not only ridiculous but turns it into a Fire brand of contention. Thus our
Author being unwilling to part with his fond notion of the word, Holy, in the
Text, does I fear profanely abuse the Scripture, by flying to this old shift
of Mr. Tombs grounded upon a mistake of the scope of the Text as is before
shown, for the Corinthians doubt was whether it was sinful to cohabit with
their Infidel Yoak-fellows, and not whither is was fornication to live with
them. It will not be amiss to give you the reply that Mr. Baxter made to
Tombs, when he urged that though the word (...) does in all other places
signify authority or power, yet in the 1 Cor. 11.15. it is rendered a Vail. To
which says Mr. Baxter, if God do no where in all Scripture call the mere
making a thing lawful (the sanctifying it) but many hundred times use the word
in another sense; then we must not call it, nor so interpret him here, but God
does no where in Scripture call the mere making a thing lawful (the Sanctifying
of it) therefore we must not do so, nor here so interpret it. Mr. Tombs
granted the Antecedent, but denying the consequence, said, that though God did
not so use the word, yet we might, and though he use it five hundred times
otherwise, yet we must so interpret him here

To which, says Mr. Baxter, I am resolved to learn of God how to speak rather
then you, and to follow Scripture phrase as near as I can, etc. But I must
follow the Author --

And secondly, says he, Neither are we to seek of some Parallel place, where
the word holy signifies this sort of Holiness, Mr. Tombs Exercit. p. 13, 14.
viz. Matrimonial holiness, Mal. 2.15. A holy seed, viz. a Legitimat seed, as
Calvin and Camer, and others enlarge upon it, in opposition to Bastardy, for so
were Bastards to be esteemed, Deuteronomy. 23.17. and so 1 These. 4.3, 4, 5. This is
the will of God even your Sanctification, and that you abstain from
Fornication. etc.

Still Mr. Tombs word by word, both Scriptures and Authors, so that the Book
might have well born the Title of Tombs redivivns, but,

First, For that in Malachy it has no neerness to it; for Godly or of God is
not the same with Holy: nor does he say that all Seed begotten in lawful
Marriage of one to one, is a Godly Seed: But that he might seek a seed of God;
that so he might have a Church proceeding from orderly and chaste marriage. Mr.
Gerre has cleared this very well in his Vindiciae Paedobaptismi. The place in
Malachy, says he, to Mr. Tombs does not any thing countenance your conceit,
that Holy is taken for Legitimate: not only because that place is capable of
another sense then to import a Legitimate Seed, but if it be taken for
Legitimate, it follows not that Holy and Legitimate are one; Holy is a higher
state then Legitimate, both are from Gods Ordination; Seed in both senses may
be termed a Seed of God, as the Original is there, and yet they be different,
and so though a Seed of God be translated Legitimate, yet it follows not that
holy is taken for Legitimate.

Then for that place in Deuteronomy 23.17. This makes it more unlikely, says
the aforementioned Author, for though Bastards were once Legally unclean, yet
that was a Ceremonial thing, that was abrogated when the Apostle wrote to the
Corinthians, and for the Apostle then in that sense to say Bastards were
unclean, was neither true, nor safe, for it were a reviving again the
Ceremonial Law. And for the other Text, 1 These. 4.3, 4, 5. where (...)
Sanctification is the same with Chastity, Mr. Marshal did not fly to a shift,
when he told Tombs, that Chastity among the Heathens is never called
Sanctification, but among Believers it is, being a part of the New Creation,
and one branch and part of their Sanctification wrought by the spirit of God;
for the Apostle here writes to the Saints to take heed of that sin to which,
whilst they were in their Infidel State, they were much given up to. Chastity
indeed amongst Infidels we call a moral virtue, but cannot properly be called a
part of Sanctification.

Thirdly (which is the last reason the Author brings, I should have said Mr.
Tombs) Neither can Matrimonial holiness be said not to be a Separation to God;
Mr. Tombs Examen. page 77.
for it is no other then setting a part according to Gods Ordinance, and which
is called honorable (or in this sense holy) etc.

The Author had been ingenious if he had given us all that Mr. Tombs says
upon this -- for he flies to the English Liturgy for help; I may add, says
he, that Marriage has had the reputation of a holy estate, as the Liturgy
calls it.

In answer to which this may suffice, it is a chaste estate, but for the term
holiness to be given to it, it is to be susspected to be the Issue of a
supposed Sacrament, Mr Geree Vinditiae Paedollapt.
so esteemed by the Papists, and this may occasion some Epethites given to it,
which are yet retained, that ought to be laid aside.

There are two other petty objections which I let pass as not thinking them
worthy of any more answers, Vide Marshalls defense p, 146. and Gerees Vindiciae
Paedobapt. p. 25.
when both Mr. Marshal and Mr. Geree has done it so well, to whom I refer the
Reader.

Exceptions against our Arguments for Infant Baptism, from Genesis 17. Acts 2.39.
removed.

In the next place he attempts to invalidate our great Argument for
Infant Baptism drawn from the connection, that is, between the Covenant and the
seal, so that if the Infant seed of Believers are found to be within the
Covenant of Gods Grace, they ought therefore to partake of the Seal; The Author
sights most furiously against this Argument, but all the Weapons he makes use
of in this engagement, are fetched out of Mr. Tombs his Armory, whose edges
were long since blunted in an encounter with Mr. Marshall and Mr. Geree, yet
has he thought fit to whet and furbish them over again, and to make a great
flourish, as if he would do some notable execution. But thou will find Reader,
that he tenders nothings to the end of the Chapter, but a nauseous Crambe, a
Repetition of the old routed Arguments; and indeed the controversy has been
so much bandied too and fro, that without a miraculous invention, it is
impossible to find out any thing New, either Pro or Con, and the utmost that
can be done, is but to improve the Old Arguments. The foundation upon which we
ground our practice, is Gods Covenant, Genesis 17.7. from whence (says he) it is
thus argued.

Those to whom the Gospel Covenant belonged to them, the Seal thereof
appertained: But to Believers and their seed the Gospel Covenant belonged, as
Genesis 17.7. I Will be a God to thee and thy seed, Acts 2.39. The promise is to you
and to your children.

Therefore to them the seal thereof, Circumcision so called, Romans 4.11. did
appertain, Genesis 17.10. For the Faederati were to be Signati, those in the
Covenant were to have the Seal thereof; And therefore by consequence it
naturally follows, That if Circumcision, the seal of the Gospel Covenant
belonged to the seed of Believers under the Law, then does the Gospel Seal,
Baptism much more appertain to the seed of Believers under the Gospel, which
comes in the place, room, and use of Circumcision, otherwise the privilege
under the Gospel, would be less then that of the law, should Children be denied
such a benefit.

Repl.

I do not find, but the Author has done us right in forming the Argument, and
do therefore own it as sound and good, notwithstanding this quick-sighted man
(or rather he with Mr. Tombs his eyes) has espied many faults in it, for,

First in general, he tells us, it is fallacious and false reasoning, and that
there is no natural consequence at all from Scripture, to infer the Baptism of
Infants, nor any ground to build it on Circumcision, and that diverse things in
the Argument are pre-supposed, but cannot be proved.

Secondly, He puts in his particular exceptions against it, as,

Except. 1.

First, because Circumcision was not the seal of the Gospel Covenant, to all
Believers for 1. Mr. Tombs Examon. page 36.
some under the Gospel Covenant were not sealed therewith, as all Believers
from Adam to Abraham, neither do we find any of the Believers out of Abraham's
family, as Lot, Melchesideck, Job, received any such Seal.

Well said Mr. Tombs, They are his very words in his Answer page 36. and in
his Exercit. page 4. and therefore to this there needs no other answer then
what Mr. Geree gives him, which is short and full, viz. All Believers that had
it not, were either those that were before the Administration begun with
Abraham, and so before the Institution, or such of them that were with or after
him, either they joined not themselves to that Administration, and so were not
to be sealed no more then the Proselytes of the Gate. Or if they did unite to
the Church in Abraham's family, then it is apparent they might have laid claim
to Circumcision, as other Proselytes did.

2. There were (says he) some to whom the Covenant did not belong, that
received, Mr. Tomber Exercit. page 4.
that called the seal of Circumcision, as Ishmael; for of him God had said,
that this Covenant was not to be established with him, but with Isaac,, and yet
he was Circumcised, Genesis 17.20, 21, 25. Gal. 4.29.30. And the same may be said
of Esau, Romans 9.10, 11, 12, 13. And as to all the Strangers in Abraham's house,
or bought with money in Israel, that were Circumcised, it may well be doubted,
whether the new-Covenant-promises did belong to them.

All this is Mr. Tombs again without giving the least hint, Ne (...) quidem,
whence he had it, and that I may not be thought to wrong the Author, I will
transcribe what I find in Mr. Tombs his Exercitation, page 4. and let it be
compared -- some (says he) were Circumcised to whom to promise in the Covenant
made with Abraham did belong; of Ishmael God had said, that his Covenant was
not to be established with him, but with Isaac, and yet he was circumcised,
Genesis 17.20, 21, 25. Romans 9.7, 8, 9, Gal. 4.29.30. The same may be said of Esau:
All that were in Abraham's house, whether Strangers, or born in his house were
Circumcised, Genesis 17.12, 13. Of whom nevertheless it may be doubted, whether
any promises of the Covenant made with Abraham, did belong to them.

Repl.

To this then we reply,

First, That the Covenant appertained to all the Infant seed of Abraham,
without exception, and to all the Infants of Believing Jews, and consequently
the Seal of the Covenant, Circumcision, was in like manner dispensed to them
all indefinitely, to Ishmael as well as to Isaac, to Esau, as well as to Jacob;
for neither Ishmael nor Esau were cast out of the Covenant till they
degenerated, and discovenanted themselves by their own wickedness.

Secondly, Whereas it is said, My Covenant will I establish with Isaac Genesis 17.
27. We are not (as Mr. Geree says truly) to understand in that place the
Covenant we stand in to God, in regard of persons, for our own personal
benefit, but the Covenant of special prerogative to Isaac, That Christ should
come of, and the Church remain in his posterity.

Except. 3.

His next exception is, Because Abraham's Covenant was a mixed Covenant, Mr.
Tombs Exercit. page 39.
as the seed was.

Repl.

I observe Antipaedobaptists are extremely divided in their opinions about the
Covenant that God made with Abraham (as much as the Author says we are about
the grounds upon which we assert Infant Baptism, and who shall bring in the
Verdict for them I know not) but they all unite in this, to make the Covenant
of no effect to us and to our Children; some of them say (and they speak
roundly) that it was merely a Covenant of temporal blessings, as the
inheritance of Canaan, and that it has nothing to do with spirituals; The
Anabaptists of Germany heretofore called it a carnal thing that had nothing to
do with eternal life.
these will make sure work of it, and leave no ground at all from thence for
our seed to be comprised in it. Others are contented it should be a Covenant of
Grace to Abraham and his faithful Seed, yet say they, it was a Covenant of
works, at least to his carnal seed; the most subtle of them (as Mt. Tombs)
tells us, it was a mixed Covenant, you carry (says Mr. Tombs) the Narration of
the Covenant made with Abraham in Genesis 17, as if it did only contain the
Covenant of Grace in Christ, whereas it is apparent out of the Text, that the
Covenant was a mixed Covenant, consisting of Temporal benefits, to wit, the
multiplying of his seed, ver. 6. the possession of Canaan, ver. 8. The birth of
Isaac ver. 16. and the spiritual blessings; the Author treads in his steps, and
Ecchceth to him most exactly. -- As the birth of Isaac, the possessing the land
of Canaan, etc. he might have saved himself the labor of writing his Treatise,
and only reprinted Mr. Tombs Exercitation. But to the point. We shall prove
the Covenant made with Abraham, and his Natural Seed, no mixed Covenant, but a
pure Covenant of Grace, the same in substance with ours under the New Testment,
For,

First, We have the express Testimony of Scripture for it, Gal. 3.8.

2. It is evident from that phrase, Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations for an
everlasting Covenant, etc. In faedus seculi, as the Hebrew has it, for a
Covenant of perpetuity, which denotes the quality of it, that it is not
Temporary, but Everlasting, respecting spiritual good things.

3. The Tenor of it speaks it a Covenant of Grace, I will be thy God, etc. In
which words God engages himself, all that he is, and all that he has, and all
that he can do in the behalf of poor dust and ashes, and this virtually
comprehends all sorts of spiritual blessings, Christ, Grace, and Glory; and
that Christ was by promise intended in this Covenant is clearly evident from
Luke 1.54, 55. and verse 69, 72, 73. And the Apostle giving us the substance of
the Covenant of Grace, does it in the words of Abraham's Covenant, Heb. 8.10. I
will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. And whereas, he says,
it appears to be mixed in regard it contained many Temporal Blessings, as the
Birth of Isaac, Canaan, etc. I answer those temporal Blessings, were but annexed
to the Covenant, (it is his own Phrase) They were not the substance or essence,
but only an accidental Appendix to it: there was no more mixture in that
Covenant then in ours, under the New Administration, for as our Divines still
tell them, Godliness under the Gospel also has the promises of this life as
well as of that to come. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Earthly things were indeed dispensed to them more distinctly, and fully,
suitable to their Paedagogical EsTate, to allure them to the service of God,
and Heavenly things more generally and sparingly; on the contrary, spiritual
blessings are more fully and clearly, and earthly things more generally and
sparingly held forth and promised to us under the Gospel. Mr. Marshalls
defense. page 97.


The abundance of their Temporal blessings were figures, Signs, and Types of
spiritual blessings, to be enjoyed by them and us. As their deliverance our of
Egypt, was a Figure of our freedom from spiritual captivity; The promise of
Canaan was a Type of Heaven, and an Explanation of the primary grand promise to
be their God, giving intimation that he would as cetrainly bring them to the
Heavenly, as to the Earthly, and to the spiritual, everlasting glorious rest,
as well as to that Temporal or Corporeal rest, upon which Reverend Mr. Cotton
has an excellent observation, Mr. Cottons grounds and ends of Baptism of
children p. 40.
viz. That it was from hence that Jacob gave such solemn charge by Oath unto
Joseph, and Joseph to his Brethren, the one to bury his dead body in Canaan,
the other for the Transportation of his bones to Canaan, which they would never
have done for an earthly inheritance, but to nourish in the hearts of their
posterity Faith and desire of Communion in the Church, Joshua Heb. Salvator
Dominus Salvator, The Savior or Lord Savionr.
and of their rest in Heaven, whereof Canaans rest was a Type, whereunto, not
Moses but Joshua must bring them; that is, not the Law, but Jesus.

Except. 3.

A third Exception, is, Because the Seed in the seventh verse to whom the
Covenant belonged, This is Tomb'ss again. Exerc. page 48.
was not the Carnal, but Spihitual seed only, which he attempts to prove by
Scripture and Authority; the Scriptures are, Gaol. 3.16. and 24. and Romans 9.7,
8. Before I shall show how grossly these Scriptures are mistaken, and wrested to
a quite different sense from what the Apostle intends, as shall be made appear
by the context and design of the Apostle in this Chapter, I shall premise a few
things, as,

1. The Covenant of Grace contains in it only spiritual good things, Temporals
are more properly, Additionals, then of the Essence of it.

2. The Covenant of Grace is but One, the Identity or sameness of the Covenant
Mr. Tombs confesses to be one and the same, both to Jews and Gentiles,
Exercit. p. 39.

3. Though this Covenant be but one, yet all are not in it after one and the
same manner, some are in it only by participation of external Church
privileges, others by being interessed in the internal saving benefits
thereof, by means of those privileges.

4. The whole body of the Jews, as they descended from the Loins of Abraham, by
propagation, and before they were Regenerated, were according to Scripture
Testimony taken by God into Covenant, and were so esteemed by God himself in
one respect or other: Hence God says he, made his Covenant with them all,
Deuteronomy. 29. speaking there, of the renewing of the Covenant of Grace, verse
10.12, 13, 14, 15.

And the Apostle is express, Romans 9.6. To them appertained the Covenant, and
they are said not to be strangers to the Covenant of promise (as the Gentiles)
but in the same Ephesians. 2.11, 12. And such as Apostatized from God, are said to
break the everlasting Covenant, Isa. 24.5. And in the new Testament to count
the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, Heb. 10.29. Which expressions argue,
that in some sense they must be in and under the Covenant; that is, in regard
of external privileges only; for it is certain, they were never in it
efficaciously, and savingly as the Elect, choice seed of Abraham, for then they
could never have fallen away; they were in it in regard of external
Covenant-privileges, and common graces, which Hypocrites and Reprobates may
partake of; and in this very sense Christ speaking of the Jews collectively,
calls them, The Children of the Kingdom, Matthew 8. and the Apostle, the
Children of the Covenant.

5. And as it was under the old Testament, so is it under the new, the Covenant
is the same norwithsTanding the difference of Administration: And as it was
then, so is it now, Gal. 4.24, 29. Some are born of Agar, and some of Sarah,
Mr. Cottons grounds and ends of Infant Baptism.
some the spiritual seed, Secundum propositium Electionis, chosen according to
Gods will and gracious intention from all Eternity, God principally intending
the Coventant for them, these may be said to be spiritually and savingly (in
regard of powerful efficacy and operation of the Covenant upon them) within e
Covenant. Others are in it, quoad externam Oeconomiam, Hypocrites in Covenant,
quoad externam Oeconomiam.
in regard of external privileges. They are in Christ only by profession,
Branches in appearance not spiritually and savingly engraffed: Joh. 15. There
profession speaks them within the Covenant, in facie visibilis Ecclesiae, as
Mr. Marshal speaks, by virtue whereof they derive a right to the Seals and
Sacraments of the New Testament.

6. There are two sorts which may be reputed in Covenant under the New
Testament, as well as under the Old, in regard of external and visible
Economy, or external Church privileges.

1. Such as stand by their own visible profession, as all first Covenanters do;
so te Proselytes under the Old Testament, and all visible Saints: or else

2. Such as stand in a Political, Moral consideration, as in the right of
another, through a free promise. The distinction is common amongst our Divines,
but I quote it from Mr. Sydenham, cap. 4. p. 31. Of his Christian Exercitation.
And he illustrates it by a Princes giving a Title of Honor, or a piece of land
to one, and his Heirs, they are all interested in it, yet some prove fools, or
traitors, and are afterward incapable, and this distinction he shows, holds in
the New Testament: for if men deny a being in Covenant, in regard of external
privileges, as well as special grace, or as he speaks, if they deny an
external, as well as an internal being in Covenant. Then

1. None can administer an external Ordinance, an outward sign to any; for we
must go by external rules in these actings.

2. We set a Seal to a blank to all grown persons who are baptized, without we
know them certainly in the Covenant, and that who knows? for our Judgment will
no more hinder the Seal from being a blanck to grown Professors, than to
Infants, without they prove real at last, much more he speaks there, which I
omit. Having premised these Propositions, we shall now examine what force there
is in the Scriptures, for to prove what he would have, referring what is said
to the judgment of the impartial Reader. The first Text is that in the 3. Gal.
16, Now to Abraham and his Seed were the promises made, he says not to Seeds
as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed which is Christ. And if ye be
Christ's, then are you Abraham's Seed; v. 29. The other is Romans 9.7, 8. Neither
because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all children, but in Isaac shall
thy Seed be called, that is, they which are the children of the flesh these are
not the children of God, but the children of the promise are connted for the
Seed. And Romans 4.13. For the promise that he should be Heir of the World, was
not to Abraham, or to his Seed through the Law, but through the righteousness
of Faith, etc. Hence Mr. Tombs, the Author, and all the party conclude, that,
the Seed to whom the Covenant belongs, is the Spiritual, and not the Carnal.
Not being born after the flesh, but believing that makes us children of the
promise.

To this exception of his in which their greatest confidence lies, I reply

Repl.

1. It is built on a most gross corrupting, and abusing the Scriptures. Let us
then diligently consider those two places in the Galatians? And afterward that
in the Romans. First, touching that in the former place, the words are verse
16. He says not to Seeds, as of many, but of one which is Christ. Beza upon
the Text says, obscurus locus est, it is a place not easily understood: a dark
Scripture, and indeed too dark, and intricate for Antipaedobaptists so boldly
to ground their opinion upon, so directly contrary to the sense of many plain
places. The question is what does the Apostle mean here, by Christ? By Christ
cannot be meant Christ solely personal, for then no Believer should be
accounted for the Seed but only Christ (who as concerning the flesh came of
Abraham) And he and none else should be concerned in the promises: But it is to
be understood of Christ mystical, as Beza there notes, Apostolus eo nomine non
solum caput, sed membra cum suo capite designans, the Apostle by the word
Christ, denoting both Head, and Members. Capnt, and Corpus unus est Christus,
the Head and the Body make up one mystical Christ: the word Christ being to be
taken collectively in this place, so we have it 1 Cor. 12.12. to which Beza
refers. And if this be the sense of it, as what else can rationally? then as
Mr. Sydenbam notes, this Text will make rather for us, than against us, for if
we exclude all Infants from being of the Body of Christ; we must in so doing
unavoidably exclude them from Salvation, for he is Savior to no more than he
is head of, which is his Body. As for the words in the nine and twentieth
verse, that will afford the Antipedobaptists little relief: the words are, If
ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to promise, from
whence, says the aforesaid Author, they argue, the Apostle here describes who
are the Seed, so that now no children born of believing parents can be the
Seed, for they must be Christ's according to that v. 16. We are all the children
of God through Faith in Christ Jesus. But let such understand what Beza says
on the place, namely that the Claramontanus Bible has the words thus, and he
thinks more right (...) If you be one in Christ, then are ye Abraham's Seed:
which comports well with the former verse There is neither Jew nor Greek,
neither bond nor free, etc. but ye are all one in Christ Jesus, and if ye be
all one, then Abraham's Seed. From which

1. It is clear that the Design of the Apostle is to take away all difference
between Jew and Gentile, and to hodl forth their unity in Christ, and that this
is the very scope of the place Beza shows fully in his Annotations upon it, and
that now there is no distinction betwivt them as formerly: But the Gentiles are
become Abraham's Seed, as well as the natural and believing Jews. Quod unius
Seminis nomine collectivo significatur, as before in the sixteenth verse, which
is pointed out to us by the collective name of one Seed.

2. The Apostle here has no intent to show the distinction of Abraham's Seed as
the Subject of the outward privileges and administrations of Ordinances, but
to show that none are spiritually and really Abraham's Seed, and Heirs of
promise, but such as are Christ's, one in him with Abraham: for if this should
be the distinction of Seed as the subject of outward Ordinances, it would be as
much against professing Believers as Infants: for the proposition from this
Text, as our Opposites draw it, is thus: none but those who are Christ's are
Abraham's Seed, and none are Christ's but real Believers, and therefore none but
they must be baptized. But how weak is this? 1. Because if none but such are
Abraham's Seed, and consequently none but such the subjects of Baptism, then
visible Believers are not the subjects of Baptism, for they may not be Christ's,
no more than Infants. 2. None must be baptized at all upon this account, for
who knows who is Christ's according to Election and saving Faith? To say we have
charitable grounds to believe visible professors are Christ's, till we see the
contrary, is not to the question as stated, nor as it lies in the Text: the
Text says, If ye be Christ's, then ye are Abraham's Seed: they say none are in
Christ but real Believers, See Chapter the fifth of the first part of the
Authors Treatise.
and none must be baptized but the spiritual Seed, and that will require not
only a judgment of charity, but infallibility to determine. And besides the
Apostle is describing here what the real and spiritual Seed are, as having an
inward right to Christ, and not what the apparent Seed of Abraham was, for he
speaks to the Galathians who were visible professors, and Believers then in
appearance, and he puts them upon a trial of themselves, whether they were
Christ's or no. I have been the larger in quoting something from Beza, but more
from Mr. Sydenham, who speaks abundance of reason, that you may see how
wretchedly this Text is abused by our Opposites. And how far wide it is from
the purpose, for which they usually bring it.

Now for that other place, Ram. 9.7, 8. They that are the children of the
flesh, these are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are
counted for the Seed. What do they gather from hence? Why, that Infants because
children of the flesh, are not under the promise: this indeed is well argued.
for this is to make the Apostle contradict himself in the same breath, for the
Text says, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called. Now that was a child of Abraham's
flesh, and yet a child of promise too. And from hence issues three undeniable
Propositions, as Mr. Sydenham notes.

1. That Abraham's spiritual Seed were as much his fleshly Seed also, Isaac, as
Ishmael, except Proselytes and Servants.

2. The Covenant was administered to all Abraham's natural and fleshly children,
as if they had been his spiritual, and before they knew what faith was, or
could actually professs Abraham's faith.

3. When there is mention of Abraham's carnal Seed in opposition to his
spiritual Seed, it cannot be meant primarily, or solely of those that descended
from his flesh, for then Isaac, and Jacob were the carnal Seed, yea Christ
himself, who as concerning the flesh came of Abraham. It must be therefore
understood.

1. Of those of Abraham's Seed which degenerated and slighted the Covenant of
the Gospel, such as Ishmael, and such of whom the Apostle speaks of, Romans
9.1.2.3. his Brethren and Kinsmen after the flesh, whose condition he bewails,
which was the generality of the body of the Jews; or

2. Some conceive by children of the flesh, he means not in this place
children by natural generation, but such as trusted in outward fleshly
privileges, and by children of the promise put in opposition to them, is meant
true Believers, which are indeed the true Seed, in whom the word takes effect,
and who were figured forth by Isaac. Si sensum mysticum spectes, non ii qni ex
lege justitiam quaerunt, sed fideles, sed quod promissionis filius
intelligantur is quos diximus secundum literam ingelligi apparet ex verse. 9.
This is a truth, says Beza, but not apposite to this place, for Paul does not
here distinguish Ahrahams children from others by their Faith as in the fourth
of Romans, Quia vero promissionis filios interpretantur eos qui fidei
amplectuntur promissionem, dicunt quidem quod res est, sed non satis apposite
loquuntur Neque enim Paulus boc loco filios Abrahami a caeteris distinguit ex
fidei nota ut supsa. c. 4. sed de primaria cansa^ id est de ipsius fidei font
gratuitae videlicet electionis aeterno proposito disserit. Beza in Locum.
but disputes of the primary cause, even of Faith it self, which is the eternal
purpose of God according to his Election of Grace: verse 11. So that the
Apostles express Doctrine is, that Election and Salvation is not from works,
but free Grace. But the Opposerss of Infant Baptism, have always perverted the
scope of Paul in this place, as if he intended it, of outward Church
privileges, not to be had by being born of believing Parents, which the Text
has nothing to do with, as every unpartial and judicious Reader will apprehend.
Nay this very place proves the quite contrary, for the Apostle makes two sorts
to be within the visible Church, viz. Some are of Israel, that is in man's cyc:
these partake of the outward privileges, v. 4.5. Others are Israel, that is
the true spiritual Seed, that belongs to Gods Election, and obtain the saving
Promise. So Gal. 3.8. The Gospel was preached to Abraham, and the Covenant made
with him, is the same for substance with that we live under, and as persons
were under it then, so is it now: it is not streighter now, and larger then,
but the same. And the like appears, verse 14. and 17. the Identity of the
Covenant is there manifest, which is a truth destructive to the Opinion of
Antipaedobaptists, and therefore they so strike at it.

Having thus examined the Expositions, which according to his Imagination, the
Scripture it self puts upon the [Seed] spoken of, Genesis 17.7. and discovered his
great mistake. I could do it too very fully as to most of the Authors
following, which he says, do give in their concurrent sense with his, upon the
Text.

The first named is Calvin upon: Genesis 17.7. who says, that it is manifest that
the promise understood of spiritual Blessing, pertains not to the Carnal Seed
of Abraham, but to the Spiritual as the Apostle himself says, Romans 4.9. etc.

In this I find the Author guilty of shameful Oscitancie, and it is
intolerable for any man thus to impose his mistakes upon the Reader. The words
are not Calvin's, but Estius his Answer to Calvin; who again and again in his
Comment upon Genesis 17.7. asserts the promise to be made to Abraham's natural and
fleshly Seed, and to all of them -- for thus he says, Nunc videndum est quem
populum designet. Falluntur autem qui putant solos hic electos notari -- They
are deceived who think it to be meant only of the Elect. Again, clara est Pauli
Doctrina de naturalibus Abrahoe filiis, quod sint Sancti rami, quia ex sancta
radice prodierint, Romans 11.16. the Doctrine of Paul shows clearly it is
understood of the natural children of Abraham, for if the root be holy, so are
the branches.

Then afterward: Quare nihil certius est, quam Deum foedus suum pacisci cum
filiis Abrahae, qui naturaliter ex eo gignendi erant. Wherefore nothing is more
certain than that God made his Covenant with the children, which were naturally
to be begotten of him. And then answers the Objections that may be made against
it from Romans 9.8. Neque repugnat quod dicit Paulus. The cause of this mistake
in our Author is mere carelessness, for he never examined Calvin, but finds in
Mr. Tombs his Examen: page 50. This passage quoted by him, viz. Estius annot.
ad Genesis 17.7. Colligit hinc Calvinus eo ipso quo quis est semen Abrahae, ad eum
pertinere promisstonem Abrahae factam: that is, hence Calvin gathers, that the
promise -- belonged to the children of Abraham as they were his natural or
carnal Seed. To which Estius replies -- thus -- Responsio manifesta;
promissionem illam de benedictione spirituali intellectam non ad carnale semen
Abrahami pertinere, sed ad spirituale quemadmodum eam ipse Apostolus
interpretatus est Romans 4.9. -- Which is according to the Authors Translation --
It is manifest that the promise underdood of spiritual blessings, pertains
not to the carnal Seed, etc. here I might pass some observations upon this
mistake of the Author. 1. That he is very careless in quoting Authors, and
taking one for another, and that the testimony he cites for himself is against
him. 2. That he and his party, and the Jesuits and Papists agree very well in
the interpretation of those Scriptures that relate to the Covenant. The Author
lies open to the lash also in what he quotes out of Amesius, de praedest. For
Amesius speaks but just half of what he sets down, in one and the same
character, and the promise that he disputes of there against the Remonstrants,
is that in the ninth of Romans 8. So that it is not ad idem, for we are
speaking of that, Genesis 17.7. God said indeed he would not establish his
Covenant with Ishmael, but with Isaac, Genesis 17.27. but by Covenant there is not
meant the Covenant we stand in to God in regard of our persons, for our own
personal benefit, but the Covenant of special Prerogative to Isaac, that Christ
should come of, and the Church remain in his posterity.

Next folows the dismal Consequences, which, as he says, the Doctrine of
Infant Baptism is attended with. But they are only imaginary, not real ones.
Quicquid recipitur recipitur ad modum recipientis; as the man thinks, so the
Bell, etc. But let us hear what they are.

1. If God made his Covenant with the Posterity of Believers, as this Doctrine
asserts, then says he, all the Posterity of Believers should certainly have
grace bestowed upon them.

Reply. No such matter, for we have proved they may be said to be in Covenant,
in regard of external prividledges only; and not partake of the spiritual
grace, or saving benefits of the Covenant.

Which, says he, Mr. Blake does confidently affirm, p. 6. saying, that
Christianity is hereditary, that as the child of a Noble man is noble, the
child of a Free man free, a Turk a Turk and of a Jew, a Jew, so the child of a
Christian, is a Christian.

But I pray Sir, who told you this of Mr. Blake, was it not your old friend Mr.
Tombs Exercit. p. 53. your words differ very little. If this be true says
Tombs, that the Covenant of grace is a Birthright privilege, then the
children of Believers are children of Grace by nature, for that which is a
Birthright privilege is a privilege by nature, and if as Mr. Blake says, p.
6. to [but neither of them names the Book] Christianity is hereditary, that as
the child of a Noble man is noble, the child of a Turk is a Turk, of a Jew a
Jew, the child of a Christian is a Christian, then says Tombs [just as my
Antagonist] Christians are born Christians. O wonderful, that men should so
agree! And how are they then, says he, the children of wrath by nature? and
says our Author this is in contradiction [thats some alteration] to the
Scripture which says we are children of wrath. One would think these men did
very well agree, they do so often meet and kiss each other, but it is in aliquo
tertio, that is, in the point of Baptism, for I hear from those that knows them
both intus and in cute, that they are at a great, if not irreconcilable
distance in some other matter: But I would have the reader to understand that
those words are not Blakes, though charged upon him by Mr. Tombs to render him
odious, which is very sad: And that learned godly man being very sensible of
the injury, signifies to Tombs that he disowns it, and advises him to forbear
such device. I believe, says he, no such thing that Parents conveigh to their
children, as by Birth-priviledge, a being in Christ Jesus, but if you
understand by Christianity the bare name or title of Christian, together with a
right to Church privileges, then I shall own the thing, but disclaim the
expression: A sufficient vindication from so sordid a Calumny, and if this were
so unworthily done in Mr. Tombs, what shall we think of the Author. who has
licked up that vomit again, and cast it upon Mr. Blake, after he had so well
cleared himself, which he could not but know.

Nor does our Doctrine contradict those Scriptures which saywe are children of
wrath by nature, and except a man be born again, etc. Joh, 3.3. for even all
the Elect are born sons of Adam, children of wrath, and yet they are the
children of promise, Isaac himself was visibly the child of promise in his
infancy, he was born by promise, Romans 9.7.8, 9. and yet in respect of natural
generation, he was a son of Adam, a child of wrath.

Another Absurdity he fancies, Mr. Tombs again.
is, That then all the posterity of Believers must b^saved, without, says he,
you will necessitate the Doctrine of falling from grace.

Down right Mr. Tombs Exerc. p. 52. if God keeps his Covenant, it follows that
all the posterity of Believers are saved, or if some are not saved, though they
be in the Covenant of grace, there may be Apostasy of persons, etc.

This is a non sequitur, for the Covenant of Grace is not absolute, and saving
to all that are once within it; it is absolute and saving to the Elect Seed,
but not to those who partake of the out ward privileges of it, but take not
hold of it by faith. It may truly be said of all Elect Infants born of
believing Parents, that they are absolutely under the Covenant: (as Isaac in
his Infancy) even before they believe, Mr. Cotton's Grounds and Ends of
childrens Baptism. Dr. Proston of the Covenant.
yea their believing in Gods time is given to them as the effect, and not the
cause of the Covenant; But as for others who only partake of the outward
privileges of it, and no more, that do not believe, it is not saving to them.

As for the other dismal Consequence of Falling from Grace, which they say we
must hold, if Infants of Believers be in Covenant, and not all saved.

This is like the rest; the fear is more than the hurt; for as Mr. Cotton
says, whom soever God takes into Covenant are in a State of Grace, but what
Grace? either common or saving Grace. The Elect are in a state of saving Grace,
and they shall never totally fall away, but persons may fall away from a state
of common Grace, and from the external privileges of the Gospel, and Covenant
of Grace quatenus it respects outward spiritual privileges. Those that stick
at this, and will not own it for Truth may do well to give us the sense of
those Scriptures, psalm. 44.17. Dan. 11.30, 31. Where they are said to be false
in Gods Covenant, and to apostatize from it.

Another dismal consequence, which is only the result of an idle and erroneous
conceit is, That we tie up the Groce of Gods Covenant to the children of
Believers only, and then what hope for the children of unbelievers.

No fear of that, for the children of unbelievers may belong to the Election of
Gods Grace, but have no right to be baptized, but upon their own personal
profession, nor are the children of those who are called Christians to be
ranck'd with the children of Pagans (for they are in a nearer capacity of
Salvation, being born in a nation where the Gospel is preached) of whom the
Apostle speaks, who being strangers to the Covenant, are said to be without
hope: Lastly, he says our Doctrine overthrows the Covenant of Grace it self,
concluding an interest without faith, and deriving a Title by Generation.

Not so. Whatsoever both they, and Papists would fasten upon us (for in this
they are agreed) for we say, that the Infant Seed of Believers are Confederates
with their Parents, and God excepts of the Parents Faith, and embraces the
children into the same Covenant with them. Licet pueri Infantes, fidem non
habent, Deus tamen eorum parents compellans, ipsos etiam complectitur. God
taking the believing Parents into Covenant, takes the children in with them, as
we have before more fully shown out of Calvin on Mat. 28.19. Mark 16. according
to the Tenor of the Covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. Nor
do we hold, we derive a Title to the Covenant by Generation, for Foedus non
transfunditur per carnem, says Peter Martyr, the Covenant is not propagated or
transmitted by way of natural Generation, [that which is born of the flesh is
flesh] the Parent communicates his nature and the corruption of it, Mr.
Prinsley of the Doctrine and practice of Pedobaptism.
unto his child but nothing of Grace. That is the free gift of God, and this it
is that brings the child of the Believer into Covenant as well as the Parent,
even the free and gracious promise of God made to both.

Now Reader see some of the dismal consequences of their Doctrine, who deny the
children of Believers to be taken into Covenant with them.

1. It puts a sacrilegious restraint upon the Covenant, and makes an essential
variation in it without warrant.

2. It excludes them from the ordinary way of Salvation, for if they have no
visible interest in the Covenant, (no not so much as externally in regard of
Gods visible dispensation,) then they have no visible interest in Christ, the
Mediator of the New Covenant.

3. It exempts and shuts them out from a participation of the Spirit, and
sanctification of their natures, whereby they may be made meet for the
inheritance of the Saints: for all the influences of the Spirit, is by virtue
of the Covenant: 2 Pet. 1. Now Mr. Tombs himself acknowledges that Infants
may be sanctified.

4. They have no ground of comfort in the death of their children, no more than
they have concerning a Turk, or unconverted Indians child, for that which
affords a visible ground of hope of the salvation of another, is his visible
interest in the Covenant of Grace; to be an Aliene to the Covenant of promise,
is to be without hope, in the Apostles Account, Ephesians. 2.12. So that we may say
(with Mr. Ford, concerning all the children of Heathens, dying in Infancy, They
are taken into the hands of God, who indeed may (for any thing we know) save
them by Prerogative, and an undiscovered depth of mercy; but he has afforded
us no ground, so much as to hope, that any of them are saved, because the
Statute Law of the Kingdom does not extend Salvation beyond the Covenant. Now
an Anabaptists Faith concerning the Infants of believing Parents, even his own,
puts them into the same irrelative condition (as to God and the Covenant) with
the children of Infidels and (by consequendce) under the same hopelessness of
Salvation. Now let tender Parents consider, who undoubtedly would think it a
sad thing to bring forth children to the destroyer, what sad principles theirs
are, by, and according to which, they must kiss their beloved Babes, when they
are a dying with that sad Farewell, which the dying Heathen gave his departing
soul;

Animula vagula blandula, etc.

And truly one of their Opinion in this town, and supposed godly, said in my
hearing, they had no ground of it.

5. And consequently they have no ground of hope ever to see them again with
comfort at Christ's appearance, for there is no foundation of hope of a glorious
resurrection unto life, but by virtue of the Covenant. Luke 20.36, 37, 38. Heb.
11.16. Act. 26.7, 8.

The other Scripture that he encounters with, is that Act. 2.38. A parallel
place to that in Genesis 17. The Argument which we bring for Infant Baptism from
hence is this,

Those to whom the promise does belong, to them belongs Baptism, but to those
that repent and their children the promise belongs, therefore to them and their
children belongs Baptism.

Against this he has a double Exception.

1. By the promise there, is not meant the Covenant of grace but the giving of
the Spirit, called the promise of the Father, prophesied of by Joel 2.28.

To which we answer, That though in the fourth and seventeenth verse. Whereis
mention of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, which refers to Joels
Prophecy, yet the promise in the eight and thirtieth verse is of another
nature, and not meant of those extraordinary Gifts; for

1. Because it is such a promise as is still a fulfilling, and shall be
throughout all the times of the New Testament, paralled to that Isa. 44.3. I
will pour out my Spirit on thy Seed, and my blessing on thy Offspring. It is
such a promise as appertains to Parents, and to their children, and all that
shall be called to the end of the world, whereas the promise of extraordinary
Gifts, was but pro tempore, for a certain time, and relating to that season.

2. It cannot be understood of extraordinary Gifts, because Peter's hearers had
no such Gifts nor had the Jews or Gentiles, who were afar off, and afterward
called such miraculous Gifts; and as Mr. Stephens notes, if the promise (to
you, and to your children) be meant of extraordinary Gifts, how will the parts
of the Text agree with each other? The Apostle exhorts them, be baptized every
one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins: and
then gives this reason, For the promise is to you and to your children. If
therefore the promise be meant of extraordinary Gifts, then the command, be
baptized every one of you, will stand in immediate relation to such a promise.
And so the matter will come to this Issue, that all that are baptized: and
particularly they that renounce their old, to take up a new Baptism, they will
have a promise made to them, and to their children to speak with diverse kinds
of languages. [Which promise I never understood-was made good amongst them, for
few of them have any more than their Mother Tongue.] On the other side, if the
promise be taken for the promise of Christ, and for remission of sin by his
blood, in this case it will be easy to show the connection of the words; for
what can be more aptly spoken than this? Be baptized every one of you in the
name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of your particular sin? for the
promise of the pardon of sin, by the blood of Christ does belong to you and to
your children?

3. The promise here mentioned was to give hope to those poor creatures, and to
prevent the despair, which they were ready to fall into upon conviction, that
they had crucified the Lord of Life, and what comfort could this bring to their
wounded consciences, to tell them they should have the miraculous gifts of
tongues?

2. It Is farther objected, by children are no other meant than the posterity of
the Jews.

To which we reply, with Mr. Sydenham.

1. The word (...) signifies off-sping, though never so young. Joh. 16.21. Luke
1.31. Mat. 1.26. Luke 1.57.

2. It Is an indefinite word, therefore must not be restrained to grown
children, except God had expressed it in a peculiar phrase.

3. It must be understood of their Infants, because he uses the phrase of
speech to these Jews, (which they had been trained up in from their fathers)
I Will be the God of thee, and thy Seed, and the Jews must needs understand him
speaking in this Dialect of their children included in the promise.

4. Why should the Apostle name children, if he had not meant Infant Seed?
otherwise it had been sufficient to have said, the promise is to you, and as
many as the Lord shall call: but therefore names children, because it had
relation to the Covenant.

It is true what the Author says concerning Dr. Hamond, that he conceives
children to be there really the posterity of the Jews, and not particularly
their Infant children, but that is but one Doctors Opinion in opposition to an
innumerable company of our judgment, and that not without sufficient ground, if
the forementioned reasons be well weighed. The other is, Dr. Tailor who speaks
not his own sense upon the Text, but personates (as he tells us) an Anabaptist;
we may see his own proper judgment in his last piece, viz. The consideration of
the practice of the Church in baptizing Infants of believing Parents, page
48.49. It is, says he, in our case as it was with the Jews children, our
children are a holy Seed: for if it were not so with Christianity, how could S.
Peter move the Jews to Christianity, by telling them the promise was to them
and their children? For if our children be not capable of the Spirit of
promise, and holiness, and yet their children were holy; it had been a better
Argument to have kept them in the Synagogue, than to have called them to the
Christian Church -- And indeed if the Christian Jews, whose children are
circumcised, and made partakers of the same promises, title, and inheritance,
and Sacrament, which themselves had at their first conversion to the faith of
Christ, had seen their children shut out from the new Sacrament [of Baptism] it
is not to be doubted but they would have raised a storm, greater than could
easily be suppressed: since about their circumcision they had raised such
tragedies, and implacable disputations; and there had been great reason to look
for a storm; for their children were circumcised, and if not baptized; then
they were left under a burden, which their fathers were quit of, for S. Paul
said unto you, whosoever is circumcised is a debtor to keep the whole Law,
these children therefore that were circumcised, stood obliged for want of
Baptism to perform the Laws of ceremonies, to be presented to the Temple, to
pay their price, to be redeemed with silver and gold; to be bound by the Law of
pollutions, and carnal ordinances: ad therefore if they had been thus left, it
would be no wonder if the Jews had complained, and made a tumult; they used to
do it for less matters, and this may serve to balance what the Author quotes
form the Doctors lib. of Proph. p. 233.

Except. 4.

Because, says he, Circumcision was only a Seal to Abraham, not to believers,
and their Seed, a Seal of the Faith that Abraham had long before he was
circumcised, but so could it not be said of any Infant that had no faith.

Repl.

In this the Author does quadrare with the Papists. So say the Jesuits, and so
say the Antipaedobaptists. Bellarmin and after him others object that
Circumcision in Romans 4. Bellarmin lib. 1. de Sacramentis.
is not said to be a Seal universally to any faith, but only a Seal of the
individual faith of Abraham, which is clear, says he, in that it is expressly
said, it was a Seal of the righteousness of the faith that he had, being yet
nncircumcised, that he might be the father of all that believe: but only
Abraham could be such a father, etc. your collection, says he, is naught, when
you say Circumcision was a Seal of Abraham's faith, that therefore it is so to
others, for you conclude a general from a particular. So he and his followers
limits the use of Circumcision as a Seal of the righteousness of faith to
Abraham only. Paraeus gives an acute reply to this, Paraus ad locum. Quod omni
Speciei inest, toti generi recte tribuitur: sicut igitur valet: Homo, Equus,
and quodvis animal sentit, movetur: and sensus, motus, differentia Systatica
generis recte dicitur. Sic. valet circumcisio est (...) addita foederi
obsignationis causa, ergo. Dr. Sclater on the fonrth of Romans.
thus -- That which belongs in common to all the Species, may well enough be
attributed to the general, for that which all the Species have in common, they
have from their general. But why, says Dr. Sclater, should circumcision be a
Seal to Abraham only, and not to others as well as him? was the Covenant made
with him only, or with his Seed also? or was Circumcision a sign of the
Covenant to Abraham only, or else to his Seed also? if the Covenant belong to
[all] if Circumcision was to [all] a sign of their being in the Covenant, why
not to [all] also a Seal of righteousness? Forsooth, say the Papists, one end
of Abraham's Circumcision was peculiar to Abraham, as that he should be the
father of all Believers, therefore this also of being a Seal of the
righteousness of faith. Answ. And I wonder why we may not conclude by like
reason, that to Abraham only it was a Sin of the Covenant, because this end
they mention had place in Abraham only? But let us more nearly view the
reasons; it was Abraham's privilege only to be the father of all Believers, both
circumcised, and uncircumcised, ergo his privilege only to have circumcision a
Seal of righteousness: how prove they that consequence? Because Paul joins both
together, and therefore they are of like privilege: Answ. Why may we not say
(ut supra) that the necessity of the sign of Circumcision was also Abraham's
privilege, because it also is joined to the rest? But for fuller satisfaction,
view the scope of the Text, which is this; to show that justification belongs
to Believers of both people: the proof is from a sign: Abraham had
righteousness in uncircumcision, therefore righteousness belongs to the
uncircumcised; for this was that the Lord mystically intended to signify in
justifying of Abraham before Circumcision, and in commending Circumcision to
him justified: but why does he mention that end of Circumcision as sealing up
the righteousness of faith? Answ. To obviate an objection which might be made
in this manner: if Abraham was justified before Circumcision, what profit
received he by that Sacrament? Answ. It sealed unto him the righteousness of
faith: and shall we say now it was Abraham's privilege to be confirmed in
persuasion of righteousness? belike then his posterity, either needed not such
confirmation, and so Abraham's privilege shall be to be the only weakling in
faith, that needs means of confirmation, or else his Seed shall lack that help
that Abraham had for establishment; though the Covenant was equally made to
them. Thus far Dr. Sclater, and I repent not may pains, he has so cleared the
point that I know not what either Papist, or Antipaedobaptist can say against
it. I shall add that which every one will subscribe to, that the children of
Abraham stood in much more need of a Seal to confirm their faith, then he
himself with whom the Covenant was originally made, and for that reason was
called the father of the faithful, as well as for the eminency of his faith.

It could not be, says the Author, a Seal to an Infant that had no faith.

Repl.

I perceive he has read Bellarmin, for he jumps in with him: his words are
these -- If it be a Seal of Faith (in that Baptism comes in the place of
Circumcision) it is in vain to baptize Infants: and why? because they have not
Faith. Farther, says he, Isaac received not the sign of Circumcision, as a
Seal of the righteousness of the Faith which he had, being yet uncircumcised,
seeing he was not in the faith, till after Circumcision: to which there needs
no other answer than this, viz. Isaac was confederate with his Father Abraham,
and upon that account to be circumcised, which engaged to actual Faith, and
upon actual believing, it sealed this righteousness of Faith to him.

[It was a Sign put into his flesh only]

Repl.

We must take heed of extremes: The Papists hold that Sacraments do justify,
and confer grace modo non ponamus obicem peccati mortalis, provided that we put
no bar of mortal sin, which because Infants cannot do, they are all discharged
by Baptism from the guilt of original sin. Against this Mr. Calvin in his
Institutions does vehemently inveigh, terming it, Doctrina diabolica a devilish
Doctrine, because men hereby are taught to rest in a corporeal Element, more
than in God himself: and with as much zeal does he condemn the Doctrine of
[nuda Signa] which makes the Sacraments to be only bare and naked Signs.
Caveamus says he, Calvin Instit. de Sacram.
ne vim Sacramentorum enervemus, usumque prorsus evertamus: We must take heed
we do not lessen the virtue of the Sacraments, and quite subvert their use.

So Chamier (as Mr. Blake observes) is no less zealous against the Papists and
Anabaptists. Chamier lib. 1. de Sacram. in Gen cap. 10. Sect. 11.
For he having mentioned the use of Sacraments as distinguishing Signs, adds
-- Hic tamen nec solus est finis, nec praecipuus Sacramentorum; itaque
Anabaptistas aeque cum Bellarmino improbamus -- quibus Sacramenta nihil sunt
quam Signa instituta, ad discernendum Christianos a Judaeis, and Paganis, ut
Romany olim toga erat signum quo discernebantur a Graecis palliatis. This is
not the only or chief end of Sacraments, therefore we oppose the Anabaptists as
well as Bellarmin, who esteem Sacraments nothing more than signs,
distinguishing Christians from Jews and Pagans, as heretofore a Gown was a sign
whereby the Romans were known from the Grecians: so that upon consideration,
how apt men are to fly into extremes; we may conclude that in medio consistit
veritas, the truth lies betwixt both, as in this, so in very many other points.
As touching the business of Circumcision, it it was a sign indeed or mark of
distinction, to distinguish the people of God from Aliens, to separate betwixt
Jews by nature, and sinners of the Gentiles; and it was also a Seal to ratify
and confirm what the Covenant did hold forth and promise. For God having
entered Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, Genesis 17.10. This is my Covenant,
which ye shall keep between me, and you, and thy Seed after thee; every
manchild among you shall be circumcised. And whereas the Author and Bellarmin
before him says, it was a sign and a Seal to put into the flesh of the Infant,
only it was a sign and a Seal to Abraham, Mr. Cobbet enervates this Argument in
his Vindication, p. 54. by showing

1. That the initiatory Seal is not primarily and properly the Seal of a man's
faith, or obedience, but of Gods Covenant, rather. The Seal is to the Covenant,
even Abraham's Circumcision was not primarily a Seal to Abraham's faith of
righteousness, but to the righteousness Faith, exhibited and effected in the
Covenant, yea to the Covenant it self, which he had believed unto
righteousness; hence the Covenant of Grace is called the righteousness of
Faith. Romans 10.1.

2. I farther answer, that it is granted, Infants have not actually the use of
Faith, but to that end was Circumcision administered to the children of the Jews
(as Baptism is now to our Infants) that when in time to come they should
believe to righteousness (as all the Elect, who live to age do) their Faith
might receive confirmation by their Circumcision in Infancy, and this was that
which heightened David's confidence in his encounter with Goliath, reflecting
upon Gods Covenant, of which the Circumcision which he received in his Infancy,
was a sign and a Seal.

He goes on, Neither is Baptism more than Circumcision called a Seal, it is
sign proper only to men of understanding, representing spiritual Mysteries.

Repl. And why not as proper to Infants, as to men of understanding? because
they represent spiritual Mysteries; and if this be all the reason he can give,
he might better have said nothing: for what thinks he of Circumcision, did not
that represent and shadow out diverse spiritual Mysteries, scilicet, our
corrruption by nature, and the nature of mortification [by cutting of the
foreskin.] Was not the glorious mystery of our Redemption by the blood of
Christ signified by the bloodshed in Circumcision, and yet this Ordinance was
applied to poor ignorant Babes, to use the Authors Dialect, and how slightly so
ever he speaks of an Ordinance of like resemblance for signification yet the
wisdom of God thought fit to have those circumcised that were void of
understandstanding. I find the Author and his party too bold in censuring of
things, that do any way cross their idol-opinion; and the wisdom of God himself
shall suffer, rather than they will recede from the error they have sucked in,
yea, 'its observable that some of them are as pertinacious, and inflexible in
their principle of opposition to Infant Baptism, and lay out as much zeal in
this matter, as if their Salvation were concerned in it.

And not as Circumcision which was a Sign not improper for Infants, Mr. Tombs
Examen page 84. line 12.
because it left a signal impression in their flesh to be remembered all their
days, but so cannot Baptism be to any Infants, and some carry it farther, how
shall Infants know they have been baptized?

Repl. It is true, Circumcision left a signal mark upon the Jewish Infants, but
what of that? had they any other way to know this mark was given them for any
such religious end, and purpose, as a sign or seal of the Covenant betwixt God
and them, but by the testimony of others? For instance, suppose an Infant born
blind (as we read of such a one in the Gospel) was circumcised, who could never
see that signal mark, he must be beholding to others, both to be taught the
religous end of Circumcision, as well as to have intimation of the character he
received in Circumeision. It is well known that the same Ceremony is used by
other nations (though not as a Sacrament) as the Inhabitants of Colchis, the
Ethiopians, the Egyptians. The Israelites therefore when grown up, had no other
way to know that signal mark was given to a religious purpose (which was the
principal end that Ordinance pointed at) than by the information of their
Parents, or other witnesses. And the Jewish Doctors tell us there was one
appointed for that purpose, whose name they called Baal Berith, and Sandak,
that is the Master of the Covenant, and to this sense Junius and Tremelius
interprets that in Isaiah chap. 8.2. where it is said that he took unto him
faithful witnesses, viz. Vzziah the Priest, and Zacheriah: Faithful witnesses,
to what? why to the Circumcision of his Son, Mr. Brinsley:
and from hence it is conceived arises that aneient custom of witnesses (grown
now into a mere formality) in baptizing children. Concerning which Reverend Mr.
Cotton has these remarkable passages, Mr. Cottons Grounds and Ends of
Infant Baptism.
that when children are baptized upon the profession of their Godfathers and
Godmothers (for so they call it) it is not the intendment, or Doctrine of the
Church, to baptize them upon the Covenant or profession of them (which is one
of the mistakes of our Author p. 184. of his Treatise) but to bind the sureties
that when the child grows up to years of discretion, they shall assist the
Parents in the Christian education of the child, that he may learn and practice
those good things which at his Baptism they promised, or undertook for his, as
appears by the charge given to the Sureties. I shall add that the same Office
may be much mere needful in case the child's Parents dye, before it comes to
years of discretion.

5. Except. Circumcision was not administered to Believers, as Believers, and to
their Seed, but according to the Institution, to all the natural lineage and
Posterity of Abraham, good or bad.

Repl. In which passage, there are two mistkes, for.

1. Abraham was a Believer, and was not Circumcision administered to him, as a
Believer, and to his Seed?

The whole body of the Israelites, professing the worship of the true God were
accounted Believers, and all the world besides, Infidels, without God, and afar
off, Ephesians. 2.12, 17. But as for the Jews, they have the name of Gods people, his
peculiar people, they are said to be near unto him, Psalm. 148.14. A people
called by his name. 2. Chron. 7.14. And God owns them as his. Ephesians. 3.15. And
all upon account of the Covenant God made with Abraham, and his Seed, and it is
upon the account of the Covenat of free grace that any among the sons of men
are the people of God. It Is true indeed, the Apostle says, Romans 9. All were not
Israel that were of Israel, all were not godly, by virtue of Election, and
Regeneration; there were many of them his people, nay, most (for though Israel
be as the Sea-sand, yet a remnant only shall be saved.) By Covenant relation,
or external profession only, as there are Believers only by profession now
under the Gospel, by virtue of which they are esteemed within the Covenant, and
admitted to the privileges annexed.

2. That confident assertion too is spoken without book, namely, That
Circumcision belonged to all the lineage of Abraham, good and bad. For

1. His Female-posterity were not circumcised personally: this he himself
objecteth against us, and that right enough, for the command was only for the
Males, not Females, by reason of their incapacity.

2. If any credit may be given to the Jewish Doctors: (as who is so silly as to
deny it them, in a matter of Fact of this nature) they tell us that the
Male-children of an excomunicated person that remained impenitent were not
circumcised, and that this was one of the ways, by which they punished
impenitent excommunicated persons; Buxtorf has it out of the Epistles of the
Rabbis, Godwin 's Moses and Aaron. lib. 5. cap. 2. page 181.
and we have the same attested in Godwin's Jewish Antiquities.

3. Moreover during so long a time as the Israelites were in the wilderness,
there was not one Infant of all that were born there circumcised, and so they
wanted the signal mark. We see in some cases the Ordinance was suspended, (as
Christ allows us a dispensation in respect of the Sabbath) and we may say of
Circumcision, as he did of the Sabbath, Circumcision was made for man, and not
man for Circumcision.

Circumcision belonged to all the posterity of Abraham, good and bad (as he
says before) without any such limitation as is put upon Baptism, if thou
believe with thy heart thou may.

Repl. And why was that? But because not only the Eunuch there, but the rest of
the adult persons, that we read of in the Acts, who were baptzed, were the
first Subjects of the Ordinance, and that requires personal profession of
Faith; (was in Abraham who was circumcised; but it was not so with his
children) and they were all of them Aliens, (for not only the Gentiles, but
Jews also were to be looked upon as such, in reference to the new
administrantion of Baptism) and therefore it was necessary they should make a
profession of their Faith, Mr. Geree. Vind. Paedoboptist.
and acceptance of the Govenant-under the new administration, before they were
admitted to the Seal thereof, Baptism: so if any Minister of the Gospel should
preach to Jews and Pagans, they are to have some account of their Faith, before
they ought to baptize them; but upon their believing, and being baptized, the
promise takes in their children also to a participation of the same Ordinance.
For as we have before hinted, Abraham believed first, and afterward was
circumcised, but he having a Covenant made with him and his Seed; Isaac his Son
was circumcised before Faith. So was it with the Proselytes, and their
children; so that here lies the fallacy, when that shall be taken for a rule
absolutely necessary in the administration of Baptism, which is only so in some
respect. Farther to what he says, of no such qualification mentioned, that the
Parent should be a Believer to capacitate the Infant for Baptism. It may
suffice to tell him, there was no need thereof, for the Apostles knew well
enough, the Covenant in the former administration to extend to visible
Believers and their Seed: which was never repealed by the coming of Christ.

But will you deny Abraham to be a believing Parent? was not he a Father to
them all? what then? he was a public common Father which reaches not the case
in hand, neither have they any other in his stead, therefore the Analogy holds
not.

Repl. This is a poor shift, for that Abraham was a public Father we all hold,
according to that of the Apostle. Romans 4.11. He received the Sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, which he had, yet being
uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of them all that believe, though
they be not circumcised, that is, the uncircumcised Gentiles that believe, as
well as of the Jews. But why is he termed the father of Believers in both
people? I suppose no better reason can be given than what I find in Doctor
Sclater upon the fourth of Romans: namely, because from him the Blessing of the
Covenant is derived as an inheritance passes from the Father to the Son, or
because in him the Covenant is made with all Believers, and their Seed. But
what is this to the children of Believers, what benefit redounds to them that
do not actually believe, nor profess the Faith of Abraham, having not the use
of reason? the same Learned Doctor gives this answer, although Infants have not
actually the use of reason (nor can actually believe) yet to that end (as
Circumcision heretofore) Baptism is ministered to Infants, that when in time to
cime, they shall believe to righteousness, their Faith may receive
confirmation, by Baptism in infancy received; as David's Faith did against
Goliath, he reflecting upon his Circumcision, (the sign and Seal of Gods
Covenant with him) when he went out against Goliath, that uncircumcised
Philistine. To this purpose says Augustine, In Abraham praecessit fidei
justitia, and accessit Circumcisio signaculum justitiae fidei, etc. In some
justification goes before the Seal, as in Abraham, and Cornelius, in others the
Seal is before righteousness -- Sicut in Isaac, qui octavo suoe nativitatis die
circumcisus est, praecessit Signaculum justitiae fidei, etc. As in Isaac who
was circumcised the eighth day, the Seal preceded Faith -- Ita in Baptizatis
infantibus etc. So in infants that are baptized -- August. de Bapt. contra
Donat. l. 4. c. 24.

Excep. 6. Because Baptism came not in the room, place, and use of
Circumcision, and the reasons he brings to prove it, are diverse; we shall now
examine them.

First, he says, It must not be looked upon to come in the room, and stead of
it by any means: and why

1. Because then Males, Mr. Tombs Examen p. 4.
not Females would be baptized.

Reader, we must now give thee notice, that we are to renew our combat with Mr.
Tombs, for this first reason is his, Examen, page 4. And the old Answers will
do well euough.

1. The reason why Females were excluded from an actual participation of
Circumcision was their incapacity.

2. They were virtually circumcised, Mr. Marshal Defense of Infant Baptism.
and reputed among the circumcised ones in that they were admitted to the
Passover, when the express command of the Law was that no uncircumcised parson
must eat of it. Exodus 12.48. And farther it appears, they were reputatively
circumcised, by that passage, where it is said, the whole house of Israel was
circumcised, and by that of Sampsons Parents, who were displeased that he took
a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines. Judge. 14.3. for if the Israelitish
women had not been accounted circumcised in the Males, Circumcision could have
made no difference between Wife and Wife.

2. His next reason is, Because all Believers out of Abraham's Family were not
circumcised. Mr. Tombs Exer p. 4
Mr Tombs Exercit. p. 4. He gives instances of those out of Abraham's Family
that were not circumcised.

Repl. I have answered this before, that some of them lived before the
ordinance of Circumcision was instituted, and others for other reasons were not
circumcised, as I have shown but I love not to repeat.

3. His third reason is, because then the circumcised needed not to have been
baptized, if they had beem already sealed with the new Covenant Seal, but
Christ himself and all his Apostles, etc. were circumcised, yet nevertheless
were baptized.

Repl. If this deserves an Answer, take this, The Covenant of Grace both under
the Law and Gospel is one and the same for substance, though as to the external
administration thereof, there is a difference, and accordingly the Seals are
different. The Landlord if he please, may break the old Seal, and set on a new
one to the grant, he makes to his, Tenant.

2. He says, it comes not in its room and stead as to the ends and uses.

Repl. Though as to some circumstances, there be a difference between
Circumcision and Baptism in regard of their ends and uses, yet there is no
material difference, as to substance.

But let us see his reasons why Baptism succeeds not Circumcision as to the
ends and uses: which are these.

1. Because Circumcision was a sign of Christ to come in the flesh, but Baptism
that he was already come, Tombs exerc. page 4. Answ. There is a very good
harmony notwithstanding that, quoad substantiam, as to the substance, they both
look at Christ, and agree in the main. The one signifies and seals the
remission of sins, by and through the blood of Christ to be shed, the other
through that blood already shed. There is an agreement in the signification,
though not in the manner of signification.

2. He says, Circumcision was to be a partitionwall between Jew and Gentile,
but Baptism testified the contrary. Mr. Tombs again, quoting Cameron for it,
Exerc. page 4. and then p, 6, Circumcision separated the Israelited from all
nations, but Baptism signifies that all are one in Christ.

Repl. Though Baptism be no partition wall between nation and nation, yet the
end and use of Baptism is to distinguish Christians from Pagans, Turks and
Infidels. One of the ends of Baptism is to be a badge of distinction betwixt
those who are within, and those who are without, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
5.12.13.

3. The Author farther tells us, Circumcision initiated the carnal Seed into
the carnal Church, and gave them right to carnal Ordinances, but Baptism was to
give the spiritual Seed, an orderly entrance into the spiritual Church, and a
right to partake of the spiritual Ordinances.

Repl. Although I have ground to hope my Antagonist is a spiritual or godly
man, yet he talks here at a carnal rate; for what thinks he of Isaac and Jacob,
and Christ himself, they were the spiritual Seed, as well as the carnal or
fleshly Seed of Abraham, for as concerning the flesh Christ came of him. As for
his expression of carnal Ordinances, it is Scripture language Heb. 9, 10. And
the Apostle means those Levitical outward Ceremonies, which were placed in
terrene and earthly matters that reached only the flesh, or did sanctify only
to the purifying of the flesh. But sure the circumcised had right to all the
other Ordinances of a spiritual nature as well as those, and the Author is to
rash in calling the -- Church of God under the Old Testament a carnal Church, I
scruple not to say it is a carnal speech of him. But it is observable, all is
carnal with some men that does not suit with their Genius, when in the mean
time the carnality lies unseen by them in their own proud, censorious,
self-conceited, contentious spirits. And did indeed Circumcision initiate into
the carnal Church? (that is the Church of God under the old Testament) was
Jesus Christ the head of a carnal Church? he was the head of the Church under
the Law, as much as of the Church now in the days of the Gospel: and will any
sober man say, he was the head of a carnal Church? This were heterogenous
indeed that a spiritual head should be joined to a carnal Church: But I pray
what singular virtue do these men see, and find in Baptism, that they so much
advance it above Circumcision? what is there in it of it self (since they keep
such ado about it) more than in Circumcision? It is altogether in it self as
carnal as Circumcision, and the people that submit to it as carnal as others;
and as carnal, and perverse an use do some of them make of it, as the Jews did
of Circumcision. Some I know are more wise and sober than the rest; but too too
many make an idol of their Baptism, they make it a firebrand of contention,
and the beginning and end of all Religion. When as to speak plainly, the
Baptism of water of it self (due reverence being still had to all Gods
Ordinances in their places) is as low and carnal a thing, as poor a Ceremony,
as empty a sign and shadow as Circumeision. Baptism and Circumcision as to the
letter, are just alike as to any intrinsecal worth, the one relates to the
letting out of a little blood, the other to the washing of the filth of the
flesh. The cleansing of ones hands and feet from dirt is the same with it, Mr.
Sydenham 's sober Exercit.
and as efficacious, and acceptable as this of it self. In a word there is a
Circumcision in the flesh, and a Circumcision in the heart, the former carnal,
the later spiritual, and so there is a Baptism of the flesh, and a Baptism of
the spirit. The Apostle derides Circumcision in the flesh, where that of the
heart was wanting by giving it the contemptible name of Concision. Blakes
Covenant sealed.
And as Circumcision was Uncircumcision; so Dipping is Non-Baptism where that
of the spirit is wanting.

4. Lastly, he says Circumcision was to be a Bond to keep the whole Law.

Repl.

The place is Romans 2.25. Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the whole
Law. The Apostle intends both ceremonial and moral Law; as else where he
speaks, He that is circumcised is a Debtor to the whole Law; the meaning is, he
that is circumcised with an opinion that he shall be justified thereby, that
same man is fallen from Grace, that is, from the way of justification by a
Covenant of Grace, Mr. Blakes Covenant sealed,
and puts himself under a Covenant of works, and so is bound to keep the Law in
every punctilio; nevertheless Circumcision in it self was properly a Bond
binding the faithful to Evangelical Obedience [walk before me, and be upright,
or sincere] Genesis 17.1. Circumcision which was the Seal of the righteousness of
Faith, did oblige Abraham to walk perfectly, or sincerely before God, and
hereunto also Baptism obliges us.

5. He adds, Circumcision was administered to all Abraham's natural Seed, without
any profession of Faith, whereas Baptisim is to be administered to the spiritual
Seed of Abraham only upon profession.

Repl.

Here Is a double mistake, for first, we have showed before that the children of
excommunicated persons, that were impenitent were denied Circumcision: Godwin's
Moses and Aaron, lib. 5. cap. 2. page 181. So Buxtorf. Secondly, we find some
baptized in the fourth of Matthew, and Lydias house, when none that we hear of
professed Faith, but her self.

6. Lastly He draws low, and is come to the Dregs, Note here Mr. Tombs and he
differs, for Tombs grants they are both the same Sacraments, for the spiritual
part, viz. Sanctification by the Spirit, and juslification by the Blood of
Christ, Examen. p. 83.
and tells us, Circumcision was a sign of Temporal Blessings, and Benefits to
be enjoyed in the land of Canaan, whereas Baptism was to be a sign of spiritual
Benefits.

Repl.

But I pray what Temporal Blessings and Benefits in the land of Canaan, did
they enjoy, who never entered into it? But this is but an evasion learned from
the Jesuits, as before: For Canaan or temporal Blessings were not the only
things which Circumcision sealed, neither yet the main thing; for Genesis 17.7.
God promised Abraham to be his God, and the God of his Seed, this was the grand
promise, the main of the Covenant which Circumcision sealed up, temporal
Blessings were but an Additament.

The Text says Circumcision was a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, and so
of all spiritual mercies, as much as Baptism. Nor is Baptism only a seal of
spiritual blessings (this will not be owned for a true position in Divinity)
for Baptism seals our deliverance out of afflictions, as well as out of
corruption, yea, it seals to us the raising our bodies from death out of the
grave, Cottons Grounds and Ends of Infant Baptism.
as well as our souls out of the death in sin. Baptism seals a much temporal
as spiritual blessings; for he that gives Christ, how shall he not with him
give us all things else? and indeed Mr. Tombs like a Divine acknowledges that
both Circumcision and Baptism signify the righteousness of Faith, and
sanctification of the heart. Exerc. p. 6. and Exam. p. 83. After all this
unsound stuff, the Author is pleased to grant there is some Analogy (little
without doubt) betwixt the one and the other, and since he touches it only
with a light finger, I shall give you the Analogy between them more fully.

The Analogy betwixt Circumcision and Baptism.

1. Circumcision was a Seal of the Covenant made with Believers and their Seed.

2. By Circumcision Believers and their Seed had entrance into the Church of
the Jews.

3. Circumcision shadowed forth the corruption of our nature, by cutting off
the foreskin of the flesh.

4. Circumcision shadowed out also mortification to sin, or regeneration by
cutting of the foreskin, and casting it away.

5. In Circumcision there was bloodshed, which pointed at our Redemption by
Christ.

6. Circumcision was a Bond to Evangelical Obedience. Genesis 17.1. Walk before me
and be upright.

So is Baptism. 1 Pet. 3.21.

So are Believers and their Seed by Baptism into particular Gospel Churches.

Baptismal washing points at the same. 1. Pet. 3.21.

The same is signified by Baptism, Romans 6.3, 4. called by Peter the laver of
Regeneration.

The water in Baptism represents the same, viz. the doing away the guilt of sin
by his blood.

So also is Baptism. 1. Pet. 3.21.

Notwithstanding all this, if we will follow the Authors advice, we must not by
any means conclude that Baptism comes in the room of Circumcision, and for this
reason which lies at the bottom, because then he must renounce his opinion, for
it will thence follow, that Infant Baptism is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ. But
he has learned from Mr. Tombs to give a ponderous reason why (though there be
some Analogy) we must not own it to come in the room and stead of Circumcision,
Tombs again Exercitation p. 7.
viz. Because there is an Analogy between other things and Baptism; and we may
on the same account say it comes in the room and stead of them, As the -- Ark,
Manna, Rock and from such like Arguments drawn from Analogies, what Jewish
Rites may by our wits be introduced to the countenancing the Papists in their
High-Priest-Hood, Tithes. But will he never have done with Mr. Tombs? we find
this in his Exercit. page 7. -- Where he says, -- By like manner of
Argumentation it will be lawful to bring in the whole burden of the Jewish
Rites, -- and who shall put a bound to men's wits -- and this manner of arguing
will countenance the Arguments of the Papists, for an universal Bishop, because
there was such an High Priest among the Jews, etc. And that Tithes are due to
Ministers, Jure Divino, form Analogy of Melchisedec and Aaron, etc. Exam. p. 86.

Well, since we have this Crambe bis cocta, that is enough to turn ones
stomach, being tainted with long standing; I think Mr. Gerees stomachical
medicines may be proper -- We bring in, M. Gere. Vind. Padebaptismi.
says he, no new Rite by Analogy, but only apply that which God has brought,
unto those, to whom by Analogy it does appear to belong.

And again Baptism is not instituted or bronght in as a new Rite by us; but
being appointed of God, is applied by us, by proportion to Infants. And for
that of countenancing the Papists in their High-Priest-Hood: neither does that
follow; for this Argument proceeds, as though we set up Circumcision it self:
whereas we neither set up Circumcision, nor Baptism: but apply Baptism
instituted of God to Infants. And therefore for you (says he to Tombs) to
infer the bringing in of things not in their kind mentioned, or appointed in
the New Testament; is an apparent non sequitur: your instances being far
unparallel to ours of applying an instituted Ordinance to children by way of
proportion. I shall expect a good answer to this from the Author, or Mr.
Tombs, ad Graecas Calendas.

He next applauds my Lord Brooks (who gives not them a very good character) for
that saying of his, viz. That the Analogy which Baptism now has with
Circumcision in the Old Law, is a fine rational Argument to illustrate a point
well proved before; but he somewhat doubts whether it be proof enough for that
which some would prove by it (besides the vast difference in the Ordinance) the
persons to be circumcised are stated by a positive Law, so express that it
leaves no place for scruple, but it is far otherwise in Baptism, where all the
designation of persons fit to be partakers, for ought I know, says he, is only
such as believe: for this is the qualification which with exactest search I
find the Scripture requires in persons to be babtized, and this it seems to
require in all such persons; now how Infants can be properly said to believe, I
am not yet fully resolved. This is very true which he relates of my Lord
Brooks, who speaks not positively, but modestly, that he somewhat doubts, and
is not fully satisfied as to the way of Argumentation from Circumcision to
Baptism, and withal does yet commend it for a fine rational Argument to
illustrate a point well proved before: that is something, and more than our
Author would have had him spoke, but I must acquaint the Reader with more which
he speaks, little to their advantage. I will not, I cannot, says he, take upon
me to defend that, men usually call Anabaptism: yet I conceive that Sect is
twofold. Some of them hold free will, community of all things, deny Magistracy,
and refuse to baptize chilren. These truly are such Heretics (or Atheists)
that I question whether any Divine should honor them so much as to dispute
with them. There is another sort of them who only deny Baptism to their
children, till they come to years of discretion, and then they baptize them,
but in other things they agree with the Church of England. Truly these men are
much to be pitied. And I could heartily wish before they be stigmatized with
that opprobrious brand of Schismatics, the truth might be cleared to them. For
I conceive to those that hold we may go no farther than Scripture [that is the
express word] for Doctrine and Discipline, it may be very easy to err in this
point in hand; since the Scripture seems not to have clearly determined this
particular; but for his part, he says, many things prevail with him in this
point, as

First, for ought he could ever learn, it was the constant custom of the purest
and most primitive Church to baptize Infants of believing Parents. For, says
he, I could never find the beginning and first rise of this practice; whereas
it is very easy to track Heresies to their first rising up, and setting foot in
the Church.

Again I find all Churches (even the most strict) have generally been of this
judgment and practice: yea though there have been in all ages some, that much
affected novelty, and had parts enough to discuss and clear what they thought
good to preach, yet was this scarce ever questioned by men of note, till within
these last ages: and sure the constant judgment of the Churches of Christ, is
much to be honored, and heard in all things that contradict not Scripture.

Nor can I clear that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your children -- I
know some interpret it illegitimate, and holy, legitimate -- but says he, I
believe the Apostle means that Relative Church-Holiness, which makes a man
capable of admission to holy Ordinances, and to Baptism.

Except.

Lastly, the Author excepts against the Argument we usually bring for the
Baptism of children; Else our privilege under the Gospel, will be less than
theirs under the Law, for theirs were circumcised, they were taken into the
Covenant with the Parent, and were sealed, whereby they were distinguished from
the world, and this was a great privilege, and to deny Baptism to children,
which succeeds Circumcision, is to restrain Gods Grace, and make us loosers by
Christ's coming. To which he answers not at all.

1. Because they were not circumcised, because they were children of Believers
or sealed with a New Covenant Seal, as being in the New Covenant thereby, as
before proved, etc.

But what an absurd conceit and idle dream this is we have shown before to
which I refer the Reader.

2. Because it ought to be esteemed no more loss of a privilege, than our not
enjoying literally a Holy Land, City, Temple, Succession of High Priest, etc.
for all those Types are spiritualized to us under the Gospel -- and so far we
are better, Tombs again Eramen. p. 101.
and not worse.

Answ.

But take heed of disparaging the Grace of God in vouchsafing them the Seal of
his Covenant, now under the Gospel. For as Mr. Marshal says in answer to such
cavilling as this. None of those, City, Temple, Succession of HighPriest, etc.
were of the substance of the Covenant of Grace, for though Circumcision was a
part of their administration, yet it did belong to the fubstance, it belonged
to it, says he, not as a part of it, but as a means of applying it; and though
it be a privilege to have nothing succeed Circumcision, as it bound to that
manner of administration; yet it is a privilege to have somewhat succeed it as
a Seal of the Covenant, in as much as a Covenant with a Seal, is a greater
benefit than to have a Covenant without it.

Thirdly, He says if it should be granted, that Circumcision was a Seal of the
New Covenant, belonging to all the children of Israel, then would not the
baptizing children of Believers answer it. Neither amount to so great a
privilege. And why?

1. There were all the Familes and Tribes of Israel (and all proselyted
strangers) with their children without distinction of good and bad to be
circumcised: But here only one of a City, or two of a Tribe: for Believers are
but thin sown, and the children of unbelievers, and wicked men are to receive
no such benefit in the Judgment of so many.

Answ.

I repent the losing of so much time as I am put upon in answering such
frivolous objections, but such wrangling will never advantage their cause.

First, Then it is not true that all their children were circumcised, for in
the case of Excommunication, if a person persisted in impenitency amongst other
punishments, this was one, his Male-children were not circumcised. Godwin's
Moses and Aaron, l. 4. c. 2.

2. Let it be considered, that the Church of God is now of Greater extent under
the Gospel, that it was then, Isaiah 54.12. The desolate has more children
than the married: enlarge the place of thy Tents, and let them spread the
Curtains of thy habitation, etc. So chap. 60.6. The multitude of the Sea shall
be converted unto thee, and the riches of the Gentiles shall come unto thee --
who are these that fly like clouds, and as the Doves to the Windows? v. 8.

And when these come in, their children come in with them, and so the number of
the baptized do infinitely exceed the circumcised, the extent of the Gentile
Church so much exceeding that of the Jews, we find three thousand came in a
day, and five thousand at another time in the Acts.

3. Whereas he says wicked men are to receive no such Benefit, that is, for
their children in the judgment of so many; It is the judgment of many more that
they ought, if they profess the Christian faith: although I conceive not the
privilege of ignorant, and scandalous persons.

Secondly, He adds another reason which is exceeding weak; and that is, Because
we are at an utter uncertainty when we have a right Subject; for if the Parent
be an Hypocrite, or no elect person, which is beyond our reach to understand,
we cannot know whether the child be fit for Baptism.

Answ. And how can those of his way tell when they have a fit Subject for
Baptism, are they sure all whom they baptize are elect persons and sincere, we
have told him before, de occultis non judicat Ecclesia. A serious profession is
sufficient, and we are to judge such professors, in probability Believers, and
may on that ground admit their children to Baptism. We have a rule for
baptizing, and that we are to follow, and a rule to know, those that are
baptizable, but none, for an infallible judgment of men's sincerity, we are not
called to judge of this matter, nor is it in our power, and it is not our sin if
we be deceived. Mr. Baxter says well to this, in his Answer to Mr. Tombs, how
do you know, (says he to him) whom you should baptize? whom does the Scripture
command you to baptize? If you say as Apol. p. 94. that it is those that make
free, serious, understanding profession: I would know whether it be the
profession it self, the bare profession which God bestows this privilege on?
or whether it be the faith professed? if it be real faith, then without that,
there is no Baptism; if it be bare profession, or if we may call it false
faith, then false faith (or profession without faith) is the condition of
baptizing, And if it be real faith, the Baptizer cannot know that, if it be
said that in common estimation they are Believers, then common estimation
renders one capable of Baptism. When these men have answered the point for
themselves, they have answered it for us.

Thirdly and Lastly he says, Neither can the child (when he is grown up) have
any certain knowledge that such a Ceremony has past upon him in Infancy, he
having no infallible mark thereof; whereas the circumcised Infant had an
indelible character and mark in his flesh, to assure him that he had received
that Rite.

Answ. That they had a sensible mark to mind them of their. Circumcision is
true, though some of them had an art to make it invisible, as Beza notes upon
that place, 1 Cor. 7.18. Let him not gather his Circumcision, We have the note
in our Margent Bible.
which was done (as he quotes it out of Celsus, and Epiphanius) when the
Surgeon by art draws out the skin to cover the part circumcised. Godwin has
the same in his Moses and Aaron, and puts the question how it is possible for a
man, after once he has been marked with the sign of Circumcision, to blot out
that character, and become uncircumcised? For thus some Jews, for fear of
Antiochus made themselves uncircumcised. 1 Mac. 1.16. Others for shame, after
they were gained to the Christian Faith, uncircumcised themselves, and then
tells us what is before. This by the way: But the Author says, he that was
circumcised had a character or mark, to assure himself that he had received
that Rite. To this I reply in the words of Mr. Brinsley. True; such a sensible
mark they had. But how did they know that that mark was given them for any such
religious end and purpose? That they received it as a Sacrament, a Seal of the
Covenant betwixt God and them. Other nations there were (and that many) who
used Circumcision (even as the Turks do at this day) and I find in Mr. Godwin
the same, in his sixth Book of Miscellaneous Rites. It was used, says he,
(though not as a Sacrament) by many other nations, by the inhabitants of
Colchis, the Ethiopians, the Trogloditae and the Egyptians. Now then how did
the Israelites know it was given them to such a religious intent? why herein
they were to give credit unto the testimony of others, viz. the Parents and
other witnesses, and Mr. Godwin in the aforesaid Book tells us from the Jewish
Doctors, that when a little child was to be circumcised, one who supplied the
place of a witness (whom they called by the name of Baal Berith and Sandak,
that is, the Master of the Covenant, held the child in his arms, whilst it was
circumcised, that so he might bear witness to the Circumcision, and of the name
given the child at that time. Such was the use of the later Jews; and it
seems that the practice was ancient, even as ancient as Isaiah's time. So
those two learned expositors Junius and Tremelius interpret that place. Isa.
8.2. He took unto him faithful Witnesses. Witnesses to what? says Mr. Brinsly;
why to the Circumcision of his Son, of whom he speaks in the verse before;
such as might witness that he gave him that name in his Circumcision, as the
Lord appointed, viz. Maher-shalal-hash-baz. Which whether, says he, it was a
thing really done, or only represented to the Prophet in a vision, is not
material: for it seems however it was a practice then in use in those times.
And from hence it is conceived that ancient custom [as ancient indeed as
Tertullians days] of having Godfathers, and Godmothers, (as we call them) in
Baptism. Some persons specially appointed to witness the Baptism of such a
person; which use is still continued amongst us, with this injunction that they
mind the child of that faith into which it was baptized, and that they take
care that it be instructed and brought up in the knowledge of Christ, yet now
it is in most places become a mere formality, and an occasion only of feasting.
But we return to the matter, From those Witnesses or their Parents did the
children of the Jews receive the Testimony of their Circumcision; and they
might give the more credit to it, because they saw the same practiced upon
others daily. And even such a Testimony have children now from Parents, or
Sureties, besides the Testimony of the whole congregation, and the Records that
are kept thereof in a Book kept for that purpose, according to the custom of
the Church of England.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein the Author attempts to prove that the Ceremony of Baptism, is
Immersion, and not Sprinkling; which is an other Rite, he says) introduced
contrary to the signification of the Word, and Nature of the Ordinance, etc.

SInce the Author has thought meet to appear thus as a Witness against
Infant Baptism, it had been well if he had followed the good old Rule enjoined
Witnesses, that is, to speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth; and for want of which he has given such a partial and lame account
hitherto. We are now come to a main point, upon which they place very much
confidence, viz. the signification of the Word Baptism, and the Author
undertakes to prove, that the Manner and Ceremony thereof ought to be by
Dipping or Plunging the whole Body, and not by Sprinkling or pouring Water on
the Face or Head.

1. From the proper and genuine signification of the Word, which according to
the Greek Lexicons, and the most eminent Critics, he says, imports nothing
less than to Dip, Plung, or cover all over. And that Scapula and Stephens, two
as great Masters of the Greek tongue as we have any, tell us in their Lexicons,
that (...) from (...) signifies mergo, immergo, obruo, Item tingo, quod fit
immergendo, that is, to dip plunge; overwhelm, put-under, cover-over, to dye in
Color, which is done by plunging.

Answer.

To this we Oppose Dr. Featly in his (...) page 37. who says, that Hesychius
and Stephanus, and Scapula, and Budaeus, the great Masters of the Greek Tongue,
make good by many instances and allegations out of Classick Writers, that the
Word [(...)] imports no more than Ablution, or Washing, which may be done
without Dipping. Now what a case is the illiterate Reader in? who shall he
believe, the Author or the Learned Dr.? For my part being not willing to take
up the matter upon trust, I was the more curious to examine the Critics.

First, I consulted with Stephanus, and he says the Word (...), signifies not
only mergo, immergo, (to dip, or plung) but also abluo, lavo, (to wet, or wash)
and in the same place in his Lexicon he brings in Cyprian (who flourished about
1500 years since) translating the Word (...), Tingentes, following therein his
Master Tertullian; Corpus tingere sparsa aqua Ovid. 4. Fast. p. 558.
and says Stephens, Tingere apud prophanos Authors, idem est quod aspergere,
the Word tingere, among Heathen-Writers signifies Sprinkling, as he shows out
of Ovid and Cicero.

For Passor the Author tells us, Nec enim Herculi nocere Deianira voluit, quum
ei tunicam sanguine Centauri tinctam dedit, Cic. de Not. Deor. p. 98.
he Translates the Word by Immersion, Dipping, Submersion, but he has left out
Ablution, or Washing, which Passor there adds, (...), says he, is Immergo,
Abluo, either to dip, or to Wash.

After him comes Vossius, who is most expressly against the Author's Opinion.
The Word, says Vossius, signifies to Wash, and Washing is not only by dipping
as he hints, but by pouring out of Water, or sprinkling it on the Body, and
represents the washing of the Soul, according to that in Ezekiel. 36. I will
Sprinkle clean Water upon you; and therefore it seems Baptism may be celebrated
either way, by Dipping or Sprinkling.

Then for our own Countrymen Mr. Leigh, Rogers, Tailor, Mede, Hammond: it is
tedious to examine them all. We will only bring one of them to the test which
is Mr. Leigh, who is instar omnium, for profound knowledge in the Greek and
Hebrew. This Man the Author glories in: Mr. Leigh, says he, in his Critica
Sacra, tells us, its proper and native signification is to Dip into Water, or
to plung under Water, and that the proper signification was such a Dipping or
Plunging as Dyers use for dying of Clothes.

True Mr. Leigh says this, but he says more, and it is disingenuously done of
the Author thus to pick out what serves his turn, and leave the Reader in the
dark as to the rest. When As Mr. Leigh says in the very beginning, as soon as
he names the Word (...), that although it be derived from (...), to Dip, or
Plung, and signifies primarily such a kind of Washing as is used in Buks, where
linen is Plunged and Dipped; yet it is taken more largely for any kind of
Washing or Cleansing, even where there is no Dipping at all: and he quotes
these Scriptures for it, Matthew. 3.20, 22. Mark. 7.4. (...), They Baptized
themselves, it is rendered Washed themselves; and so did eat. So Mark. 10.38.
Luke 3.16. Act. 1.5. and 11.16. 1 Cor. 10.2. It is put generally for Washing
says Mr. Leigh, as Luke 11.38. Heb. 9.10. Christ nowhere requires Dipping,
but only Baptizing, as he quotes out of Dr. Featly.

Thou seeest, Reader, how little he has gotten by these Authors. I shall add a
few more of great renown in the Church, who are opposite to the conceit of
Baptizing to signify only Dipping. The first is Cyprian, Baptizare etiam morbis
laborantes in lectis solitos. Cyp. in Epist. ad Magnum. L. 4. Epist. 7.
indicat, and pro Baptismo probat. and sic Baptizatum Cornelius Novatum scribit
apud Eusebius. L. 6. Cap. 43. qui sic autem Baptiz ablantur, inquit Vossius, non
immergebantur nec perfundebantur, sed aqua sola aspergebantur, etc. Vossius de
Baptismo. p. 358.
who in his Epistle ad Magnum L. 4. Epist. 7. acquaints us that it was usual in
those days to Baptize sick Persons in their Beds, and the said Father proves
by diverse reasons the warrantableness of such Baptism; and that persons are
rightly Baptized although only Sprinkled, and he grounds it upon Ezekiel. 36. I
will Sprinkle clean Water upon you etc. In like manner Vossius cites out of
Eusebius, L. 6. C. 43. That it was the Custom of those times to Baptize sick
Persons in their Beds. Cornelius writes that Novatus was so Baptized, upon
which the Learned Vossius makes this Observation; That those who were thus
Baptized were not doused or dipped under Water, but only Sprinkled. This is
Vossius whom the Author brings to be for Dipping, according to the
signification of the Word, as if that were the only way of Baptizing; but you
see what a false Suggestion it is.

Estius another very Learned Man, and great Critic, declares his Judgment,
Probat Estius modum ablutionis, scilicet aspersionis exemplo Apostolorum, Act.
2. Sane interalios Thomae Aquinati veristmile est aqua persudisse, ob
Baptizandorum multitudinem, Vossius de Bap. p. 359.
grounding it on Act. 2.4. which is this, That the Apostles did Baptize by
Washing or Sprinkling, for, says he, it is altogether improbable that the
Apostles Dipped 3000 Persons in one day, and 5000 at another time. Non est
verisimile propter Multitudinem immergi omnes potuisse, sed vel perfusos, vel
aspersos fuisse aqua. He conceived that they were rather washed, or had Water
Sprinkled on them.

Walfridus Strabo, (an Ancient Ecclesiastical Writer, though since Austin many
hundred years) says in his 26th Chapter, It is to be noted that many
heretofore were Baptized, not only by Dipping, but also by pouring Water on
them; and that the same way of Baptizing may be still retained. This is he whom
the Author quotes to be for the Baptizing of grown Persons only.

Lastly, the Magdeburgenses (whose History of the Church the Author much
applauds, and that justly being a rare work indeed) tell us that Baptism
signifies Tinging, or Washing, and for this they bring Mark. 7. when the
Pharisees come to the Market except they Wash [the Word is Baptize] they eat
not, and yet it was but a part, their hands only, and not the whole Body that
was so Baptized or Washed. They also quote that place Luke, 11.38. That
Baptizing is merely Washing, and not only Dipping, The Pharisees wondered at
Jesus (...), that he was not Baptized before Dinner, that is, that he did not
Wash. Now this must be by all means (according to some men's fancy) by Dipping
and not pouring Water upon the hands; yet what more common than to Wash ones
hands this way, or by holding them under a Cock or Spout or Your, 2 Kings
3.11. Here is Elisha the Son of Saphat, which poured Water on the hands of
Elijah: that is, who was his Servant as it is noted in the Margent. It is a very
poor Supposition that Washing of hands must only be by Dipping; what if the
Pharisees had had a mind to have Washed their Faces when they did their Hands,
as is common; must that have been by Dipping? But the aforesaid Text in the
Kings puts the matter beyond exception, where by good hap we have found a
place, to prove that a Man may Wash his Hands without Dipping.

In a Metaphorical sense the Word (Baptize) is used for Pouring out the Spirit.
But to go on with the Magdeburgenses, they tell us that the Baptism of
Christians was taken a judaica lotione, from the Jewish Custom of Washings:
which the Apostle speaks of Heb. 9.10. Their service stood in diverse Washings.
The Greek is Baptisms. Now those Baptisms or Washings were not all of them
Dippings; although some it is confessed were. Mr. Goodwin in his Jewish
Antiquities shows, that the Jews had (amongst other Baptisms or Washings) a
threefold Baptization for the Dead; one of which was named (...), that is,
Baptization or Washing the Dead Corpse: it is like this was done with some
Odoriserous Water, to keep off ill scents. Thus likewise the Graecians had
their Ablutio mortuorum, Homer says, Jupiter: bid them do so to Sarpedon.
(...) Il. 11.
they Washed the Corpse with Ointment, and poured Ambrosia upon the Head and
Face. It Is said of Tabitha, that she dyed and when they had Washed her, they
laid her up in an upper Chamber, Act. 9.37. I hope when they washed her, they
did not Dip her under water.

2. It appears to be so, says he, from the Practice and usage we find thereof
in Scripture.

1. In the Story of Christ's Baptism, Mat. 3.5. Jesus came from Galilee to
Jordan unto John to be Baptized of him; and verse 16. when he was Baptized he
went up straight way out of the Water.

Answer.

We may be said to come up out of the water, when we have not been under it.
Men usually go down into the water to bath themselves, and and yet keep their
Heads above water; but the Words in the Text which are (...), as Mr. Sydenham
notes, may be better translated, went up from the water; (...) signifies more
properly; ab from, than ex out; because Rivers for the most part lie low, and
in Valleys, in coming to which usually there is a descent, and coming from them
some ascent.

2. A Second Scripture, which he urges for his Opinion is that of John 3.
verse. 23. And John was Baptizing in Aenon near Salem, and the reason why he
pitcheth on this place, is given to be, is this, because there was much Water.

Reply.

The aforesaid Author gives a sufficient Answer to this, viz. John's Baptizing
at Aenon, namely because there was much water, is a good reason why he chose
that place, for the Country to come in and be Baptized, because they might go
many Miles in those hot Countries, and not meet with a drop of water, and it
was a great privilege to those places that banked on Jordan, that they had much
water, but this is no Argument to prove that John plunged all he Baptized, The
Argument, says Mr. Sydenham, must be this, John Baptized in Aenon because
there was much water: ergo Baptizing is by Dipping all the whole Body. This is
a dangerous and ominous way of arguing, to those who deny Consequences and
Deductions for to warrant duties, without express syllabical Precept -- None of
our Consequences for Infant Baptism are so strained and far-fetcht. It was
necessary for them, that had so many of several parts to Baptize, to go where
there may be much water, when they could get hardly a drop many miles. You may
in England go twenty miles in some Countries, and not find a River to plunge a
man's whole body under water, what would it be in Spain and other hot
Countries, where Water is sold as Wine and beer with us, how far might they go
ere they could get a River to plunge themselves in? etc.

A third Scripture is that, Act. 8.36.38. -- And they went both down into the
Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he Baptized him, and when they came up
both out of the Water. etc.

Answer.

I see not how this Text can serve their turn, for there is nothing in it to
prove that Philip plunged him over head and ears; if they will prove it from
any thing it must be from their going down into the Water, or coming up out of
it; but that will not do, for I may go down into the Water, and come up again
out of it, and yet not be up to my Ankles: and how can it be proved hence they
went any farther, or whether Philip did not flash water into his Face, or cast
it over his Head, or whether he dipped only his Head, or his whole Body under
water; the Scripture is silent as to this, and Men may conjecture what they
please, but must not impose upon others. The Text faith, they both went down
into the Water, but their going down into water was no part of the Baptism, for
then they had both been Baptized: for they went both together down into the
water, but it is said that Philip Baptized him after they went down into the
water. That the Eunuch was Baptized is clear, but after what manner we are yet
to seek. We cannot from hence learn the management of this business, whether
Philip took up this great corpulent Person (for such Eunuchs use to be) quite
out of the water by the strength of his Arms, and so Dipped down again or no,
or whether so much of him only as was above the water was Dipped, and that of him
under the water left alone. And besides, as for this Eunuch, if his whole body
were Dipped whether it were in puris naturalibus, altogether naked, or in his
wearing clothes, this latter cannot be conceived for they went presently up in
the Chariot, nor could he have any convenience of shift for such a purpose, for
their meeting was accidental as to the Eunuch's part: so that we conclude,
nothing for plunging the whole body under water can be pretended to from this
Text.

The last Scripture the Author mentions is tha Romans 6.4. Buried with him in
Baptism, etc.

This is a Metaphorical expression signifying partaking of Christ's Death by
virtue of Union, but Plunging the whole body does not hold similitude neither
with Christ's burial, nor the manner of burials in the most part of the World:
for as Mr. Sydenham notes, Christ's burial, and the manner of it was not by
throwing under the Earth, for his Body was wrapped up in a linen cloth by
Joseph, and laid in a Tomb or Sepulcher, hewn out of a Rock, and this was the
custom of the Jews, Matt. 27.60. to cut out a place like a Cave, out of a Rock
to lay their dead Bodies in; and besides, Christ is said to stay three days so
buried, and so must they under the water, if they are for an exact resemblance
to his Burial; but of this we may have occasion to speak more in our Answer to
the 6th Chapter.

After this the Author brings diverse Learned Authors, who affirm that the
ancient way of Baptizing was by Dipping, as Cajetan etc. And amongst the rest
he has a passage out of Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments who takes it out of
Fabian viz. That Austin and Paulinus did in the 7th Century Baptize here in
England great multitudes in the River Trent, and the River Swall, where note by
the way (says Mr. Fox) it followed there was no use of Fonts.

To this I Answer, there could not well be any use of Fonts, because as Bede
says, it was in initio Ecclesiae ubi jam cito templa [non potuerunt extrui, it
was before Temples were built, and therefore says he, passim ad Flumina turba
Baptizata est, Beda Lib. 2. Angl. Hist. cap. 14. And I shall mind the Reader
with a pretty Observation of Mr. Fuller upon this occasion; we have it in his
Church History, p. 66.

That (says he) which they bring for Dipping, because they were Baptized in
the River Swall, makes against it. For Cambden in his Preface of Britain page
136. cites a certain Author who reports how in the River Swall near Richmond in
Yorkshire, Austin in one day Baptized above tenthousand Saxons -- Though Bid
ascribes this numerous Baptizing to Paulinus Archbishop of York. Now, faith
he, if so many were Baptized it may be well urged against the Anabaptists and
Papists; against the former, that all these could not be dipped in a day; and for
the latter it appears that in that Age the Administration of the Sacrament was
not loaded with those Superstitious Ceremonies, as essential thereunto, of
Crossing, Spittle, Oil, Cream, Salt, etc.

Lastly, the Author frames an Objection or two on our behalf, which he
undertakes to Answer thus.

Objection.

But the Word (...) signifies if not to Sprinkle, yet not only to Dip, and
overwhelm, but also to Wash. Mark, 7.4. where there is mention of Washing of
Hands, Cups, Pots, Vessels, which may be done without Dipping or Plunging under
Water.

Answer.

That Baptism in a sense is Washing, says he, I no ways doubt, for you can not
dip a thing without you wash it: But may not Cups and Vessels be washed though
not dipped? True (says he) they may though not from this Scripture, the Word
being (...); for though all Dipping be Washing, yet all Washing is not Dipping
in a proper sense.

Well argued Sr. I perceive you are very ingenious and logical, you are now at
your termini convertibiles, where shall we have you next? No wonder that (as
some boast) you convert many to your Judgment. But by your leave I will lay a
Rub in your way: What think you of that place Luke 3.16. I Baptize you [with
Water] if by Baptism had been meant Dipping, must it not have been said I
Baptize you [in Water]?

Once more Act. 1.5. John Baptized [with Water] is not this a very improper
speech if it be meant of dipping, for it is as much as to say John Dipped with
Water -- The same may be said of Christ's coming after John, whom, he says,
shall Baptize with the Spirit; is this to be understood of Dipping, or is it
not rather of the pouring out of the Spirit which was promised?

If this will not satisfy, I shall offer one Text more, and that I think is
beyond exception; it is concerning Nebuchadnezzar; Dan. 4.30. of whom it is
said he did eat grass as the Oxen and his Body was wet with the dew of Heaven,
(...) as the Septuagint has it: (...) is here rendered Wet, and that with the
Dew of Heaven: It is the second Aorist of (...), from whence comes (...). So
now we have found that which the Author said he could never do, namely, that
the word is simply taken for Washing, by pouring on Water, or Sprinkling; for
if the Root signifies so, then does the Branch also. And thus my Antagonist
having shown so much of his Acumen in the Greek, he will also give us a taste of
his skill in the Mystery of Huswifry.

I presume, says he, you will account her but a S^lut, and give her no thanks
for her pains, that having unclean Hands, Vessels, or Clothes to Wash, does
only Sprinkle, or pour a little Water upon them as though that would serve.

It Is a commendable thing to be cleanly, and let all Maids take special notice
of this item, and as they would not willingly incur the brand of Sluts, let
them be mindful of this that when ever they set about that necessary work of
Washing Dishes to look well to their business, and let them be sure they dip
them quite under water, or they will never be clean: and I question whether
this will do without some rinsing and rubbing, for I have observed your cleanly
Huswifes to fetch off the filth that way, and then they will shine like
Crystal, if afterward they scour them with Sand. But we must be more ferious
in a business of this nature, and I hope to be excused, being tempted thus 10
Answer our Author in his own kind. I will leave that word of Mr. Baxter to the
consideration of the Judicious viz. It would be but folly for any to think Men
must needs fill themselves full of Bread and Wine, because it best signifies
the fullness of Christ; so it is no better to say, that we must needs be washed
all over because it best signifies the fullness of Christ. Christ told Peter
that the Washing of his Feet was enough to cleanse all.

Eight Argument against the Administration of Baptism by Dipping.
1. BEcause we are not to presume to do that which is not written, that is,
that is not founded upon Scripture-precept, either Thetice, in so many express
words, or Dianoetice, by clear consequence: They will not allow us the
privilege of deducting Consequences from Scripture, although never so clear,
yet they presume to make use of Consequences, and think they can demonstrate
that which is impossible to be done, from Scripture. There is a positive saying
in Mr. Leigh's Critica Sacra upon the Word [(...)] Christ nowhere requires
Dipping but only Baptizing, and as for the manner and method how this should be
done, there is altum Silentium in the Scripture, a deep silence: and therefore
it is I very great boldness, (to say no worse,) for any to lay the whole essence
of Baptism in Dipping.

2. As there is no express Command for it, so there is no President in the
New Testament; they cannot instance in any one Person that ever was so severely
dealt with as to be Plunged over Head and Ears. Nor is there any convincing
Circumstances to be collected thence, that any was so served. And is it not
strange that upon search of all the Sacred Register, from the time that John
the Baptist began his Ministry, to the time that John the Evangelist ended
his, which was above sixty years, during which time thousands and ten thousands
were Baptized; that if Plunging over head and ears had been the way, then no
error ever should be committed, no fainting, or drowning of persons under
water, or some accident or another happen, to demonstrate that Baptizing was
after that manner. Me thinks there should fall out something, either of
Omission or Commission, that might argue the thing. But we have not so much as
one Circumstance of that nature.

3. Because as the Word (...) signifies both to Plunge and to Wash, so it is
mostly used in Scripture for Washing. It is a good Rule to be observed that
when we find a word in Scripture of a double sense, and it hangs as it were in
Equilibrio, so that we know not which to take, our safest course is then to
observe which way the Scale does most incline, that is we are to embrace that
sense which is most common in Scripture. But in the matter before us I think we
need not be much at a loss, for we shall not easily find any explicit place in
all the Bible, where the Word Baptize is used positively for Plunging.

4. Let it be granted that in Scripture the word can be found to signify
Dipping, yet for as much as it is also in Scripture used simply for Washing, we
are also to observe and follow another Theological Rule, that where a word is
of doubtful interpretation, admitting a double sense, that sense is to be taken
for right, which agrees best with the Mind of God in other places; and the
general Anatogy of Faith, and Evangelical Doctrine. Hence then we conclude that
Baptizing is not Dipping, because this Practice runs directly cross to a Vital
Maxim of Religion, which is self-preservation, required not only in the
Moral-Law, but Charactered in us by Nature: and under the Evangelical
Dispensation, we find our Lord Jesus so tender of Man's health and life, that
rather than it should be endangered, even the Sabbath it self must be dispensed
with; and the Reason Christ gives is, because Man was not made for the Sabbath,
but the Sabbath for Man; so may it be said Man was not made for Baptism, but
Baptism Instituted for Man, for his good, not hurt; and therefore Dipping which
we know has not been only to the damage of some Men's health, but the loss of
some lives, is to be suspected to be none of Christ's Ordinances. And for this
Reason Mr Cradock (a great Independent as they call them) in his Treatise of
Gospel-Liberty, says, the Practice is to be restrained by the Magistrate, for
the preservation of the lives of his Subjects.

Let us a little dive into this Dipping-Principle, and we shall see how
inconsistent it may in some cases be to the Life of Man.

1. We know the Command of Baptizing takes place immediately upon Believing; for
this is certain, every one that Believes ought presently to be Baptized (if he
can have it) for so it was without delay, as appears by several Instances in
the Acts of the Apostles. If then only Dipping be Baptizing, what shall become
of them that are weak and sickly, that have Catarrhs, Consumptions, Palsies;
These, if they Believe, although it be in Winter, in frost and snow, must to
the work without any delay, they must I say be covered all over with water: and
if so, may not this hasten their end, which may endanger the lives of the
soundest Bodies? Is this think you suitable to the mercy and tender Bowels of
Christ, whose Yoke is easy and Burden light? Certainly such a penance as this
to some Persons and to those that live in extreme cold Countries, is more
unsupportable than the burden of the Ceremonial-Law, and more dangerous than
what ever the Ceremonial Law requited. And what though our bodies may endure it
better than theirs who live under a more severe Climat, yet we must know
Christ's Ordinances are calculated for all Meridians, and all are bound to
submit unto them. That therefore cannot be Christ's Ordinance, which must needs
compel some to self-cruelty and destruction. To those therefore who are such
stubborn asserters of the Doctrine of Dipping, that of Peter may be well
applied, Why tempt ye God, to put such a Yoke upon the necks of Christians, not
able to bear it, when nothing else but your mistaken expounding of the Text
has brought it on them? what then Mr. Baxter speaks in respect of weak
Constitutions, is (for ought I know) a truth, viz. The way of Dipping is good
for nothing but to dispatch Men out of the World, that are burdensome to it,
and to ranken Churchyards.

Secondly, Baptism cannot be by way of Dipping, because Christ has Instituted
no Ordinance, to thwart and cross the pure and chaste Rules of the Gospel, which
prohibits all appearances of evil, and the unclean glances of the Eye. Can we
therefore imagine that Christ's Baptism should entrench so much upon the laws
of Civility, Chastity, and Modesty; as to require Women and Maids, to appear
openly, in the light o the Sun, out of their wonted habit, in transparent and
thin Garments next to nakedness, and in that posture to be Plunged, in the face
of the whole Congregation, before Men and Boys? for my part I cannot bring my
self to believe that Christ owneth any Practice of so uncomely an aspect, and
that is seemingly so scandalous and ignominious to the honor of Christianity.

5. Christ's Ordinances are calculated for the Universal World, for the
Inhabitants of all Countries, and on that consideration, I see not how Dipping
can be one of them: for how can Persons be strictly obliged to that in all
places, which cannot be practiced but in some, and that too at certain times;
for some Countries are so hot and dry, that People must travel many miles
before they can find any River up to their Knees, and in other places at Winter
the water is frozen up, that the Ice cannot be perforated or broken up.

6. I cannot think that by Baptizing we are to understand Dipping under water:
for the prime end of Baptism (as the Author says Chap. 4th of his first Part,
page 15.) is, that the Baptized might have the Mysteries of the Gospel
represented in a sign, and preached to his Eye in the Ordinance, which has been
Preached to his Ear. But what of that can be seen or apprehended at that time
when the Ordinance is celebrated? how can any one, especially such as are
timorous, and of the weaker Sex, be free to exercise their Minds or Faith upon
Divine Mysteries? What can such think of, but their danger, and how they shall
escape being throtled or drowned? And I cannot conceive (if there were nothing
but this) that Christ has instituted an Ordinance, that shall so confound the
senses, and put tender folks into such an afright and amaze for the present,
and at such a time when they had need have their minds most serene to
contemplat of the glorious Mysteries represented in the Ordinance.

7. Baptizing cannot be by Dipping, for if so, then the Body must be either
naked, or clothed: if cloated, then certainly the person is not Baptized but
his Clothes; for Vossius says true, de Baptismo page 357. Baptismus non
vestium est, sed humani corporis: Baptism is not that of the Clothes, but of
the body of Man: for if one be Dipped in his Clothes, the Flesh cannot be said to
be washed primarily, but secundarily, and by consequence, and it is the Garment
that is properly Baptized, Mr. Sydenham's Exercitation on Baptism.
or Washed; and yet that part that is to be Baptized ought doubtless to be
naked, that the Water may fall immediately upon the flesh that has been the
instrument and subject of sinning: and therefore anciently, for above
six-hundred years, Vossius shows that (through an erroneous mistake) Men,
Women, and Infants, Vossius de Bapt. p. 357. Eo etiam, posito pudore toto
penitus corpore nudabantur, adeo ut ne fascia quidem (qualem pictores
honestatis causa appingere solent) obduxisse videantur partibus pudendis.
were Baptized naked, and the Christians gloried in it, that for the sake of
Christ they could expose themselves to shame, until afterward they came to more
light, and had regard to modesty; which taught Christians that the washing of
one part may suffice, and may well enough signify the purifying the whole Man,
as Christ told Peter as before, in a case of like resemblance, John 13.10. And
this is the reason, as Mr. Sydenham well observes, why we only pour Water on
the Face, because it is the principallest part wherein the Image of God most
appears, and the Soul shines forth most eminently, on which all the workings of
men's humors and affections leave the visiblest impression and symptoms. And
it is observable that the same Word in the Greek [(...)] signifies both the Face
and the Person, because the whole Person is represented by the Face; and thus
we Baptize the Person when we Baptize his Face, which we can look upon without
shame.

8. Baptizing is not by Dipping, but some other way, for it is said of John that
he Baptized all Jerusalem and Judea, and the Regions roundabout, and
three-thousand were Baptized in one day, and five thousand another, which is
hinted brawny Arms, to go through such work as to Dip them all; and how all
these could be Dipped Men and Women promiscuously in their Clothes, or how they
could get Garments to render the act comely, is not easily to be conjecture,
and therefore it is more likely Water was flasht, or cast upon or over them.

CHAP. V.
Wherein we have an account given of some pretended Mischiefs, Absurdities, and
Contradictions chargeable upon the Practice of Infant Baptism.

WE were once resolved to have pretermitted this Chapter, being a
Recapitulation of the Author's former Arguments against us, and containing
nothing that is material and pertinent to the Question, that has not been
already either Actually or Virtually resolved: but had I persisted in that
resolution, and said nothing, it would have been imputed by some to be, by
reason of some difficulties that I found therein, which made me unwilling to
meddle with it. I have, to prevent all such imaginations, encountered it with
assurance, that the ingenious Reader will approve my Husbanding time better,
than to make a large repetition of what has been already said; when in truth
it is sufficient only to point to such places in my Book, where the same things
are pressed as we find here, and to which answer has been given. Nevertheless
I shall superadd a few things. He begins with Mischiefs.

1. The first Mischief is, by altering Christ's Order in the Commission, Matt.
28.19. wherein Teaching, Repentance and Faith; are required always to precede
Baptism, which this makes to follow after.

Reply.

Notwithstanding what is said to this in the first Chapter of my Book, I add,
That I deny the Proposition to be Universally true, that Teaching, Faith,
Repentance, ought always to precede Baptism. For Persons to be Baptized are,
either;

1. Original, which have no precedent title. To such, Teaching, Repentance,
Faith, must precede their Baptism; for such having not precedent Evidences of
being in Covenant, must put forth some acts of Faith and Repentance of their
own, that so they may have evidence of right.

2. Secondary, and derived, viz. Infants of former Believers, and it is not
requisite, that Teaching, Faith, Repentance, should precede their Baptism. This
distinction of Primary, Original, or Secondary and Derived Persons in the Title
to the Sacrament of Baptism, would answer most of the Author's Arguments for
him, if he would please to consider it. We call the Believing Parents Original,
and their Infants Secondary and Derived Persons for distinction sake: Not as if
the Father were the Original of his Son's right to the Covenant or Seal; No,
God's mere Grace in Christ, who at the first Institution of the Covenant was
pleased to take in both the Believer and his Seed, is the Original of both
their Rights; The Seed Deriving it immediately from the Tenor of the Covenant,
as well as the Father: But because the Relation of that Infant to that Believer
as his Seed, is a determining Mean, bringing him within the Covenant, from
which his Right proceeds. If you say, How prove you this distinction of First
and Original Persons, and Secondary and Derived, out of the Word? I prove it, 1
From the Tenor of the Covenant it self: I will be a God to thee, and to thy
Seed after thee; where there is this distinction of persons in the Covenant, 1
To thee, Abraham, actually believing. 2. To thy Seed after thee, brought within
the Covenant, by being thy Seed, and by thy actual Believing, though they for
the present are not actual Believers; and so the Seal was to be put on them in
that Right even before their actual Believing. 2. So is there ground for it in
applying and holding out the Covenant in the same Tenor under the Gospel, as
is before shown from Act. 2.39. There are the same two states of persons. 1.
You, and others, as many as shall be actually called. 2. The Seed of them and
others, so actually called. 3. In the constant Practice according to this
warrant, in the taking in of the Proselytes: He who came in, and took hold of
the Covenant, was Circumcised on his actual taking hold of it, but then the
Original-Persons actually professing, they stayed not for such actual
profession in the Seed of such a one, but gave them the Seal, as persons in
Covenant, even before actual Profession. I have been the larger, because this
is the Key which must open the way to be satisfied in the lawfulness of
Infant Baptism; and to repel all Arguments against it.

2. Those places in the Commission, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing etc. to
which he should have added the other, Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is
Baptized, shall be saved, must be taken in the Latitude of Original Persons,
not of Derived, for of such alone does Christ speak there, giving Commission of
the planting and first-gathering of Churches, for that the Whosoever in Mark
must not be taken in a full Latitude of necessity, is plain from the other
clause to which it is convertibly prefixed, viz. Shall be saved: for if the
Universality of the speech reach Infants to exclude them absolutely from
Baptism; it must also reach them in the same manner to exclude as full from
being Saved, as is before noted in the first Chapter of this Book.

2. By changing the Subjects of Christ's appointment, viz. Men and Women of
knowledge and understanding, capable to Evidence Faith and Repentance, for
ignorant unconverted Babes that know neither good nor evil.

This was answered just now, in what was said to the altering Christ's Order in
the Commission: and there is more in the first Chapter of my Book, Part 1.

3. By frustrating the Holy and Spiritual Ends of the Ordinance.

See what a full answer we have given to this, and how short he comes of making
good this charge, Chap. 4. Part 1.

4. By inverting the order and manner from Dipping to Sprinkling.

Which is answered Chapt. 2. Part 2.

5. By introducing much Error and false Doctrine, as

1. That it was to take away Original Sin.

Answer.

Although some of the Fathers have spoken too highly of Baptism, and our
Authors own Theophilact, whom he quotes Chap. 7. page 82. for one of his eminent
witnesses for Believers Baptism, speaks very Hyperbolically of it, as that all
our Sins are drowned in Baptism, as Pharaoh and the Egyptians were in the Red
Sea; that Infidels dye in their Sins, because unbaptized, for which
extravagancies and others, (as that Christ by Baptism had opened Heavens door,
which was shut against us by Adam's Sin) he is censured by the Magdeburgenses,
Cent. 10. p. 190. And likewise Bellarmine, and the Popish Schoolmen, speak
magnificently of it: as Baptismo reipsa tolli peccata, ita ut non solum non
imputetur, sed nec sit quod imputari posset ad culpam: which he intends not
only of Original Sin in Infants, but Original and Actual in grown Persons; but
notwithstanding this error, Infant Baptism, as to its warrantableness, receives
no prejudice, no more than the Baptism of grown persons.

2. It is also acknowledged that very many Episcopal Divines, and others, who
are Protestants, hold that Original Sin is done away by Baptism, but in a way
quite different from the Papists; for they assert Original Sin to be removed by
Baptism ex opere operato, from the Work done; and that it is so done away as
that there is an utter abolishment of it, so as not to render the Baptized
person obnoxious to God's Wrath and Condemnation: for not only the reatus
peccati Originalis, the guilt of Original Sin, but in Baptismate tollitur id
quod veram and propriam rationem peccati habet: the very essence or being of
Sin is taken away [it is with them annihilated], Council. Trident. Sess. 5.
for so speaks the Council of Trent, with a si quis neget Anathema sit; if any
one denies it, let him be Anathematized. On the contrary, Protestants ascribe
the doing away only of the guilt of Sin by the Blood of Christ, and applied by
the Spirit in that Ordinance; but they assert the inherence of Original Sin in
Infants after Baptism, which shows it self early in the fruits thereof, when
they are capable of acting Electively. And all that I apprehend they say upon
the point, is, that there is a possibility and probability, as some say; others
go higher, to a certainty, that in elect Infants, those that dye in Infancy,
the Season of God's doing that, which all acknowledge to be done at one time or
other before death, viz. the doing away the guilt of Original Sin, is at the
time of Baptism; and that Text Act 22.17. Arise and be Baptized, and wash away
thy Sins, has a favorable aspect upon Gods designing and blessing that
Ordinance, for the sealing of pardon in reference to grown Persons.

2. To work Grace and Regeneration, This is Mr. Tombs his 7th Argument against
Infant Baptism. Exer. page 30.
and to effect Salvation by the work done.

Although the Author knows all Protestants disclaim this, and condemn it for a
damnable Error, yet he seems indirectly at least to charge it upon the Church
of England, which for my part I look upon it as very unjustly done. What means
else those reflections of his page 148. upon that passage in the Service Book
in the Rubric before the Catechism, viz. That Children being Baptized, have
all things necessary for their Salvation, and be undoubtedly saved; and then
after Baptism the Priest must say, We yield thee hearty thanks that it has
pleased thee to Regenerate this Infant with thy Holy Spirit; just comporting
(says he) length and breadth with Pope Innocent's first Canons.

Answer.

It Is fit the Church of England should be believed in what sense she intends
those words, Baptism by the Ancients was commonly called Regeneration, or a
New Birth, so it is by the Scripture, Tit. 3.5. (...) Washing of the New Birth
or Regeneration.
and we may learn it in her Articles, which speaks her at an infinite distance
from the absurd and irrational Error of Salvation by merit, or ex opere
operato: and it is not for others to put what interpretation they think meet,
especially, such as are Obnoxious to her Lash. Will you hear what Mr. Cotton of
New England (an Independent as they call them) speaks in Vindication of the
Church of England in this particular matter, and at a place where he needed not
her favor; and as I take it at a time, when she could not help him: which are
circumstances that will not suffer us to suspect him of flattering or fawning.
We have it in his grounds and ends of Children's Baptism. Notwithstanding
(says he) those expressions in the Service- Book, yet the Church of England
does professedly teach the contrary Doctrine, not only in their Pulpits, but in
Books allowed by public Authority: She does assert that the Scraments do not
beget Faith, nor Regeneration ex opere operato; but they are signs and seals
thereof: Nor do I find that the public Prayers of the Church are contrary
hereunto, but as in judgment they do believe that God by Covenant promises to
pour clean Water upon us and our Seed, Ezekiel. 26.25 Is. 48.3. and that he
Seals the Covenant and Promise by Baptism.

3. That it was an Apostolical Tradition.

And for that we have the Testimonies of Origin and Cyprian as before, Mr.
Tombs his 4th Argument against Infant Baptism; Exerc. p. 28.
Chap. 3. Part 2. who lived near the Apostles days; and in which Chapter we
have also shown how Tradition is, both by the Fathers of old and Reformed
Churches, taken in a safe sense different from that corrupt one of the Papists,
and not derogatory to the authority of the Scripture.

4. That Children have Faith, and are the Disciples of Christ.

Answer.

No Paedobaptists ever held Children had personally actual Faith, for their
condition is insufficient for the production of Intellectual Acts, but as for
the habit and grace of Faith, the inherent infused power of believing, it is
more than any Antipaedobaptist in the World can prove they have not; for 1.
Their condition makes them not incapable of Sin and Corruption in the Roots and
Principles of it, (most of them confess it, Anabaptistae ut Paedobaptismum
prorsus tollerent, peccatum negarunt Originale, ut non sub esset causa cur
Infantes Baptizarentur Dr. Prideaux Lect. 22. page 331.
though some of them deny Original Sin) and therefore not of the Roots and
Principles of grace of which Faith is one, for the acts of both are Moral and
Intellectual: But whether Infants Baptized have any such thing as a distinct
habit of Faith or no, this question of their Baptism depends not upon it: It is
a hidden thing. The ground on which we give them Baptism must be visible; and
so it is, viz. their being the Seed of Believers, and hereby visibly entitled
to the Covenant, and so to the Seal of it. We look not to what they have, but
to whom they pertain, viz. to God, as being the Seed of his Servants.

That they are Disciples is sufficiently proved, Chap. 1. Part. 1.

5. That all Children of Believers are in the Covenant and federally Holy.]

That Is abundantly made good Chap. 3. Part 2.

6. By defiling and polluting the Church, viz.

1. By bringing false matter therein, who are no Saints by calling, being
neither capable to perform duties nor enjoy privileges.]

Notwithstanding their inability to perform Duty, yet they are capable of
enjoying Privileges as we have abundantly made good, Chap. 6. Part 1. and are
as true matter for the Church now under the Gospel, as formerly under the Law,
as is there made out.

2. By laying a foundation of much Ignorance and Profaness.]

Cujus contrarium est verissimum. The contrary is most true: for,

1. Infant Baptism lays a singular good foundation for knowledge; for in that
Children are taken into Christ's School, they are in a near capacity to be
taught, and those who recommend them to that Ordinance are obliged to promote
their knowledge, and to see them brought up (...), in the Nurture and Admonition
of the Lord.

And we know the Liturgy of the Church of England, But the neglect hereof is
much to be lamented, the Children are not looked after as they should be, nor do
Ministers mind them of their duty.
gives charge -- You must remember that it is your part and duty to see that
this Infant be taught so soon as he shall be able to learn -- And that he may
know these things the better, ye shall call upon him to hear Sermons, and
chiefly you shall provide that he may learn the Creed, the Lords-Prayer and the
ten-Commandments in the English Tongue, and all other things that a Christian
man ought to know and believe to his Souls health, etc.

Secondly, it lays a good foundation for Holiness: They are minded by their
Baptism to cast of the Devil's service, as soon as they are able to reflect,
that they were from their very Cradles dedicated to God, whose Livery they have
worn. And some have repelled great temptations, by virtue of their engagement
to God by Baptism in their Infancy; hence says Mr. Ford in his 2d Dialogue
concerning the Practical use of Infant Baptism, page 87. There is a very
Profane Spirit fomented under the Wings of Anabaptism; for how can it be
otherwise than such which endeavors to extirpate so considerable a means for
the advance of Conversion and Sanctification, as he shows Infant Baptism to be?
Hence, says he, arise grievous prejudices against those Ministers, Societies,
and Ordinances, in which God has been wont to scatter saving Grace in this
Nation, which are if not raised, yet fomented by Anabaptism. And their
Principle he conceives, has been very prejudicial to the Conversion of
youngones (amongst whom usually the stream of converting Grace runs) because it
speaks an actual disingagement from all relation to God, his Covenant, Church,
and Ordinances, till of their own choice they take them up at years of
discretion: Now whilst persons live loose from such engagements, as in their
proper nature and tendency further Conversion, no wonder if the work goes
slowly on among them.

3. By confounding the World and the Church together, which Christ has
separated.]

Not so, For Baptism is God's Sheep-mark (as Mr. Ford calls it) to distinguish
those that are of his Fold from such as graze in the wild Common of the World;
what confounding is there in this Principle? -- That not only they who do
actually profess Faith in, and Obedience to Christ, but also the Infants of one
or both Believing Parents are to be Baptized, and they only.

7. By introducing and establishing many Humane Traditions and Inventions of
Antichrist.] This is Mr. Tombe's his 6th Arg. Exercit. p. 1.


Many of which, and some of the worst attend the Baptism of grown Persons in
the Church of Rome, as Chrism, Exorcism, etc.

And when Mr. Tombs urged this very Argument against Infant Baptism, Mr. Geree
tells him, it was rather a Motive than a Reason against it to move peoples
affections against the inconveniences following it, rather than to convince the
unlawfulness of it -- But that which is lawful in it self, cannot reflect any
scruple of unlawfulness upon that which occasions it. And if any corruption
occasioned accidentally and separable from an act of Worship, could cashier it;
then farewell Baptism it self, Prayer, Lords Supper, and all that is Sacred: for
what a world of superstitious devices have the wanton and superstitious Heads
and Hearts of Men, taken occasion from them all, to devise and practice, it is
so clear there needs no instances to be given.

8. By being (says he) such a Make-mate, such a Bone of Contention, and that
among themselves too that own it, as well as with those that oppose it.

The Lord open the eyes of those who are so zealous against Infant Baptism that
they may see their own nakedness, and consider the beam that is in their own
eyes; certainly whilst they judge our principle, condemnation is written in
their own foreheads. First, how furiously do they contend among themselves?
What a heat is there between Mr. Bunyan and Mr. Paul, both of them for
Baptizing Believers? the former (having published a little Book whose Title is,
Differences in Judgment about Water Baptism no Bar to Communion, or to
Communicate with Saints as Saints proved Lawful; of which I have before hinted,
complains in the Epistle to the Reader, That the Brethren of the Baptized way
would not suffer them to be quiet in their Christian Communion, but did assault
them for more than 16 years, and (as they had opportunity) sought to break them
in pieces, merely because they were not in their way all Baptized. First, He
professes that he denied not the Ordinance of Baptism (though they feigned
it); but all that he asserted was, That the Church of Christ has no warrant to
keep out of their Communion the Christian, that is discovered to be a visible
Saint, and walks according to his light with God. And for this Orthodox
position, they charge him to be a Machivelian, a Man Devilish, Proud, Insolent,
Presumptuous; words, says the poor Man, fitter to be spoken to the Devil than
a Brother. He puts out his Confession of Faith upon which Mr. Paul makes
reflections, and tells him, he defies all the Brethren of the Baptized way, and
Blasphemes them that dwell in heaven, p. 3. That he belyes all Expositors, p.
13. and calls upon the Heavens to blush at his insolency, p. 35. that his
Inferences are ridiculous, topful of ignorance or prejudice, and deserve no
other answer than contempt, p. 43. and then falls to prayer, the Lord judge
between us and this accuser, to whom we shall say no more but the Lord rebuke
thee. And what says Bunyan to this, in his Book of Differences in Judgment
about Water Baptism? First, that in his simple Opinion, their rigid, and
Church-dividing, disquieting Principles are not fit for any Age and State of
the Church, page 1. and I wish there were not too much truth in what he says:
he accuses them for endeavoring and persuading him to break Communion with
his Brethren, tampering with others that their Seeds of division might take,
and prevailed so far as to rent and dismember some from them, and that the
judgment of God so followed their design, that the presons which then they
prevailed upon became afterward a stink and reproach to Religion. I find our
Author falling upon this good Man, (two to one is odds) and lashing him to the
purpose, for his last Book, you have it at the end of his Treatise of Baptism:
He charge Mr. Bunyan with absurdities, contradictions, traducing the Wisdom
of Christ, heinous Errors and fundamental mistakes; whose Principles, says he,
are presumptuous, savouring of ignorance and folly, contradicting the Wisdom
and Authority of Christ, ridiculous man of egregious ignorance and
selfcondemned: and at last, that he is one that pleases not God, and is
contrary to all Men, which last must be understood with a limitation, (of all
Men like himself). But why should Professors of Religion throw so much dirt in
the Faces of their Brethren that dissent from them? Tantaene animis caelestibus
irae? Sure such language becomes not Christians: Let it be supposed that they
have truth on their side; this is no good way to propagate it, it needs not
tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis. The Wisdom which is from above is first
pure, then peaceable. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be
gentle toward all -- In meekness instructing those that oppose, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
But haughty and uncharitable Spirits follow not this Rule, if they be set upon
a point (though controvertible) they have such a fire of zeal within, that it
breaks out into a flame that consumes the good name and credit of any that dare
oppose it. Your Opinionists if they have Faith, they will not follow Paul's
advice and keep it to themselves; but are infinitely desirous to propagate it,
and are the severest Censurers in the World.

Two other Antipaedobaptists, viz. Mr. Allen, and Mr. Lamb (being come off from
that hidebound Spirit of having Communion with none but those of our own
Judgment) are also lasht in the Authors Postscript. They have (says he) both
declined the Truth; and their Books, which were penned with great Judgment,
strength of Argument, and Authority of Scripture in his Opinion shall rise up
in Judgment against them (without Repentance) for declining the Truth; so
confident is the Author that he speaks by way of Prophesy, that what they have
writ shall not only live as a Witness for God, and his reproached Truths, but
as a living Testimony against themselves, in their unreasonable and unrighteous
departure from the same (except they repent) to all generations: if these Man
cannot appeal to Heaven touching their own integrity, so thundering a Sentence
must needs trouble their Consciences. Moreover, if I mistake not they are
divided amongst themselves about the Administrator of Baptism (as unwholesome
word because unscriptural, Pastors, Teachers, Ministers we read, of but no
Administrators) some holding none but men in Office may give Baptism, others
that a private Man may do it, especially in case of necessity; and Mr. Tombs
favors this Opinion, Praecursor page 72. and he gives his reason for it, viz.
because all, or most of the Ministers ordained in England are against Baptizing
of Persons of years Sprinkled in Infancy: and there lying upon them that see
Infant Baptism a corruption, a necessity to be Baptized upon Profession of
Faith; there is a necessity that they be Baptized by Persons not Ordained.

I like a man that will speak plainly his mind: and I will be as plain in
opening mine; and I think I have hit upon the truth, namely that the Opposers
of Infant Baptism must hold that unbaptized Persons may Baptize, and a Church
with true Ordinances may be of unbaptized persons; or else they must disown
their new Baptism, and all their Ordinances, and turn Seekers: For the first of
their Administrators must either Baptize himself, or else was Baptized by some
Person Baptized in Infancy, that is with them, by an unhaptized Person. Lastly,
I want not Instances to show how impatient they are of having their adored
Opinion contradicted, and must prepare my self for the hard Censures of my
Antagonist and his Party; and had it not been for the honor of truth, and love
that I bear unto it, they should have gone on till Doomsday (though I believe
God will shortly break the neck of their ridged Principle) before I would have
disturbed their quiet, and exposed my self to their ill will. It is
sufficiently observed and deplored by sober Christians that are unaddicted to
faction, how turbulent this fort of men have always been, as in foreign
parts, so in our own Country, in the propagation of their Opinion, and how
distastful it is to them to have any thing said against their way. There is a
sad passage quoted by the Author himself, page 308. of his Treatise, out of
Cloppenburg's Gangrene, viz. The Troops of Anabaptists that dwell in Friestand,
although they trouble not the Commonwealth, they suffer not the pure Reformed
Churches to be edified without daily conflicts; and what a stir they kept in
Gemany with those Godly Ministers Luther, Zwinglius, Musculus, contesting with
them, disturbing their Churches, you shall hear shortly in our Animadversions
upon the Authors historical part at the latter end of this discourse.

9. By being an occasion (says he) to stir up much bitter hatred, wrath,
strife, emnity, persecution against those that oppose it. How have they been
followed with Stripes, Imprisonments, Confiscation, yea Death it self.]

Something of this may be laid at their own door, as before has been
manifested in the persecution of the Tongue, to which they are so much
addicted; but as for those Martyrs he speaks of, that have suffered stripes,
imprisonment, death, we find very few of them in Fox his Martyrologie, and none
of them punished purely for opposing Infant Baptism, but the Antichristian
Tenets of Rome, Transubstantiation, the Mass, etc. for which other Protestants
suffered, and some of them, were put to death for asserting dangerous errors,
and for sedition here in England, and multitudes for horrid acts beyond the
Seas, as shall appear in the Historical Narrative.

10. By confirming hereby the whole Antichristian Interest as made good by the
Preface.

An unworthy calumny, and spoken without the least ground of reason; only
because Mr. Baxter has declared his single Judgment in some things in
reference to Baptism, in some of which he speaks not positively and
dogmatically, but as I remember he qualifies it with such expressions, as I
think so, or suppose so; and how does the delivery of his private Opinion about
it, render Infant Baptism it self, a point that confirms the whole
Antichristian Interest, that is not derived thence, and has no reference to,
or favor for it, and when many Paedobaptists differ from Mr. Baxter, and are
unsatisfied at those passages in his Christian Directory?

Absurdities.

11. By ushering in great Absurdities, viz.

1. That Persons may have Regeneration and Grace before calling.

This is no Paradox to those who have heard of John Baptists being Sanctified
in the Womb. I could here turn the Author to several places in Mr. Tombs his
Works, where he dares not deny but Infan^ts may have the seed of Grace, but I
have spoken to this before: only take notice of that is his Praecursor page 13.
It is not doubted, but Infants belong to the invisible Kingdom of the Elect,
but how they attain Salvation is not so certain: if by a Seed of Faith and
Holiness without actual exercise, the thing is more easy to conceive etc. And
again he says, There are Believers of two sorts, either in the Seed or Fruit,
either by Ordinary or Extraordinary Operation, in one of which ways Infants
are, or may be Believers.

2. That Persons may be visible Church Members before Conversion.]

And is that such a wonder? We have proved that Chapter 6. Part 1. They were
Church Members under the Law, why not under the Gospel? when were they excluded?

3. That Persons may Repent, Believe, and be Saved by the Faith of another.]

We own no such thing.

4. That Types and Shadows profit after the Antitype and substance is come,
introducing thereby the Birth-priviledge.]

The weakness of this is discovered before, proving the Covenant made with
Abraham still to continue to Believers, and their natural Seed, as you may see
toward the end of the 3d Chapter, Part. 2.

5. That the better to exclude Believers-Baptism, new Church-Covenants are
invented.] etc.

This is directed only against one sort of Paedobaptists called Independents,
whom he says in point of order, do err more than Prelate or Presbyter, owning
Infant Baptism and yet denying them the right of Church Membership: this is
answered Chap. 6. Part 1. by showing that they own the Infant Seed of Believers
to be Church Members, that is, of the Universal Visible Church before Baptism,
and the reasons for it; as also why they admit them not into their particular
Churches when grown up, till they make a serious Profession of that Faith into
which they were Baptized, and claim the privilege of Communion.

Contradictions.

12. By the manifold Contradictions that attend the Practice.]

1. By asserting, that Baptism is a Symbol of present Regeneration wrought, and
yet apply it to ignorant unconverted Babes, so incapable of Regeneration.]

This is a crambe bis cocta, answered again and again, but especially in Chap.
4. Part 1. about the ends of Baptism, of which this is named for the third.

2. That it truly figures and represents a Death, Burial, and Resurrection, and
yet do nothing but sprinkle or pour a little Water on the Face.]

This is another repetition, being brought by the Author for the 4th End of
Baptism, and answered Chap. 4. Part 1. likewise again, Chap. 4. Part 2.

3. That Faith and Repentance are required in Persons to be Baptized, and that
it is ridiculous, yea impious and profane to do it without, and yet confess
that Children, to whom they apply it have neither.]

Say no more of this for your honors sake, which has already suffered much
for abusing Authors; you know Baxter, Piscator, Perkins, Paraeus, Calvin, all
speak of grown Persons, and the last with an Asterisk -- Notandum haec verba
fieri de Adultis. Therefore, says he, that Men offer themselves rightly to
Baptism, Confession of sin is required, otherwise the whole action would be but
sport. But you must note, says he, that these words are spoken of Adult
Persons, but as for the Infant Seed of Believers the case alters there; for
they being taken into Covenant with their Parent, it is instead of Profession;
Calv. upon Mat. 19.28. and Mark 16.16. look to the first Chap. Part 1. There
you have a Vindication of our Divines from the Infamy cast upon men, as to
their sayings about Baptism in contradiction, as he would have people believe,
to their own Practices.

5. That the Baptismal Covenant enters into the visible Church, and yet deny
Church Members the privilege thereof.]

This is co-incident with what we have before, and spoken to already.

6. That separate from Rome as a false Church, and yet own their Baptism the
foundation thereof.

A little before he has this Odious Reflection upon Infant Baptism, that it
confirms the whole Antichristian Interest] and now the Assertors of it are
condemned for owning their Baptism. I conceive it therefore fit that something
be briefly said for our Vindication. First then, I take this to be the common
Judgment of Divines: That Parents ought not to tender their Children to be
Baptized by Heretics, or by Romish Priests in a Superstitious way; yet being
done, Baptism so Administered, ought not to be reiterated. For even Austin
himself, as zealous as he was for Baptism, Danaeus ex lib. 1 August de Bapt.
contra Donatistas.
is express upon the Case in his first Book de Baptismo against the Donatists
-- Non damnari Baptismum Christi ab Haereticis Pastoribus, ut nullus censeatur,
sed damnamus illos qui scientes illic accipiunt; That Baptism is not to be
condemned for a Nullity, which has been received from Heretics, but such are
to be condemned, who knowing them to be such, do yet receive it of them. Bucan
states the Case in his 16 Question de Baptismo, Bucan: Institutiones Theolog.
Loc. 47. Quest. 16. p. 614.
thus, Anne qui vere Christianam Religionem edocti sunt, parvulos suos
sacrificulis pontificiis Baptizandos bona conscientia offerre possunt? Whether
they who are truly taught the Christian Religion may with a good conscience
tender their Children, to Mass-Priests to be Baptized? he holds it negatively
for diverse weighty reasons. As,

1. Because by that Act we own their false and Antichristian Ministry, Quia
corruptelis tum Doctrinae, tum Sacramentorum and superstitiosis Cultibus,
falsae item and illegittimae vocat^^ni Antichristi Ministrorum, exemplo nostro
probandis and confirmandis, nullam occasionem praebere debemus etc.
and confirm them in their Superstitions. Whereas we are bound to abstain from
all appearance of evil, and not to partake with them in their sins.

2. Because we are not to do evil, that good may come thereof.

3. Because we are to depart and go out from amongst them, and touch no unclean
thing, Is. 52. 11. and to abstain from Idols, 1. Joh. 5.21.

4. Because if our Infants dye unbaptized (we refusing to have them Baptized in
a Superstitious manner, which is best) they are not thereby deprived of their
interest in the Covenant of God's Grace [and Salvation is from the Covenant and
not the Seal] for it is not the want, but the contempt of Baptism that is
damnable.

It was on this account that the Waldenses kept their Children from Baptism;
for Perin in his History of that people tells us, Paul Perin, Hist. Walden.
Cap. 4. p. 15.
That they delayed the Baptism of their Children until their Pastors came home
who were employed abroad in the service of the Church; because they had in
detestation those human inventions, which were added to that Holy Sacrament,
which they held to be but pollutions thereof: which the Popish Priests
observing, stigmatized them with that calumny that they were against the
Baptism of Children, [and from their Mouths the Author has taken up that false
report, and published it to the World; but God will not bless such unjust
courses.]

On the other hand the Rule holds true in many Cases: Fieri quod non licet,
factum valet; A thing which ought not to be done, yet being done, it may be of
force and valid; as in other Cases, so likewise in this of Baptism: though none
should tender their Children to be Baptized by Romish Priests in a
superstitious way; yet being done, Baptism so Administered ought not to be
reiterated. Austin gives diverse Reasons in his first Book of Baptism against
the Donatists that were for Rebaptization; showing most convincingly, that
because Baptismus ex personarum and Ministrorum dignitate non pendet, neque
dantis aut accipientis Baptismum error delet and mutat id quod a domino
constitutum est. Because Baptism depends not upon the dignity of Persons or
Ministers, Danaeus ex L. August. contra Donatist. p. 674.
the Error of him that gives or receives it does not nullify the Ordinance of
Christ; yet this is always to be remembered, that if the essential form of
Baptism has been corrupted in the Administration thereof, the Baptism becomes
invalid, and is a mere nullity, and persons taking up the Ordinance de novo, in
a right way, cannot be said to be rebaptized, because the former was not
Christ's Baptism but a Nullity: for as Zanchy speaks, he that Baptizeth, but
not in the name of the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit, but is corrupt in the
Doctrine of the Trinity, as the Arrians and Manichaeans were] such a Baptism is
none of Christ's Baptism. Decst enim vera Baptismi forma: the right form of
Baptism is wanting. I shall conclude this with the Judgment of two Divines of
the Congregational way: The first is Mr. Cotton of New England in his Grounds
and Ends of Infant Baptism, where he answers this Objection: How can we think
that Baptism Valid, and not Null, which is Administered by Dumb-dogs etc? viz.

Answer.

Though God delights not to make use of such instruments, yet I dare not say
that their Administration of the Seals, which are given not for Conversion, but
Confirmation of Grace are mere Nullities, or that the Baptism Administered by
them is to be reiterated. Take an instance in the Circumcision of the 10 Tribes
after Jeroboam's Apostasy, and the casting out of the Priests and Levites, 2 Chronicles. 11.14, 15. It was generally Administered by wicked Priests, and Men that
had no regular call thereunto: when the Priests and Levites were cast out of
Office in the 10 Tribes, Jeroboams Priests came in their room, which were as
ignorant and unskilful to expound the Law, as those ye call Dumb-Dogs; 1 Kings
13.33. 2 Cor. 15.3.

2. We must put a difference betwixt the Essentials of an Ordinance, and some
Circumstantial Additions, and Corruptions: if there be a Corruption in the
Essenee, or substance of the Ordinance, as for Instance, if Persons be not
Baptized in the Name of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but into the Name
of a Creature, then such Baptism is void and null, and the party ought to be
Baptized again: But if there be a Corruption only in the External
Administration of the Ordinance, though every Christian should labor to avoid
such Corruption, and if he has been entangled therewith, humble himself deeply
before God for it; yet such Baptism is valid for the substance of it, and
should not be reiterated. At this day the Protestant Reformed Churches do hold
it unwarrantable to Rebaptize those Persons who were Baptized in the Church of
Rome, which being administered in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, is
held for true Baptism, for the substance of it.

The other is Mr. Bartlet in his Model of the Congregational way, page 70.
Those Christians, says he, which of late days (calling into question the Truth
and Lawfulness of their Baptism) have fallen upon the Practice of Rebaptizing,
and taking up the Ordinance of Baptism de novo, are utterly void, and
altogether to seek of a true and just ground from the Scripture, for their
Practice herein; and so this latter Baptism of theirs, will be found as
unlawful, because unlawfully Administered. For if the Administration of the
Seals be now tied to ordinary Officers, and those to a particular Church, since
the Apostles times, that give them their lawful and right Call to Administer
the Ordinances; then it will follow that there is no Lawful Baptism, but by him
that is an Officer of some particular Church, and he that is an Officer of some
particular Church, must have a Lawful Calling from the Church to which he is an
Officer; for all extraordinary Officers that had their Call and Commission
immediately from Heaven are ceased. Now those that Rebaptize cannot prove the
taking up of that Ordinance again after this manner; but are enforced to hold
that a Disciple in Common, that by the exercise of his gifts does convert a
Sinner from the evil of his ways, may also Baptize him: [which Doctrine Mr.
Hooker calls a Frenzy of the Anabaptists, Mr. Hooker of New England, in his
Survey of Church Discipline, C. 2. part 3. p. 9.
which begins to labor with the loathsomness of itself]; For if that were true
what need of Christ's Ordaining Officers in his Church for these purposes? or
why may not a Godly Woman (by her good exhortations and chaste conversation,
Converting her Husband) Baptize him?

CHAP. VI.
Wherein the Author endeavors to show the Nullity, and utter insignificancy of
Infant Baptism.

THus he proceeds -- That it is no-way safe for any to rest contented with that
Baptism, which they received in their Infancy, may appear, because such their
Baptism is a mere Nullity. How does he make this out?

Why thus:

Because, says he, as the right matter, so the true Form is wanting; for the
External Form, as before is showed is not Sprinkling, or pouring a little Water
upon the Head or Face, but a Dipping the whole Person under Water, and raising
him up again, to figure out Death, Burial, and Resurrection, as before: if then
Matter and Form be wanting which is so essential to its Being, it must needs be
a Nullity.

Although enough has been said already to confute this in the 6th Chap. of the
first Part of our Book, to prove Infants of Believers fit Matter for the
Church, and consequently Subjects of Baptism, besides what has been said in
the 4th Chap. Part 2. concerning the Ceremony of Baptism: yet being willing to
give the Author full measure, pressed down and running over; We shall say
something more to evince the weakness of his Assertion in this Chapter.

First it is observable, that he who has undertaken to write a Treatise of
Baptism, [mark well], should mistake both the Matter and Form of it; for
certainly he is out in both.

1. First for the Matter of Baptism, all Divines hold it is Water, mere, pure
Water without mixture. Take the Judgment of two very eminent Divines: The first
is the Learned Zanchy, Tom. 1. Lib. 1. page 404. Materia Externa Baptismi est
Aqua, Interna, Sanguis and Spiritus, Christi; The External Matter of Baptism is
Water; the Internal, the Blood and Spirit of Christ: The other is Bucan,
Professor of Divinity in Academia Lausanensi: He in his Theological
Institutions or Common places, answers several Questions concerning Baptism,
and this is the 18th, Quae est Materia Baptismi? What is the Matter of Baptism?
To which he gives this answer; it is twofold, Externa and Interna, External
and Internal; the External is, Aqua pura, munda and naturalis sine discrimine,
simplex, vulgaris, non prius peculiaribus Consecrata, non mixta, non Oleum,
etc. That is, it is pure, clean, simple, common Water without mixture of Oil,
Spittle, and such kind of things as the Papists add to it: de Baptismo, locus
47. p. 616. The Materia Interna, the Internal Matter of Baptism, is Sanguis and
Spiritus Jesu Christi, the Blood and Spirit of Jesus Christ; de Bapt. loc 47.
Quest. 22.

2. For the Form of Baptism they agree in this, that it is those Words of
Institution, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. So
says Zanchy in the aforementioned place, and he brings the Words of the
Apostle for both Matter and Form, Ephesians. 5.26. That he might Sanctify and
cleanse it by the Washing of Water through the Word; citing that famous speech
of Austin, Accedit verbum ad Elementum and fit Sacramentum; The word joined to
the Element [ (i.e.) the Word of Institution] makes the Sacrament. So Bucan
Quest. 22. Quae est igitur forma Baptismi [scil. Externa?] what is therefore
the External Form of Baptism? Ans. The rehearsing the words of Institution, by
a Minister of the Word of God, viz. I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father,
etc. which he calls aspersio aquae, and then Intern^ Baptismi Forma est Interna
illa actio, quae Jesu Christi ipsius per Spiritum Sanctum agentis propria est;
The Internal Form is that Internal action of Christ working by his Spirit, etc.
Take notice, Reader, what a pitiful mistake it is in the Author to call
Dipping the Form of Baptism, for if that were it, then any man may Baptize
himself, and every Boy that baths, and dives under Water may be said to be
Baptized: But one would think he were conscious to himself of a wilful mistake,
by the Objection he frames for us.

Object. But it is said, there was the right words of Baptism, it was done in
the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy-Spirit.

Answer.

So there was, says he, in Baptizing Bells, Churches.

But does he take this for a sufficient Answer? Are Bells Subjectum capax, a
Subject capable of a Sacrament? Quia in ipso initio Regenerationis, cujus
sigilium est Baptismus, homo se habet mere passive; unde etiam homines vel
Circumcindendi vel Baptizandi nulla actio Externa requiritur -- sed tantum
receptio pass^^a^ Infantes igitur sunt capaces hujus Sacramenti respectu
praecipui ejus usus atque Adulti.
Children were heretofore, and so they are still, as Dr. Ames in his Medulla
Theologiae Lib. 1. c. 11. p. 186. Baptism, says he, comes in the room of
Circumcision, Col. 2.11, 12. and belongs as much to Children of Believers, as
Circumcision did formerly; for at our first Regeneration, says he, of which
Baptism is a Seal, Man is merely passive. As it was in Circumcision so is it in
Baptism, he is not Active, but Passive; and therefore Infants in respect of its
chief use (of being a Seal) are as capable of the Sacrament of Baptism as the
Adult.

Now though this may suffice, yet having promised to be liberal; We will
suppose Dipping to be of use in the Apostles days, yet it will not follow that
it is essential to the Sacrament of Baptism, so that in the want of it, Baptism
is a Nullity. For the clearing of which we must know:

1. That in every Ordinance there are some things essential, which failing, the
very being of the Ordinance is destroyed. 2. Some things requisite because
enjoined, but yet not essential; but only needful to the complete and
well-being of an Ordinance. 3. Some things merely indifferent, as being the
determination of some Circumstances (left undetermined in the Institution of
it) As in the Lords Supper, the hour when, the kinds of Bread and Wine, the
posture, and number of the Partakers, either sitting or standing or the like.
So in Baptism, whether the Person be Baptized by day or by night, in Rivers or
Pools, or Vessels (so he be able to bear it), whether the Water pass on all his
Body or some parts, and the rest unwashed. And so for this of Dipping, it comes
under the nature of an indifferent Circumstance, although some place
Superstitiously such necessity in it. I say it may be accounted an indifferent
Circumstance; so that Baptism in other things right, is true Sacramental
Baptism, whether done by way of Sprinkling or Dipping, which is thus proved.

1. That which equally represents the grace signified, is of indifferent use,
but the Baptism either by Dipping or Sprinkling, does equally represent the
grace signified.

The first Proposition is clear; for in a Sacrament are but two things
necessary, viz. (1) The matter or Element. (2) The use for representation of
the Grace. The Minor, or Assumption is evident, by considering the Grace of
Baptism, which is principally twofold, viz. First our putting on of Christ,
our Union to, and Communion with him, in which respect we are said to put him
on therein, and to be Baptized into him, Gal. 3.27. into his death, Romans 6.3.
that is, by Baptism we are Sacramentally enrighted into him and his death, and
the fruits of it, in which respects we are in the same place v. 4. said to be
buried with him by Baptism into death. Now this putting on of Christ is as
fully signified, by putting on of water on us, as by putting us into water.
Application of Water to the Person, either in one way or other is a Sign of our
Union to him: and so of our putting him on, our burying and rising with him,
and Communion with him, in all the effects of his death, which flow from the
Union.

But it is Objected, that Sprinkling does not represent our burying with him,
as Dipping does. Ans. It is a fancy to imagine that every Metaphorical
expression used in Scripture signifying our Communion with Christ, should be
punctually expressed in the Sacrament; for the expressions are various, putting
him on, burying with him, Sprinkling with his Blood: one sign cannot represent
our Communion with him in all these Metaphors. A partaking a Communion with
Christ, and his death is the Sacramental Grace intended by those various
expressions, and that being represented, as well by Sprinkling as Dipping, it
follows that water in either way of application, is Sacramental. 2dly, Our
washing or cleansing from Sin by the Blood of Christ, this is the principal
effect of Christ's death represented, and Sealed in the Sacrament, which is
equally set out by Sprinkling as by dipping. First in as much as washing may be
done by both, and indeed it is the application of Water under the formality of
Washing, not either of Dipping or Sprinkling, which is the Sacramental use of
it; so that were Washing with Water, though neither by Dipping nor Sprinkling,
yet it were a Sacrament as well as either: for the Sacramental consideration in
the use, is the Washing. 2. Numb. 19.18. Heb. 9.13.
Under the Law the Sacramental cleansing was done by Sprinkling in some cases,
and by Dipping in other; and the purifying by Christ's Blood equally
represented by both. 3. The Blood of Christ in respect of this purifying and
washing virtue and use of it, is called the Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24.
and the Sprinkling of his Blood, 1. Pet. 1.2. All which are abundant proof,
that the Grace of the Sacrament is as well, and as fully represented in the use
of Water by Sprinkling, as by Dipping.

2dly. Those Uses of Water which are equally included in the
Scripture-acceptation of the Word under the word Baptizing, are of equal and
indifferent use; but both these, Dipping and Sprinkling are so: ergo.

The Major proposition is undoubted: the Assumption is confirmed from Texts of
Scripture, where the Word is used to signify Washing, by Sprinking, as Mar.
10.38. where is a washing by Blood, which could not be by Dipping, but by
Aspersion. 1 Cor. 10.2. Is a Baptism by Sprinkling, but not by dipping. So
Mark. 7.48. Heb. 9.10, where all the Ceremonial Washings under the Law are
called Baptisms; now we know some of them were done by Sprinkling, and some by
Dipping.

3. That which in all the examples and instances of Baptism, we find not
restrained or defined, that is in this Sacrament of indifferent and arbitrary
Use; But this manner of Baptizing in Scripture-examples and practice, we do not
find restrained, or defined either to Dipping or Sprinkling.

We read of many Baptized, but nowhere specified by which of these ways;
whereby we may gather that the H. Ghost has no intent to bind, and determine
our Practice to this or that; for seeing the word he uses, is indifferent for
both, he would have left us some light either from precept, or example which
way he would have Sacramental. This Assumption is confirmed by this, that
nowhere is it expressed, that it was done by Dipping: yea in some, it is more
than probable that it was not, viz. Act. 2.41. there being in one day 3000
Baptized; which might well be done by Sprinkling but not by Dipping. So Act.
10.47. there be many Baptized at a time and place when there could not be
accommodation of water and other conveniences for total Dipping. Yea Peter's
phrase, can any Man forbid Water? imports a bringing in of Water to the place
for the use which might well be done for Sprinkling, but not for Dipping. Also
Act. 16.33. There is a Man and all his Family straightway Baptized in a
Prison, and in the night, at which time and place Water for Dipping so many
could not be had, but easily for Sprinkling.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein there is a pretense to some eminent Witness, that has been born
against Infant Baptism from first to last.

THe first that we shall mention (says the Author) is that Excellent Testimony
Tertullian bore against it upon the first appearance of it in the 3d Century.

Reply, 1. It is acknowledged that Tertullian who was the first Writer of note
in the Latin Church, has diverse passages seemingly against Infant Baptism; but
yet withal it must be considered, that his Testimony (such as it is) is but the
Testimony of one single Dr. in opposition to the general custom of the Church,
and even from this instance we may learn the great Antiquity of Infant Baptism,
that it has been in use above 15 hundred years, as it appears upon record; for
Tertullian according to Helvicus wrote his Book of Prescriptions about the year
195. which was about 97 years after St. John's Death; and it is probable, Mr.
Baxter, of Infant Baptism.
when he wrote his Book, he had arrived to the years of thirty or forty; so
that according to this calculation he lived about sixty or seventy years after
St. John, and yet as early days as these were, Children were then Baptized; for
else why should Tertullian be so earnest in dissuading them not to be
overhasty in the doing it: Cunctatio utilior praecipue circa parvulos; he
would have them defer the Baptizing of Infants, as well as those of riper years;
which shows that it was then the custom of the Church to Baptize Children
as well as grown Persons.

Reply 2. Whereas the Author says, Tertullian lived in the 3d Century,
Irenaeus contra Haeretic. Lib. 2. c. 39.
this is true, but that the first appearance of Infant Baptism was in this Age
is certainly false; for Irenaeus (who lived in the second Century) makes
mention of it.

Reply 3. Tertullian's Testimony in this case, is so far from being excellent,
that it is contemptible, and not to be regarded, as may appear by two Reasons.

First, Because he was very corrupt, and unsound in his judgment. P. Martyr
loc. com. Clas. 4. Loc. 8. Sect. 5.
It is observed by Peter Martyr in his Common places, that when Tertullian
wrote his book de Baptismo, he was fallen from the Church, and from the
Orthodox-Faith into the foul error of Montanism. Had he been sound in the Faith
in all other points, it had not been enough to scruple any one touching the
point of Infant Baptism, because of his dissent; because he only was the man we
read of that seems to be against it, how much less is this authority to be
valued, when so corrupt, that Jerome counted him little less than a Heretic?
The Magdeburg Divines, (whom the Author makes so much use of) give us a
Catalogue of his Naevi, or errors. As

1. That he did Deo corpulentiam tribuere, ascribe unto God, Grosseness, or
Fleshiness.

2. That he did speak concerning Christ incommode and periculose, unsafely and
dangerously.

3. That he condemned second marriages, ut stupra, as Whoredoms.

4. That he brought in and augmented, many filthy Ceremonies in the Church,
which he borrowed from the Montanists, as anointing the body after Baptism. etc.

5. And lastly (though they mention many other gross errors) he affirms in his
Book de Baptismo, that it is the peculiar prerogative of the Bishop to Baptize,
Dandi Baptismum jus habet summus sacerdos, qui est Episcopus.
and none must do it but by his leave: Presbyters and Deacons he allows to
Baptize but not without his Authority, and in case of extremity (that is when
one is like to dye, and in the want of a Minister) it may be lawful for a
layman to Baptize, not excepting Women provided they did it privately and not
in the Church, by which passage it is more than probable he was for Baptizing
Infants, rather than that they should dye without it); now let any indifferent
Reader judge what a precious witness the Author has singled out to lead the
Van against Infant Baptism.

A second Reason why Tertullian's Testimony deserves not to be styled
excellent, is this; because his arguments are so poor and weak, that they will
sooner administer occasion of laughter than conviction. I acknowledge the Author
has dressed them up very handsomely, and showed so much artifice herein (leaving
out somethings that are most gross) that some (who have weak heads, and no very
charitable thoughts toward the way of Infant Baptism) will think Tertullian
and he were of one mind, both against it, and that on very good grounds.

1. Because says the Author out of Tertullian, The practice of Baptizing
Children was built upon the mistake of that Scripture Matt. 19.14. Suffer
little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not etc. It is true (says
Tertullian) the Lord says do not forbid them to come unto me: let them come
when they grow elder, when they learn, when they are taught why they come etc.
upon which the Magdeburgenses have this sentence seutit Tertullianus Mira
opinione Cap. 3. Cap. 4. etc. Tertullian was of a strange opinion, and then
they repeat those weak passages before mentioned; As before intimated in Chap.
7.
according to which Dotage, the Disciples did wisely in forbidding Children to
come, and Christ did weakly in rebuking them for it, and inviting them to come
Let them come (says Christ) though (...), little Children; the wise men found
(...) the young-Child, or Infant with Mary. (...) (according to Luke the
exactest Historian) newborn Babes, or sucking Children that are carried in
Arms, and such wore those whom Christ invites to come unto him, brought in all
likelihood, by their Parents that did believe or made some profession of their
Faith, as appears by this, because they brought their Children for a Spiritual
end, to receive some special favor or blessing from Christ; and for this,
Christ would have them come, but says Tertullian, let them come when they grow
elder, when they learn, when they are taught why they come: etc. What pitiful
stuff is this? what ingenious person would not be ashamed to introduce such a
witness that paraphraseth at such a rate upon this Scripture? Christ had a mind
they should come presently as the words plainly show, but Tertullian would have
them stay longer, till they were elder. It seems by the Argument that this
Father, and the Disciples were much of a mind, and it must arise from some such
mistake as this, which is still retained by the Antipaedobaptists, that
Children are not capable of any good by the Ordinance, and must first be
taught; and that only grown Christians and Professors of Faith, are fit and
capable subjects of Christ's Kingdom. But what resentment had Christ of the
morose carriage of his Disciples, the Evangelist tells us (...), he was much
displeased; the word signifies to have the Spirit moved with indignation
against a base unworthy action; and Christ would have them know how meanly
soever they might think of them, yet they had a right to the Kingdom of Heaven
as well as grown persons who can profess their Faith: For let us take the
Kingdom of Heaven either for that of Glory, or for the visible Church, it
amounts to the same thing; for if they have a right to the former, much more to
the latter, for what is it to be a member of the visible Church, but to be one
that in appearance belongs to the invisible Church, Mr. Baxter of
Infant Baptism.
or the Kingdom of Glory; for the Church is but one, and the difference only
Respective. As for the Cavils that are made against our improving this Text for
Infant Baptism, we have before refuted them.

2. A second Argument which the Author cites out of Tertullian is, because they
that understand the weight of Baptism will rather fear the attaining of it than
the deferring it.

Reply 1. If this were a good reason against Infant Baptism, it lies as full
against infant-Circumcision, as a sign of God's covenant, which they did not
understand, and it may be never would. 2. Nor do I see how this can have any
reference at all to Infants, who are void of understanding; and the Argument is
as much levied against the Baptizing grown persons, who upon consideration of
the weight of the Ordinance, may rather fear to attain it, than defer it; for
it is well known that ancient Father was so shy of Baptism (as I said in C. 7.)
that he dissuaded young men as were innupti unmarried, and those that were
newly married and young-widows, from being Baptized, until the lust of
concupiscence was quite extinct, and then to take up the Ordinance, Risum
teneatis amici! For verily if persons in this capacity must forbear Baptism
till then, for ought that I know it will be long enough before they will meddle
with it, and one would think they should have less need of it when freed from
lustful appetite, than before.

3. A third Reason brought out of Tertullian is; because we must not give Holy
things to Dogs, and Pearls to Swine, which sure must be understood of grown
Persons that were Pagans or their Children; for this is too gross to be spoken
of the Children of believers, and Tertullian himself speaks more charitably in
his Book de Anima Cap. 39, 40. upon those words, else were your Children
unclean, but now are they Holy, 2. Cor 14. from whence he thus infers, hinc
enim Apostolus ex sanctificato alterutro sexum sanctum procreari ait, tum ex
seminis praerogativa, Vossius in his These. 11. de P^dobaptismo. Pars 2.
quam ex Institutionis disciplina etc. i.e. from hence also the Apostle affirms
that of either sex sanctified, are procreated those that are holy, a^ by the
prerogative of the Seed, so by the Discipline, or Rule of institution: so that
Tertullian could not without self-contradiction call Believers Children Dogs.

4. A fourth Reason (which is a sorry one too) is, Because we commit not
earthly or secular things to Children, by reason of their incapacity, and
therefore should not commit Heavenly things; Which is also as strong an
Argument against Gods Ordinance to Circumcise Children, as to Baptize them: And
we need not look farther than the Text before us, to confute this Argument; for
it is said (notwithstanding their incapacity) Christ laid his hands upon them
and blessed them; to denote unto us, that though Children are incapable of
laying hold on Christ, yet they are capable of being laid hold on by Christ,
and of participating Spiritual blessings, whereof, as imposition of the hands,
so Baptism is a sign.

5. A fifth Reason has respect to the promises which the Sureties made in
Baptism in the behalf of the Infants that were Baptized; for if it should so
happen that they should dye before the Infant was grown up, they should then
frustrate their promises. Now this speaks nothing against Infant Baptism, but
only of the inconveniency of making such promises.

6. Lastly the Author would have us take it for granted that the Adult were the
only proper Subjects of Baptism, because Tertullian says Fasting, Confession,
Prayer, Profession etc. is called for from them.

Reply. We have shown before out of the Magdeburgenses, That though the Infants
of Believers were Baptized, of which we have instances given by them, in
several Centuries, yet they required Fasting, Cent. 4. c. 6. p. 417.
Confession, of Aliens etc. before they were admitted to Baptism; and therefore
having spoken so much to this before, I shall only add one passage out of
Athanasius in Lib. de passione Imaginis Domini, where he speaks concerning-some
Jews, who prostrated themselves at the feet of the Bishop, and desired Baptism;
so after they had been instructed several days in the Doctrine of Christianity,
and had Fasted three days, they were Baptized. I shall add one Reason more of
Tertullian's against the Baptism of Infants, and it is inserted between his
fourth and fifth, and therefore the Author could not be ignorant of it, but
has purposely omitted it, and it is this; Quid festinat innocens aetas ad
remissionem peccatorum? etc. Why should innocent Children hasten to be
Baptized, for the remission of sins? 'Twas his error (as of other of the
Fathers) that Baptism did away the guilt of sin; and either he owned not
Original Sin, as his words seem to imply, or else he thought it more prudential
to defer Baptism, till the Child had contracted, or heaped up more, that so it
might be washed away altogether. This the Author took notice of, but was so
subtle, as not to give the least hint of it, for that would have quite spoiled
his excellent Testimony. And besides what we have said to invalidate what is
brought from Tertullian, let the Reader know that though he would have
Infant Baptism delayed, yet it was not because he judged it unlawful, but
inexpedient as before: for even this Father himself allowed of their Baptism
rather than they should dye unbaptized. And thus we see the Author has made a
great cry of a little Wool.

Concerning the Witness pretended to be born by the Waldenses against Infant
Baptism.
4 Waldenses.

IT is a miserable cause indeed, whose Advocates must still have recourse to
lies for its defense, and an Argument of the want of honesty, and conscience
for men to persist in this course, when more than enough has been said to
convince them of the evil thereof. It was a solemn rebuke which Job gave to his
mistaken friends when they put such false interpretations upon God's dealings
with him, Will ye lie (said he) for God? surely he has no need of, nor does he
require us by any sinister and sinful way, to justify him in his Attributes,
providence, cause, or truth. As touching the matter in hand before us, if the
Antipaedobaptists have the truth on their side, yet certainly it is little
beholding to some of them, who have attempted to defend it by so many
unwarrantable ways. In particular I shall make it appear that the present
Author with whom I have to deal, is foully criminal in laying out the utmost of
his skill in traducing those famous ancient Christians, the Waldenses, as if in
their several generations they had witnessed against Infant Baptism, when he
cannot but know (being so well read in the Histories of that people written by
Perin, and Dr. Usher): that they were falsely, and maliciously charged here with
by their cruel Antichristian enemies. Besides the Author (whose Treatise about
Baptism is a Compendium of what Mr. Tombs has long since written upon that
subject) knows well enough, (and is therefore the more inexcusable) how much
Mr. Tombs was rebuked, by two Reverend Divines, Mr. Marshal and Mr. Baxter.
for endeavoring to defend his opinion by popish Frgeries and Slanders.

I find by the Authors discourse that he is well read in Mr. Baxter's
Plain-Proof for Infant Baptism, who in his Apologetical Preface Page the 10th
tells us, That the lying Papists do accuse the Albigenses and Waldenses (our
first Reformers) to be Witcher, Buggerers, Sorcerers and to deny the Baptism of
Infants. Hereupon they raise war against them, put them to the Sword, and burn
their Citys to ashes. These Godly men deny their Accusations, and show that
their Ministers being much abroad to spread the Gospel, they kept their
Children unbaptized, till they came home, because they would not have them
Baptized by the Priests in the Popish fashion. Upon this (mark it) the Slander
was raised that they would not have Infants Baptized, which they purge
themselves of, and profess their judgment for Infant Baptism; all which being
so well known to the Author, (as appears by his often quoting of Perin, who
treats of these things) it is a strange boldness (to say no worse) that he
should dare affirm, that the Waldenses amongst other Ordinances of Christ, that
they defended and witnessed to, to death and banishment, and bonds, that of
Baptizing Believers, in opposition to that of Infants, was not the least: Which
he attempts to prove, 1. By their public Confessions of Faith. 2. By some
particular Witness, that some of their principal Men bare thereto. 3. In the
more general Witness born by the body of the people as appears by the decrees
of Councils, decretal Epistles, and general Edicts given forth against the
whole party for the same. 4. In the footsteps that we find thereof in the
several Countries, whre they have heretofore imprinted the same.


Reply, There are two sorts of People that it is like will be imposed upon by
the flourishes which this Champion makes, those who are Ignorant, and those who
are prejudiced against Infant Baptism: no doubt but all this will pass for
Gospel amongst such. But I may say of the Author, multa loquitur, sed nihil
dicit, or rather probat, and that what he says is but Vox and praeterea nihil,
a great sound of words, but no proof: And this I shall make appear in order.

First, for the Witness born in their Public Confessions, he cites Perin, and
if he can find any thing in that Author to serve his purpose I am much
mistaken: I shall shortly produce the same Author verbis rotundis, most
expressly against him. But my Adversary has a notable dexterity to prove
quidlibet ex quolibet, let us now hear what he quotes out of Perin, and then
judge Reader, whether it be answerable to what he affirms under this first Head.

First of all the Author tells us out of Perin, That in their ancient
Confession of Faith bearing date 1120, Article 13. they say We acknowledge no
other Sacraments but Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. P. Perin, 87. Reader
thou have here every Syllable of the Article, and is not this a knocking
Argument against Infant Baptism, that they acknowledged two Sacraments, Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord? This is a Witness indeed, but it is of the Authors
weakness to produce it.

The next is Article the 28. of an other Confession, viz. God has Ordained
certain Sacraments to be joined with the Word, as a means to unite us unto, and
to make us partakers of his Benefits, and that there be only Two of them: this
is a Witness with a witness, here is alsO altum Silentium, a deep Silence, as
to Infant Baptism, not a word pro or con, and he that sees any thing against it
in this Article wears Antipaedobaptistical Spectacles.

And in another Ancient Confession of Faith Article 7. says the Author, we
have this, viz. We do believe that in the Sacrament of Baptism water is the
visible and external sign, which represents to us that which is within, viz.
Renovation of the Spirit, and mortification of our Members in Jesus Christ,
Perin 89. There is a Harmony between all the Protestant Churches in the World,
and the Waldenses in this Article, we all who are for Infant Baptism believe
the same.

After this we have a passage out of Vigniers Ecclesiastical History, namely,
That they do expresly-declare to receive the Canon of the Old and
New Testament, to reject all Doctrines which have not their foundation in it;
therefore all the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome the condemn,
and abominate, saying she is a Den of Thieves, and the Apocalyptical Harlot.
This is all very good, but what have we in all this against Infant Baptism? but
the Author would put their words upon the Tenter-hooks, it may be, and strain
them farther than their intention, and would have us think doubtless, that they
judged Infant Baptism to be a Romish Tradition, and to have no foundation in
the Word of God; and is it not strange that it should be a Romish Tradition when
it was in use in Tertullian's days, as the Author himself intimates a little
before: But the Waldenses themselves have declared their judgment otherwise,
and seconded it with their Practice, as shall be shown by and by. They were
indeed against the Romish Ceremonies used in Baptism, as Exorcism, Chrysm, etc.
but not against Infant Baptism itself.

Another Citation is out of an Ancient Confession, Artic. 11. The words are --
We esteem for an Abomination and as Antichristian all Humane Inventions, as a
trouble and prejudice to the liberty of the Spirit. And in their Ancient
Catechism. Perin. de Doct. de Vaud. Live. 1.168, 169. When Humane Traditions are
approved for Gods Ordinances, then is he Worshipped in vain. Is. 19. Matt. 15.
Which is done when grace is attributed to the external Ceremonies and persons
enjoined to partake of Sacraments without Faith and Truth. This also is
insignificant to the purpose for which the Author quotes it, and does not in
the least touch Infant Baptism. It is a good Testimony against Humane
Traditions, and they tell us what they mean; which is done (say they) when
Grace is attributed to the External Ceremonies, and it is one of the Popish
Errors we know, that Baptism confers grace ex opere operato; it is also a good
Testimony against Compulsion to the Sacraments, and that wicked practice of the
Spaniards in forcing the Indians to be Baptized, and whoever shall compel
ignorant, and scandalous persons to receive the Lords Supper.

Lastly we have something brought out of their ancient Treatise concerning
Antichrist, writ 1120. And if we can find nothing there against our Practice,
then may we say of this Antagonist, Promisit montes, nascitur ridieulus mus.

The words of that Treatise are, That Antichrist attributes the Regeneration of
the Holy Spirit unto the dead outward work of Baptizing Children, and teaches
that thereby Regeneration must be had. And here at last by good hap we have the
word Children named, but not a jot serving the Author's design, for they do not
hereby except against Childrens Baptism, but only against the corrupt ends that
Antichrist has in it; for whether it be in Children or grown Persons, it is an
Antichristian, or Popish Tenent to ascribe Regeneration to the dead outward
work of Baptism, and this is that before mentioned that Baptism confers grace
ex opere operato.

By what has been said any unprejudiced Reader may see how meanly the Author
has acquitted himself in the beginning of his undertaking to prove the
Waldenses against Infant Baptism, from their public Confessions of Faith; and
it is not unlikely we shall find him as defective in what follows. We have seen
much confidence in the man, but not a grain of proof, and it is impossible any
man's belief should be shaken by what he has hitherto faid touching the
Lawfulness of Infant Baptism.

2. His second proof is the Witness of the eminent and leading Men. The first
he begins with, is the Famous Beringarius of Turain in Anjou, and he quotes the
Magdeburgenses Cent. 11. c. 5. p. 240. That Beringarius did in the time of Leo
the 9th about the year 1049. publicly maintain his Heresies, which they set
down to be denying Transubstantiation, and Baptism to little ones.

Now we must have to do with Mr. Tombs again, Mr. Tombe's Praecursor,
Examen p. 20.

Reply, 1. That Beringarius was a famous Champion for the Truth against Popish
Errors and Superstitions is beyond all dispute, but still it is questionable
whether he was against Infant Baptism; Why, says the Author, the
Magdeburgenses tell us so, that is 4 Protestant Divines that drew up the
History of the Church. Here the incautelous Reader is in danger of a snare; for
those Divines accuse him not of this, but only tell us what the Popish records
speak of him; Beringarius, say the Magdeburgenses, maintained his Heresies,
which they (that is the Papists) set down to be denying Transubstantiation, and
Infant Baptism, who being such false accusers may very well be excepted against
as insufficient evidence. We know what Calumnies they have cast upon those
eminent Reformers, Luther, Calvin, Beza, that lived nearer our times; what
errors they charge them with both Intellectual and Moral, as if they had been
very Heretical in judgment, and men of debaucht lives: they have their
witnesses too more than a Jury, to justify all their malicious charges, Books
written by diverse Authors, enough to make up a considerable Library: If we must
credit them against one, why not against all? the Testimony is the same.

2. Since this instance of Beringarius is taken out of Tombe's, let us hear
what answer Mr. Marshal gave him page 65. of his defense of Infant Baptism; It
is true (says he) that Deoduinus Leodienses took it up as a common fame, and
upon his credit Guitmond a Popish Bishop relates it, that Beringarius opposed
the Corporal presence in the Eucharist, and the Baptism of little ones; Usher
de Success. Cap. 7. Sect. 37.
but (says Bishop Usher in his Succession of the Church) in so many Synods
beld against Beringarius we never find any thing of this nature laidto his
charge; and Bishop Usher farther adds, that to him it appears, that they who in
those days were charged to hold that Baptism did not parvulis proficere ad
salutem, held nothing but this, that Baptism does not confer Grace ex opere
operato. And indeed, in those Popish times to deny the greasy Ceremony of
Chrism was ground enough, for a charge of denying Infant Baptism, as you shall
hear suddenly.

Next we have an impertinent citation out of Clark's Martyrology, where it is
said, that God raised up Beringarius, who did boldly and faithfully preach and
witness against Popish errors, whereupon the Gospellers were called
Beringarians for above an hundred years after, but Clark gives no hint that any
of these Gospellers were against Infant Baptism, but relates the quite
contrary, for (says he) (in the same place, and in the words following what is
before quoted by the Author) They Baptized their Children, taught them the
Belief, and ten Commandments, and carefully kept the Sabbath day; upon which
Lewis the 12th of France, (that had been otherwise informed, but now satisfied
of the truth of their faith, and practice by his commissioners, and
Confessors,) said (and bound it with an Oath) that they were honester than he,
and his Catholic Subjects.

To as little purpose as the former is that he quotes out of Dr. Usher in his
Succession of the Church out of Thuanus; Dr. Usher.
That Bruno Archbishop of Tryers did expel several Beringarians that had spread
his Doctrine in several of those Belgic Countries, and that several of them
upon examination did say, that Baptism did not profit Children unto Salvation.

And well might they say so, all Protestants are of the same judgment, and in
the same we have Dr. Usher's Paraphrase on it -- nec aliud videntur negavisse,
etc. They seemed (says he) to deny nothing else but this, that Baptism does
not confer Grace by the work done; and so we have done with his first witness.

2. The next he brings are Peter Bruis, P. Bruis.
Arnoldus, and Henricus, three famous Waldenses; they were of their Barbes,
that is, Teachers. I shall speak of the first and last being joined together in
History, as the two first great Preachers of the Albigenses and Waldenses: the
first was a Priest, the last a Monk, hated and persecuted very much by the
Romish-Church. These being driven out of several places, where they stoutly
opposed the Popish errors, were at last received at Toulouse in Provence, and
they that followed their Doctrine were called Petro-Brusians and Henricians.
Now to prove these to be against Infant Baptism, the Author in conformity to
his old friend Mr. Tombs, betakes himself to the Ecclesiastical Historians
that have written of the State of the Church in the several Centuries since
Christ, for from them must we fetch our light touching matters of Fact in the
Countries where they lived; or from such who have made it their peculiar work
to write the History of the Waldenses as Perin etc.

The Protestant Century-writers, are either the Magdeburgensian Divines, or
Lucas Osiander. I shall give a brief account of what they say of the Waldenses,
concerning the point under debate, and so leave the Reader to judge on which
side the truth lies, whether on ours or our Opposites; and shall premise this
caution, that the Reader do not mistake, and take that to be the judgment of
those Writers concerning Peter Bruis and Henricus, which they transcribe out of
the Popish Records, Councils, Edicts etc. And what they relate of them they
have it from two Popish Abbots viz. Bernard, and Cluniacensis.

1. Concerning Bernard the Magdeburgenses tell us Cent. 12. c. 5. that he in
his 66th Sermon in Cantica, flies out against these men accusing them to be
Heretics: he charge them, 1. To be Manicheans. 2. To deny the Lawfulness of
Oaths. 3. That it is unlawful to Baptize Children. 4. That it is unlawful to eat
any thing quod ex coitu generatur, and accordingly (says Bernard) they denied
the lawfulness of eating Flesh and Milk.


These were then a terrible sort of Fellows, if we may believe that old
Superstitious (though otherwise devout, and some think Pious) Abbot, who is
commonly known by the name of St. Bernard. And certainly if these
Petro-brusians were guilty in these things, they were even Monsters in nature.
What to deny our little ones both Milk and Water too, O Cruelty! But as these
good men cleared themselves, from these false imputations and calumnies; so
also do the Magdeburgenses in their History speak highly of them, and that
which is sufficient for their Vindication.

The other cited by the Author, is Lucas Osiander, Cent. 12, 262. And I doubt
some prejudice to his cause, Osiander.
may arise from citing him. Whatsoever Osiander says (concerning Peter Bruis.
and Henricus, of their being against Infant Baptism) he takes it out of the
Works of Peter Cluniacensis, another Popish Abbot; and he does Calumniari
fortiter, lay very many abominable errors to their charge; and among others he
accuses them of this Venial one of denying Infant Baptism. Now if any credit
may be given to this Abbot, it must be per totum, throughout, in all, or else
in nothing: And verily if his Testimony be valid (as Mr. Tombs would have it
accounted, and the Author from him) our opposites need not glory in such
Waldenses, that they comported with their opinion, nor we be troubled at their
dissenting from us.

Let us now look into the wicked and false Testimony or Account, this lying
Abbot gives of those two precious Ministers, Peter Bruis, and Henricus, as
Osiander takes it out of his own Writings.

Exorta est, and progressu temporis vires acquisivit haeresis Albigensium. Ea
Romae primo caepisse putant, postea vero in comitatu Tolosato (etiam intra
viros Illustres) long lateque sparsa dicitur; quin etiam in Angliam penetrasse
scribitur.

Dogmata haec illis attribuuntur, ( inquit Osiander).

1. Baptismum abjiciunt.

2. Corporum resurrectionem negant.

3. Carnem comedi prohibent.

4. Christum non esse Deum, nec assumpsisse de Virgin, sed de Caelo carnem
duxisse.

5. Ecclesiam non posse aliquid possidere, nisi in communi, etc.

There arose and in progress of time gathered strength the heresy of the
Albigenses, that is said to take its rise at Rome, then dispersed far and wide
over the Country of Toulouse, (and that amongst men of quality;) and moreover
they say that it got into England.

They are charged to hold these Opinions, says Osiander.

They cast of Baptism, meaning that of Infants.

They deny the resurrection.

They forbid eating Flesh (as Bernard before.)

They say Christ is not God, neither took he flesh of the Virgin, but brought
it down from Heaven.

That the Church should possess all things in common.

By this time I suppose we may conclude, that these Waldenses were vile
persons, or Cluniacensis a lying Abbot; and this latter we do not in the least
question. Furthermore (as if the Author had never enough of him) he tells us,
that the Magdeburgenses set down the Assertions of Peter Bruis against
Infant Baptism, Transubstantiation, Tombe's Examen page 25.
Worshipping of Images, Purgatory, which are distinctly, and at large answered
by Peter Cluniacensis: But you must know he had never any personal conference,
or dispute with him. But that I may not remain in the Author's debt, for what
he quotes out of the Magdeburgenses, I shall requite him with what I find in
Osiander, who tells us that the said Cluniacensis does profess twice in his
Writings, that he would not accuse the Waldenses upon uncertain report, but
from their own Writings; nay farther, he charge them that they denied the
Divine Authority of the Old Testament, and all the New, except the Gospels:
Evangelium creditis, Epistolas Fauli cur non Suscipitis? Respondetis, quia non
adeo certa nobis autoritas est earum. i. e. You believe the Gospel, why not
also the Epistles of Paul? your answer is, because the Divine Authority of them
does not so certainly appear to us. And upon that account (says Osiander)
Cluniacensis spends two whole Chapters to prove the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures against them. I shall conclude this with Mr. Marshal's words to Mr.
Tombs upon his quoting Cluniacensis, to the same end as my Antagonist does. He
(says that Reverend Minister) that reads that railing Book of Petrus
Cluniacensis, will find that he acknowledges most of what he lays to their
charge to be upon the report of others. Now me thinks the Author should blush
at his indiscretion for introducing such a Popish Calumniator for an evidence
in this matter; and if he believe this Abbot slandred Peter Bruis and his
followers in these things, I hope he will excuse the Reader if he believe he
did noless, when he charge them to be against Infant Baptism, and that
Children who dyed before they could actually believe, were damned; which is
another Article Cluniacensis brings in against them, and one as true as the
other. I see by this that when men are engaged in a cause, and wedded to an
opinion, they will not refuse the most sordid and shameful ways to promote it.
They will fall in with slanderous Papists, and take up what they say to defend
their Opinions. Witness my Antagonist, and his Predesessour and Tutor Mr.
Tombs, who was checked by Mr. Baxter for his evil carriage in this very thing,
he boldly justifies himself, and tells us in his Precursor, page 29. That
Petrus Cluniacensis was (though a zealous Papist) yet thought fit by Illyricus
to be reckoned among Witnesses of truth in his Catalogue; and if such as he
(and especially Bernard) be not taken for Witnesses of things in their times, I
know not how Protestants will make up their Catalogue of Witnesses for them in
all Ages: I think these are dangerous words, somewhat derogating from the
honor of the Protestant Religion.

The other eminent Person which is joined in History with Peter Bruis, is
Henricus. These two, as is said, were the first and most famous Preachers of
the Albigenses and Waldenses. This Henricus (says the Author) witnessed to
this great Truth, being a Friend and Colleague of P. Bruis; whose Doctrines and
Positions are also recorded by the Magdeburgenses under eleven Heads; the first
whereof was denying Baptism to Children. Cent. 12. p. 843,

We have observed before that Bernard is so ingenious, as to acknowledge that he
takes up these things by hearsay, and upon report; ab iis qui ad Pontificiam
ecclesiam redierunt, of such as were returned again to the Church of Rome, and
who is such an infidel as not to believe what they say? Furthermore the
Magdeburgs tell us, that when the Henricians, or Disciples of Henricus were
examined, Bernard himself confesses, they denied the things that were Objected
against them, and that happily (say the Magdeburgs) because they Objected such
things as they never taught. Ait porr^ in Examine eos Objecta negasse. Haec
ille, sc. Bernardus. Quia forte alia ^is Objecta fuerunt, quam docuerunt. Magd.
Cent. 12. p. 845.
Mr. Tombs told his Tale about Henricus a little handsomer than the Author, in
his Praecursor. page 29. And is not ashamed to say, it seems utterly unlikely
to him that be, and his followers should be belyed, and tells us what Bernard
said of them in 204th Epistle: the same also he has in his Exercitation p. 31.
and let us compare the Author with him, and we shall see he has the Story from
him; for thus he concludes this Section.

The Author.

The same Bernard in his Epistle to Heldefonsus Earl of St. Gyles, says, The
Henerici did deny Holy Days, Sacracraments, Churches and Priests, complaining
that the Children of Christians were excluded the life of Christ, whilst they
denied them the grace of Baptism, and not suffered them to partake of Salvation.

Mr. Tombs Exerc. p. 31. and Examen. page 21.

The same Bernard in his first Epistle to Heldefonsus Earl of St. Gyles,
complains of Henricus, that he took away Holy Days, Sacraments, Churches,
Priests, that the life of Christ is stopped to the little ones of Christians,
while the grace of Baptism is denied, and they not suffered to draw near to
Salvation.

Thus far we find the Author exactly following Tombs, having little else but
what is transcribed out of him; only he omits that ingenious passage of Mr.
Tombs Praecursor page 30. As for the Albigenses and Waldenses it might be
(says he) that some might be against Infant Baptism, yet others not; or it may
be in the beginning beld so, but after left it. But this Author makes as if the
whole Body of the people had been against it which follows next to be examined.

Thirdly (says he) in the Witness, born not only by some particular Men, but
by the body of the People; 3. By the People themselves, suffering for the same.
as appears by decrees of Councils, Decretal Epistles, and Edicts given forth
against them as well as the Testimony of many Learned Writers.

Reply.

There is no convincing Proof to be fetched from hence, of their being against
Infant Baptism; because they were their Enemies, calumniating malicious
Papists, that loaded them with all manner of reproaches, to render them Odious:
And no marvel (says Mr. Marshal) such Opinions should be charged upon them,
Marshal's Defense. p. 66.
though they held them not; seeing we find this particular charged upon Luther,
Calvin, and Beza, who did all in a special manner oppose this error; so that
(says the same Author) unless some one does out of their own Confession give
better evidence, Ies. Vicecom. Obser. Eccl. Vol. Lib. 2. c. 1. p. 103.
I shall believe that this Doctrine of opposing the Baptizing of the Infants of
Believers, is an Innovation no ancienter than the Anabaptists in Germany.

And whereas the Author cites two Canons of Alexander the 3d, one made in the
Gallican, and the other in the Lateran Council, against the Waldensian, or
Catharian Heresy, the latter Anathematizing them as for other Heresies, so
particularly for denying Infant Baptism, and for their Contempt of all the
Sacraments.

We are informed by Perin (the French Historian,) that these Canons were
discharged against the Waldenses as soon upon the matter, as they were known by
this name. For (says he) in the year 1160 Peter Waldo Citizen of Lions
courageously opposed Transubstantiation, with diverse other corruptions crept
into the Church of Rome, blaming the Vice, Luxury, Excess and Avarice, of the
Pope and his Clergy, and he was the more harkened to, being held in great
esteem for his learning, piety and great charity. Now the Pope considering that
at Lions, there were so many persons (by reason of Waldo's teaching) that
questioned his Sovereign Authority over the whole Church, fearing what this
might come to, being chased out of Lions, they spread themselves in diverse
companies and places; and from this Waldo, they were called Waldenses, Perin
Hist. Lib. 1. p. 2, 3.

The Monks, Inquisitors and others, (says the Historian) being their Mortal
Enemies, poured out Reproaches, and laid Opprobrious Imputations on them,
affirming they were the Authors of all Heresies in the World, and that they
were Confederates with the ancient Heretics.

Because they made profession of Purity, they called them Cathares i. e.
Puritans. Because they denied the Bread which the Priest showed in the Mass to
be God, they called them Arrians, as if they denied the Divinity of Christ; and
because they maintained that the Authority of Emperors and Kings depended not
on the Pope, Manicheans; and for other causes which they fained, they called
them Gnostics and Apostoliques. This Protestant Historian is large in these
things, but I must contract, among others laid to their charge he mentions
these 3 following.

1. That they held Community of Goods. 2. That it was unlawful to swear at all.
3. That they rejected the Baptism of Infants.
This Bernard and Cluniacensis, charged them with as before.

They acquit themselves (faith Perin) from these Calumnies by putting forth a
Book called the Spiritual Almanac, Fol. 45. They assert and maintain Propriety
of Estate, the Lawfulness of Oaths grounded on Heb. 6.6. and alleges 'twas
God's Ordinance, that the people of Israel should swear by his Name. Deuteronomy.
16.53.

And lastly for Infant Baptism (the matter in dispute) Perin gives this account
page 15. [which I desire the Reader to observe it, because we have so ancient a
declaration of their faith in this particular.]

That they being constrained for some hundred years to suffer their Children to
be Baptized by the Priests of the Church of Rome, they deferred the doing
thereof, as long as they could, having in detestation those Humane inventions
which were added to the Sacrament, which they held to be but pollution thereof.

And forasmuch as their Pastors were many times abroad, employed in the service
of the Churches, they could not have Baptism Administered to their Infants by
their own Ministers. For this cause they kept them long from Baptism, which the
Priests perceiving, charged them thereupon with this imposture viz. That they
were against Infant Baptism. Which, says Perin, not only their Adversaries
have believed, that is, the Papists: and from hence came all that Bedrole of
Decrees, Councils, Decretal Epistles, and Edicts against them, but also others
(says he) who have well approved of their Life and Faith in all other points;
amongst the number of which we must reckon Mr. Tombs, and the Author of this
late Treatise of Baptism now under examination.

This ample account, given by such an excellent impartial Historian; so many
years since, before the World was so troubled with disputes about Baptism, and
from one of their own Countrymen, a man unconcerned, as to interest, or
dissenting parties in this controversy, and being so faithful in his relations
of the Faith, and sufferings of the Waldenses, that he was never (that I could
hear of) questioned or suspected, will undoubtedly be credited by all ingenious
Persons, and is sufficient to dismount thousands of those Canons, Edicts, etc.
the Author brings.

Besides this, that I may (if possible) undeceive the Antipaedobaptists, who
are hardly brought to believe any thing that is against them; I will add two
other Testimonies, from whence we may conclude the Body of the Waldenses were
not against Infant Baptism; one of them is Luther, the other Bullinger, both of
which have written smartly against Anabaptists, and would never have given such
a large Encomium of the Waldenses, had they apprehended them to be touched with
the error of denying Baptism to the Children of Believers.

Luther professes that he hated the Waldenses (whilst a Monk) as desperate
men, until he knew their piety and truth of their Belief by their own
Confessions and Writings, whereby be perceived that those good men were much
wronged, and that the Pope had condemned them for Heretics, being rather
worthy of the praise that is due to the Martyrs.

And Bullinger that wrote a Book against the Anabaptists, says in his Preface
to his Sermons upon the Revelations, That above 400 years since the Waldenses
have made Profession of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, throughout France, Italy,
Germany, Poland, Bohemiah, and other Kingdoms.

4. If this be not enough to clear the Waldenses from what the Author would
have us believe from the Testimony of their Enemies the Papists, we are willing
to give him full measure, pressed down and running over; and that is by the
Testimony which they give of themselves in their Public General Confessions of
Faith. We have before shown the Author could find nothing in any of their
Confessions against Infant Baptism, let us now see whether we can find any
thing for it.

First they purge themselves from the imputation of denying Infant Baptism,
Hist. Wald. Lib. 1. c. 4. p. 15. So Lib. 1. c. 6. p. 43.
and show the reason why for some hundred years they forbore it, as before; he
that writes the History, professedly sets down in his 3d part of it, the
Doctrine of the Waldenses and Albigenses, and particularly what their Faith
was, touching Baptism in these words of their own, viz. And whereas Baptism is
Administered in a full Congregation -- And for this cause it is that we present
our Children in Baptism, which they ought to do, to whom the Children are
nearest, as Parents, etc.

In the year of our Lord 1535, an Assembly of the Waldenses from all their
Valleys met at Angrongne, Perin. Hist. Wald. L. 2. Cap. 4. page 57.
and there was signified what they understood of their Brethren of Provence and
Daughine, namely, that they had sent into Germany their Pastors, George Morell,
and Peter Mason to confer with Oecolampadius, Bucer, and Capito, touching the
belief which they had time out of mind: [Mark hereby the way how unworthily the
Author Prevaricates and endeavors to blind the Reader, page 329. of his Book,
as if all the Waldenses were declining, or Apostatizing, toward the
Antichristian Abomination of being present at Mass: if some of them of Provence
were faulty; yet this Assembly at Angrongne stood fast in the Truth] where
(says Perin) when they had read certain Letters of encouragement sent from
Oecolampadius, both to those of Provence, Dhugtony and to themselves.

Afterward concluded on certain Propositions and Articles of Faith, which were
read and approved, signed and sworn to by all the Heads of the Families and
their Pastors, with one mind and consent, to Conserve, Observe, Believe, and
retain amongst them inviolably without any contradiction, as being conformable
to the Doctrine which has been taught them, (mark it) from the Father to the
Son, for these many hundred years out of the Word of God.

If therefore among any of these Articles we can find Infant Baptism owned,
what becomes then of all the Crack that the Author makes, as if they had been
of his judgment.

The Articles there agreed on were in number 17, too long to be inserted, the
last is about Baptism, and thus it is to a Syllable.

Article 17.

Touching the matter of the Sacrament, it has been coneluded by the H.
Scriptures, that we have but two Sacramental signs, the which Christ Jesus has
left unto as, the one is Baptism, the other the Eucharist, which we receive to
show what our perseverance in the faith is, as we have promised when we were
Baptized being little Infants.

This is the Confession of the Faith of the Assembly at Angrongne, where a
letter was read from Oecolampadius to those of Provence, who (it seems out of
fear) were sometimes present at Mass with the Papists, or at least some of
them, who did in heart doubtless abhor it: but how does this prove they were
not heartily for Infant Baptism? And because the Letter is so Excellent a
Disswasive from any Compliance with Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship, I
shall here insert it.

Oecolampadius his Letter to the Waldenses of Provence, 1530.
WE understand that the fear of Persecution has made you to Dissemble in your
Faith, and that you bide it. Now we believe with the heart to Righteousness,
and confess with the mouth to Salvation. But they that fear to Confess Christ
before the World, shall not be received of God the Father. For our God is
Truth, without any dissimulation, and as he is a jealous God, he cannot endure
that they that zare his, should join together under the Yoke of Antichrist: For
there is no Communion of Christ with Belial. And if you Communicate with the
Infidels in going to their Abominable Masses, you cannot but perceive their
Blasphemies against the Death and Passion of Christ. For when they glory in
themselves, that by the means of such Sacrifice they satisfy God for the sins
of the Living and the Dead, what can follow, but that Jesus Christ has not
sufficiently Satisfied by the Sacrifice of his Death and Passion, and
consequently that Christ is not Jesus (i. e.) a Savior, and that he dyed for
you in vain. If then we have Communion at this impure table, we do declare our
selves to be One Body with the Wicked, how irksome soever it be to us. And
when we say Amen to their Prayers, do we not deny Christ? What death should we
not rather choose? What Pain and Torment should we not rather suffer? Nay into
what Hell ought we not rather to plunge our selves, than to witness by our
presence, that we consent unto the Blasphemies of the wicked. I know that your
weakness is great, but it is necessary that they that have learned that they
are bought by the Blood of Christ, should be more Courageous, and always fear
him that can cast both Body and Soul into Hell. And what shall it suffice us to
have a care of this life only? Shall that be more precious to us than that of
Christ? And are we contented to have tasted the delights of this World only?
Crowns are prepared for us, and shall we turn back again? And who will believe
that our Faith has been true, if it fail and faint in the heat of Persecution?
Let us therefore pray unto God to increase our Faith. For certainly it shall be
better for us to dye, than to be overcome by temptations. And therefore
Brethren we exhort you to dive into the bottom of this business; for if it be
lawful to hide our faith under Antichrist, it shall be likewise lawful to hide
it under the Empire of the Turk, and with Dioclesian to adore Jupiter and
Venus; nay it had been lawful for Tobit to adore the Calf in Bethel. And what
then shall our faith toward God be? If we honor not God as we should, and our
life be nothing but Hypocrisy and dissimulation, he will speue us out of his
mouth, as being neither Hot nor Cold. And how do we glorify our God in the
midst of our Tribulations if we deny him? Brethren, it is not lawful for us to
look back when our hand is at the Plough: neither is it lawful to give ear to
our Wives enticing us to evil, nor to our Flesh which, notwithstanding it
endures many things in this World, yet in the Haven it suffers Shipwreck.

These Godly Admonitions confirmed the weak, and came seasonably, for the
persecution immediately began, and was more cruel than ever.

4. Lastly the Author attempts to make good what he has said of the Waldenses.
From the Footsteps, says he, we find of this truth in the several Countries
and places where the Waldenses had heretofore imprinted it, as appears by the
following instances.

Reply.

The Rise of Error like the Head of Nilus; is not easily found out: and as
Diseases do not always come of Infection, but owe their Original to the
pravity of the humors, as the Principal Cause, and Seminary of them; so is it
with Errors there being a weakness, and corrupt disposition in the mind of man
to fall into the same without the Ministry and Teaching of Impostors. That the
Waldenses (by reason of the sore persecution under Alexander the 3d, and his
Successors) wege dispersed through Germany and France, (as the Author tells us
out of Du-plessis) is not to be doubted, yea throughout all Italy, Poland,
Bohemia and other Kingdoms, some hundred years before they had spread
themselves, as Bullinger has told us. But that the Opposers of Infant Baptism
in upper and lower Germany were the remains and Offspring of those the
Waldenses had before instructed, is a conceit foreign to all History, and has
no foundation in Reason or Truth: his ipfe dixit, or saying so, is no ground
for us to believe it. And he affirms it only upon conjecture, and this waek
Conjecture, arises from his will, that it should be so, according to that
saying, quod ^^lumus facile credimus.

We have before shown that in the year 1535. the Waldenses in a general
Assembly of all the Valleys met at Angtongne, and declared their Faith, as
touching other Articles of Religion, so in particular that of Infant Baptism,
which they professed to own; declaring farther that it was a Doctrine taught
them from Father to Son many hundred years before. These were the legitimate
Offspring of the Ancient Waldenses inheriting the Patrimony and Faith of their
Ancestors. It was near upon the time of that Assembly that the German
Anabaptists did appear upon the stage; I am sure it was not above 10 or 12
years before: for the Waldenses, as was said, sent to Oecolampadius for advice,
and he, as the Author has it page 307. disputed with the Anabaptists at Bazil,
Vlme, Ausburg 1527, and 1529. I will not say, but in some points the German
Anabaptists might agree with the Waldenses, as the worst of Heretics do in
some things with the Orthodox, but it is the Authors private fancy, that the
Fathers of those Germans, had been the Disciples of the Ancient Waldenses,
which if true, their Children did horribly degenerate. For if any credit may be
given to the Histories of diverse Religious, sober Protestants, besides the
Testimonies of those glorious Lights, Luther, Melanchton, Zuinglius, Bullinger
and others, concerning the men of the Anabaptist Judgment in those Countries;
we shall hardly meet with the like execrable persons, in in any of the Records
of time, since Christianity was professed. Let not those who are against
Infant Baptism in these days (many of whom, are not only sound in their
judgments in other points of Religion, but holy in their conversation) be
condemned for the miscarriages of those in foreign parts, more in former
times, than of late: Nor let those Godly men, who are dissatisfied with the
practice of Infant Baptism, be offended at the Zeal of Gods holy Ministers,
against those evil men, who under a pretense of Religion perpretrate all manner
of villainies. It was long since, and is still the judgment of very wise and
holy-Men, that those German Anahaptists were a Faction raised up by Satan, and
fomented by the Pope in that juncture, on purpose to retard and hinder the work
of Reformation, so hopefully begun, by those burning and shining lights
beforementioned. At that time the learned Councellor Conradus Heresbachius
expresses the same in an Epistle of his to Erasmus: Satan ejusmon^ pestes in
illum finem excitavit, ne se^l, reformatio orbis Christiani, in Doctrina and
moribus, per Lutherum, Zuinglium; Melancthonem, Bucerum; dliosque Dei viros
suscepta, perficeretur.
And Melchior Adamus (in his History of the lives of the German Divines) says,
that at that time the errors of the Anabaptists broke forth, that the Divil
might sow his Seed, who first declared against Infant Baptism, and afterward
rebaptized themselves, and then followed an inundation of all the Heresies that
ever were; Vita Zwing lii, page 30. And yet my Antagonist toward the latter
end of his Discourse has the confidence to Apologize for those Monsters, who
were the abomination of all Europe, and whose memory is accursed, and stinks to
this day in the Netherlands, and who are the Scard^^ and abhorrency of
Protestant Churches throughout all the World. By which undertaking, Irr^psit
intereae temporis ut Diabvlus sua zizania semper interserete consuevit,
Catabaptistarum haeresis qui primo Infantes Baptizare veta^int, and
seipsorre-baptizabant; postea colluviem omnium, quae unquam fuerunt, haeresean
inundabant.
I conceive he has done dishonor to himself, and his cause, and shall have no
thanks from his party. And for his questioning the verity of those Testimonies,
(being herein singular) wherewith all the world is satisfied, and endeavoring
to lessen and mince the Crimes that can admit of no Extenuation, he has hereby
little advantaged himself, and certainly he that durst Advocate for such a
business is a daring Person indeed.

He tells us they were dispersed all abroad throughout upper and lower Germany,
and it is true; but wherever they came (as he himself quotes out of
Cloppenburg) they suffered not the Reformed Religion to be edified without
daily conflicts.

We shall speak first of Vpper-Germany, and we are necessitated (something
against our will) to give an account of the carriage of that People, fearing
lest it should reflect upon the Godly Antipaedobaptists of these times.

There were multitudes of them (says the Author) in that Country, as appears
not only by the opposition made against those persuasions by the Popish party,
but by the Protestants also, and that from those who were called chief of the
Reformation: as Luther, Micarius, Zuinglius, Brentius, Calvin, Junius,
Oecolampadius.

Here the first thing Ishall observe is, that these Gallant men stood up for
Infant Baptism, in opposition to those that were against it, who (for that very
reason it seems) are not worthy to be accounted chief of the Reformation, by
him, and his party; for observe, Reader, that he does disown them as such, in
saying those who were called chief of the Reformation. Next let us enquire how
the Anabaptists did promote the Reformation, then newly begun in those parts.
The life of Junius, (who was Preacher at Limburg) speaks out how much they
hindered the progress of the Gospel there: how grievously they disturbed Regius
at Ausburg, and afterward Musculus at Augusta, Vrbani Regii vita, page 73.

Muscui^ vit. p. 373.


Melchior Adamus tells us in their lives. Musculus, although a famous, learned
and Godly Divine, (as appears by his Comments upon several parts of the Old and
New Testament) yet was very poor after his Marriage, and seeing that he could
not maintain his Wife with that little Money that was remaining, agreed with a
certain Weaver for a certain Sum, to learn his trade. The man unknown before to
Musculus, was an Anabaptist, and there dwelt at that time a Teacher of that way
in his house, miram Sanctitatem simulans (as the Story has it) conterfeiting a
wonderful deal of Holiness. Melchior Adam. in vit. Mase. p 373.
Musculus soon found him out to be a very naughty fellow, and reproved him of
his faults, charging him to be a lazy, idle, hypocritical Person; at length his
Master took offense at him and turned him out of door, contrary to Agreement,
of whose perfidiousness he very much complains; for it seems the Weaver had
gotten poor Musculus his Money and not fully taught him his Trade, and dismissed
him because he was opposite to their Opinion. Musculus now being in great want,
and not knowing well what to do, was fain at length to work for 4 pence per
diem in a Town-ditch, whilst his Wife (during this time) was a servant, or she
might have been starved. Afterward God provided better for them, for he was
advanced to be Minister at Augusta, Erat autem illo tempore ejus Ecclesiae
afflictus and perturbatus status, non solum propter Episcopi Canonicorum,
reliquorumque pontificiae Religionis Machinas etc. verum etiam ob
Anabaptistarum furorem etc.
where the Anabaptists troubled him very much; for at that time the Church of
Christ there, was not only vexed by the Papists on one hand, but by this sort
of men on the other hand; who not being contented to Preach in private, did
impudently rush into the public places for God's Worship; and there cause
disturbance, and sometimes get up into the Pulpit and preach their errors, as
the same Author tells us, page 376. in Musculus his life. At which (and by
reason of some other seditious carriage) the Magistrate being offended, put
diverse of them into Prison. Cum res ad tumultum and seditionem, Populo
vehementer commoto spectaret: But it was not till they occasioned a great
Tumult and Commotion amongst the people, Ingeniam hominis animum esse docebat,
qui^d uci magis quam cogi velit. Eoque magistratum ad clementiam and
longanimitatem cohortabatur.
etc. Musculus disswades the Magistrate from severity, daily visits and
relieves the Prisoners, forbearing to insist upon any matters of difference in
opinion. At first they vilified him, called him false Prophet, and Wolf under
sheeps Clothing: till at last by his Christian moderation and sweetness of
Spirit, he had insinuated himself so much into them, that seposito omni^
affectu pravo ipsum patienter audiebant, laying aside all prejudice, they
hearkened to his reasonings and forsook their Error; whereas some a little
before professed they would rather undergo any torment than relinquish the
same, and one of them afterward became a Minister of the Church.

In like manner one Thomas Munzer made a great uproar in Saxony: for first he
pretended an extraordinary call from Heaven, and that he was raised up by the
command of God for the punishment of wicked Princes, and altering of Politic
Government; whereupon he stirred up the people to cast off the Yoke of
obedience to Civil Magistrates, as they had cast off the Pope, for the one
says he oppresses us in Civil as the other does in Religious Rights. Thus he
goes on Preaching up Liberty, and that all men were by nature free, and that
all things ought to be free and common: and when he could not persuade Luther
to comply with him, nor make good his Doctrine by Argument before Luther, with
whom he had frequent conference at Wittenberg, but on the contrary was rebuked
by him, and earnestly admonished not to disturb the peace, but submit to God's
Ordinance: he began to rise up and thunder against Luther himself, crying out
that Luther was in as much fault as the Pope of Rome, and as bad as the Pope:
and that all the Gospel he preached was a Carnal Gospel; till at length the
common People being stirred up by this Trumpet, and enticed with the seeming
sweetness of Liberty, began every where to imbroile themselves in dangerous
mutinies and troops, and all reverence to Magistrates was contemned and cast
off. Hereupon the Duke of Saxony cleared his Country of Munzer, who wandered
here and there through Germany, and came at length to Mulbuysen, a famous Town
in Thuringia; there as before Preached he up the same Doctrine of Liberty from
Oppressors, many addicted themselves to him, some of the richer sort having
been overprest with Taxes, and others of small and beggarly estates, whom he
made sure to himself by telling them, not only the Monasterirs should be prey
and spoil to them, but likewile Preached up Community of all things, according
to the Example of the primitive Churches. Having thus gotten a party of
factious Persons fit for his turn, he became at length a Senator; whatsoever he
commanded was done: his pleasure was a law, and his direction in all thing, as
he said, a divine Revelation. His first work was to displace the Magistrates,
and to take all power into his own hand. In Zwevia and Franconia, near 40000
Pesants took Arms upon this occasion; who robbed a great part of the Nobility,
and plundered many Towns and Castles, Munzer being their chief Captain. At
length the German Princes, sensible of the danger prepare, forces set upon
them, and kill some Thousands: Munzer himself was apprehended, and brought to
the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave; being asked why he had thus abused the
miserable Pesants, and raised these Tumults; his answer was, he had done but
his duty, and that such Princes as hindered the Reformation of the Church ought
to be opposed. The Landgrave on the contrary proved by Scripture that
Governors ought to be had in honor; that all Sedition is forbidden by God,
and that by the Laws of the Gospel, no Christian may take arms against their
lawful Prince, upon any pretext whatsoever. To this when he replied nothing, he
was first put upon the Rack to know what his purpose was, and who were his
confederates: afterward he was brought on the Stage, and was so extremely
confounded and dejected, that he was not able to give any tolerable account of
his Faith; yet in general terms Confessed his Fault and his Error, and his Head
being cut off, was carried upon a Spear through the Army.

After the same mode, the Anabaptists carried themselves in Switzerland; there
they likewise troubled the famous Zwinglius, that eminent Servant of Christ, in
the work of the Ministry at Zurith. This Zwinglius was a person of that note,
that Bishop Jewel in his Defense of the Church of England, gives this
honorable Testimony of him, and of Luther, page 360. Mirtin Luther (says he)
and Hulderick Zwinglius, are most excellent Men, even sent of God to give light
to the whole World. This same Zwinglius, whilst he was busy in carrying on the
work of Reformation, (as we are informed by Melchior Adamus) was interrupted by
the Anabaptists. First they declaimed against Infant Baptism, and rebaptized
themselves as before was hinted. Zwinglius was very tender of them, and treated
them with much gentleness, Quod Autores and anoics erant, and docts, and oves,
and cives, familiariter egit. Melchior Adam. in vita Zwinglii p. 30.
for some of them were his friends and of his own Flock; until he found much
falsehood and untruth in what they said, and that they made a grievous rent,
broke off communion and erected a new Church. This moved Zwinglius to try his
strength with them, and indeed the Anabaptists first made a challenge on the
6th November 1525 to dispute the point with any of the Reformed Divines.
Hereupon Zwinglius and some others had the patience to argue with them
publicly in the Court before the Senate, three several days; and when (as
Spanhemius tells us) they were by strength of argument in full demonstration of
Spirit and of power, confuted, they fell to Railing, and poured out reproachful
speeches. Melchior Adamus gives the same account in the History of Zwinglius
his Life. Habita sunt disputationes cum ipsis seriae, in quibus errorum
convicti, Blasphemiis, and conviciis despumarunt in Antagonistas. Melchior Adam.
The said Zwinglius so overpowred them with Arguments at that time, that one of
them had a pretty conceit beyond the rest, and said Zwinglius was a learned
man, and could prove any thing, but says he, O Zwinglius, I adjure thee by the
living God to speak thy Conscience and tell us truth. I will said he: Thou art
a seditious Fellow, since milder answers will not serve the turn, I speak plain
and home. After which disputation on the 15th November, the Senate made a
Decree against them, and declared that Zwinglius had said enough to convince
them; established Infant Baptism, commanding the Anabaptist Teachers to be
silent and quiet. Notwithstanding which the trouble of the place ceased not,
for the Anabaptists increased and others adjoined to them, and they fell to
preaching and disputing again, that the Tumult was great and the Citizens fell
together by the Ears. The Magistrate once more taking cognizance of the matter,
how that by these contentions the City became obnoxious to the forces of the
house of Austria, and the Idolatry of Rome; for the prevention hereof, Tandem
carcere, proscriptionibus, morte, contra perjuros, inabedientes, seditiosos,
non jam Catabaptistas, Senatus agere coactus; ut malum intestinum averruncaret.
Melchior Adam.
passed a severe Edict against them, not as Anabaptists, but as perjured,
disobedient, seditious persons, which was done in the year 1530. five years
after they first began to dispute with Zwinglius. Vid. Spanhemius and Melch.
Adam.

2. In the next place the Author tells us how the Anabaptists spread themselves
about this time over all the low Countries, which is very true, both in
Westphalia, Friesland, Holland, to the horror and confusion of those parts;
for the light of the Gospel which brake out but a little before in
High-Germany, darted down its beams to the Low Countries, and the blessed work
of Reformation was carrying on apace, had not the same sort of People broken in
again, to distract the Churches then planting, and disturb the Ministers. Take
but one instance, which is instar-omnium: At Munster in Westphalia this
troublesome Sect first appeared, there they soared high, pretended Divine
Revelations, they insinuated themselves into the esteem of men by an appearance
of Sanctity at first, and in a short time gained a great multitude of people
over to them. We must know that at this time Popery was the prevailing Religion
here, as in other Towns of the Netherlands, and the people began to relish the
sweetness of the Gospel, and Truth did every day triumph over Popish errors.
Several Ministers were sent down from Magburg to propagate th Gospel, and the
Popish interest lost ground a-pace, and their Doctors durst not dispute with
the Reformed Divines from Scripture. Upon this the Senate ordained some of the
Churches, for the use of the Reformed; this indeed displeased the Bishop, but
it came not to Arms or Blows (as the Author falsely suggests) page 324 of his
Tretaise. But notwithstanding the Bishop's dislike, the Senate revoked not
their former grant, and the work of Christ was hopefully carrying on, when in a
few months there came privily into this City of Munster, certain Anabaptists in
the year of our Lord 1533. of whom the principal were John Matthias a Baker of
Haerlem, and John Becold a Tailor of Leyden. These begin their Deformation,
with a new Catechism, preach down Childrens Baptism, and preach up Community of
Goods, and by a notable faculty of language, and show of piety which they
expressed at their first entrance, they ingratiated themselves and their
Tenants, with many of the people. In a short time their party was greatly
augmented, many flowing into them especially of the poorer and baser sort, as
those that knew not how to live for debt, and such as were inclined to Tumult,
and disposed to mischief. Then fell they to the old work of contending with the
Reformed Ministers: The Senate perceiving how much the City was divided in
their judgment, appointed also here a day for a public disputation, at which
again it was the lot of the Anabaptists to be worsted. The Senate afterward
makes a Decree to clear the City of them: some depart for a little space and
re-enter secretly, others conceal themselves within the Walls, and not long
after assembled themselves openly, and appeared with greater Audacity than
ever; new Tumults every day arose, and from disputing they came to fighting.

The New-Prophets John Matthias and John Becold feigned Raptures, Ecstasies, and
Revelations; and perceiving their own strength, began to rant it to the purpose
and to act all manner of Violence and Rapine: They encouraged the people to
fall upon the Monasteries and Churches, and in a short time the Suburbs, were
burned and the Churches spoiled. They ordained community of Goods on pain of
death, destroy Libraries, abolish Schools of Learning, and commanded, all Books
except the Bible to be Sacrificed to the flames.

Then did these two Impostors send forth horrible cries about the street,
exhorting all to repent. They sent to other Towns where any were addicted to
them, invited them to this City as their, common Randevouz, promising a
hundredfold, for whatever was lost in this cause. The Tumult mult and
Consternation was so dreadful, that the Senators (many of them) forsake the
City, and the rest were displaced: forthwith they choose new ones of their own
Faction, run armed up and down, and chase out of the Town all that did not
favor their Sect, without respect to Age or Sex; so as many Women with Child
misearried with the fright. By this time the Bishop brings an Army, besieged
the City: Matthias makes a desperate salley and was cut off, and now John of
Leyden assumes absolute Dominion, sits upon a Throne of State, and ascribes to
himself this Title, I John King of Righteousness over the whole World. During
his Reign (which God in mercy shortened) he cut off whom he pleased, the Estates
and Lives of men being at his devotion: he perpetrated horrible Villainies,
ordained Polygamy to cover his Adulteries and monstrous Lusts, murdered diverse
persons, stood out so long against the Besiegers, that the Famine increased
miserably in the City, and the people perished in great numbers, and those that
escaped out were pitied and spared by the Besiegers, being nothing but skin and
bones. At length the place was taken by Storm, the prodigious Impostor (with
two of his chief servants after a great slaughter of others being taken alive)
were sent up and down to the Princes of Germany, as Spectacles of Scorn and
Wonder, and many Divines labored to convince them of their Errors; and in some
things the King would seem to yield, which was thought only to save his life,
for he promised upon pardon to reduce all the Anabaptists in Holland, Brab^nt,
Friesland (where they were in great numbers) under the obedience of their
Magistrates.

Being brought back again to Munster, after the Exhortations of many pious men,
that they would confess their Erros; the King relented, the other continued
stubborn; being all brought to Execution, the King was fastened to a Post, and
the other two in the same manner had their flesh pulled off with hot burning
Pincers, and at last run through with a Sword. Their Carcases were enclosed in
three several Cages of Iron, and hanged up upon the highest Tower of the City,
the King in the middle, and higher than the rest.

I shall now proceed to make some remarks upon what the Author acquaints us
with in favor of some of the German-Anabaptists.

The first is that of Cassander who in his Epistle to the Duke of Cleve, says
That the Anabaptists of the Belgic and lower Germany, are followers of Menno
Simonis, and concerning whom he gives a good report as of a Godly man.

This is Mr. Tombs again, Mr. Tombs.
Exam. p. 25. only with this difference, Tombs quotes Cassander's words in
Latin, which the Author translates, and Tombs is so ingenious as to acknowledge
both Munzer, and those at the City of Munster, to have rebelled against
Magistracy, for whom my Antagonist does Apologize. But, says Mr. Tombs, But
since those days it cannot be found that the Anabaptists by Writings or
Actions have done it.

Now to this Mr. Marshal makes Reply, that he does not hear much of their
denying the Magistrates Authority, nor will he take upon him to Divine what
they would do, if they should increase to much strength, but prays that it may
not be so.

And as for Cassander, I find indeed he speaks favorably of some of their
persons, but does not in the least excuse their Doctrine or Principles; and for
Menno Simonis, as Spanhemins tells us, he declared a dislike of their actings
at Munster, nevertheless acknowledged them for Brethren, though weak ones, and
professed that notwithstanding their calamity, they might find God merciful
unto them. This Menno indeed renounced Popery, and came over to the
Anabaptists: but withal is said to embrace and preach up diverse Heresies and
Blasphemies concerning the Human nature of Christ. and other Errors about the
office of the Magistrate: and though it is true, (as the Author says) from
Menno, many Anabaptists of the Low Countries are called Meunonites at this day,
yet let him know from Spanhemius (one of their own Country, and lately public
Professor of Divinity at Leyden) that the Anabaptists are not so bad all of
them as to follow his opinions. Tombe's Praeeursor. Sect. 82. p. 62.
To let pass what he cites out of Cloppenburg, taken out of Tombs Praecursor.
p. 62.

The next man applanded by the Author, (who was Contemporary with Munzer) is
one Balthazar Huebmer, a Dr. in Waldshnot, a great Preacher of this way in
Bohemia and Moravia, who was taken Prisoner with his Wife by the Emperor's
command, who was himself burned at Vienna, and his Wife drowned for Heretics
in the year 1528.

This is Mr. Tombs again, Mr. Tombs.
Examen page 23. But because we have such an ample Character of this man, I
have been the more curious in enquiring what account we or him in History: and
before I shall enter upon that, I shall tell thee Reader, that the Author minds
me with what I lately met with in a Book entitled plus ultra, being an
Examination of Dr. Heylins Discourse of the Reformation of the Church of
England, the Examiner observes that when the said Dr. speaks of Harding the
Jesuit (a base Apostate, and grand enemy of the Gospel) it is with terms of
honor and reverence as Dr. John Harding, one of the Divines of Lovain, and the
most learned of the College, page 128. but when he speaks of those Glorious
Lights of the Reformation, it is barely Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin: in like
manner we have here one Balthazar Huebmer a Dr. in Waldshnot a great Preacher
of this way in Bohemia etc. when in a leaf or two before we have no venerable
Title given to those famous Divines of the Reformation, but it is plain Luther,
Zwinglius, Calvin.

I have met with this Huebmer in several Authors, without the Title of Dr.
which made me think he was a Dr. of H. D. his Creation, until I found it in Mr.
Tombs to be otherwise, in his Examen, page 23. who says, that Zwinglius gives
him that style in his Epistle, before his answer to his Book about Baptism: be
it so, and if he were regularly admitted to that degree, I think he was the
first and last Dr. that ever was of the Anabaptist judgment. Concerning this
man Mr. Tombs relates out of one of Zwinglius his Epistles, that Huebmer came
to Zurich, and there made a Recantation, but it appears he was afterward taken
by the Emperor and burnt at Vienna, for what cause I know not says Mr.
Tombs. Then farther he relates more of what he finds in Zwinglius his Epistle
to Gynoraeus viz. We approve dexterity and moderation in a man; but in that man
(I wish I were deceived says Zwinglius) I never perceived any thing in him but
an immoderate thirst after profit and glory. Mr. Tombs concludes modestly, and
says only this, I leave him to his judge to whom he stands or falls.

This Huebmer is called by Melchior Adam, Princeps Catabaptistarum, the
chiefest of the Anabaptists, and the head of them that disputed with Zwinglius
at Zurich; Alpha eorum fuit Balthazar Hubmerus, Apostata iterum iterumque
factus, qui Zwinglii beneficio liberatus, tantis convictis vtrum been de se
meritum onerare nebulo non dubitavit, ut apologia satisfacere fratribus
habuerit necesse. Melch. Adam. page 30.
and he tells us he was an Apostate several times, who being freed out of
Prison by Zwinglius his endeavors, was so ungrateful, as to load him afterward
with such reproaches, that Zwinglius was fain to write an Apology for himself,
to satisty the Brethren. That Learned and Godly man Bullinger says of him, that
whilst he was pastor at Waldshnot the whole Cit became proselytes to his
opinion, and that they banished out the Citizens, that were men of good
conscience and sincere, and drove them from their possessions, by which means
the Gospel which did there excellently flourish, was utterly rooted out.
Spanhemius has this of him, That Bul-Diol. Huldricus, Zwinglius that valiant
Champion of the Truth confuted that Turbulent fellow, who by his words and
writings had troubled the consciences of many, and yet at Zurich recanted his
Error, and did forswear the Tennents of the Ambaptists. Spanhem c. ^^.


But he was burnt at Vienna for an Heretic (says the Author), whereas his
Tutor Mr. Tombs. says, be knows not what he was burnt for, and this might
have been his lot, if he had been for Infant Baptism: they do not use to
distinguish of men that go under the notion of Protestants, all are in their
account Heretics, and deserve burning that are not of the Church of Rome. Sad
instances you shall have by and by, and unless I mistake, we do not find in our
Martyrologies very many of the Author's judgment to have suffered death, purely
for their opinion of Antipaedobaptism; and in truth, I have not faith to
believe ever any one did: as for those which suffered in Henry the 8th his time
we shall find it was for some other causes, and usually (as the rest of
Protestants) for denying the Real presence in the Eucharist and the Popes
headship.

After this he tells us out of Comenius, the distresses that befell the
Anabaptists upon the defeat of Frederick, by the Emperor's forces at Prague,
how that the Enemy began the year after the victory with the Anabaptists in
Moravia, and banished a great company of them, etc.

To which I have this to say, that they dealt kindly with them, in comparison
of their dealings with the Godly Ministers that were for Infant Baptism: for as
soon as ever Fredrick Elector Palatine (the Defender of their Faith and
Persons) was defeated, the faithful Ministers of Christ (as in the Marian
days) were the proto-Martyrs. It was the precious blood of those men that was
first spilt, and the Antichristian cruelty showed it self most barbarously
against them. Diverse of them were shot to death, excruciated, and tortured with
new-invented Torments, covering some with hot burning coals, twisting about the
forehead of others knotty Cords, and with a stick straining their heads, till
their eyes were ready to start out; cruelly burning one with his Wife, broiling
another to death with a fire made under him; cutting another in small pieces;
hanging another by the privy members, being 70 years old, with his Books fired
under him; and at last shot through the body and slain: another being above 70
years old was brought into the market place, laid upon the fire and burnt to
death. Thus the poor Ministers in every place suffered: all banished out of
Prague, twenty one out of Cuttenburgh, many Citizen's accompanying them, one of
which preached on that Text, They shall cast you out of the Synagogue; all the
multitude present bewailing their loss with great lamentations. Thus did they
deal with them at Boslavia, Radecium, Zaticum, and in other places, and some
were stifled and poisoned with the stink of Prisons: Comenius, Clarks
Martyrology. page 183, 184.
see all this in Comenius his History of those persecutions; which is
Translated, and in Clark's Martyrology taken thence.

As for that which follows, That the Anabaptists which were banished out of
Moravia into the neigbouring Countries of Hungaria and Transylvania, were of
the Waldensian stock, he has nothing for it, but a Conjecture.

And whereas he adds, that these were of the Stock that had been instructed by
the Waldenses of old, because of their living together in Houses or Colleges,
which was the custom of the Waldenses: But forasmuch as we have heard before,
that it was their custom to baptize their Children, we have better reason to
conclude they were none of their Stock. And if that be true which the Scholar
says (who came from those parts about 5, or 6 years since) that they live
together after that manner in Hungaria, Transylvania, I wish them good
fellowship and safety.

We have two or three impertinent Stories more, viz.

1. Some of the Waldensian Sect were punished at Oxford in Henry the 2d's time,
and does he think this was for denying Infant Baptism? Nay rather it appears
they were no Anabaptists; for if they had, no doubt Holinshhead in his Cron. or
Bishop Usher in his History of the state of the Church would have told us so.
And it is strange the Author should thus impose his groundless Conjecture upon
the Reader. Take the Story as it is in Holinshhead and then judge. About the
same time came certain Dutchmen of the sort called Valdoies over into this
Realm, to the number of thirty or more, who held Opinions in Religion, contrary
to the Faith of the Roman-Church: Those which at that time came were
indifferently well learned, and their principal or Ringleader was named
Gerard. Now also was a Council assembled at Oxford, whereat the Dogmatists were
examined upon certain points of their Profession. The aforesaid Gerard
undertaking to answer for them all, protested that they were good Christians,
and had the Doctrine of the Apostles in all reverence. Moreover, being examined
what they thought of the Substance of the Godhead, and the merits of Christ,
they answered rightly, and to the point. But being farther examined upon other
Articles of Religion then received, they swerved from the Church, and namely in
the use of the Divine Sacraments, derogating such grace from the same, as the
Church by her Authority had then ascribed to them; and what was that think you?
but this that they did not confer grace ex opere operato, from the work done;
for this Romish Tenent, the Waldenses ever opposed, as before in their
Confessions, and can any Man rationally pick any thing out of this Story
against Infant Baptism.

Next we have a Relation of seven Dutch Anabaptists indeed, that came over with
Anne a Cleve in Henry the 8th's time 1528. near about two years after John of
Leyden sent out his 12 Apostles to propagate their Opinions over all the World,
and the King might well judge these to be some such that might occasion
disturbance in this Nation likewise; so that this instance will appear to
signify nothing, for Henry the 8th burnt more Paedobaptists than Anabaptists.
And that these were not put to death purely on the account of Anabaptistry is
beyond all doubt, but as Heretics for disowning the Popes Supremacy,
Transubstantiation etc. or why might it not be possibly on the same score, for
which those suffered in Queen Elizabeth's time? For in her time also, says he,
in the year 1575. a Congregation of Anabaptists were taken at the Meeting
within Ald-gate, 27 of whom were imprisoned, and of them four recanted, two
were burned and the rest banished; and he quotes Stow's Cron. for it, but very
darkly and partially: for he neither tells us out of him (as he ought to have
done) what Anabaptists they were, nor what they held, nor for what they were
burnt, as Stow, and also Holingshead does in their Cronicles, viz.

1. That they were Dutch Anabaptists (coming hither not long after the German
Commotions).

2. That they held Vile, Blasphemous, and dangerous Opinions against Christ,
and the peace and welfare of the State, for which they were thought worthy of
Death. I shall give it to you in the Words of Stow, and Holing shead, which is
thus in both verbatim.

In Queen Elizabeth's time Anno Domini 1574, on Easter day, which was the third
of April, about nine of the Clock in the fore-noon, was discovered a
Congregation of Anabaptists Dutchmen, in a house without the Bar of Aldgate
Prison; and four of them bearing faggots recanted as follows.

Whereas I. I. T. R. H. being seduced by the Devil, the spirit of Error, and
false Teachers, his Ministers, have fallen into certain most detestable, and
dangerous Errors; namely: 1. That Christ took not Flesh of the Substance of the
Blessed Virgin Mary. 2. That Infants of the Faithful ought not to be Baptized.
3. That a Christian may not be a Magistrate, or bear the Sword or Office of
Authority. 4. That it is not lawful for a Christian to take an Oath.


Now by the Grace of God, and through conference with good and learned
Ministers of Christ his Church, I understand and acknowledge the same to be most
damnable and detestable Heresies, and do ask God and his Church Mercy for my
said former Errors, and do forsake and renounce them. Now let any man judge
whether these be not fine fellows to be brought in for a Testimony against
Infant Baptism, and whether the Author has done well in endeavoring to
reflect dishonor upon the Reign of that Famous Queen, as if they had been
burnt merely for not owning Infant Baptism: To tell such blind Stories is not
for the honor of his cause; but it is his humor and he cannot leave it. And
now at length we are come to the dregs of his Treatise, and there indeed he
seems very culpable in his Essay to Palliate those foul and enormous Crimes,
which were perpetrated by the Anabaptists of Germany, which is such a piece of
weakness as will expose him to the just Censure, not only of all judicious
Persons besides, but even of his own party. Even Mr. Tombs himself acknowled
geth the actions of Muncer, and what was done at the City of Munster, and when
Mr. Marshal had spoken of the World of mischief that people did, and what
dangerous Heresies and Blasphemies they held, Mr. Tombs ingenuously
confesses; That much of this is true, I make no question, Examen p. 24. Then
again in his Praecursor p. 29. he complains (and that upon good ground) of the
abuse of charging those Tenants, and practices upon all of the same Profession,
which is true of some, as that all Anabaptists are wicked because those of
Munster were so. Mr. Tombs is so knowing a Man, and so wise, that he durst not
question the verity of those things, and that because, as Mr. Marshal says, the
things have been done so lately, and so many agreeing Stories are written of
them, and by Men of such undoubted faith and honesty, that it leaves no place
for doubting. And, as Mr. Baxter says on the same occasion, if the Testimony
of these holy and precious Men whose service the Lord so graciously made use of
in the Reformation of those Countries from Popish darkness, as Luther,
Melanchton, Zwinglius, Bullinger and others, that did, and suffered so much to
accomplish it, and lived in the Country and times where, and when these things
were acted, may not be credited, then we may call in question the truth of all
History whatsoever. Add hereunto the Testimony of those famous Men, Peter
Martyr, Calvin, Beza, Bucer; who can scarce speak of the German-Anabaptists
with patience, or give them any other title (whatever the charitable Author
says) than Furies, Blasphemous, Unclean, Seditious, Frant^ck wretches, etc.

Two material Objections he has a mind to clear.

1. The first is concerning the Miscarriages of these Men.

2. The Second is some of the Waldensian Confessions which seem to own the
Baptizing of Infants.

But it had been more to his honor to have let those Objections lain dormant,
unless he had said more to the purpose.

To the first, he says, That take it for granted, that things were so as to
matter of fact, that is, that many Anabaptists did prove so horribly wicked as
is reported, yet it is both unreasonable and uncharitable, to render all the
people either in those times, or since to be such persons also, and to judge an
Error in the Principle, from the Error in the Conversation of some that Profess
it.

Reply.

Thus far the Author speaks well, for it is not fair dealing to judge at such a
rate, and Mr. Tombs before him argues rightly in the case, in his Praecursor
p. 56. I am sure, says he, it is no Rule to judge a Doctrine false by this that
the Professors miscarry, but only to make Men wary and fearful; if it be, we
must judge the same Doctrine false by reason of some men's miscarriages; and true
because of others godly living. Nevertheless we may safely affirm that Doctrine
is to be suspected false, which is usually attended with gross miscarriages in
the Professors of it, for that speaks the Doctrine Ominous, and looks like a
Spiritual Judgment of God upon it. And I heartily wish there were no ground to
say, that of such a nature is the Doctrine of Baptizing grown Persons in
opposition to that of the Infant Seed of Believers. For not to insist upon the
horrid Errors and wicked Lives of those in Germany, nor of the Blasphemies and
Immoralities of diverse Persons here in our own Nation; the very principle it
self of Anabaptistry is of a dangerous nature, which, in that rigidity as some
men hold it, is of such a disquieting tendency, that as Mr. Bunyan speaks
before, it is not fit for any Age or State of the Church. I cannot but sigh to
consider the ways of some men, whose Spirits are impregnated therewith, so
that their very constitution inclines them to nothing more than to rent, and
tear, and divide the Church: The Zeal for their Opinion has and does still
prove the greatest hinderance to the conjunction of Christians here in this
Nation. For as soon as they become Baptists as some call them (and our
opposites love to appropriate the name to themselves they fall off from Godly
Ministers, and People differing from them, though never so Holy. But let Men
calmly consider whether this be not an effect of ignorance and pride, and more
from an erring, than well instructed Conscience, and what a scandal and shame
it is to the Christian Religion to make it thus a fomenter of faction and
disturbance in the World; and what an injury is hereby done to Christ by
contracting, and narrowing his Interest in such a manner. But I see not how it
can be otherwise, if men adhere and strictly keep themselves to the
Antipaedobaptistical Principle; for if our Ministers be no true Ministers, and
our Baptism a Nullity, and consequently our Churches no true Churches, how can
they hold Communion with us? and though some that are for the Baptism of
Believers only, do, yet it must be imputed to their good nature, and not their
Principle, which they cross in so doing.

Farther, says he, if it be granted many Anabaptists did prove so horribly
wicked in Germany, yet others that owned that Principle, were Men of another
Spirit, both in that as well as in former times, for which we have most ample
and authentic Testimony from their greatest enemies. Witness that honorable
Character that Raynerius, the bloody Inquisitor gives of them in those days in
France, Cassander, Bellarmine, and Baronius of those in Germany, and Mr. Baxter
of them in this Nation.

But hold, Sir, I doubt your ample and authentic Testimony will fail you: and
first I must tell you, Rainerius is not for your turn, for he never gave any
honorable Character of Anabaptists. That favorable Character which he gives
relates to another sort of People called the Waldenses, which you and I had
some discourse of not long since, and found to be none of your kindred; for
they were for Infant Baptism. Verily, Dr. Featly's Roma Ruens.

Rainer. contra Wall. C. 4.

Inter omnes sectas quae adhuc sunt, and fuerunt non est periculosior Eccles.
Leonistarum, idque tribus de causis.

Prima; quia est diuturnior, aliqui entm dicunt quod duravit a tempore,
Sylvestri alii a tempore Apostolorum. Secunda, quia est generalior, fere enim
nulla terra est in qua haec Secta non sit. Tertia, quiae cum omnes aliae Sectae
immanitate blasphemiarum in Deum audientibus horrore m inducant, Haec sc.
Leonistarum magnam habet speciem pietatis, eo quod coram omnibus just vivant,
and been omnia de Deo credant, and omnes Articulos, qui in Symbolo continentur.
Solummodo Roman. Eccles. Blasphemant and clerum.


says Dr. Featly, (who wrote a Book against Anabaptists) Rainerius the
Inquisitor, though entertained against us, [not against the Author's party] yet
speaks he so much for us, that he deserves a Fee of us. The Sect, says he, of
the Waldenses or Lyonists, is more pernicious to the Church of Rome, than all
other Sects.

1. Becanse it has been of longest continuance, for some say, it has
continued ever since the Apostles time. 2. Because it is more general than any
other, for there is almost no Country into which it does not creep. 3. For that
all other Sects do bring an horror with the hainousness of their Blasphemies
against God, but this has a great appearance of Godliness, because they live
justly before Men, and believe all things well concerning God [neither of which
could be said of the German-Anabaptists] and all the Articles, which are
contained in the Creed; only they speak evil of the Roman Church, and the
Clergy. And that Rainerius did not look upon the Waldenses as Anabaptists, is
demonstrated by this, because he gives not the least hint of it in the
Catalogue of their Errors, which follows upon the former words. The Waldenses,
says he, do not receive the Canon of the Mass, they say the Church does err in
forbidding Priest's Marriages, they allow not the Sacraments of Confirmation,
and extreme Unction, they condemn Latin Prayers, and affirm prayers for the
Dead do not profit the Souls of the departed: but never a word of denying
Infant Baptism, which is very strange if he had udderstood any thing thereof.
Rainer. contra Wald. C. 5. Canonem Missae non recipient, etc.

Next for Bellarmine and Baronius, I cannot learn yet where they give any
honorable Characters of the Anabaptists, only they do not so much condemn some
of them as others, and do hope their intentions might be good, and that they
erred more out of igmorance than malice; if this be honor according to the
Author's computation, why then I see a little honor will serve their turn, who
are of his judgment: and I find a singular faculty in him to make much of a
little at every hand. And what though Cassander says, in two of them, namely
Menno Simonis and Theodoricus there were tokens of a Godly mind; yet Spanhemius
[whom I shall rather credit than that Papist] tells us (and that out of his own
Confession of Faith) that he held Blasphemous Tenants against Christ, and
opinions destructive to Magistracy; and therefore says Mr. Marshal to Mr.
Tombs (when he brought this Testimony of Menno out of Cassander) this Menno,
says he, (whom you plead for by Cassander's Pen) his whole Doctrine is as full
of blasphemy about our Savior's taking Flesh of the Virgin Mary, and other
Heretical, and abominable stuff as the rest of his fellows, though I think his
spirit was not so seditious as many of theirs; and what Mr. Tombs says of
Menno is not much to his commendation, it is in his Examen p. 25. And from
thence the Author fetches the honorable Character (such as it is); yet herein
Mr. Tombs shows most ingenuity, in that he speaks out all that Cassander says
in this Epistle to the Duke of Gulick and Cleve; Hujus quem dixi Mennonis cui
nunc hic Theodoricus successit, etc. They were, says he, imperito quodam Zelo
incitati, moved by an ignorant Zeal to do what they did, having a fancy that
they must destroy the wicked, per vim externam, by force of Arms, and this in
order to the setting up the Kingdom of Christ [just of the same strain with
those they called 5th Monarchy-Men that put all London into such a fright some
years since]: and this Satanical delusion put them on upon such Exorbitancies.
But who-ever has a mind to understand fully, what kind of men the German
Anabaptists were, Vide Baxter's Plain-proof. p. 143.
let them read Mr. Bullinger's Dialogue against the Anabaptists; he lived in
those times when, and near the place where they played their pranks, and gives
a large account of their abominable uncleanness, treachery, sedition, etc. But
some, says he, may object, many things are charged upon them falsely, and fame
adds somewhat. To which he replies, that whatsoever he mentions may be all
proved by signed Letters, and by certain Testimonies; and tells us that in
judgment he has silenced many of their crimes, and spoke less than they have
committed, for says he, they far exceed the Nicolaitans and the Valentinians,
in wickedness. And then comes home to our Author's plea, viz. They were not all
thus defiled, and if a few among them are such, what is that to the Godly? To
which Learned and Holy Bullinger gives this answer, I have long ago known this
kind of Men, and am not ignorant how much by guile, and deceit, Hypocrisy can
do; and it is true, that the wickedness of a few should be no disparagement of
the innocent, but you cannot show me one man of them, who is not blemished with
some of the foresaid wickednesses; I mean Lying, Treachery, Perjury,
Disobedience, Sedition, Filthiness.

There is one more whom the Author has found out that gives an honorable
Character of the Anabaptists: And they requite him well for it, do they not?
Mr. Baxter (says he) one of their severest enemies in these Nations, yet has
done himself and his Opposites that Right, as to witness to the innocence of
their Conversation, in his Defense of the Principle of Love. p. 7. viz That
Anabaptists are Godly Men, etc.

But what Anabaptists does he speak of? Not those of Germany but England, and
not all here neither. I know, says he, as good and sober Men of that mind, as
of theirs that are most against them. And God forbid that he, or I or any one,
should be so uncharitable as to think there are no Godly Anabaptists; but that
the number of Godly sober Men of their mind is small, is the judgment of some
Godly, Sober, and observing Christians. Some good and sober Men Mr. Baxter knew
amongst them, but the generality of them were bad enough, for so we are to
understand him in his Plain-Proof, p. 143. I have had, says he, too much
opportunity to know very many of these called Anabaptists, and to be familiar
with them, and having first Examined my Heart, lest I should wrong them, out of
any disaffection, through difference of judgment, as I clearly discover, that I
bear no ill will to any one man of them nor ever did, nor find any passion, but
compassion moving me to say what I do; so do I impartially and truly affirm
concerning the most of them that I have conversed with, that I have known few
of them, [speaking first of their Ministers] so much as labor after the
winning of Souls from Sin to God, and bringing them into love with Christ, and
Holiness, and Heaven. But the main scope of their endeavors in public and
private is to propagate their Opinions, and if they do preach any plain wholesome
Doctrine, it is usually but subservient to their great design.

He charge them farther to be the greatest hinderers of the Work of God in
converting Souls, by endeavoring to alienate the hearts of the People from
Godly and painful Ministers, making it their business to disgrace them, etc.
Moreover, that in his own experience he never knew the labors of any zealous
Anabaptist that ever God blessed to the true Conversion of many Souls: But many
they made mere talkers, Censorious Opinionatists, and usually three leave
them-yea I desire, says he, any sober Christian but to look impartially
through all the Land, and tell me where ever any such Teachers lived, but the
place in general was much the worse for them; where the Gospel before
prospered, and Christians spent their time and conference in the edifying of
each others Souls, and in Heavenly duties, and mutual assistance, and living
together in unity and love, according to the great Command of Christ, they
ordinarily turn all this to vain janglings, and empty, windy, unprofitable
disputes: So much for the Teachers. Then after this he shows, Anabaptistry has
been the ordinary inlet to the most horrid Opinions and that few came to the
most monstrous Doctrines but it was by this door, and how negligent many of
them are of Family Duties, the Lord's Day, etc.

We now come to examine the Apology which is made for the German Anabaptist.
1. First, he says, They were not the Anabaptists that first began the
Sedition, but it was from a conspiracy of Husbandmen against the Bishops, and
Canons, which was called the Rustic League, for which he quotes Baronius, how
that it began in the year 1502. which was the Praeludium of that great
Sedition, which was in its Vigor 1525. according to Osiander's account. But
how does this mend the matter, they were not first in the wickedness, in the
sedition, but seconded it? A sorry evasion: and besides the Author is gone off
from that which he should speak to, and that is of the Vproar and Confusion
that was made in Swevia in the year 1525. and did not the Anabaptists begin and
propagate that? Spanhemius tells us in his first Chapter, that Nicolas Storch,
Mark Stubner, and Thomas Muncer three Anabaptists, were the Persons that began
that lamentable Sedition.

2. The Author tells us Persons of all sorts concerned themselves in it. Like
enough, for so it is usual in all popular commotinos, persons of all sorts, and
interests, join in. No Man is so weak as to think those 40000 pesants in
Swevia, and Franconia were all Anabaptists; but Sleiden in his Com. L. 5. and
also Spanhemius informs us, that the Trumpeter and Ringleader was Thomas
Muncer, who (with other Anabaptist-Teachers) stirred up the discontented people
to rebel against the Magistrates, and imbodied them into an Army. It was that
impostor, who was their General, that set out his Declaration that his design
was to restore Liberty, and to deliver Subjects from the Youke and Tyranny of
Princes, which was as much to be cast off, as the Popes of Rome.

3. He makes an odious comparison between the Protestants of Geneva in the
recovery of their Civil and Spiritual Liberty, and these Germans, who, if they
had miscarried in their attempt, might (he conceives) have fallen under as much
Obloquy, as the chiefest of those People did in their defeat.

But the actings of Geneva, the Switzers and the Cantons were more justifiable
than theirs, and not so barabarous, nor their Tenants so blasphemous as theirs:
Notwithstanding the reflections of the Papists, and some others of late, who
have in print branded our first Reformations for Rebellions, and they are Men
too that would be thought obedient Sons of the Church of England, and of great
names: but yet one that has but half an Eye, may easily see that these
Theologasters, either wanted discretion, or affection to the Protestant
Interest; and it is pity the Virga Censoria is not taken from them, and they
turned out of their office, as the Romans used to serve the Censors, when they
abused it. But I hope no (...) can charge those of Geneva to have robbed the
Nobility, plundered Towns and Castles, and rifled all that is Sacred as those
Germans did, but that they fell off from popery, and sought Reformation in a
more regular way.

4. The Author speaks not right concerning the Commotion at Munster, in saying,
Spanhemius acquaints us, that the first stir in the City was about the
Protestant Reformation, the Synod (he means Senate) siding with Mr. Rotman and
other Reformed Ministers against the Papists and the Bishop that opposed them
to Arms. For though the Senate would not obey the command of the Bishop, (who
was then at a distance from the City) in taking away some of the Churches,
which a little before they had granted for the use of the Reformed Divines, yet
this difference was soon composed and it never came to Arms or Blows,
Spanhemius tells us.

5. That which follows is exreamly scandalous, namely, That there is good
ground to doubt of the truth of what is reported concerning the Monstrous
wickedness, and villainies of John Matthias, and John Becold of Leyden; and what
are those grounds of doubt? why,

1. Because, says he, the things are written either by malicious Papists their
mortal enemies, or else by some of their most inveterate enemies the
Protestants, who were willing to take up and improve such reports, to blast not
only the whole party of the Anabaptists, but their Principle also.

Reply.

I dare say that here are in the latter part of this Sentence, so far forth as
it relates to Protestants many untruths, and may sigh over it, that old saying,
Quot dicta, tot maledicta. Alas to see whither affection to a cause will carry
Men!

1. Then, the Protestants were not inveterate Enemies to the Anabaptists, but
very loving Friends to some of the chiefest of them, both before and after they
took up the Opinion, until the Rebellion of Muncer, and that at Munster.
Witness the Friendly and Brotherly conference that was between Luther and
Muncer at Wittenberg where they had often Conference, and Luther entreated him
to be quiet, and not broach such Doctrines as were against Magistracy and Civil
Government. Zwinglius dealt tenderly and gently with those that fell off from
his Church, for they were his intimate Friends, Musculus visited them in
Prison, relieves them, and was their Advocate, and persuaded the Magistrate to
be kind, and to use no severity; for that was not the way to reduce Men from
their errors.

2. Bullinger (of whom we have before spoken) begins his Book with a
Lamentation at God's Judgments on Christians, for their not profiting by the
Word; for which God gives them up to delusions and to a reprobate Sense: he
professes that before he did in silence conceal their Crimes, and spoke less
than they committed. Luther, hearing of their vile pranks at Munster, was
necessitated (and so were diverse other Ministers for the honor of the Reformed
Religion which did so much suffer by those Exorbitancies) to put forth a
Testimony in print against them; in which he says, It was plain that Munster
was become the habitation of Devils; for so the Justice of God had punished the
Sins of Germany, and especially the loose and profane life of those that
professed the Gospel; but in this Tragedy of Munster the marvelous Mercy of God
evidently appeared, that e had not permitted that old subtle Serpent and
cunning Satan, to contrive and govern that business, but only had given way to
some Silly Blockish Devil, who seemed not well skilled in Villainy, to be their
Guide and Conducter; and that though the State was disturbed by it, yet he
conceived the Church on that account would receive the less prejudice by it.

3. Spanhemius, in his History of their Actings, says, That the Protestant
Ministers were extremely troubled at what happened, and the Papists vilified
the Gospel by reason of it; for the Popish party said this was the fruits of
revolting from them; and they were afraid the Magistrate would have an evil eye
upon them, and suspect that the liberty which they granted, might tend to the
sowing of Sedition, if they did not declare against them, and preach down the
Doctrine, and Practices of those Anabaptists.

4. Lastly, What other thoughts can we have then of that uncharitable passage,
That the Protestants were willing to take up and improve such reports, to balst
not only the party of Anabaptists, but their Principle, but that it is the
Ebullition of a Malicious, or at best Prejudicial Spirit? and yet for all that
if such tumultuous and rebellious carriages proceed from the distempered brains
of some Men, I see not why they should be imputed to those amongst us who are
of a better temper. But if from their Opinions and the very Constitution of
their Sect, as we have cause to judge much of it does, it will be something
difficult to make it out how it may not be chargeable upon all. But I think our
Antagonist is the only Man that ever Apologized for those Germans: But
welfare a sure friend in a corner! it seems he loves them so well that he
would fain save their credit, though by laying an imputation of forgery on the
most faithful Historians and grave Divines since the Reformation. Yet these
Historians cannot be so put off; for they are punctual, name Persons, Time
Place, Opinions, Condemnation, and Punishment, all matters of Fact open to the
World: But if all who bear witness against an evil-doer must be held as
Enemies, and their Testimony be rejected under that Plea; and nothing believed
but what themselves are pleased to acknowledge upon record, who will be guilty?

2. His other Plea is as follows: Another thing there was, says he, by which
people in all Ages took occasion to misrepresent this People at Munster, That
they were for Community of Goods, casting their Estates into one common Stock,
and was the same thing that Osiander tells us Muncer did in Mulhusian in
Thuringia 1524. And which the Waldenses did respecting the Example, Act. 4.34.

O fearful! And did not John Matthias their chief Prophet (as they called him)
take an excellent course to effect it, by setting forth a Proclamation to be
read through the City, requIring all Persons upon pain of Death to bring forth
their Glod and Silver, Silver, and all their Goods, unto a public place
appointed for that purpose; the severity of which Edict so astonished the
People that they were fain to obey it.

The other Objection which the Author attempts to Answer, is that of the
Waldensian Confession in favor of Infant Baptism. The first is that of
Laodislaus King of Bohemia 1508. presented to Ferdinand 1535. Which Confession
he looks on as signifying nothing to the point, because they were a mixed
People, some for, and some against Infant Baptism, and disowned the name of the
Waldenses. This indeed is something to invalidate the Authority of that
Confession, to which I can say nothing, having not had the opportunity to see
it. However if it be so, as he says, then we understand that those of them
that were aginst Infant Baptism were not Waldenses, no more than they who were
for it.

The other, says he, is a passage in the Spiritual Almanac, owning the
Baptism of Children, which he conceives was written by George Morel, 1530. one
of the Ministers sent by the Waldenses of Provence to Oecolampadius, Bucer, and
Capito, at a time when they were in a declining condition, and for
self-preservation were ready to comply with the Mass.

I must take the freedom to tell the Author that he does prevaricate again, and
is more than ordinarily at a loss how to come off handsomely in this thing: For;

1. He cannot deny the Confession; that is smething for us: you have the
Confession taken from Perin the French-Historian, in page 62. of the 2d Part of
our Answer, to which I refer you.

2. He supposes it was put forth by G. Morel about the year 1530. and why so
late? others suppose it of an ancienter date, but however the Church
unanimously did assent to Infant Baptism.

3. Farther; he supposes the Confession to be made at that juncture when they
sent Morel to Oeclampadius for Resolution, whether they might not be present
with their bodies at Mass, so they kept their hearts right with God? This is
not to the purose, for we gathere hence no more than this, that God's own
People are Subject to sinful fears, and are sometimes tempted to sin rather
than to suffer, and that the fear of Man works a snare: all which you may
observe from the excellent Letter sent them by Oecolampadius, p. 67, 68. of the
2d Part of our Answer. But all this while, what is this to take us off from
believing that they were against Infant Baptism, which they say had been owned
and practiced amongst them for some hundred years. This they scrupled not, nor
sent for any Resolutin in the case; nor did they Baptize their Children out of
fear of the Papists, who accused them that they were against it, because they
had in detestation their humane Inventions added to the Sacrament, and for that
reason delayed the Baptizing their Children until their own Pastors came home,
which were often and long abroad in Propagating the Gospel.

4. He says, Oecolampadius sharply rebuking them [in his Letter] they
thereupon promised to suit themselves to the Documents they received from him.
What they are, see in the aforesaid Letter, I am sure there is nothing of
Baptism in it, but only good counsel to stand fast in the Truth, and keep
themselves from Idolatry: and there was a good effect of it, as appeared by
their constant suffering, for persecution came suddenly upon it.

He says, In conformity to those Documents they received from him, it appears
there is little or no difference between the French, and German- Protestants,
especially those that own Calvin's way, being most shrunk up into little more
than a bare form.

But why does he talk in this manner, when all the Documents they then received
was to endear Christ, and his Truth to them, and to fortify them against
suffering? And what an extravagancy is it in the Author to take occasion from
this Circumstance to slur the French, and German Protestants, many of whom
doubtless have as much of the power of Godliness as himself, or as any of the
Mennonists, or Anabaptists at this day in Holland, whose Religion we understand
by some friends of theirs, is pitifully shrunk up to little more than the Form
of Dipping, and which is worse, they say they be very Erroneous in more
considerable points.

6. Yet more against them: he accuses them to have little of the old purity
left amongst them. And what need has the Author to vilify them at this rate,
and how impertinent is it to the Province he has undertaken. The Lord enable
us to search our own hearts, and we shall see cause enough to judge our selves,
and not be forward in Censuring others: and it is to be feared the Author
condemns them the more, as having little of purity because they are for
Infant Baptism, his Zeal is so much carried out about the little things of
Religion.

7. But this, says he, cannot at all weaken or enervate their old Confession,
Practice, and Witness, confirmed with so great authority, and for so many Ages
together. The words are good, but being applied to a cipher, a nonentity, they
become a piece of Ridicule; for there is no such Confession to be found, unless
it be in Vtopia: Nay there is nothing looks like a Confession that excludes
Infants from Baptism, as appears after all their endeavors to prodace it. See
this, p. 46, 47, 48. of the 2d Part of our Answer.

8. He Professes ingenuously amongst all his search, that except those two
passages, (1) the Confession presented to Laodislaus, the 12th Article of which
is for Infant Baptism, and that in the Spiritual Almanac [which declares the
Baptizing of their Children] he can find none. Very good: however he has not
gained much advantage to his cause; having found two Confessions for
Infant Baptism, but never one against it; for he must reckon the lying
accusations of the Papists, that they were against Baptizing Children, when
they only abhorred their filthy Ceremonies, and purged themselves from the
calumany, by putting forth their Confessions in which they Profess their
judgment for it.

9. Lastly, In may little search I have found another Cnfession, and such a one
as may shame the Author for his prevarication, and that is it which we have
before mentioned in the 2d part of our Answer p. 65. The Confession made at
Angrongne; where the Heads of every Family, with the Pastors signed several
Articles, and the 17th is for Infant Baptism as before.

Of the Witness pretended to be born by the Novatians and Donatists.
THe Novatians and Donatists, says the Author, gave Witness against
Infant Baptism, as Austin's 3d and 4th Book against the Donatists does
demonstrate, wherein he manageth the Argument fof Infant Baptism against them
with great Zeal, etc.

Reply.

1. In this the Author is guilty of a great mistake, and we have no Authority
for this thing but his ipse dixit, his own saying so; neither the
Magdeburgenses that write largely of their Opinions, nor any of the
Church-Histories; nor Danaeus in his Opusculum, nor Zanchy who treats of them
in his Volumes, nor Beza, nor Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, nor Clark that
has a large Story of them, nor any other that ever I could meet with, assert
this, that the Donatists were against Infant Baptism.

2. Though the Novatians, Donatists, and Pelagius denied Original Sin, yet all
three allowed and practiced Infant Baptism. Dr. Featly in his (...), page 31.

3. Danaeus in his Opusculum, speaks of the Origianl, De Donatistis, and little
Origin, Progressu, and Doctrina. page 673. to 676.
Progress, and Doctrine of the Donatists, from page 653. to 676. where though
he sets down the Errors of the Donatists, and gives us the sum of all Austin's
Disputes with them, speaks not a word of this, but in diverse places shows they
were for Rebaptization of such as were Baptized by Heretics, or not in their
own Churches, which Austin vehemently opposes; and this I conceive is the
ground of the Authors mistake, and which I am the more inclinable to believe,
because he has a particular tract of all the Heresies collected by Austin,
Augustinus de Haeresibus Cap. 69. p. 995. Danaeus.
and the 69th Chapter is, de Donatistarum Erroribus: The Errors of the
Donatists. And in it is no mention made of their being against Baptizing
Children, and in the 38. Chap. of the same Tract we have an account of Novatus,
from whom they are called Novatians, and of the Errors they held, but not one
hint of any such thing as Antipaedobaptism: they were also called (...),
quatenus a reliquo Christianorum hominum caetu se tanquam Sanctiores separant;
pretending that they were more pure than any of the Churches of Christ besides:
Posterior aetas ad praegravandam bonam S. Sancti Evangelii causam, homines vere
Evangelicos infami Catharorum nomine calumniata est -- ut Waldenses pauperes de
Lugduno, Arnaldistae ab Arnoldo quodam, etc.
which title of Catharists [or Puritans] came in process of time, says
Danaeus, to be used to the reproach of Holy-Men; so, says he, the Waldenses
and poor Men of Lions were branded with the infamous name of Catharists.

4. But let it be taken for granted that the Novatians and Donatists were of
kindred to the Author and his party [as indeed the Lineaments of their Faces
and Complexion are in many things alike with some that are against
Infant-Baptism], ye^^ do not know what honor will redound to then cause from
it, for both the Novatians and Donatists were vile persons and always condemned
for Heretics. We shall therefore give the Reader an account of their Rise,
Errors, and Agreement; I dare not say with those called Anabaptists amongst us
in every thing, that shall be set down, but most exactly with those in Germany
before mentioned.

Novatus.

Under the Persecution of Deeius the Roman Emperor Anno Christi 250, being the
7th Persecution, rose up the first Quarrel and Heresy of Novatus, who in those
days made a great disturbance in the Church, holding this Opinion, That they
who once renounced the Faith, and for fear of torments had offered incense to
the Idols, although they repented thereof, yet could not afterward be
reconciled nor admitted to the Church. This Novatus being first Priest under
Cyprian at Carthage, afterward by stirring up discord and faction, began to
disturb the Bishopric of Cyprian, to appoint there a Deacon, against the
Bishop's mind or knowledge. and also to allure, and separate certain of the
Brethren from the Bishop. After this he went to Rome, kept there the like stir
with Cornelius, setting himself up as Bishop of Rome against Cornelius [altare
contra altar, as the Magdeburgenses have it] which was the Lawful Bishop of
Rome before. The which to bring to pass he used this practice: First, he had
allured to him to be his Adherents 3, or 4 good Men, and Holy Confessors, which
had suffered before great torments for their Confession. Afterward he enticed
three simple Bishops about the coast of Italy to repair to Rome, under pretense
to make an end of certain Controversies then in hand. This done, he caused them
(whether by making them drunk, or by other crafty counsel) to lay their hands
upon him and to make him Bishop, and so they did. Fox Acts Monum. 1. Part, p.
84. We have it also for the most part in the Magdeb. Cent. 3. Cap. 7. p. 186.
Sub Decio Schisma Novati. He for his wicked Opinions was condemned in a Synod
at Rome, Magd. Cent. 3. Cap. 9. p. 293.

Donatus.

In the year of our Lord 331, or a little more early, there sprang up in Africa
the Donatists, taking their name from Donatus. This Man, Initium ejus haereseos
Hieronimi Chronicom in Annum Christi, 331. and Paulo antiquiorem Donatum facit.
Magd. Cent. 4. C. 5. p. 375.

Donatus cumsua part Schisma illud in Haeresim convertit. Magdeb. ibid. They
speak of their cruelty, Cent 4. Cap. 5. p. 379. Clark of the Persecution of the
Donatists p. 89, 90. in his Martyrology.


as the Magdeburgenses inform us, Cent. 4. c. 5. p. 375. fell out with
Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, because he was against his will Ordained Bishop,
but when Donatus and his party could not prove what was Objected against
Cecilianus, and they were found liars; they were not contented to make a Schism
only in the Church, but afterward broached Heresies, as the Magdeburgs tell us
in the same place, and this Schism ended not there, but came at length to
Persecution. For, as Glark in his Martyrology informs us, Austin complains in
sundry places, and in his 50th Epistle he thus writes; In hoc labor multi
Catholici, and maxim Episcopi, and Clerici, horrenda and dura perpessi sunt
quae commemorare longum est. In this disturbance the Orthodox, especially the
Bishops and Ministers, suffered cruel and horrible things, the particulars
whereof are too long to recite. For some had their Eyes put out, some their
Tongues cut off, some slain outright; to speak nothing of their plunderings
and outrageous burnings, not only of private Habitations, but Churches also.
Julian the Apostate favored these Heretics, because he knew they were such a
pest to the Church of Christ.

How the Anabaptists of former times did Symbolize with the Novatians and
Donatists.
1. The Novatians and Donatists denied Original Sin.

2. Ex Novatianorum sontibus Ortum esse hunc Errorem non dubito. Danaeus in
Opusculo suo; de Pelag. Errore, p. 678.
The Novatians and Donatists confined the Church of Christ to their Sect only.
Magdeb. Cent. 4. C. 5. p. 376. Ecclesiam dixerunt nullibi, esse quam in Africa
and quidem tantum esse in part Donati. No true Church but of their own party,
and all others esteemed Heathens.

3. If any were Converted, or rather Perverted to the Donatists, they
Rebaptized them. Magd. Cent. 4. C. 5. p. 376.

4. The Novatians held every man had Freewill; so did the Donatists, and from
the Novatians Pelagius sucked in that Error. And say the The Donatists hold --
cum arbitrio libero homo creatus est; and si vult credit in Christum, si non
vult, non credit, si vult perseverat, si non vult, non perseverat. Magdeb.
Cent. 4. ut supra.
Magdeburgenses, the Donatists hold, if a man will believe, he may; if not, he
may not believe; if he will persevere he may, if he will not he may choose.

5. The Novatians and Donatists both held that upon the commission of a great
Sin, a Man was not to be Communicated with, though he repented. Magdeb. Cent.
4. ut supra.

6. d The Magdeburgenses speak the same of the Donatists. Cent. 4. Vt supra.
Non sine peccato volunt videri, sed etiam justificatores esse hominum, etc.
Zanchy tells us, that the Donatists putant se esse puros, and ab omni
peccatorum labe immunes esse, adeo ut nihil necesse habeant veniam peccatorum
suorum a Deo postulare. They are so pure and free from Sin, that they have no
need to ask pardon of God. And Beza upon John 1.3, 8. says, the Donatists and
Anabaptists hold the same -- Itaque; non homines sed monstra hominum sunt.
Pelagiani, Cathari, Donatistae, Anabaptistae, qui ex hoc loco perfectionem
illam somniant aqua absunt ipsi omnium hominum longissime. The Pelagians,
Novatians, Donatists, and Anabaptists, do from this place dream of perfection
etc.

1. Dr. Pride. calls the German Anabaptists: Evangelii opprobrium, and says,
isti ut Paedobaptismum prorsus tollerent, peccatum negarunt Originale, ut non
subesset causa, cur Insantes Baptizarentur.
So did the Anabaptists heretofore in Germany, and some still in England.
Pontan. Catalog. Haeret. Dr. Pride. de Pec. Origin. Lect. 22. p. 331.

2. Dr. Pride. calls the German Anabaptists: Evangelii opprobrium, and says,
isti ut Paedobaptismum prorsus tollerent, peccatum negarunt Originale, ut non
subesset causa, cur Insantes Baptizarentur.
Anabaptists judge none of the true Church, but those of their way and Practice.

3. So if any be admitted into the Churches of the Anabaptists, they must be
Rebaptized; so formerly in Germany. Pontan. Catal. Haeret.

4. The Anabaptists in Germany and some in England have held the same, viz.
Free Will -- thence they are known by the name of Free-Willers. Pontan. Catal.
Haeres.

5. As the Novatians heretofore at Rome, so the Anabaptists now, says Zanchy,
hold there is no hope of pardon for him that falls into a great sin after
Baptism, upon a misunderstanding of that place, Heb. 6. It is impossible to
renew them again by repentance. Zanchy Tom. 7. Loc. 8. de Symbolo Apostolorum
p. 756. So Sleidan tells us the same p. 529. denying absolution to Men sinning
after Baptism, though they repented.

6. Alsted in his Compendium says, The Anabaptists held they were pure, and
without Sin. Beza says the same upon John 1.3, 8.

Let not the Reader mistake, as if I designed to represent those who are called
Anabaptists amongst us, were all of them tainted with the forementioned Errors
of the Novatians and Donatists, for I suppose the generality of them here in
England do abhor the owning of such Tenets; not but that some are tainted with
some of them, but others I know to be as Orthodox in judgment (the denying
Infant Baptism excepted) and holy in conversation, as any other Christians that
I know.

I shall conclude this with this observation of the vain attempt of my
Antagonist, in bringing in those Ancient Heretics for a Testimony against
Infant Baptism, which I persuade my self was never before done by any man; and
then I cannot but smile to see how neatly he has dressed them up, and in such a
comely habit, that they look just like those called Independents; yet it is
certain they have no affinity with them. For:

1. He tells us, They were for purity of Churchmembers, and that none ought to
be admitted into Churches but visible Saints.

This is very good, but Beza (whom I shall believe before the Author) says
otherwise in his Annotat. upon Ephesians. 5.27. That he might make unto himself a
glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle, etc. From this place, says he, the
Donatists gather, that the Orthodox Churches were not worthy of the name of
Churches, Donatistae ex hoc loco colligebant Orthodoxorum Ecclesias nomine
Ecclesiarum indignas esse, and perfectionem justitiae volebant in hac vita
constituere. Beza in Ephesians. 5.27.
and that from hence they conclude a perfection of Holiness in this life. In
this then the Author has misrepresented the Donatists, and abused his Reader.

2. He says, they were for purity of Church Discipline, and keeping-out such
as apostatized or sinned scandalousty, when we find they were for keeping-out
all that so sinned, although they repented. So Novatus and Donatus, and their
followers held, that after Baptism there was no Reconciliation, or readmittance
to the Church, though never so penitent.

That they both agreed in Asserting the power, rights and privileges of
particular Churches against Antichristian Encroachments, of Presbyters,
Bishops, Synods: When Novatus from an ordinary Priest was so ambitious to be
made a Bishop; opposed Cornelius the lawful Bishop of Rome, and by ungodly
means set up himself Bishop, after he had also disturbed the Bishopric of
Cyprian; and for his wickedness was at last condemned by a Synod. And for the
other Donatus, he set himself against the lawful Bishop of Carthage, and he,
and his adherents were found liars, and afterward turned cruel Persecutors,
destroying all Churches that were not of their mind.

4. That they Baptized again those whose first Baptism they had ground to
doubt, but not because they were against Infant Baptism, but for other reasons.

Of the Witness pretended to be born by the Ancient Britains
COnfidence is a great matter, but when the groundlesness of it is discovered,
it does not in the least advantage a cause, but reflect shame upon the owners
thereof; and truly our Antagonist has not wanted it, thoroughout all his
Discourse: And there remains yet a high degree of it in this pretense of his,
that the Ancient Britains were also against Infant Baptism; for in all the
Volumes of History relating to this Island, he can find but one slender hint to
fasten a Conjecture (for it is no more) that the Ancient- Britains were of his
side, and that is from a passage which he finds in Fabian's Cronicle which you
shall hear by and by.

Know therefore that in the year Anno 596, Austin was sent from Gregory Bishop
of Rome, with near forty more, to preach the Gospel to the Inhabitants of this
Island, who were then Pagans, and as Vestegan says, without the knowledge of
God serving, and Sacrificing unto their Idols of Thor, Woden, Friga: It pleased
God to make them in a short time instrumental to convert Ethelbert then King of
Kent; Now after he was Baptized into the Faith of Christ, with an innumerable
company more, (Regis ad exemplum); The foresaid Austin with the concurrence of
some others, as Mellitus and Justus, two sent as Coadjutors from Gregory,
assembled and gathered together some of the British Bishops and Doctors who
were then dwelling in- Wales, to which place the Britains had long before been
driven, and there Professed the Christian Faith, and worshipped God in purity):
In this Assembly Austin charged them that they should preach with him the Word
of God to the Englishmen, and also that they should reform certain Rites and
usages in their Church, specially for that of keeping Easter Day, Baptizing
after the manner of Rome, and such other like. To this the Britains would not
agree, refusing to leave the custom which they so long had continued without
the assent of them all which used the same. After that Austin gathered another
Synod, to the which came seven Bishops of Britain with the wisest Men of that
famous Abbie of Bangor, who took offense at Austin's Lordly carriage, never
rising up out of his Seat, nor giving them that respect they looked for. Fox,
Acts and Monuments 1. Book p. 154. But Fabian expresses himself otherwise as
the Author notes, thus, viz. Then he said to them, since you will not assent to
my Hosts generally, assent you to me especially in three things. The first is
that you keep Easter in due form and time as is ordained. The second, that you
give Christendom to Children. And the third, that you preach to the Saxons, as
I have exhorted you; and all the other debate I shall suffer you to amend
amongst your selves; but, says Fabian, they would not. To whom then Austin
said, that if they would not take peace with their Brethren, they should
receive War with their Enemies, etc. From their denial to comply with Austin's
Propositions, whereof that was one the giving Christendom to Children, the
Author does confidently conclude, they were against Infant. Baptism: But that
there is no sufficient ground hence for such a Conclusion will appear.

1. First, Because no such thing is mentioned by other Historians as Beda,
Cretensis in Polychron. Huntingtonensis, which write of this matter, they speak
only in general. Mr. Fox relates it, viz. of Baptizing after the manner of
Rome, without mentioning Children.

Secondly, Because Fabian is nigro carbone notatus, looked upon as no faithful
Historian; and I find Mr. Fox in his Martyrology, refuse to give credit to his
Relation in other things, as he does not observe his words of giving
Christendom to Children, in the Story which he gives us.

Thirdly, Neither do Fabian's Words import that they were any more against
Baptizing Children, than Preaching of the Gospel, for they refused to do both
to the Saxons; and that possibly because they would confine their labors to
their own Diocese, and attend their own Flocks; or rather because they would
not Subject themselves to the Bishop of Rome (for they told Austin to his Face
they owed him no Subjection) and to the imperious command of such an upstart,
proud Prelat, as Austin was, between whom and them there had passed some heat
of words, which made them rise in disdain, and departed thence in great
displeasure.

Fourthly, Or they might refuse to give Christendom to Children after Austin's
mode with the corrupt Rites and Ceremonies in use by him. For other Historians
express the Injunction given that it should be after the Roman Manner.

Fifthly, But to put it out of all doubt that the Words of Fabian was not
Austin's, but rather Fabian's own Paraphrase upon them, appears by what we find
in the Preface to Fabian that what he relates of this matter he has it from
Beda; if therefore no such passage can be found there, then we are sure the
Author is mistaken in his Conjecture, and it is a great presumption to lay such
stress upon a doubtful passage that may admit of several interpretations. We
shall now give the Reader an account what Beda says to the thing, viz. Dicebat
autem eis, quod in multis quidem nostrae consuetndini, immo universalis
ecclesiae contraria geritis; and tamen si in tribus his mihi obtemperare
vultis, ut Pascha suo tempore celebretis, ut Ministerium Baptizandi, quo Deo
renascimur juxta morem sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, and Apostolicae Ecclesiae
compleatis, ut genti Anglorum una nobiscum praedicetis Verbum Domini,
caeteraque agitis quamvis moribus nostris contraria, aequanimiter cuncta
tolerabimus. At illi nihil horum se facturos, neq, Bed. Hist. Ecclesiast. Lib.
2. c. 2.
illum pro Archiepiscopo habituros esse respondebant. In English thus -- But he
said unto them, in as much as you do contrary to our custom, yea to the custom
of the Universal Church, nevertheless, if ye will obey me only in these three
things. sc. That you keep Easter in its proper time, Administer Baptism,
whereby we are born again to God, after the manner of the Holy Church of Rome,
and the Apostolical-Church; and preach the Word of God together with us unto
the English Nation, we will patiently bear all other things which you do,
although contrary to our customs. But they answered they would do none of
these, or own him for Archbishop.

What now is become of Fabian, that sandy Foundation, upon which the Author
builds his belief and assertion, that the Ancient Britains were against
Infant Baptism. When therefore Austin perceived that they were so refractory,
he told them, if they would not take Peace with their Brethren, they should
receive War with their Enemies

And if they disdained to preach the way of life to the English Nation, they
should suffer by their hands the revenge of Death. And which Austin
accomplished, faith Fabian, accordingly, by bringing the Saxons upon them to
their utter ruin. This also is supposed to be another Paraphase of Fabian's
upon Austin's Words, which according to Sicque completum est praesagium isti
pontifici Augustini. Hist. Bed. L. 2. c. 2. Editione whelochiana.
Bid were delivered by way of Prophecy, and not that he had an intention to
revenge himself by bringing in Enemies upon them for their destruction. And we
find Mr. Fox in his Act. and Mon. put a favorable construction upon the Words
of Austin, and lays most of the blame upon the British Bishops, whose Words
are; Of both these parties the Reader may judge what he pleases, I cannot see
but both together were to be blamed, and as I cannot but accuse the one, so I
cannot defend the other. First, Austin in this matter can in no wise be
excused, who showed no more humility in this Assembly to seven Bishop's coming
at his commandment to the Council. Again, the Britains were as much or more to
blame, who so much neglected their Spiritual duty, in revenging their Temporal
injury, that they denied to join their helping labor to turn the Idolatrous
Saxons to the way of Life and Salvation, in which respect all private cases
ought to give place and be forgotten. For which cause, it is no great marvel
that thestroak of God's punishment light upon them, according to Austin's
saying, that if they would not take Peace, etc.

We shall now leave all to the Reader, and let him consider (if it be worth his
while) and weigh the Story with all circumstances, and believe as he please; I
shall add one thing more, and that is, Let it be taken for granted that these
Britains were against Infant Baptism: Nevertheless about 200 years before,
Infant Baptism was owned by Pelagius himself (although he denied Original Sin)
which was a Britain, and a member of the Monastery of Bangor, as the Author
himself quotes in his History of Christianity page 11. And Mr. Tombs himself
in page 20. of his Answer says, the Pelagians did grant the Baptizing of Infants
etc. And I have better Authority than he, even Austin himself, that had so much
to do with Pelagius in his Book de peccato Originali Cap. 32. has this saying,
Pelagius etsi Baptisma Infantium verbo concedit, re tamen ipsa tollit and
negat. Though Pelagius grants Infant Baptism in word, yet he takes it away and
denies it in deed. And again Cap. 18. upon the same point of Original Sin
Austin has this passage; -- Baptizari parvulos ut in regnum Dei ingrediantur
ex Pelagii Sententia. Danaei Opus. omnia Genevae ex Lib. Aug. de peocato
Orinali. p. 692.
'Twas Pelagius his opinion that Children were to be Baptized, that they may
have entrance into the Kingdom of God. So ex Lib. Aug. Cap. 19. de peccato
Originali; there is more. Thus then you see we have a more ancient Testimony
for Infant Baptism by this Britain, than those whom the Author fancies strongly
to be against it; who lived 200 years nearer the Apostles times than they. I
will conclude it in the Words of Mr. Fuller in his Church History: Pelagius,
says he, was bred in the Monastery of Bangor, where he lived with 2000 Monks,
whose hands were the only Benefactors for their Bellies, Abby-labourers, not
Abby-lubbers, like their Successors in after Ages -- Infinite are the deductions
and derived consequences of Pelagius his Errors amongst which Mr. Fuller says,
there are these two in reference to Infants:

1. That Infants were born without Original sin.

2. That they were Baptized not to be freed from Original sin, but thereby to
be Adopted into the Kingdom of God, as was before noted out of Aust.

There are yet remaining 4 or 5 trifling Arguments to prove the Ancient
Britains did oppose the Baptizing Infants.

1. Because they received the Christian Faith, Doctrine and Discipline from the
Apostles and Asiatick-Churches, who has no such thing as Baptizing Infants
amongst them as you have largely heard] When the Magdeburgenses tell us
expressly, that it was in use in the Asiatick Churches. Cent. 3. C. 6. p. 124.
In this Age they say, Baptismus Infantibus datur -- Children were Baptized: and
this we have abundantly shown before from the Testimony of Cyprian.

2. Because it appears they so fully prised, and faithfully adhered to the
Scriptures, etc. And no such thing is to be found there] This is the old
Objection which we have often answered. See Chap. 1. Part 1 of our Answer. So
Chap 5. Part 2.

3. Because they did so vehemently reject Human- Traditions, in the Worship of
God, especially all Romish- Innovations, Rites, and Ceremoneis] We find no such
vehemence of spirit in the Story as the Author speaks of, unless it was against
Austin's pride; or beacuse Austin showed them not that honor which their own
proud hearts expected. And whereas he says, they so rejected Romish Rites, but
Infant Baptism came from Romes Ordination and Imposition] This is pitifully
poor, for it was practiced as we have shown in Africa and Asia hundreds of
years before this time, e're any Popes as Universal Bishops were in being. It
was practiced in Tertullian's and Cyprian's days, this none denies.

5. Because Constantine the Great, the Son of Constance and Helena (both
Christians) born in Britain in the year 305. was not Baptized till Aged, as
before. And we have before given you the reason why his Baptism was put off. I
refer the Reader to Chap. 7. Part 1. of my Answer; you have it in Cent. 4. p.
18.

5. Because of the Correspondency and Unity, that was betwixt the French
Christians, afterward called Waldenses, and them. And for this very reason if
we had none else, we conclude the Britains were for Infant Baptism, because the
Waldenses were, as we have sufficiently made appear. There is one Reason more
so weak that I think not meet to say thing to it; and in reference to the
confidence of my Antagonist, that the Waldenses, Donatists, Britains were all
against Infant Baptism, when neither of them were.

I shall conclude with a Distich, which I think may not improperly be applied
to his whole Discourse; Ridiculus tandem ecce cavis mus prodit ab antris,
Quem gravidi Montes parturiere diu.


ANACEPHALAEOSIS, Or, a Recapitulation of the History of the Magdeburgenses
concerning Infant Baptism, from the first to the thirteenth Century.
CENT. I.
1. THey tell us Cent. 1. L. 1. C. 4. p. 152. That Baptism was taken from the
Jewish custom of Washing: and forasmuch as Infant Baptism was in use among the
Jews together with Circumcision, as a Rite of Initiation for both the natural
Jews, and Proselites of Age, who were with their Infants Circumcifed and
Baptized, as Ainsworth shows upon Genesis 17. out of the Rabbis. Also Goodwin in
his Moses and Aaron, and Mr. Seldom the great Antiquarie; and Dr. Hammond in
his Resolution about Infant Baptism proves, that Christ took up the usage of
Baptizing from the Jews, and made it a Sacrament, and accommodated it, as a
Rite of Initiation into the Profession of Christianity; it follows by
proportion, that the Children of them that profess the Christian Faith are to
be Baptized with their Parents, as was the custom of the Jews.

2. There is nothing in Christ's Commission, Mat. 28. that is against it; for
the Teaching there that is required, excludes not the Children of Believers
from Baptism, as appears by the consideration of the Condition of the Persons
to whom Christ sent his Apostles to Baptize, who were Aliens, and the whole
World in regard of the new-Administration were such. Nor is that in Mark 16.
exclusive of Infants; though it requires believing to go before baptizing. And
the reason is, because the same condition that is required there, to precede
Baptism, is required to precede Salvation: So that if the sense of the place be
that Infants must not be Baptized because they cannot Believe, it will as
directly follow they must not be saved, because they cannot Believe. The way of
answering one, answers both, and by the same distinction the Salvation of
Infants may be maintained, their Baptism may.

3. If the Import of the Commission had not been to take in the Children with
the Parents in Baptism, it had been needful for Christ to have given them a
Caveat, when be sent them forth to disciple the Nations, to this effect. -- See
that ye forbear to Baptize the Children of the Nations, and that because the
Apostles knew, that Children under the former Administration were reputed
disciples, belonged to the Covenant; and had Crcumcision the Seal thereof
applied to them, and that Baptism succeeded in the place thereof. Col. 2.11, 12.

4. The Magdeburgenses say, though we have no particular example of any Infants
Baptized in this Century, yet Origin and Cyprian (that lived in the time of
those that saw the Apostles) affirm that Infants were Baptized in the Apostles
days. Cent. 1. L. 2. C. 6. p. 496. and that the custom of Baptizing them was
transmitted from them to Posterity. Cent. 1. L. 1. C. 4. p. 151.

5. Though we have no express example, yet we have something Equivalent
thereto. As,

1. The Baptizing whole Households or Families, of which we have such frequent
mention in the Acts. As Lydia's Family Act. 16.15. though there be no hint of
any one that Believed but herself. So Stephana's Household, 1 Cor. 1.16. and
diverse others. When once the Head of the Family Professed his Faith, all the
Family were by and by Baptized. As under the Law when the Master of a Family
was Proselyted, he and his were forthwith Circumcised. And it is altogether
improbable that in so many households that are said to be Baptized there should
be no Infants, when we can scarce find one Family without them.

2. No Children of Believing Parents are mentioned to have been Baptized
afterward, during the space of 60 years, for so long it was from the time that
John the Baptist began his Ministry to the time that John the Evangelist ended
his: in which time there could be no less than thousands and ten thousands of
Children born of Christian Parents, and grown up to Maturity, and yet we find
not one of all these Baptized at years of discretion, and therefore may well
conclude they were Baptized in Infancy.

CENT. I.
Nothing in Christ's Commission against it, nor in the Apostles Writings.

CENT. II.
The Ancient Fathers of the Greek-Church for Infant Baptism.

Justin Martyr who lived (by calculation) in St. John's days, must needs know
what was done amongst the Apostles, gives several hints for Infant Baptism in
is unquestionable Works, as in his Dialogue with Triphon, Part 2. Prop. 3.
wrote 150 years after Christ.

Irenaeus that lived in the same Age, within a hundred years after the
Apostles, and was a Bishop in France according to Helvicus in the year 170 of
our Lord, within 73 years of St. John: and as noted by Mr. Baxter must live
consequently within 43. years of St. John, for he would not be Bishop till
about 30 years old; and we have his Testimony for it very plainly, Lib. 2.
Advers. Haeres. C. 39. speaking of Infants being born again, that is, by the
Laver of Regeneration viz, Baptism. Dr. Hammond Resolution. Sec. 4. p. 212.

CENT. II.
Infant Baptism opposed by none. Magdeb. Cent 2. Cap. 4. p. 48. de Baptismo.

Nec usquam legitur Infantes hoc seculo a Baptismo remotos esse. Infants were
not excluded Baptism in this Age.

CENT. III.
Infant Baptism was in use in this Age as appears from Tertullian, who lived in
the first hundred years after the Apostles, and expresses himself thus in his
Book de Anima, viz. That the Children of the Faithful are holy by birth, which
is Parallel to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.13. And whereas it is said he was
for the delay of it; the Magdeburgenses tell us, so he was also in respect of
the Aged, he had such a superstitious conceit of Baptism that he thought it
best for all people to delay it, of all conditions and Ages Cent. 3. C. 6. p.
124. and they say that he held a strange Opinion indeed, that it was not fit
for young men, unmarried, nor young. Widows to be Baptized, and why? because in
these the lust of Concupiscence was not extinguished. Cent. 3.

More Greek Fathers for Infant Baptism.

1. Origin, who lived Anno 226. is most express for it, affirming that it was
transmitted to the Church from the Apostles, as in his Comment upon Levit. C.
12.13. Hom. 8. and in Hom. 14. on Luke, and upon the 6th Romans And though we
have them not extant in Greek, yet being translated by Jerome, as the Magdeburgs
and Dr. Hammond observe from his Epistle to Heraclius, prefixed to the Comment;
we have his Authority to secure us that they are his own.

2. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, who besides his own Testimony (who flourished
about 248. and according to Bucol nearer Christ, in 222) gives us in his
Epistle to Fidus, the Testimony of an African Council of 66 Bishops. Magd.
Cent. 3 C. 9. p. 205. Synod Afric. de Infant. Baptizandis.

Opposed by none.

CENT. IV.
We have in this Age the Testimony of diverse other Greek-Fathers for it, as
Nazianzen, who lived in the year of Christ 375. and shows it was in use in his
time in his Orat. 3. in S. Lavacrum. Magdeb. Cent. 4. C. 6. p. 417. where he is
for it in case of death, and in his 40th Oration he owns is absolutely thus --
Have thou a young-Child, says he, let it be Baptized from an Infant, let it be
early Consecrated to the Spirit.

Farther, the Magdeburgs say, they have before shown out of Origin, and
Cyprian, that the Baptism of Children was in use in the African Churches; and
they also prove it continued in this Age from the 124th Question of Athanasius,
and from Nazianzen, that it was Practiced in the Asiatick Churches. Magd. ut
supra.

Chrysostom, another Greek Father, who lived Anno 382 was for it: so was

Bazil, that flourished about the same time; he gives Testimony to it, Lib. 3.
contra Eunomium -- What say you of Infants, may we Baptize them? Yea, for so we
are taught by the Circumcision of Children.

In Concurrence with them, we have the Testimony of the Latin Fathers who were
their Contemporaries, as

1. Ambrose, who lived about Anno 381. he speaks for Infant baptism in his Book
of Abraham, the Patriarch.

2. Jerome also, contra Pelag. l. 3. and in his Epistle to Laeta, he is much
for it.

3. Austin is for it, none more; he lived about 391. The Church, says he,
always had it, always held it: Aust. Sermon. 5. de Verb. Apost.
and in lib. cont. Donatist. cap. 24. disputing against the Donatists (who
denied Original Sin, but not Infant Baptism any more than Pelagius, whose
Disciple he was) says, That which is universally received, and practiced, etc.

CENT. V.
In this Age Children were baptized, say the Magdiburgenses, Cent. 5. C. 6. p.
654. Both the Adult and Infants

CENT. V.
Not opposed by any, not the Donatists, as H.D. falsely suggests; for though
they denied Original Sin, yet not Infant Baptism, and therefore not mentioned
in the Catalogue of their Heresies. Magd. Cent. 5. C 5. p. 628. de haeresi
Donatistatum,

CENT. VI.
In this Age Infant Baptism was in use, as appears by the Speech of Maxentius,
which the Magdiburgs quote, viz. We believe Inants newly born are to be
baptized, Magd. Cent. 6. c. 4. p. 227. They inform us also that Gregory the
Great was for it, by the doubt he resolves about Abortives.

CENT. VI.
Not opposed by any we find in this Age, but by one Adrianus: though H. D.
without any good bottom, confidently affirms, that the Ancient Britains were
against Infant Baptism: this Conceit is vain, as we have shown in the
Examination of that History. He does also very weakly bring Gregory's Testimony
against it, and yet tells us (which is true) that Gregory accused Adrianus to
John Bishop of Larissa, that he turned away young Children from Baptism. You
have it Chap. 7. of the first Part of his first and second Edition: Chap. 7.
Cent. 6. and p. 231. of the 2. Edition. Compare them together, and you have a
perfect Contradiction.

CENT. VII.
Adult persons and Infants were both baptized in this Age, as we learn from the
Magdiburgenses, Cent. 7. C. 6. p. 145.

It should not be Constance but Constantinople.

It should be Constantinople.

CENT. VII.
Not opposed by any that we find in the Magdiburgensian History, under this
Century; yet does H. D. misrepresent 3. Councils.

1. The Bracarens in Spain, as if they had made a Decree against it, when 'twas
only this, That none ex adultis that were grown up, should be baptized, that
were not first indifferently well instructed in the Doctrine of Christianity,
Cont. 7. And in p 146 and 147. they tell us the very manner how this Bracaren
Council ordained Infants should be baptized.

2 The Council of Constance decreed, as in the Bracaren, that no Adult persons
should be baptized, unless, as before, they were instructed -- For, say they,
non shall be baptized, that are not instructed, except Infants, which by reason
of age cannot speak. And then they tell us, this whole Council was invited to
the Baptism of the Child of Heraclius, p. 167.

3. Concerning the Toletan Council, the Magdiburgenses say their Decree was,
That the Children of the Jews that were [Baptizati] baptized, should be
recommended to some Christians to be taught, Magdiburg. Centur. 7. p. 146.

H. D. is a very heedless Writer, and does overlash again in his Story of
B^rinius (he is named Berinus by the Magdiburgs) how that he was a great
Oppugner of Infant Baptism, when it is not so; for all that they say of him is
-- [Eundem morem servat Berinus,] that is, Berinus followed the Manner of the
Council of Constance, i.e. to baptize no Adult persons, but upon Profession
after Teaching; but this Council shut not out Infants from Baptism, as before,
but was for it. And, to make it more plain, the East Saxons, whom Berinus
baptized, with their people (as the Magdiburgs express it out of Bid) were
Pagans, as Bede shows in his 3. Book, 7. Chapt.

CENT. VIII.
From the 4. Book of Bid upon the Canticles, they show that Infants in this
Century were accounted fit subjects of Baptism, Cent. 8. c. 4. p. 218.

CENT. VIII.
None are found to have opposed Infant Baptism in this Age; and therefore H. D.
is to be blamed for wronging Haimo. The Magdiburgs quote two passages amongst
others, which show he was most express for it, as that in Romans 5. Item parvuli
in Baptismate mundantur -- Children are made clean in Baptism, Cent. 4. C. 4.
p. 145. And again In fide parentum ait Haimo baptizari Infantes.

CENT. IX.
The Magdiburgenses acquaint us with one of the Grounds upon which Inants were
Baptized, viz. Sinite parvulos, etc. Suffer little children to come unto me.

CENT. IX.
It was opposed by none in this Age but by one Popish Bishop, named Hincmarus,
Bishop of Iaudum in France, who was most severely rebuked for it by his Uncle
Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes -- Etsi, says he, tremendum Dei judicium te non
terruit, etc. timere debueras ne tu solus hoc ageres, quod nullus Christianorum
unquam facere ausus est: He had cause to fear he did that which never any
Christian did before him. This man was condemned by a Synod sub Carolo Calvo,
Anno 870. and put out of his Bishopric, and writ his Recantation with his own
hand, Cent. 9. C. 9. p. 444. And afterward was restored to his Bishopric,
Cent. 9. C. 9. p. 447. sub Carolo Crasso.

H. D. in his Abstract presents us with diverse others in this 9. Century, as
Opposers of Infant Baptism; as one Gislebert and English Monk of the Order of
Benedict (a precious Witness) but though the Magdiburgs recite much of his bad
Doctrine, yet not a word of his being against Infant Baptism; and therefore he
wrongs his Reader and them too, by referring to Magd. Cent. 10. C. 4. p. 234.
of his 2. Edition. This Gislebert was very erroneous; he held all sin done way
by Baptism ex opere operato; he was for Merit, and held the Virgin Mary to be
without Sin, and to make Intercession; and is not this a pure Witness, think
you, against Infant Baptism? Cent. 10. C. 4. p. 188, 189.

Under this 9. Cent. H.D. brings in Rabanus, in both his Editions. This Rabanus
was an Abbot. He was for Infant Baptism, as appears by that Saying of his, That
the Spirit of God enters into the Infant before he comes out of the Font,
though we know not how. The Magdib. quote it out of his 10. Chap. of his Book
of the Eucharist, Cent. 9. C. 4. p. 143.

Again he says concerning little ones that are incapable of teaching, they
that offer them up in Baptism, must answer for them.

H. D. brings Remigius for Believers Baptism in opposition to Infants, or else
he trifles. This Remigius was also a Monk of the Order of Benedict, and was for
the Worshipping the Virgin Mary, as the Magdiburgs tell us, but not a word
against Infant Baptism, Cent. 9. c. 10. p. 533.

CENT. X.
They tell us in their 6. Chap. page 293. that in this Age they baptized both
the Adult and Infants.

CENT. X.
It was not opposed in this Age that we find from the Magdiburgenses, and
Smaragdus is no Witness for H, D. for he is express for Infant Baptism, as they
snew us, he grounding it upon that Passage, Sinite parvulos, etc. Suffer little
children to come, etc. Cent. 10. C. 4. p. 138. and who has also this
Expression, Infants are made pure by Baptism, which they quote from his words
upon the 2. Chap. of the Epistle of Peter.

Ausbertus speaks nothing pro or con, but only of the Virtues of Baptism, and
the danger of Mortal Sins.

Theophilact is not for H. D. his turn; for he says, That the Faith of him
that offers the Child in Baptism or baptizeth it, cleanses the Child, quam
vis nondum valet cord credere ad justitiam, and ore confiteri ad salutem, i.e.
though he be not able to believe unto righteousness, nor confess with the
mouth. Cent. 10. c. 4. p. 187. de Doctrina.

CENT. XI.
They tell us that in this Age they baptized not only Adult persons but such as
were newly born, Cent. 11. C. 6. p. 260. And then giving diverse Instances of
Children that were baptized, (...). They quote Anselm (...) it, that the Dies
Baptism^^^, the Day of Baptism as the 8th day, he grounding it upon
Circumcision, Cent. 11. c. 4. p. 169. They quote also his Note upon that place.
And her daughter was made whole the self-same hour, how the Mothers Faith stood
the Child in good stead, Mat. 15. So the Faith of the Parent, says he, may
avail for the Infant in Baptism, though he be at present incapable of good or
evil, Cent 11. C. 4. p. 171. and not withstanding all this; Anselm is brought
by H. D. in opposition to Infant baptism.

CENT. XI.
None againsT Infant Baptism that we can find upon good ground in this Age; for
as for that which H. D. brings concerning Peter Bruis, Arnoldus and Henricus
they are only Popish Calumnies, as we have shown in the Examination of the
History of the Waldenses.

Durandus also is under this Century brought in by H. D. as a Witness against
Infant Baptism, though most severe against Anabaptists.

CENT. XII.
They baptized, as they tell us, as well Infants, as grown persons, and give
instances of Children baptized, Cent. 12. C. 6. p. 872.

CENT. XII.
None that we find who opposed it in this Age.

H. D. misapplies Peter Lumbard, as if he had been for Believers Baptism in
opposition to that of Infants, when his words are, Children are cleansed from
Original Sin by Baptism, Cent. 12. c. 4. p. 596. H. D. does abuse the saying of
Peter Lombard, viz. The person that is to be baptized, should first believe and
confess. We have it in h s 18. Chap on John. Which is spoken of Pagans as
appears by what follows. Again, All that are baptized. says he, whether little
ones or great ones, receive in their foreheads the sign of the Cross, in his 8.
Book on the 13. Chap. of the Revelation.

Albertus Magnus, the Conjurer (another of H.D. his Witnesses) has not, that I
can find, a word to his purpose.

CENT. XIII.
The Magdiburgenses do end with the 12. Cent. and it is remarkable, that
(excepting the Waldenses who are calumniated by the Papists) they mention but
one person that was against Infant Baptism, viz. Hincmarus. They indeed speak
of one Peter Apamen a Bishop of Syria, Cent. 6. c. 5. p. 304. de Haeresibus,
and Zoaras the Monk that agreed with the Heretic Severus, and was condemned
with him in the Synod of Constantinople. They have it out of Nicephorus, lib.
17. c. 9. These they say, were accused of Re-baptization, and other heinous
Crimes, but not for oppugning Infant Baptism; and therefore Mr. Henry Danvers
needed not to have put these in for Witnesses in his 2. Edition.

CENT. XIII.
The Waldenses are here falsely pretended to be against Infant Baptism. See our
Examination of the History before.

The Name of Wickliff being famous, H. D. would fain get something out of him
for his turn, but cannot; for none of the words quoted from him, are against
Infant Baptism, unless he thinks that is Cap. 2. de Trialog. viz. That they are
presumptuous and foolish who affirm Children dying unbaptized cannot be saved:
Or because he rejected the Popish Traditions of Salt, Cyl, Spittle, Chrism;
this in H. D. his account renders him an authentic Witness against us; for he
concludes thus: And may we not from as good evidence say that he rejected
Infant Baptism also? Treatise of Baptism, 2. Edition. There he also quotes a
Popish Writer, which charge Wickliff with denying Infant-babtism, and in the
same place says, it was the Albigensian Heresy; one as true as the other.

From what has been said, I see no reason why Mr. Tombs and Mr. Danvers
should be so much offended with Mr. Marshal and Mr. Baxter, for saying
Infant Baptism was but lately opposed by the Anabaptists of Germany; and I
appeal to the Reader, whether Mr. Baxter speaks not true in is Plain
Scripture Proof, p. 153. who says, That for his part he cannot find in his
small Reading, that any one Divine or Party of Men did certainly oppose or deny
Infant baptism, for many hundred years after Christ. And then again, p. 261.
The World may see what a Cause you put such a face upon, when you cannot bring
the least proof, so much as of one Man (we will allow them one, viz. Hincmarus)
much less Societies, and least of all godly Societies, that did once oppose or
deny Infants Baptism, from the Apostles days till about Luther 's time.

A Persuasive to UNITY amongst all that fear the Lord, though of different
judgments about Baptism, enforced from Scripture-Arguments, and the dangerous
Consequences of Divisions.
IT is well advised by Jacobus Acontius, in his Book entitled Stratagemata
Sathana, that in all disputes about points of Religion, this should be engraven
upon our hearts, That we have not to deal with the man with whom we dispute,
but with Satan himself; and that the main quarrel is not that point about which
we argue, but something of a greater concern. For the design of that envious
One has been in all Ages to sow tares of Division: He it was that made the
first Schism in the glorious Communion, and has ever since out of an intense
hatred to the peace and quiet of mankind stirred up Emulations, Wrath, Strife,
and mutual Antipathies in the minds of men; especially among Christians, has
he labored to his utmost to foment and cherish Differences, to agitate
Schisms, and to rend and tear the Church of Christ into diverse Sects and
Parties, and by his notable subtilty and influence upon our corrupt nature, to
make our very Arguings and Contendings for the Faith once delivered, too often
managed with Pride, Prejudice, and carnal Interest, a means rather of widening
than healing our Breaches. So that in our Contests of this nature, if we gain
but a grain of Truth, we are in danger of losing a pound of Charity. There is
(as the Apostle James terms it) a (...), a bitter Zeal, bitter indeed in its
root, issuing from a root of bitterness within, and bitter in its fruits,
accursed discords and irreconcilable distances amongst Brethren. The
consideration whereof has made me even jealous of my self, lest in the
foregoing Responsatory-discourse, any thing has dropped from my Pen, which may
tend rather to the exasperating than convincing our Opposites; for it is hard in
disputes both not to be provoked, and not to provoke. Nevertheless, I hope the
Godly, Sobery, and Ingenuous amongst them, will put the best interpretation
upon all; and the rather, because they cannot but perceive how tender I have
been of them, manifesting respect to such throughout all the Discourse: And
though I contend with what I conceive is an error in them, yet I cannot but
love their persons; for I know there are some of that Persuasion who for their
eminency in Grace, ought to be had in estimation by us: And I would always
distinguish the Humble and Holy from the Heady and High-minded, the Tender and
Conscientious from the Turbulent and Factions of that Party. And Oh! how much
do I long to see all rigidness on every side removed, and a sweet
correspondency and compliance between God's People, though of different
judgments, as to the Subject of Baptism. I have for more than twenty years
considered the point, and weighed what has been said on both sides, and cannot
possibly be brought to judge it a matter of that moment as to break Communion,
or to be prosecuted with so much Vehemence, as it is by some of the Dissenters.
1. It being only about a point not so expressly revealed, but that Godly Persons
both in Christ visibly, may differ in their light about it. 2. Also it being
only about the right or wrong application of an external Ceremony, or Solemnity
of Christ's Institution (for Baptism in the outward Act of it can be esteemed
no more). Wherefore I could heartily wish there were a reviving of the
Primitive Moderation, when Christians did bear one with another, and allow a
liberty in matters of an higher nature, without breach of Communion. For I
verily believe, the Church of Christ has received more prejudice by contesting
about this thing than is commonly thought of; for it has always produced
heart-burnings amongst Christians, and undermined the Power of Godliness. And
it would be more for the honor of Religion, if our Spirits were so attempered
and sweetened, as to indulge each other a latitude of practice according to our
light and persuasion, without imposing or condemning, according to the
Apostolical Rule, Phil. 3.15, 16.

Certainly the differences that are amongst us about Baptism, were they put in
the Balance of the Sanctuary, to try whether they bear proportion to the
distances and animosities attending the same, they would be found too light.
And if Austin did so much lay to heart the breach which was between two single
persons, Jerome and Ruffinus (concerning which we have spoken before in our
Answer) that he cried out, Hei mihi qui vos alicubi simul invenire non possum,
etc. Woe is me that I cannot find you both together, I would even fall down at
your feet with much love, and many tears; I would beseech you for your selves,
and for one another, and for weak Christians for whom Christ died, that you
suffer not these dissentions to spread. Oh! how much more cause have we to
lament the breaches of so many thousands of God's People, and to use our utmost
endeavors to repair the same. I wish there were more of Melancthons Spirit
amongst us, who professed that though he had many domestical troubles, yet the
public wounds of the Church (arising much from the difference 'twixt Lutherans
and Calvinists about the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which Christ intended
for a bond of love, as he did the other of Baptism) did most deeply afflict
him. Oh! how sad is it to behold the Staff of Beauty, and the Staff of Bands,
Zech. 11.10, 11. Zeph. 3.9.
so broken amongst us. And that we cannot call upon the Lord, and serve him
with one consent. Those were Halcyon and blessed days when the multitude of
Believers were of one heart and one soul; when they held communion in Doctrine,
in Fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and Prayer. When the People of God could
hear together, and pray together, and receive together, Act. 4.32. When those
thousands of Believers were as if they had but one heart and soul to animate
and actuate them in God's service. What an eminent answer was this of Christ's
Prayer, Joh. 17.21. That they all may be One, (...), the words are very
emphatical; it is not said that they may love and agree, though this be
intended, Burges on Joh. 17.21.
but those words -- that they may be One, is, as if the Church of Christ should
be but as one person; and, as the Apostle argues, none ever hated his own
flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. and we are members of his Body, and of his Flesh, and of his
Bones. On this account there should be no divisions amongst the Members of
Christ, for they are one Spirit as it were. They should no more hate one
another, than a man does his own flesh; And Dionysius the Arcopagite calls the
Godly (...), that is, persons closely compacted into One, according as the
Apostle has it, Ephesians. 4.16. where he speaks of the Body's being compacted. For
they should be as the Pearl, which is united in it self, and is called Vnio. He
that is joined to the Lord, says St. Paul, is one Spirit, One Spirit in
himself, One with God, and One with all his People. In order to this blessed
Unon and Accommodation of the Godly, I shall in all humility address my self to
both Parties, to them who are for, and to them that are against Infant Baptism.
1. To the Dissenters in general. 2. To the Antipoedobaptists in particular.

1. Concerning the first of these, the Dissenters in general that fear God, I
can with great confidence expect to meet with better measure from them, than to
be condemned for an overweening conceit of my own sufficiency to undertake the
Work of a Conciliator; I only humbly submit what I have to say to their
judicious and godly Consideration, Whether it be not their duty to entertain
and keep up Fellowship and Communion in all other Ordinances wherein they are
agreed, notwithstanding this their difference about Baptism? which to me seems
clear for several Reasons; as,

First, Because they are Members of the same Body, of which Christ is the Head.
Romans 12.4, 5. We being many, are one body in Christ, and every one Members of
another, -- the import of which is, that all Believers stand to Christ in the
same relation that the natural Body does stand to the natural Head, and that
they all stand in relation one to another, as the Members of the natural Body
do stand one to another. To the same purpose is that, 1 Cor. 12.12. where from
the 4th to the 7th verse, the Apostle shows, That there are diversities of
Gifts, and differences of Administrations, and diversities of Operations; but
all come from the same Spirit, Lord and God, and are given for this end, that
they may be for the profiting of the whole. And that we might more plainly
apprehend him, he further tells us, that as in the natural Body there are
diverse Members joined, and each Member has its several office for the good of
all; so is Christ, says he, that is, Christ collectively and mystically,
Christ and all his Members: and then he adds, verse. 13. That by one Spirit we
are all baptized into one Body, Christum intellige cum Ecclesia sua conjunctim,
et quatenus est corporis mystici caput. Beza in loc.
whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or free; which cannot be meant of
Water Baptism, says Mr. Jesse (an eminent godly Antipaedobaptist) in regard
all the Body of Christ, Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, partook not of that
Sacrament of Christ instituted for the Gospel-Administration) and are made to
drink into the same Spirit; which is also to be understood metaphorically and
spiritually, Potionati sumus, says Piscator, and so prove our selves to be of
one and the same Corporation of Believers. Like to this is that Ephesians. 4.16. from
whom the whole Body fitly joined and compacted together, etc. From what has
been said there follow these five Corrollaries.

1. Unity of the Body in the Church flows from Unity to the Head; first, the
Members are united to the Head, and then to one another, and with the Head.

2. This Spiritual Union and Conjunction with the Lord Jesus, is the foundation
of all their Communion with one another.

3. As in the Natural Body, all the Members do not only meet in the Head, as
the Lines in the Center, but have real Union one with another; so in this
Mystical and Spiritual Body, all Believers have not only each for his own part
Union and Conjunction with Christ, but also a real Union and Conjunction with
each other, which is the ground of all offices of Love, and reciprocal
Fellowship and Communion, wherein they stand obliged amongst themselves.

4. Union to the whole, the Catholic or Universal Church or Body of Christ,
gives right to Communion with any particular Church of Christ in the World; and
there is no Believer (as Mr. Marshal observes) in any part of the World, but
wherever he comes, might demand, upon the profession of his Faith, and his
voluntary subjection to the Gospel, his right in the Ordinances, to hear, and
pray, and receive the Sacrament with them.

5. To deny Communion to any who give evidence that they are of the same Body,
is to be guilty of a great Schism in the Body, and most opposite to the design
of God's Grace, in compacting all his People into one Body; which was, 1. That
there should be no Schism in the Body. 2. That therefore the Members should
have the like care of one another.


They therefore who in contrariety hereto stand at a distance one from another,
and refuse Communion, do that which is not practicable from Scripture: for it
is unnatural and destructive to the Body, and not only so, but foully scandalous
to the Christian Religion: for, as the Lord Verulam speaks, Lord Bacon's
Essays.
like a Divine as well as a Philosopher, Schism is one of the greatest
Scandals, yea more than corruption of Manners: For, as in the Natural Body, a
Wound or Solution of Continuity is worse than a Corrupt Humor, so in the
Spiritual: So that nothing does so much keep men out of the Church, and drive
men out of the Church as breach of Unity. This then is the first Argument, they
are both visibly Members of Christ's Body, and therefore should have Communion
one with another.

2. Because both parties agree in the main Fundamentals of Religion; and Union
in the great things of Religion should oblige them to bear with one another in
lesser matters. Phil. 3.15, 16. If in any things ye be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even that to you: Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained,
let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing. Here Is an excellent
direction to preserve Unity amongst God's People, notwithstanding difference in
judgment, and for composing and healing of differences when they arise.

1. Christians are to consider whereunto they have already attained, and how
far they do agree, Whether there be not a mutual Consent in the Principles and
Fundamentals of Religion; for, if this be wanting, all Union is but a daubing
with untempeted mortar, and a Conspiracy against Christ: but when there is a
Consent in Fundamentals, and the Marks of Godliness upon Persons, Wisdom and
Charity should teach us to condescend unto, and forbear one another: but alas,
how much is this wanting! may we not sigh out that doleful sentence, Heu pro
quantillo pacem perdidimus! for what poor inconsiderable things do we jar and
differ!

2. To walk by the same Rule, or to put in practice those Truths wherein they
do agree. They agree in Prayer, in Hearing, in the Lord's Supper, let them walk
together in these. The best way to attain Unity in Judgment, is to maintain it
in Obedience, and jointly to walk together in the Ordinances and Duties wherein
Christians do agree.

3. To mind the same thing; that is, I conceive, to propose the same ends in
Religion. Nothing causes more difference than poor, narrow, selfish-ends. If
Professors had all one common end, viz. to be really Godly, and to advance the
Glory of God in the World, there would be an end of these bickerings. St. Paul
has an eye to this, Phil. 2.1, 2. There he uses most pathetical Arguments to
Love and Union; and for to further it, he presses the Philippians to be
like-minded, and let nothing, says he, be done through strife or vainglory.
v. 2, 3. and in the 4th verse -- look not every man at his own things, etc. that
is, at his own Interest, Honor, Party, etc. Were we better United in our ends
and aims, and did jointly level at God's Glory, and Christ's Interest in the
advancement of piety, we should quickly agree in the use of means.

3. Because we are Commanded not to refuse Christian Communion, though the
difference be in far greater matters than this of Baptism. Romans 14.1. Him that
is weak in the Faith receive you etc. By Faith is meant the Doctrine of Faith,
as Beza notes on the place. Him that is weak, and so weak, Fides hoc in loco
declarat Christianam ipsam Doctrinam in qua sit aliquis rudis, ac proinde
discrimen Ciborum and Dierum nondum intelligat Christi beneficio fuisse
sublatum.
as not to discern that by Christ's coming the difference of days and meats was
taken away. There was it seems a great difference amongst them, and some were
more thoroughly instructed in the doctrine of Christian Liberty, as touching the
cessation of legal Ceremonies, who held all days alike, and all meats in
themselves indifferent; whereas others being not well informed, observed still
a difference both of meats, accounting them clean or unclean, and of days
accounting them holy or servile, according as they stood in under the
Levitical-Law. This caused no little stir and trouble amongst them -- Now the
course the Apostle takes to heal these breaches is worth observing: He does not
cast the Balance to one side, requiring the other to come up to their
Practice, but exhorts them to allow a Latitude; and not only for Opinions, but
Practices, and to forbear one another in love, and not to censure and condemn
those that differ from them. Seeing the Men of contrary Persuasions in lesser
matters may yet agree in the main fundamentals; and the reason why the stronger
should receive the weaker, is, because God had received him, that is, into
Communion with himself. We have the same urged again Chap. 15.6. Wherefore,
receive ye one another as Christ also has received us: by all which it appears
that no supposed or real error can be a reason why others should not be
received to Communion, farther than it is a reason to prove that the Lord has
not received them; and the conclusion is that let the Error be where 'twill,
either on the Paedobaptist's or Antipaedobaptist's side, it is all one, if God
and Christ have received these of both Persuasions into Communion with himself,
they break the Command, if they refuse to receive one another into mutual
Communion.

4. Is that Command of the Apostle, to follow after such things as make for
Peace, and mutual Edification. Romans 14.19. The Word is (...), that is, let us
eagerly pursue after it as the Hunter does his Prey; and it denotes,

1. That we are not barely to desire it, or accept of any reasonable terms that
are proposed for accommodation and agreement, but we are to pursue and go after
it, if by any means we may overtake it, or apprehend it. The same duty is
pressed; Ephesians. 4.3. where the Exhortation is to keep the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bound of Peace; the Word is (...), which signifies a most earnest studying
which way it may be effected: Ita alicui rei studere, ut ad eam omni impetu
feraris, and approperes; to be so intent upon a thing, as to further it with
might and main as we use to say. The Gramarians oppose this Word (...) to
(...), which signifies Inconsiderate, Perfunctorie, and extempore aliquid
agere; to do a thing carelessly; but this in the Text signifies Diligenter, and
intent a cogitatione efficere; to be diligent and very thoughtful how to
accomplish a thing, and it points out this, that we ought on all hands to use a
sedulous endeavor to preserve the Unity of the Spirit.

2. It denotes unwearied patience in the pursuit after it, notwithstanding all
disappointments and discouragements met with in our attempts after it. We ought
not to give over, but persevere in so good a Work. I like not that speech of
Hornbeck Summa Controv. L. 9. de Luther. who says, The Calvinists had done too
much in overtures for a Reconciliation with the Lutherans; much less can I
approve of such who by word and writing endeavor to widen breaches, and set
Christians at farther distances. Certainly the Pride, Conceit, and Discontent
of some spirits have done much mischief this way: and to speak plainly the
inconsiderableness of our differences, and inconsiderateness wherewith it is
pursued, argues that much of the Zeal of the Dissenters, is not, as one says,
that holy fire which is kindled by a Coal from the Altar, but rather an Ignis
fatuus that leads men quite out of God's Way; or a Wild Fire that rends and
tears where it goes. Now in as much as nothing hinders endeavors like to
despair, and all Essays for Union hitherto have proved succesless, and there
are few to be found of healing, and peaceable Spirits, but much of Pride,
humor, and selfconceitedness appears everywhere, even in those that we cannot
but think are good Men in them main; we may conclude, if we look no farther
than our selves, that the differences amongst us will never be composed. But we
are to look higher than our selves, and for the erecting of our hopes and
quickening our endeavors after it; we should consider,

1. Christ has prayed that all Believers may be one, John 17.21. and he was
heard in all that he prayed for. That they All may be one, (All) of them there
is, the Universal Extent of it; One in Affection, and not only so, but also One
in Worship, and Communion and Ordinances, although there may be variety of
Opinions amongst them.

2. God has promised to bring this about. Jer. 32.39. I will give them one
heart, and one way. And in Zeph. 3.9. They shall call upon the name of the Lord
and serve him with one consent, the Word in the Original is one Shoulder. They
shall all of them have as it were but one Shoulder, that they shall set to the
service of God. And Hosea 1.11. Then shall the Children of Judah, and the
Children of Israel be gathered together; Here (says Mr. Buroughs) we have a
Promise both to Israel and Judah together; great was their Enmity, heretofore
they Worshipped the same God, though in a diverse manner, Judah keeping close
to God's Institutions, but Israel not. There was a great deal of bitterness
between them, though Worshipping the same God. But God has promised they shall
be gathered together, upon which he raises two Observations.

1. That there shall be Union between Judah and Israel. Here Is a mercy, (says
he) a wonderful work of God! Many times between such as profess the same
Religion, and seem not to differ much, and yet to differ; their Oppositions are
most bitter and irreconcilable, and requires a mighty Work of God to bring them
in and Reconcile them.

2. God has a time, [there is a set time appointed] to gather Judah and Israel
both together, that is, to bring Peace to his Church; God has a time to gather
all his Church together in a way of Peace, that there shall be a Universal
Peace amongst his Churches; for though it is true it be meant here of Judah and
Israel literally, yet Israel and Judah is to set out to us all the Churches of
Christ, that shall be afterward amongst the Gentiles So that Ephraim shall not
envy Judah, and Judah shall not envy Ephraim. Isa. 11. 13. The envy of Ephraim
shall depart. God will take away this Envious, Vexatious Spirit.

3. Let it be considered that we (upon whom the ends of the Earth are come)
live nearer the accomplishment of these Promises than the former generations:
yea,

4. The day of their fulfilling begins to dawn, the Spirits of many excellent
Christians incline, and work toward Union; yea some are actually in Union and
Communion in all other Ordinances, though they differ in the point of Baptism:
they are come off from their former rigidness, and can hear and pray, and
receive together in diverse places of this Nation.

5. Light increases more and more, whereby they see what is the right Basis,
and ground of Communion; That it is for grace-sake and not a Syncretism, or
agreement in Opinions, That Christians should love and embrace one another; and
that heart-Religion, and Godliness is to be preferred before Notions and Forms.

6. They do also see the dismal and fatal consequences of their Divisions, and
those who are wise and solid, must needs on that account be studious of
Accommodation: they do now experimentally find that it is this:

1. That strengthens the hands of the common Enemies of Religion, Divide and
impera; Dissolution is the Daughter of Division: It is even Nuts to the common
Enemy to see how God's People wrangle and divide: they may well conclude that
though they are quiet and let them alone, destruction will arise out of
themselves; they may fit still, and laugh and say, Aha so would we have it. And
as the Apostle speaks, if ey bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not
consumed one of another. This is like to be the finis operis though not
operantis, Gal. 5.15.
the Event though not the Intent. Si colligimur frangimur; these Clashings, if
not stopped, will prove (horresco scribere) fatal to the interest of Religion,
and welfare and safety of Professors in the Nation.

2. This also opens the Mouths of Men to Blaspheme, and speak evil of the good
ways of God. Dioclesian (that persecuting Roman Emperor looked upon the
Christian Religion as a wretched device of wicked Men, and that because of the
pride and dissentions he observed amongst the Pastors and Bishops; so now adays
some Atheists, and time-servers set their Wits on work to vilify the pure
Worship of God, and to bring the power of Godliness into contempt, and the main
Topic from whence they fetch their Hellish Arguments is the Divisions and
Dissentions of Professors. There be some of late have been notable Factors for
Hell, and would deride and jeer Men out of strictness and purity; and not a few
Books of this kind have been printed whose design have been merely to
discountenance Religion, and the Authors of them have done as much for the
Devil this way, that he can hardly tell what to desire more of them; and it is
to be feared he will pay them their wages shortly: And verily the Divisions of
God's People have occasioned much of these men's Blasphemies, it has been a
woeful stumbling Block before them.

7 It is that which in all likelihood will draw persecution upon all their
heads at last; they fear it, and they need it, and it is just with God to bring
it upon them. Remarkable is that saying of Cyprian, viz. non venissent
Fratribu^ haec mala, si in unum Fraternitas fuisset animata. These evils had
not happened to the Brethren, if they had joined together in Brotherly
Unaminity.
As when there is no quietness in the house but a continual clamor, and
brawling among the Children, and they scratch and fight and tear one another,
the Father comes in, and whips them all: So if Christians will not be quiet,
but still go on to persecute one another with their Tongues, and tear one
another by Dissentions, Gods way to divert this humor, is, to set the Common
Enemy upon them, if they rend themselves from one another, and forsake the
Assembling themselves together, God will let loose the Dogs to worry them and
drive them together. He will melt them into one piece in the fire of
persecution. Common sufferings long since under those persecuting Emperors
Constantius and Julian, Zozomen. Lib. 4. C. 20.
brought the Christians to agreement who before were at great Enmity. And
Bullinger in his Book of the Persecution of the Church, says more than once,
that the dissentions of God's People is that which gives them up into the hands
of their Enemies ad abstergendum aeruginem, to scour off their rust as he
phraseth it. And Mr. Buroughs ut supra in his Comment upon Hosea Chap. 3.
says, God may justly give us over into the hands of our Enemies, if we agree
not among our selves, and they may Chain us together: perhaps a Prison may make
us agree, as it was said of Ridley and Hooper, though Ridley stood much against
Hooper in point of Ceremonies, and they could not agree, yet when they came to
Prison they did well enough there; the Lord deliver us, says he, from that
Medicine of our dissentions, that we be not made so to agree, yea that we be
not sodered together with our own blood.

2dly, There is one thing yet behind, and that is to apply my self more
particularly to those who are Antipaedobaptists, that fear the Lord in this
Nation, and let it be resented, as offered to them in all love and humility.
There are a few things I would leave with them by way of Caution. The Lord
knows I desire not to scatter in Israel nor to divide in Jacob.

1. Take heed lest your Zeal for your own way, which you take to be most
agreeable to Truth, does eat up your love to Peace and Union with the Godly,
Cautions to the Antipaedobaptists.
who are otherwise minded; The Apostle Exhors us (...), to speak the Truth in
love, to truthify it in love, as Mr. Crook translates it, aiming to reach the
fullness of the Greek in one Word. So it is your duty (if your opinion be true as
we suppose it is not) to manage your Tenants with love, meekness and moderation
of Spirit toward those who are otherwise minded, and yet agree with you in
other things: For though every Truth be precious, yet every Truth is not
necessary to Salvation, nor to be found in all, with whom notwithstanding it
may be necessary for you to hold Communion; and that because you cannot but
know that many Paedobaptists are as Godly as your selves, Sanctified in Christ
Jesus and called to be Saints. 2. In not doing so, you deprive your selves of
the benefit of their Gifts and Graces, and of that help which you might have
from many eminent Ministers of Christ; and that assistance for Conversion of
Souls and Edification, which in some of your Meetings you very much want; and
when those that are able of your way shall be removed by death, you are like to
be straightened for want of Men, of competent and fitting parts for the carrying
on the work of the Ministry, as it ought to be done amongst your selves.

2. Beware of Pride; for where this is predominant, it will not suffer men to
recede from those rigid Principles and Practices they have taken up. As Pride
makes men unwilling to receive the Truth from others, so it will keep them from
retracting an Error, though convinced thereof. Luther confessed to Melancthon
before his death, that he would have retracted many things, (especially in
those Sacramental Controversies) but that he feared it would lessen the
Authority of his Works. So much of Pope has every man in his own breast, as to
affect to be thought infallible, malunt semper errare quam semel errasse
videri; they had rather always err, than seem once to have erred. But whatever
a man may lose in reputation of knowledge, he shall be sure to gain in
estimation of candor, ingenuity, and sincerity. Austin got as much esteem by
his Book of Retractations, as by any other of his works.

3. Take heed of a Censorious judging-Spirit: do not condemn those that close
not in with you to act against their light. It is a very uncharitable passage
which I find in Mr. Tombs his Praecursor page 91. Unless, says he, I speak
against my conscience, I must needs say, that it is ignorance or wilfulness,
holds Ministers and People in their stiff asserting and Practice of
Infant Baptism. But what it was that kept him so long in the practice of it, in
his Parish-Churches before the Assembly of Divines sat, is best known to the
searcher of hearts; and yet this very man 17 lines above in the same page, has
that which amounts to self-contradiction, viz. That he reverenceth many
Paedobaptists as Godly Ministers of the Gospel far beyond himself. The Lord
banish from among you this Censorious spirit, unto which some of you have been
too much addicted. How often have we been araigned at your bar for sinning
against light, for Obstinacy and Wilfulness? and your Censures have lighted
most heavily upon Ministers, sparing none, neither Conformists nor
Non-conformists. Heretofore 'twas wordly Interest, Parochial Maintenance, and
fear of displeasing the people that blinded and corrupted them (a hard Censure
to be past upon the whole body of the Ministry of the Nation) and how could it
consist with Godliness for them to persist so many years in the Practice of
that which they thought in their own consciences to be but a mere Tradition and
Innovation. But you have lived to see your mistake herein; and tell us now (if
you can) what the temptations are that blind the Non-conformists, since their
Ejection, and keeps them from coming over to you? They were in number (as they
say) about 3000. and I think you cannot show us a Catalogue of one in a County,
no not in ten Counties, that is proselyted to you. God by his inscrutable and
wise Providence, has found out a strange way to clear the innocence of his
Servants, that were so often branded for Hirelings, and there has been an
effectual course taken to clear their eyesight, had Wordly Interest blinded
them: They are now out of the reach of Compliances on that account.

4. I would also humbly advise you to take heed of dividing Principles, that
are inconsistent with the Word, especially in this Circumstance of the Church
wherein we are in danger to be overwhelmed with other difficulties: if it were
tolerable, and venial to divide at other times, yet now the fault is
irremissible and irrational. Luther counseled the Synod at Norimberg to
silence the Disputes until a fitter opportunity; Meum Consilium est, ut causam
hanc sinatis ad tempus sopitam jacere, hoc tempore enim and animis sic
affestis, venenum est disputare. I counsel you that in this juncture of time,
and when your minds are so much out of tune, you would let this Controversy
sleep, and not dispute about it, for it will prove poisonous.

5. Take heed of rejecting those Overtures for Union, which are made by your
Brethren. We are commanded to follow after those things that make for Peace,
and shall we run away from them? You say they differ from you, and do not you
likewise from them? We all see but in part, and know but in part, and therefore
should bear with one another. Why should you not have the like freedom which
your Brethren have? Their Arms are open to receive you. You are straightened in
your own Bowels, and not in theirs. O why will you not embrace where Christ
imbraceth? and receive those whom God receives? Or why do you refuse Communion
with those here in Ordinances that you have ground to believe you shall have
Communion with in Glory. Persuasive to Peace.
If you say, because they are not Baptized after Believing: This can be no more
necessary for Church Communion, than it is unto Salvation; for the means cannot
be more necessary to the subordinat end, which is Church Communion, than it is
to the Principal which is Salvation And Baptism is necessary to Salvation but
by way of duty where opportunity concurs, but not by way of means where
opportunity is wanting. And if to be Baptized after Faith, were indeed the
Paedobaptists duty, the true reason why they do not perform it, is the want of
a Moral opportunity, that is, the want of Conviction that it is their duty,
they verily believing they were sufficiently Baptized in their Infancy: and
that it is not lawful for them to be rebaptized. And all the while they remain
under this persuasion, they can no more lawfully receive an after-Baptizing, by
a voluntary submission to it, than they can who desire to be Baptized, but want
the opportunity of health or such an Administrator (as you call it) as is
necessary thereto. And if their Right to Salvation under these Circumstances,
be not cut off, as doubtless it is not for the reason before given, then no
more can their Right to Church Communion thereby be cut off for the same
reason. To conclude, let us all pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, that our
Father which is in Heaven, the God of Peace, would look down upon his Divided
Children, and create Peace among them; That Christ Jesus who is the
Peacemaker, and Prince of Peace, that prayed for it, and bequeathed it to his
Disciples as his last Legacy, would reconcile our hearts one to another: That
the Spirit of Peace whose fruit is Peace would compose our differences and make
up our breaches, and give us enlarged hearts to embrace each other: That the
Blessed Trinity, which has nothing so proper to it self as Unity, would pity
Zion, and raise up healing Instruments, and rebuke fiery Spirits, and remember
the Promise that is made to the Church to be fulfilled in the times of the
Gospel, That all her Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be
the Peace of her Children.

(...) Mat. 5. 7.
FINIS
Errata.
PART 1.
Page 2. line 2. for our read your. P. 9. l. 3. r. only manner. Chapt. 4. P.
51. l. 29. for one r. own. Chapter 7. P. 4. l. 11 for not Dipping r. not only
Dipping.

PART 2.
Chap. 3. P. 152. l. 7. r. on l. 9 dele is meant ibid P. 154. l. 22. r. we.
idem P. 165. l. 22. Dele when. Chapter 7. P. 105. l. 23. r. as idem P. 106. r.
prejudiced. Ib. P. 120. l. 7 for this r. the for Kidderminster r. Beaudly, etc.

To the Bookbinder.
By reason of the Author's remote distance from the Press, some great mistakes
have happened, so that several Leaves must be cancelled: the Alphabet is also
confused, wherefore observe these directions.

The Title is a quarter of a Sheet; after that place the Preface, then B C.
[cut off 25. and 26. Pages, and supply them with a leaf printed on the Title
sheet] D E F G. Then A a B b C c* a half-sheet: then G g H h I i K k L l M m N
n O o P p Q q R r S s T t a half sheet. after T t place C c, but cut of the 2
first leaves of the said C c] D d E e F f, but be sure to cut off the 4 last
leaves of the said F f] then G g g H h h I i i K k k a half sheet, and a leaf
marked K k k* printed with the Title sheet. lastly L l l.


