THE SPEECHES Of Captain Walcot, Jo. Rouse, and Will. Hone, On Friday the
Twentieth of July, 1683.
CAptain Thomas Walcot being drawn to Tyburn in one Hurdle, John Rouse and
William Hone in another, and there put into a Cart, the Reverend Dr. Thomas
Cartwright, Dean of Rippon, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary,
with Mr. Smith the Ordinary of Newgate, began to acquaint Captain Walcot, That
this was the last time he had to spend in the world, and therefore desired him
to make a good use of it, telling him, That at death leaves him, so Judgment
will find him; and earnestly exhorted him to make an ingenious Discovery and
Confession of what he knew touching the Conspiracy and Treasons of which he had
been found guilty, and received Sentence to die.

To this Captain Walcot replied, That he had some Papers in his Pocket, of what
he had prepared to say in Writing, because his memory was bad; therefore he
desired they might be pulled out, and he would read them.

Then Dr. Cartwright and the Ordinary spoke to Hone and Rouse to the effect
beforementioned, earnestly desiring them to confess the whole of what they
knew; instancing some places of Scripture to them, as Joshuab's advice to
Achan, etc. My Son, confess, and give glory to God whom you have dishonored,
etc. telling them, they would have imbrued their hands in the Blood of a
merciful and good Prince who had often pardoned, and gave many Acts of Oblivion
and Indemnity to his Subjects; and whose Reign has preserved the purity of the
Protestant Religion amongst us: That we cannot enjoy more than we do enjoy:
with other good admonitions for them to make clear Discoveries of the truth of
what they knew.

Captain Walent in the mean while was prepared to read his Speech.

Dr. Cartwright asked him if he could discover any more than he had done already.

Walcot. I Have not in the general. I told the King the thing was laid very deep:
There was a Gentleman with me last night, I told him what I told the King, and
that was all: I told him I thought an Act of Indulgence would be very
necessary, because he had a great many men to take Judgment of. I know not the
particulars of the Design; but the King has the Lord Howard, Mr. West, and
others that know more than I. I was never in Council with them, nor never with
them above four, five, or half a dozen times.


Then looking upon his Paper, he began his Speech as follows. THis great
Concourse of people do not only come here to see me dye, but also to hear what
I shall say; and because I would not be reproached, and thought to be an
Atheist when I am gone, I have two or three words to speak for my Religion. I
do believe in Three persons, and one God, and I expect and hope to be saved by
the Merits and Righteousness of his Son Christ Jesus, without the hope of an
advantage by any Merits or Righteousness of my own. And I believe that the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the word of God, that they were not
written according to the will of Man, but holy men of God writ them as they
were inspired by the holy Ghost.

I believe that these Scriptures ought to be the Rule of our Faith, and the
method of our Worshipping of God: I believe that as Christ is the head of his
Church, so he is then Law giver, That it is not in the power of any Council or
Conclave of Cardinals, or power upon earth whatsoever, to set up the Precepts
and Traditions of men, and to make them of equal validity with the word of God.
I believe it was not because the Jews rejected and Crucified Christ, that he
rejected them, but because they rejected his Word; which appears by the Three
thousand that God by one Sermon of Peter's Converted; they being pricked in their
hearts, and touched in their Consciences, cried out, Men and Brethren what
shall we do? and they were that day added to the Church. It was certainly
because the Jews rejected the Word and Gospel of Christ, that the things were
hid from their eyes which belonged to their peace. It is a dreadful thing to
reject the Word of God; and it is a dreadful thing to live in a sinful course
of life, till God withdraws his Spirit from us: For it is said, it shall not
always strive with man. Death is the wages of sin. I believe had not Adam
sinned, he and we his posterity had not dyed. Death is said to be the King of
Terrors, but it is only so to those that are terrifyed with a terrifying
Conscience, that have the arrows of the Almighty sticking in them, from
Convictions of great guilt, and see no hopes of mercy, have no assurance of
pardon; but those that are Christ's, he takes away the terror, and horror, and
sting of death; he enables them to say with Paul, To me to live is Christ, and
to dye is gain: he enables not only to get unto Christ, but into Christ; and so
they have Communion and Fellowship with the Father and the Son. It is no hard
matter to get the notions of the promises of the Gospel into our heads; but
unless the Lord is pleased to apply them to our hearts, we cannot believe:
except we be in Christ as branches in the Vine, we are not Christians indeed.
It was the case of poor Francis Spira; he was certainly a knowing man, but
notwithstanding he had not faith to apply the promises. Christ has said, that
he that believes in him, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and he that
lives and believes in him, shall never dye. So if we be able to apply the
promises by the Spirit of God, we may have comfort through Faith: but then
Faith is the gift of God, and Faith comes by hearing the Word of God, and
receiving it in the love of God.

I shall not be tedious, Mr. Sheriff, I shall be very short.

Mr. Sheriff. Take your own time.


Walcot. As to the present occasion of my death, I do neither blame the Judges,
nor the Jury, nor the Kings Council: I only blame some men that in reality and
in truth were deeper concerned, and more engaged than I, that came in as
Witnesses against me: who Swore me out of my life to save their own, and who
for fear they should not do it effectually, contrived that, That I will appeal
to you all, whether there be a probability in it or not: for they said that I
made it a scruple of Conscience to have a hand in killing the King, or to
embrue my hands in his blood, but was so generous as to undertake the Charging
his Guards, whilst others did it, and to the end another might do it. Truly I
will appeal to all that know me, whether they believe me so much an Idiot, that
I should not understand it was the same thing to engage the Kings Guards,
whilst another Killed him, as to Kill him with my own hands. But however, by
their Swearing against me, they have secured their own Lives and Estates, and
made my Blood the price of theirs. I confess I was so unfortunate and unhappy,
as to be invited by Colonel Rumsey, (one of the Witnesses against me) to some
meetings, where some things were discoursed of, in order to the asserting our
Liberties and Properties, which we looked upon to be violated and invaded. But
it was he, and Mr. West, and some Gentlemen that are fled, who were the great
promoters of those Meetings. I was near a quarter of a year ill of the Gout,
and during that time Mr. West often visited me, and still his discourse would
be, concerning Lopping the Swo Sparks; That was the word he used, meaning the
King and the Duke; and proposed it might be done at a Play: This was his
frequent discourse: for he said, Then they would dye in their Calling: it was
his very Expression. He bought Arms to do it with, without any direction of
mine; I never saw the Arms, nor I never saw the men that were to do it: though
they said they had fifty employed to that end. I told several of them, That the
Killing the King would carry such a blemish and stain with it, as would descend
to posterity, that I had Eight Children, that I was loath should be blemished
with it: and withal, I was confident the Duke of Monmouth would revenge his
Fathers Blood, if it were but to vindicate himself from having any hand in it.
Mr. West presently told me; that the Duke of Monmouth did not refuse to give an
Engagement, that he would not punish those that should kill the King.

And now I desire to forgive all the World from the very bottom of my heart;
and I pray God of his mercy from my heart to forgive them, even Mr. Shepherd,
who delivered me up, who promised to carry me into Holland, but instead of
that, he brought me into the condition wherein I now am. I do desire with all
my heart to forgive the Witnesses, and withal do earnestly beg that they may be
observed, that some remarks may be set upon them, whether their End be Peace,
and that they die the common Death of all men. Certainly, though it be the Law
of the Land I ought to die, and the King may justly and reasonably put me to
death for being in those Meetings where a War was debated; yet I think these
men are guilty of my Blood, that were as deep in as I, and have betrayed me,
and taken it away. Then in the next place I beg leave, Mr. Sheriff, to speak
one short word of Advice to my Friends, that has been often given to me,
though I was not so fortunate and so happy as to take it, and that is, That
they would neither hear any man speak, nor speak themselves, that which they
would not have repeated: for there is no such thing as Faith in man to man,
whatever there is in man to God: either the Tears of a Wife, or a Family of
little helpless Children, something or other will tempt and provoke men to
betray one another. When God has a Work to do, he will not want Instruments,
for he can make them; nor will he want a way to do it, for he can contrive it
and bring it to pass. And I do most heartily desire, and my earnest Prayer to
the Almighty is, That this may be the last Blood spilt upon this account. I
know Acts of Indulgence and Mercy in the King would make him much easier in his
Government, and would make his People sit much easier under it; and that the
Lord may incline his heart to Mercy, ought to be the Prayer of every good man.
What has happened, and what has been the present occasion of our Calamity, I
suppose every man knows; what Provocations have been on the one hand, Fears and
Necessities, Jealousies and Sufferings of the other, I will not intermeddle
with, resolving to use my utmost endeavor to make that Peace and
reconciliation with my God, which is impossible for me to make with man; and to
make it my hearty Prayer to the Great God before whom I am in little time to
appear, That he would stench this Issue of Blood, and find out some other way
to preserve these Kingdoms in Unity and Peace; to the Honor and Glory of his
Great Name, and the eternal Comfort of his People.

One word, Mr. Sheriff, I desire leave to speak as to Ireland, because the King
pressed it hard upon me, and several people have been with me about Ireland, how
far Ireland was concerned in this matter. I do aver here, as in the presence of
God, before whom I am now going to appear, That I do not know an English man
nor Protestant in Ireland engaged in it. What I did know, was only of one
Scottish Gentleman in the North; and the King knows it, but he says he does not
believe it. For they that were concerned, I was never in any of their Councils:
I never saw any of those Lords, but the Duke of Monmouth, and that was I
believe above six months ago. I never saw nor spoke with one Lord, only my
Lord Howard; I heard my Lord Howard say. That they did not value Ireland, for
it must follow England.

I have not more to say, Mr. Sheriff: but truly you will do an act of a great
deal of Charity, if you will prevail with the King for an Act of Indulgence and
Liberty to his People; I think so: and so the Lord have mercy upon me.


Dr. Cartwright. You blame them for that which is their Virtue, and not their
Crime, That they have been Witnesses for the King.


Walcot. I was not for contriving the Death of the King, if you will believe me.


Dr. Cartwright. You blame them for betraying of you in Contriving the War,
upon which the death of the King must have followed, if your Treason had gone
forward, for else you could not have defended your self from that Justice to
which he has brought you: and therefore for you to lay that as a Crime upon
your Witnesses, is indeed very strange.


Walcot. Sir, I think it was but reasonable that I should suffer that is due
from Justice, and reasonable by the Law; but these men, they did not come in
against me till they did it to save themselves.


Dr. Cartwright. Better late than never: a man had better save his Soul and
Body too, than die as now you do, for Crimes that ought to make every good man's
heart relent; and therefore for your blaming them, it was for that which was
their duty to do, they have not committed a Crime in that, but a very
meritorious act.


Walcot. They have revealed it with that aggravating circumstance, which I
think no rational man will be guilty of.


Dr. Cartwright. That circumstance which you call aggravating, is no
aggravation at all: That is rather a mitigation of your Crime, to make them
believe that You were tenderer of the Kings person than to shoot him when he
was not armed. But you confess you were consulting this Crime.


Walcot. I was not to have a hand in the Kings Death.


Dr. Cartwright. But it was proposed when you were there.


Walcot. It was so.


Dr. Cartwright. And it was agreed to be done.


Walcot. Truly I do not know how far it was agreed; I was there many Meetings.


Dr. Cartwright. These very Meetings you could not but be sensible of.


Walcot. There were several Meetings wherein the business of the Kings life was
never spoke of.


Dr. Cartwright. That was agreed in those Meetings; but you had a tenderer
Conscience.


Walcot. I say, they were for asserting our Liberties and Properties.


Dr. Cartwright. I would sain have you explain that.


Walcot. Truly, Sir, since you do press me to speak, we were under general
apprehensions, and so were those Lords that are likely to suffer, as I have
heard; they were under general apprehensions of Popery and Slaveries coming in.


Dr. Cartwright. What sign was there of it? you had no Persecution at all; you
were allowed by the Law to meet five in a house, besides those of the Family.
It is true, the Conventicles have been disturbed of late; and I would have you
look upon it as a Judgment of God, to bring you to this for forsaking the
Church of England: You have forsaken Communion with that Church in that way you
were instructed from your Youth.


Walcot. I do not come here to dispute of Religion, but I come here to die
religiously, if it please God to enable me.


Dr. Cartwright. I pray God enable you: but I would not have you charge that as
a Crime upon the Witnesses, which was their Duty.


Walcot. I cannot tell how to excuse my Witnesses for aggravating things against
me, and making them worse than really they were.


Dr. Cartwright going to reply; Walcot. Pray, Sir, give me leave, for a man to
invite a man to a Meeting, to importune him to this Meeting, to be perpetually
soliciting him, and then to deliver him up to be hanged, as they have done me
--


Dr. Cartwright. It was a Crime to follicits you to those Meetings; but when
you were in, it was a Duty in you and in them to reveal it: if God had given
you the grace to reveal them, the turn had been theirs which now is yours. And
whereas you say you cannot excuse them, that is uncharitable.


Walcot. I do forgive them, and I desire with all my heart God would forgive
them.


Dr. Cartwright. You confess you were guilty enough to take away your life.


Walcot. I was so. The same measure we mete to another, that measure God will
mete to us: Then, Sir, I do leave it to God.


Dr. Cartwright. Then you pray this may be the last blood spilt upon this
account.


Walcot. I do so.


Dr. Cartwright. Would not you have Traitors brought to their end? You talk of
spilling Blood, as if it were innocent Blood now spilt, when you do confess and
own the guilt. But I shall give you no further disturbance, but my Prayers to
Almighty God for you, that God would give you mercy. And then turning to Hone.


Dr. C. Mr Hone give glory to God, and unburthen your Conscience, for you have
but a short time to stay here.


Hone. I have nothing further to say, but that I have been guilty of the Crime.


Dr. C. You are so?


H. Yes, I am guilty of this Crime according to the Law of the Land.


Dr. C. I, and according to the Law of God?


H. Yes.


Dr. C. You say according to the Law of the Land, a man may be sworn out of his
life by false witnesses, but you were guilty of Conspiring the Death of the
King, and raising an Insurrection?


H. Truly I must say as the Captain well minded, I was drawn in Thou saw a
thief, and thou consentedst with him: So I say, that I was drawn in, I saw the
thief and consented; I have looked upon my self since to be the more guilty of
blood, and my Circumstance was to be drawn in, and ensnared; for I never was at
any of their meetings, none of their Cabals, but in a public Coffee-house or
Tavern, where they discoursed the matter of Fact: and I was to meet the K. and
the D. of York. but I did not know at that time when, or where, nor what was my
business.


Dr. C. But you were to assist?


H. Yes, I promised that, to assist.


Dr. C. Do you beg God and the Kings forgiveness for it, from the bottom of
your heart, that you have been guilty of this: For if the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the Ditch; as well he that leads, as he that is led,
although he that leads may fall deeper: There are circumstances make one man's
Crime greater than another; The greatness of theirs does not lessen yours.


H. I believed that then I was very near another snare: I was resolved to go
down into the Country, and not meddle in the thing at all, and had been in the
Country, but meeting with Keeling, (I freely forgive him for whatsoever is
done,) he called me, and discoursing with him, I did say I was for killing the
K. and saving the D. of York.


Dr. C. Why was you for saving the D. of Y.


H. I do not know what to say as to that: there was no reason.


Dr. C. What was your own private reason for killing the K. and saving the D.
of Y.


H. As to that I think this, that the D. of Y. did openly profess himself to be
a R. Catholic, and I did say I had rather dispose of the K. than the D. of Y.


Dr. C. Had you rather a Papist should Reign over us, as you take him to be,
than the K.?


H. I do not know what to say to that.


Dr. C. That does deserve a reason, Mr. Hone. You ought to give some reason of
that, you cannot but have some reason; if you had had a design to kill the D.
and save the K. then it might be to prevent Popery, but you say the quite
contrary. God in Heaven forgive you for your murderou; design.


H. I know as little of this as any poor silly man in the world; I was fain to
gather it, I had it not so down right, I was drawn into it, however I am now to
die: as for the Witnesses, I desire the Lord to forgive them.


Dr. C. They have not wronged you, they have done their duty.


Dr. C. Rouse what say you?


Rouse. As a man and a Christian, in the first place, as God has made me a
Christian through his Grace, that the World may understand, that I do not dye
as Capt. Walcot says, an Atheist; I do here declare in the presence of God,
and this vast number of people, what Faith I dye in: In that very Faith which
was once delivered, and in the Belief of that Doctrine which the Church of
England makes Profession of, and is agreeable to the word of God, being founded
upon the Doctrine of the Prophets, and Apostles, whereof Jesus Christ is the
Corner Stone. There have been very various opinions concerning me, upon the
account of the various employments that I have been exercised in, both here,
and beyond Sea: It has been my lot to fall under such circumstances, and to
fall under such misrepresentations and Censures, upon the account of some
public Employments, that I have been in for the K. and after I returned from
Flanders, upon the account of Disbanding, it was almost morally impossible for
such a one in my capacity, to stand right in the affections and opinions of all
people. When I was employed in Flanders, in the payment of that Army, I was
then between 2 Rocks; I will leave it to the Judgment of all sorts of people,
you know the Country, I need not particularise, nor reflect upon opinions, and
the like. But I having been bred up in England, and had that education it
pleased God to give me, I was not fond of, nor carried off with, that
debauchery in those times: and sometimes, more than once or twice, it was my
lot that I was like to have been murdered for pleading for, and justifying the
actions of the King of England. Since my return, and being employed under Sir
Tho. Player, and some others about disbanding, there it came to my Lot, because
I could not humor some Gentlemen, who neither feared God, nor honored the
King (I will not say so of all, for I know some were very worthy Gentlemen,
that scorned any of those actions, which some would attempt. There is one
worthy Gent. I can speak very honorably of) that so they might have their
pockets full of money, did not value how the Accounts were stated, and at the
very same time I was under many temptations of handfuls of Guineas in my hand
to do so and so, to cheat the K. and because I would not do that, I was looked
upon as a Jesuit. I did wave all these things under those circumstances. It
has been my lot likewise being employed by Sir T. P. and the rest of the
Commissioners to fall into those Companies and places where my Lord Shaftsbury
and others have been, and have had some kind of Discourse, which was not
Treason, but rather a thing that I ever abhorred, and declared a detestation
of: since these hurly burlys, concerning Parliaments going off, and coming on,
did discontent the people upon one account or another, I confess I have been a
hearer, and have understood too much of some kind of meetings, which I pray God
forgive them for, and especially those that call themselves Protestants, being
10000 times worse than any others. That there have been such kind of Designs,
and Meetings, and Clubbs, I have not been ignorant of; God forgive me that. I
have not been as careful and as diligent, and as ready and forward to discover
it a great while since. That I ever had a hand in it, or the least thought or
resolution, or intention to appear in it, but rather, on the contrary, have
declared my opinion against it both in the sight of God, and man, as a breach
of the Laws of God, and the Laws of the Land, and contrary to our Duty, who are
bound to pray for the King, and all that are in Authority. I do declare in the
presence of God, I am a perfect stranger, and I thank God my Conscience is
clear, I have acquainted his Majesty in Council, and I have had the Honor to
be admitted into his Majesty's presence in private almost half an hour on
Saturday was seven-night, where I was as clear and above board, and as faithful
to his Majesty as I could be in an humble manner, according to my duty; where I
offered to have some time, and place allotted, that I might give him a whole
Scheme of the business: For there were a great many Gentlemen that had a
respect for me; It was their opinions that I had a general Knowledge of all the
Clubbs, and all the Designs that ever were since the King came in, but they
were under a mistake. I gave his Majesty an account to the best of my
knowledge, and when I had done, his Majesty seemed to be pleased, and to thank
me for it; but before I had power to put it in writing, and wait upon his
Majesty, the Providence of God did so order it, the Council thought it fit that
I should be committed to Prison, where I was some days; I have had more
kindness among Heathens and Indians, I pray God to forgive them for it, I had
not liberty to send to my Wife big with Child, in two days where I was.

Sir, I shall not hold you in suspense, and multiply words, but what is most
proper to this occasion. What I have given to his Majesty in Council, and what
I have spoken to his Majesty, in private, is nothing but the naked truth to
clear my own Conscience, that I may not go out of the world with any thing upon
me: I wish those that call themselves Protestants would discharge their duty
better to God and the King, than either I or the best Subject ever did. I have
looked upon it as an obligation ever since I knew what it was to be a man, to
carry my self obedient to those that God has set over me, especially the King
and those that are in Authority; and I have made it my practice to pray for the
King, as for my own soul. That it has been my lot to be acquainted with those
vanities of Clubbs, and persons, no rational man will wonder, considering the
Circumstances and places I was called to. There is one particular Gentleman,
Mr. Sheriff; I must desire the favor to clear my self by something that I took
occasion to speak of yesterday. I did acquaint you, Mr. Sheriff, with what I
had spoken to the King, how I was interrupted in the further discovery of what
I had a mind to say. What was further said yesterday, it was nothing but the
naked truth: In the first place, as to what was afterward discourst of, as to
some particular persons, namely and particularly Sir Thomas Player, I must do
justice to all the world. That he has been acquainted with the Lord
Shaftabury, none, here, will wonden; but that he has been very shy of his
Company since he came out of the Tower: for he told me many times, he never was
in his company but once, for he did not like some things, and saw some designs
that he was afraid were going on; and thereupon Sir Thomas Player was so
ingenuous and honest to the King, as to break off. I always looked upon him as
a very Loyal subject, and I must declare in the presence of God and all these
people, I never heard him speak one dishonorable word of the King; what he may
have had with others is best known to himself. I have been in several Clubbs
eating and drinking, where it has been discourst to accommodate the Kings Son,
the D. M. That there was a design to set up the D. of M. I will not say while
the King raigns, though some extravagant hotheaded men have taken upon them to
discourse these things, but not any worthy man: I know those that were worthy
to be called by that name, have declared in my hearing, that in opposition to
the D. of Y. if the King be seized, they would stand by the D. of M. There are
others, (I will not give nicknames to any, you are wise men, and know what I
mean by speaking in the general,) that were for a Commonwealth, and some there
were, two or three persons. I shall be as plain as I can, and I hope you will
bear with me since it came to my lot to come to the knowledge of it. Some were
for the D. of M. some for a Commonwealth, and some, but very few, not worth
naming, were for the D. of Bucks: But that I think fell at last between these
two, being the greater part, as far as I did apprehend by discoursing here and
there in the City, which I did very frequently do. But the way of these
Gentlemen's discoursing these things was only one at a time, especially a very
industrious Gentleman that has made it his practice a long time, (for it has
been my lot to be acquainted but two months and that too long,) which is the
Witness that comes against me, and I pray God to forgive him, and I blame him
not for discovering me, but for the words he spoke himself, by way of
instigating me to enter into a design against the King; they were his own words
and not mine. I blame him not for discovering any thing whereby the King may be
served. He did tell me several times there were Clubbs in London, but I could
never get out of him the places where the Clubbs were. Yet I endeavored what
possibly I could to come to the bottom of that design for my intent was to make
a faithful and true discovery, that I might not go to Whitehall or a Justice of
Peace, with an idle story, or a sham: but at last I got out of him that Rich.
Goodenough was chiefly instrumental. This was a very few days before notice was
given, this certain person Thomas Lee the Dyer, that he was sworn against by
one How: I asked him the meaning. He told me that that How was a very Rascal. I
asked Lee, Sir, what course shall be taken? for what by the Doctors-Commons of
the one hand, and what by the persecutions of the other, we must think of a way
how to relieve it. There is some design in hand, says Lee, don't you know? no,
said I, I would be glad to hear. There is an invasion, said he, going on, a
design against the King and the Government, but that was only a fallacy; but he
discovered afterward to me that there was a resolution, and a certain number
of people about the City and the Nation, to make an attack upon the Tower of
London, upon the City of London, upon Whitehall, and upon St. James's: I said
what do you design then? have a care that you don't shed more innocent blood,
for the Land is stained with blood too much already. No, says he, the
resolution as Mr. Goodenough says, is not to spill a drop of blood, but only
to secure the Kings person, that the Papists do not kill him, and then says he
we will deal with the D. of Y. as we please. They were his own words to the
best of my remembrance. Afterward this Gentleman was sworn against by one Mr.
Keeling in East-Smithfield, says he, he is a Rogue and a Dog, and I have seen
him but once these nine Months, and I had no discourse but only drunk a glass
of drink; which proves since to the contrary. Being then in Company at the
Kingshead Tavern in Swithens-Ally near the Exchange, news was brought, he was
sworn against, he did not know what to do, but found out a place near
London-wall, and desired me to go to one or two about the matter, he knew not
how to obscure himself, his house was beset, Messengers after him, and likewise
a kind of Judgment or Execution; how to put both ends together he knew not. I
told him, if he would I had a bed, he might go to my house. I never heard a
word from Rich. Goodenough one way nor another of any design against the K. and
the Government, whom I have known this seven years; only this Lee told me, his
hand was as deep as any other. Its true, this Gentleman comes and swears
against me, that I should be the only person to engage in taking the Tower of
London. Sir John -- you know very well in what capacity I have been, and how
very incapable I was in my person to take the Tower of London. I speak in the
presence of God, before whom I am to appear in a few minutes, I never had any
such thought, never had any such desire, never consulted with any persons of
Quality, never discoursed of any Arms in order to it, but only this I was
saying. This fellow being set on (and I think a more proper person than any man
in the world) for that he was a little low in the world, he was under a
temptation of being thrown out by an Anabaptistical Church, for some kind of
failings, he was under a temptation to make himself somebody, therefore he did
close with Mr. Geodenough and some others; and when the first Proclamation came
forth, he himself told me, I never knew it before, that Rumsey, Captain Waicot,
Nelthrop and Goodenough and West were concerned in this design, he was the man
told me: and when the second Proclamation came out, then he could tell me of
those too; I told him he was a wretch he had not discovered it betimes; as to
his swearing against me, for which God forgive him, that I had a hand in taking
the Tower of London, the thing is this: He knew I was intimately acquainted
with a certain Captain, one Blage, who was my servant 21 years ago in Virginia;
he has been a very faithful and honest servant, I believe, to his Majesty for
these 15 years, particularly five years in three of his Majesty's Men of War. I
know very well the man is of such a principle that he abhors to engage in any
wicked design. But only Lee discoursing at random about taking the Tower,
Captain Blage gave this answer, (for he is a very jocular man,) if I were of a
mind to take it, were it for the service of the King, if there were an enemy
coming in, says he, I would with six Ships well manned and armed with Guns
undertake to take the Tower: upon what account he said it, I don't know, but I
believe in my Conscience he had no more design to put such a thing in practice,
than I have to cut my own throat at present; Captain Blage had heard these
discourses pro and con, says he 2 or 300 men would do it, it is weak in such a
place, I wonder his Majesty dos not make it stronger. Now when he came to
swear, as soon as he was taken up, he took occasion to swear against me, all
the discourse he used in pressing me to undertake this design.


Mr. Sheriff Rich. Pray, if you have any thing that was not told in Court,
discover it, but you need not go over that which was in Court.


Rouse. Mr. Sheriff, I have nothing at all to say, either to blame the Judges,
or the Jury, or the Witnesses themselves, the greatest of all. I thank God I
was not any way to have had any hand in it: but the very words themselves that
came out of his mouth he makes me the Author of, but I freely forgive him, as I
desire God would forgive me: tho he did tell me positively there were five
hundred Arms to be brought out of the Country. I heard of such a thing, I
confess, here and there, but could never know the Authors of it, nor the Clubbs
where it was discoursed: it was lately that he told me, Goodenough told him,
That the King was to be taken off as he came from Windsor, That there was
several things to be done in order to it, That they wanted a place of meeting,
and some thought of Salisbury Plain, and some of Black Heath, but the most
convenient place pitched upon was Black Health. They were discoursing how to
gather the People together; Some were for communicating it privately, others
for a Ball. They asked my Thoughts: said I, the best way will be, if you throw
up a Silver Ball, to get the People together: for my design was to get what I
could out of them. Thereupon he went to Mr. Goodenough, and discoursed him, and
told him, that my Opinion was, to throw up a Silver Ball and declare, All those
that will come and drink a Bowl of Punch, shall be welcome, and that by this
means they would have gathered thirty or forty thousand men in two or three
days time, which otherwise would have been a fortnight a doing: but for
himself, I will not blame him, nor lay any thing to his charge of which he is
not guilty. I mus^ needs give him his due. I do not remember that ever he
insisted upon shedding of Blood, but that he has discoursed in very
opprobrious terms and base Language of the Duke of York; by calling him Rogue,
and Dog, and such things: and that We will do his work: That is true. And, that
after the King's decease, the Duke of Monmouth, having a Vogue with the People,
must of necessity succeed: I cannot tell what I can say more as to that; that
is the chief thing I have to say, if I have not forgot any thing.


Mr. Sheriff Rich. Mr. Rouse, you would do well to name those Persons that were
with you in that Consultation.


Rouse. There was no Consultation at all, Sir. That I had was from this Thomas
Lee's mouth himself, That there were five hundred Arms to be brought in; That
he had it from Richard Goodenough, and Nelthorp, and Mr. West, and that Mr.
West particularly knew from whom these Arms were to come, for he gave me a hint
that part of the Arms were bought by Mr. West.


Mr. Sheriff Rich. Who proposed the way of the Ball?


Rouse. Sir, he was saying, there was several Propositions made in the Club
where Goodenough was, and some thought of one way and some another, but they
could not find out a proper way; Says he, what do you think? Said I, if the
People meet together they may throw up a Ball, just in that careless way, I
said so. So he came to me afterward, and said, that he had discoursed with Mr.
Goodenough, and Mr. Goodenough told him, that there was forty thousand pound in
Bank, and if such a Ball cost thirty or forty pound, it mattered not, to carry
on such a Design as that was.


Here Captain Walcott spoke. Captain Walcot. Sir, I desire you to take notice
of this, among other things, that so far as I ever heard of this business, it
is of no longer a date than August or September last: I would not have this
Consequence of it, so as to stifle the Popish Plot.


Mr. Sheriff. Do you know any thing of the Popish Plot that has not yet been
discovered?


Capt. Wall. No, Sir.


Hone. I had but the knowledge in March last of this business.


Capt. Wall. I do not know nor ever heard, that it was older than August or
September last.


Mr. Sheriff. Ordinary, do your Office.


Ordinary to Walcot. Have you fully discharged your Conscience?


Capt. Walcot. I have.


But it being said that Rouse was interrupted, Mr. Sheriff North. If you have
any thing to say, Mr. Rouse, go on, but do not make Repetitions.


Who pulled his Paper out of his Pocket and looked on it. Rouse. He declared
further, Mr. Sheriff, That when once the thing came so far that the Tower and
City was taken and so many Men gathered together, they would quickly increase;
and the method was, to go to Whitehall with Swords in their hands, and to
demand Privileges and Liberties, not to take away the Kings Life, but only let
the D. of Y. look to it: for he was resolved upon it that he should not succeed
the King. Then he delivers another Paper, being his Petition to the King, and
some more Notes in Shorthand.


Ordinary. Have you fully satisfied your Conscience.


Rouse. I have Sir a Word or two to speak to the People. I have discharged my
Conscience as to any thing as to what I was acquainted with. It had been happy
for me if I had not heard of it; but that I had a hand in it I thank God I am
free.


Dr. C. You had a hand in the concealing.


Rouse. That I had.


Dr. C. And in maintaining the Correspondency without discovering it; and you
do diminish your Crime.


Rouse. No Sir, I don't desire it. Mr. Sheriff, I do freely acknowledge and
confess that it is just in God in the first place, and righteous and just in
the King, that I die; and that I die justly for concealing it. I would lay no
blame upon the King nor any other Person in the World. I did not conceal it
upon any Account to his Majesty's Prejudice nor any Man in the Nation; and I
hope God will give more Grace to those Persons that do succeed. I beg a Word or
two I had almost forgot, as a Man and as a Christian, That it is a thing of
such evil Consequence, I have found it by bitter Experience now, for such and
such public Places to be visited, especially by those that are Professors of
the Protestant Religion, and particularly Coffee-Houses, where it is very well
known too much time is spent, and Families, and Wives, and Children, suffer too
much: I pray God the People may take notice of it and lay it to Heart that
spend their time so, thinking it is but a Penny and a Penny; and so discourse
of State Affairs as if so be they were Gods Counselors in the Government of
the World, running from the Coffee-House to the Tavern and from the Tavern to
the Coffee-House, which has been the Debauchery of this Age; and so bring them
into this Dilemma to discourse of those Things neither pleasing to God nor the
King, nor themselves, but their Prejudice. The Profanation of the Sabbath Day
is commonly discourst of in this place; God forgive me for not observing it as
I should. I pray God those that follow me may be more careful of their Duty to
God and Man, for the good of themselves, their Souls, and their Families; those
that are young especially and coming up, that they may chiefly mind their
Concerns for Eternity, and that they would pay their Duty and Homage to the
King and those that God has set over them, and not neglect that great Command
to pray for the King and all that are in Authority.

Being asked if they had any thing more to say, They said, No. Mr. Ordinary
then prayed with them, and sung a Psalm; and then they desired to pray
themselves; which was granted.
Captain Walcot's Prayer.
O Lord, our God, Thou art the God of present help in time of Trouble, a God,
that have promised to be with thy People in the Fire and in the Water. O Lord,
we pray thee, that thou will afford thy presence to thy poor suffering Servants
at this time, that thou will enable us to pray with Faith, to trust in thee, to
be in expectation and hope of Mercy from thee. O Lord, thy Servant that
speaks does confess, that the Iniquities at his heets have justly overtaken
him that just and righteous art thou in all thy Judgments, that he has reason
to bear thy Indignation, because he has sinned. O Lord, we beg, even for thy
Son Christ Jesus's sake, that our sins may not be brought to our remembrance in
order to our despondency or discouragement, or our despairing in thy Mercy, but
rather, O Lord, in order to an assurance that our great God has pardoned and
forgiven them in the Blood of his Son. O do thou has each of our Souls in that
Fountain set open for Sin and for Uncleanness. Give us, O Lord, inward
Spiritual strength from thy self, and give us cause to bless thy Name for
inward supporting Graces, for inward assistances. O let us find an increase of
spiritual strongth, let us be assured that our Sins are done away, and let us
also be assured that our Names are written in the Book of Life, and let it be
such an assurance as may be matter of joy and rejoicing to our Souls. O do thou
enable every one of us, from the inward evidence of thy Spirit, to say with thy
Servant Job, That we know and are assured that our Redeemer lives. O do thou
give us such an assurance of an Interest in thee, that we may be enabled in
deed, in reality, and in truth, to say, that we have run our race, and we have
finished our course with Joy: O let us now receive the fruit of those many
Petitions that we have put up unto thee. O let us now find the Spirit
influencing our Hearts to a yielding patience, and a through subjection to the
Will of God: let us find thy Spirit assuring us that we are thine. O let us
have stronger Evidences of thy Love, stronger Testimonies of thy Affection: O
give us some inward Tastes of those heavenly Joys that we hope through the
Mercy of Jesus Christ in a little time to have a more full Fruition of. O Lord,
do thou speak peace to every one of our Consciences; enable us to take hold of
thy Strength that thou may make Peace with us, and let us not be
discouraged, O Lord, since we have a High Priest that can be touched with our
Infirmities: let us with Boldness have Access to the Throne of Grace, that we
may obtain Mercy and Grace to help in time of need. O take away the Sting and
Terror that is in Death in any one of us, by assuring us of our Interest in
thee, by assuring us that our Names are recorded in the Book of Life; tho we
lie under a Sentence of Death from Man, we beg that we may have a Sentence of
Life eternal from our God; and tho we meet thee, O Lord, in a Field of Blood,
we beg that thou will come to meet with us in a Field of Mercy. O Lord extend
thy Mercy, thou Lord whose Compassions fails not, cause the Bowels of thy
tender pity to yearn with Compassion toward us: enable every one of us, O
Lord, to die believing in Jesus Christ, to die hoping in his Mercy, to die,
relying upon him for Justification, for Sanctification, and for Adoption. O
Lord, though we have been Prodigals, we desire to return to our Fathers House
where there is Bread enough. O enable us to come unto thee as Children to their
Parents. O let our Prayers be offered with so much Fervor in Christ Jesus;
that thou may think it reasonable to assure us of thy Love. O let the
Intercession of Jesus Christ be accepted. O Lord, we beg that he may be our
Advocate; if our Advocate be our Judge, certainly we cannot miscarry. O let
Jesus Christ be the Hope of every one of our Souls; and Lord let not our Hope
be like that of the Hypocrite, but let our Faith be built upon the Rock of
Ages, and let us not fail from the apprehension of Affliction and Punishment
from men. Yet, O Lord, do thou so order our Hearts and our Spirits aright, that
thou may be the Lot of our Inheritance, and our Portion for ever. O do thou
interest us in thy self; Lord carry on thy own Work. We desire to come unto
thee that we may have life. Lord help us, Lord put to thy helping Hand, Lord
teach us truly to leave no Sin unrepented of in any one of our Hearts. And O
Lord, we beg that with us thou will give us leave to recommend unto thy Care
our poor Wives and Children: Thou have promised to be the Father of the
Fatherless and the Husband of the Widow; and thou have commanded us to cast
the Care of them upon thee. O do thou make Provision for them, deal kindly with
them, imprint thy own Image upon them, and enable them to bear this severe
stroke with Patience. O Lord, stand by and support them; let their Ways be
found so pleasing and acceptable unto thee, that thou may think it
reasonable to make all their Enemies at Peace. Lord, interest them in thy Love,
and do thou favor them with thy Mercies and loving Kindnesses. O Lord, we also
beseech thee in the behalf of these poor Kingdoms wherein we are, that thou will be merciful to them, prevent Divisions among them, heal all their
Breaches, compose their Differences, make all that are thine of one Heart and
Mind in the things of thee our God. And Lord, if it be thy Will, do thou rule
in the Heart of the King, that he may rule and reign for thee, and for the good
of thy Church and people. Lord, favor us with thy mercy, assure us of thy
love, stand by us in the difficult hour, take us into thine own Care, cause thy
Angels to attend us, to convey our Souls as soon as they are divided from our
Bodies, into Abraham's Bosom, into the Paradise of our God. And Lord, we beg
that thou will be with us, with thy extraordinary Presence, helping us to trust
in thee, doing for us beyond what our narrow Hearts are able to ask or think.
All which we beg for the sake of thy Son Jesus Christ, in whom, O Lord, this
little time do thou give us Hearts to give thee all Glory, Honor, and Praise,
now and for evermore. Amen. Sweet Jesus, Amen.

HONE's Prayer.
GLorious Lord our God, thou art the God of the whole Creation, and the God
that created the Heavens and the Earth in six days; by thy power we stand here
before thee: Lord, help us to be looking up unto Jesus Christ, who is exalted
to be a Prince and a Savior to give Repentance to Israel, and Remission of
sins. Now, Lord, for thy mercies sake we would be helped to say, That Power
that raised up Christ from the dead, that is able to raise up our poor Souls
before thee from Death to Life. O Lord, for thy mercies sake wash all our Souls
in the Blood of Jesus Christ, which speaks better things than that of Abel:
and, Lord, for thy mercies sake pardon all our sins, from our first, our
Original sins, and our sins of Sabbath-breaking, and our sins of Transgression,
and the sin for which we are condemned; O Lord, pardon it, and let us not go
out of the World with one sin hid in our Souls. For thy mercies sake pardon all
our sins; and, Lord, do thou preserve this Nation, and put it into the heart of
the King to be merciful, and to rule in Truth and Righteousness. And for thy
mercies sake, rule the Affairs of this Nation, and help to rule and govern all
things for the government of our Souls and our Spirits, for thy mercies sake;
and help us that with joy we may be received into Glory, into the eternal
Habitations: for Christ is sent into the World to that purpose, to save
sinners, of whom we are chief. And, Lord, for thy mercies sake, let me have a
true belief in Jesus Christ aright, to be looking up unto him for Life and for
Salvation. Oh that we might perish if we perish, and be found doing thy will to
the utmost of our power. Lord, accept of us, and help us and be with us this
little time we shall be in this world. All which we beg for the sake of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory with the Kingdom both now and for evermore.

Mr. ROVS's Prayer.
O Lord our God, who art nearer to each and every one of us, than we are to our
selves: It is not all the Confessions to men in the world, were it confessed by
the Tongues of Angels, those glorious Spirits above, that can avail any thing
with the great God, against whom we have sinned, or that can procure pardon for
the least transgression which deserves eternal wrath. And therefore for the
Sins that we have been guilty of, either against the first or the second Table,
either against God as our Creator, Christ as our Redeemer, or the Holy and
Blessed Spirit as our Sanctifier, the sins that we have committed against thy
holy Church, and that Faith that I hope we die in the belief of, the sins that
we have been guilty of against our Neighbors, upon one account and another,
the sins that we have been guilty of against our Governors and Rulers, to whom
thou have obliged us under manifold obligations, both as Men and Christians,
the sins that we have been guilty of in our several places, Relations and
Capacities whatsoever, whatever have been their Circumstances and their
Aggravations, the least whereof deserves everlasting death, without the Merits
of Jesus; for all those greater or lesser sins, whether that original sin we
brought into the world with us, that source and fountain, and foundation of all
other sins, those actual sins and transgressions against any of those that thou
have set over us, or those that have been equal with us; those relation-sins,
as Husband and Wife, as Master and Servant, in every relation and capacity;
Lord forgive them, and wash them away in the blood of the Lamb of God, that
stands at the right hand of the Majesty on high. And because we have no
worthiness of our own to recommend us to thee, therefore we beg thee for thy
Sons sake to fetch arguments from thy self. Our righteousness is as filthy
rags, and the best of us are as a menstruous cloth. Fetch Arguments from the
riches of thy grace, from the goodness of thy nature, from the multitude of thy
mercies, from the blood of thy Son, from that blessed, eternal intercession
that we hope he is making for us, and for all that belong to the election of
Grace, and shall be brought to glory. Remember thy Churches, hasten the
fulfilling of thy promises, the accomplishing of thy prophesies through the
world, the downfall of the man of sin, and the destruction of all thy true
Churches implacable enemies. Lord hasten the day of the calling the Jews, and
the fullness of the Gentiles; put an end to Wars and rumors of Wars, let the
desire of all Nations come. Dwell in these Three Nations, be a wall of fire
round about them; prevent any kind of Insurrection at home, all manner of
Invasion from abroad; let those that tarry behind, enjoy peace, and truth, and
righteousness. Dwell in and reign in the heart of the King, Lord bless and
prosper him in his Person, give him a long, a prosperous, and an happy Reign.
Good Father we pray thee, let him live here with a flourishing Crown upon his
head, till thou in thy due time shall receive him to an eternal Crown
hereafter. Bless him in his Royal Family and Relations, in his Royal Brother.
Bless him in his Royal Consort, make the King a Nursing Father, and the Queen a
Nursing Mother. Confound all hatred, malice and envy, all evil speaking, every
thing that is contrary to sound Doctrine, and give thy people that live under
him, to show that dutifulness and respect as becomes Christians, and ^s becomes
Loyal Subjects. Bless the Clergy, by whatsoever Names or Titles distinguished,
make them sound in their Doctrine, and make them useful and unblameable in
their Lives and Conversations. Help them to mind the Souls committed to their
charge, and help them to do their duty, that they may be able to say, behold
here are we and the Children whom thou have given us. Now Lord bless all the
Nation from the highest to the lowest, from the Prince to the Peasant, of all
sorts, ranks and degrees. Give Loyalty toward our dread Sovereign, who is a
merciful and gracious Prince, whom thou have set as thy Vicegerent to Reign
over us, who can do nothing but what is just and equal before thee, to whom he
must give an account of all his Transactions, even to thee the King of Kings.
And Lord grant peace and love and unity one among another, and the practical
observation of thy holy day, and those duties that relate to God and Man. Grant
that those that follow after us, may take particular Example by us. We must
needs acknowledge and smite upon our thighs, that we in Justice are brought
hither, that we have nothing to do, but to condemn our selves, and justify the
Justice of the Land, and to pray God to bless his Majesty to Reign in these
Nations, and those that shall succeed him upon the Throne. All which we beg
upon the account of our Lord Jesus Christ, who was dead and behold he lives, to
whom with thy self and eternal Spirit, we desire to ascribe, as is due, all
honor, praise, and glory everlasting. Amen.

There was these Lines more in the Paper delivered by Captain Walcot, than what
you have before seen.
AS to Ireland, I am very inclinable to believe, could I have charged any body
there, with being engaged in the matter for which I suffer, I might have had my
Life; but by the blessing of God, I will charge no man wrongfully, no not to
save my Life; and these being some of the last words I am to speak, I do aver I
knew not an Englishman, or Protestant in Ireland any way engaged in it.
Besides, I was told, they that were mostly concerned, did not value Ireland,
and said it must of course follow England. Something I heard of one Gentleman
in the North, and whether it be true or false I will not determine.

FINIS.

