Vindiciae Vindiciarum; OR, A VINDICATION of a late TREATISE, entitled,
Infant Baptism Asserted and Vindicated by Scripture and Antiquity. In Answer to
Mr. HEN. D'ANVERS his REPLY. To which is annexed, The Right Reverend Dr. Barlow
(now Bishop-Elect of Lincoln) his Apologetical-Letter. ALSO An Appeal to the
Baptists (so called) against Mr. Danvers, for his strange Forgeries, and
Misrepresentations of diverse Councils and Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

By Obed Wills, M. A.

He that is first in his own cause, seems just; but his neighbor comes and
searches him.

Prove. 18. 17. London, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

The Preface.
THe Wise Man tells us Pro. 17. 14. that the beginning of strife is as when one
sets out Water, therefore leave off, says he, contention before it be
meddled with. The Original is big with an Emphasis, and is rendered by Arius
Montanus, [Aquas aperiens, or qui aperit aquam] that is to say, Opening the
Bay, or making a gap in the Banks for the water to run out; so that at first,
though the matter may seem inconsiderable, yet the Waters widening their
passage, become impetuous, grow stronger and stronger, carry all before it,
drown the Country, and cause great Devastations: In like manner from small
beginings of Controversy, Breaches are enlarged, Animosities fomented, the
World filled with Variance, Noise, and Clamor: so that he that first starteth
the same, without being compelled thereunto, especially if it be about
Theological points, and those Circumstantials and Punctilio's, shows himself to
be a man of little judgment, and less affection to the Churches Peace. For
though disputes about Religion are sometimes Necessary, yet are they always
Dangerous, too often emptying the heart of Christian Charity, and filling it
with Carnal Zeal, and Passion: upon which account few there are to be found,
who are fitly qualified to manage such undertakings, which are usually carried
on with more heat than any other Subject. For that besides Reason, Learning,
Reputation, Confidence of Verity, and Interest, which warm men in other
Polemical encounters, they are in this inflamed with a Zeal for God, and the
Impulse of Conscience to appear in his Cause, and for his Truth impugned. The
Concurrence of all which, or some of them, have perhaps induced Mr. Danvers to
appear once more upon the Stage, and thereby given the Ansa, or occasion of
another Duel, between him and me, who both being of no great Strength, might
well have given place to others, as fitter Champions for the Truth, on which
side so ever it be. I must therefore acquaint thee, Reader, that my Antagonist
having formerly published a Treatise for the Baptism of Believers only, I
presumed to declare my Dissent from him, and in my Preface to the Answer have
expressed the Reasons that obliged me thereunto. And besides my endeavors to
refute all his Arguments against Infant Baptism, I did more especially detect
his failings in the Historical part of his Discourse, and how extremely
culpable he was in his Collections, and in perverting the sense of Authors,
contrary to their intentions: And though some thought it was impossible for
him, not to be convinced of the offense he had done Antiquity, yet instead
thereof, and an ingenuous acknowledgment of his Aberrations, he has attempted
to vindicate himself, and by all Artifices imaginable to cover or guild over
his Defects; and for a pretext to hide them, has as much as in him lies,
insinuated a disesteem of my labors, making use of the politic Engine of
Repercussion, retorting and bandying back the charges which I bring against
him, with a sufficient Talio, and large requital. Herein much resembling
Verres, who when Tully framed an Oration against him for Thievery, he knew no
better way to discountenance the same, than by accusing Tully, a true man, that
he was a Thief. But this will prove but a poor Salvo; for when the Vanity and
Injustice of such a procedure appears, will not his face be covered with
redoubled Shame? I am sorry he has obliged me to consume more precious time
with him, and am not willing to say any thing that may disturb the tranquillity
of his Soul, and that because he is deeply touched at what is past; for however
he pretends to Patience, and Suffering, it is easy to observe in him the marks
of a great Animosity and Discomposure: And can any man blame him? since he (as
he tells us) had formed his Treatise in a new Method Preface to the Reply.
for the Benefit of this Age, and consequently might expect it should have been
a Standing-book for the whole Nation, to be universally received without
contradiction. But instead thereof, to have the Mummery discovered, the Mask
and Vizard plucked off, to have his darling Child, his first born in this kind,
Anatomized, it is unsoundness and rotten parts laid open, and exposed to Shame,
Censure, and Loathing, this must needs exasperate a great Spirit. This was such
a Provocation, that his fancy has been more busily employed in inventing
Charges against me, then in clearing himself. He has mainly improved his Study
(in conjunction with what help he could get from the Wits of his Party) to
disparage my Book, vilify my Person, and to render both odious, and to be
suspected. And what a noise does he make in the Preface, with the remarkable
exaggerations of my Curtilations, Misquotations, Mistranslations,
Misapplications, when all this while he looks upon what I have written through
the Multiplying-glass of prejudice, taking Mole-Hills for Mountains, and
Peccadillo's and little escapes for unpardonable Crimes; and what is wanting in
Weight, he makes up in Number. Never did any Momus more industriously set
himself to carp; and some of his Accusations are so trivial, that they may be
brought against the exactest Writer living. And yet after all these
Exclamations, having compared notes with him, and examined Quotations, I find
my self little more concerned, then in the mistake of a Name, a Century, and a
passage of Cassander. And since my Antagonist has the confidence to refer
matters in debate between us to the Tribunal of the Reader, I willingly join
issue with him, not doubting (if he has Honesty and Ability to judge) but that
he will find me Innocent, and this Accuser a Delinquent. There is no way to try
our metal, but to bring it to the Touchstone of the Original Authors, from
whom we pretend our Authorities. There are some things in debate* that they who
understand only their Mother tongue, cannot possibly be competent Judges of
which side the Truth lies: some other things are obvious to the unlearned, and
they that have read only P. Perin in English, and Mr. Foxes Book of Martyrs
have wondered at Mr. Danvers errors. In respect of these I have the less need to
vindicate my self from some of his charges. And truly if the satisfying some
men's importunity, that I would endeavor to disabuse credulous Souls, had not
been more important than any fear of suffering my reputation by this Satyrist,
I should have been altogether silent: For though it be certain, there is
nothing so far from Truth, which a craftily composed discourse cannot make to
appear probable, yet my private thoughts were, that I might have saved this
labor: Since the Learned are well satisfied of the Truth of what I have
written, and the more illiterate that are Paedobaptists are not over-forward to
believe what Mr. Danvers says, and for his own Party, many of them will boast
still. Partiality and Prejudice will not suffer them to believe what is said in
opposition to him, and from them I must expect no milder penalty, then what I
suffered for the first Piece, viz. to be looked upon with a Squint-Eye, and
wounded in reputation. But methinks there should have been so much nobleness in
Mr. Danvers, being a Gentleman, and a Christian, as to have forborne his
Invectives, and instead thereof, have attacqued some of our Arguments for
Pedobaptism, against which he has brought no other Weapons than what every
Zantippe can afford, viz. the Sword of the Tongue, and the Arrows of bitter
words. But I must expect an after-clap of Thunder, for he says he has much to
reckon with me for mistakes in the Doctrinal part. I would advise him rather,
first to take off the exceptions I have made against his Historical part of
Baptism, which he cannot but be convinced of, unless he wink hard. Let him
clear his Accounts with me in respect of that, before he enters upon new work;
or rather, which is most ingenuous, let him publish a Retractation of his
Errors, and so desist: for experience at tests the Truth of that Maxim, Veritas
non quaerenda in cristicis. Moreover he cannot be ignorant that the Nation has
taken a Surfeit of these Baptismal-Controversies; there is more said already
pro and con, than we are able to speak, and few have patience to read any more,
and if we fall to it again, doubtless our Books will prove waste paper. And I
must further acquaint Mr. Danvers that he having treated me with so much
rudeness in what is past, I have little heart to have any more to do with him,
(unless I see better cause) and do hereby promise him Security, as from me,
from all contradiction, whenever he lets fly. There is no Gaping I find before
an Hot-Oven; and silence is accounted the best Answer to such as super-add
Contumacy to their mistakes: For when men are grown so tenacious of an opinion
which once they have espoused, as never to admit of a Divorce, though by
conviction they find it Adulterate, all disputing is to no purpose: such were
anciently condemned, quos non persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris. If Mr. Danvers
be not to be numbered amongst them, I should be glad; For what ever he has said
of my malignity against his person (altogether unknown to me) I here declare
before all men the contrary, and that I love him as a Brother, though erring,
and had much rather convince, than shame him, heartily advising him to cease
tossing the Ball of Contention; to be humble and loving to all Christians; to
mortify his passions, and follow peace with all in every place that call on
the name of the Lord Jesus.

Mr. Danvers's Defense from the Charge of Prevarication, Falsehood, and
perverting the Testimonies of the Ancients, found insufficient; and the same
further made good against him.
IN the 20th page of his Reply, entitled Innocence and Truth vindicated, he
tells us, That he does not quote the sayings of the Ancients as if they had
been Anabaptists, or to prove, that Believers Baptism is the only Baptism of
those Centuries; for, he says, that would have been Madness and Contradiction:
and indeed to quote them for such an end had been little less; and I presume,
if that were not his design, he will be hardly put to it, to give any rational
account why he produced them, and not be found at last to contradict himself:
For in his Treatise of Baptism Edit. 1. (which was the Book I answered) next to
the Preface we have the Contents of his Book, consisting of two parts: the
first proving Believers, the second disproving (as he tells us) that of
Infants Baptism, under these two Heads.

1. That the Baptising of Believers is only to be esteemed Christ's Ordinance
of Baptism.

2. That the Baptising of Infants is no Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

The first of these he attempts to prove in seven Chapters, and the last is
from the Testimonies of learned men in all ages since Christ, witnessing to it.
Witnessing to what? Why, to the truth of his first Assertion, viz. That the
Baptism of Believers is the [Only] true Baptism: Had he said no more than A
true Baptism, he had been safe. And again, in his 7th Chapter of the same
Treatise, p. 56. he thus expresses himself: Not only Scripture, but even
Antiquity it self (of which they so much boast) is altogether for Believers,
and not for Infants Baptism: Now whether these sayings of his, compared with
that abovementioned, that he does not quote the Ancients to prove That
Believers Baptism is the only Baptism of those Centuries, be not Pro and Con,
and evident contradiction, I will not say Madness; and whether he has not
shamefully relinquished his Thesis, yea whether he does not prevaricate to free
himself from the Charge of Prevarication, is submitted to the judgment of the
Reader. And although it must needs be obvious to every impartial eye, that Mr.
D. is herein found tardy; yet, as one that has quite forgotten himself, he
does also in the third page of his Reply tell us, that he hopes it will be
acknowledged he does not prevaricate and pervert the Testimonies in the three
first Centuries, and that Believers Baptism was the only Baptism for near 300
years, flatly gain saying what he has in the 20th page of the same Book, as we
have above mentioned. Thus, Proteus-like, he often changes Shapes, and being
so wavering and fickle, as we have noted, it is a shrewd Sign he will also
faulter in making good what he pretends to as to the 3 first Centuries; namely,
That he has not prevaricated or perverted the Testimonies thereunto belonging.
Which whether it be so or not, we cannot come to know but by making some
Reflections upon the 7th Chapter of his Treatise of Baptism, where he begins
with the first Century, thus -- The Magdiburgenses in their excellent History
do tell us, that as to the subject of Baptism in the first Century, they find
they Baptized Only the Adult or Aged, whether Jews or Gentiles. How well Mr.
Danvers does excuse himself for adding the word only, we shall hereafter see.
We are now upon the trial of Prevarication; which is a concealing or letting
pass that which ought to have been declared, on purpose to deceive; and this I
charge him with: for though the Magdiburgs do say (what every one knows) that
we have Examples of Adult persons both Jews and Gentiles that were baptized,
but as touching Infants there are no Examples recorded, Exempla annotata non
leguntur; yet they add in the very next line, that Origin and Cyprian affirm,
that even in the Apostles days Infants were baptized, and since these Fathers
lived in the next Century after the Apostles, they may very well be thought to
understand what the Apostles did.

In the 2d Century, Mr. Danvers quotes from the Magdiburgs some of Justin
Martyr's words in his Apology to Antoninus Pius, where mention is made of
Instruction and fasting, and prayer before Baptism, but withal conceals what in
the same place the Magdiburgs tell us, that this was the Method which was used
in reference to Aliens upon their Conversion to Christianity; for these are
their words -- Cum qui ad fidem Christianam conversus esset sat instructus etc.
that is, when any one was converted to the Christian Faith, he was sufficiently
instructed before Baptism.

In the 3d Century he does egregiously prevaricate in telling us, that the
Magdiburgs say, As to the Rites of Baptism they have no Testimony of
alteration: for hereby he does suggest to the Reader, that in this Age as well
as in the former there was no Baptism owned but that of the Adult: whereas,

1. Those words [as to the Rites of Baptism they have no Testimony of
alteration] are his own words, and not the Magdiburgs, who say only this, viz.
Baptizandi ritus in Ecclesiis Asianis observatos hoc seculo, quia omnium ferme
Doctorum Asiaticorum scriptis destituimur, commemorare non possumus; that is,
We cannot rehearse the Rites of Baptizing observed in the Asiatick-Churches,
because we want for the most part the Writings of the Asiatick [ Doctors.]

2. He silently passes by what they do expressly say was in use in this Age,
namely, that Adult persons of both sexes, and also Infants, were baptized;
Baptizabantur in utroque sexu, Adulti simul et Infantes, Cent. 3. C. 6. p. 124.

3. Further: under this head he perverts the Sense of Mr. Baxter's words, and
carrys them quite off from the intent and scope of his Discourse, as you may
see in his Saints Rest, Part 1. c. 8. sect. 5. For what is there spoken from
Origin and Cyprian of an express Covenanting before Baptism, is meant of Adult
Strangers; nor is Mr. Baxter treating there of Baptism, but something else. And
at this rate what Author can be secure from the Violence of his
interpretations? And if he had thought on it, he might have urged for Adult
Baptism that of the Magdiburgs, Cent. 3. C. 6. p. 124. where having said as
before, That persons of both Sexes, both Aged and Infants, were baptized; the
words immediately following are these, Adultorum autem aliquandiu antequam
baptizabantur, fides explorabatur, i. e. But as touching the Adult, they
enquired after Faith and Repentance before they were baptized. Thus much for
the 3 first Centuries, wherein as you see Mr. Danvers is sufficiently faulty;
and yet as if he were most innocent, he does (in the preface to his Innocence
and Truth) most confidently address himself to the Reader, and complements him
in a high strain, saying, that at his Bar the matter is now brought betwixt me
and him; and all that he asks, is only to do themselves and the Truth in
question so much right, as to afford the Common Justice of an open ear; that
having heard the Recrimination (he means Crimination) they will also attend to
what is said for Vindication.

But the specious Title of a Book, or Daring Preface, will never blind an
intelligent Reader, who will judge of things not by a parcel of confident words,
but secundum allegata and probata, according as things are alleged and proved.

In the next place we come to the 4th Century, concerning which Mr. Danvers
says, I make a great Cry; though I know no such Vociferation, but only a just
Censure made against him, by reason of the Authorities of this Age which he
has so much abused.

For in his Treatise of Baptism in both Editions he thus speaks -- In this Age
they [the Magdiburgs] tell us, That it was the universal practice to Baptize
the Adult upon Profession of Faith: if he quotes it not to show that it was the
practice to Baptize only the Adult, it is impertinent; but his grand Assertion
both in his Treatise of Baptism and in his Reply, p. 4. That Adult Baptism was
only practiced in the 4th Century, denotes in what sense we are to understand
him. Now for Mr. Danvers thus to father on the Magdiburgs what they never
spoke, and also to pervert what they did speak, renders him chargeable with
Falsehood and Prevarication; for,

1. They say no such thing, that it was the Universal Practice to baptize only
the Adult upon profession of Faith. But of this in its proper place, when we
shall make good the Charge of Falsehood against him in diverse other things as
well as this.

2. They do indeed tell us, That in the Churches of Asia the Baptized were for
some time first instructed, and were called Catechumens; wherein then lies the
prevarication? Why,

1. Because the Instances there given by the Magdiburgs were Aliens: For they
tell us of some Jews (taking it from Athanasius) that being newly converted to
Christianity, prostrated themselves at the feet of the Bishop, and desired
Baptism. Narrat de Judeis Berythi Athanasius in lib. de passione Domini, quod
ad Episcopi ejus urbis genua advoluti Baptisma petierint, quos ipse cum
clericis suis suscipiens per dies multos in doctrina Christianae pietatis,
erudierit; which Jews, after they had been for many days instructed in the
doctrine of Christian Piety, the said Bishop with his Clarks baptized.

2. Because a little before in the same Chapter the Magdiburgs have these words
-- Baptizabantur autem aqua public in Templis cujuscunq* sexus aetatis et
conditionis homines; men of all ages, sexes and conditions were baptized
publicly in the Temples, (how could this be by dipping) and lest it should be
thought Children were not comprehended under those universal terms, they say in
the same chapter -- De Asianis Ecclesiis Nazianzenus loquens Infantes
baptizandos esse ait etc. Nazianzen speaking of the Churches of Asia says,
That Children were to be baptized. And note here by the way, Reader, That
because in my Answer I have not gone on with the following words of Nazianzen,
si aliquid immineat periculi, that is, in case any thing of danger happen, Mr.
Danvers does in his Preface exclaim against me for curtailing that Father: but
the judicious Reader may understand* that he quarrels at me without a cause;
for my business was to prove, that Infants Baptism was owned in that Century,
as to matter of fact, and not to discourse the ground of it, or to enquire in
what cases it was done, and therefore he might have spared his frivolous charge
about that matter.

It is truly observed by one of the Anabaptists party, That my Antagonist is
so tenacious that he will stand in a thing, although all the World gainsay it:
for though the Baptism of Infants in this 4th Century, be so frequently
attested by the Magdiburgs, yet he will not receed from his former Position;
but has invented a threefold evidence (as he calls it) to prove, that Adult
Baptism was only practiced in this Age.

1. From the sayings of the Fathers and great men of this Century, both in
Africa, Asia, and Europe. 2. From the Positive Decrees of the three eminent
Councils of this Age. 3. From the pregnant Instances of the most eminent men
that were not Baptized till aged, though the Children of Christian Parents in
this Century.
1. He begins with the sayings of the African Doctors, Athanasius and Arnobius,
two of the most eminent of this Age, who (says he) do positively affirm, That
Teaching, Faith, and Desire, should, according to Christ's Commission, preceed
Baptism; whereby it appears that no other than Adult Baptism was practiced in
the Churches of Africa.

To this I answer, That having searched after the Doctrine of Athanasius in the
4th Century of the Magdiburgs, I find not any thing of him mentioned about
Baptism, but only one saying contra Arrianos sermon tertio, viz. That the Son
is not therefore commemorated in Baptism, as if the Father was not sufficient,
but because the Son is the Word of God, and the proper Wisdom and Brightness of
the Father, with a passage or two more concerning Christ's Divinity. Nor is
there any word concerning Baptism to be found in Athanasius his life, Cent. 4.
C. 10. from page 1027 to 1053, for so far it reaches. But suppose this Father
has something of that import elsewhere, according as Mr. Danvers reports of
him in his Treatise of Baptism, namely, that our Savior did not slightly
command to baptize; for first of all he said, Teach, and then Baptize, that
true faith might come by teaching, and Baptism be perfected by faith. Will this
think you do the business? will this prove that he owned no other Baptism but
that of Believers in opposition to that of Infants? No such matter: For, as
has been shown in our answer, the Commission it self for Baptism does not
exclude Infants that privilege, as appears by the consideration of the
condition of the persons to whom Christ sent his Apostles who were Aliens; and
of such ought we to interpret the sayings of Athanasius, because of the
instance beforementioned from him, viz the Jews at Berythrum, who being
proselyted to the Faith of Christ craved Baptism of the Bishop, and they were
made Catechumens, and instructed and fasted 3 days, and baptized by the Bishop.
But Mr. Cobbet in his Just Vindication, examining a book called a Well-grounded
Treatise etc. takes notice of this very passage mentioned by Mr. D. from whom I
suppose he therefore had it. And page 219, 220. Mr. Cobbet demonstrates that
Athanasius's words are wrested to another sense than the scope of his Discourse
tended, and some words left out which served to declare his meaning, and other
words so palpably mistranslated, that the Reader is grossly abused thereby as
well as the Author.

The next is Arnobius upon the 146 Psalm. It is very strange to me that when Mr.
Danvers had rejected Origin upon the Romans. as spurious, though Perkins only
tells us, it was not faithfully translated by Ruffinus; he should quote
Arnobius upon the Psalms for his own opinion, which is altogether spurious;
being (as Perkins says) of a far more modern forge. It seems it is lawful for
Mr. Danvers to quote spurious Authors, though not for the Pedobaptists. But I
hope the judicious Reader will hereby be satisfied that this testimony does not
prove his Assertion, That no other than the Adult-Baptism was practiced in the
Churches of Africa in the 4th Age.

He also adds a saying of Optatus Milevit. out of the Magdiburgs, Cent 4. p.
237. Namely, that none deny but that every man by nature, though born of
Christian Parents, is unclean, and that without the Spirit he is not cleansed;
and that there is a necessity of the Spirit's cleansing before Baptism; so that
the house must be trimmed and fitted for the Lord, that he may enter in and
dwell in it. But this Authority signifies as little as the other: for suppose
this passage rightly translated, as it is not, yet the quotation is very
insignificant to prove that for which he brings it, viz. that no other than
Adult-Baptism was practiced in the Churches of Africa in the 4th Cent. for
Optatus presently adds, Hoc exorcismus operatur, Exorcism does this; which Mr.
D. knows an Infant as capable of as the Adult, and which was equally practiced
on both; and therefore he did discreetly to leave it out, but how honestly, is
left to the Reader to judge, and to his own Conscience. But indeed the whole
sentence is miserably mistranslated, as all Scholars may see by the Latin which
runs thus:

[ Neminem fugit quod omnis homo qui nascitur quamvis de parentibus Christianis
nascatur, sine spiritu mundi esse non possit, quem necesse sit ante salutare
lavacrum ab homine excludi and separari. Hoc exorcismus operatur, per quem
spiritus immundus depellitur and in loca deserta fugatur. Fit domus vacua in
pectore credentis, fit domus munda, intrat Deus and habitat, Apostolo dicente,
Vos estis Templum Dei, et in Vobis Deus habitat.] Another by this true
translation viz. [Every one knows that every man that is born, though of
Christian Parents, cannot be without the Spirit of the world (the unclean
spirit he means) which ought to be cast out and separated from a man before
Baptism. This Exorcism does, by which the unclean spirit is driven away and
flys into desert places. The house is made empty in the breast of a Believer,
the house is made clean, God enters and inhabits there according to the
Apostle, Ye are the Temple of God, and in you he dwells.] And is it not strange
that Mr. Danvers who in his Preface charges me with the notorious abuse of
Authors in curtilations and mistranslations, should be thus notoriously guilty
of both himself? Qui alterum accusat moechum, seipsum intueri oportet.

2. Thus having traveled through Africa, we shall now set footing in Asia,
where Mr. Danvers would have us believe, That it was the Faith and practice of
the Churches, to baptize the Adult, in opposition to that of Infants. And this
he says appears by the like sayings of Bazil, Gregory Nazianzen, Ephrim Syrus,
Epiphanius.

Reader, thou must know that Mr. Danvers cuts out work for me that I am not
concerned to take notice of; for my Business was to answer his first Treatise
of Baptism, and these two last men are not therein mentioned, but brought in
since, as Auxiliary forces: nevertheless I shall not wave them.

1. For Bazil, the passage which Mr. Danvers quotes from him and inserts in
both his Tratises of Baptism is this, viz. Must the faithful be Sealed with
Baptism; Faith must needs preceed and go before. Contra Eunomium. In answer to
which, 1. I deny that any such Sentence is to be found in Bazil, for I have
perused all that he says in reference to Baptism in his 3 Tomes, nor have the
Magdiburgs any such saying of his where they repeat his Doctrine and sayings,
Contra Eunomium; they mention only this against Eunomius, That Baptismus est
Sigillum fidei, Baptism is the Seal of faith, Cent. 4. C. 4. p. 234.

2. There is a great absurdity in the words, as they are placed by Mr. Danvers.
For the Interrogation is, Must the Faithful be Sealed with Baptism? and the
Answer is, Faith must needs preceed and go before; and how absurd is it? for it
supposes that the faithful could be without Faith. But what can be said to
that which is further urged from Bazil? That none were to be baptized but the
Catechumens, and those that were duly instructed in the Faith. I answer, that
those words are not to be found in terminis in any part of his discourse about
Baptism: But do not the Magdiburgs say thus, Bazilius ait non alios quam
Catechumenos baptizatos esse; Bazil says none but the Catechumens were to be
baptized? But when I tell Mr. Danvers that Cyprian held Infants Baptism an
Apostolical Tradition, as the Magdiburgs inform us, he replies, That is just as
much as if Mr. Wills should so affirm except some Authentic authority be
produced for the same, page 91. of his Innocence etc. And may not I be bold to
assume the same freedom, and retort, that if we cannot find the aforementioned
words in Bazil, though the Magdiburgs tell us so, it is just as much as if Mr.
Danvers should so affirm. But suppose Bazil had said it, what will it amount
to? surely no convincing Testimony: since whether the non alii quam
Catechumeni, No other than the Catechumens does exclude the Infants of
Believers from Baptism, we are yet to seek; For that passage may very well be
interpreted that no Pagans were baptized till first they were made Catechumens
or instructed; so that it is left to the Reader to judge whether from that
speech of Bazil (if it were his) it may groundedly be concluded, he was against
Infants. Baptism, which that he was not, I shall give you Reasons shortly.

The next is Nazianzen, who was very positive and express for Childrens
Baptism, as shall be demonstrated when we come to discover the weakness of our
Antagonists Cavils against it.

The third man is Ephrim Syrus, the Monk, whom the Magdiburgs so much blame for
ascribing such wonders to the Cross, that (if you will believe him) the Devil
flys and is not able to stand before it, as the other said of Baptism (strange
Anabaptists as ever the world heard of!) This Ephrim termed the Cross Daemonum
expultrix, et Paradisi reseratrix; That which routs Devils, and opens
Heavens-gate, and therefore advises all Christians to cross themselves in
diverse places of their Bodies, which will notably fortify and preserve them
from the Devil. Madg. Cent. 4. C. 4. p. 302. This is a Witness that seems to be
spit out of the Popes mouth, for he is for praying to the Martyrs and Saints
departed, and helps us to some pretty little forms, As, pro nobis miseris
peccatoribus interpellate; pray for us miserable Sinners. And, O gloriosissimi
martyrs Dei me miserum vestris juvate precibus; O ye most glorious Martyrs of
God help me a miserable Wretch with your prayers. But it may be said what of
all this, he may not withstanding his superstition be an Authentic Witness of
what was in his day as to Matter of Fact: It may be so: What then is his
Testmony as to Baptism? why, this: Those who were to be baptized did profess
their Faith before many witnesses, and renounce the Devil and all his works,
etc. as it is in the Church-Catechism. And Ambrose that was so much for
Infants Baptism, and lived in the same Century with Ephrim, speaks his very
words, as the Magdiburgs inform us from his 3d Book of the Sacraments. Chap. 2.
Confessos baptizandos scribit etc. Ambrose writes there, That those who confessed
were to be baptized, where he recites, how that the Baptized declared, he
renounced the Devil and all his works; and then withal in the same place tells
us, that in his 84 Epistle of his 10th book of Epistles, he is for
Infant Baptism, Cent. 4. p. 239. which clearly makes this quotation of Ephrims
very insignificant as to his purpose; because he might say that, and yet be for
Infant Baptism as Ambrose was. But Mr. D. quotes his 3d Orat. of Baptism for
this passage; which I presume is a Manuscript, as not being to be found among
his printed Works. And if so, I hope Mr. D. will discover himself such a friend
to the Commonwealth of Learning, as to bless the world with its publication.
But I am afraid at last it will appear that Mr. Danvers is every whit as guilty
in mistaking Nazianzens 3 Orations of Baptism for Ephrims book de Paenitentia
Cap. 5. as I was for mistaking Bazil for Nazianzen. And it is as much a making
an Authority.

3. Mr. Danvers tells us, it was the Universal practice of the Western or
European Churches, as appears from Hilary, Ambrose, Jerome, and
Marius-Victorinus, to which I reply more generally.

1. That in this he does designedly go about to delude the Reader, for these
four Ancients were contemporaries, and flourished in the 4th Century; And they
are all put together by the Magdiburgs in one chapter, where they give us their
saying from their several works. One of them speaks of Baptism upon profession,
and there is no sentence quoted from him in reference to Infants, whereas they
give the words of all the rest of these Fathers concerning profession before
Baptism, and withal diverse passages of the same men asserting Infants Baptism*
which being so, Mr. Danvers can never be excused for his Partiality and
Falsehood, in saying as he does, That it was the Universal practice of the
Western Churches to baptize the Adult, that is, only such, which is the point
prae manibus.

2. particularly. 1. For Hilary, he does very ill in saying as he does
expressly, Treatise of Baptism, Edit. 1. That all the Western-Churches did only
baptize the Adult, quoting Hilary lib: 2. de Trinitate; whereas Hilary has no
such saying there, but is for Infants Baptism, as appears in his 2d Epistle to
Austin.

Then for Ambrose, he is large for it in his 2d. Book of Abraham, Chap. 12.
which the Magdiburgs have amply set down, Cent. 4. C. 5: p. 239. and in the
same Chapter Nazianzen is mentioned for it, whom we shall suddenly vindicate,
and evince, that he was absolutely of our side, notwithstanding the frivilous
distinction whereby Mr. Danvers would render him otherwise.

2. Marius Victorinus speaks nothing about Infants.

But lastly, as for Jerome, the Magdiburgs give his Testimony for Infants
Baptism in words at length, and not in figures, Cent. 4. C. 5. p. 239.
Hieronimus quoque lib. 3tio Dialogorum adversus Pelagianos Critobulo sic
scribit: Jerome also (having spoken of Ambrose just before) in his 3d Book of
Dialogues against the Pelagians writes thus to Critob. Tell me, I pray, and
resolve the question, why are Infants baptized? Attic. That their sins may be
done away in Baptism. Critob. But what sin have they committed? is any one
loosed that is not bound? Attic. Do thou ask me the question? The Evangelical
Trumpet or Dr. of the Gentiles, that Vessel that shines throughout all the
world will answer thee -- Death reigned from Adam unto Moses, even over them
that have not sinned after the manner of Adams transgression, which is the
figure of him to come: But all men are guilty either in respect of themselves,
or Adam; Qui parvulus est parentis in Baptismo vinculo solvitur: he that is a
Child, is freed in Baptism from the Bond of his Parent [that is, Original Sin,
or guilt contracted from them].

2. His second Medium or Argument, to prove that Adult Baptism was only
practiced in the 4th Century, is the Positive Decrees of the 3 eminent Councils
of this Age, viz the Garthaginian, Laodicean, and Neocesarean; which, he says,
do positively decree that Teaching, Confession, Faith, and Free-choice ought to
preceed Baptism.

We omit speaking to these Councils for the present, intending to do it in a
more convenient place.

3d Argument that Adult Baptism was the only approved Baptism of this Age, is,
his Ten remarkable Instances in this Century, that were not baptized, though
the Children of Christian Parents, till they were able to make profession of
Faith, viz Constantine, Basil, Gregory, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Jerome,
Austin, Nectarius, Valentinian, and Theodosius.

Here Mr. Danvers (and others of his party, as I hear) triumphs over me,
because in my Answer I speak not to every one of these, and besides I am
upbraided by him for excepting only against 4 of the Ten Testimonies of the
Fathers, viz Athanasius, Bazil, Ambrose, and Nazianzen, who, as I told him in
my answer, were for Infants Baptism.

To which he Replys;

1. That if but four of the Ten be excepted against, then he has six more
stands good, besides the former ( viz. 15 not excepted against as perverted).
But really I have endeavored to understand his Account, but cannot: and
therefore either he is very confused, or I am very dull.

2. The four that I lay claim to, viz. Athanasius, Bazil, Ambrose, Nazianzen,
he will not grant me, being, as he says, full in their Testimonies for Adult
Baptism; He begins with Bazil's saying, That Faith must preceed Baptism. To
this I have already replied, that notwithstanding this he might be as much for
Infants Baptism, as Ambrose, who spoke the same words; and moreover, I shall
now give you some Reasons from whence we may conclude, That Bazil was for
Infants Baptism.

1. Because two of the most eminent Greek Fathers his contemporaries, were for
it, viz. as Nazianz. appears in his Oration in Sanctum lavacrum, Madg. Cent. 4.
C. 6. p. 417. likewise Chrysostom in his Homilies ad Neophytos, besides those
eminent Latin Fathers, as Ambrose, Jerome, and others that were such zealous
Assertors of Infants Baptism who lived in the same Age with Bazil.

2. Because in all the three Tomes of Bazil, there is not one word to be found
against Infants Baptism (though he be very large in his discourses about
Baptism) and certainly he would have said something against it, had he deemed
it an error, for as much as it was practiced not only in the Age wherein he
lived, but in the Churches of Asia, where he was Bishop. Nazianzen speaking of
the Churches of Asia, says, Infants were to be baptized. Mag. Cent. 4. C. 6.
p. 461.

Because Nazianzen his most intimate friend and fellow-student was for
Infants Baptism. The Magdiburgs say there was so great an endearedness between
these two Fathers, that they had as it were but one Soul. Nazianzen is called
animae Bazilii dimidium, the half of Bazils Soul, if in them both, say the
Magdiburgs, there was not Una prorsus atque eadem anima. They further tell us
that from the time of their first acquaintance there was such a Conjunctio
animorum et Studiorum, such a conjunction of spirits and studies that they
continued in most entire friendship ever after. Cent. 4. C. 10. p. 939, 940.

4. We do not find that in any of their Epistolary Entercourses, any thing that
may argue them to be of different judgments in this point; hence I suppose it
may be rationally concluded, that as Nazianzen was for Baptism after
preparation and confession, and condemns those that enter upon it rashly, Magd.
Cent. 4. C. 6. p. 417. And yet in the foregoing page tells us, the Churches of
Asia owned Infants Baptism in case of danger, and declares his own judgment
absolutely for it, without respect to danger. Orat. quarta ad Baptismum, as you
shall hear more anon; so might also Bazil be notwithstanding he has any-where
said, Faith should preceed, or go before Baptism.

5. It Is no wonder we read not of Bazils insisting upon Infants Baptism, for
such was the Error, and superstition of those times wherein he preached,
ascribing such Virtue to Baptism to do away the guilt of Sin, that they would
delay the taking up that Ordinance, till they thought they should dye, that so
they might depart with pure Souls; so that, as far as I can find, Bazil had
much ado to persuade his Hearers to be baptized, and spends abundance of his
pains in quickening them to take up Baptism, without longer delay: as appears
in his Exhortation to Baptism, where he does most sharply inveigh against
procrastinating the same. If Mr. D. would but weigh these things without
prejudice, I doubt not but 'twould abate much of his Confidence that Bazil is
on his side.

Nor will he allow me Athanasius, but concerning him we shall speak in another
place.

Then for Ambrose he says, that he is full also, That the Baptized should not
only make profession but desire the same. But then (as conscious of
prevarication) he adds, that if any of them should contrary hereto say, they
would contradict themselves and the practice of the Age: But this is mere
shuffling. Since the practice of the Age, as to profession, had respect to
Pagans as we have often told him, and in this sense we are to understand
Ambrose; and whereas in my Infants Baptism Asserted, I prove Ambrose was for us
from those words of his lib. 2. de Abraham. C. 12. being these -- Because every
Age is obnoxious to Sin, therefore every Age is fit for the Sacrament; to this
he replys, that this is no proof that he was for Infants Baptism. First,
because Circumcision is hereby meant. Secondly, if Baptism, then those of every
Age that are fit for that Sacrament, must not be supposed, viz. those that are
capable to confess Faith, and desire Baptism, otherwise not only Children but
all good and bad, being obnoxious to Sin are to be esteemed fit subjects for
Baptism. Neither will this Evasion serve Mr. Danvers turn to put by this our
Testimony; and I wonder, he should labor thus to darken Truth, and delude the
Reader; for it is true, those words beforementioned were spoken of Circumcision,
but he knows it was by way of introduction to the Baptism of Infants; and
therefore that he may not impose upon the Reader, I will give the whole
Sentence of Ambrose from the Magdiburgs, Cent. 4. C. 5. p. 240. The Law
commands the Males to be circumcised when newly born, and as soon as they begin
to cry; because as Circumcision was from Infancy, so was the disease [Sin]: no
time ought to be void of a Remedy, because no time is void of Sin -- Neither
the old man that is a Proselyte, nor the newborn Infant is excepted; then comes
in those words, Because every age is subject to Sin, every age is fit for the
Sacrament; and the very next words are these, eadem ratione Baptismum asserit
Pervulorum, lib. 10. Epistolarum, Epistola 84. that is, by the same reason he
asserts Infants Baptism in the eighty fourth of his 10th Book of Epistles.
Whether now Mr. Danvers has not weakly opposed and dealt sophistically with
this Quotation of Ambrose, and whether it be not a pitiful shift in him to say,
the being fit for the Sacrament of which Ambrose speaks, must be supposed to be
meant of those only who are capable to confess Faith, is submitted to the
judgment of the impartial Reader. As for what he objects that if every age be
fit for the Sacrament, in regard every age is obnoxious to sin, then Infidels
are fit subjects of Baptism: I answer that the foregoing words of Ambrose, viz.
Neither the Old man that is a profelyte, nor the Newborn Infant is excepted,
show, that he speaks of those who are within the Church.

The last man that we bring for Infants Baptism, and excepted against by Mr.
Danvers is Nazianzen; and it is observable, that he confesses what we urge from
him has most in it: It seems then I was mistaken, for I thought what we bring
from Chrysostom and Ambrose, had altogether as much in it, as what is re-urg'd
from Nazianzen. The words quoted from this Father are out of his 40 oration,
viz. Have thou a Child? let it be early consecrated (...) from its Infancy. To
which he replies, that I impose a fallacy upon the Reader, for translating the
greek word (...), Infants, thereby concluding him absolutely for
Infants Baptism, and that because, says he, the word signifies a State of
Childhood, as 2 Timothy 3. 15. And therefore Nazianzen must be understood by his
early consecration to mean, not in the Cradle, but as he explains himself, so
soon as they are able to understand Mysteries, except in case of death: and
when I pray according to Nazianzen were they capacitated for the understanding
Mysteries? the Magdiburgs inform us from his 3d Oration, it was about the age
of three years: Extra periculum, triennium aut eo plus minusve expectandum esse
censet, Cent. 4. C. 6. p. 416. that is, if there be no danger of Death, his
judgment was, they should stay till they are about 3 years old or something
less, and so be baptized; nevertheless, say they, in some other place of that
Oration Nazianzen declares, omni aetati Baptisma convenire, That Baptism is fit
for every age, comporting herein with Ambrose as before: But whether I or Mr.
Danvers do impose a fallacy, let the Reader judge by what follows.

1. Nazianzen was for baptizing Children in case of danger, though as young as
the Children of the Jews that were circumcised the 8th day, as appears by the
reason which he gives for their Baptism, viz. It is better to be Sanctified (by
which he means baptized) without knowledge, than to die without it; for, says
he, it happened to the circumcised Babes of Israel, upon which Vossius has
this note, in his Thesis of Baptism, Non igitur Nazianzenus etc. Nazianzen was
not against Infants Baptism, and his judgment will be taken as soon as most
men's.

2. Though [(...)] should be taken for a state of Childhood, yet in that place
of Nazianzen we mention, it is not to be taken so largely (that is, Children of
some understanding,) as Mr. Danvers does suggest, because of the instance of
Circumcision given by the Father.

3. Nazianzen being a Greek-Father, intends the word according to its proper
signification, and as it is generally taken in the New Testament as well as in
profane Authors, and that is a state of Infancy; for (...) signifies an
Infant, says Mr. Leigh, Crit. Sac. and is properly spoken de partu recens
edito, of a Child newly born, quoting Beza on Luke 18. 15. who says, the word
properly is taken for Infantes teneri nimirum, and adhuc ab uberibus pendentes
parvuli, (i. e.) Sucking Babes, such as are carried in arms. The same word is
given to Christ, when the Wisemen found him in swadling-clouts, Luke 2. 12.
And we have it again for a newborn Babe, 1. Pet. 2. 2. As newborn Babes
desire the sincere Milk of the word etc.

But Mr. Danvers has not done with Nazianzen yet, and therefore frames an
Objection for us and answers it himself thus. It is not manifest that in case
of death, he would have an Infant baptized? To which he answers, It is true,
but that was not qua Infant, but as a dying person.

We see by this acute distinction that our Antagonist is not only a Critic,
but that he has some Logic too, in which he says he owneth little skill; but
that little, I suppose, is in that part which they call Sophistry, or the abuse
of Logic. But that the weakness of this distinction may appear, consider,

1. That it is true Nazianzen would not have an Infant baptized qua Infant.

2. It is untrue, that Nazianzen would have an Infant baptized qua a dying
person; for if they were to be baptized under either of these Considerations,
then had he been for the baptizing all Infants, and dying persons promiscuously.

3. But Nazianzens judgment was to have them baptized because they were the
Children of Christians in iminent danger of death; They were such as were
capacitated for that Ordinance on the account of God's Covenant; else why does
he speak of circumcising Children in the very place which is now under debate;
Melius est enim nondum rationis compotes sanctificari quam non Signatos et
initiatos vita excedere, Nazianz. Orat. 40. It is better, says he, they should
be consecrated without their knowledge, than to die without the Seal, and not be
initiated, idque nobis designat octavum diem circumcisio illa, itaque fuit
figurale signaculum ac propter irrationales introducta: For so it happened to
the circumcised Babes of Israel. But let the account be what it will upon which
Nazianzen would have Children baptized, it is not material; since he owned
their Baptism in some case, which is sufficient, if we had no more to overthrow
Mr. Danvers's Position, That the Baptism of Adult persons was the only Baptism
owned in this Age; and it is excentrical to the question to talk of the
Consideration on which they were baptized

But to give Mr. D'anvers full measure, pressed down, and running over, we
shall acquaint him with some other place of Nazianzen, where he is for the
Baptizing Children absolutely without respect to dying state, and that is in
his 4th Oration, p. 648. Edit. Lutetiae Par. (...). 1. It belongs to all
degrees of Ages, to all Kinds and Manners of Life. Wherefore it should be
carried through all: Art thou a Young Man? Then it is of use against the
turbulent motions of the soul: So he speaks of its convenience for old Age.
Then he comes to Infants, (...), etc. Have thou an Infant? let him be
sanctified [baptized] from his Infancy, let him be dedicated to the Spirit,
lest wickedness should take occasion, etc. And then he concludes, (...). Art
thou afraid of the Seal (Mr. D'anvers will not have Baptism to be a Seal)
because of the tenderness of his nature? (...); Thou art a pusillanimous
Mother, and of a weak Faith.

As for that jeer with which he concludes, that we may as well bring Protogenes
for an Authority, that pretended to Baptize Children in this Age to cure
Diseases, as Gregory Nazianzen to save their Souls; I shall retort what I find
in his Friend Haggar, in his Book called The foundation of the Font discovered,
page 94. Where he thus speaks I can boldly say with a good conscience, in the
presence of God to his Glory, I have known many weak and sickly before, that
have recovered health and strength afterward (that is, after being dipped) and
some immediately in a few days, yea and that when they have been so ill, that
all Doctors have given them over. A good encouragement to proselyte credulous
souls to their way, and to augment their Churches apace; for if Dipping prove
usually so medicinal and succesful, even in desperate cases, it will
undoubtedly impair, if not render altogether useless, the Practice of Physic.
But whether this story of Haggar be not as fabulous as that of Protogenes, I
leave to the Reader to judge.

2. Mr. Danvers in the next place comes to the Decrees of the three Councils,
to prove that it was the universal practice of this Age to Baptize upon the
profession of Faith.

To which I gave this Answer: 1st, That we have ten-times three for
Infants Baptism, and if we must go by number of Councils, we shall carry it.

2. I told him that the 3 Councils, which he mentions for Adult Baptism, had
respect only to Pagans; To which he gives this answer, It is granted I think
(as I have made it ready to his hand) he may quote the Canons of thirty
Councils for Infants Baptism in the following Ages (and a stout Argument no
doubt for it): But what are such Decrees says he to this 4th Century, which
are for Believers-Baptism on profession, and free choice, and it is impossible
to produce one for Infants Baptism till after this Century.

To this I reply: 1st, Mr. Danvers boasts too much in saying he made the 30
Councils ready to my hand for Infants Baptism; and he is too vainglorious to
confess who made them ready to his hand; but, without disparagement to his
reading, I think verily 'twas Baronius or Vossius, or some other. 2dly, He
confesses that we have 30 Councils for Infants Baptism; what then is become of
his stout Assertion in his Treatise of Baptism? Chapt. 7. p. 56. That not only
Scripture but Antiquity it self, which (says he) has been so much boasted of,
is altogether for Believers and not for Infants Baptism. 3dly, Let it be
further noted, that we can produce 30 for it, and he not one against it; but he
tells us it is impossible for us to produce one for Infants Baptism till after
the 4th Century. But 4thly, Mr. Danvers has forgotten himself; for we have an
African Council about an Age before his three Councils, consisting of 66
Bishops (where Cyprian was present that flourished in the year 250) who
determined, that Children might and ought to be baptized, before the eight day.
Cent. 3. Cap. 9. p. 205. Synodus Africana de infantibus baptizandis, and to
which Synod Jerome refers for the Antiquity of Infants Baptism, mentioning
Cyprians Epistle to Fidus, as the Magdiburgs have it, Cent. 4. c. 5. p. 239.
nor is that to be slighted which Austin speaks concerning this Synod, Cyprianus
non novum aliquod decretum condens, sed Ecclesiae fidem firmissimam servans
etc. Cyprian was not devising any new Decree, but followed the most sure Faith
of the Church, Aug. Epist. 28. ad Hieronimum.

But if Infant Baptism was owned in the 4th Century why is it not mentioned in
any of those three Eminent Councils which were then held, the Carthaginian, the
Laodicean, and Neocesarean? They speak not a word of it, but positively decree
that Teaching, Confession, Faith and free choice, ought to preceed Baptism. I
answer, That as it is certain that almost all the Canons of those Councils are
taken up about Discipline, and have hardly any thing of Doctrine in them; so it
is to be observed that Councils do not mention all things controverted in one
Age, but rather are concerned in resolving the doubts which troubled the Church
when such Councils were convened; since therefore there is no Canon in those
three Councils before-specified for Infants Baptism, it may well be thought the
reason was, because in those days none did scruple it; which we may the rather
believe because it was in practice before those Councils and in the same
Century also, as is before fully shown. But since Mr. Danvers glories so much
in these Councils, and prefers them before all those many ones that follow
after, it will not be amiss to examine what they are that he stands so much
upon; for certainly if we must give them the pre-eminence, it must be upon
account of their purity, whereas truly we shall find if they are not altogether
as corrupt as those that follow, yet certainly in some things as gross for
Error and Superstition, as the Popish Councils themselves.

The 4th Council of Carthage, which Synodus 4tae Carthaginensis Cent. 4. cap.
9. page 873.
is that Mr. Danvers intends, and it is the 85th Article, Those who are to be
baptized, must give in their Names, and Abstain for a long time from Wine and
flesh, and after often examination may receive Baptism.

The 7 and 90 Canons owneth Exorcism, or conjuring out the Devil. Though, if
Mr. Danvers is to be believed, Exorcism was added to the former filthy customs
in the 9 Cent. as he tells us in his 2d Ed. p. 11, 7. The 74, 75, 76, Canons
are for Penance.

Also the 76 Canon is for pouring in the Eucharist into men's mouths that are
upon the point of dying. But notwithstanding Mr. D's. confidence, it is very
clear that that 85 Canon was not intended by the Council to exclude Infants
from Baptism, because Augustine, who was (as Mr. D. tells us 2d Ed. p. 108) a
great Patron and Defender of Infants Baptism, subscribed all the Decrees of
this Council: So that only the Adult are herein intended.

Next for that of Laodicea, The Laodicens. Concilium Cent. 4. cap. 9. p. 833.
2d Canon is for Penance according to the quality of the Sin. The 26th owneth
Exorcism, the 48th for Anointing with Oil after Baptism; the 59th contains the
Canon of Scripture, and rejects the Revelation, and what then will become of
Mr. Danver's Theopolis, or discourse made upon some part of it, which is in
print?

But what does this Council say against Infant Baptism? why, that the Baptized
should rehearse the Articles of the Creed (2 Ed. p. 59) but do they say that
none must be Baptized but such? and why may not this intend only the Adult as
well as that above? let Mr. Danvers render a satisfactory reason against it if
he can.

Synodus Neocaesariensis, Lastly the Neocaesarean Council, upon which Mr.
Danvers lays so much Stress, determines in the 6th Canon, that a Woman with
Child might be baptized; Because the Baptism reached not her Womb, for in the
Confession made in Baptism each ones free choice is showed; hence Mr. Danvers
from Mr. Tombs concludes against Infants Baptism. To this I answered in my
Infants Baptism Asserted etc. That the Canon respected Pagans, as Mr. Marshal
notes from Balsamon the Glossator, who says, Such Women as went with Child,
and come from the Infidels* And what is this to the Question which is about
Children born in the Church, of Believing Parents? and Balsamon himself upon
this Canon, says with respect to these, they may be said to answer by such as
undertake for them. But Mr. Danvers out of self-Opinion that he is still right
in his Baptismal notions, and that no Gloss can be good that thwarts with him,
rejects it, and tells us we do miss the Case. But what thinks he of Dr. Hammon:
he may be thought to hit the case as likely as Mr. Danvers. The said Dr.
speaking of this Cannon brought against the Baptizing the Children of
Christians, says, Is it far enough from it, for as for the words of the latter
part of the Canon: Each ones will or resolution, which is professed or
signified in the Confession, or Profession, (for so he words it in his
translation of the Greek) it imports no more than that the Confession or)
Profession of a Woman that being with Child is baptized, does only belong to
her self, not to the Child, and consequently that her Baptism belongs only to
her self; [so as the Child cannot be said to be baptized because the Parent
is]. And all, says he, that can be concluded from hence, is, that the Child of
such a Parent that was baptized when that was in her Womb, must when it is born
have a Baptism for it self, and the Baptism of the Parent not be thought to
belong to it. And this, as he observes, in opposition to the Conceit of the
Jewish Rabbis, who say, si gravida fiat proselyta, adeoque lavacro
suscipiatur, proli ejus Baptismo opus non est; that is, if a Woman great with
Child become a proselyte, and be baptized, her Child needs not Baptism. But if
this will not satisfy Mr. Danvers, I must tell him that the Magdiburgs do
question (If I understand them aright) whether that Council ever made this
Canon. Canon Concilii Neocaesariensis (si unquam fuit) permittit, etc. And
certainly those Excellent Historians (as Mr. Danvers calls them) would never
have put such an If to it, if they had wanted ground for so doing. And Mr. D.
cannot be ignorant how usual it has been, to have Canons foisted in by others
that were never thought one by the Councils themselves. Nay, I think I have
more reason to deny the very Being of this Council, than Mr. Danvers has that
of Cyprians 66 Bishops. For neither Eusebius, nor Socrates, nor Theodoret, nor
Sozomen, nor Evagrius, those ancient Ecclesiastical Historians, make any
mention of it, that I can find; nor our modern Collector of the Councils,
Sympson: but however suppose there was such a Council, and that they made such
a Canon, just as Mr. Danvers words it; There is nothing positive against
Infant Baptism, (which certainly there would have been, had their Judgments
been against it): And Mr. Danvers only gathers it by Consequence, because they
say, that Confession and free-choice was necessary to Baptism. But this is not
sufficient; For Our Savior tells us, That he that Believes not shall be
damned; which is as much against the Salvation of Infants, as these words of
the Council against their Baptism. And yet Mr. D. will not deny but that some
Infants are saved. And why may not the other expression be as well taken in a
limited sense? But suppose not; Mr. D. must remember that he tells us in his
second Ed. p. 65 That Austin says, That none without due Examination, both as
to Doctrine and Conversation, ought to be admitted to Baptism; And yet Austin
was for the Baptizing of Infants. And why may not this Council be supposed to
be as inconsiderate? Certainly they were corrupt eonugh in Mr. D's. Judgment,
to take up such an Antichristian error (as he is pleased to call it.) For the
1st. Canon is against Ministers Marriage. The 2d. is for Penance. The 3d.
against often Marriages, and Penance for the same, etc.

Thus far we have tried Mr. Danvers his strength, and let the Reader Judge upon
the whole, whether he has any ground to conclude himself free from
Prevarication both in Councils as well as Fathers: For after all this Clutter,
and great noise of Councils and Fathers, he has not produced so much as one
man that denied, and condemned the practice of Infants Baptism, nor one Canon
that ever was discharged against it.

Thirdly, in regard I except only against four of those eminent Men
beforementioned, as not baptized till Aged, though born of Christian Parents
(as Mr. Danvers will have it) and they are, Constantine, Nazianzen, Chrysostom,
and Austine, he therefore triumphs, and says* he has six other unperverted
Authorities unexcepted against, who were not baptized till they could make
confession of Faith, which he conceives, is a substantial argument, that
Believers Baptism was the Baptism generally owned in this Age.

To this I answer. 1 That for to say Believers Baptism was generally owned in
this Age, comes short of his former Assertion, that it was the only Baptism
owned; 2. And that it was generally owned because of those six men's not being
baptized till aged, is a non-sequitur; and the quite contrary may be much more
rationally argued: for, if upon his inquisition through Asia, Africa, and
Europe, [that is, all the world where Christianity was professed] he can find
but six persons born of Christian Parents remaining unbaptized, till they were
able to make a profession of their Faith, will it not follow, that the
Baptizing of Believers Children in their Infancy, was generally owned in that
Age? especially if we consider, upon what suspicious grounds Baptism was
retarded in those days; sometimes to the very point of dissolution, concerning
which we have spoken before. But I shall not contend with Mr. Danvers about the
grounds, why the Baptism of all those ten was delayed, since neither of us,
without great presumption, can absolutely determine; and unless we are
instructed by a sure light, from the records of Antiquity, when all is said
that we can say, we shall but impose upon the Reader our uncertain guesses. But
having a good foundation in History for what I have formerly said, concerning
Constantine and Austine not being baptized till Aged, which was their Fathers
being Infidels at their Birth, and so continuing (for ought we can learn to the
contrary even to their death. I conceive Mr. Danvers cannot clear himself from
perverting their Testimonies, being unserviceable to his purpose: For,

1st. For Constantine, we have told him (in our Infant Baptism) from Mr.
Marshal, that it does not appear that his Mother Helena was a Christian at his
Birth; and for his Father, Constantius, every one knows that is acquainted with
History, that he was none, although he favored the Christians, and grew into a
good esteem of their Religion, especially toward his latter end. Mr. Danvers
has only this to say against it, that good Historians are of another mind, and
that Helena was a Christian, before the birth of Constantine, quoting Grotius
and Dailly for it: But if this were so, what has he to say for Constantius his
Father? Why, the Magdeburgs give this account of him from Eusebius, that
Constantine was Bonus a Bono, Pius a Pio; a Good Man from a Good Man, a Holy
Man from a Holy Man. To this I reply;

1. That Constantius his being denominated a Good Man, does not argue him to be
a Christian, but only morally good, as many other Heathens were; nor is Pius
always taken for a holy man though Sacer be: For Antoninus, the Pagan Emperor,
(to whom Justin writ an Apology for the Christians as Mr. Danvers notes,
(Treatise of Baptism. p.) was called Pius for his Clemency, and modest
behavior, having raised no persecution against the Christians, and putting a
stop to the same, when moved, by sending Edicts into Asia, prohibiting all
persecution, merely for the profession of Christianity. Fox Act. and Mon. V. 1.
p. 37, 38. But if it could be proved that Constantius was at any time a
Christian, yet that would not serve our Antagonists turn, unless it could be
made out, that he was such at Constantine's Birth, which no man will affirm.
Neither is it likely he was a Christian, when Constantine was grown up; for
then how could he have permitted his Son to be educated in the Court of that
Tyrannical Pagan Emperor, Dioclesian; So that it is no wonder Constantine was
not baptized till aged, especially if it be considered, that he continued a
Pagan sometime after the Imperial Crown was put upon his Head. For Socrates in
his first Book and first Chapter, tells us at large, Qua ratione Constantinus
Imperator ad fidem Christianam se contulerit, by what means Constantine the
Emperor became a Christian; and the Story is to this effect, viz. That when he
heard how Maxentius ruled Tyranically at Rome, he was resolved to go against
him, and as he was marching with his Army thither, he considered with himself
(being not without some fear of Maxentius, by reason of his Sorceries and
Devilish Arts) quem deum sibi adjutorem ad bellum gerendum advocaret, what God
he should invoke for his assistance in the War; and being in doubtful
deliberation, he saw a Pillar of Light representing the effigies of a Cross.
And for the more credit of this Apparition, Eusebius in the first Book of the
life of Constantine witnesses, that he has heard Constantine himself
oftentimes report it to be true, and that not only he, but his Soldiers saw it.
At the sight of which being much astonished, and consulting with his Men upon
the meaning thereof, it so happened that in the night-season, in his sleep
Christ appeared to him, with the sign of the same Cross which he had seen
before, bidding him to make the figuration of it, and to carry it in his Wars
before him, and he should have the Victory. Where by the way, let us observe
what Mr. Fox says concerning this Story: It is to be noted, says he, That
this Sign of the Cross, and these letters added withal, In hoc vince, that is,
In this overcome, was given to him of God, not to induce any superstitious
Worship, or opinion of the Cross, as though the Cross itself had any such power
or strength in it, to obtain Victory: But only to bear the meaning of another
thing, that is, to be an admonition to him, to seek and aspire after the
Knowledge and Faith of him, who was crucified upon the Cross* For the Salvation
of him and all the World, and so to set forth the Glory of his Name; as
afterward it came to pass. Fox Act. and Mon. lib. 1. p. 77.

2. That Austin had Christian Parents Mr. Danvers cannot prove by any
Antiquity, but recommends us to Dr. Tailor, and Mr. Baxter, who have, it seems,
said something to that purpose, when in the meanwhile he makes no reply to what
I alledg to the contrary, in my Infants Baptism Asserted etc. part 1. p. 21.
Where I prove from Austin's own pen that his Father was an Infidel, when he was
grown up to understanding, and he relates how he came afterward to be
converted: Aug. Confess. lib. 2. c. 6. And though Dr. Tailor and Mr. Baxter may
be of another mind, yet Dr. Owen, who is not inferior in learning to either,
tells us in his late Book of the Spirit, p. 294. Sec. 11. that the reason why
Austin was not baptized in his Infancy was, because his Father was not then a
Christian.

By this time I suppose the Reader may guess how well Mr. Danvers has purged
himself from the charge of prevarication, and proved his grand Assertion, That
Believers Baptism was the only Baptism for the four first Centuries. For if he
reflects upon the whole that has been hitherto disputed between us, he shall
find that as to the first Century, the Magdiburgs (from whom we have our light
in the History of Baptism) tells us, that Origin and Cyprian affirm, that
Infants were baptized in the Apostles days. In the 2d Century, he perverts the
words of Justin Martyr by applying that which was spoken of baptizing Pagans
against the baptizing of Believers Children, as appears by what the Magdiburgs
say in that very place. In the 3d Century, he suggests that no Baptism was
owned but that of the Adult, when they tell us plainly, both persons grown up,
and Infants of both Sexes were baptized. And for the 4th Century, Mr. Danvers
is so bold as to say, that the Magdiburgs tell us it was the Universal Practice
to Baptize the Adult upon profession of Faith; Treatise of Baptism, Edit. 1. p.
64. when they say otherwise, namely, That persons of all ages were baptized in
the Temples, and cite Nazianzen for baptizing of Infants in the Churches of
Asia, to which also we have added the Testimonies of Hillary, Ambrose, Jerome,
Chrisostom, Austin, all of the 4th Century: and for Infants Baptism, lastly he
brings the Canons of the 3 Councils of Carthage, Laodicea, and Neocaesaria,
which have not a word in them against Infants Baptism, and what is decreed
about Confession before Baptism relates to Strangers, as I presume I have made
it appear beyond all doubt in the two last of them (if that of Neocaesaria ever
had a being.)

But I must proceed on, and follow Mr. Danvers, for he tells us he is not alone
in his Opinion, and therefore brings in diverse Authorities to confirm it; that
only the Adult upon confession of Faith were the subjects of Baptism in the
first times, p. 14, 15.

He begins with Strabo, that says, In the first times Baptism was wont to be
given to them only that could know and understand, what profit was to be gotten
by it. But it seems by the story, that Strabo his first-times go no higher than
Austins Days; for he instanceth in his being baptized at Age, when as we have
Testimony that Childrens Baptism was in use in the Church above a hundred years
before Austin was born. And Austin (that lived about four hundred years nearer
the primitive times than Strabo) affirms, that the Church always had it, and
always held it. Besides, the Testimony of Strabo) is not to be valued, being
condemned by Vossius and others for a false Historian: We have formerly in our
answer given instances thereof, and particularly we noted that gross mistake of
his, That Sureties (called Godfathers, and Godmothers, were first invented in
Austin's days, when Tertullian speaks of them, above a hundred years before.

Next follows Beatus Rhenanus, Rupertus, Boemus, Dr. Hammond, and Mr. Baxter;
the eldest of whom lived but in the 12th Cent. according to Mr. Danvers, and
had no other way of knowing what was don in the first times than we: and
therefore let them affirm what they please, unless they can prove it by the
records of those times, it signifies no more than if Mr. Danvers told us so.
And the contrary to what he asserts is apparent from Antiquity. But because Mr.
Danvers shall not say I slight his Authorities, I shall particularly examine
them. And as for B. Rhenanus (who lived in 15. Cent.) what Mr. Danvers makes
him say is very impertinent to his purpose. For his business is to prove, that
only the Adult were then baptized, which his quotation affirms not: and what
then does it signify, but to help to swell his Book? But I shall make it
appear that Mr. D. has shamefully mistaken Rhenanus's sense, and thereby
exceedingly abused him. For B. Rhenanus in his Annot. upon Tertullian's Corona
militis, on those words, Aquam adituri, says thus, p. 500. Baptizandi ritum
ostendit, qui in usu Veterum fuit, de quo Consuetudo quaedam mutavit. Nam tum
Adulti regenerationis lavacro tingebantur, quotidie externis e Paganismo ad
nostram Religionem confluentibus. Siquidem id temporis ubique reperire erat
Ethnicos Christianis admixtos. Postea statis temporibus nempe bis in anno
celebrari baptismus caeptus, ejus enim rei nullam hic facit mentionem, alioqui
non omissurus. Qui mos antiquus etiam per tempora Caroli Magni et Ludovici
Augusti servatus est. Judicant hoc Leges ab illis sancitae, quibus cavetur ne
quemquam sacerdotes baptizent (excepto mortis articulo) praeterquam in Paschate
and Pentacoste. That is, He ( Tertullian) shows the Rite of baptising that was
in use among the Ancients, from which a certain custom has made a change. For
then for the most part the Adult were baptized, strangers daily flocking from
Paganism to our Religion: because at that time Heathens were everywhere to be
found mixed among the Christians. Afterward Baptism began to be celebrated at
stated times, to wit, twice in the year, for of this thing [the two stated
times of Baptism] He [ Tertullian] makes no mention here; otherwise [had it
been in use] he would not have omitted the mention of it. Which ancient custom
[to wit of celebrating Baptism at two stated times of the year] was also
observed in the days of Charles the Great, and Ludovick the Emperor, as appears
by the Laws made by them, whereby care is taken that the Priests Baptize none
(except those at the point of death) but at Easter and Whitsontide. By this it
is apparent (1st.) that by the Adult he means only Heathens newly converted,
and (2.) By the ancient custom* Baptizing at the two stated times of Easter and
Whisontide; and not the baptizing those that were come to their full growth, as
Mr. D. says. And to assure him Infants are not hereby excluded, Rhenanus
presently adds, Hoc sic accipiendum ut sciamus Infantes post Pascha natos ad
baptismum Pentacostes reservatos, et natos post Pentacostem, ad Paschatem
festum diem Bapismo offerri solitos, excepta, seu dixi, necessitate, una cum
adultis Catechumenis qui de externis nationibus Danorum, etc. and similium
populorum, Christianae Religioni initiabantur. That is, this is so to be
understood that we may know that these Infants that were born after Easter were
reserved to the Baptism of Whitsontide, and those that were born after
Whitsontide to the Easter following, except in case of necessity, etc. And now
I persuade my self Mr. D. for very shame, will take no more notice of this
Quotation, unless it be to acknowledge his Inadvertency in producing it.

His next Author is Rupertus in his 4th Book of Divine Offices, c. 18. Here Mr.
D. is guilty of most notorious forgery. For in his second edition, p. 73. he
has the same quotation, and there he tells us Rupertus says, that in former
times the custom was that they administered not the Sacrament of Regeneration
but only at the Feast of Easter and Pentecost. And here in his Reply, p. 15. he
alters the words and makes him say, that they administered but only to the
Catechumens, etc. If Mr. D. must have the liberty thus to deal with Authors, I
confess there is no standing against him. But I hope the Reader will hereby be
satisfied, that this signifies no more as to his purpose, than the former, but
deservedly renders him unworthy of belief in his Quotation of Authors.

Boemus follows who lived in the 16 Cent. (though M. D. brings him into the
12th (2. Ed. p. 73.) And he tells us there, that he says, That in times past
the custom was to administer Baptism only to those that were instructed in the
Faith, and seven times in the week before Easter and Pentecost, Catechized.
Suppose this to be a right Translation, it makes no more against the baptizing
of Infants than the other of Rhenanus: for it clearly appears that by in times
past, Boemus intended then when Persons were appointed to be baptized at Easter
and Pentecost; at which very time Rhenanus tells us Infants were baptized. And
it is most certain that baptizing of Infants was before then, because Cyprian,
Origin, Tertullian, do all mention it, who lived before that custom was brought
into the Church.

Dr. Hammond is the next; and I need not search to see whether he is rightly
quoted; for he makes the Dr. say nothing but what all the Paedobaptists
acknowledge, viz. That all men were instructed in the fundamentals of Faith
anciently, before they were baptized. But how does this prove that only the
Adult. were then the subjects of Baptism? I wonder Mr. D. is not ashamed to
quote Authors at this rate.

His last is Mr Baxter. And he tells us that Tertullian, Origin, and Cyprian do
all of them affirm that in the primitive times none were baptized without an
express Covenanting. But this falls out very unluckily for Mr. D. For those
three Fathers being every one of them for Infants Baptism could intend no other
than Heathens converted to Christianity; which all acknowledge; And it is plain
Mr. Baxter so intended it, because he has written largely to prove that none
are to be baptized but such, and the Children of such. And after this manner
does Mr. D. prove his Assertions. But I am confident it will prevail with none
that have not given themselves over to an implicit Faith.

His next Testimonies for it (beginning with particular persons) are from Duch
Authors: we shall speak with them in due time and make it appear, how grossly
they err in their relations of diverse things, as particularly about
Cresconius; but of this when we come to examine his pretended Witnesses.

Then we have Faustus Regiensis named, who said, that personal and actual
desire was requisite in every one that was to be baptized, which that it was
meant of Adult Pagans, needs no other proof than this, that he was a Pelagian,
and they were for the Baptism of Children by the confession of Mr. Tombs, and
I presume Mr. D. will not persist in denying it.

Concerning Alban that suffered for opposing Infants Baptism in the 6th
Century, I cannot give credit to the Dutch Martyrology which it seems affirms
it, because there is nothing to be found in the Century-Writers, nor any Martyr
of that name noted, but only St. Alban the first (as Mr. Fox tells us) that
ever suffered Martyrdom in this Island; but that was under Dioclesian, and not
for opposing Infants Baptism, but refusing to offer Sacrifice unto Devils.

I cannot find the Swermers under the 6th Century in the Magdiburgensian
History, as suffering under Justinus, or Justinianus for being Anabaptists: Nor
in Sympsons History of the Church, nor in any other Authors as I have met with.
And certainly, if indeed they had convinced the Imperial Council to leave off
Childrens Baptism, as Mr. D. mentions it twice in the compass of twelve lines,
all Historians would have taken notice of so remarkable a story, which yet I
can find mentioned by none.

As for Peter Bishop of Apamen, and Zoaras the Monk, we told him formerly that
the Magd. told us, they were for Rebaptization; but that did not prove them
against Infants Baptism: Their words are these. Cent. 6. c. 5. De Anabaptis.
Anabaptismum defendisse Petrum Apameae Syriae Episcopum, et Zoaram Monachum
Cyrum, scribit Nicephorus. But says Mr. D. in his Reply, p. 106. The late
Century-Writers calling them Anabaptists in a modern sense [that is, for those
that deny Infants-baptism] we have no reason to doubt it. But how does M. D.
prove this? because they say Nicephorus writes they defended Anabaptism [that
is Re-baptizing] Risum teneatis amici! But let Mr. D. take them and make the
best of them he can; I shall not envy him such Patrons. For the Magdeburgs
tells us in the same place, out of Niecphorus, that they owned but one Nature
in Christ: and were guilty of most wicked Obscenities.

Another which Mr. Danvers quotes is Adrianus Bishop of Corinth. I granted in
my Answer that this Man was against Infants Baptism, where-as since I have
understood from a Learned Divine, well-read in Church History, that Adrianus
was falsely accused to have turned away Children from Baptism (for that was the
Charge) when as in truth his fault was only his remisness, not taking care in
his Diocese for the timely Baptizing of them, whence it happened that many died
unbaptized, which was judged dangerous.

Nor should I have granted Hincmarus to be of Mr. Danvers party, who is brought
in next to Adrianus, for refusing Infants Baptism. I was told of the Mistake
(though led into it by what I found in the Magdiburgs, who represent him as
accused by his enemies for denying Childrens Baptism) by the aforementioned
learned person: And having since met with Sympsons History of the Church, I
find this following Account of Hincmarus under Century 9. and in page 566.
Edit. 3 That in the Council of Acciniacum in France, Hincmarus, Bishop of
Rhemes, accused his own nephew Hincmarus Bishop of Laudum, a man disobedient to
his Metropolitan, and a man who for private injuries had excommunicated all the
Presbyters of his Church, debarring them from saying Mass, baptizing Infants,
absolving the Penitents, and burying the Dead, and was condemned of Petulancy
and deprived of his Office. Judge Reader by this, whether this man be to be
looked upon under the notion of an Anabaptist by the character yet given. But
(to go on with what Sympson says afterward) he was restored to his Office by
Pope John the ninth, and that because he made his Appeal from his Metropolitan,
and the Synod of his own Country to be judged by the Chair of Rome. A pure
Anabaptist indeed!

There are three other of Mr. Danvers's Witnesses yet behind, (and had there
been but one more it would have made a complete Jury) but those three speak
nothing at all of Infants; so I let them pass. The Dutch-Martyrology (Mr.
Danvers's Commonplace Book) name also Smaragdus: But he has the Wit now to
leave him out, though he is in his Treatise of Baptism, Edit. 1. under Cent.
10. But I minded him in my answer with those words of Smaragdus, That little
Children are to be baptized, grounding it upon Mat. 19. 15. Suffer little
Children to come unto me etc.

Thus Reader thou have heard what Mr. Danvers's Witnesses can say, and what
exceptions I have made against them; they all stand at thy Bar, and I hope thou will give righteous judgment, and do by this time see, that my Antagonist
has no need to complain, that I allow him but two Witnesses, viz. Hincmarus,
and Adrianus, having been too liberal in that.

2. In the next place he produces another Parcel, that he says denied
Infants Baptism; but as the Donatists, Waldenses: But how false this is we
shall hereafter show. And as for those of Germany we are contented he shall
have them, some of which he may be ashamed to own. As for what he says of the
Churches of Helvetia, Flanders, Bohemia, Hungaria, Poland, France, and
Silvania; as I take it, those of them who were really Anabaptists, are of no
higher Antiquity than Luthers days: and for his pretending to the Ancient
Britains, I shall reckon with him for that in its proper place; so for the
Lollards, they are of the same stamp with the Waldenses, whose Confessions will
confute Mr. Danvers. For the Wickliffians; the Council of Constance that
accused Wicklif for other things and condemned him, never charged him with
denying Infants Baptism; and Walden that writ against him shows from his own
works, that he was for it. Lastly, since Henry the Eight's time, there has
been of this sect here in England.

But what dangerous Errors some of them held in that Kings Reign, and in Queen
Elizabeth's, we have shown in our Infants Baptism Asserted, part 2. p. 90, 91.
To which Mr. Danvers says nothing in his Reply. And really I wonder he should
not publicly disown Munzer, John of Leiden, Phifer, Knipperdoling with their
Comragues; I hope he reckons not those Synagogues of Satan into the number of
the Churches of Christ, though it is to be feared, since he is so much their
Advocate.

But concerning the Anabaptists of this Age here in England I have sufficiently
published to the world, that I believe many amongst them are persons truly
fearing God.

3. Mr. Danvers brings Testimony for Adult-Baptism from Paedobaptists; and it
seems a strange design to all that I have spoken with about the same, that he
should offer to bring Chrysostom, Austin etc. against Infants Baptism, so
making the Fathers to contradict themselves, and for which I rebuke him in my
Answer.

But he takes much pains to vindicate himself, in which undertaking I find him
so full of Meanders and tedious Circumlocutions, that I judge it not worth while
to follow him, (...), step by step; And there is no great reason I should take
notice of it. Since he confesses, 1. The sayings of those Men [Pedobaptists]
are expressly for his Opinion, though it may be [O sad is it but a may be?] not
intended so, and therefore says he, I have done them no injury. 2. He says,
he quotes them not to prove Believers-Baptism was the only Baptism of those
Centuries: Why then did he quote them? why, to show how they contradicted
themselves, and likewise his dexterity, how well he can beat them with their
own weapons. O Prodigious self-conceitedness! What does he think he can see
(having washed his Eyes so profoundly) the folly of contradiction in the sayings
of such a numerous company of Fathers, and Learned Godly Divines? And yet he is
so blind as not to see in how many things he contradicts himself. I shall give
you a Catalogue of some of them before we part. Mr. Danvers might have forborne
his wrangling, and attended to the distinction which we gave in our Answer of
Ecclesia colligenda and collecta, which serves very well for the reconciling
the Fathers, and modern Divines to themselves: For when they speak of Teaching,
Confession and Examination, requisite before Baptism, they intend it of the way
that is to be taken in the first planting of a Church, when Pagans are brought
into the Faith of Christ; and when they speak of the Right of Infants, it is in
a Church already gathered, of which Infants being a part they must not be
denied Baptism. But this Mr. D. likes not, and therefore, has invented a way
to reconcile the seeming difficulty (as he calls it) and what is that? why all
the sayings of the later Doctors and learned men (why not of the ancient ones
too?) wherein confession and profession is required, are to be understood, not,
says he, as Mr. Wills would have it, to intend only Adult Persons and Pagans,
but Infants also, because they hold Infants to repent and believe by their
Sureties. Which he conceives he has sufficiently proved by the Instance which
he gives from the Catechism of the Church of England, just before mentioned,
which (after his usual manner) he does pervert. For it being said in the
Catechism, that Faith and Repentance, is required in persons to be baptized;
the Question is, Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender
age, they cannot perform them? To which Mr. Danvers makes the Catechism give
this answer, They do perform them by their Sureties; as if that was all the
answer they gave: whereas indeed the answer in the Catechism runs thus; They
perform them by their Sureties who promise and vow them both in their names;
which when they come to age, themselves are bound to perform. And as if the
Bishops foresaw that such as Mr. Danvers would cavil at the word perform; in
the last Edition of the Common Prayer Book, they Common Prayer Book last Edit.
have left it out, and only say, Because they promise them by their Sureties,
which promise when they come to age, themselves are bound to perform. So that
it appears, the sense of the answer in the Catechism is to be understood,
according to what we find mentioned by the Magdiburgs, Cent. 4. C. 6. p. 422.
Neque enim hoc ille ait, ego pro puero abrenunciationes facio, aut fidei
Sacramenta profiteor; sed ita puer renunciat et profitetur, id est, spondeo
puerum inducturum cum ad Sacram intelligentia venerit, sedulis adhortationibus
meis, ut abrenunciet contrariis omnino, profiteaturque etc. which in English is
to this effect; the Sponsor does not say, I do renounce the Devils works etc.
and profess Faith for the Child, but promises, when the Child comes to
understanding, he will exhort him to renounce the Devil, and World etc.

But Mr. Danvers conceives that the sayings of the Doctors and learned men,
when they speak of profession before Baptism, is not by them intended of Adult
persons, and Pagans, but of Infants also: Otherwise it would be, says he, to
make two Baptisms and necessitate two Commissions; one for the Adult, and the
other for Infants.

To this I answer, there is no such need of two Baptisms, for the Baptism of
Adult persons and Infants is one and the same, as to the matter, both being
baptized with Water, and so also, as to form, In the name of the Father etc.
Nor does it necessitate two commissions, one will serve the turn very well, and
comprehend both Parent and Child; and to make this clear, I will give the
Judgment of some of our modern Doctors and learned men as to the sense of the
Commission for Baptizing, differing toto caelo from Mr. Danvers's fancy.
Perkins upon Mat. 28. 29. Go teach all nations baptizing them: In these words,
says he, the Baptism of Infants is prescribed, and the Apostles by virtue of
this Commission, baptized whole families, as knowing in Gods former
Administration to his people, the Children were taken into Covenant with the
Fathers. As the nation of the Jews, were first taught, and then they and their
Infants being Confederates were circumcised; so says our Savior, Go disciple
the nations, and baptize them.

Paraeus upon Matthew. 3. 7. has those words: Ad eos [Infantes] etiam pertinet
universale Christi mandatum, (...); nec obstat, quod infantes doceri nondum
possunt: (...) enim Christo proprie non est docere (ut vulgo redditur) sed
discipulos facere, sicut exponitur, Joh. 4. 1. In Christi enim mandato,
doctrina etiam sequitur Baptismum, (...), Facite discipulos baptizando et
docendo, etc. non quod doctrina non debeat praecedere baptismum in adultis, sed
quod debeat etiam sequi in infantibus baptizatis. 1. The general command of
Christ; Go, disciple all Nations, appertains to Infants; neither does it hinder
because Infants can not be taught, for the Greek word does not properly
signify to teach as it is commonly rendered, but make disciples as it is
expounded Joh. 4. 1. According to Christ's Command Teaching does follow
Baptism: For it is Baptizing them, and then teaching them to Observe. Make
disciples by Baptizing and Teaching etc. not that Teaching ought not to go
before Baptizing in the Adult, but that it ought also to follow in baptized
Infants.

Spanhemius in his Dubia Evangelica, tells us that (...), which we render [
teach] signifies to make disciples, which is done, says he, by Baptizing and
Teaching; and he gives this reason for this his Analysis; because, if (...)
should signify only to teach, there would be found a tautologie in Christ's
words. Thus, Go, Teach all nations, Baptizing them, Teaching them: The sense
therefore (says he) of Christ's words, is this, Go ye, make Disciples to me
out of all nations by Baptizing and Teaching, and the former way of making
disciples, Infantibus etiam aptari poterat, may be applied to Infants.

4 I think I could bring some scores that understand the Commission in this
sense, and therefore argue against the Anabaptists thus -- The Gospel is to be
preached to every Creature: All nations must be discipled; but Infants are a
part of this Creation, are included in all Nations; therefore they must be made
disciples also: for [Them] in the Commission, must refer to Nations, or else it
relates to nothing, for it has no relative besides to answer to, and therefore
Infants being a part of the Nation, where the Gospel is preached, must be
baptized.

Thus we see hitherto Mr. Danvers cannot discharge himself of the charge of
Prevarication, and perverting the Authorities produced by him, but like a
discontented man, is angry with every Body he meets with, that crosses his
humor, and therefore falls a Skirmishing with the Lutherans, Calvin, Baxter,
and concludes bitterly against me with an Appeal to the Reader, whether it can
be supposed, I did read his Book, and answer it with consideration, and so
whether I ought not to be esteemed a person extremely void of Reason and
Conscience. And let the Reader likewise judge whether this be suitable to the
Title of his Book, A Sober Reply to Mr. Wills, against whom I may rightly
object that of Ambrose on the 119 Psalm. Quem veritate non potest, lacerat
convitiis

Secondly, concerning the Falsehood chargedu pon Mr. Danvers which is fully
proved in what follows.

Page 30. After some scornful jeers which he is pleased to cast upon me, as
that I profess my self a solid grave person, a Minister of the Gospel, a Master
of Arts and a Learned Man, and one that has spent much time in the University
(which is more than ever I professed or pretended to) he thinks it not enough to
render me ridiculous, but wicked also, and therefore insinuates, that I have a
peculiar malignity against his person (whom I never saw) as well as against the
Truth.

To which I shall only say, That Mr. Danvers has cause to repent of his great
Uncharitableness, especially because I have expressed my Charity toward him,
declaring in my Infant Baptism Asserted, part 2. page 224. That I hope he is a
Godly-Man, and I appeal to the searcher of Hearts in this matter (who knows
that he wrongs me) that I look upon him rather as an Object of pity than
hatred. And for that other which is much worse, that I have a malignity against
the Truth, I can speak it in sincerity, (my Conscience bearing me witness) that
I can do nothing willingly and knowingly against the Truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8.
Wherefore I desire him to search his own Heart, whether the malignity be not
there, and so I shall leave him to our great Master, whose Prerogative it is to
judge, and who I hope, may in time convince him (...), Jude 15. of all his
virulent Speeches.

Mr. Danvers having thus discharged his Stomach, offers to join issue with me,
in order to the speedy trial, at whose door the Falsehood lies. He has made a
good beginning, has he not? and it is very like we shall have as good an end.

1. First I charge him with Falsehood, for saying the Magdeburgs tell us, that
in the first Century the Apostles Baptized only the Aged; I told him the
Falsehood lay in this, because he adds the word Only, which is not spoken by
them. And how does he clear himself of this? Why, by inveighing against me Suo
more, and telling the World, that I am an injurious Man, and charge on him a
Falsehood of my own making; how so? Since, says he, my words are thus; As to
the subjects of Baptism the Magdeburgs tell us, that in this Age they find,
they Baptized only the Adult or Aged, I do not say, says he, that they tell
us, that in this Age they Baptized only the Adult: risum teneatis amici!
Reader, I think thou art hard put to it, to find how I have injured him; for it
seems by his own confession, they tell us they baptized only the Adult, but I
wrong him, for not putting in his other words [that they did find it]; But it
is to be supposed that whatever they did tell us, they did find it. But I must
tell Mr. Danvers that they do not say that they find, they [only] Baptized the
Adult. This is all they say, Baptizatos esse adultos exempla probant, de
infantibus baptizatis exempla quidem annotata non leguntur. Examples prove that
the Adult were Baptized, and as for the Baptizing of Infants, we read not any
Examples upon Record. Now for to say that the Magdeburgs tell us, they find,
they Baptized Only the Adult, is (as he brings it in) a subtle insinuation to
deceive the Reader) for the words being placed in that order by themselves, do
import, as if the Magdeburgs did not look upon Infants Baptism as Apostolical,
or that any such were baptized in the Apostles days; whereas their very next
words are: Nevertheless Origin and Cyprian tell us, that even in the Apostles
days Infants were Baptized; and that it is evident from the Apostles Writings,
that Infants were not excluded from Baptism: which words being concealed by Mr.
Danvers, show him* to be as guilty of Substraction in this latter as of
Addition in the former. Had Mr. D. said, they only find they Baptized the
Adult, I should have let it pass; because there are no particular Examples
thereof upon Record; but there is a vast difference between that, and they find
they Baptized only such: The first leaves room for Infants Baptism, for a non
dicto ad non factum, nonusvalet consequentia, but the latter is totally
exclusive thereof; could Mr. D. find it; but he is as unable to do that, as to
prove the Magdeburgs said so. And yet he would have his Reader believe, it is
most manifest that I am an injurious man in charging this falsehood of my own
making upon him, there being no such Words in his Book, though but three lines
after he fully acknowledges what I charged him withal; as may be seen p. 31 of
his Reply, where he says, my words are expressly thus, that in this age they
find they Baptized only the Adult. And now let any sober man in his senses (to
use Mr. D's own words) judge whether indeed I have done him injury in charging
this upon him, or those Ministers he informs us of, who said upon the reading
thereof, he wanted morality in so dealing with Authors.

A second Falsehood for which I censure him is for saying the Magdeburgs tell
us, that the Custom of Dipping the whole body in Water, was changed into
sprinkling a little water in the face, in the first Century; whereas they say
no such thing in this Century, nor any of those that follow. So that I charge
him with a double Falsehood.

1. For representing them, as if they asserted the ceremony of Baptism was only
by Dipping, which they do not, but the contrary.

2. In affirming that the Rite was changed in that Century from Dipping into
Sprinkling.

Let us now observe, how Mr. Danvers vindicates himself as to this.

1. He says, the Magdeburg's own words will clear him for Dipping, and refers
us to Cent. 1. c. 6 p. 148. where they speak nothing at all of this matter:
Indeed I find in Cent 1. lib. 2. c. 6. p. 497. we have these words; As to the
place of Baptism, it was as occasion was offered, in Rivers and Fountains, and
the manner was thus; Minstrum Baptismi in aquam baptizandos immersisse seu
lavasse in nomine patris etc. probat verbum (...); which Mr. Danvers thus
translates, the word (...), signifying immersion or dipping in Watter [thus far
he is right] proves that the Minister of Dipped by washing is nonsense.
Baptism did dip the Baptized, washing them in the name of the Father; which is
a very corrupt translation of the words, as all Scholars know: for it ought to
have been translated, The Minister of Baptism does dip or wash them, according
to the genuine signification of the Word, as they give it us, Cent. 1. lib. 1.
c. 4. p. 152. Vocabulum Baptismus significat tinctionem seu lavationem a graeco
verbo (...), so Mar. 7. 4. say they; for it is taken a Judaica l^tione, the
Jews washing which [was otherwise besides dipping]: The words of Mark are; The
yeat not except they wash. How now can Mr. Danvers justify himself to
represent them, as restraining the word Only to Dipping, when they give us to
understand, it signifies any kind of Washing, rinsing, or cleansing, as a man
will wash his hands, as well by pouring water on them, as by dipping, 2 King.
3. 11. here is Elisha which has poured water on the hands of Elijah, being his
Servant, as it is noted in the Margent.

1. The other Falsehood is for saying that the Magdeburgs tell us, that the
Custom of dipping the whole body was changed into sprinkling in this Century:
Let the Reader judge, how lamely he comes off here; for he says, those words
of changing the custom were his own, not the Magdeburgs: But what had he to do,
to interpose his own words, when he undertakes to tell us what the Magdeburgs
say as to the manner of Baptizing, when he repeats their words all along, and
then concludes, which said custom of Dipping the whole body was changed into
Sprinkling a little Watter in the face. There is no man living but would have
taken those words, to have been the Magdeburgs as well as the rest, being all
joined in the same sentence, and one and the same character. See his Treatise
of Baptism Edit. 1. pars 1. p. 58. Surely in this any ordinary Reader may see,
we have found Mr. Danvers faulty, nor will any evasion serve his turn for an
excuse; yet has he still something to say for himself, and that is, that in
the 2d. Impression of his Book, he did for the better distinction (that all men
might know those words of Altering the Custom of dipping the whole Body into
sprinkling a little water in the face, were his own, not the Magdeburgs) put
them into a different character; and then says, that prejudice blinded my Eye,
my business being to make a hole if I could not find one. What unparalelled
confidence is this! But be it known unto him; (and his Eye might have seen it
in my Preface to Infants Baptism asserted, that my business was to answer his
1st Edition, and he knows very well, (by a good token which I shall forbear to
mention) that my Book was printing, when his 2d Edition came forth; which is
sufficient, (I doubt not) with an Impartial Reader to clear me from blame in
not taking notice of his different Character, had he really made it. But when
upon examination the Reader will find no such thing, to convince him of Mr. D.
care in this particular; (there being only a Semi-colon between, and not the
least distinction to make it possible for the most intelligent Reader so much
as to suppose it;) I presume he will wonder at it, that a good man should talk
at such a rate. But if he did indeed on purpose put those words in this fifth
head into a different character, left they should be supposed not to be his
own; why did he not do so in the 2d. head, the four last lines being his own?
nor in the 3d. head where the three last are his own? nor in the 4th head where
the last is his own? As the Reader may see Ed. 2d. p. 46. certainly if he had
so honest a design, as he pretends, he would have done so throughout, and, I
appeal to his conscience whether he ever thought of such a thing as a different
Character before he saw my Answer to his Book.

A third Falsehood, which I lay at his door, is for saying, the custom of
dipping was changed into sprinkling in the third Century.

To this Mr. Danvers answers p. 36. of his Reply, I do him manifest injury: How
so? Why, because he tells us, he says only this, viz. many were the
corruptions about Baptism, that were creeping in, some whereof he confesses,
he mentions, and amongst the rest, Altering the form from dipping to
sprinkling. Where then is the manifest injury? I know not, unless it be because
I say he changed and altered: and being it seems pincht with this charge, he
calls me unfaithful man: and though as above, he confesses, that he said among
other corruptions that was one, the altering the Form from dipping to
sprinkling; yet he denies it again presently with a severe increpation, and
wonders that I am not ashamed to assert, that he says the custom of dipping
the whole body was changed into sprinkling in the third Century. I suppose
Reader, thou have seldom met with the like ridiculous contradiction in any
Author; I assure thee some have set their wits on work to find out the injury I
have done him, and cannot hit upon it, unless it be because I have asserted
that he says the custom of dipping the whole body when he only names dipping:
I thought indeed when ever people are dipped it had been the whole body, and I
borrowed the form of expression from himself, p. 57, 58. of his first Edition;
So that he is the Man that has cause to be ashamed, and is found very
unfaithful, in speaking thus forward and backward at his pleasure, yea that
which is manifestly false, and then denying it in the same breath, so adding
one Falsehood to another; which is a sorry way of Vindication. But he would say
something if he knew what, to clear himself; but it is very confused, and
impertinent, as that he did not quote p. 125, 126. for that, but for the
superstitious Rites, and did thereby only intend, etc. with more such stuff
which I let pass, and think it necessary to give the Reader an account of the
whole that he has upon this matter in his Treatise of Baptism 1 Edit. p. 113.
2 Edit. p. 101, 102. and so he will be the better able to judge, whether I have
wronged him, or he me. Thus he speaks there verbatim. [Many were the
corruptions about Baptism, that in this Age were creeping in, as the confining
Baptism ordinarily to be performed by a Bishop] quoting Magd. Cent. 3. p. 123.
limiting the time to Easter and Whitsontide, p. 129. altering the Form from
dipping to sprinkling; (there is that for which I accuse him) and the place from
Rivers and Fountains to Baptisterions; with diverse superstitious Rites, as p.
125, 126.

The 4th. Falsehood I charge him with is for Fathering several things upon the
Magdeburgs respecting the 4th. Century, when not a word of it is to be found in
them; as

1. That they tell us it was the universal practice to baptize the Adult upon
profession of faith; and how he clears himself of this, let the Reader observe:
all the Reply, that he makes to it, is, That he does not say, that the
Magdeburgs do say in so many words, that it was the universal practice of this
age, to baptize the Adult upon profession of Faith, as he says, I would
insinuate. But for this, let Mr. Danvers's own Book decide the business. I
confess I wonder he should deny it when there are a thousand witnesses to prove
it (for so many Books were the first impression as they say). For my part I
have expressed the very syllabical words without altering one tittle, as the
Reader may see if he please to look on Mr. Danvers's Treatise of Baptism, Edit.
1. p. 64. under Century the 4th these are his words, -- In this age they tell
us, that it was the universal practice to baptize the Adult upon profession of
Faith, and for which they give us several Authorities, out of the Learned
Fathers, and Councils at that time, some whereof you have as follows. If Mr.
Danvers can excuse himself no better than he has done in this, it had been
more for his credit to have been silent.

And whereas he excepts against the two instances I bring from the Magdeburgs
that Baptizing of Children was owned in the Eastern-Churches. The 1st was
Nazianzen: Mr. Danvers puts this off easily, telling us: he has answered that
already, and refers the Reader thereto, and so do I, to the reply I make him,
where is manifested the Vanity of his distinction That Nazianzen was not for
baptizing Children qua Children, but as dying persons.

The other Instance given by me from the Magdeburgs is, that of Athanasius
Question to Antiochus, which they bring for Infant Baptism, used in the African
Churches: the words are, Quod et in Africanis ecclesiis receptum fuisse
Athanasius testatur, Quest. 124. (1) Athanasius does witness in his 124.
Question, that it was received in the African Churches. And for quoting this
Mr. Danvers is in a pet, and says, I produce a spurious piece [is the
Magdeburgensian History such?] why then does he call it an excellent History?
And further adds, that I was not ignorant of this, but went on purpose to
abuse the world.

This is very harsh, but I will not be moved, but only tell him, he does very
ill thus to load me with undeserved Calumnies; for,

1. I took up the Quotation from the Magdeburgs: Cent. 4. C. 6. p. 419. where
they produce it for a Testimony for Infants Baptism in the African-Churches.

2. They give not the least hint in that place, of its being spurious, but
introduce it, with other Testimonies that are Authentic, without the least
Censure.

3. I never understood that it was reputed spurious (as Mr. Danvers
presumptuously says I did) for, I never read the life of Athanasius, till
after I received this severe correction; who also says, I did, out of mere
design, fall in with the wicked cheat. This is more of Mr. Danvers's Charity
and Sobriety, and another of his great charges in the preface, saying, That I
abused the Reader with a supposititious Testimony of Athanasius, etc. But is
this so great a Crime in me as to deserve such severe Reprehensions? Certainly
not from Mr. D. who is equally guilty with me in this particular: for in his 1.
Ed. p. 66. p. 2. Ed. p 56. he quotes Arnobius upon the Psalms for his opinion,
which Perkins tells us is spurious. Now if I should have told Mr. D. that he
was not ignorant of this, but went on purpose to abuse the World; and that he
did of mere design fall in with the wicked Cheat, and abused his Reader with
the supposititious Testimony of Arnobius; how would he have liked it? I believe
he would have called me the most disingenuous Person in the World; when yet I
took mine out of the Magdeburgs (his excellent History) where I think his is
not to be found; though his expressions would induce us to believe he had it
from them.

A fifth thing charged upon him is the curtailing and leaving out part of a
Sentence quoted by Bazil, vix. Must the Faithful be sealed with Baptism? Faith
must needs preceed. And I do in my Answer censure him for stopping there, when
he should have proceeded with what follows, which is this: What then say you of
Infants, which neither know good nor evil? may we Baptize them? yea for so we
are taught by the Circumcision of Children.

Now how does Mr. Danvers clear himself of this? Why by telling us there are no
such words to be found in Bazil: and I do freely confess my mistake of a name,
and fathering upon Bazil the words of Nazianzen: but withal I must tell Mr.
Danvers that he in his Treatise of Baptism 1 edit. Cent. 4. page 66. 2 edit. p.
56. fathers upon Nazianzen that which he never spoke, viz. That the Baptized
used in the first place to confess their sins, and to renounce the Devil and
all his works before many witnesses; and that none were Baptized of old but
they that did so confess their sins: and for which he quotes no place, where we
may find it in that Father, which put me and another to some trouble in
perusing all that Nazianzen has writ upon the subject of Baptism; so that I
can confidently affirm those words; that none were Baptized of old, but they
that did confess their sins, are coined by Mr. Danvers and none of Nazianzen's.
And I am apt to think he cannot find in Nazianzen, that the Baptized renounced
the Devil and all his works before many witnesses; because the Magd. have no
such quotation out of him as I can find; but they tell us indeed Ephrim said
so. By which it appears to me that Mr. D. is as guilty in making an Authority
of his own as I am. For he says page 47. of his Reply, it is true the words I
find to be exactly the words of Gregory Nazianzen: And then withal let me mind
him that Nazianzen's Authority for Infants Baptism in the 4th Century is
altogether as good as Bazil's being of as great repute in in the Church as he;
and what pregnant grounds we have to believe that Bazil was for Infant Baptism
likewise you have heard before. To conclude this, although it be not possible
for any unprejudiced man to conceive otherwise of my naming Bazil instead of
Nazianzen, than that it was an innocent mistake; yet does Mr. Danvers
(according to his accustomed charity) declare his fear that I did knowingly
impose upon the Reader, and that it was not lapsus calami, but mentis, not a
sin of ignorance or a mere mistake, but a wilful mistake. But in these his
uncharitable surmises he is very injurious to me, but most of all unto himself
who is more guilty in this very particular.

A sixth Falsehood he is censured for is for bringing in the Waldenses as
witnesses against Infants Baptism, etc. But as for this, he tells us he will
examine it in his 3d Chapter whereto he refers the Reader, and so do I to my
Reply to him under that head, where is sufficiently discovered his falsehood and
weakness.

The seventh Charge is for dealing craftily with Mr. Baxter and traducing his
sayings, quoting diverse of his Arguments to Mr. Blake, as though he had been
only for Believers Baptism, when in the same place he so fully explains
himself, that as for Infants Right to Baptism he takes that for granted, upon
the account of their Parents, and that the dispute is wholly managed with
respect to Adult, not Infants Baptism.

Now as to this Mr. Danvers has nothing to say, but that Mr. Baxter
contradicts himself, as before he has said of the Fathers and Doctors of the
Church, and all our Learned and Godly Divines, according to the Verdict of his
modest intellect.

The eight and last I charge him with is that of delusion, which he endeavors
to fasten upon the Reader in reference to Dr. Tailor, by improving that
Argument which he has in his Liberty of Prophecy as though he were against
Infants Baptism; when the Dr. himself says, his design in that piece was only
to draw up a Schem of the Anabaptists Arguments, and to represent their
fallacious reasonings, and declares, that he conceives them to be in an Error,
and that he was for Infants Baptism.

To this Mr. Danvers replies, in way of vindication, that whatever the Drs.
judgment or end was in writing, yet God's Wisdom and Power in it the more
appears, if an Enemy, to bring forth such convincing Arguments from his own
mouth, to witness to his despised truth.

To all which this may suffice for Answer.

1. God is Infinite and unsearchable in his Wisdom and Power, and has made
even Satan himself to bear witness to the Divinity of Christ; but whether Mr.
Danvers's Opinion be a truth Sub judice lis est, is the thing in controversy.

2. As touching his Argments, how convincing they are, we do not deem Mr.
Danvers a Competent judge.

3. The Dr. himself who has so much discust the point, and examined what can
be said pro and con is more likely to give a right Judgment, and to penetrate
into the strength of the Arguments on both sides, and he has declared himself
fully for Infants Baptism, and given us his Arguments for the same, in a Book
entitled The Consideration of the Church in Baptizing the Infants of
Believers; the which he published since his liberty of Prophesy.

But notwithstanding all this Mr. Danvers takes much pains to make the World
believe, that the Dr. in his liberty of Prophesy, spoke his own judgment as
well as theirs. And in his Preface to his Treatise of Baptism, Edit. 1. says,
Surely Dr. Tailor had the reputation of a person of more Integrity, Conscience
and Honesty, than so egregiously to prevaricate in the things of God. But what
prevarication is it in him when he gives us to understand he does but personate
an Anabaptist, and tells us he will draw a scheme of what they can say for
their Opinion, which he looks upon as erroneous, and in the same place
positively declares himself for Infants Baptism?

And whereas Dr. Hammond has answered that Collection of Antipaedobaptistical
Arguments put forth by Dr. Tailor, Mr. Danvers tells us Dr. Hammond has rather
confirmed than answered them: But I hope not all of them; for that had been a
strange way of answering indeed: There is one of his mediums to prove
Infants Baptism by, which Mr. Danvers says I much glory in, and which he is
pleased to except against; the rest, it seems are not worthy of his notice, and
that is the Drs. Argument taken from the use of Baptism amongst the Jews, as a
kind of Initiation (of which Mr. Ainsworth gives diverse Testimonies upon the
17. Gen.) and says he, the Institutions of Christ (who came first Messiah to
that People, was born of that Nation, lived regularly under their Law, and
observed their customs) were by him drawn from their former practices in the
Old- Testament, and so were lightly changed, and accommodated to his own
purposes. And after that he had instanced in diverse things, he pitcheth upon
the Lord's Supper instituted and taken from their post-caenium, and cup of
Blessing, solemnly used by them at the close of a Festival, and from thence
passes on to that of Baptism, or Washing, a known Rite solemnly used among the
Jews as a form of Initiation into the Covenant of God, and so into the
Congregation: And shows out of the Talmud, that the way of entering into
Covenant was by Circumcision and Baptism, and then comes to improve the
Argument thus: That as the natural Jews were thus entered, so were the
Proselytes; and as the Proselytes of age, so also were their Infant-Children.
From which it appears that the Jewish Ceremony of Baptizing, was accommodated
by Christ to the right of our Initiation of the profession of Christ, whereof,
says the Dr. we have as little reason to doubt, as that a Picture was taken
from that Face which it resembles to the life, and from whence we have, as he
conceives, no obscure ground for our practice of Baptizing, not only those who
make profession of Faith, but also their Children with them.

In answer to which Mr. Danvers refers us to the Animadversions of Sir Norton
Knatchbul where we have such censured, that fetch the foundation of Truth from
the Rabbis, and no doubt deservedly. But as for Infant Baptism, the foundation
thereof is laid in the Covenant of God's Grace that takes in the Child as
confederate with the Parent, and consequently the Child must not be denied that
Seal, which under the Gospel-administration, is Baptism. But that Baptism was a
way of Initiating the proselytes of age with their little ones, we have it
several ways attested. See Godwin of the Jewish Antiquities, c. 3. p. 10.
quoting Moses Kotsen, Moses Aegyptius, Drusius de trib. sec. p. 102. who says,
That to the making of Males Proselytes were required Circumcision, and
Purification by Water; and for the Females, only Purification by Water. From
whence Mr. Godwin concludes thus; hence we may observe that a kind of
Initiation by water was long in use among the Jews (having before found it to
be as high as David's time) though, as he says, it was not Sacramental till
Christ his Institution: yea therefore it may seem to have been used by them,
because they expected it at the coming of the Messiah, as appears by their
coming to John, questioning not so much his Baptism as his Authority: by what
Authority he Baptized, Joh. 1. 15. But what need more be said to this? when Mr.
Tombs himself (to whom I hope Mr. Danvers will subscribe) acknowledges, Examen
p. 89. That it is well known, Baptism was in use among the Jews, in the
initiating Proselytes, for many years together with Circumcision.

CHAP. II.
Wherein Mr. Danvers pretends to show that Infants Baptism has neither
Foundation in Scripture, nor Antiquity, with an answer thereto.

1. THe Arguments used in his Treatise of Baptism, we have again in this his
Reply thus. That if Infants Baptism had been any Appointment, or Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, there would have been some Precept or Example; but the Scripture
is wholly silent as to either, etc.

To which I gave this answer, in my Infants Baptism asserted etc.

First, A thing may be said to be commanded in scripture two ways:

1. Expressly, or literally and syllabically, that is, totidem verbis, in so
many words: Thus we acknowledge Infants Baptism is not commanded; it is nowhere
said, Go Baptize Infants, if it had there would have been no controversy.

2. A thing may be Commanded in Scripture implicitly, and by good Consequence;
and what is thus commanded is as valid and obliging, as if it were in so many
letters and syllables, and thus we affirm Infants Baptism is commanded. There
are in Scripture clear grounds and principles, from whence by just and
warrantable consequences it may be deduced, that Beleivers children ought to be
baptized; for if they belong to the Covenant and are holy, if they are members
of the visible Church etc. then they have right to Baptism with more to this
purpose, Infants Baptism Asserted, pars 1. p. 36.

To which Mr. Danvers says nothing in his reply, but plays the sophister,
mangles my discourse, picks up words scattered in my Book about a hundred pages
each from other, and spoken upon different accounts, and withal foisteth in
some of his own with them, and then falls a-skirmishing with the man of Clouts
which he has made.

To give you some instances of his disingenuity herein.

1. He represents this to be my argument for Infants Baptism, viz. That as
there is no scripture expressly commanding, so neither is there any scripture
excluding Infants from Baptism, nor any Scripture that says there was no
Infants baptized, and then refers the Reader to p. 36. 38, 101, 131, 132, where
note, what a Compass he fetches to glean up words and then patcheth them
togetther for an Argument: and after all this, the words are not to be found in
those pages, but are more his than mine: I have told you before, what is
asserted by us, namely, That Infants Baptism is implicitly, though not expressly
commanded in Scripture: page 36, and page 38, I speak thus -- To say,
Infants Baptism is no Ordinance of Christ because we have no Examples in
Scripture, of any that were Baptized, is a pitiful Argument: for we have no
Examples of most of the Apostles that they were Baptized, and shall we say
therefore they were not Baptized?

Page 101. Which is another of my places that Mr. Danvers turns the Reader to; I
show, that the want of an express Command makes not against the lawfulness of
it, and that the Anabaptists want an express Command or Example (there being
neither to be found in the Book of God) to plunge Men head and ears under
Water, as they use to do; Nor have they any Precept or Example, to Baptize
people with their clothes on. And in p. 131. and 132, the last of my pages he
refers to, I thus express my self, that there is nothing in Christ's Commission
that is against Childrens Baptism; for the Teaching that is therein required,
excludes not the Children of Believers (if (...), be restrained to Teaching) as
appears by the consideration of the conditions of the Persons to whom Christ
sent his Apostles to Baptize who were Aliens, and though Believing goes before
Baptism in Mark it does not exclude Infants; because the same condition, that
is required there to preceed Baptism, is required to precede Salvation: so that
if the Sense be that Infants must not be Baptized, because they cannot believe,
it will as directly follow they must not be saved, because they cannot believe.
The way of answering one answers both, by the same distinction the Salvation of
Infants may be maintained, their Baptism may. Thus Reader, I have given thee
the whole which Mr. Danvers improves into an Argument against me, as before;
but how justly I shall leave to thy consideration. And I must crave leave to
say that this Argument: Infant Baptism is lawful because nowhere forbidden in
Scripture, nor nowhere told where it was not done, is a Brat of his own
begetting, which he would fain lay at my door.

Next follow some passages quoted from Divines that are Pedobaptists; as, first
from Dr. Owen in his Book called Innocence and Truth Vindicated (by which name
Mr. Danvers has baptized his Book, though little of either is found in it);
who lays down this position, That no part of Gods worship, either in the old or
New Testament, was lawful, but what had some express warrant from his word for
the same; in opposition to what Dr. Parker asserts, that what is not forbidden
may be Lawful: To this I answer that I humbly conceive, that his position of
express warrant is to be understood with some limitation: for I have learned
from Mr. Ger^^, and some other Divines, that there is a great difference
between an Ordinance it self, and some particular circumstances or the subject
to which that Ordinance is to be applied: For the Ordinance it self, as the
setting up Baptism as a Sacrament of the Gospel Covenant, renewed by Christ, it
requires express warrant in the word of God: But when we have such Warrant for
the Ordinance it self, to whomsoever we find by grounds or principles in
Scripture that it does of right belong, there we may apply it though we want
express testimony for it, if we have none against i^. And that this is the
Doctor's meaning is clear from what he tells us in his Exposition of Heb. c. 1.
p. 86. viz. That it is lawful to draw consequences from Scripture-Assertions,
and such consequences rightly deduced are infallibly true, and de fide: nothing
will rightly follow from truth, but what is so also, and that of the same
nature with the truth from whence it is derived; so that whatsoever by just
consequence is drawn from the word of God, is it self also the word of God, and
of truth Infallible. And if Mr. D. will please to ask the Doctor what he
intended by express Warrant, I am confident he will find him exactly of Bucers
mind who thus expresses himself on Romans 6. Lex dei perfecta est, docet que
quibus totam Vitam ad voluntatem Dei instituere licet, quare contineri in
Scripturis necesse est certa, and non expressa nominatim, oracula, de omnibus
quaecunque afillis Dei, sive public, sive privatim suscipi convenit.

Mr. Danvers has picked up another saying of Mr. Collins before his Vind.
Minist. Evang. viz. That in things relating to the worship of God nothing ought
to be done without express Warrant in the Gosple. This Assertion of Mr.
Collins's in that latitude as it is laid down is liable to exception; for there
are many Circumstances relating to Gods worship, as time, place, and order,
that are not so expressly set down in the Word, which nevertheless may lawfully
be prescribed by the Church, provided that it agrees with the general Rules set
down in the Word: and I find this was written in opposition to Soldiers that
took up the practice of Preaching without Ordination: and his endeavoring to
make the bow straight might make him bend it a little too much the other way.
But I am confident if he was to explain what he meant by those words, Mr. D.
would find them very little for his purpose. But to come more closly to the
matter, what express Command have we for the observation of the Christian
Sabbath? for want of which, many Anabaptists (notwithstanding the Apostles met
on the first day of the week) own not the Morality of it. Again, what express
Command, or Example have we, for Women's receiving the Lord's Supper; good
consequence there is for it, but no express mention of it. But this satisfies
not Mr. Danvers, for he is for express Scripture, to prove Women received the
Lord's Supper; as you have it in his reply to Mr. Blinman: who very rationally
and truly argues against Mr. Danvers that the words upon which he lays the
stress of Women's receiving the Lord's Supper are in express terms against him,
it being these [all that believed were together] and as he argues rightly, the
Greek phrase is expressly of Men and not of Women, viz. (...), the Article
(...), being masculin expressly limits it to Men and not to Women, etc. Mr.
Danvers Replies very confidently, that the exception of Mr. Blinman seems to be
as defective in Grammar as in Divinity [and why in Divinity, since Mr. Blinman
holds that Women received the Lord's Supper, and this is not the thing disputed]
and then he paedagogue-like, sends the Reverend Learned Man to his Grammar to
learn what Syllepsis means: which is nothing to the purpose but to make a noise.

To gather up then the Discourse, we grant all this is good by consequence,
That the First Day ought to observed as a Christian Sabbath, that Women ought
to receive the Lord's Supper, but we cannot prove either by express terms. To
conclude then, how injurious and no less ignorant a Spirit appears in those
words of Mr. Danvers; That Mr. Blinman trifles in the things of God, and plays
with Words to pervert the Truth, when he only tells him (being challenged
thereunto) that as much might be said for Infant Baptism as Women's receiving
the Lord's Supper, there being no express Command for either, but only implicit,
and both warranted by consequence.

There is a third Author quoted by Mr. Danvers, viz. Dr. Hammond, who says,
that an Institution of Christ, such as each Sacrament is, should not be judged
by any other rule, than either the Word wherein the Institution is set down, or
the Records of the practice of Christ or his Apostles. A sound position, but
such as touches not the case before us, for we judge of the Sacrament of
Baptism as belonging to the Infant Seed of Believers by the Word wherein the
Institution is set down, as before is shown.

Thus we have manifested the Sophistry and weakness of Mr. Danvers's arguings
together with the impertinency of his Quotations. Nevertheless he concludes, as
if he had done some great thing. By all this evidence it appears that Mr. Wills
is so Heterodox in his Positions, that he has neither Scripture Reason,
Antiquity, or the learned Protestant-Writers to stand by him, and wherein if he
persists, he gives up not only the Independent, but whole Protestant Cause (as
if all the Protestant Cause depended upon the sayings of those three men before
mentioned, or on my opposing him for wresting and misapplying the same against
Infant Baptism). But what should make him fancy the Protestant Cause depended
upon the sayings of this Triumviri, I cannot imagine, unless it be because one
is an Independent, the other a Presbyterian, and the third Man an Episcoparian,
and Protestantism is only found among the men of these Professions, the
Anabaptist being not concerned in it. And truly if we consider what Mr. Danvers
has said of the Protestants in some parts of his Discourses, we had need of
much charity to believe, it would be at all grievous to him, if the Protestant
cause miscarried; for we are all in his esteem a company of erroneous persons,
not of the Church of Christ, having no true Ministry or Baptism, Antichristian
enemies to the Truth, as well as to them, and ever and anon linkt by him with
the Papist, as conspiring togethher in upholding the Tradition of
Infants Baptism, and therein grounding all our Christianity, and against which
he bids defiance; and declares against all possibility of Communion with us,
whilst we adhere thereto, as may be seen in his Preface to his Treatise of
Baptism, Edit. 2.

But will Mr. Danvers allow of no consequences, or are not implicit Commands
obligatory? you have his judgment in what follows.

1. He tells, us he will allow of Consequences when there is express Scripture
for the thing elsewhere, as in the case of the Resurrection, else not: And I
pray, who now is Heterodox? No thanks to him for his grant, for we have no need
of consequences to be drawn, where the thing is set down in express terms: It
seems if the Doctrine of the Resurrection had not been delivered in Scripture
plainly in so many words, all consequential arguings from the Infinite Power
and Justice of God requiring it, would little have availed with him. But he
might have learned from Mr. Sydenham (with whom he is acquainted) that to deny
Consequences to have the strength of Commands is to leave very few Duties to be
practiced, or Sins to be avoided: expound the Ten-Commandments without
Consequences, and very few will be found literal transgressors, but most
deplorable debaucht Persons. And since the Bible is but a short System of
Religion, every place is fitted to expound each other, and this must be done by
Rational, Spiritual, Comparisons and Inferences: and how does Mr. Danvers prove
that those of his way, must be covered when Baptized, have they any express
Word, or Example for it? does he not fly to rational Inference? how does he
know Baptizing is by Plunging? has he any other way for it than consequential
Reasonings? it must be so, he conceives, for the word signifies it; see his
Reply, p. 34.

2. He says, he will admit of plain Consequences, which mends the matter very
little. For now we shall want some Supreme Judge to determine, which are plain,
which not; must we go to him and his party for resolution? certainly it must be
so according to his mode of arguing, for though he will admit of plain
consequences he presently adds, Therefore we deny the Inferences usually drawn
from Circumcision under the Law for Baptism under the Gospel to be either
plain, proper, or true: How blind was Nazianzen, Jerome, Austin, and the rest of
the Fathers, to infer Infants Baptism from Circumcision? and how irrational are
the deductions of such an innumerable company of Doctors and learned Divines?
Had they lighted their Candles at Mr. Danvers's Torch, they might have seen
what had been plain, proper and true Inferences; but the Vanity of his
discourse in this kind, we have showed in our Infants Baptism Asserted, part 1.
116, 117. and answered their objections against our Arguments for
Infants Baptism drawn from Circumcision.

In the next place he says, That as to the Antiquity of Infants Baptism, with
its impious Concomitants of Salt, Oil, Spittle, Chrism, Exorcism, it was not
about 400 years after Christ, in the Milevitan and Carthaginian Council, and
that according to my own grant.

To this I answer, that here Mr. D. does impose: For in the 106 page of my
Infant Baptism (the place which he intends) I do not calculate the Antiquity of
Infant Baptism, from those Councils 400 years after Christ; nor is there any
thing there spoken of Salt, Oil, Spittle, etc. This trumpery is an addition of
his own, to render Infant Baptism odious, although he knows it was used also in
the Baptizing of grown Persons in those days. 2. What is there spoken of
Infants Baptism is from Dr. Tailor, and no grant of mine, about the necessity
of Infant Baptism not determined till the Canon of the Milevitan Council. 3. He
makes me to say positively, that the reason why it was not enjoined sooner was,
because the lawfulness of it was rarely, if at all questioned before, and then
glories that I have confirmed his witness against Infants Baptism; whereas all
that I say amounts but to a conjecture, and that upon a supposition of the
truth of Dr. Tailors speech concerning the time when Infant Baptism was
established by Canon; for these are my words: Belike the reason why it was not
established sooner by Council, under an Anathema, was, because it was rarely,
if at all, questioned or opposed till then. It was indeed determined in
Cyprian's Council about a hundred and fifty years before, that Infants might be
Baptized before the eight day, but no Anathema was made about this point of
Baptism so early. 4. Observe Reader what an idle Inference my Antagonist draws
from the pretended Grant of mine; then says he, if it be so, that the Canons
in the Milevitan Council, and enforcing Infants Baptism [with thirty more
Councils doing the same] were only made upon the occasion of those that denied,
or opposed it.

We have then, says he, our witnesses throughout all ages confirmed by
himself, the Reader must needs see how precarious he is in his reasoning, and
if he has no more to say for his Witnesses in all ages than this, I am sure he
will never carry it at the Bar of an Impartial Judge: He must seek elsewhere for
his Witnesses than in my Writings, or he is never like to find them, and if I
had argued at the rate as Mr. Danvers does in this thing, I might justly have
deserved his censure for folly, and falsehood.

Lastly, he concludes that till any instance be produced of any Child that was
Baptized, as an Ordinance of Christ, within the first 300 years, he is yet
unreprovable in his Assertion, and very safe in what he has said.

I answer, 1. That this is very weakly spoken, in as much as he confesses just
before from the Magdeburgs, that the Records of Antiquity say nothing of the
particular persons, either Infants or Adult, that were Baptized in the third
Century, but only; there is mention made of one Family Baptized, in which there
was a young Man named Symphorianus, Magd. Cent. 3. c. 6. p. 1. 25. 2. What
though we have not the particular names of Children (having not the
Church-Registers) it is sufficient that we are informed in general that it was
then the practice of the Church to Baptize Children, as we have it in the same
place beforementioned, p. 125. significat Cyprianus in Epistola ad Fidum,
etiam Osculum Infanti a ministro baptizante dari solitum, that is, Cyprian in
his Epistle to Fidus does likewise intimate, that the Minister used to kiss the
Child when he Baptized it: Let Mr. Danvers's Friends judge, whether this be not
enough, if no more could be said, to confute all his Discourse about Antiquity.
Add hereunto this consideration, That in this Century Tertullian persuading to
defer both the Baptism of Children, and others who are of age, does thereby
intimate that it was the custom of the Church at that time to Baptize the one
as well as the other; otherwise there was no reason why he should desire that
they would defer the one as well as the other.

Concerning Tradition, which Mr. Danvers says, is the principal ground that
has been urged for Infants Baptism, with an answer thereto.
Sect. 2. To make out this he quotes Austin, who calls it an Apostolical
Tradition; to which I said in my Answer, that anciently the greatest points of
Faith were by the Fathers named (...); so they are called by the Apostle, 2
These. 2. 15. which is all one with Divine Doctrines or Ordinances, for so the
word is rendered, 1 Cor. 11. 2. And to make this more fully appear, the
Magdiburgs tell us, that Bazil calls the manner of Baptizing in the name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, a Tradition, by which he means the Doctrine of the
Lord Christ. Magd. Cent. 4. c. 4. p. 235. Egregie and Basilius hac de re
scribit, lib. 3. contra Eunomium, Baptismus noster est secundum Traditionem
Domini in nomine Patris, etc. that is, our Baptism is according to the
Tradition of the Lord, in the name of the Father, etc. Again Bazil in his Book
de Spiritu sancto, by Tradition means the Scripture, as Hermannus Hamelmannus
observes de Tradit. Apost. and tacitis. p. 355. Certum est quod Basilius per
vocabulum Traditionis, aliquando Scripturam intelligit; it is certain that
Bazil does sometimes understand by the word Tradition, the Scripture; for so he
speaks to Amphilochius in his 10th Chapter of the abovementioned Book of the
Holy-Spirit. Hanc Traditionem quae me perduxit ad lucem ac Dei cognitionem
largita est, etc. If Austin then means the same that Bazil does by Tradition,
viz. the Scripture, he says true, when he tells us that Infants Baptism were
not to be believed, unless it were an Apostolical Tradition, and although he
intends the word otherwise in that famous speech of his in his 4th Book against
the Donatists, Chap. 24. (which Mr. Danvers does ill in curtailing) namely,
That if any do inquire for a Divine Authority for the Baptizing Children, let
them know, What the Universal Churh holds, nor was instituted in Councils, but
always retained, is most rightly believed to have been delivered by no other
than by Apostolical Authority; to which this is added in the next words* Tamen
veraciter conjicere possumus quid valeat in parvulis Baptismi Sacramentum, ex
circumcisione Carnis quam prior populus accepit, that is, Nevertheless, we may
conjecture how much the Sacrament of Baptism is available to Children, by the
Circumcision of the Flesh which the former people received.

His next instance is from Bellarmin, that it is an Apostolical Tradition, etc.
But Mr. Danvers is not ignorant that Bellarmin says, Satis aperte Coll^gitur
ex scripturis, to which purpose we have him, Tom. 3. lib. 1. c. 8. de
Sacrament. It is clearly gathered from Scripture.

A third passage Mr. Danvers brings from Dr. Field in his Book of the Church,
Chap 20. Where speaking of the several senses in which the word Tradition is
taken he says, That Infants Baptism is therefore called a Tradition because it
is not delivered in the Scripture that the Apostles did Baptize Infants, or
that they should do so: And is it fair dealing for Mr. Danvers to stop here,
when the following words would have cleared the point, which are these; yet is
not this received by bare and naked Tradition, but that we find the Scripture
to deliver unto us the grounds of it, lib. 4. p. 375. and the more inexcusable
is our Antagonist being formerly minded of this unfaithfulness in our
Infant Baptism Asserted, etc. And when I showed to a Friend that has a great
respect for the Anabaptists, how he had served Dr. Field, the said person
presently said, certainly Mr. Danvers is either weak or wicked.

The last instance is from the Convocation at Oxford, and he deals unfairly
with them likewise, by altering, and disordering their words; For he quotes
them thus. That without the Consentaneous judgment and practice of the
universal Church they should be at a loss when they are called upon for proof
in the point of Infant Baptism: whereas they are expressed in another strain,
and less advantageous to Mr. Danvers's purpose, being thus. That the
Consentient judgment and practice of the universal Church is the best
interpreter of Scripture in things not clearly expressed; and then they say, that
without it they should be at a loss in sundry points of Faith and manners,
believed and practiced when by Socinians and Anabaptists, they are called upon
for proofs, instancing in the Trinity, and Coequality of persons in the
Godhead: baptizing Infants, ^^e observation of the Lords day, and even the
Canon of the Scripture it self, etc.

Mr. Danvers having as he thinks cleared his Position, proceeds to draw a
parallel between Papists and Protestants, to show that there is no great
difference between them, after the manner as I have represented the Protestant
sentiments in the point.

To which I reply, 1. That the Papists hold many things that are Orthodox and
sound, especially in Doctrinals, but are very corrupt in Discipline, and
abominably unsound in the point of Tradition, for they equal it with Scripture:
and the Council of Trent determined that Tradition was to be entertained pari
pietatis affectu, with the like affection as the Scripture, etc.

The Protestants abhor this, as may be seen at large in the aforementioned
Author Hamelmannus in his Book of Traditions, where disputing against
Staphilus, and Cassander, and speaking particularly of Infants Baptism, p. 818.
he says non nobis satisfaeceret, nisi peteretur probatio paedobaptismi ex
Scripturis; Tradition would not satisfy us unless we had Scripture Proof for
it.

Now for his Parallel.

1. Do the Papists, says he, maintain that the Ecclesiastical Tradition of
Infants Baptism, as it is gathered from the Scripture, and appointed by the
Church, is of equal Authority with Scripture it self? so, says he, does Mr.
Wills assert for Protestant Doctrine, That the Tradition of Infants Baptism,
proved by Consequential Arguments from the Scripture, ought to be esteemed as
firm and good, as the Scripture it self; and to prove that I say so, Mr.
Danvers refers the Reader to p. 117. of my Book, where there is nothing spoken
of Tradition; but only a position quoted from Mr. Baxter's Scriptureproof, viz.
That evident consequences, or Arguments drawn by Reason from Scripture, are as
true proof as the very words of a Text. And is there any hurt in this? can any
man that is rational deny it? does not Dr. Owen positively assert it? Nay, does
not Mr. Danvers himself tell us We admit of plain consequences? Reply p. 69.
though he will not grant Infants Baptism to be of the number of them. But what
says Mr. Baxter in the forementioned place? If I prove, says he, that all
Church Members must be admitted by Baptism, and then prove that Infants of
Believers are Church Members, is not this as much as to prove they must be
baptized? What thinks Mr. Danvers of that passage of Nazianzen in his 5th Book
of Theology? Quae colliguntur ex Scripturis Sacris, perinde habenda sunt, ac si
in illis scripta essent: those things that are gathered out of Scripture are to
be of like esteem with us, as that which is written in Scripture. Without doubt
Mr. Danvers look's upon this as a Popish saying in Nazianzen. The rest of his
Parallel is so frivolous, that I will not trouble my self, nor the Reader with
it. And truly if one were minded, how easy is it to retort upon him, and show
the vanity of his discourse in such a manner? as for instance.

Does Mr. Danvers say that the promise Genesis 17. 7, pertains not to the Carnal
seed of Abraham, but to the Spiritual? so does Estius the Jesuit against
Calvin, about which Mr. Danvers committed so great a Mistake, that if I had
done the same he would have said I had belyed Calvin, and abused the World.
Does Mr. Danvers say, Circumcision was only a Seal to Abraham, not to Believers
and their seed? so says Cardinal Bellarmin, in his first book of the
Sacraments, and after him other Papists, affirming that Circumcision is not
said to be a seal universally to any faith, but only a seal of the individual
faith of Abraham.

Does Mr. Danvers say, it could not be a seal to an Infant that had no faith?
Bellarmin speaks the same; If it be a seal, says he, (in that Baptism comes in
the place of Circumcision) it is in vain to baptize Infants, because they have
no Faith: so that it seems, his sentiments about these points are the same with
the Papists also.

Mr. Danvers Exceptions against our Testimonies for Infants Baptism from the
Ancients, examined and confuted.
His first Exception is against that passage we bring from Justin Martyr in his
Dialogue with Triphon, part. 2. propos. 3. where he says, It was lawful for
all to receive the spiritual Circumcision, which was done by Baptism: From
whence we argue, That if it was lawful for all to receive it; then Infants who
were the subjects of the legal Circumcision, for they must be part of the all,
and not excluded.

To this Mr. Danvers says two things. 1. That it is a mere Impertinency, and
nothing to the purpose, why so?

1. Because there is not one wo^d of Infants, nor of Infants Baptism, nor its
Apostolicalness: And what of that? does he not know that omne universale
continet in se particulare, every universal contains within it self the
particular? And does not Justin say it was lawful for all to receive the
spiritual Circumcision, which is Baptism? Nor do we stand in need of a word for
its Apostolicalness here, since the only end for which the Quotation is urged
is to prove that Justin was for Infants Baptism.

2. He tells us it is not only Impertinent, but Absurd, to interpret the word
[All] to be all men, for then it must comprehend wicked as well as good,
Unbelievers as well as Believers. But this is a shift; for I say, [All] is here
to be limited to those who are within the Church, for to them Only appertained
the Legal Circumcision under the Law, of which Justin speaks, and by proportion
to such only, the Spiritual Circumcision [Baptism] now under the Gospel.

As to what he further objects, that Justin in this very Dialogue tells us,
that by the Word and Baptism Regeneration was perfected in all mankind: As it
is more than the Magdiburgs say, for their words are, per aquam et fidem
regenerationem fieri humani generis; so it makes nothing at all against us,
because this is added by the Magdiburgs in the same place (speaking how they
baptized in Justin's time) De adultis paenitentiam requirunt etc. They required
Repentance of the Adult before Baptism. If Mr. Danvers had set this down, he
could not have framed his objection. Just thus he deals with Mr. Baxter's
Treatise of Baptism, Chapter 7. p. 49. 2d Edit. where he quotes Mr. Baxter as
rendering some part of Justin Martyr's Apology in these words in his Saints
Rest, Chapter 8. Sect. 5. viz. [I will declare unto you how we offer up our selves
to God after that we are renewed by Christ etc. Where if you will compare, you
shall see both how considerably he varies it in the words from Mr. Baxters
words, and likewise how he leaves out that which would have shown the Quotation
nothing to his purpose, viz [Justin Martyr speaking of the way of Baptizing the
Aged.]

In the next place he excepts against what we urge for Infants Baptism, from
Irenaeus, who lived in the same Century with Justin, in the Age of those that
saw the Apostles, and so must needs know their Practice: It is a passage of his
in lib. 2. Advers. Haeres. c. 39. where discoursing of Christ that came to save
all ages, he specifieth particulars, as Infantes et Parvuli, Infants and little
ones, as well as pueros et juvenes, et seniores; Boys, young men, and old men:
and then concludes, Omnes inquam qui per eum renascuntur in Deum; All, I say,
who by him are born again unto God. Where, by Infants being born again unto
God, must needs be understood, after the Scripture-notion and sense, and as the
Ancient Fathers usually took the word (...), that is, Baptism. For as Mr. Mede
observes, that by the Washing of regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. none will deny is
meant Baptism: And Vossius, upon that Scripture says, that to call Baptism
Renascentia, [Regeneration] is usitata veteribus loquendi forma, an usual form
of speaking among the Ancients. And to put this out of all doubt, Justin
Martyr, in his Apology beforementioned, speaking of the manner how they were
baptized, says, The party was brought to the place where the water is, and
regenerated in the same manner, wherein we were regenerated. To this Mr.
Danvers has little to say, and if I mistake not, very little to purpose, as,
that it is Impertinent as before and far-fetched, and that there is not a word
of Infants Baptism in it, or Apostolicalness: which is just the 2d part of the
same tune which was sung but now: And further he adds, that as the
interpretation upon which it is founded is fallacious; so neither Scripture nor
Justin, does call Baptism, Regeneration absolutely [who says they do?] but
only the Symbol of Regeneration. And this is very true, and which no body
denies but I must tell Mr. Danvers that this is altogether impertinent, and far
off from the matter we are upon.

But his Confidence does not abate, for he tells us, it is manifest these
Authorities are to little purpose, yea wholly insignificant, and nothing to the
purpose [do not only tell us this Story, but give us Reason for it, or say
nothing] and that they failing, as he concludes they do, there is (...)
pedobaptismi, a fearful tumbling down of the whole Fabric of Infants Baptism,
Repl. p. 79.

And to help after, he presents us with a pretended saying of Dr. Barlow, but
he does not point to any Book or page where we shall find it. The words which
Mr. Danvers says the Doctor speaks are, these; viz. I Believe and know that
there is neither precept nor practice in Scripture for Pedobaptism, nor any
just evidence for it for above two hundred years after Christ. Reader, thou
must understand that Mr. Danvers has made mention of this Reverend and Learned
Man's name, above twenty times in his Treatise of Baptism, Edit. 1, 2. and in
his Reply, as if he had spoken much in derogation of the Antiquity of
Infants Baptism. For in the 1st Edition of his Treatise of Baptism p. 74. we
have him thus, Dr. B. late Doctor of the Chair, a person of great Learning and
Eminency, has these words in a Letter I have seen in print; I do believe, and
know, there is neither Precept nor Example in Scripture etc. as before: And for
as much as I questioned the Truth of this, [that is, that the Doctor was of
this Opinion] and being desirous to know his Judgment, and whether he owned any
such printed Letter, I did therefore write to him, and received this following
Letter from him, viz.

Dr. Barlow's Letter.
SIR,
I Understand by your Letter (and the Books you mention, which I have since
read) that some late Writers have made use of my name, (giving me the Title of
Dr. of the Chair in Oxon) and cite (as they say) a printed Letter of mine,
wherein I declare my Judgment against Infant Baptism.

You desire to know of me, (who should best know my own Opinion) whether or
(how far) those things are true which they say, and cite in my name? And
therefore out of that respect, which is due, and I owe to Truth and you; and
that I may undeceive others, and give you that satisfaction which you so
civilly desire, I shall crave leave to tell you (and all whom it may concern)
these few things.

1st. That it is a great mistake, to call me Doctor of the Chair in Oxon, when
it cannot be unknown to any who know that University, that a very Reverend and
far more worthy Dr. Richard Allestree, the worthy Provost of Eaton-Colledg.
Person possesses, and (with great Learning and general Approbation of all)
performs the Duties of that great place.

2dly. That never any thing of mine was printed (by any knowledge or Permission
of mine) against the received Doctrine or Practice of Paedo-Baptism, as it is
warranted and approved by the Church of England.

3dly. That (about twenty years ago) Mr. Tombs writ to a then Reverend (since
a Right-Reverend) person of the University, desiring himus to examine, and give
him the true meaning of certain places in Tertullian, and some of the Ancient
Fathers, which were usually produced for Infant Baptism. That Reverend Person,
whom I was bound (for many Reasons) to obey, commanded me (who had more time,
though less ability) to examine those Quotations, and return an Answer to Mr.
Tombs: which I did, in a Letter then sent him: and (as Mr. Baxter In his Book
entit. More proofs of Infants Church Membership, page 343.
truly says) this is that secret Letter which they are pleased to cite.

4. I acknowledge that such words as are cited by Mr. In his Treatise of
Baptism. London, 1674. page 65, 66.
Danvers (and such others, spoke and Writ then, with more Confidence than
Judgment or Discretion) are in that Letter, which had been secret still, if
some had not betrayed that trust which was reposed in them.

5. Lastly, It is to be considered, that that Letter was Anno. 1656.
writ about twenty years ago, (when I talked more, and understood less) and yet
whatever Doubts or Objections I had then against Infant Baptism; I never
thought them so considerable, as to warrant any Division, or Schismatical
disturbance of the Peace of my Mother the Church of England: And therefore I
did then, and since, and (when I have a just call, God willing) ever shall
Baptize Infants, according to that Form and those Rites, which our Church has
prescribed in her Sacred Office for Infant Baptism. In short, Mr. Baxter's
candid and charitable Page 343. of his Book before cited.
Answer for me, [ That it is not likely that I, who have subscribed the Articles
and Liturgy of the Church of England, will be against Infant-Baptism] I shall
endeavor to make good. I have (with Assent and Consent) Subscribed our
Liturgy and Articles: and (God willing) never shall practice, or print, or say
any thing in contempt of, or contradiction to the Doctrine, or those innocent
Ceremonies contained in them.

(...). T. B.
Oxon Apr. 13. 1675.

Our 3d testimony is Origin, who in diverse places of his Works, as in his
Homilies upon Romans 6. says, The Church received a Tradition from the Apostles
to give Baptism to little Children: the same we have again in his Homilies and
Luke 14.

To this Mr. Danvers Objects.

1. That of Dr. Tailor, That Origin is but one single Testimony. 2. That his
Writings are notoriously corrupt, and particularly in the point of Baptism. 3.
Many of his works, and particularly those that treat of Baptism, fell into ill
hands.
In answer to the first; Let Dr. Tailor in his later Discourse of the
consideration of the Church in Baptizing the Children of Believers, answer Dr.
Tailor in his former Book of the Liberty of Prophesy, where he says, that
Origin is but one single Testimony. In his later Discourse (put out since) he
cites Justin and Irenaeus, saying positively, That the Tradition of Baptizing
Infants passed through Irenaeus his hands. So then he, by this acknowledges
that we have more than the single Testimony of Origin: and if he has put forth
any thing else since in contradiction to it, I may say his words are not much
to be credited, for we know not where to find him.

2. Origen's Writings (says he) are corrupt: who denies it in some things? So
are Tertullian's, so are all the Fathers. To which Mr. Danvers vauntingly
replies, Let both Origin and Tertullian go together, only I shall thereby have
the better bargain; for Mr. Wills in parting with Origin parts with all, but I
have many more to witness for me besides.

To which I only say, I wish I could see them, or if it were possible to speak
with them face to face, as I lately did with Dr. Barlow, it is very like I
should have the same account of their Judgments, as I had of his; And let Mr.
Danvers know, that one word of solid Reason, has more weight in it, and is
more taking with the judicious, than all his Thrasonical Boasts and
calumniating reflections?

3. His Works fell into ill hands; which is true of some, yet not all of those
that treat of Baptism: for I tell him in Infant Baptism Asserted p. 135. that
Origen's Homilies on the Romans and Luke, are translated by Jerome, and to be
esteemed Authentic, quoting Erasmus for it: and for this Mr. Danvers falls
foul on me, this being another of his great charges in his Preface, that I
abuse Erasmus, who says quite contrary to what he says I father on him. As 1.
That the Translation of the Homilies on the Romans appeared to him to be
Ruffinus's and not Jeroms. 2. That the Preface to the Translation which
represents it as Jerome's was a cheat of the Bookseller, as Erasmus notes.

To this I answer, 1st. That Erasmus does not say that the Homilies upon the
Romans, set forth as translated by Jerome, were Ruffinus's Homilies, and not
Origen's. 2. The Magdeburgs reckoning up the legitimate Works of Jerome in the
story of his Life, do mention that of translating Origin on the Romans to be
one, and that according to the Judgment of Erasmus, Cent. 4. Cap. 10. p. 1218.
Extant inter Origenis Opera Latin facta quaedam quorum interpres fuit
Hieronimus, Erasmi judicio: that is, among the works of Origin, some are
translated into Latin by Jerome, in the Judgment of Erasmus; and then they nam
which they are, as follows. As the Homilies upon Jeremy, which have Jerome's
Preface to them, the Homilies upon Ezekiel, the 39. Homilies upon Luke cum
Praefatione Hieronymi, with Jeroms Preface, and ten Books of Origen's Comments
upon the Romans. [there's that which will clear me against all Mr. Danver's
reproaches] cum ejusdem praefatione, with Jerome's Preface. I appeal now to the
Reader, whether I had not good Authority for what I said, That according to
Erasmus's judgment Jerome translated Origin on the Romans. You see from whence I
had mine information, The Magdeburgs affirm that both Translation and Preface
too were Jerome's, and Mr. Danvers knew it to be so, for in my Answer I directed
him to the Century and page in the Magdeburgensian History, from whence I had
it. And therefore it is a sorry trick, of him to slur me as he has done in this
thing, and make such an Exclamation against me. What credit is to be given unto
Mr. Wills let all men judge! he might rather have said what credit is to be
given to the Magdeburgs (and their excellent History as Mr. D. calls it) let
all men judge! for if I was deceived, they deceived me. 3. I have yet further to
say, and that is that I have another to speak on my behalf, Dr. Hammond (of no
small note for his knowledge in Antiquity, and perhaps not inferior to Erasmus)
who tells us in his Letters of Resolution, p. 215. that though we have not
Origin upon the Romans in Greek, yet being translated by Jerome, and so owned by
him in his Epistle to Heraclius, prefixed before the Commentary, we have his
Authority to secure us that the words [about Infant-Baptism] were Origens. And
let it be supposed that Jerome did not translate those on the Romans, and that
the Homilies themselves are spurious, and none of Origens; Yet those on Luke
pass for current without control, and there the point of Infant Baptism is as
fully asserted, as in the other place on the Romans.

Against this also Mr. Danvers has borrowed a scrap from Mr. Tombs (who
finding nothing in Erasmus Censures) has yet by good hap hit upon a word in
Erasmus Comment on Luke 1. 3. The words of Erasmus are [For so he seems to
think, whosoever he was, whose Commentaries are extant upon Luke under the
title of Admantius] which shows (says Mr. Tombs) that Erasmus took them not
to be Origens, or at least doubted thereof.

It is very remarkable that Mr Tombs should spy out this passage, much more
that he should comment thus upon it. For what Erasmus speaks of Origin upon
Luke, might as well be said of every Book; nor can any man say posatively these
are the Books written by Justin Martyr, or Tertullian; so that to interpret
that passage of Erasmus for a doubt is but a mere Cavil.

But that he doubted not that Jerome translated Origin on Luke, take his own
clear word for it in his Censure, Homil. In Lucam, Dubium non est quin 39
Homilias in Lucam verterit Hieronimus, quod ipse palam in praefatione
profitetur. There is no doubt to be made of it, says he, that Jerome translated
the 39 Homilies on Luke: And if Jerome translated them (as there is no doubt
according to Erasmus) then we need not doubt but he did it from the Original
Copy of Origin.

Judge now Reader what Mr. D. has got in this Business, notwithstanding all the
Clutter he has kept with his boastings and defamings: we see by what is said,
That we have Infants Baptism owned as from the Apostles by Origin on Luke
[whatever becomes of that on the Romans,] and translated by Jerome, of which
Erasmus does not in the least doubt; so that the Fabric stands yet upright
never like to be demolisht by Mr. Danvers, whatever great exploits he has
done heretofore in the days of his Colonelship.

Our last Testimony is from Cyprian against whom also he has something to say,
though methinks that of Vossius is enough to silence all
Cavils, viz. That the Testimony of Cyprian, for Infants Baptism both in his
time and before, is beyond all exception. And Grotius speaks to the same
purpose, viz. That the Epistle of Cyprian to Fidus maks the matter plain that
there was then no doubt of Infants Baptism.

Against this he gives in three Exceptions,
in his Treatise of Baptism, presented again in his Reply; as First,
Infants Baptism is not urged by Cyprian for an Apostolical Tradition, nor upon
any Authority of Scripture, but upon his Own, and Bishops Arguments; though if
he should have said it was an Apostolical Tradition, his word, he says, would
have no more been taken than when he tells us Chrysm was so. To which I
replied, in my Answer, That though Cyprian did not say it was Apostolical; yet
it follows not he did not own it as such: yea, to put it out of doubt, the
Magdeburgs tell us he did own it as Apostolical, Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 6. p. 496.
But what though the Magdiburgs tell us so (says he) that is no more than if Mr.
Wills had said it: Strange! that such venerable persons as those famous Divines
were, that have written such an excellent History, as Mr. Danvers elsewhere
terms it, should be of no more credit with him than my self, whom he so much
vilifieth? But has he not forgotten what he speaks just before, That Cpyrian
held Chrysin to be an Apostolical Tradition? and is it not strange! that he
should not hold the same of Pedobaptism? But whether he did or not, is not
material to the point which is now before us; for we are inquiring de facto,
what was done in Cyprian's time, as to the Baptizing Children; not de jure,
upon what ground they did it, or whether 'twas esteemed Apostolical: if the
practice was owned it is as much as we need to put by Mr. Danvers's Cavil; and
that it was so, Mr. Tombs his great Tutor, had never the face to deny, but
confesses plainly, That it was a truth, that Cyprian assured Fidus, that by
the unanimous consent of sixty-six Bishops gathered together in a Council,
Baptism was to be administered to Infants, as well as grown men. Tombs Examen,
page 11. And since Cyprian flourished in 250 according to Perkins, and Usher
places him in 240, what is become of Mr. Danvers proposition, That Believers
Baptism was the only true Baptism for near 300 years after Christ, page. 3. of
his Reply? Mr. Tombs himself does lend us his helping hand to pluck down this
rotten fabric. I am not willing to let any thing pass, that may blind the
weaker sort of Readers, and therefore shall go on with him: If Cyprian (says
he) should have said Infants Baptism had been an Apostolical Tradition, his
word would have been no sooner taken, than when he tells us, Chrysm was so.
This crambe we had in effect long since by Mr. Tombs in his Exercitation:
There were many other things (says he) went under the name of a Tradition,
which were but mere humane Inventions: What then? Ergo Infant Baptism, which
went under the name of a Tradition, is also human Invention. Shall I show
(says Mr. Marshal) the natural face of this Argument in a glass? such and such
men, who went under the name of honest men, were knaves, Ergo all that go under
the name of honest men, are knaves: It Is true (says he) many things in those
days went under the name of Apostolical Tradition which were but humane
Inventions; and it is as true, [as before is fully shewn] that many points of
faith went in the same ages, under the name of Tradition. But to proceed,

His second Exception is, because it is questionable, whether there were ever
such a Council. This is to lay the Ax to the root of the tree. But to this I
answer:

1. The Magdiburgs do not question it, but own it as authentic, as any of the
rest of the Councils, Cent. 3. C. 9. p. 203.

2. Mr. Tombs was so wise as never to question it, in all the contest he had
with Mr. Marshall, and others that ever I observed. But why should we question
it? Why? because (says he,) there is no place mentioned where that Council was
kept. What if I say 'twas at Carthage? no doubt Mr. Danvers would then give me
the lie: and yet Dr. Featly calls it the Council of Carthage; and well he
might, because Cyprian was Bishop of that place. And for his further
satisfaction, that he might not cavil against the being of this Council, I
reckon up in my Infants Baptism diverse of the Ancients that make mention of it
with high Esteem; as Nazianzen, Crysostom, [Greek Fathers] Ambrose, Austin,
Jerome, of the Latins. So that I conceive Mr. Danvers is very perverse to
question it. And as much weakness follows, in that he says; It was no
Argument, it was a Decree of such a Council, because so many had a good esteem
of it, for the same Fathers esteemed very well of Chrysm, etc. But when I speak
of an esteem of it, my meaning is, That they did not judge it a fictitious
Council, but a real one, which is obvious. I wonder Mr. Danvers should not
apprehend it. But since he is not a man of that Sagacity as I thought him, but
runs on upon a fall scent, I shall leave him. A second Reason of his doubt, is
because the grounds brought by Cyprian for Infant Baptism are weak: and because
I gave no answer thereto in my Infant Baptism, Mr. D. taxes me, and it is one
of the Charges in his Preface to the Reply, That I am notoriously partial in my
Answers all the Book through, replying to what I judge weak, and leaving other
unanswered. Whenas I profess, I let many things pass because of their weakness,
and have even wearied my self out with making answers to his Impertinencies. I
could have given him the same answer, which Mr. Marshall did to Mr. Tombs near
30 years since, when he objected the weakness of Cyprian's grounds, viz. If
what Cyprian spoke was weighed in the Balance of his judgment, it would not be
found light: and even Mr. Tombs himself confesses, that Jerome and Austin,
relied upon that Epistle for the proving of Baptizing Infants: which
acknowledgment (says Mr. Marshall) strengthens my opinion of the worth of
Cyprians grounds; for two such eminent men would not have relied on that which
had no weight in it. But what are the weak grounds which Mr. Danvers mentions?

1. Because he and his Council held, that Baptism was simply necessary to
Salvation. But is not this more than Mr. Danvers can prove? I do not find the
Magdiburgs mention it; although Mr. Tombs says, Tossanus notes it for
Cyprian's Error, That Infants should be baptized ne pereant, lest they perish.

2. That it washes away original sin, so as it is never to be imputed. This is
the judgment of many learned Protestant Divines, especially the famous Dr.
Davenant in his Epistle speaks positively, Omnes Infantes baptizati, ab
originalis peccati reatu absolvuntur. Others are not so general, but conceive
it to be a truth with respect to Elect Infants: and they judge they have good
reason to conclude, that since they must be discharged from the guilt of
Original sin, or cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, God does apply the
Blood of his Son to them, in the use of that Ordinance of Baptism.

3. Because the Grace of God is to be tendered to all, therefore all Children
should be Baptized. I see no such weakness in this; for though it be laid down
in such general terms, that Grace is to be tendered to all, and none hindered
from coming to Christ; yet, as Mr. Marshal observes, what he says, ought to be
understood of the Church, because he speaks of such as God has cleansed, or
purified; and 'twas concerning such, that Fidus stood in need to be informed,
as to the time of Baptizing; and the Magdeburgs conjecture, that Fidus
Episcopus ad Cyprianum scripserat, he had written to Cyprian about it.

4. Because Children have lesser sins than others. This is harsh: but you must
know, this is Mr. Danvers's dress. The Magdeburgs express it otherwise, thus;
Si quid hominem impedire a baptismo, potius adultos, peccata sua arcere
deberent, quam Infantes, qui nihil peccaverunt, nisi quod ex peccato Originis
vitia trahant; which is to this effect: Grown Persons should rather keep off
from Baptism by reason of their Sins, than Infants, which have contracted no
guilt but that which is Original. I hope there is no great hurt in this.

5. Because in their first birth they do nothing but pray, crying, and weeping.
Well said Mr. Danvers! the words are these; Because in their first beginning
(or birth) crying and weeping, they can do nothing but call for Mercy: which
(what ever ignorant people may think of it) is a high strain of Rhetoric in
Cyprian, importing only, that Children are objects of Mercy.

6. Because the Soul that is not baptized is lost. This is to the same purpose
with the first: but the Magdeburgs have it not, nor Dr. Tailor, who translates
the Epistle to Fidus out of the Greek, at the end of his Consideration of the
practice of the Church of Baptizing Infants. Therefore Mr. Danvers must find it
elsewhere, or else he split the first Reason into two; cujus est dar^, ejus est
disponere.

There are two other things which he brings as reasons why he questions this
Council, which are very frivolous; as That Tertullian, Cyprian's Master, was
against Infants Baptism; which is not so absolutely, for he was for it in
danger of Death: and the other is, That many things were fathered on Cyprian
which were none of his. If I should let but this one pass, Mr. Danvers would
cry out against me for partiality. But, why should he fancy that this of
Infants Baptism, was one of those things fathered upon Cyprian? when the
Council is owned by the Magdeburgs, the Fathers Greek and Latin, and even by
Mr. Tombs himself, as before.

His third Reason I have spoken to already, being co-incident with the latter
part of his first.

One thing I had almost forgotten, and that is; whereas in my Infant Baptism
Asserted, I tell Mr. Danvers, that his pretended Witness Tertullian was as
corrupt as Cyprian, and that the Magdeburgs inform us that he was the first
inventor of Chrysm, and that Cyprian belike took it up from him; he retorts in
his Reply thus, That if Tertullian was the first inventor of Chrysm, which
Cyprian calls an Apostolical Tradition, what credit then (says he) is to be
given to his Testimony that dare to avouch so fearful a Lie? A rude speech!
altogether unfit to be uttered against so glorious a Martyr as Cyprian was; but
any thing is good enough to be spoken in contempt of those who are for
Infant Baptism. But I assure the Reader, that as there is no good Manners, so
neither is there truth in that passage of Mr. D's: for I cannot find that
Cyprian held Chrysm an Apostolical Tradition; it being not reckoned amongst his
Naevi, which after the Magdeburg's account are six, and the last is, Sumpsit
Ceremonias, ex Traditionibus Montani a Tertulliano, consecrationem and
unctionem post Baptismum; That is, he took up the Ceremonies, viz. Consecration
and Unction, (that is, Chrism) from Tertullian out of the Traditions of
Montanus. Here Is nothing of Apostolical Tradition. And Hamelmannus shows what
Traditions Cyprian held, that he took up the Ceremonies of Consecration and
Unction from Tertullian, but not a word of calling it an Apostolical Tradition.

There is nothing in this Section more, but only that Mr. Danvers does
endeavor to vindicate himself from a mistake about Austin's words, which I
charged upon him; but it is so intricate and dark, that I do not very well
understand him. Also there is some disparagement cast by him upon that blessed
Martyr of Jesus Christ, Mr. Philpot, and a fling against the New England way of
baptizing the Children only of In-Churched Parents, with some other Reflections
which I let pass as futilous, having no mind to spend time in such small
matters.

CHAP. III.
Wherein Mr. Danvers endeavors to vindicate his Witnesses against my
Exceptions, and the same examined and found insufficient.

1. HE begins with particular persons; but first minds me, with my
penuriousness in my Preface to Infants Baptism, where I allow him from the
first Century to the end of the twelfth only two Persons against
Infant Baptism, viz. Adrianus, and Hincmarus. But what will he think of me now?
for I have denied him those two also, as before; and have showed the ground of
the mistake why they have been looked upon under the notion of Antipedobaptists.

The first witness mentioned is Tertullian, who (says Mr. Danvers) opposes it
in six Arguments. We shall inquire into them by and by. Mr. Danvers says true,
that I acknowledge Tertullian has diverse passages seemingly against
Infants Baptism: but, according to his humor, he is catching me up before I am
down: for he calls upon the Reader to take notice, that his witness is owned by
me. And is it not a very great owning indeed, to say, he has diverse passages
that seem to be against it? But in the 38 page of my Infant Baptism, I give a
Reason why it is more than probable that Tertullian was for Infant Baptism; in
the 41 page, That he was no more against their baptizing, than of grown persons
baptizing; and in the 43 page, we showed that the Reason why he would have
Infants Baptism delayed, was, not because he judged it unlawful, but
inexpedient; for he was for it, rather than the Child should dye unbaptized.
And now I tell Mr. Danvers further, that as for those seeming passages against
Infant Baptism, they are spoken in reference to the Children of Pagans, not
Believers, according to the judgment of Estius and other Learned Men: for (as
Mr. Marshal observes) Tertullian in that Book of his de Baptismo c. 18. speaks
of the Baptism of such as were not born of Christian Parents, and therefore
desires the Baptism of such Infants should be deferred till they come to years,
and be able to make confession of their sins, and profession of Faith, their
Parents being Infidels, and their Sponsors mortal. And that this is the meaning
of the place, seemed evident to him, because in the 39 chap. of his Book de
Anima, Tertullian acknowledges that the Children of Believers had a privilege
tam ex Seminis praerogativa, quam ex institutionis disciplina; a prerogative by
their birth, besides that of their Education. And by this time me thinks Mr.
Danvers should be sick of his Witness Tertullian, as Mr. Marshal said to Mr.
Tombs in the same case.

As touching the Reasons which Tertullian urges for the delay of the Baptism
of Infants, and which Mr. Danvers undertakes to Vindicate as proper and good,
against those who would make those words, Suffer little children to come unto
me, to be a coming to Baptism, I shall only remind him with two or three things.

1. With what we have from the Magdiburgs Cent. 3. c. 4. p. 83. Sentit
Tertullianus in libro de Baptismo, mira opinione, pueros non tam cito
baptizandos osse, atque ad illud Matthaei 19. Nolite parvulos prohibere etc.
Tertullian (say they) is of a strange opinion to dissuade the Baptizing of
Children by such Reasons as he gives in his paraphrase upon the 19 of Matthew.

2. None that ever I heard of, have brought this Text of coming to Christ, as a
full and direct proof for baptizing of Children, or have urged that the coming
there was a coming to Christ for Baptism, who never Baptized any; nevertheless
it proves two points, which lay a good foundation for Infants Baptism. 1. That
the Kingdom of God is made up as well of Infants as grown persons. 2. That
Infancy is no Bar or exclusion of any from coming to Christ and receiving a
Blessing. Infants are capable of receiving benefit by Christ, though they do
not actually believe; though they cannot lay hold on Christ, yet Christ can lay
hold on them, and bless them.

Object. But Baptism is not concerned in the Text, except it can be made out
that Blessing was Baptizing.

To this I replied in my former Answer, That it is true, Blessing is not
Baptizing, but it is something more; and Christ in Blessing them, vouchsafed
that to them, which usually was as an Ordinance administered after Baptism, and
which is of an higher nature, and so we may argue from this to Baptism
inclusively, or a majori, from the greater to the less. 2. And further, though
Blessing be not Baptism, yet in as much as they were of the Kingdom of Heaven
whom he blessed [let it be meant if you will of the Kingdom of Glory, it
supposes that they must be first of the Kingdom of Grace, and were of the
visible Church, and so it comes all to one] it follows, they were qualified
Subjects for Baptism. For, grant to Children a Church relation (as I have
proved it is their Right), and their right to Baptism will unavoidably follow
upon it. Mr. Danvers might have done well to have shown us the weakness of our
arguings from this Text, as containing in it a good foundation for
Infants Baptism, instead of undertaking to vindicate Tertullian's Paraphrase
thereon, grounded on a mistake, as if Pedobaptists made the word Come in the
Text, to be a coming to Baptism. And for Tertullian's reasons against Childrens
coming to Baptism, I shall not scruple upon second thoughts, to say they are
childish ones, and the Magdeburgs wonder at their silliness.

For, 1. (says he) Children cannot come till they are elder, till they know
and are taught why they come; and may not the same be as well urged against the
circumcising Children of old? Let them stay till they are older, till they can
know what the Ordinance means.

2. And then for the weightiness of the Ordinance, in which regard he would
have them forbear; were there not also many deep Mysteries wrapped up in
Circumcision? As that it was a seal of the Covenant. Did it not shadow forth
the mortification of Sin, Regeneration, and Redemption by the blood of Christ?
And was it not a ridiculous reason which he gave why young men, and those who
were newly married, and young widows should delay Baptism? namely, That the
lust of concupiscence should be first extinguished. One would rather have
supposed, that the Ordinance might have proved a Remedy against such violent
passions as they were supposed to be subject to: for the more temptation any
state is obnoxious to, the more need it has of Helps, specially such as do not
only lay ingagments, but contribute strength, as Mr. Geree speaks. Most of the
rest of his reasons, as our Divines observe, do argue that his words for the
putting off Infants Baptism, are to be expounded of Aliens; as that about not
giving holy things to dogs; and that of the Inconveniency by reason of the
mortality of Sponsors, or Sureties, for in that Chapter he is speaking of
Infidels as we have showed before.

But Mr. Danvers being willing to make the most of a little, will not by any
means part with this witness (such as it is) and therefore brings in Dr. Barlow
to confirm it, that Tertullian disliked Infants Baptism, as unwarrantable and
irrational: but the Doctor having now declared his Judgment, I hope Mr. Danvers
will for the future forbear quoting him as he has done. Then we have Daille,
Scultetus, and the Magdiburgs etc. But we have told you before, from learned
men, that it is to be understood of the children of Pagans; to which we may
add, the Judgment of Junius (that famous Expositor) concurring with them.

As for the Testimony he brings from B. Rhenanus of the ancient Custom of
baptizing those of full growth, we have spoken to it already, and showed how
grossly Mr. Danvers did mistake him. And for the rest of his Regiment,
Vincentius, Victor, Heribertus, Cresconius, Fulgentius, Regienses, Albanus, the
Swermers, Arnoldus, Henricus, etc. We shall confer with him about these, or the
most of them, very shortly; and when this is over, he will have no need to
complain of my silence (which he says gives consent to the whole) or of my
unfair and disingenuous dealing.

Lastly, he endeavors to clear himself from some exceptions, which I have made
against some of his witnesses, saying they are frivolous; which whether it be
so, I leave to the Reader to judge.

1. I tell him Berinus is nothing to his purpose: because it is evident that
his Sayings have respect to Pagans: But that he conceives will not do, because
Berinus says, Baptism ought not to be administered to any without Instruction.
But I must tell Mr. Danvers, that Bid says no such thing, lib. 4. c. 16. nor
anywhere else that I can find. Indeed l. 3. c. 7. Bid tells us of Berinus,
that Britanniam perveniens, ac primum Genissorum gentem ingrediens, cum omnes
ibidem Paganos inveniret, utilius esse ratus ibi potius Verbum Dei praedicare,
quam ultra progrediens eos quibus praedicare deberet requirere: itaque
evangelizante illo in prefata provincia, cum Rex ipse catechizatus font
Baptismi cum sua gente ablueretur etc. But what is this to Mr. D's. purpose?
Berinus herein did as all Pedobaptists would have done: and if Mr. D. can
gather from hence that Berinus affirmed that Baptism ought not to be
administered to any (be they within the Church or without) without Instruction,
I think he will go far beyond either T. Aquinas or Mr. Baxter in the
profoundness of his speculation, and subtilty of his distinction; there being
none, I am confident besides himself, able to perform such an undertaking.

2. Next I blame him for bringing in Durandus for Believers Baptism in
opposition to that of Infants, when he expresses himself positively for
Infants Baptism, and most severely against the Anabaptists. For this he has
nothing to excuse himself, but that Durandus is in his Index, but he does not
know how, put in among the witnesses.

3. I charge him with another falsehood, in b^inging in the Bishop of Apamen
among his witnesses: because, though he were for Rebaptization of such as he
conceived were not rightly baptized, yet was he not an Anabaptist, as the word
is now taken, for being against Infants Baptism. Of this he would excuse
himself if he could, by telling us the late Century-Writers do call him so in a
modern sense; which is notoriously untrue.

4. I charge him for abusing Peter Bruis, having nothing to evidence that he
denied Infants Baptism but the lying Stories of Abbots: but he says he
produced three or four evidences more to prove it. But I can find only two,
Treatise of Baptism, Edit. 1. in the 290 page. The first is that of the
Magdeburgs, Cent. 12. p. 843. where they tell us nothing but what they take
from Cluniacensis, and so name his Hypotheses, or Opinions, quoting that Abbot
for every thing: But withal manifest their suspicion that he wronged him with
an utinam vero ipsius Petri scripta extarent, ex quibus multo rectius facere
Judicium liceret, quam ex illis, qui in defensionem Pontificiarum abominationum
conspirarunt: Would to God the writings of Peter Bruis were extant, for out of
them we might give a truer Judgment, than from them who have conspired to
defend the Popish Abominations. And then again (say they) non est certum etc.
It is not certain, that they were for the rebaptization of Children baptized in
their Infancy, when they come to be of Age, nam malevoli quaedam commentiti
sunt, p. 836. they feign some things, and then fasten them per vitiosas
consequentias, by vicious consequences. The other is Osiander, and he takes it
up at second hand from the Magdiburgs; and says withal, that what Peter Bru^^
and others are charged with, it is from their Enemies; and it is uncertain
whether they held those things: for the Papists did charge them with gross
things, because they inveighed against their Idolatry; Osiander Cent. 12. L. 3.
C. 3. And when I read these passages in the Century-writers, I could not but
wonder Mr. Danvers should have no more Conscience of what he writes; and thus
go about to delude the Reader, by telling him he quotes others besides those
lying Abbots in this matter.

5. I accuse him for traducing Wickliff, he having no ground at all to say he
denied Infants Baptism; and when I discoursed with Dr. Barlow, I told him this
story that Mr. Danvers confidently reports that Wickliff was of their way: to
which he presently said, I have Wickliff by me, and could never observe any
such thing in him.

But how does Mr. Danvers make good what he affirms of Wickliff? why, he tells
us he has produced much evidence to prove it page 283: even to 289 of his
Treatise of Baptism Edit. 2. demonstrating not only that Believers were the
only subjects of Baptism, but withal, that Children were not Sacramentally to
be baptized.

To this I replied in the Recapitulation at the end of my Answer, that the name
of Wickliff being famous, Mr. Danvers would fain get something out of him for
his turn. But I must tell Mr. D. that all that he has produced to prove
Wickliff against Infant Baptism, is very insufficient to prove him so. His
asserting, that there are only two Sacraments; and that Believers are to be
baptized in pure water, tho they have received the Baptism of the Spirit, is
very insignificant to his purpose. His 3d Assertion indeed is considerable, if
Mr. Danvers can prove he ever said so, viz: That Believers are the only
subjects of Baptism; as appears (says he) in his 11 Chap-Trial: where he
says, that persons are first to be baptized with that he calls the first or
insensible Baptism, viz. in the blood of Christ, before they are baptized in
water; without which their Baptism in water profits not. One would think this
was certainly so, because Mr. Danvers is so free as to give us Wickliffs own
words, which he subjoyns to his translation. But it thereby appears he has so
grossly perverted the sense, that I cannot conjecture the reason of his so
doing, unless he presumed his quoting the Original would satisfy the Reader he
had rightly translated it, and so supersede any further examination. If that
was his design 'twas boldly done; but the discovery does not advance his
Reputation. For Wickliff does not say that persons are first to be baptized
with the insensible Baptism, as Mr. D. would make us believe, but only this,
that one without the other avails not to Salvation. And how does this prove
Believers the only subjects of Baptism? The rest of his proofs are just like
these, that is, very insignificant; because indeed Wickliff was for
Infant Baptism, as I could plainly demonstrate from his own words. But Mr.
Baxter has saved me that labor, having done it so substantially already in
his Answer to Mr. D. (see his More proofs for Infant Baptism, lately printed)
p. 354, etc. as must needs satisfy all impartial Readers, and convince Mr. D.
himself of his mistake, if he is not resolved to stand out against the clearest
evidences: To him therefore I refer them both. But suppose Wickliff had not
been so very express in his words as to this point; yet his making an apparent
difference between the children of Believers and others, in his saying, Quod
definientes, not, desinentes (as Mr. D.) parvulos fidelium sine baptismo
sacramentali, decedentes non fore salvandos in hoc presumptuosi et stolidi. And
that ample Testimonial which the University of Oxford gave him, is enough (if
we had no more) to confront Mr. D. although he had the confidence to print them
both in his Treatise of Baptism, from whence the Reader has ground enough to
infer (unless he first supposes Wickliff considered not what he wrote, and the
whole University were Anabaptists) that he was not against Infants Baptism. And
give Mr. D. as good ground to expunge Wickliff out of his Index of witnesses as
Durandus.

In the last place, he complains of another piece of injurious dealing in me,
and that is for fathering so notorious a Fallacy upon the Reader, and Abuse
upon him; because I charge him for bringing in a great Bed-Roll of Witnesses
against Infants Baptism, when those men were so firmly for it, as Austin,
Chrisostom, etc. And that Mr. Danvers is blameworthy for so doing
(nowithstanding his equivocation) appears by this: for though he would excuse
himself, by saying they were not in his Catalogue, yet they are found in his
7th Chapter of his Treatise of Baptism, Edit. 1. which serves to prove that
Believers Baptism is the only true Baptism; and that I do not wrong him, let
the Reader Judge, when he has looked upon the Contents of the same just* after
the Preface, as also the 56 Page of the first Edition Chap. 7.

His pretended Witnesses the Waldenses, found not to be against
Infants Baptism, but for it, and what is said to the Contrary, answered.
That the Waldenses were against Infants Baptism he labors to prove by a
fourfold Demonstration. (1) from their Confessions of Faith: (2) the Witness
thereto by their most eminent men: (3) from the decrees of Councils, Popes, and
Emperors, against the body of the people for the same: (4) from the footsteps
thereof they have left in the several Regions, and Countries where they have
been dispersed.

To which I replied in the first place: (1) That there are no such Confessions
to be found; Infants Baptism Asserted p. 46. (2) That the quite contrary
appears by their Confessions of Faith, witnessing how firmly they did assert
Infants Baptism, p. 40. and 64. of the same Book.

To both which Mr. Danvers makes reply, ( viz) that it may be manifest to the
Reader that their Confessions do exclude Infants from Baptism, and witha gives
in a parallel betwixt what their Confessions say, and what (as he words it) I
make them to say, and so leaves it to the Reader to judge, how fairly I have
dealt therein; and truly it is my desire also that the Reader compare us with
the Confessions, and see which of us has dealt most fairly or foully with them.

There are five Confessions of the Waldenses, besides some passages out of a
Treatise, to which Mr. Danvers has recourse for information touching their
Faith and Practice about Baptism.

There are two things, to be observed in US, in reference to these Confessions.

1. What Mr. Danvers picks out of them for his purpose as he conceives.

2. Whether I have offered any Violation, by mangling the Confessions, or
leaving out any thing that is material against Infants Baptism, which I desire
the Reader the more diligently to note, because this is another of his great
charges against me in his Preface.

1. The first Confession that is quoted by Mr. Danvers in his Treatise of
Baptism bears date 1220, of which this is the 13 Article ( viz.) They say we
acknowledge no other Sacraments but Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. I have
not left out a word of this; and I told him in my answer, that to bring this
Article, was rather a witness of his own weakness than against Infants Baptism,
and therefore upon second thoughts this is cashiered, for we have it not in the
Reply.

The next is the 28 Article of another Confession, That God does not only
instruct us by his Word, but has also ordained certain Sacraments to be joined
with it, as a means to unite unto, and to make us partakers of his benefits,
and that there be only two. In my Answer, I left out the beginning of this
Article, that is, [that God instructs us by his Word] which I am sure
contains nothing in it against Infants Baptism; and also the latter part of
the Article, which runs thus [belonging in Common to all the Members of the
Church, under the New Testament ( viz) Baptism and the Lords Supper.]

Another ancient Confession of Faith has this, Artic. 7. We do believe that in
the Sacrament of Baptism, Water is the visible and external sign, which
represents unto us that (which by the invisible virtue of God operating) is
within us, the Renovation of the Spirit, and mortification of our Members in
Jesus Christ, by which also we are received into the holy Congregation of the
people of God, there professing and declaring openly our Faith, and Amendment
of Life. Here was left out a Parenthesis ( viz) (by the invisible virtue of God
operating) and the last Clause, by which also we are received into the
Congregation etc. And with respect to this Article, I have this saying in my
Answer, namely, that there is a Harmony between all the Protestant Churches in
the World, and the Waldenses (in this Article.)

The next is out of Vigniers History, where the words are thus: They expressly
declare, to receive the Canon of the Old and New Testament, and to reject all
Doctrines which have not their foundations in it, or are in any thing contrary
to it: therefore all the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome they
condemn and abominate, saying she is a den of thieves, and the Apocalyptical
Harlot. This Confession Mr. Danvers has left out in his Reply, and I know not
the reason, unless it be beeause I have every word of it exactly, and it would
have hurt his Parallel if it had been set down.

In their Ancient Confession, Artic. 11. We esteem for an Abomination and
Antichristian, all Humane inventions, as a trouble and prejudice to the liberty
of the Spirit. And in their Ancient Catechism thus; When humane Traditions are
observed for Gods Ordinances, then is he worshipped in vain, and which is done
when Grace is attributed to the external Ceremonies, and persons enjoined to
partake of Sacraments, without faith and Truth. I have also set down every word
of this, and made this Paraphrase on it in my Answer. This is a good Testimony
against humane Traditions, but does not in the least touch Infantsbaptism, as
also against the Popish error, that Baptism confers grace ex opere operato,
from the work done: for that is the meaning of attributing Grace to the external
Ceremony here mentioned.

In their Ancient Treatise concerning Antichrist they say, that he attributes
the regeneration of the Holy-Spirit unto the dead outward work of Baptizing
Children into that Faith, [ that Faith was omitted] and teaching that thereby
Regeneration must be had: the words are, [Baptism and Regeneration, must be
had] I left out [Baptism] because it seems to make it nonsense, as it is there
placed.

Also the conclusion of the Sentence was pretermitted, which is [grounding
therein all his Christianity, which is against the Holy-Spirit.] Upon this
Article I have thus Paraphrased in my Answer. Here at last, by good hap, we
have the word Children named, but not a jot serving Mr. Danvers his design, for
they do not hereby except against Childrens-Baptism, but only against the
corrupt ends that Antichrist has in it; for whether it be in Children or grown
Persons, it is an Antichristian, or Popish Tenent, to ascribe Regeneration to
the dead outward work of Baptism; and this is that before mentioned, that
Baptism confers Grace, ex opere operato. And because the Waldenses did deny
that it did thus conser Grace, the Papists, did accuse them that they denied
Gratiam Baptismi: And for refusing to have their Children Baptized with the
superstitious Rites of Salt, Oil Spittle, etc. they charged them with denying
Insant-Baptism. This is the Judgment of Bishop Usher in his Succession of the
Church, where he treats of the Waldenses, and their Faith at large. If I had
been mistaken in my Paraphrases upon the abovementioned Confessions, Mr.
Danvers should have rectified me, and forborne the outcry which he makes in his
Preface, for abusing the Consessions of the Waldenses; and some that look no
further into a Book than the Preface will suppose me to be guilty of a
notorious Crime. But as to this also I freely submit my self to the Judgment of
the Reader, and refer it to his consideration, whether Innocence and Truth be
not by him rather abused, than vindicated. He charge me deeply of
unfaithfulness in misrepresenting their Confessions in many material and
considerable parts; but I persuade my self an impartial eye cannot discern it;
but it is easily observed how unfaithful he is at the same time in
misrepresenting my words, and fathering that on me, which is not mine, but his
own Invention, on purpose, forsooth, that he might have a substratum for his
following Queries; for he makes me to say, that there was a Harmony betwixt all
the Protestant Churches in the World, ( in those Articles) and the Waldenses,
because all that are for Infants Baptism believe the same. Had I said those
words in reference to every Article, it had been truth; whereas I do only speak
it with Respect to one of them, and that is to the third; and what is spoken by
me, with respect to one of them, he represents as spoken of all, the better to
Accommodate his Quibling Queries. It is sad to see how much he does Abuse those
Confessions, how he does wire-draw them; as if they were Homogeneal with
Anaxagoras his (...) upon Aristotle's Record; how he draws quidlibet ex
quolibet, every thing out of any thing. Never was any Confessions in the world
so prostituted to a corrupt fancy; for thus he begins:

1. Do all the Pedobaptists believe that Baptism and preaching the Word are
joined together to instruct the baptized parties, and that thereby they have
union with Christ, and partake of his benefits? Observe how Mr. Danvers
stumbles at the Threshold, how he preverts the Article. For look back upon the
Article, and you will find it does not say that Baptism and Preaching are
joined together to instruct the Baptized party; Baptism is not mentioned in the
Article, though it be included in the word [Sacraments]; afterward the Article
speaks thus, That we are instructed by the Word, and then that God has
ordained the Sacraments to be joined with it, as a means to unite us to him.

2. Do they indeed, says he, believe the Lord's Supper to belong in common
with Baptism to all the Members of the Church? why then do not Infants partake
of one as well as the other, since it belongs to them in Common, if Members of
the Church? Why, if Mr. Danvers would know the reason, it is this, Because
though the Child has a right as a Member to all the Ordinances, yet he is not
in a capacity to enjoy his right, thus; That persons may have a right to
Ordinances, and yet in no capacity to enjoy them, appears in such as are sick,
or those that lose their Reason, that are Church Members.

3. Do Paedo-baptists indeed with the Waldenses believe, that Water in Baptism
is the usual sign, representing to the subjects thereof the invisible virtues
of God operating in them, ( viz.) The Renovation of the Spirit, and
Mortification of their Members? and can it be truly said it is so to an Infant
that is not capable to put forth any act of Faith, Repentance, or
Mortification, or discern the least sign in the Water? Yes, it may be said, it
is so to an Infant, very well, and that upon as good a ground, as Circumcision
shadowed forth Mortification of Sin, Regeneration, though the Israelitish Babes
understood none of this. But Mr. Danvers does ill again in altering the
Article, as you may perceive by looking back, for it is not as he represents
it: the Article runs thus; We believe that in the Sacrament of Baptism, Water
is the visible and external sign (which represents to us) [not representing to
the Subjects] for unless I mistake, as it is so worded, it serves more to his
purpose.

4. We agree with the Waldenses in the 4th Article; for we have told Mr.
Danvers formerly that Baptism it self is a real, though implicit, profession of
Faith, and the express verbal Confession of the Parent is reputed by God to be
the Child's, and so it was under the Law, when the Parents humbled themselves,
and confessed their sins, and brought their little ones with them, even they
also are said to be humbled before the Lord.

5. The 5th Query is precarious, taking that for granted, which we utterly
deny, and that is, that the baptizing Children, is an Antichristian humane
Invention.

6. Do they believe, says Mr. Danvers, that Antichrist grounds all
Christianity, and Religion in the baptizing of Children, attributing
Regeneration to the outward Work done contrary to the Holy-Spirit, why then,
says he, do they baptize Children, which as acknowledged is the Basis and
Foundation of the false Church, and contrary to the Spirit, and for which there
is nothing but the Doctrine of Popes, and Antichristian Councils, to warrant
it? Not to say any thing of these unworthy reflections, let the Reader once
more take notice how he has also perverted this Article, look back, and you
will see what a (...) he makes of it, and Metamorphoseth the Article into
another thing; for do but observe, (1.) They do not say Antichrist grounds all
Christianity in Baptizing Children; but if they had spoken it, it had not been
against Infants Baptism, but against placing too much in it. (2.) They say
Antichrist attributes Regeneration to the dead outward work of Baptizing
Children, and that Regeneration must be had thereby, and herein they say, he
grounds all Christianity. (3.) It is extremely scandalous and false for Mr.
Danvers to say, that there is nothing for Infants Baptism, but the decrees of
Popes and Antichristian Councils, when we have so fully proved the use of it
some hundreds of years before the coming of the Pope, in the sense that the
word is commonly taken, ( viz.) for Ecumenical Bishop, challenging to himself,
and usurping Authority over the whole Church: have we not before told him, of
Cyprian, and Nazianzen, and Chrysostom, etc. and was there not a Canon for it
in the Milevitan Council, and that before the Pope came in, or any of his
Decrees?

So that now, upon consideration of the premises, I suppose the unprejudiced
Reader may be confirmed that the Waldenses were for Infant Baptism, by those
very Confessions which Mr. Danvers cites against it* We shall now give you some
account of some of their Confessions, which speak them expressly for it.

There is an ancient Confession that we meet with in Dr. Ushers Succession of
the Church. c. 8. p. 242. made by the Waldenses about the year 1176. as he
takes it from Jacobus Gretserus his proleg. in Script. Edit. contra Waldenses.
c. 1. and Hovenden's Annal. fol. 329. the words are, Nos Credimus unum Deum
trinum and unum patrem, and filium, and spiritum sanctum, etc. and in the body
of the Confession there is this Article, Credimus parvulos salvari per
Baptismum, we believe Children are saved by Baptism: which though it speak
Error according to the darkness of those times, being about five hundred years
since; yet it proves they were for Infant Baptism, for Gretserus says they
were Waldenses that made this Confession, and not as is falsely suggested, that
it was the Inquisitors Confession; for it was made before the Inquisitors, to
purge themselves from the Arrian and Manichean Heresies, of which they were
accused.

Another Confession, is that published by Balthazar Lydias, which was presented
to Uladislaus King of Hungary, where after they have given an account of their
Faith in other points, they come to that of Baptism, and having spoken of Adult
Baptism, they add, professio ista nostra etiam in pueros extenditur, our
Profession concerning Baptism extends also to Children,

But against this Mr. Danvers objects, That this Confession said to be made by
the Waldenses in Bohemia to King Uladislaus, were not Waldenses, as they
themselves acknowledge in the preamble. And further tells us out of Osiander,
that they were a mixed People of Calextines that separated from Rome in the
business of the Cup: Hussites that went further than they; Thaborites that were
more through for Reformation, and under these were comprehended the Brethren, or
Picards, many of whom did oppose Infants Baptism, whereas Dr. Burigenus that
writ their Apology speaks otherwise, and gives this title to it, Apologia verae
Doctrinae eorum, qui vulgo appellantur Waldenses, vel Picardi, qui retinuerunt
Johannis Hus Doctrinam; ( i. e.) The Apology of the true Doctrine of those, who
are commonly called Waldenses or Picards, who have retained the Doctrine of
John Hus: so that this differs quite from the Tale which Mr. D. has told us
again and again. And whereas he speaks of the Title of the Confession, whereby
it appears they disclaimed the denomination of Waldenses, he might have done
well to have quoted some Author where we might find it: but in defect thereof,
I shall bring you an Author, that gives the Title without any hint thereof, and
that is Orthuinus Gratius in fasciculo rerum expetendarum, etc. Thus. Nos
Homines depressi ac vestrae Majestati humiliter subjecti, contemptibili quoque
nomine Amicti, etc.

Burigenus that translated into Latin their Confession from a Bohemian Copy,
mentions this Article concerning Baptism, Iam Baptismus Christi aeque ad
Pueros, qui ex fide illi offeruntur and consecrantur, atque ad adultos attinet:
The Baptism of Christ does as well belong to Children, who are offered up in
Faith, and consecrated to him, as unto grown Persons.

In the History of the Waldenses lib. 1. c. 4. p. 15. so Cent. 6. p. 43. the
Waldenses purge themselves from the charge of denying Infants Baptism, and show
the reason why for a long time they forbore it, namely, because they could not
endure to have it done in the corrupt Popish way: and in the third part of the
aforesaid History, we have their Doctrine set down thus; And whereas Baptism is
Administered in a full Congregation, and for this cause it is that we present
our Children in Baptism, which they ought to do to whom the Children are
nearest, as Parents. But Mr. Danvers objects against the Confessions of
Provence, so full to the point, that they were in a declining condition, that
some of them went to Mass: what then? were they against Infant Baptism before
they declined? and did they take up the practice with the Mass? I believe Mr.
Danvers does not think it: and he knows very well they recovered out of this
Apostasy, after they had received those godly Admonitions from Oecolampadius
and Bucer, and were confirmed in the Truth, and gave proof thereof by their
sufferings, in the violent persecution, which happened soon after, and was more
raging than ever.

There is one Confession more which Mr. Danvers's Invention will not serve him
to say any thing against, and therefore silently pretermits it, and it is that
of Angrogne in the year 1535. where an Assembly of the Waldenses, from all the
Valleys met, and there they signified what they understood of their Brethren of
Provence and Dauphine, namely, that they sent into Germany their Pastors, to
confer with Oecolampadius and Bucer touching the belief they had time out of
mind, where says Perin in his History of the Waldenses lib. 2. cap. 4. page
57. when they had read certain Letters of encouragement sent from Oecolampadius
to those of Provence, concluded on certain Articles as being conformable to the
Doctrine which has been taught from Father to Son for these many hundred years
out of the Word of God: and Art. 17 is for Infants Baptism, thus, Touching
thematter of the Sacrament it has been concluded by the H. Scriptures that we
have two Sacramental Signs, the which Christ Jesus has left unto us, the one
is Baptism, the other the Eucharist, which we receive to show what our
perservance in the Faith is, as we have promised when we were baptized being
little ones.

This expression, As we have promised when we were baptized being little ones,
Mr. Danvers tells us, 2d Ed. page 313. is foisted into the Article, though
impertinent and nonsensical, because an Infant is not capable to make a
promise. But I don't judge Mr. Danvers the fittest in the World to determine
what is impertinent and nonsensical. And as wisemen as he, or any of his
party, have affirmed the same, and therefore that does not prove it to be
foisted in. For Instance, The Assembly in their larger Catechism tell us, that,
Baptism is a Sacrament, etc. whereby the parties baptized are solemnly admitted
into the visible Church, and enter into an open and professed engagement, to be
wholly and only the Lords. And in their very next Answer, tell us, the Infants
of Believers are to be baptized. And Dr. Manton in the Supplement to the
Morning Exercise Sermon. 10. tells us, that Baptism is an open and real
profession of Christ crucified, and that we must personally and solemnly own
the Covenant made with God in Infancy. And many more I could produce, if need
were, speaking* after this manner; that yet understood themselves as well as
Mr. Danvers. And why may we not suppose these Waldenses to be guilty of as much
Impertinency and Nonsensicalness as the Assembly and Dr. Manton?

2. His 2d. Demonstration (as he calls it) is from particular eminent persons
amongst them, which he would have us believe denied Infants Baptism. As
Berengarius in the 11th. Cent. Peter Bruis, Henricus, and Arnoldus in the 12th.

1. For Berengarius he goes about to prove that he denied Infant Baptism from
Lanifrank, by Cassander out of Guitmond, by a Council called by H. 1. of
France, and by Thuanus, and then says, that I except against none of these,
but have this only for a Reply, that there were several Councils in which
Berengarius was persecuted for the Real Presence, but no mention made of his
denying Infants Baptism.

Seeing this general Reply does not give Mr. Danvers Satisfaction, I shall now
be more particular; and convince him he had better have taken that answer, than
thus forced me to a more particular examination; by which I have made a further
discovery of his guilt in abusing Authors. He begins with Launifrank to prove
Beringarius against Infant Baptism, and he tells us (2. Ed. p. 241, 242) out of
the Magdeb. Cent. 11. cap. 5. p. 240, 243. [that Beringarius did publicly deny
Transubstantiation, and Infant Baptism under five heads; which Launifrank in
his book called Scintillaris answered at large. And as for his denying
Infant Baptism, he answers (that is, Launifrank) by saying, he (that is,
Beringarius) does thereby oppose the general doctrine and universal consent of
the Church.] And this is all Mr. Danvers has from Launifrank to prove
Beringarius against Infant Baptism. But this is a shameful mistake, and the
Magdeburgs say no such thing. They give us his Hypotheses de caena Domini: and
his 6th Argument against Transubstantiation, and Launifrank's answers to each:
and tell us that ad Quintum and Sextum, (that is to Beringarius his 5th and 6th
Arguments against Transubstantiation, (not against Infant Baptism) Launifrank
answers, Opposuit doctrinam perpetuam and consentientem Ecclesiae Dei: So that
this Authority is quite cashiered; and Mr. Danvers must have an unparalled
Confidence to attempt the retrieving him. The next is Cassander out of
Guitmundus, who says, that with the Real Presence, he denied Baptism to
Little-Ones, though the latter not so publicly as the former: but Guitmund and
Cassander say, quem tamen Errorem in publicum non produxit; that is, he never
publicly denied Infant Baptism. Mr. D. translates it not [ so] publicly,
because else it might be presently queried, how then could Guitmund tell? and
rather than lay such a stumbling block in the way, he thinks it expedient to
make bold with his Authors, and abuse them, than by telling truth, undeceive
his Reader. This might be a sufficient Answer; but to give Mr. D. fuller
satisfaction, I shall make a more particular inquiry into this business. And as
for Guitmundus the Magdeburgs tell us, Ait eum (Beringarium) de Baptismo Infan:
and de conjugio non recte docuisse. Which proves him as much against Marriage
as against Infant Baptism. But Bp. Usher tells us in his book de successione,
cap. 7. 37. that Deoduinas Leodiensis, took it upon common fame that Bruno and
Beringarius did quantum in ipsis erat baptismum parvulorum evertere. And adds,
deinde ex Leodiensis fide refert Guitmundus, so that Guitmundus took it from
Leodiensis, who had it from common fame; which indeed arose from their denying
it to be necessary to Salvation. As clearly appears, by Walden, charging
Wickliff to deny it, who yet was so positive in the point as Mr. Baxter has
proved. And Usher also tells us that, In tot Synodis adversus Beringarium
habitis nullam de Anabaptismo litem illi intentatam invenimus. Which further
proves it. And whereas Mr. Danvers insinuates (2 Ed. page 243, 244.) that
Beringarius recants this opinion against Infant Baptism, and then recanted his
Recantation; there is not a word of Infant Baptism in his Recantation. He
produces also Thuanus to prove Beringarius and his followers were great
asserters of Baptism after Faith (2. Edit. page 73.) and in his Reply page 116.
He quotes his preface to his History to prove that the Archbishop of Triers
did persecute the Beringarians for denying Infant Baptism; It is true he tells
us that the Archbishop did eos diocesi sua expellere, because illius doctrinam
populis disseminarent; but that Thuanus should say he did it because they
denied Infant Baptism, is one of Mr. Danvers's mistakes, there being not the
least syllable of any such thing in that Preface, or in the whole History that
I can find.

His last evidence to prove it, is a Council called by H. 1. of France, to
suppress the heresies of Bruno and Beringarius for denying Transubstantiation
and Infant Baptism: for which he quotes Bibliotheca Patrum page 432. But I
cannot find either in Bibl. Pat. or the Councils, or any where else, (but in Mr.
Danvers's book) that that Council ever charged Beringarius with denying
Infant Baptism. Let Mr. Danvers prove it if he can. And just after this rate
does he prove his matters.

But suppose these Authors had affirmed what Mr. D. would make us believe they
did, yet it falls short of sufficient proof because the same sort of men
charged Luther and Calvin to be against Infants Baptism, and this we have
acknowledged from Mr. Danvers's own pen in his Innocence and Truth
vindidicated, p. 127.

The next of his Witnesses are Peter Bruis, Henricus, Arnoldus; but of this I
have spoken already that even the Magdiburgs and Osiander (who relates what
Peter Cluniacensis and Bernard say of them) do question the Truth of what their
wicked Adversaries lay to their charge, to which I refer the Reader, and shall
only add what Mr. Marshall says to Mr. Tombs: The truth is, says he, these
two men did for 20 years together so much spread the Doctrine of the Waldenses,
and so plague the Bishops Mitre, and the Monks Bellies, that I wonder not
though they charged any thing upon them, that might make them odious to the
people. He that reads the railing Book of Cluniacensis will find, that he
acknowledges most of what he lays to their charge to be upon the report of
others: He lays this to their charge, that Children that die before they could
actually believe were damned, and that they did not altogether believe the
Apostles, Prophets, no nor Christ himself. By their corrupt consequences, say
the Magdiburgs, they would make them hold any thing, as before; To deny
Chrisme, and Oil, and Spittle in the baptizing of Children was all one with
them. And if Mr. Danvers believes Cluniacensis did slander them in the other
things, he must excuse us if we believe he did also in this about
Infant Baptism: One thing I shall mind the Reader with, and so pass on, and
that is, the good Intelligence Mr. Danvers holds,
since almost all the Testimonies that he brings through-out all his Book, are
borrowed either from Monks, Abbots, Jesuits, Inquisitors, or some Cankered
Popish Priests that make no Conscience of loading the professors of the Truth
with all manner of Calumnies.

But, says he, Cassander witnesses the same in his Epistle to the Duke of
Cleave (viz.) that Peter Bruis, and Henricus denied Baptism to little ones,
affirming that only the Adult should be baptized. It Is true, he says so: and
withal tells us [ cum Baptismo and fide etiam salutem et regnum Dei Infantibus
ademerunt, quod ad credentes tantum et baptizatos pertinere sensuerunt] with
Baptism and Faith they took Salvation also from Infants, as judging it belonged
only to Believers that were baptized: but how comes Cassander by this good
intelligence? why, the Abbot of Cluni told him so; and if Mr. Danvers will not
believe they damned all Infants, though the Abbot affirms it, why should we
believe they denied them Baptism for which he can produce no better proof? but
if Cassander is a person of such credit with Mr. Danvers, I hope he will no
longer reckon Peter Bruis and Henricus among the Waldensian Barbes; because he
tells us in this very Epistle, that the Waldenses were for Infants Baptism.

Dr. Prideaux is also introduced to confirm it, how that they were condemned in
the second Lateran Council, for rejecting Infants Baptism: it is Common for the
Popish Councils to condemn men for that which they never held. But Mr. Baxter
tells us there is not the least proof of any such matter meddled with in that
Council.

I let pass also Vice-comes, because he writes palpable lies; how that Luther,
Calvin, Beza, denied Infants Baptism; and why? because (as Mr. Danvers says
truly in his Reply, page 127) they did oppose and neglect to do it as the
Church
of Rome ordained it, without the Ceremonies of their Church, which was all one
to them, as if it was not practiced at all. We are much engaged to Mr. Danvers
for this, he has as it were spoken all in a word, given us a key to open the
Mystery of the business, and rightly to understand why Beringarius, Peter
Bruis, Arnoldus, were charged for denying Infants Baptism. I must now prepare
my self with Patience, for Mr. Danvers is come to his Paroxysme, and would even
move a Stoic. I perceive he is strangely transported with Passion, and makes
Proclamation against me. Know, says he, that hence you have a further
discovery of his unfaithfulness, and want of Conscience, for daring thus to
abuse the World with a Cheat, and that which he knows to be a mere forgery of
his own -- The Flame is not yet extinguished, but spreads into two pages more,
and is rather increased. He has injuriously belyed Osiander, belyed
Cluniacensis, belyed Peter Bruis, belyed the Truth, which by this forgery he
would cover; abused the World, belyed and abused me, and much to be feared his
own Conscience, by this piece of Folly and Falsehood.

Now what shall I say to all this? shall I implore an Increpation from above,
(...)? Jude 14. Or shall I bespeak Mr. Danvers in the Language of Craesus to
Solon in Lucian's Dialogues (...) good words O man? would any one have expected
such polluted feet of Clay, with which he kicks at me, should be attendants to
that head of Gold, I mean those Christian words in Mr. Danvers's Preface, I
will not render railing for railing, it being ever judged the sign of a bad
cause, for persons to betake themselves to such courses, and thereby supply the
want of matter with, Rage, Clamor and Noise. Who would not have judged Mr. D.
by those lines a person able to command his Passion, yea a second Moses?
Parsons the Jesuit, notwithstanding he wanted nothing but a Glass to view the
Effigies of a Railer, yet he censureth the practice as unworthy.

But to speak something for Vindication from these foul, and
shamefully-invective accusations: First, I confess my inadvertency in mistaking
the Century, and from hence it was that I related things, charged upon the
Albigenses of the 12 Cent. and applied them to Peter Bruis, and Henricus of the
11th (though I find all of them joined together by the Magdiburgs under Cent.
12th.)

The occasion of this mistake was a cursory reading of Dr. Homes his Answer to
Mr. Tombs (the Book being lent only for a day or two) where the said Doctor
reckons up about 20 errors charged upon the Albigenses, as he has it from
Osiander. I profess, that I speak the truth, I had no design to misrepresent
Mr. Danvers's pretended witnesses, and to cast a slur upon it; and I hope this
is enough to satisfy the Ingenuous Reader, and may also work some Conviction
in Mr. Danvers of his uncharitableness of Spirit, and the intemperancy of his
Pen in such frequent Judgings of my Heart and Conscience, that I did knowingly
and out of design, go about to deceive the Reader: and what should tempt me
hereunto? was it to cast Dirt on his Witness? How blind a thing is Prejudice!
Mr. Danvers is not Ignorant, that if that* had been my Aim, I might have
furnished my self with sufficiency of that nature even from Cluniacensis and
Bernard: But he says, I did it knowingly and went on purpose to deceive; why
so? because I picked only five particulars out of those twenty Articles that
were laid to the Charge of the Albigenses: a Convincing Argument! no doubt,
though no body can fathom the Mystery of the Policy in so doing, unless I open
it, which plainly is this. The reason why I transcribed no more out of Dr.
Homes was, because I do not judge it commendable to write whole Pages and more
out of Authors, and to conceal their Names, as Mr. Danvers uses to do (2) It
was done out of design, as he says, because I knew Osiander says, these
things are not reported by Cluniacensis and Bernard, but by others; whereas I
never read those things in Osiander, until Mr. Danvers's Reply came forth. (3)
It must be so he concludes, because I neither mention Century, Book Chapter, or
Page (for the greater blind no doubt) as he says I use to do in other
Quotations out of Osiander; whereas I have not mentioned, so much as one
Chapter or Page out of Osiander in all my Answer to him.

Thus Reader, thou see what this mighty Charge amounts to, and which is one
of these heinous Crimes I have committed, mentioned in the Preface to work
prejudice against me: and if I were now given to Revenge, I could presently
balance accounts. He knows I have Advantage enough against him for that
shameful mistake of his in saying Calvin interprets that Promise Genesis 17. 7. to
be understood of the spiritual Seed of Abraham, when it was Estius the Jesuit,
and Calvin does most expressly say the contrary ( viz) that it is meant of the
fleshly and natural Seed; and Estius declares his judgment against him. And if
I were addicted to such Billings-gate language, I could retort upon him; He
belyes Calvin, he belyes the Truth, which by that Forgery he would cover and
hide, he abuses the World with a Cheat, and much more fear his own Conscience
by this piece of Folly and Falsehood.

3. As for his 3d Demonstration, that the Waldenses were against
Infants Baptism, fetched from the Catholic Emperors, and Popes Councils, and
the rest of the Tribe that follows, Monks, Abbots, Inquisitors, I shall
believe it as much as that of Vice-comes, who says not only Peter Bruis etc.
was against Infants Baptism, but also Calvin, Luther; nor will that serve Mr.
Danvers turn to tell us that they were so reputed, because they did oppose, and
neglect to Baptize Children as the Church of Rome ordained and practiced,
unless he can give us some assurance that the Waldenses were not accused and
condemned by these Councils upon the same account.

Moreover he tells us, Rainerius the Inquisitor in his Book Contra Waldenses,
says, de Baptismo dicunt quod ablutio quae datur infantibus nihil prosit, etc.
Concerning Baptism they say that that which is given to little ones profits
nothing. And this Evidence Mr. Danvers would have noted, because I do
positively deny, that Rainerius in the Catalogue of their Errors gives the
least hint of any such thing, that they denied Infants Baptism. This is another
of his great Charges against me in his Preface, where he says Rainerius tells
us totidem verbis (i e) in so many words they denied it.

For Vindication of my self, let the Reader (1) know, That in my
Infants Baptism Asserted p. 96. I quote Dr. Featly's Roma ruens for what I have
said; who gives us a Catalogue of the Errors which Rainerius charged the
Waldenses with in his Book Contra Waldenses, Chap. 4. and this of denying
Infants Baptism is not amongst those which he recites. (2) I must tell Mr.
Danvers that the words he quotes don't prove, Rainerius charges them with
denying Infants Baptism, for by nihil prosit, they intend only ad Salutem. But
can Mr. Danvers find any-where in Rainerius where he positively says, the
Waldenses were against the practice of baptizing Infants? this I confess would
be something to his purpose; but till then I persuade my self the impartial
Reader will acquit me from having abused this Author, though Mr. Danvers will
not.

Next he brings Favin the French-Chronologer testifying that in those times (
viz) 12 and 13 Centuries the Albigenses did deny Infants Baptism esteeming it
superstitionus; no doubt as we have often made appear, their refusing those
superstitious Additions of Chrism, Oil, Spittle, annexed to the Sacrament by
the Papists, is the ground why they are by all Popish Writers represented to
deny Infants Baptism. Those two Abbots Cluniacensis and Bernard of the 12 Cent.
gave Favin this information; but Osiander says well, Hi autem Articuli Petro
Bruis ab adversariis adscribuntur; the Articles were charged by Adversaries:
And then he adds, whether those Tenants were theirs, or no, non satis Certum
est, it is not enough certain.

We are now come to another of Mr. Danvers's Charges, which will appear to be a
strange mistake; so that I may truly say of him, if he cannot find a hole he
will make one, to his own shame. In his Calumniating Preface he falsely
represents me to have quoted Vice-comes, to prove that the Doctrine of opposing
the Baptizing Infants of Believers, was no ancienter than the Anabaptists of
Germany, and to make this good, he (with great Confidence) turns the Reader to
page 60. of my Infants Baptism Asserted, as if he should be sure to find it
there: whereas any body that will but peruse the page shall see, I quote
Vice-comes to show what a false account he gives of Luther, Calvin, Beza, as if
they denied Infants Baptism; and besides, his Name is only in one place, in the
Margent of my Book, and that borrowed from Mr. Marshal, who also quotes him for
the same end, as is signified ( viz.) to show what little credit is to be given
to Proofs from Popish-Writers against the Waldenses for denying
Infants Baptism, when they are so impudent, as to charge Luther, and Calvin
with the same; who, (says he) did in a special manner oppose this Error, and
then he concludes thus: Unless some one dothout of their own Confessions give
better evidence, I shall believe that this Doctrine of opposing of the
Baptizing of the Infants of Believers is an Innovation no ancienter than the
Anabaptists of Germany. And now let any man judge whether Mr. Danvers does not
deal very unworthily, in accusing me, that I have abused the Reader by a
Quotation from Vice-comes.

But how can the opposing the Baptizing the Infants of Believers be an
Innovation no ancienter than the Anabaptists of Germany when we are otherwise
informed by Vice-comes in the same place where he accuses Luther, Calvin,
Beza, for being Anabaptists. For Vincentius, Victor (two Witnesses made of one
Man's name) Hincmarus of Laudum, the Henerici and Apostolici (in Bernard and
Cluniacensis time) John Wickliff in his 4th Book of Trialog. Walfrid, Strabo,
(another Dichotomic making two of one Man, an excellent way to increase the
number of Mr. Danvers's Witnesses) Ludovicus Vives witnessed against it.

In answer to these; as for Vincentius Victor I shall presently show when I
speak of the Donatists, that he was not against Infants Baptism. For Hincmarus
of Laudum, we have more than once vindicated him from this blot: the same we
have done in the behalf of the Henricians, or Waldenses. And for Wickliff we
have brought sufficient evidence to satisfy any rational Man, that he is so
far from speaking a word in derogation of Infants Baptism, that he is expressly
for it. As for Strabo he was highly for Infant Baptism, and therefore when he
says none were anciently Baptized, but those who could profess their Faith, he
intended only none that were Adult: But however we have given sufficient
reason, why his word is not to be taken, being a false Historian and a heedless
Writer, condemned by Vossius, and others. Lastly, for Ludovicus Vives, who is
yoked to the former, hear what Mr. Marshal speaks of them both. Must we (says
he) take the bare word of Vives, a Man of yesterday, or of Strabo in matters of
Fact, in things done so many hundred years before they were born? and that
against the express witness of so many worthy men, who lived a hundred years
before them? and I conceive he speaks to the purpose. For any indifferent Man
will acknowledge, that Austin (who says the Church always had, and always held
Infant Baptism) was more likely to know what was done in the Primitive times,
than Strabo, who lived 400 years remoter from them, or than Ludovicus Vives
that was above a thousand years further off from the times of which he
witnesses, than that ancient Father was.

4. In the last place he attempts to prove the Waldenses denied
Infants Baptism, by the footsteps found thereof, in those respective Regions
and places where they had heretofore imprinted it, as Germany, Switzerland,
Flanders, Holland, Bohemia, Hungaria, Transylvania, Poland, England, etc.

But as to this, I said in my Infants Baptism Asserted, that for Mr. Danvers to
tell us that the Opposers of Infants Baptism, in upper and lower Germany, (and
in those other Countries) were the remains of those the Waldenses had before
instructed, was his own private Conceit, foreign to all History and has no
foundation in Reason or Truth; and whether I have not ground for that
Assertion, let the Reader judge, when he has perused what I have written in my
Book from page 69, to 112. To most of which Mr. Danvers says nothing at all,
and therefore I conceive he is drained dry; only it is true he persists in his
former endeavors to palliate the horrid actings of the German Anabaptists, and
asperseth me for my Reflections upon the story of Thomas Munzer, and John of
Leyden.

Lastly he presents us with further Testimony from a novel piece the Dutch
Martyrology, that the Waldenses and Albigenses, were against Infants Baptism;
concerning which I only say:

1. That herein Mr. Danvers produces more Testimony than the University of
Oxford does afford; For this Book is not to be found in the Public or private
Libraries, or the Booksellers Shops.

2. It being it seems not yet translated into the English-tongue, though he
hopes it may be in good time; if I could have met with it, I should not have
understood, whether he relates things truly for want of an interpreter.

3. Therefore we must take Mr. Danvers's word for all; both that there is such
a Book, and that the passages he presents us with from thence, are truly
translated.

4. We dare not say of it, as the Papists do of Mr. Foxe's Book of Martyrs,
that it is a Book of lies; but this we say with Confidence, that diverse of
those Testimonies Mr. Danvers takes from thence, are notorious untruths; and
that Jacob Merning and Sebastian Franck, are not to be credited having abused
the World with such palpable falsehoods: neither is Twisk (another of them)
found to be a true Chronologer, all which we shall suddenly make appear, when
we come to show their aberrations.

5. Yea, some are of opinion that this Dutch Martyrologie wherein we have such
a Collection of pretended Martyrs for Anabaptism, is designedly calculated for
the Meridian of Anabaptistery, which whether it be probable, I leave to the
Reader to judge, when he has pondred the meaning of one passage, which Mr.
Danvers has quoted in his Treatise of Baptism, Edit. 2. p. 232. (viz.)
Sebastian Frank (one of the Principal Authors frequently named in the
Martyrologie) says, that about the year 610 Childrens-Baptism was held in many
places, of little esteem, by the learned endeavors of Adrianus, and others,
and therefore the Popes set themselves to uphold it by the Braceren-Council:
That the vanity and falsehood hereof may appear, let it be considered.

1. That there is nothing of Adrianus extant against Infants Baptism, in the
Century-Writers; but only the Magdeburgs say, he was complained against by
Gregory, to John Bishop of Larissa, That he turned away young Children from
Baptism: But we have shown before, that he was not against their Baptism, but
only remiss in looking after the same in his Diocese; so that many Children
died unbaptized, which was then judged dangerous, and from hence he was
reported to have turned them away from Baptism.

2. There is none else in this Age, so much as suspected against the Baptism of
Children, mentioned by the Century-Writers; and how grossly then is it said, of
Sebastian Frank, that the practice thereof was of little esteem in this Century?

3. How weakly and falsely, is that said that the Popes set themselves to uphold
Infant Baptism in the Braceren Council [in the 7th Century] because it was of
so little esteem when the Magdeburgs make mention of so many for it in this
Century? As Maxentius Gregory, and Bishop of Larissa; else Gregory would not
have complained to him about Adrianus: And besides particular persons they
mention the Council of Matiscons, 3 Canon for it, Cent. 6. c. 9. p. 613. And by
this we see what a false Historian Sebastian Frank is, and Jacob Merning, whom
Mr. Danvers brings as avouching the same, quoting the 204 page of the Dutch
Martryology for it.

And as for Sebastian Frank, Osiander Cent. 16 p. 121. tells us in plain terms,
he was a ringleader of the Anabaptists, from whom his followers were called
Frankists; and they taught, Omnia in sacris literis incerta, dubia, and
contradictoria esse; that is, all things in the Holy Scriptures are uncertain,
doubtful, and contradictory, which is a most horrid blaspheming of the Holy
Scriptures; but may be true when applied to his own History.

Having thus found these Dutch Authors so tardy, we shall leave them for the
present, and conclude with what we find related from our own Countryman, the
famous Bishop Usher, in his Succession of the Church, Chap. 7. Sect. 23. p.
196. being a saying of Windelstinus, Qui hodie dicuntur Protestants, Novi sunt
Waldenses; They who at this day, are called Protestants, are new Waldenses,
which is confirmed by another saying of Poplinerus, who tells us, That
Albigensium Religionem parum admodum ab ea discrepasse, quam hodie profitentur
Protestants, etc. the Religion of the Albigenses does very little differ from
that which the Protestants at this day profess; as appears by the Fragments and
Monuments of History written in their ancient Language; and then he further
says, that it appears by very ancient Manuscripts, that their Articles of
Faith are Doctrinae Protestantium usquequaque conformes. Tout conformez a ceux
des Protestans, altogether agreeing with the Protestants, Usher Succession,
chap. 10. Sect. 19. p. 308.

Mr. Danvers's pretended witness born by the Donatists against Infants Baptism
Confuted.
Mr. Danvers is full of Complaints of the great injuries he has received; and
amongst others this is one, that I tell him he has nothing in his Treatise of
Baptism, to prove that the Donatists were against Infants Baptism, but his ipse
dixit; whereas he says he has given us diverse Authorities for it. And the
Reason of my saying so, was, because the Magdeburgs that do in a particular
manner set before us what the Donatists held from point to point, do not charge
them with Antipedobaptism; nor do any of the Church-Historians, Eusebius,
Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, or Evagrius, mention it. Neither do any of our
modern Writers give any hint of it. Further I told him in my answer that
Danaeus (who gives us the sum of their Tenants, and of all Austin's Disputes
with them, in his Opusculum) mentions not one word of their denying
Infants Baptism. Neither does Zanchy who treats of them, and shows what they
held in diverse places of his Works, nor Mr Fox in his Act. and Mon. nor Mr.
Clark in his Martyrology (where there is a great story of them) speak any thing
of their being against Infants Baptism; no nor any other that ever I could hear
of, but only Mr. Danvers, and therefore I said as I did. And if our Antagonist
had not been extremely tenacious of his Opinion, this had been (as is
conceived) enough to have taken him off from his mistaken conceit. But all the
thanks I have for endeavoring to rectify him, is still more and more
Reproaches. Mr. Wills, says he, deals according to his wonted manner very
disingenuously with me; but wherein I pray?

1. That I, says he, having given so many Authorities and of such Antiquity to
prove it, he yet tells me [as before.]

To which I answer; I must needs say the same still, being not in the least
convinced by Mr. Danvers's Reply. For whereas he says he has given many
Authorities and of great Antiquity, to prove it; most of them mentioned not
only in the Treatise but Reply, are but of yesterday. viz. Seb. Frank, Jac.
Merning, and Twisk, (if I mistake not, three German Anabaptists) Vicecomes,
Spanhemius, Osiander, Fuller, and Bullinger. As for the three first, it is
sufficient to say concerning them, Istis Authoribus non stamus, we own them
not; because they speak falsely in many things, and that which none of the
ancient Writers do affirm. As for Instance, Mr. Danvers tells us, Seb. Frank,
and Twisk, affirm that Donatus taught that no Infant should be baptized, but
only those that believed and desired it, which is false; and neither they nor
Mr. Danvers can prove it out of Austin or any ancient Writer. But suppose
Donatus himself had been against Infant Baptism; yet Una Hirundo non facit Ver;
One Swallow does not make a Spring; It will not follow that the rest of the
Donatists were so likewise; no more than because Mr. Tombs the Head of the
Anabaptists does conform, therefore all the Anabaptists of England do conform.
Again, Jac. Merning says, that Cresconius opposed Austin in that point, viz.
of Infants Baptism. But in the whole dispute between Austin and Cresconius, I
can find nothing like it. And Vicecomes is as false as them; for he tells us,
Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. were all of them against Infants Baptism; and that
Fulgentius a learned Donatist did deny, (if Mr. Danvers mistakes him not)
Infants Baptism, and asserts only that which was after Faith. Whereas
Fulgentius himself ( de fide ad Petrum cap. 30.) expressly tells us, that
Baptism is sufficient to take away Original Sin from Infants; and Mr. Danvers
has so branded Spanhemius (in his Reply,) as a very partial and unfaithful
Writer, one guilty of lying fictions and Chimeras, that it is strange to me he
should produce him. And what do Osiander, Fuller and Bullinger say? why, that
the Donatists and our modern Anabaptists were all one. But do they say in all
things? I have already told Mr. Danvers that they were one in regard of their
concurrence in very many things, and drew the Parallel between them. And we say
Denominatio sumitur a majori. And indeed the rigid Anabaptist does Symbolize
with the Donvtists in nothing more than in confining the Church of Christ to
their Party, so no true Church out of Mr. Danvers's Party. And if we will not
renounce Infants Baptism and be dipped after their way, he bids defiance to all
overtures of Union and Communion; for he says in his Preface to his Treatise
of Baptism, that whilst such a Foundation of Antichrist is held fast, all
Exhortations to Union, viz. in Church Fellowship and Communion, will signify
little.

His other Authorities I confess are more significant to wit; Austin, Tho.
Walden, Eckbertus and Emerieus; and therefore I shall a little examine his
Quotations out of them. (1) He tells us, Reply 134 [that Austin against the
Donatists, Tom. 7. l. 3, 4. c. 23. does with much zeal and fury manage the
Argument for Infants Baptism against them, bitterly cursing them that oppose
it.] But I cannot find that Austin takes the least notice of Infant Baptism
throughout the whole 3d Book; wherein yet (if Mr. D. may be believed) he
manages that Argument with much Zeal and Fury: Nor in the 4th Book, till he
comes to the 23d Chap. And there (as Mr. Baxter has already informed him) he
is so far from controverting Infants Baptism with the Donatists, that he makes
use of it as a medium in his arguing against them. (2.) He tells us, that
Austin in his Epistle to Marcellus (it should be Marcellinus) Tom. 7. c. 6. p.
724. opposed himself against them (the Donatists) for denying Infants Baptism.
A great mistake! for all he says of Marcellinus there as touthing
Infant Baptism, is this, viz. Octavum Errorem fuisse de Infantibus, qui
priusquam renascantur in Christo praeveniuntur occiduo, Scriptum esse, raptus
est ne malitia illius intellectum mutaret. Sap. 4. That is, His eight Error was
concerning Infants that dye before they were Baptized, that they were taken
away lest malice should change [corrupt] their Understanding, quoting the 4.
Wisdom in the Apochrypha for it. And let the Reader judge whether this is to
deny Infant Baptism. (3.) He tells us that Austin and Walden do both affirm,
that Vincentius Victor a Donatist, denied Baptism to little ones: Austin in his
third Book de Anima c. 14. And Walden in his Book de Sacrament. Tit. 5. c. 33.
fol. 118. As for Austin, there is not the least Syllable to be found of any
such matter in that 14 Chap. Nay, so far is Austin from charging Vin. Victor
with denying Infant Baptism, that in the preceding Chapter he tells you, his
Opinion was that only those Infants that dyed Baptized went immediately to
Heaven; and as for others, they continued in Paradise till the last
Resurrection, and were not till then admitted to the happiness of Heaven. Haec
verba tua sunt (says Austin to Vincentius) ubi te confiteris consentire
dicenti, quibusdam non baptizatis sic temporary collatum esse Paradisum ut
supersit illis in resurrectione praemium regni caelorum, contra sententiam
principalem, qua constitutum est non intraturum in illud regnum qui non renatus
fuerit ex aqua and Spiritu sancto. Quam sententiam principalem timens violare
Pelagius, nec illos sine baptismo in regnum caelorum credidit intraturos quos
non credidit reos. Tu autem and originalis peccati reos parvulos confiteris,
and tamen eos sine lavacro regenerationis absolvis, and in paradisum mittis,
and postea etiam regnum caelorum intrare permittis. And Walden (in the place
Mr. D. quotes) says the same directly. Vincentius dixit eos (scil. Infantes)
trahere originale peceatum, sine baptismo tamen duci posse in regnum caelorum
in resurrectione finali.

As for Eckbertus the Monk and Emericus, I can find no such matter in the
Magdeb. that they likned the Waldenses in the 12 Cent. to the Donatists. And
yet I deny not, but it might be so, because, as Perin says, the Popish Priests
did reproach them with the odious name of Cathari, because they pressed after
Purity; by which name the Donatists were heretofore called, because they held a
sinless state of Perfection attainable in this Life. And this may serve as a
sufficient answer also to Mr. D's. last Argument to prove the Donatists against
Infant Baptism, because they and the Novatians were the same in Principle with
the Waldenses. It being only a foul Aspersion cast upon them by their malicious
Adversaries. Posterior aetas (says Danaeus) ad praegravandam bonam Evangelii
causam, homines vere evangelicos infami Catharorum nomine calumniata est.

Thus Reader, it is left to thy judgment (as Mr. Danvers speaks) whether he
has sufficiently justified his sixfold Testimony, that the Donatists did deny
Infants Baptism. I hope (whatever Mr. Danvers may say to the contrary) I have
sufficiently invalidated all that he has brougat for that end, and that thou will acquit me from the charge of disingenuity in condemning his Witnesses
without cause. So we are come to his last Witnesses the Ancient Britains; which
may well be called his, because no Man ever before him affirmed they were
against Infants Baptism.

Of the Witness pretended to be born against Infants Baptism by the Ancient
Britains.
MR. Danvers is singular in his Opinion; for never did any Anabaptist that I
have read of hit upon this Topic, to prove the Antiquity of their way; no not
Mr. Tombs (whose invention is admirable for Arguments, in that part of his
Anti-paedobaptism which I have lying by me, which consists of above 260 pages
in Quarto being part of the 1500 which Mr. Danvers says in his Preface was
never yet replied to. And it is no wonder that no body has undertaken it; for
as the Author of the History of the Popes Nephews speaks, the Jesuits are
Politic in writing large Volumns, on purpose to discourage the Protestants
from answering them.

Mr. Danvers gives four Arguments that the Ancient Britains that inhabited
Wales, when Austin the Monk was sent by Pope Gregory into this Island to preach
the Gospel about the year 604. did bear their Testimony against Infants Baptism.

1. Because Mr. Fox out of Bid tells us, they refused to Baptize after the
manner of Rome, which Fabian particularly explains to be in the point of
Infants Baptism.

In answer to this I did (in my Infants Baptism Asserted) 1. except against
Fabian's Paraphrase upon the words, which Bid gives us from Austin; and that
for these Reasons, 1. Because in the Preface to Fabian, we there read that what
he relates of these matters is taken from Bede's Ecclesiastical History, in
which there is no mention of the Britains denying to give Christendom to
Children, for all that he says is in his second Book, and the words are, -- In
as much as you do contrary to our custom, yea to the custom of the universal
Church, nevertheless if you will obey me only in these three things, soil. That
you keep your Easter in its proper time; administer Baptism, whereby we are
born again to God, after the manner of the Holy Church of Rome; and the
Apostolical Church, and preach the Word of God together with us unto the
English Nation, we will patiently bear all other things which you do, although
contrary to our customs. But they answered they would do none of these. Mr. Fox
relates it thus, That they would not agree, refusing to leave the custom which
they so long time had continued without the Assent of them all which used the
same. Fox. Act. Mon. 1. Book, p. 107.

2. Because Fabian is not looked upon as a Faithful Historian, and therefore Mr.
Fox in the aforesaid Book suspecteth him of diverse mistakes, and follows not
his relation of giving Christendom to Children in this story, as it is set down
by him; for he gives us it in the words of Bid, viz. That they refused to
baptize after the manner of Rome.

3. None of the other Ancient Historians, as Cretensis in Polychron.
Huntington, etc. mention their refusing to give Christendom to Children; they
only speak generally of refusing to baptize after the manner of Rome. Some
other reasons were given which I let pass, having already said enough to show
on what a sandy foundation Mr. Danvers builds this his peculiar Assertion, that
the Ancient Britains denied Infants Baptism, he having nothing for it but
Fabians conjecture, wherein he differs from all other Historians in the World.

But says Mr. Danvers, Fabian has fully hit Bede's meaning: why? 1. Because
Austin tells the British Christians, that among many things, wherein they were
contrary to the custom of Rome, and to the Universal Church, one was in this
particular of Baptism; and this he conceives must needs be in their refusing to
Baptize Children: and his Reasons are;

1. Because as to the Baptizing the Adult they were not contrary to the Church
of Rome. I answer, though they were not contrary to them, as to the Subject of
Baptism, viz. the Adult; yet they might be, and were so (if so pure as Mr.
Danvers represents them) in regard of the Adjuncts which the Church of Rome
annexed to Baptism, viz. those Superstitious additions of Chrysm, Oil, etc. They
both baptized the Adult, but not after the same manner: and this was that which
Austin stood upon, he would have had them Baptize after their manner: But Mr.
Danvers objects,

2. It could not respect the Mode of Baptism, that is strange; for does he not
tell us just before, p. 38. of his Reply, from Mr. Fox, who takes it from Bid,
That they refused to baptize after the manner of Rome; and can he tell wherein
the difference lies between Mode and Manner. But let us weigh his Reasons
(which are as light as a Feather) why it could not respect the Mode of Baptism.
His first is, Because the custom of the Church of Rome was not Universal, but
opposed by the Greeks and Eastern Churches, and not at all to be made out to be
Apostolical. He says true indeed, though it be not ad Rhombum, and though the
Church of Rome was not so universal, neither could be made out to be
Apostolical; yet they are so proud as to term it so, and say what we can to the
contrary, they do still arrogate as much to this day.

3. Therefore, says he, it must needs respect Infants Baptism; whether this be
intended as an Argument, or a Conclusion, who can tell? it is brought in as a
third Argument, and then it is idem per idem: It must needs respect
Infants Baptism, because it must needs. But he wheels about again after a
confused manner, and comes in with five other Arguments. 1. Because the Church
of Rome had particularly enjoined, and imposed it to beget Infants to
Regeneration, and therefore must intend the substance and not the Ceremony. To
which I reply; 1. It is very strange, that Mr. Danvers's mind should thus run
altogether upon Childrens Baptism, when the work which Austin would have had
them gone upon, was to Baptize the Adult Pagans, such as the Saxons then were,
and to Preach the Gospel to them, and we read not (unless I mistake) of any
Children that he baptized at all, nor any of his company, although he sent to
Gregory to know how long the baptizing of a Child might be deferred, there
being no danger of Death. 2. How came the Canon of the Church of Rome into Mr.
Danvers's mind, of Childrens being born of God by Regeneration? for Austin
spoke not of this; but only exhorts the Britains to administer Baptism,
whereby, says he, we are born again, as holding that grown Persons are born
again to God as well as Children, according to the Judgment of the Church of
Rome, as well as the ancient Fathers. Does not Just in Martyr say the same,
speaking of the manner how the Christians were baptized: they go (says he) to
the Water and are regenerated, as we our selves were regenerated, etc. So that
these are but childish Cavils against Childrens-Baptism. 2. He urge^ another,
and that is, Because Infants Baptism was universally received in this seventh
Age, in other parts of the World for this end. This is such an Argument that I
know not well what to say to it, unless it be that since Infants Baptism was so
universally received in other parts of the World, it is altogether improbable it
should be shut out of Wales. The third and fourth Arguments make but one, which
is, because Infant Baptism was received, and enjoined as an Apostolical
practice, and it had been childish and ridiculous to have said Baptism in
general was Apostolical. Mr. Danvers says true, It had been indeed ridiculous
for Austin to have said Baptism in general was Apostolical, and therefore he
speaks of the manner of Baptizing, which he would have the Britains observe as
they did, that is, to do it in that superstitious way with Chrysm, Oil, etc.
which is held by the Church of Rome to be Apostolical.

And whereas I say the Britains did no more reject Infants Baptism, than they
did Preaching to the Saxons. He thus replys; True, having as much reason to
reject the one, as the other. A strange Assertion! For though Infants Baptism
be in his account unlawful, yet the Preaching of the Gospel, one would think,
should be lawful, and more reason there is to Preach the Gospel, than to
Baptize either the Adult or Infants. But what makes Mr. Danvers judge otherwise
as to these Britains? It is because he conceives, by Preaching here must be
understood Authoritatively, by being ordained by them, and not as a company of
Laymen, or Mechanics. It seems than this Gentleman is for Mechanics
Preaching; but that which is remarkable is, to see how much he has overshot
himself in the heat of Disputation: For the Britains, to whom Austin addressed
his Speech, were not Laymen or Mechanics, but seven Bishops and an
Archbishop, as Mr. Fox informs us, Act. Mon. 1. Book, p. 107. Although it is
true they admitted not Romes Supremacy over them, which was the main quarrel,
as Mr. Fox tells us out of Cluniacensi, who gives this Reason why they would
not comply with Austin, because they would not admit of the Bishop of Romes
Supremacy over them, Ex Pet. Cluniacensi ad Bernardum. Reader, thou must know
that Mr. Danvers gave five other Reasons in his Treatise of Baptism to confirm
his former Position; and because I said in my Answer they were trifles, he
tells me in his Reply that that is an excellent way of Answering, and next to
Bellarmin, thou lie. But I must tell Mr. Danvers, I did not only say they
were trifles, but proved them such. And because he does so cunningly insinuate
the contrary, I shall now repeat my Answer to his Reasons, adding a little, and
submit it to judgment.

1. His first Argument, that the Britains were against Infant Baptism, was,
Because they kept themselves both in Discipline and Doctrine expressly to the
Scripture. Before I speak to this, know, that he has altered his note; for his
first Argument in both his Treatises of Baptism was this, Because the Britains
received the Christian Faith, Doctrine and Discipline from the Apostles and
Asiatick Churches, who had no such thing as Baptizing Children. Now this being
more than he can tell, and a Negative Argument as to matter of Fact, is not
valid, as I told him in my Answer: and besides, I minded him with that of the
Magdeburgs, who expressly tell us that Infants Baptism was in use in the
Asiatick Churches, Cent. 3. c. 6. p. 124. He is so ingenious as to wave that
Argument. But to the 1st, as it is here in the Reply, which is, because they
kept themselves in Discipline and Doctrine expressly to the Word. This he thinks
will effectually do the business, that is, casheer Infants Baptism from them.
To this I answer. 1. To say they kept themselves expressly in Discipline and
Doctrine to the Word, is more than Mr. Danvers can prove, and it is more than
Jeffery Monmouth speaks, from whom he has his intelligence. This therefore,
that they keep to the express Word is his own Dictate. 2. It is not true what
he says, nor can I apprehend how Mr. Danvers should believe himself; for no
Anabaptist believes Episcopal Government to be so expressly set down in the
Word, and Mr. Fox tells us as before, that no less than seven Bishops and an
Archbishop came out of Wales at Austin's Summons; who were also so proud, that
wanting some ceremonious Observance at their first coming to Austin they took
such offense, that in disdain and great displeasure they went away. And
observe, Reader, the sense of Mr. Fox upon this their carriage; I profess,
says he, I cannot see but both Austin and them were to be blamed, who so much
neglected their Spiritual Duties in revenging their Temporal injuries, that
they denied to join their helping hand to turn the Idolatrous Saxons to the way
of Life and Salvation, in which respect all private respects ought to give
place, and be forgotten, and for which cause he conceived the stroke of God's
Punishment did light upon them afterward. The business of Infants Baptism never
entered into this good-mans mind, as if they refused to comply with Austin on
that account, nor is it like that ever the Britains thought of it.

2. His next Argument is, Because they were zealous Impugners of Tradition. But
by the story we find no such Zeal unless it was against Austin for not
honoring them: and besides, this Argument of Mr. Danvers is altogether
precarious; for we have showed before that though Austin held Infants Baptism a
Tradition, yet withal it was in his opinion grounded on Circumcision, and the
Papists (as Bellarmine) affirm the warrantableness of it may be collected from
Scripture. But to make short work with it, I deny that they were such Impugners
of Tradition, if the Discpline of Archbishops, and the observation of Easter
be Traditions (as Mr. Danvers judges them to be;) for as the difference
between Austin and them was not about the Subject of Baptism, but the Ceremony;
so they differed not about keeping Easter, but only as to the circumstance of
time, when it was to be kept. That the Britains and Picts kept Easter, though
not at the same time as the Romish Church did, see Mr. Fox Act. Mon. page 111.
where mention is made of a Synod in which the controversy about keeping Easter
was debated before King Oswie, Alfrid's Father; and it is said Coleman then
Bishop of Northumberland, followed not the custom of Rome, nor of the Saxons,
but the Picts and Britains in celebrating Easter from the 14th day of the first
month, till the 28th of the same, against whom Wilfrid replied, -- The Easter
we keep, we have seen at Rome, -- the same is used in Italy and France, and
finally all the World over, save only by these here present, with their
accomplices the Picts and Britains.

3. Reason is, Because Constantine the son of Christian Parents was not
Baptized till aged, so in his Treatise of Baptism; but in his Reply, it is, not
baptized in this Island. But we have shown Constantius his Father was no
Christian at Constantine's Birth, and in all likelihood lived and dyed a Pagan,
though he had much respect for Christians; and even Constantine himself was a
Pagan for sometime after he was Emperor.

4. Another of his Reasons is, Because the custom of the Britains was to
baptize after Confession of Faith, being in Union and Communion therein with
the French Christians; And I told him this was a good Argument to prove they
were for Infants Baptism, because the French Christians afterward called
Waldenses were for it, and had used it so many hundred years; witness the
Confession at Angrogne.

Nor will Mr. Danvers his Old Salvo serve his turn, which is, That the ancient
Waldenses were against Infants Baptism, though he cannot but grant the more
modern were for it. For we have met with something of late that must needs
convince him, and that is, that Infants Baptism was practiced in the Country
where the Waldenses do inhabit, near twelve hundred years since.

For the Famous French Historian, John de Serres, in his History of France
translated into English, tells us, p. 12. That Anno Christi 500, Clovis the
great King of France, then an Heathen, desired to marry Clotilde Daughter of
Chilperic Brother of Gondebault, King of the Burgundians, (whose Seat was then
at Arles in Provence) Gondebault denied Clovis, because of the difference of
Religion: Clovis to remove this, promised her liberty of Conscience, so the
marriage was concluded. And (says the Author) although Clovis were a Pagan,
yet he was no enemy to the Christians, sitting himself to the humor of the
Gauloys, who generally followed the Christian Religion: He suffered his Wife
likewise to baptize her Children. So it is plain the Burgundians (from whence
the Waldenses sprang) were for baptizing Infants; and belike it was also at
that time the universal practice of the Gauls.

5. The last of Mr. Danvers's Arguments, that the Britains were against
Infants Baptism, is, because Austin himself was so raw and ignorant in the
Rite, that when he came into Britain, and the question was here put to him (I
know not by whom) how long a Child that was in danger of Death might stay
unbaptized? he was fain to send to Rome for Solution. This is so raw an
Argument indeed to prove the Britains were against Infants Baptism, that
instead of an Answer, it deserves to be laughed at. For at this very day wherein
Infants Baptism is so generally practiced, some take a liberty to delay longer
than others who are for the speedy administration thereof. And if this Argument
does import any thing, it is, that Austin himself was not so well studied as he
ought to have been as to the time when Children should be baptized. What in the
last place he speaks of Hilary, that none were baptized in the Western Churches
but the Adult, is confronted in the beginning, where we have shown that he has
no such saying in lib. de Trinitate, the Book referred to, and how he himself
was for Infants Baptism from his 2d Epistle to Austin.

As for his other witnesses, Munzer and John of Leyden, with the rest of that
Faction, though he does pertinaciously persist against the clearest evidences,
in palliating or rather denying the horrid crimes laid to their charge, and
withal (very disingenuously) reflects dishonor upon those of the Reformation,
I shall not be at so much expense of time and Paper as to expose his gross
aberrations herein, but quietly permit him to enjoy the comfort and honor of
such witnesses.

FINIS.

