THE Lying Spirit AND FALSE ASPERTIONS Turned home again. Or an Answer to two
Reviling Letters about the Peoples Right to Tithes, sent to the People called
Quakers in the Vail of Bellvier by Clement Nedham, a Presbyterian; who writes
himself, A Farmer in the County of Leicester. Wherein I have showed according
to Scriptures, what spirit it was that brought up Tithes among the Christians,
so called. And that those that brought them up since Christ put an End to them
were not in their Right Senses, but were made Drunk by drinking of that spirit
of error that made them do they knew not what, and consequently their Examples
not to be followed. With an Addition, showing, That the Impropriator has less
Right to Tithes then the Poor or Priest, if less can be. With a few Words in
Love to all those that send their Sons to those Places called Universities,
with an Intent to make them Ministers. Also a Copy of a Letter sent to G. N. in
manuscript, wherein his Unhansom and Unchristian-like Dealings may be seen.
With a short Postscript to the Reader By J. W. a Lover of Truth and all Men's
Souls, Whose outward Being is in the Vail of Bellvier, and County of Leicester.

Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this People draw near me with their
Mouths, and with their Lips do Honor me, but have removed their Hearts for
from me, and their Fear toward me is taught by the Precepts of Men; therefore
behold I will proceed to do a Marvelous Work amongst this People, even a
Marvelous Work and a Wonder: For the Wisdom of their Wise Men shall perish, and
the Understanding of their Prudent Men shall be hid. For it is written, I will
destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and bring to nothing the Understanding of the
Prudent,

Isaiah 29.13, 14, 1 Cor. 1.19. Printed in the Year, 1673.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I Was not forward in meddling with this Giant, who boasted and domineered over
me; bad it not been for the Truth's sake I could have been silent; but the Love
that I bear to it constrains me to bear my Testimony (though not with enticing
words of Man's Wisdom) against Deceit and Oppression: And so I desire thee to
mind the Inspiration of the Almighty, for that gives an Understanding: It is
the Spirit that reveals the deep Things of God, 2 Cor. 2. And as thou turnest
thy Mind inwards, to be acquainted with its Teachings, it will let thee see the
Way that a Wafaring Man, though a Fool, cannot err in; and so thou will come to
see the Rice, Ground, Bottom and Foundation of things, and that is the Right
Way to begin to build: and not to build upon Popish Authors, or to take Drunken
Men for thy Example; I mean such as were Drunk by drinking that spirit of Error
that led from God into an Heap of Confusion, which is Babylon: And by the
Spirit of Truth thou may see, as thou mindst, what it was that strove with
the Old World before the outward Law was added, which Law was added because of
Transgression, and was to continue until the fullness of Time, that God sent his
Son a Light into the World, to end the Types and Shadows, Tithes and Offerings,
that that Law required. So Reader, I desire thee to take notice, That Christ
put an End to Tithes; and who brought them up again in this following Treatise
I hope thou may see, even him whose Coming is after the Working of Satan,
with all Power, Signs and Lying Wonders, 2 These. 2. (Have thou not heard of the
Papists working Miracles) [Mark] He had Power; What Power, may some say? I
answer, Power to deceive and beguile by his Signs and Lying Wonders, and then
to make Laws for the Continuance and Upholding of that which he had gotten by
Deceit. And people, when I speak of Babylon, Antichrist or Beast, I mean that
spirit of Error that led from God; for it has several Names; because of its
several ways of workings; Satan has many Wiles, and so he has many Names:
And there are but two Spirits in the Ground, the Spirit of Truth, and the
spirit of Error; and Christ is the Truth, who has many Names and Offices, all
which is to lead into a Holy Life; but the spirit of Error leads into an Unholy
Life; so they may be known by their Workings in Man and Woman: And Happy are
all they that come to be redeemed from under the Power of Satan, Beast and
Antichrist in themselves; for there they are while people live in Sin, and
there their Fall must be: For Christ has determined to bind the Strong Man
armed, and to cast him out of the House, and to take the Possession, himself:
And so people, we are not speaking of the Fall of Kings and Rulers from their
Thrones of Justice; but of the Fall of the Beast, Whore and Antichrist in Man
and Woman; and this will hurt none, to have that destroyed which keeps from
God. And therefore I exhort all that love their own Souols, to wait low in
their Minds, that they may feel Christ Jesus exercising his Offices in them,
which is to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness.

J. W.

THE Lying Spirit AND FALSE ASPERTIONS Turned Home again. OR An Answer to Two
Reviling Letters about the Peoples Right to Tithes, sent to the People called
Quakers in the Vail of Bellvier by Clement Nedham, a Presbyterian; who writes
himself, A Farmer in the County of Leicester.
Friend Nedham,
ALthough thy Postscript be the last, yet it concerns my first Letter sent to
thee: I might say something to thy Reviling Words in it, but having written
something to thee in a Letter, and knowing it was the Practice of the Scribes,
and Pharisees, and outside Professors, Joh. 7.49.
to Revile the Children of Light, and to count them such as knew not the Law,
at present I may pass them by; only take notice of this by the way, That if I
had been so ignorant, as in thy Eyes I seemed to be, it had been thy place to
have written or spoken something to me in particular; that had been the best
way for thee to have managed thy Design to have convinced me of my Error, if
in one I had been; but thou have directed thy Reviling Words to others, and not
a word to me in particular; wherein thou have manifested thy Folly and
Ignorance in mannaging thy Design; but it is like my Confidence offended thee:
yet I must tell thee, I am as Confident as ever I was, yea, and more Confirmed;
for since thou did write thy Reviling Pamphlets the Lord has opened my
Understanding more then before, to see beyond thy Trash and Rome's Trumpery,
insomuch that I have Cause to say as Christ said, Mat. 11.25.
I thank thee, O Father, who have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent,
and have revealed them to Babes and Sucklings: And in this is that Scripture
fulfilled that says, All things work together for Good to them that love God.

And as concerning thy new start-up Question, which thou say, I writ nothing
at all unto.

Answer, If the Mysteries of the Kingdom had not been hid from the Wise and
Prudent in their own Eyes, as in all Ages they were, thou might have seen
that I had written something to the Substance of thy Matter: But the Blind
cannot see, nor the Deaf Adder hear, although the Charmer charm never so
wisely. And further, as concerning thy Question; Christ himself did not always
answer the Questions that thy Brethren the Scribes and Pharisees, Chief
Priests, and those who thought they had the Law on their sides, asked him, when
they thought to enfnare him; but sometimes he answered one Question by asking
another, Mark 11.29. and thou thy self have seemed to do so in thy Book. And
now whether thy Question about the People's Right to Tithes may not be answered
with a Just Demand from thee, What Right the People of thy Persuasion had to
take away the Bishops Lands from them? If thou say, The Bishops had no Right
to them, because contrary to the Practice of the Bishops in the Primitive
Times, who were not to be Covetous, nor given to Filthy Lucre, 1 Timothy 3. The
same say we by the Priests concerning Tithes.

And seeing thou have made thy self so busy, as few I think might worse have
done, I might proceed to ask thee, What Right thou or the People of thy
Persuasion had to Sell or Buy some men's Free-Lands? And whether the King and
his Laws have not been favorable to thee and some of thy Party?

And further concerning thy Question; Do not those that buy Land buy every Part
and Parcel, with all that thereunto belongs? And are they tied by their Deeds
to pay their Tenths, yea, or nay? If nay, how are they Thieves and Robbers for
detaining that which they never came in Covenant with any to pay? And as to the
Intents of Every Buyer and Seller, thou have stretched too far; For how know
thou the Intents of those that sold or bought Land some Hundreds of years
since, further then their Deeds or Writings make mention? And we performing our
Covenants according to our Deeds and Leases, are clear from thy salfe
Aspertions.

I Have taken notice of thy second Letter, and there I find, that thou
sleightest those thou countest to have much more Reason then I have, as much or
more then thou do me (in these words) thou say, Thou art to Thank that
Author for thy Information of several Kings, that made Laws for the Payment of
Tithes: To which thou art pleased to make Five Demands, but being answered by
T. R. I shall not need to meddle with them at present; for my Intent is to
speak to the Ground of the Matter, and so I take notice of thy following words;
thou say, Thou art still to thank the same Author for thy Information, that
King Steven by his Charter gave Tenths for the Pardon of his Sins; and the like
by Ralph Bishop of Chichester, for the Health of his Soul; and that Walter
Clifford, in the time of King John, gave the Tenths of Hammersen for the Health
of his Father's Soul.

And now, for thy better Information, first consider, That Christ Jesus, the
pure Lawgiver, was the End of that Law that gave Tithes; secondly, consider
what spirit was got up when those things above mentioned were done. For Proof
of the first I might preduce many Scriptures; but I desire thee and thy Reader
to take notice of a few, and peruse them at your Leisures, Romans 10.4.
Galatians 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 19. Wherefore then serves the Law? It was added
because of Transgression, till the Seed should come to whom the Promise was
made: Further, see Hebrews Chap. 7, 8, 9.

And as to the second, which is to show what Spirit was got up when these
things above mentioned were done; consider what the Apostle says, Acts 20. he
Exhorted the Elders of the Church, To take heed unto themselves, and to all the
Flock over the which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers; for he said, That
after his Departure grievous Wolves should enter in among them, not sparing the
Flock: Also, of your own selves (said he) shall Men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them. And in 2 These. 2. he said, The
Mystery of Iniquity does already work, only he who now lets will let until
he be taken out of the way; then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the
Lord shall Comsume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and destroy with the
Brightness of his Coming: So take notice, the Apostle foretold of the coming up
of the Mystery of Iniquity, and of its being consumed and destroyed again by
the Brightness of the Lord's Coming. In 1 Timothy 4. the Apostle spoke of some,
that should depart from the Faith, giving heed to Seducing Spirits and
Doctrings of Devils, forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats:
And do thou think the Apostle did not see the rise of the Papists or False
Church, when he spoke these words. Further, Paul writ to Titus, Not to give
heed to Jewish Fables and Commandments of Men, that turn from the Truth: And
was not Tithes a Jewish Type when ended by Christ? And did not they that turned
unto them turn from the Truth? which would be a Denying Christ come in the
Flesh. Answer in Plaineness; else would they have given them for the Health of
their own Souls, or their Fathers, or for the Pardon of their Sins. Also Jude
spoke of certain men that were crept in unawares (so they were crept in then)
Woe unto them, said he, for they are gone in the way of Cain (mark, they were
gone) and run greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward. And John saw
something that was not well in the Church of Asia, and therefore he exhorted
them, To Repent, and do their First Works (mark, their First Works) and he
exhorted some of them to their First Love. And how often did Paul exhort the
Church to stand fast, foreseeing the Danger of their being drawn aside?

Oh that people rightly saw the Drift of the holy Apostles in these things,
which was to keep them to the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and to walk
as they had them for an Example; and not to take the Apostatized Christians for
their Examples: And how mightily did Paul strive to keep the Galatians from the
Works of the Law: And were or Tithes of Work of the Law? and never in use
amongst the Christians, whilst they kept their First State. See what Peter
says 2 Epist. 2.1, 2, 3. I might produce many Scriptures to prove that the
Apostles foresaw a Falling away; but see what John says, 2 Epist. 2. Little
Children, it is the Last Times; as ye have heard that Antichrist should come,
even now are there many Antichrists: And is not that Antichrist that is
contrary to Christ, the Everlasting High Priest, not made after the Law of a
Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an endless Life; who put an End to
Tithes and Offerings, and offered himself once for all. And further, John
exhorted the Church to that they had in the Beginning, even to the Anointing
within, to preserve them out of the Snares of Antichrist, because he saw him
working in a Mystery; before whose time I do not find that Tithes came up in
this last Age. Oh! How lovingly did John write unto them? saying, Little
Children abide in him. Further, see what John said in the Revelations Chap. 13.
he said, He saw a Beast coming up out of the Earth, and he had two Horns like a
Lamb, and he spoke as a Dragon, and he exercises all the Power of the first
Beast; And what was the first Beast? was it not that Spirit that was got up
among the Heathen Emperors, when they persecuted the Christians? And
afterward, when the second Beast arose, which had two Horns like a Lamb, did
not the Christians persecute one another, and the Pope get over the Kings and
Emperors? And this Beast wrought Miracles; Here the Papists may see from whence
their Miracles came: And this Beast, that came up like a Lamb (mark, mildly by
Persuasion, yet at last) causes all both Small and Great, Rich and Poor, Free
and Bond to receive a Mark in their Right Hand, or in their Foreheads; and that
no Man might Buy or Sell, save he that had the Mark or the Name of the Beast.

And now C. N. see what Laws thou Presbyterian so strongly pleadest for; Is it
not so in most places now, that a Man can hardly buy, sell, or Trade with any
thing, but the Priest will look for a Tenth Part, if not for a Seventh of many
things, which need not be named, seeing the poor Country People, that labor
hard for what they have know so well how Coverous the Priest is, that if he
hears the Sow has pigged, away goes he, or sends, to see what is for him, or
when the Ewe has lambed; but he will make them keep them till they be fit for
his Mouth; likewise when the Sheep are sheared, Corn and Apples ready: And do
not thou plead right by the Beasts Law? But what Example is there in Scripture
for these things? This is more then the Tenths of Lands. But thou say, It is
known to every Buyer and Seller; and thou seem as if thou would have none
buy or Sell, where the Beast has power but those that can pay these things:
But is it not a Mark, that those that pay and plead for them are Upholders of
Antichrist's Kingdom? The Waters where the Whore sits are Peoples,
Multitudes, Nations and Tongues.
John numbered the days of the Beast, Verse. 18. contrary to thy pleading; for
thou pleadest as if his Reign might never have an End: But John spoke further
of the Downfall of the Beast, and said, If any Man worshippen him or his Image,
or received his Mark, they should drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, Rev.
14. He said further in Rev. 17. There came one of the Seven Angels, which had
the Seven Vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither, I will show
thee the Judgment of the Great Whore, that sits upon many Waters, with
whom the Kings of the Earth has committed Fornication, and the Inhabitants of
the Earth have been made Drunk with the Wine of her Fornication. And how are
Men when they are drank? Are they not beside their Right Senses, and stagger
and reel up and down, as they did at that day, when Tithes came last up? And
do thou think that those Kings or others knew well what they did when they
gave Tithes for the Pardoning of their Sins, or for the Health of their Souls,
or for their Fathers Souls, and gone from Christ, the Savior of their Souls?
Or whether were they not drunk, by drinking of the Whore's Golden Cup, and
beside their Right Senses, or at best, persuaded that they should merit Heaven
by their own Good Works? And did not this make the Pope and his Strain so High
and Rich? And whether that which a Man does when he is drunk, or not in his
Right Senses, or does not well know what he does, must needs stand firm without
Alteration? Can a Will stand good by Law when a Man is not in his Right Senses
at the time he makes it? And that this was their Cases, I think few but Papists
will deny.

But some may Object, and say, Were not many Good and Wholsome Laws in this
Nation made by the Papists, and yet thou say, they were in the dark, and
their Examples not to be followed?

To which I answer, I never denied but that there might be some good amongst
them, especially in Temporal Things: We see many a Wild Drunken Man, that has
a large Understanding in Temporal Affairs, yet knows little of the Things of
God. And it seems to me, that although Tithes themselves were not, nor are not
Spiritual, yet they did rather relate to the Church or Spiritual Things, and
therefore the Trial of them was referred to the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Courts, until O. C. put them down, and to gratify the Priests made a New Law
for the Recovering of Tithes.

And further, For the removing of all Scruple, I do affirm, that we do own all
the Good and Wholesome Laws in the Nations that are for the Praise of them that
do well, and for the Punishment of Evildoers.

But we believe that no man ought to have made Laws for the Enforcing of
Payment of Tithes, because Christ the Pure Lawgiver put an End to them; but he
did not end the Titles men had in their Lands: Hence I conclude, that the
Titles men have, or Law by which men hold their Lands, is different from the
Titles or Law by which the Priests or Impropriators hold their Tithes by; the
one grounded upon Right Reason, more ancient then the Papists; the other a
By-Law, made in the Midnight of Darkness, when men knew not well what they did,
which indeed may be called, A Usurping over men's Consciences and Estates: For
its most certain, men had Titles in their Lands before the Papists made Laws
for Payment of Tithes.

Thou say in page 11. of thy Book, The Author has not yet proved, why Laws
may not be admitted for Maintenance of Ministers, as well as Poor.

To which thing I have something in my Heart to say concerning my Faith, or
what I believe concerning that Matter: I believe that all Poor ought to labor,
so much as they are able, to maintain themselves, and not to spend any of God's
Creatures in waste; and what they are not able to do by their own true Labor,
is to be made out by them that have it: and this the Power of God compels them
that are in it to do, if there were no outward Law to compel to it.

And I believe the like by Ministers, That they also ought to follow Paul's
Example, that is, To Labor with their Hands, that they might not be chargeable
to any, 1 These. 2.9. Acts 20.33, 34. Then I also believe, That if they be so
called forth in the Service of the Lord, from their outward Callings, as that
they cannot labor with their Hands to maintain themselves or Families, that
then they may reap Carnal Things where they have sown Spirituals, or where they
have planted a Vineyard they may eat Fruit, or where they have fed a Flock they
may eat Milk. But the Jews were not to take Tithes of Strangers, the Priests
were not to receive Wages of them they did no Work for; for that is counted
unreasonable among men, to ask Wages of them they do nothing for: But the Power
of God compels them that are in it, if Need be, to administer Carnal Things to
those that sow unto them Spirituals; and there needs not an Outward Law to
compel to it; for their Ministry takes Effect, and begets a Love and a Life in
the Hearts of their Hearers; but a Dead Ministry begets neither Love nor Life
in the Hearts of people, and so such Ministers are forced to cry out for an
Outward Law to compel people to maintain them in Pride, and Idleness, and
Welfare, contrary to Paul's Exhortation to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8. who said, We
brought nothing into this World, and it is certain we can carry nothing out:
having Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content. But these are not so
content, but have great Revenues, as is well known: And are not these Revenues
the Cause why so many men send their Sons to those Places called Universities,
which makes our Nation swarm with so many Locusts, that destroy our Corn, and
would devour every Green Thing in God's Garden, and preach Peace to people in
their Sins while they put into their Mouths, and so cause them to Err, Mic. 3.
and keep from the Light that gives the Knowledge of God and of his VVayes, and
call it Delusion, and so keep people in the Erring and Straying from the Way
of God like lost Sheep. This is one Cause why we can pay our Rents to Vicious
Landlords or Papists, and yet cannot pay Tithes to the Priests; for they are
Upholders of them in their Wickedness, if they will but satisfy their Ends;
and many of them are Evil Examples themselves. Another Cause why we can pay our
Rents to Vicious Landlords or Papists, but cannot pay Tithes to the Priest is,
because we usually come into Covenant with our Land-Owners, to pay them Rent;
but so we do not to the Priests, to pay them Tithes. Yea, and we can pay our
Chief Rents and Taxes to the King; Christ said, Give to Caesar the things that
are Caesar 's, and to God the things that are God's; but never commanded his
Disciples to pay or take Tithes: And were not Tithes God's? Malachi. 3. And
when he ceased requiring of them did they not become the people's Right?

C. N. (page 13.) tells us a Story of some Conference he had with some of our
Persuasion in London some years since, whether True or False I cannot tell;
however, he seems to take Occasion against the Light in our Consciences, and
says, Though I grant, That the True Spirit of God cannot Deceive, yet a Lying
Spirit was in all the Mouths of Ahab 's Prophets; and I pray you (says he)
think it not Impossible that such a Spirit may be in you, while yet you think
you have the True.

Answ. And now seeing he says so, I think it not amiss to consider the Fruits
and the Effects of the False Prophets, in whom the Lying Spirit was and is,
that so we may know it where it appears now, or where it has appeared in
late years.

The False Prophets Encouraged Ahab, saying, Go up to Ramoth-Gilead, and
Prosper; for the Lord shall deliver it into the Hand of the King. Michaiah the
True Prophet said to the King, A Lying Spirit is in the Mouths of these thy
Prophets, and the Lord has spoken Evil against thee, Then Zedekiah the Son of
Chenaanah the False Prophet came near, and smote Micaiah upon the Cheek, and
said, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee? And
Micaiah said, Behold thou shall see in that Day, when thou shall go into an
Inner Chamber to hide thy self. Then the King said, Take Micaiah, and carry him
back unto Ammon, the Governor of the City, and say, Thus says the King, Put
this Fellow in the Prison, and feed him with the Bread of Affliction, and with
Water of Affliction, until I come in Peace. And Micaiah said, If thou return at
all in Peace, the Lord has not spoken by me. Ahab Disguized himself, yet a
certain man drew a Bow at a Venture, and smote him between the Joint of the
Harness, that he Dyed, 2 Chronicles. 18. 1 King. 22.

And was not this many of your Cases who are called Presbyterians, when ye were
exalted in your Power? Did you not carry away as your own the Bishops Lands,
Gleab-Lands, and some Men's Free Estates, which was theirs by a Law, (the Crime
C. N. lays to the Quakers) and exalt your selves in Pride by them, and forget
the Lord? Of which things you cannot accuse the Quakers, since they were a
People: For, as they were Convinced of God's Truth they left you, and bare
their Testimony against you; and many of them you put in Prison, and fed them
with Bread and Water of Affliction, and some Dyed in Prison by Reason of Hard
Usage: And did not those Prophets in whom the Lying Spirit was, preach Peace to
you in all these things, and encouraged you to go on, as Ahab's Prophets did?
Then did the Lord raise up many True Prophets, and sent them among you, who
told you, If you went on in Self-endedness, Pride and High-mindedness, ye
should be broken; witness George Fox the younger, who told you, AS YOU HAD
BEATEN, HEWED AND BROKEN OTHERS, EVEN SO SHOULD YOU BE BEATEN, HEWED AND BROKEN
YOUR SELVES. And did not this come to pass? Yea, and this with much more stands
in Print over your Heads at this day. And did not the Teachers of the Nation
Encourage you to go on, and petition against the Quakers, calling the Truth
Heresy? And how did they flock to Richard Cromwell, and called him Joshua, who
should carry them into the Promised Land, which was but Tithes and
Augmentations: But alas! how did the Lying Spirit deceive them, and all that
believed them and their Prophesying, insomuch as that all their Harness would
not save them from God's Arrow? And how did those hid themselves that had
smitten the True Prophets, and fawn, and flatter, and walk disguisedly like
Ahab, and some put on a White Surplice on the top of a Black Coat to save
themselves? So I hope People will see where this Lying Spirit was and is.

C. N. grants the True Spirit cannot Deceive; so the Prebyterians and their
Priests may take the Lying Spirit home to themselves, and be ashamed that ever
they Beat, Imprisoned, Whipped and Stocked the True Prophets and Servants of
the Lord.

The Quakers have not forgot how you carried away as your own (the Crime that
is laid to them) their Pots and Pans, Hay and Corn, and put the Servants of the
Lord in Prison when they could not feed your Lying Prophets, or when they spoak
to them in the Steeple Houses: But the Lord brought you down, and the Quakers
and Tremblers at the Word of the Lord, whom ye derided, stand as Witnesses
against you. So C. N. thou and thy Party may take this to your selves, to the
Shame and Infamy of your whole Profession: For Persecution is a Shame and
Infamy to any Profession whatever And have not you Presbyterians hid your
selves, as in an Inner Chamber, when a Storm has come? But when the Sun has
shined, and the Storm been over, like Snakes ye have come out of your Holes;
witness John Woodhouse's Meeting, and thine C. N. at Wortenby and at Salxelby
in Leichestershire, near unto us; we have seen your Devised Service often
blasted, according to C. N.'s Belief.

Again, In try 13th page thou say, And now my Friends, if you are convinced
that Tithes are none of yours, consider, think it not sufficient to expiate
your Guilt by saying in your usual Language, Let them that are free to pay
Tithes pay them.

Answ. It seems thou think thou have done something, as thy words [and now
my Friends] imply: But I must tell thee, We are convinced that we have as good
right to the Tenth Part as we have to the other Nine, and that for these
Reasons.

First, Because Christ fulfilled and put an End to that Law that gave Tithes,
as before I have proved.

Secondly, Those that brought them up again were made Drunk by drinking of the
Whore's Golden Cup, which was full of Abominations within, and consequently
their Examples are not to be followed.

Thirdly, We believe, That every part and parcel of our Lands is our own, so
far as our Deeds and Leafes make mention; and the Increase is God's, lent to
us: And we are commanded, Not to spend our Money for that which is not Bread,
and our Labor for that which satisfies not, Isaiah Chap. 55. And I must tell
thee, We are not satisfied with the Priests, neither do we believe that they
can give us the Bread of Life, and therefore we cannot pay them.

Again, Thou biddest us Turn to the Light or Law in our Consciences, and then
tell thee, whether the following Conclusions must not necessarily fall, to the
Shame and Infamy of our whole Profession.

Answ. Before thou callst it a Pretended Light, and now do thou directest us
unto it; but it matters not what thou call it; we know it to be true Light,
and have turned to it: and we find that thy Conclusions do not fall upon us;
but we see that thou art like the Persecuting Jews, who numbered Christ among
Thieves, and would rather have a Murderer or a Malefactor to live then he: And
what was the Cause of the Jews Envy against Christ? Was it not because they
thought in their Dark Imaginations he did something contrary to their Law? It
is like if one should have asked them, Who made their Law? they in their Dark
Hellish Natures would have said, God gave it to Moses, and Moses said in the
four and twentieth Chapter of Leviticus, and the sixteenth Verse, He that
Blasphemeth the Name of the Lord shall surely be put to Death. And was not this
the Crime they laid to him? But God forbid that I or any true Christian should
believe that these words concerned him, so as to ensnare him, although they in
their Dark Minds might so understand them.

And C. N. What is the Cause that thou countest us more Criminal then common
Notorious Thieves? Is it not because thou in thy Dark Imaginations think
that we do something contrary to Law: But if one should ask thee, Who made thy
Law thou condemnest us by? Say thou, Such and such Popish Kings made Laws
for the Payment of Tithes, and you Quakers Refuse to pay them, and therefore if
Ignorance will not, nothing else can excuse you before God or Man from being
more Criminal then Common Notorious Thieves: And here art not thou worse then
the Jews, who pleaded a Law that was before the Papists, though they understood
it wrong.

Thou say, Might not Popish Kings do what they would with their own?

I answer, Yes; But the Increase of our Labor, and Flocks and Fields, that God
blesses unto us this year, was not theirs to give that dyed Hundreds of Years
past: And did not Persecutors plead Law in all Ages against the Innocent, and
for their Mass and other things, and thought they went right when they had Law
on their sides? Search Scriptures and Chronicles, and see if it were not so:
And do not the Persecutors plead Law now for the taking away of Goods, and that
from some of you called Presbyterians? And may not some in Ages to come upon
the same Ground that thou pleadest for Tithes, plead it Right according to Law,
to take away Goods if any meet together to Worship God, if he prevent it not?
Oh! that men should be so blind to plead against themselves: But thy Pleading
signifies a Daubing.

In the 14th page of thy Book thou say, Our usual Demand, what Scripture can
be produced to prove any Examples for Paymen of Tithes to Gospel Ministers?

Answ. Thou seem to slight us for so doing, and what a Stir have the
Presbyterians made about calling the Scriptures the Word and Rule, and now if
one speak according to them, he is counted as one that seems to have neither
Common Sense nor Reason, or at best a Confident Weak Defendent; witness thy
Reviling Postscript concerning my first Letter, thou say, We ignorantly
deny Scriptures to be the Rule to try and distinguish betwixt True and False
Spirits: But whither art thou gone? Thy Nakedness of Pretense to Truth is
exposed to censure through thy own Ignorant Folly: What? are all the Pleaders
for Tithes driven out of the Scriptures? And are they forced to flee to the
Humane Law? Presbyterians, What is the Bible become of no use now? Must not the
Pope's Authority be questioned? It is enough to believe as your Mother Church
believes. Whither are you running? Come back again, come back again for shame;
else the Lord will follow you, and ye shall not have a Hiding Place; it is the
Word of the Lord in my Heart to you all, that you may be warned.

C. N. demands of us, Whether Scripture Example be not equal binding to people
as well as Ministers?

Answ. That Example of selling all, and laying down at Ministers Feet, is not
binding: Acts 5.3, 4. Peter said to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine Heart
with a Lie to the Holy Ghost; whilst it remained, was it not thine own? and
after it was sold, was it not in thine own Power? So see this Example was not
binding; the Sin lay in Lying against God, in pretending to give All, and yet
kept a Part back. Neither do we find that this was practiced any more.

He further demands, What Scripture Example we can show, that any man bought
Lands chargeable with Tithes, and Refused to pay them?

Answ. It is not hard to guess from what spirit this Demand arises; but in the
Eternal Light its seen to our Eyes to arise from that spirit that sleights us
for sticking so close to the Scriptures: I might ask him, What Scripture
Example he can show, that any man sold Land chargeable with Tithes under a
Gospel Dispensation? Again, seeing thou pleadest so much for Papists Laws,
whether? do thou own all to be Right that was brought up by the Papists, yea,
or nay? If nay, then how or by what must we distinguish betwixt Right and
Wrong, Good and Evil, seeing there is Danger of calling Good Evil, and Evil
Good; and of putting Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light? Answer this
Question, else stop thy Mouth forever.

There are some frivolous Demands in thy Book, but being sufficiently answered
by my Friend T. R. I shall pass them by, desiring thee to take notice of the
latter-end of thy last Letter; thou say, But if the Truth be not on my side
in what I have formerly offered, or may be offered by those of greater
Understanding, then none of those Conclusions are applicable against you; but
must confessedly be returned upon me, and those whose Cause I plead.

Answ. The Truth is not on thy side; for Christ is the Truth: and I do not know
that thou have named either Christ or Scriptures in all thy first Letter; only
at last thou say, Farewell in the Name of the Lord.

Answ. The name of the Lord is a Strong Tower, the Righteous flee unto it and
are safe; but thou have not fled unto it for Safety and Strength to manage thy
Design; but on the contrary, have fled to Popish Authors, and set up their Laws
above Christ and Scripture; and so have manifested thy self to be more of
Antichrist then of Christ: So let thee and those whose Cause thou pleadest take
thy Conclusions home unto your selves, and according to thy words, confess them
your Dues; for we are clear, as before is proved.

Addition.
THere is a Sense upon my Spirit concerning some who have their Understandings
so far opened, as to see that Ministers of the Gospel ought not to receive
Tithes, but they cannot tell what to say to the Impropriators, because they are
become as Free Estates or Iay Possessions to them.

Answ. Why truly Friends, if I were free to pay Tithes I could rather pay them
to the Priest or Poor, then to the Impropriators; my Reasons are, Because they
are wholely diverted from the use that ever they were given for; For Mark, When
they were given in the Time of the Law, they were given for the Poor,
Fatherlerless, Widow and Priest, that there might not be a Beggar in Israel;
but being Ended in Christ, there was Collection among the Saints for the Relief
of such as stood in need: And I believe they had never come up again, had not
that Midnight of Apostasy come up; yet when they did come up again, they were
given for the Poor and Priest, and for the Use of the Church, so called; so
that I believe, although the Gives of them were Blind and Dark in that Matter,
and their Example not to be followed, yet it never was their Intent, That they
should be Bought and Sold, or become as Lay Possessions. Hence I conclude, That
no man has Right to Receive TITHES from Another; but when they were Ended by
Christ, they became the Proper Right of the Donors, as was the Rest of their
Increase.

Postscript.
I Have a few words to say in Love to all those that send their Sons to those
places called Universities, with an Intent to make them Ministers; First,
Whether they think they buy the Gift of God or nay? If yea, then are not they
in the Gall of Bitterness, that think, that the Gift of God can be bought for
Money? Acts 8.

Secondly, If it be not the Gift of God, then what is it?

Thirdly, Whether they that Sell the Gift of God for Money, are not as bad as
Simon Magus the Sorcerer, who thought it might be bought for Money?

And further, Be it known unto you all, The Lord will not have Ministers of
your Choice; but he will have Ministers of his own choosing, and he will set up
his School on the Top of all your Schools and Colleges, namely, the Teachings
of his own Spirit in the Hearts of his People; for he is as Able as ever he was
to choose poor Tradesmen, and to fill them with his Spirit, Power and Wisdom,
and to send them forth to preach the Everlasting Gospel, as ever he was, though
some may say, Is it not the Carpentor's Son, whose Father and Mother we know? I
might produce many Scriptures to prove that God and Christ often times chose
such as were Unlearned, and little esteemed in the Eyes of the World (see the
first of the Corinthians, verse one, and Acts four, verse thirteen) that no
Flesh might glory in his Presence: And now is the Lord fulfilling his Promises
who said, In the last days I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, upon my
Handmaids I will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they shall
Prophecy: I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their
Hearts, Jeremiah 32. Joel 2. Act Therefore all ye that slight the Lord's Work
at this day, which he is doing in and among his People, betware, lest that come
upon you which is spoken in the Prophets, Behold ye Despisers, and wonder and
perish; I work a Work in your day, a Work which ye shall in no wise believe
though a Man declare it unto you.

A Copy of a Letter sent to CLEMENT NEDHAM: Whereunto is added a short
Postscript.
C. Nedham,
I Find Drawings in the Bowels of Love to write unto thee; and desire thee,
that thou would employ thy Wisdom, Strength ad Precious Time in and for the
Use and service of thy Creator, and against Oppression that the poor People
groan under, even as the Children of Israel did under Pharoah's Taskmasters;
and not to spend it in and for the Use and Service of the Proud Priests and
Impropriators, Beast, Whore and False Prophet, except thou are able to prove,
They are of God, and their Wages Right, according to his Law, lest thou provest
a Servant to the Devil; for he is the Root from whence all Evil springs, and
thou can not serve two Masters.

But if thou will persist in Opposing the Truth, and the Requirings of God's
Spirit in the Hearts of his People; be it known unto thee, That New Jerusalem,
which is coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for
her Husband which thou writest against, and spendest thy precious Time to
oppose, and call her Light a Pretended Light) will prove a Burdensome stone
too heavy for thee to Overturn.

And now it is in my Heart to put thee in mind of thy Unhansome and
Unchristian-like Dealings toward us. First, The Time thou did send thy
Letter to us, was when Friends of Clauson (where thou did direct thy Letter)
were under Sufferings and grievous Threatenings by John Reay Propriator of the
same Town, whose Envy was and is beyond the Bounds of Christianity: And here
thou seem to add Affliction to the Afflicted, and to strengthen the Hands of
Evildoers. Again, After thou had sent thy first Letter I sent one in Love to
thee, for that End that thy Understanding might be opened to see the Rice and
Ground of Tithes, and what Spirit brought them up; hoping a Word to the Wise
might have been sufficient: But instead of accepting my Love, thou vilifiedst
me with Reviling Words, as one that seemed to have neither common Sense nor
Reason, and said, Thou wast unwilling that the Nakedness of our Pretense to
Truth should be exposed to Censures through the Ignorance, Folly and Confidence
of soweak a Defendent: And here thou did manifest thy Pride, as if thou
thought scorn to meddle with me; much like Goliath the Philistine, who defied
Israel, and disdained David, and then brought forth another Monster more Odious
then the first; and we being silent a while thou did put them all in Print,
and for no other End, as I can see, but to render us Odious to the whole
Nation, and to open a Gap for further Persecution: For consider, After thy many
Arguments, and pleading Popish Laws, thou drawest thy Conclusions, That if
Ignorance will not, nothing else can excuse us before God or Man from being
more Criminal then Common Notorious Thieves: Further, Thou say, Malefactors
do or may suffer Death by Law for stealing things of small account; but your
Robbery (say thou) is of great Value; and consequently the Laws are very
favorable toward you. A sad Consequence! Were ever such Conclusions drawn
against an Innocent People? Truly when I read them I could not but say, There
was a Snare laid for our Lives; and it brought to my Remembrance the Cruelty of
New-England's Persecutors: But how Just thy Charge is, I hope is or will in due
time be made manifest.

From thy True Friend John Wilsford

Who could be glad to see a persecuting Saul become a Preaching Paul.

I have something further to say in answer to thy Book, which if I do hear thou
art not satisfied, in due time it may come forth, seeing thou have made my Name
public to the Nation.

Broughton, the 3d of the 8th Month, 1673. J. W.
These words above written were delivered into the hands of C. N. the 5th Day
of the 8th Month.



A Postscript.
READER,
FOr thy better Satisfaction, or lest thou should think I have not done
fairly in mentioning some things that are done and past; do but consider C. N's
Wicked Charge and Unhansome Dealings toward me and the rest of my Friends;
weight them in the Balance of Equity, and then see if I could do any less then
I have done; or whether I have done any more then to lay the Load on the Right
Horse. Further consider, That notwithstanding Christ Jesus so loved the World
as that he laid down his Life for it, yet when the Jews rose up in Envy against
him, he told them how they killed the Prophets, and stoned them that were sent
unto them, as may be seen at large Mat. 23. And likewise when the Jews rose up
in Envy against Peter, he told them how they crucified and slew the Lord of
Life, as thou may see at large in the Acts, Chap. 2, 3, 4. And John said,
Rev. 18.6, 7. Reward her, even as she rewarded you, double unto her double,
according to her Works. Some may say, Art thou pleading for a Carnal Weapon? I
answer, Nay; the Saints Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual; the Lamb's Sword
proceeds out of his Mouth; if any man have an Ear to hear, let him hear, here
is the Wisdom and Patience of Saints, He that kills with the Sword, must with
the Sword be killed. And so I leave, desiring every one to mind the Light of
Christ Jesus, which gives a true Understanding of the Mysteries of his Kingdom.

J. W.

THE END.

