O Inhabitants of the earth, hear the Word of the Lord, his powerful Word,
concerning his purpose and decree against the Rulers and Governors of this
Nation, and against the Inhabitants thereof, who has rejected the Counsel of
the Lord.


THus says the Lord, forasmuch as you the Rulers and Governors of this Nation,
who has rejected my counsel from time to time, and would none of my reproof,
my purpose and decree is sealed against you, and against the Inhabitants round
about, and you shall not escape my righteous Judgments, for evil is gone forth
and determined, and the word of the Lord shall stand fast for ever against the
wicked and ungodly, and they shall know of a truth that he is the rewarder of
all such as do wickedly before him, according to their evil deeds: and although
I have sent out my messengers from time to time, rising up early, and warning
them, yet they have despised my messengers, and would none of my reproof, and
some of them have they beat, and some have they stoned, and others cast into
prison, so that they have grieved my righteous Spirit in exercising cruelty
upon cruelty: And thus faith the Lord unto you again, I will stretch forth my
hand over the whole Nation, against the Rulers and Governors thereof, and
against the Inhabitants round about, and you shall feel my righteous judgments
from the one end of the land to the other, for I will strike them with a
terrible stroke, to the terror and amazement of the people round about, and my
hand shall be heavy upon all the workers of iniquity.

But unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise, with
healing under his wings, and you shall be a fruitful people in the Land, and
you shall be the rejoicing of many generations, that the ages to come shall say
of a truth, you are the blessed of the Lord; and you shall be girded about with
my strength against all your enemies, and I will give you rest and peace from
all your enemies round about, for I am now coming forth to make a true
separation between the precious and the vile, between him that serves me, and
him that serves me not; and I will make a difference between the sheep and the
goats, and my way shall be made plain and perfect before my sons and daughters;
and I will cause my glory and my renown to go forth before them, to the
confounding of the heathen round about; and all the idol gods of the heathen,
which they have worshipped, shall be broken down, and I will scatter their idol
shepherds, and all those that have worshipped in the high places with them; and
my wonderful work shall be accomplished in this day of my power, to the
confounding of the Inhabitants round about, for my work of righteousness shall
take place in the midst of the Nation, and shall spread it self to the
outermost parts thereof; and I will crown my people with strength in the midst
of the land, and they shall be the glory of the Nations round abont, for my
Standard of righteousness shall be set up; and I will beautify my people with
wisdom and strength, that all the Nations round about shall bow down before
them.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord in and thorough his Servant, who is called
by the name of Laurence Willyer.
A Letter to Oliver Cromwell, which was written to him about a month before his
death.
Oliver Cromwell,
THis is the word of the Lord to thee, because of unrighteousness, iniquity
and oppression, the Land mournes, for when the righteous bears rule in it the
land rejoices; but when the wicked bears rule, the land mournes; and this is
the word of the Lord to thee again, because thou have boasted thy self in
victories, and in thy strength; and because of this, thou have permitted and
suffered many in this Nation to worship a thing of naught, and have caused them
to bow down to idol gods, to worship the works of their own hands, and thereby
caused the people to err; thou have greived the soul of the righteous with
these abominations, therefore the hand of the Lord is turned against thee, and
thou shall not escape his righteous judgments, for the decree is sealed
against thee, because thou have refused my messengers from time to time, and
would none of my counsel; I will therefore stretch my hand over the whole
Nation, against thee, and against the Rulers, and all people that has rejected
my counsel; and I will execute my purpose speedily upon the Inhabitants round
about; and I will choose unto me a people, that shall fear my Name, who shall
govern the land in righteousness; as for your memory, it shall rot and perish
from off the face of the earth; in this day of my power will I do this, faith
the Lord of Hoasts.

L. W.

THE END.

