AN EPISTLE To the whole Flock of God, To be read in their ASSEMBLIES, or else
where.
Let this be dispersed only among Friends.
DEar Friends, and Lambs of my heavenly Father's fold of Rest and Peace,
my Heart is full of love toward you, desiring your preservation in the
heavenly blessed way of our God, which is very strait and narrow, so that too
few find it; for indeed none can rightly find it, but as they come to know a
Death to their own wisdom, willings and runinngs, which ever was an Enemy to
the precious Life and leadings of God's Spirit; therefore dear Friends take
heed of the Tree of knowledge, so as to feed upon it; for if there be a feeding
upon it; it will bring Death over the precious. Life, and so the understanding
will be darkened althou^^ (...) fession of Truth may be retained, yet the Life
which makes truly sensibly may be wanting: So dear Friends, take heed of that
wisdom which is below, and yet would be Judge over the Life and leadings of
Gods pure Spirit, which always leads in the Cross to our own wills; Oh the
harm that this earthly Wisdom and aspiring mind has done to many in all Ages!
Surely the People were in this Wisdom when they built the Tower of Babel,
thinking thereby to reach Heaven, and to get themselves a Name, but the Lord
confounded their Languages; and how are the Languages of the Babel-bulders
confounded in this day, so that they cannot agree together in their
Imaginations? But one says, this is the way, and another says, that is they
way; one says, my judgment is so, and another says, mine is thus, it may be,
quite contrary to the others; oh my Friends, is not this aspiring mind and
earthly Wisdom the ground of Strife and Contentions about the things of God, or
mind of his Spirit, which no man by this Wisdom can ever know; that is my
Testimony for God, which will stand over all that shall oppose it: Therefore
dear Friends wait to know the true Baptism, for many have believed, but too few
are Baptized into the Death of carnal reason, and that part which would save
self alive; oh Friends, the true Baptism is a weighty thing to witness; for
where this is truly known, self is made of no Reputation, man's wit and wisdom,
reason and consultation about the matters of God's Kingdom are laid aside, and
the Lord alone is waited for to guide, who by his blessed everlasting Life
leads in the narrow way to Life, where the blessed Worship, that is in the
pure Spirit, is known: Oh dear Friends and Sheep of my heavenly Father's fold,
feel me here; for it is a great weight upon my Spirit, that all those that
profess the Truth, may rightly know the Worship which is in the Spirit of
Truth, that so the answer of true Peace they may feel returned into their
Bosoms; not a selfconceited Peace, which men may create to themselves upon
their doing this or that, Pharisee-like; my Friends there is much difference
betwixt the Peace that God gives, and the Peace which some professing Truth may
make to themselves in their own earthly Wisdom, in paying of Tithes, and in
saying You to a single person, with several other things, which many of the
dear Children of God durst not, nor yet dare not do, although they should dye
for it; but this is my Testimony, with many of my ancient Brethren and Sisters,
who have kept their integrity, whom God in his everlasting love sent first
amongst us to publish his everlasting Truth, that, that Peace is not from God,
nor that liberty that which is in the right Spirit, in which the Saints were to
stand fast; but it is the liberty which is in the Flesh, which is to be judged
and stood over in the Power and Authority of God, both in the particular and in
the general; that liberty which is in the true Spirit, in which the Saints of
old were to stand fast, is to feel the Seed at Liberty, wherein the Heart is
enlarged to praise the Lord in the true Humility, brokeness, and contritedness
of Spirit, where Halelujahs are sung unto the Lord, to whom be Glory for
evermore, says my Soul. And Friends, what is the Worship which is in the
Spirit? Is it not to have all self-Will and self-Wisdom, and all that is
contrary to God inwardly brought into subjection unto it? every high thought,
and every vain Imagination laid low, all in subjection to the Seed, then there
is an inward bowing the Knee to the Name of Jesus, and the Seed comes to Reign
in every Heart thus subjected; and in this the heavenly holy Family-order comes
to be known, when the holy Child Jesus comes to Reign in every Heart, then the
traveling Babe will be nourished, and Iniquity, and oppression born Testimony
against in every place, then Judgment will not be altogether according to the
sight of the Eye, or outward appearance, but there will be righteous Judgment
from a sensible feeling of the ground of the matter, and there will be no
watching for Evil, but here all will be done in true love; here will be no
Herod watching for the Young Child's Life, but here we shall be Helpers and
Strengthners one of another in that which is good, and against every appearance
of Evil; which will make us a People to Gods praise, being fellow-feelers of
one another exercises, and Helpers to bear one another Burdens, then will
the work of the Lord go easily on, when every ones Neck is under the Yoke, but
when one draws one way, and another another way, then it goes heavily on: So
dear Friends, all take heed of a secret inclination to Self, and of letting
another do that for any of you, which you are ashamed to be seen to do your
selves, for that is Deceit and will darken the understanding and blind the Eye,
as Balaam's inclination after Balak's promotion did him; so that the dumb Ass
could see the Angel before he could.

So dear Friends, all search your Hearts to the bottom with the blessed Light,
which is given for that end, let none look overly over their own inward states
and conditions, for the Enemy is very busy to draw out the mind from that,
which gives a true discerning, into a self-conceitedness in a dry Profession;
and in this State the earthly sensual wisdom would Reign over the simplicity
and true Innocence and heavenly Seed, which should Reign over all in the Heart;
when the Righteous bear rule, there is true peace and felicity; but on the
contrary, the Seed is burdened, and the honest Heart is grieved, and yet those
that live in the airy Wisdom, above the witness may not be sensible of it, no
more then the Disciples (who were heavy and careless) had of Christ, when he
was in such an Agony, that he sweat as it were great drops of Blood, when he
said unto them, Can ye not watch with me one Hour; and at another time he said,
that he had many things to say unto them, but (said he) ye cannot bear them
now: And yet they had followed him long, and wrought Miracles in his Name; but
be said, he would send the Spirit of Truth, and it should lead them into all
Truth: (Mark) into all Truth; and he exhorted them to wait for it, which they
did; and when they had more fully received it, then they could discern that
which before they were strangers unto: So dear Friends, it is very safe for
every one to wait low in their minds, to feel that which gives a true
discerning of the thoughts and intents of the Heart, and also the things
concerning God's Kingdom, and of the well-being of our immortal Souls for
evermore, Amen.

And Friends, there is another thing opens in my Heart, that as the Jew outward
was to go to outward Jerusalem to worship, the then appointed Place; so the Jew
inward now is to know a gathering into the new and heavenly Jerusalem, which is
come and coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for
her Husband; all the true Worshipers must hither be gathered; let him that
reads understand, for it is a Mystery to all the Gazers abroad, who are
worshipping in their Imaginations, and know not the place of true Worship,
which is performed in the true Spirit, in the new and heavenly Jerusalem, which
the Lord God is the Light of, and the Gates are not at all shut by Day, and
there is no Night there, and yet the unclean cannot enter therein: But blessed
be the Lord God of my Life, he has made a little Remnant in their measures
Citizens in this heavenly Jerusalem, who drink at the pure River of clear
Water, which runs through the midst of this City, which has the Tree of Life
on each side of it, whose Leaves is for the healing of the Nations of their
sinful desires; and the true Church, the Church of the firstborn, is coming
out of the Wilderness again after the dark Night of Apostasy, wherein the
Whore, Beast and false Prophet has born Rule, which makes the Heathen rage,
and Priests angry, because their Dagon is falling, and their craft is going
down, by which they have got their Wealth, which makes them cast so many into
Prisons for their Bellies; but the Lord is risen and arising, more and more to
plead the cause of the Innocent People: Therefore dear Friends be valiant for
his Truth upon Earth, and let no man take your Crown from you by his subtilty;
but trust in the Lord, who is strength to the weak, and the binder up of the
brokenhearted, who is with his People in Prisons, neither bars nor bolts of
Iron, nor all the Cruelty of man can keep his presence from them; and therefore
every one wait to feel him in your own particulars, for our strength is to be
known within us; the World's strength is in the Arm of Flesh, but ours in the
name of the Lord, which is as a strong Tower, the Righteous flee unto it and
are safe; greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the world; and Christ
said unto his, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world; in the world ye
have trouble, but in me ye have Peace, such peace as the World cannot give nor
take away; in which peace my Soul at this time is well satisfied, Glory to the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth for evermore, who visits those that are in
Prison for his Namesake with everlasting love, in which love I rest.

Leicester County-Goal the 14th Day of the 10th Month, 1676 Your Friend and
Brother in Tribulation and satience. John Willsford.

THE END.

