A Tender Salutation TO THE Flock of God IN IRELAND.
DEarly tender and wel-beloved Friends, in the Covenant of Light and Life, you,
whom the Lord in the riches of his love and tender mercy, has visited, with a
day of Salvation, you do our Souls dearly salute, with bowels of unfeigned love
in Christ Jesus, desiring, that the visitation of the Lord might be effectual
unto you, for your everlasting Redemption, and Salvation; For the Lord has
visited you in the needful time, with a glorious visitation, and heard the cry
of the poor, who said in their hearts, Where is he now, that will show us any
good; or where is the Lord, that should have pity on me? Is his mercy clear
gone, or will his Salvation forever be hid from me? Oh thou tender birth, the
Lord has heard thy cries: Oh thou that have been like a Dove without a Mate,
and as a Pelican in the Wilderness! Oh the days of thy comforting are come and
coming: Wherefore keep thou in the tenderness before the Lord and he will have
mercy on thee, thou that did sit in Solitary Pl^ces, and mourned a part for
the Lord; he has heard thy sighings and thy groanings. O thou afflicted
Daughter of Sion, the Lord will comfort thee, and lay thy Foundation with
Stones of fair colors; (yea he has laid thy Foundation) which is the Rock of
Ages, the Foundation of all the righteous Generations, the Lord, Jesus Christ,
the elect and precious; yea the chiefest of ten thousand; Oh this is he whom we
waited for: Friends keep to him, and let him not go, part not with him for any
thing of this World; and though sometimes you go through Tribulations and great
Exercises, yet the Lord will comfort you, as you keep to him, and wait upon him
in lowliness before him; for he will be the Comforter of his people.

So, dear Friends, faint not in your Journey, nor do not grow weary in your
Trials of what sort soever, but keep in the tenderness, and cry to the Lord,
for he will hear you; for the full time is come: He has heard Jacobs cries, and
seen Joseph's afflictions, and he will arise and plead with the Nations for his
Seeds sake, that have been grieved and oppressed; for the cry of his tender
people have entered his ears who is the Lord of Sabbath; And therefore, dear
Friends, wait in your Tents before him, and keep to your strong Tower, the name
of the Lord, which the righteous fled unto in all ages, and were preserved; and
as you keep here, the Lord will preserve you when he shall try the Children of
men, and visit many with a day of Judgment in his sore displeasure, because
they have rebelled against him, and his powerful Appearance by his Light and
Spirit in their innermost parts.

Therefore we exhort you, dear and tender Friends, to bow before him who is the
Light of the World and Salvation of mankind, the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
every knee must bow in mercy or in Judgment, for the Lord will bow all before
him, the tall Cedars and sturdy Oaks, and all them that are like the Bulls of
Bashon. Therefore keep you in the tenderness and self-denying life of Jesus,
that so he may crown you with Immortallity, and eternal Life.

And dear Friends, meet often together to wait upon the Lord, in the true
sincerity of your Hearts, that so you may feel the Springs of Life to run
through your Assemblies to comfort every soul; then will you be fruitful unto
the Lord, and God will delight to bless you; and you will be like a well
watered Garden, and the Lord will smell a sweet Savor in and amongst you, and
when he shall pass through the Land with his Judgments upon the wicked, then he
will spare you, as a man spares his only Son that serves him.

And so thus, dear Friends, take your possession in the Munition of Rocks where
your bread will be sure, and the waters of Life will never fail you, in the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Rock of his People, and the strong Tower of the
Faithful; and so you being in him, fear not Trials nor Tribulations, and though
Distresses may come upon Nations; and great Judgments upon People who have been
rebellious; yet in all this know, that the Lord is at work to get himself a
glorious Name, amongst the Gentiles, in these Northern Islands, and in the
Countries round about. Oh! the day of the Lord's visitation and breaking up of
the Nations is now come, and a glorious Dispensation we are made partakers of,
whom the Lord has counted worthy to be a kind of first fruits unto him, and as
Sons of the Morning, therefore now shine forth as Stars in the Firmament of
Gods eternal Power, that so the Nations may see and hear of the Lords mighty
workings in and amongst us, that Nations may flow unto the goodness of our God,
who is risen and arising, and going over many Nations to prepare a People for
himself through his Judgments.

And much of this we have seen, and more yet may come to pass; for the great
harvest of the Lord Almighty is come, and he is gathering, and will gather from
the four Winds under Heaven a royal people, and a chosen Generation to renown
his great and glorious Name, and to spread his fame from one end of the Earth
to the other. Therefore ye that have been gathered by a mighty Arm of Power,
shine forth in the Light of the Lord, which now is risen, for what may we say?
Our Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen over the Nations; and
Kings shall come to our Light, and Gentiles to the brightness of the Lords
arising.

Therefore come away all you that waited for the Salvation of God unto your
Souls, for its now revealed and again made known in this latter Age and
Generation of the World, and many the Lord has raised up, and sent forth to
Proclaim it to the Nations, for the gathering of the People unto Jesus, who is
the great Savior of mankind, and Light of the World; for I have given him
(says the Lord) for a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and for to be my
Salvation unto the ends of the Earth.

Whe^efore, O all ye ends of the Earth, look unto him and be ye saved; for the
Lord is a God that changes not, therefore Jacob is not consumed, nor Israel
quite forsaken; for the Lord is a raising up of his spiritual Israel, which
shall obtain the blessing; and happy will they all be who shall have a part
with Gods Israel this day, though they may come through great Tribulation, and
sore Exercises, yet the Lord will reward them, as he said to Abraham, Fear not
Abraham, for I will be thy Buckler and thy Shield, and thy exceeding great
Reward.

And so, dear and tender Friends, faint not in your Journey, nor sit down by
the way, but go on in the Name of the Lord, and take your Possession, in the
everlasting Light of Jesus, and in the Kingdom of God forever, to reign with
him under his Dominion, who is worthy, and over all God blessed forever; in
whose Power and Life we salute you with a tender Salutation and a heavenly
Greeting.

O all ye that are amongst the Nations, and the gathered of the Lord, Peace be
with you, and Mercy from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, in
whose Name and Power go on and prosper, and the increase of God be with you,
and amongst you, that so the Lords Thousands may be gathered and redeemed; from
whom may go forth living Praises and heavenly Thanks giving, with Dominion, and
Glory and Hallelujahs to God, who is worthy over all forever and forevermore,
Amen, Amen.

From your Indeared Brethren, and Companions in the Lord Jesus Christ, whose
Souls desire the prosperity of Sion, and the increasing of the People and flock
of God every where; whose names are, Samuel Waldingfield and John Rallett.
Let this be read in the fear of the Lord in the Assemblies of his People.




