A DECLARATION FROM THE Lord of Hosts, Against the Idol SHEPHERDS: AND THE
Testimony of his Spirit of their Destruction being near at hand.

And also, the Glory of the Lord that shall appear to his PEOPLE.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

A DECLARATION FROM THE LORD of HOSTS, etc.
THus says the Lord of Hosts, who is strong and powerful: I will exalt my Name
over the Heathen round about, for my Purpose and Decree is gone forth against
the Idol shepherds; and I will break down their Idol gods, and their images
which they have made, from the one end of the land to the other; and I will
visit them with a rod for all their transgressions, wherewith they have been
multiplied against me, for I have called to mind the heavy yoke (and
sufferings of my people, wherewith they have caused them to suffer very
grievous afflictions) to have been born.

I have therefore heard the cry of my people, and am come down to deliver them
from the hands of their cruelty, which they have exercised from time to time
against my people, my soul has been grieved with their abominations, they have
been too heavy a burden for me to bear: they have exercised cruelty upon
cruelty, upon my children, upon my servants, and upon my handmaids, and upon my
innocent lambs, which are dear unto me as the apple of mine eye, yet I will now
be the help and strength of my people; against all their adversaries, I will
come forth in my might and power, like a man of war, against them, and will
incompasse them on every side, they shall not be able to escape my fury: for I
am very jealous for my people, and my fury does burn like an over against all
their adversaries; and I will recompense them double for all their cruelties,
and for all their oppressions, and for all their afflictions wherewith they
have afflicted my people; thus says the Lord of Hosts, who is strong and
powerful, My hand shall be dreadful against you, who have bin the
Idol-shepherds of the land, who have caused the people to bow down to Idol
Gods, even the works of your own hands, and have caused the people to err
through your lying vanities; all your deceitful merchandise will I will bring
to light, and no man shall by your ware any more; and the abomination of your
fornication I will discover wherewith you have deceived the Nations, for I will
thoroughly search and cry you, and your fruits shall be made manifest to all
people insomuch you shall become a hissing to all people round about, and a
dread and terror shall proceed from the Lord in all your inhabitations, and
shall take hold of you, and you shall not be able to escape his fury: for out
of his mouth shall proceed a sharp sword, which shall cut down the groves, and
all the high places of Baal shall be trodden under foot, and I will seatter all
the worshippers of their Images from place to place, and I will thoroughly purge
this Nation from all its dross and defilements, and all Images and likenesses
will I utterly destroy out of this land, and all the high places shall become
desolate and barren, even as a wilderness, and they shall become a Proverb and
a reproach unto all people, and they shall be even as a heap of confusion for
ever, before the face of all people; and I will cause a stinck to go upon them,
and shall come up into the nostrils of the people, and they shall abhor them,
and the beasts of the field shall come up and defile them, and they shall
become a desolate habitation to all people.

And I will repair the ruins of my own city, and my own temple to place my
name there, and I will lay in my temple, and in my city, a sure foundation
which shall not be moved; and I will kindle a fire amongst my people, and they
shall utterly consume all the Idoll-gods of the land, and the remnant of my
people shall possess the Nation, and I will incompasse them with strength on
every side against all their enemies; I will be as a wall of fire, and as a
wall of brass about them, and they shall dwell quietly in the midst of the
nation, and I will greatly multiply them with riches and strength, that all
Nations shall bow down before them; and I will be their leader, and my presence
shall go before them, and my Glory shall shine forth amongst them, to the
confounding of all their enemies: And I will greatly multiply their Seed, and
it shall be the glory of all the Nations, and my strength shall be increased
therein for their defense, for my everlasting arm shall uphold them; for with
perpetual blessings have I blessed them, for they are my offspring whom I have
chosen to place my Name in, and of their dominion there shall be no end. I will
stretch my hands over them in all places for good, and I will place my delight
amongst them, and they shall grow up to be a fruitful people in the land, and
my sanctuary will I enlarge amongst them, and will cause them to sit down in
peace; and every one shall sit down under his own vine, and under his own
fig tree, and none shall make them afraid, and great shall be the peace of my
people: And I will cause my sun to shine upon them with his everlasting
strength to beautify them. And for the increase of their government there
shall be no end; and I will establish them upon Mount Sion, the Hill of my own
planting; and they shall be called the blessed of the Lord: My garment of
Righteousness shall be put upon them, and I will cloth them with my majesty
before the face of all people, and their Renown shall shine forth to the
Nations round about, and great shall be the felicity of my people: And I will
adorn them with rich array, and plentiousnesse shall be in their habitations:
and I will put my wisdom into their mouth, and they shall judge my cause
righteously: And my dread and terror shall go forth before them, to the
confounding of all their Adversaries; and I will place true and sound judgment
amongst them, that the hearts of the people may take delight therein; and the
whole land shall be governed in peace and righteousness, and I will feed them
with the dew of Heaven, and they shall wax fat and strong: And their strength
shall be even as the strength of an Unicorn: And I will bring forth my
everlasting Covenant, and will establish it unto them, and to their posterity
from age to age through all Generations, and of their kingdom and dominion
there shall be no end; for I have sealed a perpetual decree of Mercy, and
Loving kindness unto them, and to their Generations for ever; and my
everlasting truth and righteousness shall abide with them, which shall
replenish the earth, and bring forth fruit abundantly, so that the hearts of
the people shall be knit unto them. And great shall be the prosperity of the
Nation, and I will abundantly satisfy the hearts of my people with good
things, that my delight in all things may take place; and I will fortify them
in the midst of the Nation as a strong tower, that no enemy shall come nigh
unto their dwelling place, for I will be a defense unto them on every side, and
I will make the hearts of my people glad with the joy of my countinance, and
their memorial shall continue from age to age, and from generation to
generation, and the Souls of my people shall be knit together in one union and
harmony, that nothing may sepaerate them from my love, so that peace and love
shall fructify amongst them, and great shall be the increase of my people; I
will increase their table with all manner of good things, and no good thing
will I withhold from my chosen ones, for my Decrees and Statutes shall abide
with them continually: And I will come and dwell in the midst of them, and will
lead them the way wherein they should walk, and my Statutes and Judgments
shall not depart out of their Coasts; and I will choose unto them Judges as at
first, and Counselors as at the beginning, who shall deal uprightly between
me, and my people, who shall judge in truth and righteousness, and shall plead
the cause of the Innocent, that nothing that is contrary to truth and enquity
shall take place among them: Then shall the delight of the Lord be amongst his
people, and he shall rejoice over them for good in all the works of their
hands; then shall the Tabernacle of the Lord shine forth with resplendant
beauty in the eyes of the Nations, and the glory thereof shall appear to the
uttermost parts of the earth; and all Nations shall bow down before it, and
shall become subject to his power and dominion; and there shall stream forth a
pure law of Righteousness through the whole earth, and shall branch it self
forth into the midst of the Assemblies of my People, even amongst all the
Nations found about.

Written by the Movings of the Spirit of the Lord, by one who is called by the
name of LAURENCE WILLYER.
THE END.

