AN ACCOUNT OF THE Province OF CAROLINA IN AMERICA. TOGETHER WITH An Abstract
of the PATENT, and several other Necessary and Useful Particulars, to such as
have thoughts of Transporting themselves thither. Published for their
Information.

LONDON: Printed by G. Larkin for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in
Cornhil. 1682.

To the Right Honorable William Earl of Craven Pallatine, and the rest of the
true and absolute Lords and Proprieters of the Province of CAROLINA.
May it please your Lordships,
FInding by my Conversation with People who have an Inclination to try their
Fortunes in America, that your Province of Carolina had not its due valuation
for want of being made known to the World, and not hearing of any that had
undertaken it, I looked upon it as a Duty incumbent upon me, who have had the
Honor to be your Secretary in your Carolina-Affairs now four years, to Publish
the ensuing Treatise; whereby is made known the Greatness of your Sovereigns
Gift to your Selves, and to the World the Greatness of your Trust and Favor
with Him; and to those that have a desire of settling there, to what kind of
Country and Climate they Transport Themselves: Wherein I have most strictly
kept to the Rules of Truth, there not being any thing that I have written in
Commendation of your Province, which I cannot prove by Letters from thence now
in my possession, and by Living Witnesses now in England.

I should not have been thus presumptuous to adventure upon this Work, and to
have craved for it your Lordships Patronage, had not the Employment I have
under you (which has given me frequent Opportunities of discovering the
Humanity and Softness with which you Treat all Those who apply to you, your
constant Endeavors for the Good of all those who come under your Government in
Carolina, and the great care you have taken by your admirable Constitution of
Government. which you have there settled, for the lasting security, peace and
well being of all the Inhabitants of your Province) induced me to believe that
the same goodness with which you treat others, will be extended to me, and that
you will pardon my present presumption, and all the other Imperfections of,

May it please your Lordships, Your Lordships most Faithful and Obliged, Humble
Servant. SAMUEL WILSON.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Province OF CAROLINA IN AMERICA.
CAROLINA, is that part of Florida, which lies between twenty nine and thirty
six Degrees, and thirty Minutes of Northern Latitude: On the East it is washed
with the Atlantic Ocean, and is bounded on the West by Mare Pacificum (or the
South Sea) and within these bounds is contained the most healthy Fertile and
pleasant part of Florida, which is so much commended by the Spanish Authors.

This Province of Carolina, was in the Year 1663. Granted by Letters Pattents
in Propriety of his most Gracious Majesty, unto the Right Honorable Edward
Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord
Berkely, Anthony Lord Ashly, now Earl of Shaftsbury, Sir George Carteret, and
Sir John Colleton, Knights and Barronets, Sir William Berkeley Knight, by which
Letters Pattents the Laws of England are to be of force in Carolina: but the
Lords Proprietors have power with the consent of the Inhabitants to make
Bylaws for the better Government of the said Province: So that no Money can be
raised or Law made, without the consent of the Inhabitants or their
Representatives. They have also power to appoint and empower Governors, and
other Magistrates to Grant Liberty of Conscience, make Constitutions, etc. With
many other great Privileges, as by the said Letters Pattents will more largely
appear. And the said Lords Proprietors have there settled a Constitution of
Government, whereby is granted Liberty of Conscience, and wherein all possible
care is taken for the equal Administration of Justice, and for the lasting
Security of the Inhabitants both in their Persons and Estates.

By the care and endeavors of the said Lords Proprietors, and at their very
great charge, two Colonys have been settled in this Province, the one at
Albemarle in the most Northerly part, the other at Ashly River, which is in the
Latitude of thirty two Degrees odd Minutes.

Albemarle bordering upon Virginia, and only exceeding it in Health, Fertility,
and Mildness of the Winter, is in the Growths, Productions, and other things
much of the same nature with it: Wherefore I shall not trouble the Reader with
a particular Description of that part; but apply my self principally to
discourse of the Collony at Ashly-River, which being many Degrees more
Southward than Virginia, differs much from it in the Nature of its Clymate and
Productions.

Ashly-River was first settled in April 1670, the Lords Proprietors having at
their sole charge, set out three Vessels, with a considerable number of able
Men; eighteen Months Victuals, with Cloths, Tools, Ammunition, and what else
was thought necessary for a new Settlement, and continued at this charge to
supply the Collony for diverse years after, until the Inhabitants were able by
their own Industry to live of themselves; in which condition they have been for
diverse years past, and are arrived to a very great Degree of Plenty of all
sorts of Provisions. Insomuch, that most sorts are already cheaper there, than
in any other of the English Collonys, and they are plentifully enough supplied
with all things from England or other Parts.

Ashly-River, about seven Miles in from the Sea, divides it self into two
Branches; the Southermost retaining the name of Ashly-River, the North Branch
is called Cooper-River. In May, 1680. the Lords Proprietors sent their Orders
to the Government there, appointing the Port-Town for these two Rivers to be
Built on the Point of Land that divides them, and to be called Charles Town,
since which time about an hundred Houses are there Built, and more are Building
daily by the Persons of all sorts that come there to Inhabit, from the more
Northern English Collonys, and the Sugar Islands, England and Ireland; and many
Persons who went to Carolina Servants, being Industrious since they came out of
their times with their Masters, at whose charge they were Transported, have
gotten good Stocks of Cattle, and Servants of their own; have here also Built
Houses, and exercise their Trades: And many that went thither in that
condition, are now worth several Hundreds of Pounds, and live in a very
plentiful condition, and their Estates still increasing. And Land is become of
that value near the Town, that it is sold for twenty Shillings per Acre, though
pillaged of all its valuable Timber, and not cleared of the rest, and Land that
is cleared and fitted for Planting, and Fenced, is let for ten Shillings per
annum the Acre, though twenty miles distant from the Town, and six men will in
six weeks time, Fall, Clear, Fence in, and fit for Planting, six Acres of Land.

At this Town, in November, 1680. There Rode at one time sixteen Sail of
Vessels (some of which were upwards of 200 Tuns) that came from diverse parts of
the Kings Dominions to trade there, which great concourse of shipping, will
undoubtebly in a short time make it a considerable Town.

The Eastern Shore of America, whether it be by reason of its having the great
Body of the Continent to the Westward of it, and by consequence the
Northwest-Wind (which Flows contrary to the Sun) the Freezing-Wind, as the
North-East is in Europe, or that the Frozen Lakes which Lye-in, beyond Canada,
and lie North and West from the Shore, Impregnate the Freezing Wind with more
chill and congealing qnalities, or that the uncultivated Earth, covered for the
most part with large shading Trees, breathes forth more nitrous Vapors, than
that which is cultivated; or all these Reasons together, it is certainly much
more cold than any part of Europe, in the same Degree of Latitude of thirty
nine and forty, and more North, though above six hundred Miles nearer the Sun
than England; is notwithstanding, many Degrees colder in the Winter.

The Author having been informed by those that say they have seen it, that in
those Parts it Freezeth above six Inches thick in a Night, and great Navigable
Rivers are Frozen over in the same space of time; and the Country about
Ashly-River, though within nine Degrees of the Tropic, has seldom any Winter
that does not produce some Ice, though I cannot yet learn that any has been
seen on Rivers or Ponds, above a quarter of an Inch thick, which vanishes as
soon as the Sun is an hour or two high, and when the Wind is not at North-west,
the weather is very mild. So that the December and January of Ashly-River, I
suppose to be of the same Temperature with the latter end of March, and
beginning of April in England, this small Winter causes a fall of the Leaf,
and adapts the Country to the production of all the Grains and Fruits of
England, as well as those that require more Sun; insomuch, that at Ashly-River,
the Apple, the Pear, the Plum, the Quince, Apricock, Peach, Medlar, Walnut,
Mulberry, and Chestnut, thrive very well in the same Garden, together with the
Orange, the Lemon, the Olive, the Pomgranate, the Fig and Almond; nor is the
Winter here Cloudy, Overcast, or Foggy, but it has been observed that from the
twentieth of August to the tenth of March, including all the Winter Months,
there have been but eight overcast days, and though Rains fall pretty often in
the Winter, it is most commonly in quick Showers, which when past, the Sun
shines out clear again.

The Summer is not near so hot as in Virginia, or the other Northern American
English Collonys, which may hardly gain belief with those that have not
considered the reason; which is its neerness to the Tropicks, which makes it in
a greater measure than those parts more Northward partake of those Breezes,
which almost constantly rise about eight or nine of the Clock, within the
Tropicks, and blow fresh from the East till about four in the Afternoon; and a
little after the Sea-breeze dys away, there rifes a North Wind, which blowing
all night, keeps it fresh and cool. In short, I take Carolina to be much of the
same nature with those delicious Countries about Aleppo, Antioch, and Smyrna:
but has the advantage of being under an equal English Government.

Such, who in this Country have seated themselves near great Marshes, are
subject to Agues, as those are who are so seated in England: but such who are
planted more remote from Marshes or standing Waters, are exceeding healthy;
insomuch, that out of a Family consisting of never less than twelve Perons, not
one has died since their first Arrival there, which is nine years: but what is
more, not one has been sick in all that time; nor is there one of the Masters
of Families that went over in the first Vessels, dead of sickness in Carolina,
except one, who was seventy and five years of Age before he came there; though
the number of those Masters of Families be pretty considerable: diverse persons
that went out of England Ptisical, and Consumptive, have recovered, and others
subject in England to frequent fits of the Stone, have been absolutely freed
from them after they have been there a short time; nor is the Gout there yet
known. The Air gives a strony Appetite and quick Digestion, nor is it witetlh
suitable effects, men finding themselves apparntly more lightsome, more prone,
and more able to al Youthful Exercises, than in England, the Women are very
Fruitful, and the Children have fresh Sanguine Complexions.

The Soil is generally very fertile, but has some sandy tracts so as to make
an agreeable variety, but even this Land produces good Corn and is excellent
pasture; Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, and Peace, thrive exceedingly, and the ground
yields in greater abundance than in England, Turnips, Parsnips, Carrots,
Potatoes, and Edoes, a substantial wholesome nourishing Root grows well, and
all excellent in their kinds they have near twenty sorts of Pulse that we have
not in England, all of them very good food, insomuch that the English Garden
Bean is not regarded.

Near the Sea the Trees are not very large, they grow pretty near together;
farther up they are larger, and grow farther asunder, and are in most parts
free from Underwood, so that you may see near half a mile amongst the bodies of
large tall timber trees, whose tops meeting make a very pleasing shade, yet
hinders not grass, myrtle and other sweet scenting shrubs here and there from
growing under them: Amongst these Groves of Timber Trees are here and there
Savana's, (or grassy plains) of several magnitudes clear of Trees, which has
occasioned some that have seen them to compare Carolina to those pleasant
Parks in England, that have abundance of tall Timber Trees unlop'd, here you
may hunt the Hare, Fox, and Dear all day long in the shade, and freely spur
your horse through the Woods to follow the chase.

This Country has the Oak, Ash, Elm, Poplar, Beech, and all the other sorts of
useful Timber that England has, and diverse sorts of lasting Timber that
England has not, as Cedar white and red, Cypress, Locust, Bay and Laurel
Trees, equal to the biggest Oaks, large Mirtles, Hickery, black Wallnut, and
Pynes big enough to Mast the greatest Ships, and diverse other sorts, which I
cannot enumerate.

The woods abound with Hares, Squirrels, Ratoons Possums, Conyes and Dear,
which last are so plenty that an Indian hunter has killed nine fatt Dear in a
day all shot by himself, and all the considerable Planters have an Indian
hunter which they hire for jess than twenty shillings a year, and one hunter
will very well find a Family of thirty people with as much Venison and Foul, as
they can well eat. Here are also in the woods great plenty of wild Turkeys,
Partridges, something smaller than those of England, but more deicate, Turtle
Doves, Paraquetos, and Pigeons: On the grassy plains the whistling Plover and
Cranes and diverse sorts of Birds unknown in England.

Carolina does so abound in Rivers, that within fifty miles of the Sea you can
hardly place your self seven miles from a Navigable River, and diverse are
navigable for good big Vessels above three hundred miles: The Rivers abound
with variety of excellent Fish, and near the Sea with very good Oysters, in
many of which are Pearl: the Author having seen Pearl that have been taken out
of some of them bigger than Rouncival Pease, and perfectly round. On the Rivers
and brooks are all the winter months vast quantitys of Swan, wild Geese, Duck,
Widgeon, Teale, Curlew, Snype, Shell Drake, and a certain sort of black Duck
that is excellent meat, and stays there all the year.

Neat Cattle thrive and increase here exceedingly, there being particular
Planters that have already seven or eight hundred head, and will in a few years
in all probability, have as many thousands, unless they sell some part; the
Cattle are not subject to any Disease as yet perceived, and are fat all the
Year long without any Fother, the little Winter they have, not pinching them so
as to be perceived, which is a great advantage the Planters here have of the
more Northern Plantations who are all forced to give their Cattle Fother, and
must spend a great part of their Summers Labor in providing three or four
Months Fother for their Cattle in the Winter, or else would have few of them
alive in the Spring, which will keep them from ever having very great Herds,
or be able to do much in Planting any Comodity for Foreign Markets; the
providing Winter Food for their Cattle, taking up so much of their Summers
Labor; So that many Judicious Persons think that Carolina will be able by Sea,
to supply those Northern Collonys, with salted Beef for their Shipping, cheaper
than they themselves with what is bred amongst them; for, considering that all
the Woods in Carolina afford good Pasturage, and the small Rent that is paid to
the Lords Proprietors for Land, an Ox is raised at almost as little expense in
Carolina, as a Hen is in England. And it has by experience been found that
Beef will take salt at Ashly-River any Month in the Year, and save very well.

Ewes have most commonly two or three Lambs at a time; their Wool is a good
Staple, and they thrive very well, but require a Shepherd to drive them to
Feed, and to bring them home at night to preserve them from the Wolves.

Hogs increase in Carolina abundantly, and in a manner without any charge or
trouble to the Planter, only to make them Sheds, wherein they may be protected
from the Sun and Rain, and Morning and Evening to give them a little Indian
Corn, or the pickings and parings of Potatoes, Turnips, or other Roots, and at
the same time blowing a Horn, or making any other constant noise, to which
being used, they will afterward upon hearing it, repair home, the rest of
their Food they get in the Woods, of Masts, and Nuts of several sorts; and when
those fail, they have Grass and Roots enough, the ground being never frozen so
hard as to keep them from Rooting, these conveniences breeds them large, and
in the Mast time they are very fat, all which makes the rearing them so easy,
that there are many Planters that are single and have never a Servant, that
have two or three hundred Hogs, of which they make great profit; Barbados,
Jamaica, and New England, affording a constant good price for their Pork; by
which means they get wherewithal to build them more convenient Houses, and to
purchase Servants, and Negro-slaves.

There have been imported into Carolina, about an hundred and fifty Mares, and
some Horses from New York, and Road-Island, which breeds well, and the Coalts
they have are finer Lim'd and Headed than their Dams or Sires, which gives
great hopes of an excellent breed of Horses, as soon as they have gotten good
Stalions amongst them.

Negros, By reason of the mildness of the Winter thrive and stand much better,
than in any of the more Northern Collonys, and require less clothes, which is a
great charge saved.

With the Indians the English have a perfect freindship, they being both
useful to one another. And care is taken by the Lords Proprietors, that no
Injustice shall be done them; In order to which they have established a
particular Court of Judicature, (composed of the soberest and most
disinteressed Inhabitants) to determine all differnces that shall happen
between the English and any of the Indians, this they do upon a Christian and
Moral Consideration, and not out of any apprehension of danger from them, for
the Indians have been always so engaged in Wars one Town or Village against
another (their Government being usually of no greater extent) that they have
not suffered any increase of People, there having been several Nations in a
manner quite extirpated by Wars amongst themselves since the English settled at
Ashly River: This keeps them so thin of people, and so divided, that the
English have not the least apprehensions of danger from them; the English being
already too strong for all the Indians within five hundred Miles of them, if
they were united, and this the Indians as well know, that they will never dare
to break with the English, or do an Injury to any particular person, for fear
of having it revenged upon their whole Nation.

The Lords Proprietors do at present grant to all persons that come there to
Inhabit as follows, viz. To each Master or Mistress of a Family fifty acres,
and for every able son or man servant they shall carry or cause to be
transported into Carolina fifty acres more, and the like for each Daughter or
woman servant that is marrigeable, and for each child, man or woman servant
under sixteen years of age, forty acres, and fifty acres of Land to each
servant when out of their time, this Land to be enjoyed by them and their Heirs
for ever, they paying a Penny an Acre Quit-rent to the Lords Proprietors, the
Rent to commence in two years after their taking up their Land. But forasmuch
as diverse persons who are already Inhabitants of Carolina, and others that have
Intentions to transport themselves into that Province, desire not to be
cumber'd with paying of a Rent, and also to secure to themselves good large
convenient tracts of Land, without being forced to bring thither a great number
of servants at one time; The Lords Proprietors have been Prevailed upon, and
have agreed to sell to those who have a mind to buy Land, after the rate of
fifty pound for a Thousand Acres, reserving a Pepper-Corn per annum Rent when
demanded.

The way of any ones taking up his Land, due to him either by carrying himself
or servants into the Country, or by purchasing it of the Lords Proprietors, is
after this manner: He first seeks out a place to his mind that is not already
possessed by any other, then applies himself to the Governor and Proprietors
Deputys, and show what rights he has to Land, either by Purchase or otherwise;
who thereupon issue out their Warrant to the Surveyor-General to measure him
out a Plantation containing the number of acres due to him; who making
Certificate that he has measured out so much Land and the Bounds, a Deed is
prepared of course, which is signed by the Governor and the Lords Proprietors
Deputys, and the Proprietors Seal affixed to it and Registered, which is is a
good Conveyance in Law of the Land therein mentioned to the party and his Heirs
for ever.

I have here, as I take it, described a pleasant and fertile Country, abounding
in health and pleasure, and with all things necessary for the sustenance of
mankind, and wherein I think I have written nothing but truth, sure I am I have
inserted no wilful falsehood: I have also told you how men are to have Land that
go there to Inhabit. But a rational man will certainly inquire, When I have
Land, what shall I do with it? what Comoditys shall I be able to produce that
will yield me money in other Countries, that I may be enabled to buy Negro slaves
(without which a Planter can never do any great matter) and purchase other
things for my pleasure and convenience, that Carolina does not produce? To this
I answer, That besides the great profit that will be made by the vast herds of
Cattle and Swine, the Country appears to be proper for the Commoditys
following. viz.

Wine. There are growing naturally in the Country five sorts of Grapes, three
of which the French Vignaroons who are there, judge will make very good Wine,
and some of the Lords Proprietors have taken care to send plants of the
Rhenish, Canary, Clarret, Muscatt, Madera, and Spanish Grapes, of all which
diverse Vinyards are planted; some wine was made this year that proved very good
both in color and taste, and an indifferent good quantity may be expected the
next year: The Country has gentle rising hills of fertile sand proper for
Vines, and farther from the Sea, rock and gravel, on which very good grapes
grow naturally, ripen well, and together, and very lushious in taste, insomuch
as the French Protestants who are there, and skilled in wine, do no way doubt
of producing great quantitys and very good.

Oil. There are several Olive trees growing, which were carried thither, some
from Portugal, and some from Bermeudas and flourish excedingly, and the
Inhabitants take great care to propagate more, so that in all probability it
will be an excellent Oyl-Country.

Silk. There is in Carolina great plenty of Mulberry Trees, such as are by
experience found to feed the Silkworm very well, yea as well as the white
Mulberry, but there is of that sort also, which are propagated with a great
deal of ease, a stick new cut and thrust into the ground, seldom failing to
grow, and so likewise if the Seed if them be sown.

Tobacco. Tobacco does here grow very well, and is nearer to the nature of the
Spanish Tobacco than that of Virginia.

Indigo. Indigo thrives well here, and very good has been made.

Cotton. Cotton of the Cyprus and Smyrna sort will grow well, and good plenty
of the Seed is sent thither.

Flax and Hemp Thrives exceedingly.

Good plenty of Pitch and Tar is there made, there being particular persons
that have made above a thousand barrels.

Here is great plenty of Oak for Pipe staves, which are a good Commodity in
the Maderas, Canaryes, Barbados, and the Leeward Islands.

Sumack. Sumack grows in great abundance naturally, so undoubtedly would Woad,
Madder and Sa-Flower, if planted.

Drugs. Jallop, Sassaparilla, Turmerick, Sassafras, Snake-root, and diverse
others.

In short. This Country being of the same Clymate and Temperature of Aleppo,
Smyrna, Antioch, Judea, and the Province of Nanking, the richest in China, will
(I conceive) produce any thing which those Countries do, were the Seeds brought
into it.

The Tools that men who go thither ought to take with them are these, viz. An
Ax, a Bill, and a broad Hoe, and grabbing Hoe, for every man, and a cross cut
Saw to every four men, a Whip-saw, a set of Wedges and Fraus and Betle-Rings to
every family, and some Reaping Hooks and Sythes, as likewise Nails of all
sorts, Hooks, Hinges, Bolts and Locks for their Houses.

The Merchandises which sell best in Carolina, are Linen and Woollen, and all
other Stufs to make clothes of, with Thread Sowing Silk, Buttons, Ribbons,
Hats, Stockings, Shoes, etc. which they sell at very good rates, and for these
goods any man may purchase the Provision he has need of.

The Passage of a man or woman to Carolina is five Pound, Ships are going
thither all times of the year. Some of the Lords Proprietors, or my self, will
be every Tuesday at 11 of the clock at the Carolina-Coffee-house in
Burching-Lane near the Royal Exchange, to inform all people what Ships are
going, or any other thing whatsoever.

An Abstract of the Pattent granted by the King, the 30th of June, in the 17th
Year of his Reign, under the Broad Seal of England, unto Edward Earl of
Clarendon, George Duke of Albermarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord
Berkley, Anthony Lord Ashly, Sir George Carteret, and Sir John Colleton,
Knights and Barronets, and Sir William Berkeley Knight, their Heirs and Assigns.
Impri. AS a mark of our particular Favor, we do give and Grant all that
Province, Territory, or Tract of Land, lying within our Dominions of America;
extending North, and Eastward as far as the North-end of Caraliuck-River, or
inlet upon a straight Westerly Line to Wyanoake-Creek, which lies within or
about the Degrees of 36 and 30 Minutes Nothern Latitude, and so West in a
direct line as far as the South-Seas, and South and Westward as far as the
Degrees of 29 inclusive, Nothern Latitude: And so West in a direct line as far
as the South-Seas.

2. Also all Ports, Harbors, Bays, Rivers, and Inlets belonging to the
Province and Territory aforesaid.

3. All the Soil, Land, Field, Woods, Mountains, Ferns, Lakes, Rivers, Bays,
and Inlets, within the limits before mentioned: with the Fishing of all sorts
of Fish, together with the Royalty of the Sea upon that Coast: And all Veins,
Mines, and Quarries of Gold, Silver, Gems, and Precious Stones, or any other
thing whatsoever.

4. The Patronage and Advowsons of all Churches and Chapels, with License to
build and found Churches, to exercise and enjoy as ample privileges, etc. as
any Bishop of Durham, in our Kingdom of England.

5. We do by these presents constitute the aforenamed Persons, their Heirs and
Assigns, the true and absolute Lords and Proprietors of the said Province, to
be holden of Us, our Heirs and Successors, as of our Manor of East-Greewich,
in our County of Kent, in free and common Soccage, and not in capite, nor by
Knights service, paying yearly for the same the fourth part of all Gold and
Silver-Oar which shall from time to time be found, besides the yearly Rent of
twenty Mark.

6. We do grant full power to the aforesaid Proprietors, to make several
Counties, Baronies, and Collonies, within the said Province, with several and
distinct Liberties, Privileges, etc.

7. Also to make, ordain, and exect, and under their Seals to publish any Laws
and Constitutions; by and with the advice, assent, and approbation of the
Freemen of the said Province, or of the Freemen of the County, Barony, or
Collony, for which such Law or Constitution shall be made, or of the greater
part of them, or their Deligates: And likewise to erect any Courts of
Judicature, and establish any Judges, Justices, Magistrates, or Officers, as
well within the said Province, as at Sea. Also to pardon, whether before
Judgment or after, all Crimes and Offenses against the said Laws, and to do all
and every other thing which to the complete establishment of Justice unto
Courts, Sessions, and Forms of Judicature, and manners of proceeding therein do
belong, and we do enjoin it shall be absolute firm and avayleable in Law, and
all the Liege People of Us, our Heirs and Successors, within the said Province,
do observe and keep the same. Provided the said Laws be consonant to Reason,
and as near as may be conveniently agreeable to the Laws and Customs of this
our Kingdom of England.

8. And because such Assemblies of Freeholders cannot be so suddenly called as
occasion may require, we do grant to the Proprietors, their Heirs and Assigns,
by themselves or their Magistrates, full power to ordain wholesome Orders and
Ordinances, within the Territory aforesaid; so as they be reasonable and not
repugnant or contrary, but as near as may be agreeable to the Laws of England.

9. And to the end the said Province may be the more happily increased by the
multitude of people resorting thither; We for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do
give and grant License to all the Liege people of Us, our Heirs and Successors
(excepting those who shall be specially forbidden) to Transport themselves and
Families into the said Province, and there to settle themselves and Inhabit.

10. That the Subjects and Liege people of Us, our Heirs and Successors,
Transported, or to be Transported into the said Province, or such as shall
descend from them, be Denizens and Leiges of Us, etc.

11. Full liberty and license to lade and freight in any Ports whatsoever, of
Us, etc and Goods not prohibited by the Laws of our Kingdoms: saving to Us,
etc. the Customs and other Duties due for the said Goods.

12. Full liberty and license at any time from the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel, Anno. 1667. As well to import into any of our Dominions from the
said Province of Carolina, these several Commodities, viz. Silk, Wines,
Currants, Raysins. Capers, Wax, Almonds, Oil and Olives, without paying any
Custom, or other Duty for the same; and this to continue during the space of
seven Years, to comence from and after the first Importation of four Tuns of
any the said Goods, in any one Bottom or Vessel. As also to export and carry
out of our Dominions into the said Province Custom-free, all sorts of Tools
which shall be useful and necessary for the Planters there in the Improvements
of the Premises.

13. Full Power to Exect and Constitute Sea Ports, etc. for Lading and Vnlading
of Goods, and likewise the Proprietors to have and enjoy the Customs and
Subsidies in the Ports, etc. aforesaid for Goods, etc. there Laded or Vnladed:
The said Customs to be reasonably assessed by themselves, with the Consent of
the Free People there, or the greatest part of them.

14. Full and absolute License, Power; and Authority, from time to time, for
ever, to Assign Alien, Grant, Demise, or Enfeoff, the Premises or any part
thereof, to be held by the said Person or Persons, their Heirs, etc. In
Fee-simple, or Fee-tayl, or for term of Life, or Lives, or Years of the said
Proprietors, by such Bents, Services, and Customs, as shall seem fit unto them.

15. Full Power and Authority to confer Honors, so as they be not such as are
conferred upon any of the Subjects of England.

16. Further, we do give and grant full Power to erect as many Forts,
Fortresses, Castles, Cities, Borroughs, Towns, Villages, etc. and furnish with
Ordinance and all other Weapons, Ammunition, etc. as shall be thought fit, with
all th Liberty, etc. within any Corporations in England. Also to erect as many
Markets and Fairs, as shall be thought necessary. And likewise to erect so many
Manors with such Seigniories as to them shall seem meet. And in each Manor to
hold a Court Baron with all things whatsoever thereunto belonging. And to hold
views of Frankpledge and Court-Leets, to be holden by Stewards deputed by the
Proprietors, or by the Lords of other Manors and Leetes.

17. To Levy, Muster, and Train, all sorts of Men. To pursue an Enemy as well
by Sea as Land, even without the limits of the said Province, and them to put
to death by the Law of War, and to do all other things which to the Captain
General of an Army belongs.

18. We do grant unto the Proprietors and Inhabitants of the said Province,
that the said Province and Inhabitants thereof shall not be held or reputed any
part of any Collony in America, or elsewhere, nor be depending on their
Government: but that they be subject immediately to our Crown of England. And
that the Inhabitants of the said Province shall not be any ways liable to
appear or answer to any matter whatsoever out of the Province aforesaid, except
in our Realm of England, etc.

19. Our will and pleasure is, and we do give and grant unto the Proprietors,
free License, Liberty, and Authority, to give and grant to such Persons as
cannot in their private Opinions conform to the public exercise of Religion,
such Indulgences or Dispensations as they shall think fit.

20. And if it shall happen that any doubts or questions shall arise concerning
the true sense and understanding of any Word, Clause, or Sentence, contained in
this our present Charter. We will, ordain and command, that at all times, and
in all things such Interpretation be made thereof, and allowed in all and every
of our Courts whatsoever, as Lawfully may be adjudged most advantageous and
favorable to the aforesaid Proprietors, their Heirs and Assigns.

In Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Pattents,
Witness our Self at Westminster, the thirtieth day of June, In the seventeenth
Year of our Reign.
FINIS.

