THE Spirit of Quakerism, And the Danger of their Divine Revelation LAID OPEN:
In a faithful Narrative of their malicious Prosecution of Henry Winden, and his
Wife, as Murderers, at the Public Assize at Carlisle. By Henry Winder. WITH
Suitable Reflections on the said Narrative: Containing several other Instances
of their pretended Revelations, etc.

Mat. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets which come unto you in sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

v. 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits.

Joh. 4.1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they
are of God.

Tantaene animis coelestibus Irae! LONDON, Printed for John Harris at the
Harrow in Little Britain, 1696. Price 6 d.

The AUTHOR's PREFACE.
BEing desired by Persons of Worth and Eminence to give a public account of
the doleful and unparalled Conflict I had with the Quakers, which was
publicly acted, and yet so variously reported, that 'twas ^^ssable for those
living at a distance to know the Truth; lest I assent unto their importunity,
and herein give a ^ Relation of the most material Passages: It Is true, the ^^g
they have done me was a sufficient incentive to have (...) all my strength to
have made their Villainy as notorious (...) possible; Nevertheless they see, and
the World sees how (...) I have been to do it; my Reasons are such as these.

1. My Wife was against it, two of the Accusers being (...) own Sisters, whom
she was loath to expose to perpetual in^^y, or to have them stand marked to
Posterity for Blas^^^rt, though she knew full well, that they vehemently ^^^ed
for her Blood, could they have got it in any such way ^^^ld advance the Credit
of their Revelations; for all ^^^dismal encounters she had with them by word
and wri^^^ when it was once over, she would often say, She could (...) forgive
them, and wish their Abuses might be blot^^^d (...) of her Memory, except so
much as might stir her up, thankfulness for her deliverance; but I considered
that this was fulfilled that saying of our Lord in Mat. 10.^^.36. I am come to
set a Man at variance against (...) Father, and the Daughter against her
Mother, (...) and a Man's Foes shall be they of his own House

2. I was hindered by Thoughts of my own unworthiness to be the Subject of such
a story. It Is true, at first I looked on i^ as an afflicting Providence, but
afterward thought it ^ Dignity far surpassing my deserts, that God should
choose (...) his Instrument to fight this Battle, and to bring down the Pride
of the Towering lofty Spirit; and when I considere^ what Persons our Savior
chose for his great Apostle^. I soon inferred that Omnipotence could conquer by
unlikely Instruments.

3. I thought that Party so under the Power of Prejudice^ that the clearest
Convictions offered to them would be (...) like water spilt upon the ground, as
yet; so I thought, if i^ pleased God that I should live till that Prejudice wa^
a little removed, which I knew could not be without l^^^ Experience, I would
then give some Relation of the Matter^ to manifest to the World that what I
should do, proceed^^ from a calmness of Mind, not from fury, or desire of
revenge^ I had large and sad Experience how hard it was to disentangle, and
reclaim those that have entertained any thing under the Notion of a Divine
Revelation; one might a^ well attempt to remove a Mountain as beat them out o^
their Conceit, though so utterly false as ever the Father of Lies can invent.
Time I hoped would make them mo^^ flexible, and then this narration would be a
word in d^^ season, therefore I now hasten to perform my Promise.

To these the Publisher adds: When I received these Papers in London, I find
the Quakers in open Discord^ each Party calling the other Apostates, but not
agree^ upon a Judge of their Controversy; Would they both consider this Story,
it must lead them to the right and true end of this Strife. G. K. is called
Apostate, but from what? Not from Scripture-Doctrine to which he now returns;
but from Quakers fictions; so might a Jewish or (...) Gentile Convert to
Christianity be called Apostate, but th^^ sort of Apostasy is every Man's duty.
2 Cor 6.16. (...) recriminates that W. P. etc. are Apostates, but h^^ will he
prove it, unless Scripture be owned as Judge? H^^^ be way see the grand
delusion, their pretended immediate Revelation plainly appearing to be
Imposture; so that till we have a certain appeal, it is lost Labor to argue
other Points, and to appeal to G. F. or to a yearly ^^^^ing, he knows is
downright Popery. Finding things (...) this Posture, and others at work upon
this refractory ^^^ple, I think it a Service seasonable, and due to this
Generation, to send them this cooperating Alarm; and hopeful (...), because in
some of them a more docile, flexible temper appears, and G. K. is so far from
their arrogant Conceit of Infallibility, or speaking and writing all by
immediate Inspiration, that he promises to correct his own Books.

I well know, this touches their Diana, and that the ^^^dest of this Sect never
took kindly the least contradiction (...) any hand; for they would not suspect
themselves in the least Error; And why then should they bear Opposition, or
^^ear persecution, who cannot err^ If they be infallibly (...), we are all
infallibly wrong: But I value not their Rage. A^ since I find their Leaders so
much delight in Father ^alebranch, and the Skeptical writings of our day; I
will not despair but they may question whether they have in all things followed
a true Light; Never did People so soon, and so egregiously depart from their
Primitive Form, and ^^ected Simplicity, which (as I see one tells them in
Print) ^g^es that they were either much out of the way at first, (...) are so
now; They cannot act things so contrary upon an ^^anged Principle; but if
changed, then not infallible; (...) Holy Spirit changes not one tittle of his
Oracles. They (...) what hindered the Council of Trent to reform any ^^e
grossest abuses, viz. L^st they should confess their Church (...) erred, or
needed Reformation: Either then let the ^^^kers avow their Reformation, or
shake hands with their ^er Mother of Rome and Brethren of Trent, but reform ^^y
cannot, must not, till beaten out of this cursed pretense (...) Divine
Inspiration, the strongest hold of the Devil. ^^a^ they may be so rescued is my
aim and Prayer; to that (...) I expose herein only what ought to be exposed, a
bloody, (...) Villainy, perpetrated in the Name of the Lord, whereby they
utterly forfeit their affected Name of Friends. Still I find them busy to draw
unwary Souls into their Net; such there is need to confirm by a loud caution,
and they will accept this Service, though it may be the sinless Friends will not
yet blush, who knew all this Story 23 years ago, and should have disclaimed the
Actors, but did not. Let them hear or forbear, I do hereby acquaint them and
others, that when they please, I am ready to favor them farther, by sonding
abroad, 1. One of their own very Original Rolls of Testimonies against a
certain City in this Kingdom, wherein they seemed to have aped the Prophe^s
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Zechariah, which I lately measuring found to be above 13
Else long, and all full.

2. And with this a farther Essay by a Learned, peaceable, compassionate Friend
of theirs, wherein he prov^s a^ large from their Prints and Practices, that
they pretend to no less than such Inspiration as the Lord's Prophets and
Apostles had of old; yet they have no such Inspiration. This he argues: 1. From
their many Impertinences and No^, sense in their Books, which cannot without
Blasphemy be attributed to the holy Spirit. 2. From the many flat
contradictions of one such inspired Pretender unto another, especially their
Women. 3. Their scurrilous railing at their best opposers. 4. Their apparent
contradictions to plain Scripture. 5. Miserable perversions, and grossest
Misinterpretations of Scripture. 6. Their Novel Opinions not heard before in
the Church of Christ. 7. The allowed novelty of their Se^^, having no pretense
to Succession. 8. Their many Doctrine^ calculated to serve Popery, Instanced in
Nine heads of Doctrine, wherein they agree with Papists against Scripture^ 9.
Notorious Possessions and Witcherafts. 10. Many gross Blasphemies uttered by
these so inspired. 11. Wallowing (...) ^ gross unnatural Sins. 12. Wild
attempts of long fasting and miracles. 13. Contradiction to all other good
Christians, whom they allow to be enlightened by their sa^^ Spirit.

I choose to try their Patience with this, which alone, ^^st they open their
Eyes, might convince them, the (...) Friends acted from no Divine Inspiration,
but a ^^^ilish Transport; And can wise folks still trust a notorious ^^at? Will
they still scorn the sure word of Prophesy, so ^^^^ably fitted to lead them
into the way of truth and ^^fe? Are they-all so proud and blind? When they mean
^^^^stly, they will come into clearer light: Mean while, there is one thing
that all men must think unfair in them, that ^^^^as they speak, and act very
differently from their (...) Leaders, they will neither condemn any Actions or
(...) of those Leaders, no, not James Naylor's, nor yet (...), or justify
them. No ingenuous Man refuses to confess (...) ^ault when he discerns it;
would they value Scripture, ^rov. 28.13, 14. Jam. 5.16. 1 John 1.9, 10. there
it is (...), and exemplified often, and appositely to this case ^s those
Converts, Act. 19.18, 19, 20. David, and ^^ter, Kings, Prophets and Apostles
did often fr^ely (...) Errors, and retract them; Nay, and G. K. Page 31. (...)
his Narrative has these Words (well suited to his (...) Practice) he that
testifies not against a thing ^^en there is just Occasion for it, justifies it.
What (...) ails our Quakers, that they will confess no Sin to God or Man? (...),
or last, they shall. But what hinders them now? What (...) this proud pretense,
to act all by Divine Inspiration? ^^^y are all for bearing their Testimonies
against others, (...) why not impartially against wickedness among themselves?
Disown it if you think it so, and disown its Principle: (...) if not, the World
must say, and justly too, that still (...) like such Principles and Practices,
only you dare not (...).

Such a^ need to be farther acquainted with the very Heart ^f Quakerism, and
the designs for which it pleased wise Pro^^^^ce, to permit that unchristian
Spirit to go abroad at (...) a time, I beg to inform themselves from two very
small (...), viz.

1. A Survey of Quakerism; by the excellent Author of the Falfilling of the
Scriptures, Printed for T. Parkhurst. 1677.

2. John Norton's brief Tract concerning the Quakers Doctrine. Printed London
1660.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 25. read predicted. p. 7. l. 8. r. Hudleston. p. 8. l. 19. for
upon r. up, p. 9. l. 11. r. then send. ib. l. dele had. p. 12. l. 16 and 20 and
22. r. Penrith. ib. p. 31. for within r. with them. p. 13. l. 1. r. 200 (...),
p. 14. l. 12. for the r. their. ib. l. 19. r. County. ib. l. penult. r. also
against. p. 15. l. 28. r. Liberate without their. p. 16. l. 12 and 17. for the
r. their. ib. p. 15. for sued r. served. p. 21. l. 8. for lift r. left. p. 23.
l. 13. r. Counties. p. 24. l. 21. r. Slay. ib. l. 26 r. Multitude for. p. 25.
l. 2. d. your. ib. l. 3. r. notoriously. ib. marg. r. 29. p. 26. l. 28. for
where r. when. p, 27. l. 6 for on r. one. p. 29. l. 17. r. 2 Pet. 2. ib. l. 20.
d., p. 31. l. 7. for there. r. their. ib. l. 17. for Scriptures r. Scripts. p.
32. l. antepe^ult. r. Event.

THE NARRATIVE.
THERE were two Women, the Name of the one was Margaret Bradley, the Wife of
Thomas Bradley of Knipe in the Parish of Ba^ton, and ^^y langhorn, the Wife of
Thomas Langhorn of Helton (...) the Parish of Askam, was the other, both in the
^^nty of Westmoreland. These two turned Quakers most with the first in the
North, and became very ^^ous among them, having attained such boldness (...)
their profession, that they went Preaching and ex^^ting up and down the
Country, and became very ^^^blesom both to Magistrates and Ministers, with
^essages they pretended they had from the Lord unto (...).

In the year 1673, in harvest-time, When I H^nry ^^ler was among my Reapers,
the said Margaret Bradley came unto me, desiring me to step aside that she ^^^t
speak with me; I did so: Then she told me she (...) a Message from the Lord God
unto me; and bid (...) observe her, for what she had to say she had it (...)
the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Well, said I, say (...); and thus she
proceeded. I have seen by the Re^ation of Jesus Cerist that thou art a
Murderer; being ^^reat astonisted, I asked, Why? Whom, or What are I Murdered?
She answered, The Lord has Reveal^^ to me, that thou tookest thy own Child by
the Neck from (...) ^^mb of her who is now thy Wife, and Murdered it, (...) bid
it. Then, said I, the Lord rebuke thee, thou ^^^^dent Wretch, I am as innocent
in this matter as the Child yet unborn. This she regarded not, but went away.
Not long after the aforesaid Mary Lang, horn being my Wive's Sister, came and
told my Wife, that the self same thing was Revealed to her, and Th^^ all which
Margaret had said was truch, and she would senl it with her blood; This she
urged in many Words affirming that they were the saithful and true Witness and
Messengers of Jesus Christ. Therefore said she, confess, confess it, and God
will pardon you, for b^^ can pardon great sins, as well as little ones; fear
no^ confess, and you shall Find mercy.

My Wife took it very ill at first, that her near^^ Relations should hunt after
her Life without any manner of cause; but being conscious of our perfect
Innocence, we made our appeal to the Searcher of Hear^ who in due time heard
our Prayers, and gave (...) strength sufficient to go through this bad rep^^
with Courage and Cheerfulness, still comforting ea^^ other with this, that God
was above the Devil, a^^ in time they would be made manifest; which (Bleed be
God) accordingly came to pass; Mean wh^^ with good Confidence we opposed them,
to convi^^ them, if possible, by all the Arguments we co^^ use, that their
pretended Revelation came from (...) Devil, that Liar from the beginning, and
the Fat^^ of Lies, who never yet invented a greater Lie th^^ this, and that it
was Blasphemy to father it upon (...) God of Truth; Therefore, said we, be
persuaded t^^ God sent you not; with much more to this purp^^ which we might as
well have spoke to the stones, (...) the Wind; for those Women would hear
nothing against themselves, and so went their way: So^^ weeks after this they
returned both together, and s^^ing said, They had now a Message from the Lord,
and a (...) easy one, which we might easily do; said they, you (...) bow to us,
and confess us to be true Prophetesses, and (...) pray for the dead Child that
you have Murdered, so you (...) (...) shall be united in one. This you must do,
for it is God's Lay^ant, between God, and us, and you, and must be here ^^ealed
up, and shall never be discovered to the World, if you ^^ll submit to these
easy Terms. We answered, Ah poor ^^aded Creatures! Shall we bow to you, and
confess ^^t to be true, which we know to be false, and pray (...) that which
never yet was? These easy Terms are (...) hard for us; we know no Guilt; you
are false Pro^^^tesses, the God of truth never sent you with such (...) to us,
be convinced of your error before you go (...) farther; but I think the Devil
has already led (...) so far, that he cannot bring you off without shame (...)
confusion: Thus we parted the second time.

After a while these Women sent us a Letter begin^^ thus, The Word of the Lord
came unto me saying, write (...) Henry Winder, and say, the Lord has given thee
yet (...) days to make away thy Goods and Lands to thy Children, (...) to
settle thy Concerns, for I have h^ar'd, I have heard, (...) bleating of the
Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen, and (...) destruction, destruction will
unavoidably come upon (...) at the end of 40 days. Thus they commonly began
(...) Letters, which to insert would be tedious, and (...) the most part they
were jointly concerned there^^ I returned an Answer, in order to persuade them
(...) quiet at home, and mind their own business, but (...) purpose; for at the
end of 20 days they sent ^^^er Letter, and came also to Remember me that (...)
Glass was half full, and the other half was f^ling (...) which will run over
and spread abroad, and then, (...) they, 'twill be too late to provide for thy
Chil^^.

Growing now weary of their repeated fooleries, as (...) was at first surpised
at their brazen-faced Impu^^e, I only answered that all their blundring noise
^^^ch was almost continual by word, or writing,) (...) no terror at all to me;
for, said I, I fear ye not at all, being sure you are acted by the Devil, an^
therefore I will not turn one hoof out of the wa^ for you. Thus the 40 days end
came, my Wife wri^ing Letter after Letter to them, hoping at least (...)
prevail upon her own Sister, and she had often cau^^ to thank God for
unexpected assistance therein; b^^ still they made nothing of all she could say.

All this while (which was about a year) the mat^^ was but little blazed
abroad, save that the Women (...) communicated it to some of their Friends,
raising th^^ Expectations that it would mightily Conduce to (...) Honor of
their Religion; and by this time anot^^ Sister of my Wife, Margaret Walker, the
Wife of (...) ward Walker of Soulby, in the parish of Dacre, (...) come into
them, and full as Zealous in the cause, (...) far more fluent and Eloquent. In
this Encounter t^^ bid us arm our selves for the battle; for, said they, (...)
is the battle of the Dragon; put on strength ye pr^^ professors, advance with
your Noblest Resolution, (...) know, that the Lamb shall get the Victory. So
(...) deed he did, and ever will; but how much more (...) Dragons than Lambs
they acted in this matter, let (...) Reader judge.

Destruction came not at the 40 days end, as (...) had prodicted, So up they
rouse, and these 3 Wo^^ went to William Layton of Daleman, Esquire, Justic^^
peace for the County of Cumberland, and told (...) They were come with a
Message from the Lord God unto (...) Well, said he, What Is the Matter? Said
they, (...) must send for Henry Winder, and his Wife, and (...) stion them
about a Murder which he has commi^^ and, We shall direct thee how, as we have
received (...) Revelation from the Lord. According to their (...) and humor the
Justice sent his man to me, that I (...) needs go with my Wife to speak with
him, which willingly did; and there we found these Women, (...) (...) darged us
with Murder forthwith; we cried Not Guil^^^^: The Justice then Questioned them
what Proof they ^^^d, they answered, they had it by Revelation: But, (...) he,
you are now entering upon Law, and must pro^^ed according to Law, and your
Revelation will be (...) Proof: Will you therefore Depose it upon Oath? (...)
said they, we cannot be free to take an Oath; then (...) he, can you prove it
by any others? No, said ^^ey; then, said he, What Circumstances can you of^^^
that may Evidence the truth of your Charge against (...) man? Q. We only had it
by Revelation of Jesus Christ. (...) How long since was this Revealed to you?
Q. Nine ^^uts after it was done, said they. L. Was it a Son, or (...) Daughter?
said the Justice; they answered, That ^^as not yet Revealed to them; but one of
them a lit^^ after told him, it was a Son, and began to repre^^ the said Henry
as murdering the Child, taking it (...) his left hand, the Knife in his right,
and therewith ^^tting its Throat; but in some former Revelations, ^^ey said,
they saw him stopping its Breath with a ^^apkin. What, said the Justice, had
you no thought (...) this before? they said, No. When he had their ^^arge, and
observed their insolent Behavior, he turn^^ to us, saying, You hear these Women
charge you ^^^h Murder, sure there is something in it, how will (...) clear
your selves? I said, they may charge upon (...) what they please, we are purely
innocent in this ^^tter. The Justice observing us to be undaunted by ^^is
infamous Charge and Vexation, said then to the ^^^men; according to your
desire, I have Questioned ^^^vy, and his Wife, and I find in them nothing but
^^^ocence; What can I do for you in this case? No, ^^o, said they, he is not
Innocent. Then speaking to ^^ny Langhorn, he enquired how she perceived the
pre^^ded Revelation, or how it proceeded, what Symp^^ns attended, and after
what manner it had its Ope^^tion? Mary answered, She could not well tell, but
she (...) sure it began in her Feet. Then, said he, What would you have me do?
Answ. We desire thee to get us them to the Assize at Carlisle, (which was now
Aug. 1674, (...) and there will a Spirit rise at the left hand of th^^ Judge,
that will testify for us. But, said he, will yo^^ be tied to follow them? Answ.
We cannot swear, bu^^ we will be there: Well, said he, I Will engage that Har^^
and his Wife shall be there too: This was about (...) Week before that Assize.
And now these Women mig^^ tily bestir themselves, and had quickly got a gre^^
party of Friends, inclining to their Opinion so far, (...) to declare them true
Prophetesses; as John Slay of (...) a great Speaker in their Meetings, etc. and
that th^^ would seal their Testimony with their Blood. Th^^ wrote their
Accusation against me, and my Wi^^ which they cast here and there in Towns and
Stre^^ where they came, and at Carlisle gave one of those Pap^^ to my Lord
Judge (^ir.... Wild, and Baron Rainsf^^ as I remember, were then our Judges.)
He only b^^ them proceed according to Law, and they should h^^ Justice. Mr.
Layton and Mr. H told my Lord wh^^ the Quakers appeared, and that they said a
Spa^^ would arise at his left hand, to prove the Murthe^ then, said my Lord,
all the People will see and hear (...) And now there was great Expectation
among them (...) the Spirit, they said, should rise to testify for the^^ and in
truth, what they spoke, they gave out with su^^ assurance, as made some
indifferent persons either (...) lieve them, or at least suspect us. Hence
multitu^^ came into Carlist^ to see this Wonder, but all were (...) ceived, for
nothing appeared: Nevertheless we stay^^ in Town all the time of the Assize,
and when eith^^ of us could meet any of them, we were ready to (...) braid them
for creating such Tumults and Disco^^ses; (for now it was every Bodies talk)
and ne^^ should we get any other Answer, but Fear God. T^^ they persisted in
their Delusion without the least (...) knowledgment of Error, or any sensible
Discourag^ment.

Shortly after this, I sent for a Writ of Defamation against these three Women
and their Husbands; but (...) the mean time they solicit another Magistrate,
^^he is Lord of the Manor, under whom I hold my ^^nd, viz. Andrew Huddlestone
of Hutton-John, Esquire, ^^stice of Peace for the County of Cumberland. I
^^aring this, let the Writs rest till they had their full ^^utse: Being come to
Mr. Huddlsteon, they told him (...) the first place, that it was Revealed to
them that (...) should have my Land: They went also to Bernard ^^sol-bride,
then Sheriff of the County, and told him, (...) like Revelation that he must
have my Goods. ^^eir Spirit moved them to believe these Motives ^^old stir
these Gentlemen to do their utmost for (...). To Mr. Huddleston, they said, God
has decreed ^^s, and we hope thou will do us lustice, in disco^^ring the
Murder which H. W. has committed, for ^^od will be Glorisied in his
Destruction Mr. Huddleston ^^d, What would you have me do? said they, Get us
^^en bither, for we have now revealed Witnesses, that will ^^isy the Truth of
what we laid to their Charge. We know (...) Revelation of Jesus Christ, That
Elizabeth Robinson, ^^ise of Thomas Robinson, living in the same Manor (...)
Parish knows all this, being Bed fellow to H. W's ^^ise when the thing was
done, and it is Revealed to (...) that she has told it to her Husband Also that
^^istopher Wilton and his Wife, being next Neighbors ^^ll. W. know the same.
Therefore we desire thee, to ^^ed for these four to testify this Truth. But
first of all (...) Hudal^sion sent for me, while the Women were in ^^s House,
told me their Errand, and that he had no ^^ind to meddle between us: To whom I
said, I be^ech you Sir, take this trouble upon you, give them ^^kir own way in
every thing, do as they direct you, ^^d spare not me, try me to the uttermost;
then, said ^^e, I will, and told the Women, H. W. is come, but ^^re will not
send for the Witnesses to day, for it is late, and we shall not have time to
examine the Matter. Therefore we'll appoint another day, and I Will send f^^ all
your Witnesses; which he did. On the Day a^^ pointed we all met: Now the
Quakers had giv^^ Mr. Huddleston in Writing particular Directions h^^^ to
Examine every Witness, and the very Questions (...) was to put to each,
accordingly he examined the^^ one by one, and so carefully, that he would not
(...) one hear what another said: I, nor my Wife, nor a^^ of our Party (as they
called them) were permitted (...) be present at the Examination, but only the
Q^^kers, who threatened the Witnesses, thatif they wo^^ not speak the Truth they
must be hanged too. Th^^ being upon Oath, cried out with Amazement, (...)
should we be Questioned about a Thing we know no more (...) than the Child in
the Mother's Womb; in which mi^^ with like Expressions they all agreed, telling
the Q^^kers that doubtless they were Bewitched.

This being done, Mr. Huddleston called upon me a^^ my Wife, with his own
Family, and many Neighbors, who were in his Hall come to hear this W^^der, and
said thus to the Quakers, Have you had Justice now? Answ. Yes. Then, said he,
were these W^^nesses revealed to you by the same Spirit, as the oth^^ Things
were? Answ. Yes, by the very same. The^^ said he, it is a false lying Spirit,
believe it no mo^^ Answ. Yes, we will believe it still, for we can go to the
^^ry place where it was buried. This word dropped unawa^^ from them, and they
could have been content to (...) it fall; but when I heard them mention a
place, I desired Mr. Huddleston to hold them to their Word, th^^ so they might
manifest themselves yet more; whe^^ upon he Questioned them, Where was that
place^^. They said, it was revealed to them, That H. W. buri^^ the Child on
Sparkhead-Moor, a place about a Mile ^^stant from Mr. Huddleston's. That Is a
vast place, sai^^ he, it will be impossible to find it, without more particular
Directions; go again therefore, and consult the Spirit; for if there was a
Murder, and God intends this way to discover it, the Spirit will certainly
show you the very place, and by the surface of the ground (...) will appear,
though many Years ago. Thus they departed, and came again, saying, now the very
place ^^s revealed to them; and now there was a deep Snow ^^nd Frost, so that
they could not proceed; in which ^^ne they often visited Mr. H. who at length
when the ^^ow was partly off, made them promise to be there (...) a set Day,
adding, I will send my Man to keep ^^od Orders, that ye be not disturbed, (for
she said ^^e was afraid to be troubled in the search by the People) but to me,
he said, that I should not go, least ^^eir foolery should provoke me to
passion. At the ^^ay appointed they came to the place, with a great ^^ltltude
from places adjacent, to hear and see what should there be done; being met,
they were slow, and ^^d no great courage to begin the search, but my Wife
^^urred them on, and bid 'em cheer up, and take cou^^ge, for if they had found
any Child, she would be content (...) s^ser death for it: Thus she upbraided
their faintness ^^d folly; but many blamed her, for they who had ^^aved
themselves so devilishly all along, who knew that they might have laid there?
To which she an^^red, she made no doubt but God was above the ^^vil: So they
being greedy of her life took courage (...) proceed, hoping still to get honor
to their Revela^^ns by our death; so Margaret Bradley drew a Circle ^^th a
staff of about 10 yards circumference, and said ^^e had it by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, that the Child (...) within that place; and so got some to begin
to ^^ork, but the ground proved so hard a Gravel, that ^^e indifferent
Observers desired them to shift to a sof^^ place; and they not being able to
dig any farther, ^^parted with shame and confusion.

Note here, that Mary Dawson (who was afterward Mary Langhorn) long before
this came one morning by break of day to my house, my Wife being gone that
night to a Neighbor in Travail: she called at the doors and Windows, and told
me she would do me no harm, I told her, that was little of my Fear; when I came
to the door she asked me if (...) knew any thing of the A sort of fuel dug
out of the earth.
Peat-mow (...) What Peat-mow, said I, do mean^ I know nothing of it: Yes,
but tho^ do, says M. L. For 'twas there th^^ did i. e. hide.
feel the Child, as it is reveale^ to me; yet this very Woman after wards did
averr, that the Child was buried as before said. Being thus miserably
disappointed. and despairing to get my life this way, because none of the^^
Revelations would hold, the aforesaid M. L. my Wife (...) eldest Sister came by
night, and calling upon my Wi^^ desired to speak with her, who said, What art
tho^^ not yet weary, what have thou yet? Answ. Nothin^ but Good for thee, I
will assure thee, I Will do thee (...) harm, so she went to her; then said M. L.
I have sea^^ I have seen, by the Revelation of Jesus Christ that thy H^^ band
will certainly destroy thee, and that he will hang (...) the Neck for it, and
that thy Children shall be left desolate, (...) shall be scattered and it in
other folks Chimney corners.
No^^ and none shall have compassion on the^^ Go, Go, said my Wife, I have so
goo^ experience of your Revelations, that if (...) h^d doubted my Husband's
Love, I should now doub^^ it no more: As for my Children, I hope God will
provide for 'em, and I have better hopes of them, because that Spirit has
always been a Liar; but I see it is i^^ vain to talk; we must take another
course with you^ once more I advise thee to go home, and be quiet and abide
with thy family, and keep thy Children together, as long as thou can; Let the
Lord do with me what he will, I am his own, and I fear him n^^ (...) all; take
thee no care for me, for he will do it; ^^ed as for thy Threats, I fear 'em the
less because thou ^^eakst 'em.

Thus they continued time after time; sometimes ^^ce, and sometimes another,
and sometimes 2 or 3 ^^gether came to me with their pretended Revelati^^s and
Messages, and telling me they were the In^^uments that God had Chosen to
discover all my ^^cret Villainies, etc. so that now when all their old ^^es
failed, they had new Revelations that I was ^^ilty of the death of some persons
nearly related to ^^em and me: I could not forbear to bewail my un^^ppiness,
who had already waded through a sea of ^^oubles and reproaches, a burden
intolerable, had (...) not been supported by a God of truth, and a ^^ear
conscience, that still the Devil should be ^^ffer'd to throw so many of his
envenomed darts (...) me; nor could I choose but be concerned, that ^^ose
persons for whom I once had so great a respect, should be strayed into such a
Wilderness of ^^rror, that I thought it next to impossible they should ^^er
find the way out. Reason was now so taken ^^m them, that the Devil could make
them believe any thing: Yet I thought it much more happy to be ^^us abused,
than that I should have been an abuser, ^^al that this burden was far easier
to bear, than a ^^ilty Conscience would have been, though no Creature in the
World had known it; I can safely call God to Wtness, that if ever I knew any in
the World, for whom I would have ventured my Life to do them ^ood, it was these
very persons the Devil made my Accusers; so sadly were they bewitched and led
captive by him at his will; and now that no manner of Arguments, nor their own
experience of so many hameful disappointments, would move them to any
observable sense of their Delusions, I resolved to jangle no more; but
considering what loss I had sustained by the aforesaid Women, and that many
other Quakers, especially their own Husbands were intoxicated by their
Diabolical Eloquence, yea, and that they had bred some suspicion of me for a
while in others of their acquaintance, we thought it reasonable to proceed
according to Law against them, and both to recover our Damage, vindicate our
Good Name, and publicly to manifest the workings of their Fantastic Spirit;
whereupon I brought my Action of Defamation against the 3 Women and their
Husbands Thomas Langhorn for default of appearance suffered a Judgment. H. W.
having declared against him for 300 l. Damage. This was obtained 25 and 26
Carol. 11. and at the same time a Writ of Enquiry came down^ whereupon a Jury
was impannel'd, which sat at Pe^cith in the County of Cumberland, Mr. William
William of Johnby-Hall Gent. being Foreman, Mr. Robert Willison and other
principal men of Pencith made up most o^ the Jury, who being met on a day
appointed at Elizabeth Robisons of Penrish to examine the matter, I desire^ the
two Justices aforementioned to inform the Jury what they knew of the matter;
they both came, an^ before the Jury gave a full account of the particular^
transacted before them, after them John Noble (wh^ was Deacon of that Church I
had left, and now returned to again; Dr. Richard Gilpin now of Newcastle being
then our Minister in the Parish of Grastock) declared his Knowledge being as
much concerned as either of the Justices; for he was within at all the
Examinations and Assizes, and received several long Letters from them, and
longer Discourses, from all which he gave a full account of the whole Business
of all their Revelations, Accusations and miserable Events; also of the
Reputation of the party charged, that he was always accounted a very faithful
ju^^ Man, and that he had for a long time experienced him to be so;the
Gentlemen of the Jury having full satisfaction in these reports, after a little
Deliberation, gave a Verdict for me, and 200 Damages. Easter Term. 26. Car. 11.
the Writ of Enquiry was Executed, and Judgment thereupon, and afterward
Execution thereupon, entered Rotulo. 1578. where it may still be seen in Mr.
Winford's Office in the Common Pleas, as also all other Records in this Case
hereafter mentioned. Now Thomas Langhorn and his Wife had before this made sale
of their Goods, and were gone up to London, but employed John Mounsey of
Patterdale to be their Attorney, and Mr. James Bird of Browham, now a Justice
of Peace for the County of Westmoreland, was B. W's. Attorney. At London they
stayed about a ^ear. When they came home we arrested them; but they still were
very obstinate and scorned to pay any thing; to Prison they would go, possessed
of their old ^^oud Error, and so to Carlisle they went, and remain^ed Prisoners
almost Five Years, practicing their be^^^ed Passive Obedience and Glorying in
it. At length time and experience a little humbled them, so that same
Confessions they would make that they had done ^s wrong, but none
proportionable to the Heinousness of their Crimes; yet my Wife being moved with
natural Affection toward her Sister, notwithstanding her former malignity
against her, did daily solicit ^e to let them come forth, which accordingly I
did (...) a very small part of my Damage, they being a little more humbled at
last to ask Pardon; for I resolved till they made Submission, or paid the
Money, there they should stay; 'twas not the Money I desired, but their
Repentance, which in part I have now seen; more than once I expected.

Note, That this Mary Langhorn was formerly the Wife of John Dawson of
Hutton-John, after whose death she did at diverse times express to H. Winder
(then a Widower) her great Affection to him, and desire to have him for her
Husband; but his Love was set on her young Sister Anne, his present Wife, so
rejected Mary's Solicitations, which enraged her to that degree, that ever
after, her anger was implacable. However she took another Husband, and in
Prison she bar^ him Twins, a Son and a Daughter: and to manifest her willful
impenitence, or immortalize her infamy^ she Named one, Innocent Prisoner, and
'tother, Ha^^less Sufferer, so firm was her delusion yet, though they could not
in all this time choose but have many Convictions, seeing there was not from the
beginning t^ the end any one accident that might cause them t^ hope for other
reward than loss and shame. Every thing contradicted their design, had the
understanding been awake, or sound and clear; but that and their conscience
were perfectly stupifyed; but at last she thawed a little, for the Friends saw
it dishonoure^ them all: This Mary lives yet in Helton, and is quiet.

During their Imprisonment, I brought my Action 1. Against Tho. Bradley and
Margaret his Wife, wh^ lived in another Country, and poor, Skulking i^ holes.
Term. paschae. 26. Car. 2. I had an exigent against them, and Mich. following
actually out-lawed them.

Term. paschae. 27. Car. 2. a Declaration against Bradley.

Term. Trin. 27. Ejusdem Regis, I obtained Judgment, and a writ of Enquiry.

At length I had them into Appleby Goal, but some of their Friends got them out
by a Trick, so they run away, and as I heard, lived miserable poor. I knew they
were not able to pay, so least they should die in Prison, I took them up no
more; this is the Exit of the 2d. couple of my accusers. 2. I brought my Action
against Edward Walker and his Wife: he put in his appearance, so the Cause came
to Trial at common Law at Carlisle. When they saw I had proof sufficient to
cast them, they informed their Council that I (...) 200 l. damage granted me
before, on the same accent; and by this the Judge was moved thus to direct the
Jury. Gentlemen, You see the plaintiff has ^oved sufficiently that this Woman
has spoken and ^^e such things, as if proved, might have taken any his Life,
but she makes no proof, so that he must (...) found damnify'd. Yet because he
has had 200 l. ^^ted him before, and because she is a Woman (and ^e all have
Wives) you must be moderate in the damage: Hereupon the Jury brought me in 10
l. Damage, (...) allowed me costs of Suit. Term. Trin. 26. Car. 2. had this
Issue entered Rotulo. 495.

Michaelmas following I obtained Judgment upon the ^^dict aforesaid, and
Execution against the Body of ^^^er and his Wife. Trin. 28. Ejusd. Regis, a
Scire Fa^^ against Walker, and then a Judgment thereupon Michaelmas following;
all which I again mind the ^^ious Reader, that he may see with all my
Decla^^^tions against them, on Record in Mr. Windford's ^ffice.

Nothing would please Walker's Zeal, but to be a ^^fering Witness too for the
same glorious Cause, so (...) Prison I sent Him and his Wife, where they staid,
(...) cannot say, till they were willing to pay me, but ^ill a good Samaritan,
as they called him, paid the Money, and got them a Liberty without the License,
^ho I think afterward wished he had not so done; ^^t they were not half
Humbled, nor would acknowledge it a Kindness, nor repay the Money, least
thereby they should confess some Fault, though so small a (...) was easy for
them to pay; however at last they ^^ffer'd him to take it.

Spiritual pride it seems by this was still predom^nant in them, they would not
draw any suspicion upon their infallibility and perfection, and hence not (...)
jot more of Condescension could so obliging a pers^^ obtain of these stomachful
Friends; I hope long (...) Time and Experience (if it has not yet) will ma^^
them wiser in all things, and so bring them and (...) Christians of different
persuasions into a nearer Neighborhood and Union; that as there is but one G^^
there may be but one Faith, one way, etc. I p^^ God graciously discover to all
my proud Enemy more of the Errors and grievous miscarriages, for th^^ had need
like Peter or David to Weep bitterly, a^^ repent in Dust and Ashes; and the
good Lord pard^^ them, for they knew not what they did, and s^^ they knew not
whom: through the Grace of God I (...) freely forgive them all. As for the
bloody Thre^ of Destruction to come upon me and mine from (...) Lord, I find to
my Comfort, that the Curse caus^ shall not come, as they also may observe: I
know (...) Blessings and Curses are not theirs to dispose of; (...) kept in
wiser hands; hitherto the Lord of his inf^^ free Mercy prolongs my days with my
Dear (...) Faithful Wife and Children, whom he has increa^^ preserved and
abundantly Blessed; my whole Fan^^ he has spared as a Father spares his own
Son (...) serves him. And this I declare, as I am bound (...) the praise of his
Goodness and Truth, and to s^^ my Seal to his fure Word; That in the fear of
the (...) is strong Confidence, and his Children shall have a pl^^ Refuge,
Prove. 14.26.27. Also that in the way of p^teousness is life, and in the
Pathway thereof is no D^^ Prove. 12.28. Now that this Story may be a Cau^^ to
all that heard or now read it, to walk humbly (...) God, and beware of
groundless extremes, is the P^^er of him that is an unfeigned lover of all good
Christians.

From my House in Hutton-John, in the Parish of Graistock, and County of Cumb.
this 9th. of July, 1696. Henry Winder.

William Layton Esquire; dyed soon after these things were done; others attest as
follows.

So much of the Transactions herein set down as ^^^es to my self, is true,

Witness my Hand, Andrew Hudlestone.

In Testimony of the Truth of all the Material ^ssages related in this Narritve
of Henry Winder's ^^^gle with the Quakers, and particularly of the ^^th on
Sparkhead-moor, and the Trial at Carlisle, (...) set our Hands,

John Noble of Penruddock, all in Graistock. Adam Bird Seni. of the same, all
in Graistock. John Atkinson of Motherby Schoolmaster, all in Graistock. Edward
Martin of Dacre Adjacent, Thomas Hedshon then of the same, Thomas Robinson and
Elizabeth his Wife of Todrick, within named, are also yet living there.


POSTSCRIPT.
THE Survivers of my Accusers remain Quackers still, but very quiet, speak
little of Revelation, deny Perfection in this Life, (...) well they may;
Pretend a reverend Esteem of (...) Scriptures; yet hold many odd Fancies, as,
that (...) Heathens who never heard of Christ with the outward ear, (as they
term it) may yet be go^^ Christians, if they obey the Voice of Christ within,
but they will not take the Scriptures for the only Rule. What is within said of
their many Fa^^ charges, and Revelations, with the Approbation a^^ Assistance
of many other Quakers, does sufficient^^ evince the dangerousness of their
Spirit. But (...) farther Caution, and to satisfy such as probab^^ will
enquire why they choose me for their M^^^ to shoot at, I think it not
impertinent to declare, (...) follows.

I well Remember when that Sect first came in^^ our Country, some of them came
into our Par^^^ Church, where excellent Mr. Gilpin was our Minister. So bold
and resolute were those Quakers (...) Behavior, and many of them so furnished
with thwarting Arguments, and cross Answers, that our Learned Minister being
not yet acquainted with their new Cant, seemed to me sometimes almost at a
loss for Replies; whereupon I, and others of the Church, were sadly shaken, and
some of us so ticked with this new Doctrine, that we withdrew from our former
Communion, and appeared to vindicate the Quakers, and herein my Wife was
entangled and seduced with me; this was sadly resented ^^y our pious Minister
and People; and on this very Account the Church appointed a Day of Humiliation,
the Ministers and others came to me, ^^d to several that were now grown
disaffected, to desire us to be there on that day: I think we were (...)
prevailed with to go; and indeed a day of very (...) Humiliation, and
tenderness of heart it proved: ^any that were shaken, or stood Tottering were
^^uced, well satisfied, and confirmed for the rent ^^d like to have been very
great: I Remember at (...) time I was so satisfied, that I had secret resolves
(...) comply with the Church, and made some open ^ecantation, but these
Convictions stayed not long; ^^e Arguments of the Quakers were continually
^^^ing about me, and scarce any thing else could (...) my Audience, so that I
was quickly again where (...) as before; upon which several Meetings were
^^ointed by the Minister, and chief of the Society to ^^course these Matters. I
being now much in com^^y with the Quakers, was grown too hard for ^^guments; To
them I would go, as Jer. 2.24.25. ^^d to them I did return, and was very
constant ^^ith them, I think also indifferently well beloved (...) them. For
soon after my Entrance among them ^^y reposed a great trust in me, viz. to be
Re^^et of all their Collections in the County; which ^^iged me to go frequently
to their Monthly Meetings for several Years. By being thus concerned I had
opportunity to discourse with many o^ them from every Quarter, whereby I found
a very great change from what was at the beginning^ much Jarring, and Discord,
secret envyings, and different Opinions; This caused much disquiet an^ anguish
in my Mind, and put me upon a ne^^ Examination of the Grounds of Religion:
There^^ I considered both what I had renounced, and wh^^ it was I now
entertained in the room thereof. (...) remember that the first thing that
induced me (...) leave Communion with the Church, was a Conce^^ That the
Scripture was not the word of God, for th^^ Word was God himself; and the
Scripture a de^^ Letter, and the Letter kills; therefore I thoug^^ the
Scripture could not be the Rule of Faith a^^ Worship; and that such as teach by
it, must be bli^^^ Guides, and if the blind lead the blind both must (...)
together. The Rule to which I thought I was (...) take heed was a light within;
there was the word (...) God directing me what I must do to be saved; (...) I
judged it needless to do, or know any this (...) which that Light showed not to
be necessary, a^^ by that Light I saw no Necessity of outward Or^^nances; so
concluded they were but Commandments of Men, and not to be regarded, etc. T^^^
being the Foundation of my Relapse to Quakeri^^ I next considered why others
opposed this my N^^ on, as my self had once done; And I found t^^ opposed the
sufficiency of this Light within from Belief that God had given the Scriptures
for (...) sufficient Rule, and that the Scriptures contai^^ all things
necessary to be believed and practiced (...) had no way to prove the
sufficiency of my Lig^^ but by the Scripture, which I fancied referred (...) to
it; so this revived my Suspicion of that ^^ticle, especially considering it was
to no purp^^e Men to teach any Doctrine which they could pretend no Scripture
for, this forced this Inference upon me, If all Doctrines must be proved from
Scripture, then doubtless Scripture is the Rule, but I see it is, and it must be
so; Therefore I cannot avoid this conclusion, That the Scripture is the Rule,
and if it be, then here was my first Mistake: This made me Remember who they
were I had lift, even Those that taught this very Doctrine; And then may I left
them, and that was at First, because they taught this Doctrine; Thus I
proceeded from one consideration to another, to a fresh view of the Sacraments;
for when I could not escape the foresaid conclusion (though it went much
against my Mind) that the Scripture was the most sure and perfect Rule, it
brought me thus (...) reason the Case. If the Scripture be the Rule, the
^^rament of the Lords Supper is surely a Duty, being therein so expressly
required; If a duty, then ^^e I cannot without Sin live in the Neglect of (...)
or condemn others use of it; But of all this (...) I convinced; therefore among
the Quakers (...) can not stay with a clear Conscience, etc. I shall arise and
go to my Fathers house.

Notwithstanding all these convictions, I continued to frequent their Meetings,
until I thought the Lord left me, or ceased to show me my way, (...) to strive
with me to return. Then I fell into (...) Temptation wherein I was so cast
down, that (...) despaired to receive Comfort any way, but under the ordinances
appointed in the Scripture; and now through infinite grace to a great
Backslider, I returned to that Church from whence I cameere out, and therein I
abide, and stand to this ^^y. This did very much displease the Quakers; for
many a call and invitation I had from them to return. When they saw nothing
would prevail, they began to envy me, and their Love was turned into Malice,
which eats like a Canker; from which at last broke out the aforesaid Tragedy.
If this was not the thing that so incensed them against me, I know not what
was, except what I said before of Mary Dawson.

Witness my Hand Henry Winder.

REFLECTIONS On the preceding NARRATIVE: WITH Several other Instances of the
Quaker's pretended Divine Revelations, etc.
A Strange story this is (Reader) indeed, and beyond the power even of Quakers
impudence to deny, since 'twas so long transacting, so many friends concerned
in it, and not in a corner, but in the open face of two Countrie's; testified
and vindicated at a public Assize. Certainly the Righteous God by permitting
so strong delusions as these, designed to expose to common view the temper and
tendency of the Spirit of Quakerism; nay, the Devil himself (who one would
think is ordinarily one of their Friends.) svern^ here to have owed them a
spite, who so long by so enchanting suggestions, managed these Persons to the
shame of the whole Sect.

That none may read so memorable a thing as common News; nor miss of some good
fruit thereby, I annex some Remarks upon it, which shall be directed.

First to the Quakers, or such of them as are most concerned.

1. Because your good is in special manner here by designed, and to expose
nothing among you b^^ what is perniciously evil, I freely declare, If any o^
you sincerely value Scripture Light and Rule, and do not adhere to the guidance
of this mad Spirit this story intends not to accuse you. H. W. (as you read
above) is so just and fair to own all that little hopeful amendment he saw in
his envious persecutors, and the sounder mind of some Friends who a^ the first
Assize persuaded the Women to do him right, by confessing their Error. One of
those sai^^ to John Flee aforesaid, he feared the matter would issue in shame
to their party; but that great Speaker reproved him in these words, do thou
not hear that they say it will bring honor to the truth. He then believed
their prophetical Spirit. But I will nor be so Quaker-like as to censure a
multitude. For ought whereof I can find tolerable proof that most are
innocent. Show the world your dislike of this Spirit and Principle, by
disclaiming such who are acted by it, as of late you reject G. K. from your
Community, and I shall charge none such, but (my Friends, for why should you
not be mine too,) are not you obliged like other men, to satisfy the Church of
God what rule you walk by? 1 Pet. 3.15.16. and that you entertain no such wild,
wicked doctrines? it is your positive Duty that you renounce, and bear
Testimony against what is notorious false and evil; and every honest man
readily comes to the light that it may be manifest his deeds are wrought i^
God. Joh. 3.21. So would we all rejoice, as (...) did over his Children, to see
you walking in ^aistian truth. 2 Ep. Joh. 1.2.

2. Say in earnest, What think ye of these three dear Sisters? True Quakers
they were, and owned as such to the last: But what Spirit, what Wildfire is
this that they and you have chose for your Guide? Had not they the same
assurance of being divinely respired, as others of you, i. e. their own strong
Imagination? Now, if hereby some were deceived, ^ay not other Quakers also? And
will you still believe the Spirits untried? You expect that we believe your
Testimony; we demand proof by sound Reason, Scripture, or Miracles, that its
God's Testinony; and such the Son of God, and his Apostles, did not disdain to
give unto Jews and Gentiles; ^ay, our three Women it seems were convinced how
just this is, when they told of a Spirits appearing for them in open Court,
Joh. 8.24.
Wram the Father sends, he leaves not a^^, as these were left. Your Spirit in
this very story ^^ers Contradictions, bloody Revenges, and sneaking carnal
Policies, etc. such God's Eternal Holy Spirit never did. See then what Spirit
ye are of, and be instructed by that Man after God's own heart, what to do
Psalm. 119.59.60.176. Least (to evade the Conviction here offered) you allege,
That this is a ^^gular Instance, and so affects not a party, I referr you to an
old Book, The Quaker shaken, and to a late one, The Snake in the Grass, for
many more like Instances, to which in so great plenty, I add a few.

About the date of this Story, Peregrine Dalston of Ouston in Cumberland, fell
deep in love with a Neighbor Female-friend, and confidently asserted It was
revealed to him, that if he could swallow his Bed-sheet, it should be a
Testimony to him that he should obtain his beloved Lamkin: Well, the poor
Wretch obediently attempts it, and (what would the Devil have more) was justly
choked in the trial. An older, and more crafty Friend was he, that came by
like Revelation to Paul Hobson's House, near Durham, saying, The Lord sent him
to Sojourn there, till the Spirit call him elsewhere. Paul Hobsen was then a
Man of figure, and his humor was to entertain any fanciful People a^ few days,
so bid him Welcome: This Spark it seem^ so long liked his Quarters, that a
Spirit came upon his Landlord to devise how to get rid of his Burt, and this
was his Expedient; he spoke through a Reed into the Enthusiasts chamber,
saying, Arise, and go immediately into Wales, where it shall be told th^^ what
thou shall do. This Friend was so loving, that he lay still all night, nor
offered next day to depart, till Mr. Hobson said to him, Friend, What sort of a
Voice was that I heard from thy Chamber last night^ Answ. Ah, 'twas a Call of
the Spirit to me, etc. and now I must obey it: Which he did. Welfare
Implicit Faith. The Story is not yet beyond the memory of Man.

Nor that doughty Oracle of a Bristol-Prophet, where the late Reverend Mr. John
Paul was Minister of St. James's: That modest Friend came naked into the
Congregation, with only a Rope about him, and bellowing as their manner was: He
dropped his Rope, while some Sinners that better understood the 7th Commandment,
cast a Covering over his shame, and b^^ him out: By and by comes another
inspired Friend into the Church, crying, Thus says the Lord, Give the Mr. as
Ro-o-pe again. Thus says the Lord, Give the Man his Rope. A heavenly Prophesy
sure; Ay, indeed, of all things 'twere pity to rob him of what he best
deserved, or most needed, to bind him to better ^^aviour: Give him his own, and
give him his (...).

Thus William Simpson, one of their greatest Spealers, walked naked in Penrith,
with his head shaven, and ashes on it, crying, Repent, Repent, Destruction is
as hand. Likewise he went thus through many Market Towns, and in, or near
Carliste, for disturbing ^^e quiet People, was taken to prison; and there he
thought he had a Revelation, That that City should (...), and be destroyed
within Ten days. This he so proclaimed, that thereby he affrighted some so far
as to remove their Goods; but a little time discovered the Man to be miserably
deluded, and for a public Offense, he was publicly whipped out of Town. See
(...) 66.4. They like not this sport now.

About the same time Margaret Mark, Wise of Thomas Mark of Soulby, in the
foresaid Parish of Dacrr, turning Quaker, renounced her Husband, would not own
him, called him Dog, Devil, etc. very zealous he was for their way, and
constant at their Meetings; but having disowned her Husband, lived apart with
only on Servant, and spent her time industriously in spinning. To this Servant
she showed some very fine Linen, telling what she intended it for. Its written,
said she, that a Woman shall compass a Man, and I am the Woman that must be
Mother to a second Savlour; and this Cloth I have prepared against that time
to wrap him in. Believe me, if the Son of God would be born again, and did not
like his old Hanger, I would commend him to a Quaker for soft and warm Lodging,
provided he be but a Savior to their tooth. See here how the Devil is apeing
the blessed God, but like a bungler, for honest, pious Mary did cleave to her
betrothed Husband. Matthew. 1. Stay Reader, and ask, How many Christ's and
Saviors will this People at length produce? There was but one to come, and he
the Son of God, and born of a Virgin: Now he came long ago, and we look not for
another, nor is there is Heaven or Earth such another Son of God, nor can be. I
know no need of a Second, nor Fault in the first, unless this be one, That he
was not born of a Quaker, nor will be confined to save only Quakers, nor will
he save any (no not Quakers) but in his own way; they must value his Blood, and
submit to the Rule of his Word; but Quakers like not such Terms, therefore will
have a second. I admit that this Woman after she was perverted fell melancholy
a while, but recovered soon to act rationally in all matters as ever she had
done; after which she lived eight or ten Years, and all the while a Quaker,
continuing to abhor her Husband as a Serpent, if at any time she met him: No
wonder, for you see she expected other Fruit of her Womb, but woefully deceived
in the event. Now, shall we marvel that Quakers offer us a new Creed, or
Christianity, and scorn our old Bible, when their Spirit says, we must have a
second Savior? A Carnal one too, and who is within none but a single Woman:
But he was only in her Imagination, so was a fit Brother to their other Christ
within: Well, Is this all? No, we have more Christ's among them, for Nailor
owned himself to be jesus the Son of God.

If they allege that she, or M. M. were melancholy, and that such a mind or
fancy is a Balueum Draboli, I grant the whole, both of these and such other
Diviners: But will the Quakers own this Plea? Did they ever reject any of their
Dreamers or Prophets as such? Did they deal so by this Conceiver, or our 3
Prophetesses or their great Prophetess in Somersetshire, who when one told her
the late Duke of Monmouth was dead, said these very Words, Believe it not, I Will
tell thee what I have from the Lord, he is as surely alive still as any of
(...). No, no, they reject them not, for these are the Tools to amuse the
simple: Now, say I, what a case is these people in, without a rule to try the
Spirits? Every Jugler, every brainsick Demoniack may be their Prophet: Thus
you lie at the Devil's mercy, who is not unwatchful to scratch where it itches,
and improve his advantages. Verily one would almost suspect that Father of Lies
in Torment, did even recreate himself by playing upon the credulity of such,
who are said to sport themselves with their ten deceivings. 2 Pet. 13.17.19.
etc. how nearly the Text concerns this People they would do well to consider,
by comparing, v. 1, 2.

But Friends, Memories are not always perfect; therefore we will come nearer to
the Year, 1686. when another (full of Spirit, no doubt) and upon a large Carnal
Pulpit too, or a High-place in that City, uttered this Angelical Preachment.
The Light is broke out in the Minds of Men, and Lo, this is our meeting Place;
had he not better have said as another since that time, who having designed to
Speak, the Spirit unluckily forgot to tell him what. Friends, I have a good
Conception, but a very bad Utterance. Just so inspired was that Prophet of
yours, who in the Year, 1694. walked through many Towns and Counties in this
Kingdom, pronouncing Judgments here and there; as particularly at Bristol, That
in few Months that City should become a Pool of Water, except it did repent;
this was declared amongst a crowd of you; published in the Streets, owned before
the Mayor, whose courtesy to the silly Wretch others o^ you Congratulated,
Caressed the Man, Honour^ his Prophecy above the Bible; coppied and hung (...)
up in your Houses; yet I dare Challenge you which of you believed him, or fled
out of Sodom. (...) But why did ye not, if he was inspired and se^^ from God?
And if he was not, then what was h^^ and you that approved him? and encouraged
him o^^ his way; See 2 Ep. John. v. 10.11.

Now least all or some of these be said to be obscure Persons, and that their
personal Freaks do no^ affect their Party, I desire it may be remembered from
public undeniable Prints this present Year that a very public Person, a great
Leader and Favorite of this People, did openly own this pretense to immediate
Divine inspiration, as a rule o^ Practice; I mean, William Pen, in his
Excommunicating G. K. for he acted by no Written Rule, no^ pretended so, but
that a Divine Power came upon him so forcible, that he knew not whether he we^^
Sitting, Standing or Kneeling; and that under th^^ power he uttered that
Sentence. How to distinguish that Frenzy from this of our Women, I know not:
'Twas all the warrant he had to pronounce G. K. a Heretic or Apostate: How
like this Roari^^ is to that of a Popish Bull, let others judge, and what
further proceedings against G. K. a Pensilvatian Magistrate might think to
justify by a like impulse, I cannot tell; but would not much trust t^^ good
Nature of a provoked Quaker; was it not will for Henry Winder that his Cause
depended in an English Court of Justice; else the Testimony of these
Prophetesses might have touched his Life, namely before a Magistrate disposed
to believe such Revelation: Suppose but that his Accusers or their Abetters had
been upon the Bench, I demand what security he had to escape? and the like I
say of G. K. ^ow let them tell us, if they can, what censure of ^^e Friends W.
P. has incurred for his so daring Assault of this Man; or wherein this differs
from the and Pranks of Old Diotrephes, 3 Ep. John v. 9.10. (...) what we may
judge to be an avowed Act of (...) party, if this was not. I know there little
Politicies in their methods of acting most part, so as nothing may be imputable
to the party, but lie at be door of this or that single Man, when convenient to
be disclaimed; and thus it comes to pass that (...) never know, or shall know,
what is the Doctrine of Quakerism, they reserving a liberty (like the Father of
Lies who is a very changling) to shrink from whatever they find unseasonable to
own: Thus W. ^. is taught by his Spirit, in the Years, 1693. and (...) to
divulge several Scriptures that carry a face (...) submitting his Doctrines to
Scripture Test, and ^^^uting them thence, yea, wherein he would seem (...) say
the very same concerning the Person of Christ (...) the Resurrection, for which
he pronounces G. ^. an Apostate; hoping perhaps that the world had ^^got how
flatly his Sandy Foundation shaken opposed (...) Doctrines, or that no body
would remember (...) he so lately said in a public Meeting, That (...) see no
need of Preaching the Faith of Christ with^^ which so many Nations receive, and
it profits them (...), but the Faith of Christ within. Whether this be a^^^able
to his novel pretense of valuing and teaching from Scripture, let honest
Quakers judge, by comparing 1 Cor. 1.17, 18, 23, 24, 30. -- Cap. 2.2. -- Cap.
15.2, 3, 4, 11, 12. And what inspiration taught W. P. this guileful doubling, I
wish himself to consider; for God is jealous, and the judge is at the Door.

3. Where will this Spirit lead you? Never to forsake this World for Christ,
whatever W. P. tall^ of No Cross, No Grown. He means no outward Cross for that
too is to be born within. Never were J^^ more busy and witty to grow carnally
Rich; ins^^ much that I have heard you glory of that success (...) a sure
Argument of God's Favor; much like some of the Popish Marks that their Church
is true; God (...) Spirit leads to God, and to mind Heavenly future things; to
follow Christ and crucify the Flesh, etc. which how you do at this Day, they
that look within your Families, Kitchins and Wine-Cellars, or upon your
sumptuous Houses, curious Habits, and leathern Conveniences, do plainly see.
Now sin^^ your Spirit aims to get and enjoy these pleasures o^ Sin and Flesh, I
ask, Where will it lead you for that? Archbishop Whitebread, and such others,
did surely mean to return from whence they came since then your Spirit, Fancy
or Flatus is your supreme Rule, its but sending among you some well skilled in
their Hocus Pocusses (and such you may read in the History of Jetzer) and then
you by warrant of your sort of Revelation, may as well Worship the Virgin Mary,
as your own St. George. Scripture its true forbids both; but that is a Carnal
(...) made of Paper and Ink, and the Spirit searches deeper things: Since
Friends of Old and of Late come with pretended Impirations, (and Rome too has
her Father's Missionary) what have you to try their Spirits? Can none come and
say, The Lord sent them, whom he sent not? If some may, How shall we discern
who are sent? To judge by Scripture is to set up a Rule you have been long
throwing down (...) Shall we then judge by the Events, the accomplishing, or
not, of their Predictions? As we are taught Deuteronomy. 18.22. By this, many more
Quakers besides our three Women, are Notorious, Presumptuous Impostors; yet if
at some time a predict^^ Event should follow, that is no sure Rule, (...) 13.1,
2, etc. Namely, If that Prophet calls (...) People from the Law of Moses, as
you do: I ^^^^sess till you return to the Law and the Testimony, I see not what
security you have a^^^^st the most Hellish Illusions, and Diaboli^^
Suggestions. That there is a Devil ( the (...) Spirit, in your Cant) your
selves often express; and Scripture tells you, he is a busy receiver, a false
Prophet; that his Delusions are (...), 2 These. 2. Depths of Satan, Rev. 2.24.
He (...) Simon Magus, and the People too, think (...) a great man, yea, the
great Power of God, (...) 8.9, 10. and you cannot forget Mahomet's (...) so
long as you see so many vast Na^^^s believe his Grand Lie. Now, why should
(...) not, as soon as a Missionary Quaker? (...) your principle I cannot
imagine how to ^^tinguish a New from an Old Alcoran. In (...) Assemblies you
have, and still read Friends (...) therein, but not Scripture; and the Spi^^^^
in your Writers has often charged you (...) do so, witness some of their Title
Pages: (...) then speak out, whether you be not in (...) Peril as they in 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Giving heed (...) seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Demons, and
(...) through the Hypocrisy of Liars, -- as I think, (...) text is better
translated by some.

4. Does not this Story wonderfully confirm (...) Doctrine of sinless
Perfection? The Wo^^n enjoin their accused Brother to bow to (...) and Confess.
Ah! the pride of this Qua^^^ Spirit! it tells them they must Bow to no (...)
but withal it tells them that others must Bow to them; so G. F. had the
Humility to receive Adoration and Worship, and Nailon too, and justified it by
a pretense that Christ was in him: So says the Papist, he is in a Crucisix.
Further they must be acknowledged Prephetesses too; Prophetesses no doubt, for
foretelling a Fact 9 Years after 'twas done; nay, in the Authority of their
Spirit, they have Popishly enjoined the accused to pray for the dead Child
Moreover Self-contradictions and Inconsistencie^ confirm their Infallibility;
as well as the Pope's One says, the Child's Throat was cut, another 'twas
strangled; once 'twas hid in the Peat-mow^ and then 'twas Buried on
Sparkhead-moor, hoping surely no search would be made there Dreadfully they
usurp the Name of God and Jesus Christ in vain; yea more, to vouch their
Hellish Lies and Impostures, how audaciously and profanely do their Letters
imitate the phra^^ of Scripture? How prodigiously is the Fi^^^ Commandment
violated here! It prescribes Duty in all Relations, but here is unnatural
contempt and dreadfullest breach of Duty to nearest Relations: And what horrid
violation of the 6th. (...) barbarous thirsting for their Brother and Sister
life! Of the 8th too and 9th, in seeking to ^o^ them of their Reputation and
Estate, and to draw them to accuse themselves, under color of providing for
their Children: Besides that they s^ unweariedly, impudently, bore false,
devilishly false Testimony before God, Angels and Me^ And is this the
Perfection of Quakers? Yes, this is it indeed, just like that of the bloody
self-righteous Pharisees, or that in Jer. 2.23. to 27 an^ 35. Sure they would
not have us think the^ void of sin, if they allow that either they (...) we
know what Sin is. But, mark Reader, that (...) hard to know, since we must have
no Gospel, no (...), no Rule, but within our Selves; for a wiser ^^^an tells us
what we all may feel and witness in (...) selves, That every Man's way is right
in his own (...), Prove. 21.2. -- Cap. 12.15. Even the ^ool is wise in his own
Conceit, Prove. 26.12, 16. (...) 28.25, 26. And so were these great
Perfectionists too! John 7.48, 49. John 9. v. 22. -- 34. These indeed in our
Story, since their Impostures (...) opened, seem to deny perfection in this
life, (...) will W. P. deny it without shuffling? Or ^till G. F. deny it, who
declared himself equal (...) God, and received Worship? Remember (...), Reader,
as their Infallibility consists with (...), and Self-contradiction; so can
their perfection stand with most Abominable Wickedness. These are the People
that confess no sins, nor will (...) a part in the justest national
Humiliations; (...), they are devoutly keeping their perpetual (...) bath the
while in their open shops, that no ^estomer be lost. No wonder they so
perversely refused to join, both in the Year 1689. and in (...) 1696, in giving
God thanks for delivering us (...) our Religion from French Tyranny: Against
(...) I and Christ without, they will bear a Testimony, (...) none against the
late King James and Popery; (...) ^ean, not they of Pen's Faction; for I ought
(...) own that distinction, lest I wrong the Innocent.

5. Do we not reasonably demand an account of (...) Doctrine concerning Jesus
Christ, and the ^oly Spirit, on whom all this stuff is fathered, as said by his
Inspiration, or that he had discover^^ all this to you? If there is no Christ
but with^^ you, and that is it you mean, all this may be (...); for all this
lewd stuff certainly came from within, as Mat. 15.18, 19. Ephesians. 2.2. Cap. 4.18.
If Friends will be so pleased, I can tell them of (...) Stanch Quaker at this
day so just and true, that being taken in the fact of Cursing and Swearing
freely owned, it is not I, but the Devil in me: So may the Devil dwell and be
Friends with the Quakers Christ within. But if that Darkness a^^ Corruption
within (whatever you call it) is your Christ, it is the Devil's Christ, and
God's Christ warns you against it, in Mat. 6.23. And wh^ he speaks, the Spirit
speaks unto the Churches Rev. 2. But who or what is your Spirit? It not seems
to confess Christ, and you read that occasionally the Devil would do so, Mat.
8.29. (...) 4.34. If by the Spirit you mean that Divine Eternal Person, who
spoke in and by the Prophet and Apostles, 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. and speaks still
(...) the written Word, 2 Timothy 3.16. we know, the is not of him: But if your
Spirit is your preg^^^ imagination, or a wild Passion, then it is granted th^^
were acted by it. But then we that complain of Socinians and others, who make
the Holy Gh^^^ a Divine Power, Quality or Creature, must mu^^ more complain of
you. Tell us therefore plain^ what ye mean by Jesus Christ, what ye think of
his. For ye have not told Dr. Lancaster to satisfaction. Do you mean the Light
or any thing within you? (...) ye are wont when ye tell us, Christ is crucified
(...) in, risen and exalted within; yes, rather crucif^^ than exalted, but how
both I cannot devise. However take that notion with all its Nonsense, (...)
can this Light, or whatever else in you, be (...) Christ, i.e. be a Savior,
and be Anointed? for so^^ of you know that so these names mean? How (...) that
Light in you reveal Secrets, send Messenger (as you call your selves, Witnesses
and Embassa^^^ from the Lord Jesus Christ?) Why have not all (...) Quakers such
Revelations, or Discoveries, since they are all furnished (and we too) with the
light within? Is this Christ of yours a Person, a glorious Lord, exalted at the
right hand of God the Father, and such as the Scriptures represent true Christ
to be? Then down go the Sentiments most of you have so long espoused about
Christ: Yea are Apostates from Primitive Quakerism, and from Father Fox. That
Jesus descri^ed in Scripture was to seal up Vision and Prophecy, Dan. 9.24. or
to give such perfect discovery of God's Counsel and Will to the World, that the
Spirit's extraordinary Gifts of Illumination should be no more necessary, nor
continual. But the Quakers by pretending to constant prophetical Revelation
from him, deny his Work aforesaid; and denying that he has ^^one his Work,
deny that He is come, or worse; ^ay, that He ever was to come, or needs to
come. A ^^gular Privilege they have in having their Christ within, whom
there is no danger of forsa^ing in any case; it is but to consult their ^ight,
'twill give a Response like that, Cum fueris (...), Romano vivito more. Then
enter Father Mo^^^s, and all is done: They may in a new sense (...) as their
inward Christ will not fail to tell them) (...) all things to all men, as
already in habits and ^^tures; so may be Papists or Turks upon occasion.

6. If you will grant these Women were deceived, ^^en who deceived them? Was it
not that old Master of Art, so Officious among the Sons (...) God, Job 1. The
same that beguiled the Corinthians from pure Christian Simplicity, (...)
^^inth. 11. If they did err, God and his Spirit (...) Truth so far left them.
And then I think it worth your inquiry, what might be the occasions or causes
of that penal permission, this no more of you be so enchanted. One most fatally
intoxicating notion I take to be, that of the saving Grace of God in all men;
what could men devise more proud and provoking, to bring all God's remedial
provisions into contempt? I can see nothing it saves, unless they mean that it
saves them all care and pains i^ working out their Salvation. For no people
sleep so secure as they, without all fear or Spiritual conflict.

7. Is it not time to review all the Doctrine and Practices which upon this one
Antiscriptural conceit you entertain? If you are o^^ of the way, never were men
so fearfully out no guide so slippery as that ye have chosen; (...) very
Proteus, as all men see, only will not change white. Ye can confess or deny
Christ come in the Flesh, ye can own or disown his satisfaction and
righteousness; value or deride and decry his benefits, Grace and Word pro re
nat^. The Antichrists in St. John were honest men to you, and yet of them he
said, they had not G^^^ because they did not abide in the Doctrine of Christ I
do not equal all Quakers in this charge, but to all I say, Read, and consider
your ways, Pro^^^ ^4.16. A wise man fears and departs from evil, but the
Fool rages and is confident: See also v. 6, 12, 14, 15, 17, 22, 25, 27, 33.

Secondly; if perchance ye will not read, not hear, others will: wherefore them
I invite to observe, from this our Narrative,

1. That Primitive Quakers were very troublesome to Magistrates and Ministers
with their pretended Messages from the Lord. They would come and openly disturb
Mr. Gilpin (and hundreds more) in the Church, and H. W. in his house, and the
Justices in theirs. Such was the temper and tendency of the Quakers Spirit,
they could not stay at home in their callings, 1 Thessalonians. 3.6. to 15. They were
immediately carried against Magistracy and Ministry, the two so great
Ordinances of God for governing and blessing the World; but what is the matter
that ^^e so seldom hear of their Messages now adays to Magistrates and
Ministers? Why none to Long William and his Parliament, as to Oliver and his?
They can tell a pretty reason or two ^ ^^at we may ask, is their Spirit ceased,
or are they weary (O utinam!) with seeing their Prophecies so often baffled and
disappointed? had they not need assure the Magistrate, that now their Mind is
changed? Else how unsecure is the State and Church? Whom may they not accuse at
this ^^ate? And instigate others (for herein the Pope ^^d they agree) to
execute their Anathema's? Mark the Peaceable mind, and Innocence of ^^sighting,
unswearing Quakers: Others they will ^^pley to swear, at every Custom-house, that
is, (...) damned to do their drudgery. And G. K's case done sufficiently shows
the World their benignity to any they dislike. See 1 John 3.10, 12, 15. (...)
27.14. Wrath is cruel, and Anger is out^^gious, and who can stand before Envy?

2. That Scripture and Quakerism are mutual enemies; H. W. must forsake that,
if he will turn Quaker, Turk, or Papist; none of their Messages to him are from
that. Indeed they boldly Ape its Language, as the Devil uses to do in his
Oracles. But if Scripture is such Serpent's meat, such a Lying Book, or is not
(as it affirms it self to be) the very Word of God, why does the pretended
Spirit of God in Quakers aim to speak so like it? use its Phrases, and way of
delivering its reports? Does the Holy Spirit or does Jesus Christ love to
resemble and imitate false seducing Authors? as the Penmen of the Bible are,
if they be not such as they own themselves to be: But if indeed they were sent
and taught of God, then is Quakerism contrary to the Doctrine that is of God. I
know what respect they give it, since a good Act of Parliament taught them what
to say for peace but how else do they yet honor it? And (...) they do, what
sort of Christians can they be? The Jews were to retain and observe Moses Law,
Mal. 4.4. and we Christ's, Matthew. 28.2^ and Christians I find those called, who
receive Christ's and his Apostles Doctrine about the Person and Office of
Christ who died for Sinners: Acts. 11.26. with Ephesians. 2.21. But they do not: Nay,
you hear them count those go^^ Christians that heard not this Doctrine; but who
Believers can such be? To. 10.14. Do they (...) hereby confess another Christ?
To. 16.20, (...) Well, though they be Enemies to Scripture, (...) them the
Scriptures of both Testaments (...) fulfilled, that such deceivers will come,
Matthew 24. and that there is a Spirit of Error as well (...) of Truth; many
small Antichrists as one Gra^^ one; so that we need not call in question o^
Scripture-Christianity for them; nay, they affo^^ us an argument that it is the
very Word (...) Words of God.

3. Observe the pride and danger of casting off Scripture-Rule. Honest Men come
to the clearest Light to be tried and undeceived; these run from it, that none
may have whereby to convince them, admitting no appeal but to their own Light,
i. e. the Defendant will be his own Judge: This holds them fast in the Devil's
snare. And how credulous can they be of any Reports! I know whom they surmised
to be the Author of a Book that offended them, and Answered it is his, with
many lying, scurrilous Reflections, when he knew no more of its Author than
they: But that is a small thing. Mark how this Woman's Revelation began, even at
her FEET, to make sure of entire possession; no wonder they count all others
carnal, since Quakers are all over (...) Spiritual, that they can receive
spiritual Impressions and Divine Revelations, even in their ^eels; but hear the
consequence, Ezekiel. 13.3, 5. 6, 8, 9. and v. 17. to 23. I have sometime heard of
Monkish Dispossessions, and egresse of Demons a posteriori, but never of any
illapse of the holy Spirit like this. Risum teneatis?

4. How busy the Devil has been, is, and will be against the Word and Spirit
of Christ, and thereby against his Church and Honor; and ah! how strong his
delusions when once admitted? Hardly were any of these seduced Wretches wrought
to the least measure of Repentance, and shame, after most woeful frustrations of
their Dreams, and public detection of their Lies. This is the fruit of casting
off Scripture, Ministry and Ordinances as outward, carnal things; so easy it is
to retain a pretense of Religion quite separate from its life, truth and power.
Here we have great swelling names of Spirit and Revelation, and of Jesus
Christ, but coupled with a fierce bloody Zeal as any in Popery Might not such
Revelation be as good a Warrant to Poison or Stab H. W. as to put the
Magistrate upon hanging him on such proof? Reader, these are no new things in
the World Marvel not if the Devil acts now as he did of old. But what a
senseless shamm is Quaker pretense to Universal Charity? Sometimes they tell us
that even Socrates is safe in obeying his Light, as T. S. of late; why then do
they not let all alone to be taught by their own Light? But their treatment of
H. W. when reclaimed, shows that they can endure none but themselves. And here
observe their singular Charity to Protestants, whom they set on even grounds
with Papists, Jews, Turks and Pagans just so and no more. A goodly price is
this put on Reformed Religion! and the glorious everlasting Gospel! since
Pagans be and do as well without it. But says the Spirit of Truth so is Psa.
147.19, 20. John 14.6. Ephesians. 4.18. and are not we highly obliged by this their
Candor? Oh the front of these Men! Truly did we use Scripture no more in our
houses and Assemblies than most Quakers do in theirs, as well we might be
Pagans.

5. Mark by what means H. W. once a Quaker, escapes out of their Net. In him
you first see there may be fearful long Backslidings of good people, Ps. 37.23,
24, to 34. whom yet effectual Grace will recover, as Peter. Satan though he
winnow them, shall lose his prey. Were it possible, he would deceive the very
Elect, Mat. 24.24. But Christ has prayed that their Faith do not utterly,
finally fail: Wise and merciful provision has he made in the new Covenant for
such Cases, Jer. 3. Ezekiel. 36. Hos. 14.4, 5. But see here by what Methods and
Arguings he was set right, and reduced to Truth; 'twas (...) just use of his
Reason, and consideration guided by Scripture, that represented Quakerism to
him groundless, absurd and Impious; then durst ^e no longer abide in it: May
others give like Glory to free, rich and powerful Grace, Ezekiel. 16.^^.63. 2 Cor.
6.16. coming out from among Unbelievers.

6. How wise and faithful is the Lord in exer^^^ing his Children by
Persecutions, Afflictions, Reproaches, etc. according to Psalm. 119.67, 71,
(...) for much endeavor had been used to con^ince H. W. and his Wife, of that
Error; but ^ather than let them sin unto death, God per^its their own nearest
Relations to be their ^urpest scourge; this opened their eyes to let them see
the strong Delusions of the Quaking spirit, and now they humble themselves
great^^; write an Acknowledgment of their Error; ^eg Prayer of the Church,
etc. and after a while, ^ere received. Reader, see Psalm. 94.12, 13. Psalm.
119.78, 79, 80. Heb. 12.10, 11. wherein the Lord fully declares his fatherly
purposes in correcting his Children, especially in case they go ^^^ay. But it is
dreadful when Corrections make ^o impression, Jer. 5.3. Thus it has been with
the ^ost of H. W's persecutors to this day; con^^^ning which frame of Spirit I
wish others ^^y take warning from Jer. 6.10, 15, 16, 17, 19 -- cap. 8.5, 6, 12.

7. Think what need of thy Compassions and Prayer for these so deluded, that by
the Gospel they may be better enlightened, Acts 26.18. Re^. 3.18. The Lord is
patient, (Oh how patient! toward them, suffering his Name to be thu^
blasphemed. The day is not yet come (but it i^ coming, Jude 14, 15.) wherein he
will judge the World by the Lord Jesus Christ, whom he h^^ ordained Judge of
the Quick and Dead. While he thus forbears, it is meet we should act in a li^^
Spirit toward sinners. 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. Cap. 6. (...) 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. even
toward these; they are no^ alike deplorable. God once convinced many obstinate
Jews, and will more; so he recovered many from the depths of Popery: Nor are
all Quakers equal in sin. Some ground of charitable hope remains, that if they
durst examine, the Veil might be rent from their blinded minds. I know their
danger from 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. 2 Timothy 3.13. but H. W. and others, after many Years
delusion were recovered Who then dares say that no more shall, after a longer
stay in their Tents? They must be rebuked sharply; yet, Christian Reader, put
on Bowels of large Compassions: Charity for thee they have none, till thou turn
Quaker; no, not common Pocket-charity, most of them confine that to their own;
thou therefore put on the more Charity to them, as Christ Jesus to the
obstinate, murdering Jews. It Is hard to say what thou can do to convince or
gain any of them If they will not hear thee, nor the Church, they must be left
to God. But Noah, that perfect Man, and preacher of Righteousness, condemned
the World. That thou may profit them, or at least Antidote thy self, I
beseech thee,

1. To practice in the name of Christ that Mortification of Lusts and Passions
they pretend to; particularly that of Self conceit, Revenge, and ^^^y Zeal:
These thou see our Perfectionists had not put off. St. John in his day, to
secure against worldly Antichrists then appearing, advised to ^rucify worldly
Affections, 1 John 2.15. cap. 4.5, 6. so say I: Love of Gain has made many
Quakers; for the Devil, and the worst of Men will be kind to their own.

2. Adorn Christian Doctrine (which they pro^ess not) in a holy, shining life:
Be better than ^hey, 1 Pet. 2.9. Do they make show of any Ver^^e, or laudable
practice? It Is a vile shame if Christ's Disciples outdo them not, whose Light,
Principles and assisting Grace so far exceed theirs. They once made a specious
show of Humility, Self-Denial, Contempt of the World, plain, upright Dealing,
frugality and gravity in Apparel: The World sees it is not so now; their Rule
can stretch and bend, but thine is not so slippery and novable: Let them see,
that better Principles ^ake better Men; especially beware of casting ^^y
Offense before them to confirm them in their way.

3. Keep Humble and low in thine own eyes; There is no cause that sinful man
should lean to his own wisdom, strength, or Righteousness. God resists the
proud that will not bow to, and depend on his Guidance and Grace; but his
Favor he shows to the Humble, such he guides, leaving others to be misguided
by their own lusts. Psalm. 81.11, 12.

4. Magnify Jesus Christ the incarnate Son o^ God, the great Light, and Savior
of the World^ as necessary to thee in all thy Affairs with God and with thy
Spiritual Enemies, 1 Cor. 1.31 Col. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. He is precious
to such as know him, or themselves, Phil. 3.7, 8. The Faithful cleave to, and
follow him in a^^ his Ways and Ordinances; by Faith in him they live and are
preserved. Ah! Reader, beware o^ them that vilify him, and his Wisdom; Beware
of the Quaker's Spirit and Insinuations. It has often appeared that such as have
joined themselves to them, are prepared for any Delusions the Devil can
suggest; their case is mournful, but they scorn our pity. It Is dismal to think
how seldom any of them are reclaimed, and how Pagan like their young Generation
is educated; bu^ that this should be at this day in a Reformed, Evangelized
Nation is saddest of all.

5. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of Truth. A^^ where will thou run when he ceases
to lead thee Dare not to disobey that Light he conveys by and from the Oracles
of God. Receive Heavenly Doctrine, even the whole counsel of God in the Love of
it, lest thou be delivered to believe lies, and hardened through the
deceitfulness of Sin Of all people, proud, empty Professor, whose ears are
itching, are ^ikest to be the Seducer's Prey^ for this I dare appear to all
that mind their lase Proselytes. When many deceivers were abroad, St. John
thought it needful more fully to instruct and confirm his Disciples in present
Fundamental Truth, which those and ours agree to subvert. See 1. Joh. 2.18.
etc. St. Paul also went about confirming the Disciples souls, Acts 14.21, 22,
23. (...). in the Doctrine they had received, Ephesians. 2.20, (...). hold that fast,
2 These. 2 14, 15. Jude 3. -- 17, 18, 19, 20. Rev. 2.24, 25. Surely these
cautionary ad^onition; are of use still, and ought to be alike ^cceptable to
thee.

Finally, Dread the Methods whereby others are inveigled, i. e. a pretense of
all inward Spirit ^^ulity in Religion. A form of Godliness without life and
Spirit God abhorrs; but while we are in ^^^e Body, we must employ Souls and
bodies (...) his worship, we must have visible, sensible ordinances; such the
Wisdom of God has app^inted us: But these waxing secure and wanton (...)
formal profession, first cast off all ordinances, (...) outward duties, all
prayer, only with this re^erve, when their own Spirits would give 'em (...)
jogg, i. e. when their flesh had nothing ^o object. Thou therefore when tempted
to quit ^he beaten path of Scripture-worship, be sure to ^ee good and clear
divine Warrant for any new any commended to thee. So thou had need, ^ho must
render to God an account why thou do turn aside from the great Shepherd's
sents. Wise Solomon, in Proverbs 2.20. coun^^ls thee to walk in the way of good
men, and ^eep the paths of the Righteous: So Heb. 6.^^. do you so, praying all
along to be taught of God, and led by his Spirit into all Truth (...) means of
his Word. Ps. 119.18. Open thou ^^ine eyes, that I may see wondrous things out
^f thy Law. v. 19. I am a stranger in the Earth, ^ide not thy Commandments from
me. v. 24. Thy Testimonies also are my delight, and my Counselors.

THE CONCLUSION TO THE Sober-minded Quakers.
ONce more I beseech you hear what this story speaks to you: You plainly see
the native tendency of your pretended Revelation yet all your Speakers to this
day hold fast the pretense, alleging they know not who shall speak until the
Spirit moves in that very hour of that assembly; nor what shall be spoken: A
conceit that has often made me smile; when I have been told a week beforehand by
your selves, that such a man will on such a day speak at such a place, but a^^
populum phaleras, the credulous Mob must still be fed with wonders, and the
Women too, (who of all things love to have their Tongues at liberty) must be
heard gagling as the green Apron gives them utterance: Of this I know some of
you are sick and weary, though they dare not openly, condemn it, since so many
have undertaken to justify that impudent contradiction to the God of Order, and
to baffle those 2 plain texts. 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. But in truth
the woeful misadventures of our 3 she-Apostles, not to mention the fulsom noise
and nonsense of such others, may well turn your stomachs against that principle
which has Jet the Female Spirit loose: How to get (...) of this unruly Evil by
your notion, I cannot ^^^ern: Therefore I adjure you, seriously consider ^^at
you have done in casting off Scripture-rule, (...) ^ucking up that hedge,
choosing to walk in a^^^er light: Some of your Crafts-men, I know, (...) now
deny this, whose Ingenuity I cannot but ^^^^ire, since the Fact is notorious in
1 00 of your (...), and in constant practice; for God's Book (...) no place or
honor in your Assemblies, nor do (...) Teachers submit themselves or Doctrine
to ^t Judge. From this you cannot honorably re^^^, without taking shame to
your selves, as sin^^^e Penitents use to do; and proclaiming to the (...) that
herein was your first and most dange^^^s Error: If yet you see it an Error,
it is a fatal ^e, Why then will you not confess and forsake (...); as Psalm.
119.176. Prove. 19.27. Erring is com^on to Men, and why not to you? It Is an old,
^^d common Error, and harder to correct, but the (...) necessary, since you can
else never know therein to return. The Scripture is God's own ^^ovision, to
prevent or recover from Delusions: (...) you will not yet appear before that
Tribunal, I ^^^nk you cover your Sins, and cannot prosper: come ^^th therefore
from the tents of Deists and Papists, (...) all that shun ^eavenly light; and
if you mean ^^^estly; let us see you henceforth teach and wor^^ip, and walk by
this holy Rule. Search the di^^^e Records, which are able to make you wise to
^^^hation through faith in Christ Jesus. You cannot do less, if you have due
care of Immortal ^ouls; it is utterly unsafe to continue under other ^^^ance:
Resolve but on a little honest humility, ^^d you may escape the snare of the
proud Devil, ^rying as David, Psalm. 119.10, 11.18, 19.33 to (...) and God may
yet grant you Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth: Your Spirit (...)
grown evidently tame and towardly in other thing it keeps exact time in your
Meetings by virtue (...) a watch within you, for an outward clock, or Gla^^ on
a high place is an abomination: Why the may it not allow you to alter in this,
which is the very foundation of all you do amiss? Close n^ now your Eyes to
this warning, for fear of the Condemnation in Joh. 3.18, 19. Joh. 9.41. What
advise you is just and fair: Which if you will n^ hear, it only remains, that
(as the good old Proph^^ Jeremy) my Soul weep in secret over your
inco^rigibleness, and that you reap. the bitter fruits (...) your obstinacy, as
the very true and faithful Wi^^ness, the Son of God, has denounced in Luke
(...) 4^.

THE END.
Books Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in Little Britain.
THe Revelation unvailed: Or, an Essay toward the Discove^y, 1. When many
Scripture Pro^hecies had their accomplishment, and turned History, 2. What are
fulfilling, 3. What rest still to be fulfilled; with a Guess at the time of
them. With an Appendix, pro^ing that Pagan Rome was not Baby^en, Rev. 17. And
that the Jews shall be converted. By Samuel Petto, Minister of the Gospel at
Sudbury in Suffolk, price 1 s. 6 d.

A Faithful Narrative of the Wonderful and Extraordinary Fits which Mr. Tho.
Spatchet (late of Dunwich and Cookly) was under by Witchcraft: Or, a Mysterious
Providence in his even Unparalled Fits. With an account of his first Falling
into, Behavior under, and (in part) deliverance out of them. Wherein are
several remarkable Instances of the gracious Effects of fervent Prayer. The
whole drawn up and written by Same Petto, Minister of the Gospel at Sudbury in
Suffolk, who was an Eyewitness of a great part. With a Necessary Preface,
price 6 d.

Mathematical Divinity: Or, a plain demonstration from the Holy Scriptures,
that the times of this work were fore-appointed by the Covenant made with
Abraham, and determined to be according to the measure of the Age and fullness
of Christ. Kept secret since the World began, but i^ now made plain upon 12
Tables in a Solar Calendar, as familiar to the understanding as any common
Almanac. With a full proof that this is the last Generation which shall not
pass away till all things be fulfilled, and the Gates of Righteousness be
opened, being the result of many years study. By Elias Palmer, price 1 s.

A compendious History of the first Inventers and Institutors of the most
famous Arts, Mysteries, Laws, Customs and Manners in the whole World. Together
with many other Ratities and Remarkable things, etc. to which are added several
curious Inventions, peculiarly attributed to England and Englishmen. The whole
Alphabetically digested, and very helpful to the reading of History, price 1 s.

A new method of Educating Children: Or, Rules and Directions for the well
ordering and governing them during their younger Years. Showing that they are
capable at the Age of three years to be caused to learn Languages, and most
Arts and Sciences; which if observed by Parents, would be of greater value than
a thousand pounds portion. Also what methods are to be used by Breeding Women;
and what diet is most proper for them and their Children, to prevent Wind,
Vapors, Convulsions etc. Written (to disengage the World from those ill
customs in Education, it has been so long used to) by Tho. Trion, Author of the
way to Health, Long Life and Happiness, price 1 s.

A short Discourse of the Rise, Nature and Management of the Small Pox, and all
putrid Fevers, occasioned by the Death of our late incomparable Queen. Together
with a Philosophical Account of an excellent Remedy for these and many other
Diseases. By T. Byfield M. D. price 6 d.

Medicina Practica: Or, Practical Physic; showing the method of curing the
most usual Diseases happening to Humane Bodies, with the preparation of the
Praecipiolum, or universal Medicine of Paracelsus; to which is added, the
Philosophic Works of Hermes Trismegistus, Kalid Persicus, Geber Arabs,
Artesius Longavus, Nicholas Flammel, Roger Bachon, and George Ripley, all
Translated out of the best Latin Editions, into English. Together with a
singular Comment upon the first Book of Hermes, the most Ancient of
Philosophers. The whole completed in three Book. By William Salmon Professor
of Physic, price 5 s.

Angliae Metropolis: Or, the present State of London; with Memorials
comprehending a full and succinct account of the Ancient and Modern State
thereof. Its Original, Government, Rights, Liberties, Charters, Trade, Customs,
Privileges, and other Remarkables, etc. first Written by the late ingenious
Tho. de laun, Gent. and continued by another hand, price 2 s. 6 d.

The Balm of the Covenant applied to the Bleeding Wounds of Afflicted Saints;
first composed for the relief of a pious and worthy Family, ^ourning over the
Deaths of their ^opeful Children, and now made public for the support of all
Ch^^stians, sorrowing on the same or another account; to which is added. Sermon
Preached for the Funeral that Excellent and Religious Gent^^man John Upton of
Lupton, Esquire; (...) John Flavel, late Minister of the Go^pel at Dartmouth in
Devon. price 1 s.


