A Seasonable QUESTION, IN A SERMON On Joshua 5.13. -- Art thou for us, or for
our Adversaries? Preached on the 18th of June at Kingsnoth, being the Public
Fast: And on the 27th of July at St. Peter's Cornhill, London. By Timothy
Wilson, M. A. and Rector of Kingsnoth in Kent.

LONDON, Printed by T.S. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at
the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1690.

TO THE READER.
I Was importuned by some Friends and Relations, to publish this plain Sermon,
which was heard with general satisfaction in the Country: but then I could not
be prevailed with to transcribe a Copy for the Press. However since a good
Providence (as I hope) and business of importance has called me to London, I,
not loving to be wholly idle, resolved to Preach this Country Fast Sermon,
hoping that it might be very seasonable, and meet with as much acceptance here,
as it did in my Neighborhood. But some Auditors I had full of prejudice, and
the discourse was variously received. This was the lot of our Blessed Savior.
Some said, he was a good man: others said, nay, but he deceives the People. I
can say with St. Paul, Men and Brethren, I have lived in all good Conscience
before God until this day, Act. 23.1. I never believed the Divine Right of any
one Form of Government antecedent to agreement, but I always thought the
obligation of Conscience was consequent to it. And accordingly I have Justified
Self-defence and Self-preservation, against Illegal and Universal Oppression in
discourses published some months ago. So that I am most zealous for the present
Government of King William and Queen Mary. And I make it my business to
convince and confirm all my fellow Subjects, as I have opportunity. But this
Sermon is practical, and in all things fitted to the meanest capacity. And I
never intended that it should see the light but because it is thought that it
may do some good, I have consented to publish it. I live a retired life, and my
Neighbors are well contented, living peacably, Worshipping God in one place,
and Honoring King William and Queen Mary. But when I come abroad in the World,
I find great Animosities and Prejudices: whereas I think, that though we cannot
be all of one Opinion in smaller matters, yet true Protestants should heartily
unite against Popery and Slavery. Good Christian Reader, if thou have any
scruples, I make no Question but that thou may receive satisfaction, if thou will calmly dispute the case, I am at thy service in this work,

Tim. Wilson.

JOSH. 5.13. These words of the Verse, Art thou for us, or for our Adversaries?


AFTER the Death of Moses the Servant of the Lord, Joshua was made Captain of
Gods Israel. He was a Devout Man, and a good Soldier; full of Faith, and full
of Courage. And God magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel, and they
feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life, chap. 4. ver. 14.
He led Gods people Israel over Jordan, as Moses did over the Red Sea; and he
brought them to the Borders of Canaan, their promised Inheritance and
Possession. This made the Kings of the Amorites, and the Kings of the
Canaanites tremble. Their Hearts melted, neither was there Spirit in them any
more, ver. 1. of this Chapter of our Text. In his Travels, Joshua had (...),
saw a Vision or Apparition; And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho,
that he lift up his Eyes, and looked, and behold there stood a Man over against
him, with his Sword drawn in his Hand; and Joshua went unto him, and said unto
him, Art thou for us, or for our Adversaries?

Joshua saw one Man, or Angel, and he asked him this question. And if I were a
Preacher to all England this day, I would ask them the same question, Art thou
for us, or for our Adversaries?

The words are a question proposed by Joshua to the Angel, or Person that
appeared to him.

For the Illustration and Exemplification whereof, I shall consider these
things.

1. Who the Us are. 2. Who our Adversaries are. 3. I shall give you the
Reasons, why all good Men should be for us. 4. Why all good Men should be
against our Adversaries.
And so proceed to a short Parallel and Application to our selves.

1. I shall consider who the Us are. They were Joshua, and the Children of
Israel, and by parity of Reason, all such as Joshua and the Children of Israel
were. And I shall give you their Character in these five Particulars.

1. They were Jews, Gods People, and in Covenant with him. 2. They maintained
Gods true Religion. 3. They were oppressed wicked Men. 4. They defended
themselves against their Oppressors. 5. They had Gods Promise for Deliverance,
and believed in him.
1. They were Jews, Gods people, and in Covenant with him. They were the Seed
of Abraham, the Friend of God, and only Visible Church of God upon Earth. And
God was the God of their Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob, Exodus 3.6. and Deuteronomy. 28. and 9 The Lord shall establish thee an
holy people unto himself, as he has sworn unto thee, if thou shall keep the
Commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his Ways; and all people of the
Earth shall see, that thou art called by the Name of the Lord, and they shall
be afraid of thee, etc. There is an Holy Covenant between God and his People.
That is the first Character.

2. They maintained Gods true Religion. Art thou for us, who are the true
Worshippers of God? Gods Glory and his Name was celebrated among the
Israelites, and they served the Lord; Ye shall serve the Lord your God, (says
Moses, Exodus 23.25.) and he shall bless thy Bread and thy Water and I will take
sickness away from the midst of thee. They Worshipped neither the Idols which
the corrupt World had before the Flood, nor those Idols which other Nations
Worshipped since the Flood; but they Worshipped the God of Israel only, and
made no Covenant with the Heathen. See Exodus 34.14. That is the second
Character.

3. They were oppressed by wicked men. After the Death of Joseph, there arose a
King who hated Gods people, and resolved to ruin them, or keep them under, and
make them Slaves, Exodus 1.8, etc. He feared their Numbers and Strength, and he
consulted with his Favorites to deal subtly with them. At first he commanded
all their Male-Children to be slain as soon as they were Born; a most Barbarous
and Cruel Edict! And he set over them Taskmasters, to afflict them with their
Burdens; and they made the Children of Israel to serve with rigor, and they
made their Lives bitter with hard Bondage; and many Devices they had to keep
under and enslave the poor Israelites. But God saw the Affliction of his
people, and heard their cry, by reason of their Taskmasters, and knew their
sorrows; and he saw the Oppression, wherewith the Egyptians oppressed them;
and, Exodus 3.8. He came down and delivered them out of the Hand of the
Egyptians, and resolved to bring them up out of that Land, unto a good Land,
and a large, unto a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, unto the place of the
Canaanites, etc. That is the third Character.

4. They defended themselves against their Oppressors. The Israelites War was
plainly defensive against Pharaoh King of Egypt, though he pleaded that they
had been his Subjects, with the prescription of above four hundred years. As
soon as Gods time for Deliverance came, Moses and the Elders of Israel went to
the King of Egypt, Exodus 3.18. and demanded leave to sacrifice to the God of
Israel. They would have Freedom of Religion, and Liberty to serve God, and live
no longer under the oppression of Pharaoh. This provoked Pharaoh to wrath, and
made him Blaspheme the God of Israel; Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
voice, to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go,
Exodus 5.2. And instead of easing their Grievances, he imposed more heavy
Burdens, requiring Brick, and not allowing Straw, and punished them for not
performing what was impossible to be done. They make their complaint, as of a
thing unreasonable, and against the Law of Nature, but they could have no
redress; for Pharaoh was resolved to oppress and suppress them, if he could. He
calls all their pretenses but idleness, and to Sacrifice to the Lord was but
the effect of their laziness. Thus are wicked Oppressors, whom God has
determined to destroy, deaf to all complaints, though never so just and
reasonable That is the fourth Character.

5. They had Gods promise for deliverance, and believed in him. Gods Promise
they had, Exodus 6.3, etc. where you may see a full and plain Promise of God to
deliver Israel, to bless them, and to settle them in Canaan the Promised Land.
It is true, many of the Children of Israel had not Faith to believe this, they
hearkened not to Moses for anguish of Spirit, and for cruel Bondage, v. 9. But
no doubt most of the Israelites adhered to Moses in this cause, and had Faith
to believe that God would perform his Promise; and the most unbelieving, when
they saw Gods mighty Works, were forced to confess, that the God of Israel was
most powerful. That is the fifth and last Character.

2. I shall consider who our Adversaries are. The Adversaries of Joshua and the
Israelites, were diverse people of Canann, all Heathens and Idolaters; a corrupt
Generation, whose iniquities were full; wicked and profane, and God had
decreed to destroy them.

1. They were Idolaters. 2. They were guilty of heinous Sins. 3. They were
appointed by God to utter Ruin and Destruction for their Sins.
1. The Adversaries were Idolaters; they forsook the true God, Creator and
Possessor of Heaven and Earth, and Worshipped Idols, the Work of their own
Hands: They changed the Glory of the uncorruptible God into an Image made like
to corruptible Man, and changed the Truth of God into a Lie, and Worshipped and
Served the Creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen, as
St. Paul speaks, Rom 1.23, 25. Hence God forbids his people Israel making
Images, Levit. 26.1. and nothing provoked the Lord to anger more, than when his
people Israel revolted to Idolatry, either that of the Egyptians, or that of
the Moabites. As for that of the Egyptians, we read Exodus 32. that God was
incensed by the Worshippers of the Golden Calf, the Egyptian Idol; and
threatened to consume them, had not Moses interceeded and prayed earnestly. As
for that of the Moabites, we read Numb. 25. that the anger of the Lord was
kindled against Israel, because they Sacrificed and Bowed down to their Gods.
God sent a Plague among them, in which died four and twenty thousand, because
they joined themselves to Baal Peor, which some say was the Beastly Heathenish
God Priapus; a most lewd and abominable Idol, abhorred by the very Heathens,
who had any sense of Goodness, or sparks of Virtue and Morality left.

2. They were guilty of heinous Sins. Besides their Idolatry, Profaneness,
Superstition, false Worship, blasphemy, and the like Sins, directly against
God, and the Duties of the first Table of the Decalogue, they abounded with
notorious Vices forbidden in the second Table, and directly against their
Neighbor. They stand accused of all Unrighteousness, Malice, Drunkenness,
Murder, and especially of Whoredom, and all manner of Uncleanness, even Sodomy
it self not excepted. They were sinful, yea a people laden with iniquity, and a
Seed of evil doers, who sinned against Natural Light and Knowledge. But I shall
not descant on particulars at this time.

3. The Adversaries were appointed by God to utter Ruin and Destruction, for
their sins. Their iniquities were full, and God had fully resolved to root them
out. Thus we read, Levit. 18.25. The Land is defiled (i.e. by lewdness and
wickedness) therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the Land it
self vomits out her Inhabitants. Heinous sins defile a Land, and, as it is at
the 28 th verse, make a Land spew out the Inhabitants; so Levit. 20.22. the
same phrase is used; and ver. 23. God says that he abhors them for their most
grievous wickedness. Great Sins bring great Plagues, and Temporal as well as
Eternal Judgments on a Nation. It is true, God promised Abraham to make a
Nation of him, that Kings should come out of him, Genesis 17.6. and to establish
his Covenant with him, and his Seed after him in their Generations; and to give
them all the Land of Canaan for an Everlasting Possession; but they were to be
Pilgrims, and go down into Egypt for four hundred and thirty years, till the
iniquities of the Amorites were full: For Gods Promises and his Judgments are
all conditional, God destroys not innocent Creatures. If the Canaanites had not
done evil in his sight, and lived in all manner of profaneness and wickedness,
they should not have been destroyed If England reforms their evil ways, they
shall be saved: For God decrees misery only to the Impenitent.

I shall give you the Reasons why all good Men should be for us, which is the
third particular in the Method propounded. The Reasons may be taken, 1. From
our selves. 2. From the Cause it self. 3. From God himself. 4. From the
Examples of the most wise and devout Protestants whom we follow.


1. From our selves. We desire to live in all good Conscience toward God and
Men We desire nothing but what Laws and Liberties our Forefathers left us. We
invaded no Man's right, but studied to live quietly, and do our own business.
Our Actions were good and lawful; but our Enemies triumphed, and without Law or
Reason sought our ruin. Our present Sufferings were great, and we were
threatened with greater, and all this without our desert or offense. We were
enslaved by Jesuits, evil counselors and Unreasonable Men. Our Liberties, or
Religion, our Estates were almost gone; we scarce knew what was our own. We had
a standing Army in time of peace, without consent and against the Petition of
Parliament, to overawe us. Our Bishops were some Suspended, and some
Imprisoned, and our most Learned Doctors, and most Zealous Preachers against
Popish Innovations and Arbitrary Power, were censured and discountenanced. We
had an Illegal Declaration to be read in Churches, imposed on the whole Clergy.
Our Nobility and Gentry were closeted and threatened, and almost all our
Corporations new modelled and changed, in order to gain a Parliament that
should promote the ruin of us and our Religion. Every Man that departed from
evil made himself a prey. Superstition, Oppression, Cruelty, prevailed
throughout the Land; The whole Kingdom was filled with Complaints, and Sighs,
and Groans, by reason of their cruel Bondage; the Vilest Men were exalted; and
Men of Fidelity to God and their Country, and Loyalty to the King and Kingdom,
and Religion by Law Established, Spirits of Honesty, Spirits of Courage, were
cast out as filth; yea Dissenters, and the poor deluded Sectaries were bribed
with a pretended Liberty of Conscience, to help to ruin us first and themselves
afterward.

Now when we knew no means of help, but lay down under our Burden, and were as
a Kingdom devoted to misery; then did the Lord appear in a glorious manner, and
beyond all our expectations sent the Prince of Orange, now our Gracious
Sovereign, our Deliverer from Popish Tyranny; wherefore I say, that we are most
ungrateful, if we do not stand by him with our Lives and Fortunes. There was a
great and long plotted design, whereby Popery should have been readvanced, Gods
saving Truth been suppressed, his Worship substantially corrupted and utterly
destroyed; and it was a work of a large Extent, as that which concerns all
other Reformed Churches, whose happiness or misery will be involved in ours.
Yea Ages to come will have Reason, either to bless or curse this Generation, as
we shall follow or neglect this present opportunity; so then if we be asked a
Reason of our joining with K. William in this Resolution, here are Reasons,
clear Reasons, easy to the weakest understandings, yea open to every Man's
sense. Who among us has not felt these Reasons? To use the words of a grave
Divine in the like case. And as these Reasons are so plain, that the most
illiterate and vulgar understanding may conceive them, so they are so weighty
and cogent, that the most subtle and sublime understanding cannot but be
subdued to them; unless because they are such Masters of Reason, they have
resolved to obey none. And yet where Conscience is yet indeed unsatisfied, we
should rather pity than impose and labor to persuade rather than violently to
obtrude. But as for others, as St. Paul says, O foolish Galatians! who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth? Gal. 3.1. so I may say, O
foolish Englishmen! who has bewitched you, that, when you may have your
Religion, your Laws and your Liberties secured; you Plot and Conspire, or at
least wish well to the French Enemy?

2. From the Cause it self. We stand up for our Religion, the true Worship and
Service of God, which is Established by Law, and is our Birthright and greatest
Happiness. We stand up for our Laws, Liberties and Properties, which have all
been dispensed with by Covetous and Ambitious Spirits, and Men not fearing God,
nor loving the welfare of their Native Country. And we were in danger to be
ruined, and our Posterity after us, by corrupt Judges, who loved Bribes more
than Judgment, and the wages of Unrighteousness more than Truth.

3. From God himself. We trust that it is Gods Cause, and that God is on our
side; And if God be for us, who can be against us? It was a notable Speech, as
I have read, that Josephus reports Herod made to his Soldiers; it came from
the Mouth of a Herod, but it well beseems the Mouth of a most godly Christian
Captain. Some may say, says he, our Cause is just, but we are few and weak;
but where Truth and Justice is, there is God; and where God is, there wants
neither multitude nor fortitude. I hope all good Men will have their Eyes
opened, and heartily join with us. God was with Joshua and his Hosts, and I
trust that he will continue to be with our Protestant King and his Armies. The
Angel, or Christ himself (as some Expositors think it was) tells Joshua, As
Captain or Prince of the Host of the Lord am I now come, ver. 14. Moses says,
Deuteronomy. 20.3. that the Priests ought to encourage the people; and ver. 4. he
says, The Lord your God is he that goes with you, to Fight for you against
your Enemies, to save you.

And in God more especially, let us consider these three things; 1. His Wisdom.
2. His Power. 3. His Promise.


1. His Wisdom, whereby God foresees what is best. He has many ways to help
his Servants, in their fears, of which they are ignorant. The Lord is Great in
Counsel, and Mighty in Working, says the Prophet, Jer. 32.19. He can turn the
Enemies Counsel into Foolishness, and defeat them, as he did Achitophel's. He
can Counter plot their Plots, and make their Devices of none effect. When
Pharaoh dealt subtly, God was above him.

2. His Power, whereby he is able to effect what is best. All things are
possible to him. His Eyes are ever toward the Righteous, and he shows himself
strong in the behalf of them that fear him. He can weaken their Power, abate
their Pride, defeat their Policies, and turn their Prosperity into Misery. He
had power to drown the old wicked World, when the Earth was corrupt and full of
violence. He Rained down Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah, to refine
those impure places, and rescued Righteous Lot from that overthrow. He drowned
Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea.

3. His Promise. If we obey his voice, he will be an Enemy to our Enemies, and
an Adversary to our Adversaries, Exodus 23.22. and Levit. 26.3, etc. If you walk
in my Statutes, and keep my Commandments, and do them; among other Blessings
this is promised, I will give peace in the Land, and ye shall lie down, and
none shall make you afraid; and ye shall Chase your Enemies, and they shall
fall before you by the Sword; and I will walk among you, and will be your God,
and ye shall be my People. God promised Abraham, and consequently all that do
the works of Abraham; I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that
curses thee, Genesis 12.3. Gods Eye is on his Israel, the false Prophet Balaam,
who loved the wages of unrighteousness, and would have cursed Israel, to gain
the promotions of the King of Moab, was forced to acknowledge this Truth; God
had blessed them, and he could not reverse it, Numb. 23.20. and ver. 23. Surely
there is no Enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any Divination against
Israel. Here is enough to change all Men's Hearts to join with God and his
Servants.

4. From the Example of the most wise and devout Protestants, whom we follow.
We imitate the Glorious Company of the Saints and Martyrs ever since the
Reformation. They all Zealously contended, and some even unto death, for the
same Truth and Cause that we now contend, against the Innovations, Tyranny and
Usurpations of the Pope and all his detestable Adherents. Luther, Melancthon,
Bucer, Calvin, Zuinglius, and thousands of our Brethren beyond the Seas, in
Germany, Switzerland, Denmark, Holland, etc. And in England, the Right Reverend
Bishops Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, and other Ministers of Christ, as Mr. Rogers,
Mr. Bradford, Mr. Philpot, and many more laid down their Lives for this Truth,
and were Burnt at the Stake. Are you for these Men, or are you for their
Adversaries? Let no Man or true Protestant delude himself; for they who Burnt
our Forefathers at the Stake as Heretics, will do so to us likewise, if they
had as much power. It is not want of will, but want of power. I hope all sound
Protestants will be wise in this their day, and know the things that belong to
their Peace, before they be hid from their Eyes. And blessed be God, the most
wise Men in Church and State foresee this. I am not Zealous about Opinions, for
the most Learned and Holy Men will differ as long as the World remains; but the
Truths that I speak of are such as have been Sealed with the Blood of Martyrs,
have been justified by the most Learned Pens, and Disputes of all the Worthies
of this Kingdom, without interruption, for above an hundred and twenty years;
but of late, by a Cunning, Ambitious and Corrupt Party, we had almost been
Cheated of them, even of those Truths which ought to be dearer than our Lives.
Blessed be God, who has given a turn (as one speaks) and made a stop of their
proceedings, who were gone as far as Rome Gates in a declining way. These were
the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of England in its first Reformation.

4. I shall consider why all good Men should be against our Adversaries.

1. Because they are against the Truth. 2. Because they are Oppressors. 3.
Because they are Enemies to Gods Glory. 4. Because they are cruel to Gods
people and his Saints.
1. Because they are against the Truth. The Adversaries of Joshua and the
Children of Israel were Heathenish Idolaters, as I have showed; they hated the
true Worshippers of God; yea they were so Barbarous, as to suffer their
Children to pass through the Fire to Moloch, Levit. 18.21. and to profane the
Name of God. Moloch was the chief and greatest Idol, the God of the Ammonites.
Some say it was the Heathen Saturn, to whom only almost, among the Gods, they
Sacrificed Humane Victims, as I find in the Author of the Synopsis. Others
conjecture otherwise, that it was Jupiter, or Priapus, or Mercurius, or Mars;
whatever it was, it is no great matter, it was Devil-worship, and made the
Heathens abhorred and punished by God.

2. Because they are Oppressors. God saw the Oppression of Israel, wherewith
the Egyptians oppressed them, Exodus 3.9. and he delivered them. In all their
Affliction he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them. God
bates Oppression, and will punish all that oppress his People, Jer. 30.20. He
reproves them that oppress the poor, and crush the needy, Amos 4.1. He
denounces woes against them that covet Fields, and take them by Violence, and
Houses, and take them away: So they oppress a Man and his House, even a Man and
his Heritage, says the Prophet, Mic. 2.2. and God has promised that he will
be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble, Psalm. 9.9. This is
enough to make all oppressors tremble.

3. Because they are Enemies to Gods Glory. And God will not give his Glory to
another, nor his Praise to Graven Images, Isa. 42.8.

4. Because they are cruel to Gods People and the Saints. Idolaters hate the
true Worshipers of God, and would root them out of the Earth. Their Enemies
conspired that the name of Israel might be no more remembered upon Earth: first
the Egyptians, then the Canaanites, then the Babylonians would have utterly
destroyed them; Yea the Children of Edom said of Jerusalem, Raze it, raze it,
even to the Foundation thereof, Psalm. 137.7. or, Down with it, down with it,
even to the Ground, as one translation reads. See the desolation of Jerusalem,
and the cruelty of their Enemies, Psalm. 79.1, etc. Thus I have finished the
several things proposed, for the illustration and exemplification of the Text.
Let us conclude with Application.

The Lesson shall be of Exhortation. My Brethren, let us be exhorted to take
part with God and his true Church, against the Synagogue of Satan and his
Followers. The Text supposes that you must be for us, or for our, Adversaries.
Ye must be for Protestants, or for Papists; for the Ark, or for Dagon; for God,
or for Baal; for Israelites, or for Canaanites; for the English, or for the
Irish and French. Therefore do like Wise Men and Good Christians; Make a
Parallel, and compare us and our Adversaries, the Protestants and the Papists,
and choose that side which agrees best with Reason and Scripture the Word of
God.

The Papists teach us to deny our senses, and tell us that Bread is turned into
a God, though we see it and taste it to be Bread; after the Priest has said the
words, This is my Body, they Worship it, and then Eat it; A piece of service
that the very Heathens abhorred, to Eat the God whom they Worship. They teach
us to Worship Images, and pray to Saints deceased, and a multitude of
Fopperies, of which I make no question, you have often heard.

On the other side, the Protestants own all these, Sense, Reason, Revelation,
to have evidence in their own Sphere; not renouncing their Senses, nor their
Reason, though they have Faith in God, and believe all Divine Revelations. Solon,
(as I have read) would have all Neuters in a Commonwealth branded with
perpetual Infamy; and the reason is, Neutrality neither helps a Friend, nor
hinders an Enemy: And it was an heinous Crime in the Church of Laodicea, to be
neither Hot nor Cold, but Luke warm; for which God threatens to Spew them out
of his Mouth, Rev. 3.16.

In short, either the Protestant Religion, which we profess against the
Papists, is the Truth, or not; If it be the Truth, then the Scripture says, Buy
the Truth and sell it not, Prove. 23.23. We cannot give too dear for these
Truths. The Holy Ghost complains, none pleads for the Truth, Isa. 59.4. The
Scriptures command us to love the Truth and Peace, Zech. 8.19. In order Truth
is first. And Saint Jude, v. 3. exhorts us earnestly to contend for the Faith
which was once delivered to the Saints.

But especially we abhor, 1. The Popish Idolatry. 2. Their breach of Promise.
3. Their Persecution and Cruelty.


As for their Idolatry in Worshipping their Consecrated Host, Images, etc. I
have already discoursed of these. Therefore,

2. We abhor their breach of Promise. It is too common with them to say that
Faith is not to be kept with Heretics: And hence no considerate and wise Man
will trust them. And we have had experience of their acting according to this
principle. The famous, learned and devout Protestant John Huss was ruined by
them, when he had a Protection and safe conduct granted by the Emperor; and
upon it went to the Council of Constance; But (says the famous Historian
Sleidan) in three weeks time he was made a Prisoner, and with Jerome of Prague,
Burnt at a Stake: And the Council gave the Emperor this reason, No Promise was
to be kept with Heretics. Q. Mary promised that none of her Subjects should be
forced in Conscience, that she would in particular preserve to the Suffolk and
Norfolk Gospellers, as they were called in those days (who had been so great
Instruments in her advancement to the Throne) that Reformation begun in her
Brother King Edwards days, for which they were zealous: And she promised never
to make any Innovation or Change of the then established Reformed Religion, but
would content her self with the private exercise of her own Religion, as an
ingenious man speaks: But she broke her Faith; with those Suffolk Heretics.
And we found it thus in our days with our English Papists. As they imagined
their Power increased (though God be thanked it was only imagination, for their
Party was weak) all their Promises were as soon broken as made, and the weakest
judgment plainly discerned their dissimulation.

3. We abhor their Persecution and Cruelty. They are of a most Persecuting
Spirit, and cruel Principles. They think they do God good service, like the
Jews who killed the Apostles of Christ, when they burn Protestants at a Stake.

I will not say that the Pope is the Antichrist mentioned in Scripture, nor the
Whore of Babylon spoken of particularly in the 17 chap. of the Revelations,
(though some learned Protestants of our own Church are of this opinion) because I
am of opinion that the Antichrist is already come and past, and that Heathen
Rome, full of Idols and Abominations, is literally meant by the Holy Ghost; But
Apostatized Christian Rome acts the same part, or worse over again; and may
well be called the Scarlet Whore, or Mystery Babylon the Great, the Mother of
Harlots and Abominations of the Earth, ver. 5. because she has been Drunk with
the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the martyrs of Jesus, v. 6. And
the Pope and his adherents, his Cardinals, and Priests, and Jesuits, make War
with the Lamb ( i.e. Christ, and his true and living Members;) and the Lamb (
i.e. true and sound Protestants shall be Instruments under Christ, and) shall
overcome them: for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are
with him are called, and chosen, and faithful, v. 14. The Papists have subtilty
enough to promise fair, till they have power; But when they know or think
themselves strong enough, no Professors of any Religion can be more Cruel and
Barbarous than they are. Luther (as I have read) warmed Melancthons Spirit, by
a Letter about the Common Cause, then molested by Pontifical Rage and Caesar's
Fury. I have a quiet mind says he, about the public cause, being assured that
it is just, true, and unappaled; I fear not the fierce and cruel Papists; If we
be overthrown, Christ shall be overthrown with us; and come what can, I had
rather fall with Christ, than stand with Caesar, We have Fasted, we have
Prayed, we have consulted with the God of Heaven, (I wish I could say the whole
Nation had Reformed their lives) and I doubt not but he will answer us in due
time with good and comfortable words, as the phrase is Zech. 1.13. So then I
hope that all Protestants are for us.

And if ye are for us, I will briefly mention the manner how ye shall be for
us, that God may prosper and bless us all.

1. With your hearts. For if we have not your Hearts, you will deceive us, and
upon the least Temptation turn to our Adversaries, or stand Neuter. 2. With
your Tongues. You ought to speak well of the Kings and Nations present cause,
and stop the Mouths of adversaries. 3. With your Hands. You ought to be active
according to your strength, and in your several Spheres, to promote the common
good. 4. With your Purses, as need may be: And indeed, Blessed be God, the
whole Nation has willingly contributed to this great work: And I believe so
great Taxes were never paid with more cheerfulness. And surely God will accept
this labor of love.
Lastly with your Prayers. This all may do, and all that fear God I hope will
do. Moses hand lift up in Prayer, and Joshua's stretched forth in Battle, make
a Victorious Army. Preces nostrae, Bombardae nostrae, says Luther, our Prayers
are our Guns. Wherefore let us be encouraged to pray. Let us strive with God in
Prayer, while our Brethren are striving with the Enemy in Battle. They venture
their precious Lives for us, and endure great hardship; Shall not we pray? He
is an unworthy Member of the Church or Commonwealth, who has not a Heart to
pray now. The Poor indeed may say with Saint Peter, Silver and Gold have I
none; But yet they may give such as they have, even Prayers and Hearty Wishes,
that God would be gracious and favorable to Sion, that he would preserve our
true Religion, that he would resettle our distressed Protestant Irish Brethren,
and that he would prosper his Anointed Servant in this great Undertaking, for
the Honor of his Name, the Propagation of his Gospel, and the lasting
Happiness of this Church and Kingdom, Amen.

FINIS.

