The ESSEX Champion: OR THE Famous HISTORY OF Sir Billy of Billerecay, AND HIS
Squire Ricardo.

SHOWING The Renowned Achievements, and Valiant Acts of the Invincible Knight
Sir Billy of Billerecay; with his Love to his Lady Dulcina.

AS ALSO, The Comical Exploits, and Amorous Adventures of Squire Ricardo,
performed by his Invisible Ring.

Their Tilts and Tournaments in honor of Ladies: Their Battles with Giants and
Monsters: Their punishing of Inchanters and Negromancers, Pedlars and Poppi^
pl^^^^s.

Never before Published.

Being that Excellent Piece of Knight-Errantry, Written by William Winstandly,
Gent. at Saffron-Walden in Essex.

London, Printed for J. Blare at the Looking*glass on London bridge, 1699.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. THE Birth of Sir Billy of Billerecay: His bringing up at School: And
Resolution to pursue Knightly Adventures. Page 7 Chap. 2. How Sir Billy and his
Squire went forth to seek Adventures; Their Encounter with a Scarecrow, and
how he came to a Castle to be Dubbed Knight. p. 23 Chap. 3. Sir Billy watches
his Armor; and is made Knight by the Lord of the Castle: his ill success in
running at the Quinten: with other things which happened. p. 42 Chap. 4. Sir
Billy being dubbed Knight, marcketh forth to seek Adventures: his Encounter
with Poppet-Gyants: his Imprisonment in a wooden Enchanted Castle; and
Entertainment by the Sage Freston. p. 59 Chap. 5. Ricardo is sent with a Letter
to Dulcina, in the mean time Sir Billy encountereth with a monstrous Giant in
defense of the Tantabilan Princess, whom he Manfully overthrows. p. 75 Chap. 6.
How Ricardo in his Journey toward Billerecay, met with an Aged Palmer, who
gave him an Invisible-Ring, with which he cheats an Innkeeper; as also what a
Trick he served a Bedlam and a Tinker. p. 89 Chap. 7. How Ricardo delivered his
Letter to Jone Grumball, with her Answer to it. And several exploits performed
by Ricardo with his Invisible-Ring. p. 96 Chap. 8. How Ricardo delivered his
message to his Master, and of the Challenge made by Sir Billy against all
comers, in Honor of his Mistress Dulcina. p. 117 Chap. 9. How Sir Billy was
forced to run from his Challenge: The Mirth Ricardo had at a Wedding: What a
Trick he served an Old Fornicator; and how he went in pursuit of his Master. p.
126 Chap. 10. Sir Billy's encounter with a Dancer on the Ropes, how he was
carried before a Justice of the Peace, and set free by Ricardo by the help of
his Invisible-Ring. p. 138 Chap. 11. Ricardo going to recover his Masters Horse
and Armor, acts a very pleasant Adventure in an Inn, with other things which
happened. p. 154 Chap. 12. Sir Billy's ill success in his adventure against the
Pedlars: How he was rescued by Ricardo by the help of his Invisible-Ring,: With
other things that happened. p. 166 Chap. 13. The Woeful story of a Tailor and
his Sweetheart, how they were Hanged in a Barn; and how the Murderers were
taken by the means of Sir Billy and a Constable. p. 178 Chap. 14. Sir Billy's
entertainment at the Justices House, his Oration in praise of the Golden Age,
with his Challenging the Coroner to fight in defense of Knight-Errantry. p. 189
Chap. 15. Sir Billy's Encounter with the Coroner: How he was relieved by
Ricardo: His admirable description of his Mistress: With Ricardo's Counterbuff
thereto p. 201
THE Famous History OF SR Billy of Billerecay AND HIS Squire Ricardo.
CHAP. 1. The Birth of Sir Billy of Billerecay: His bringing up at School: And
Resolution to pursue Knightly Adventures.
IN the East part of England, as in respect of the Metropolis thereof London,
in that County formerly inhabited by the Trinobantes, afterward possessed by
the East Saxons, from whom it derived to East-sex, since by Corruption, or
rather for the more easier Pronunciation Essex: In a Town thereof called
Billerecay, not many years ago, there lived a Farmer named Thomasio, one whose
Means, as they were too low to make him envied, so were they too high to cause
Scorn, enjoying a Mediocrity betwixt Riches and Poverty, that as he was no
Gentleman to live on his Lands, yet adding Industry to his small Stock, he had
most commonly Money in his Pocket, when others who made a braver show were
without. In his younger Years he married the Sexton of Bursted's Daughter, a
Man of such Strength, that according to the Records of that place, he would
Thresh as much Wheat in one day, as another Man could do in two; and which is
further remembered of him, that at a Match of Football, played betwixt that
Village and the neighboring Hamlet, by his alone Manhood and Prowess the
Victory was clearly obtained of his side. We are the willinger to mention these
things, because the Reader may understand, that the Person of whom we intend to
treat of, was descended from courageous adventurous Persons.

Now four times had Hiem's Frofts bereaved the Earth of her Summers Livery, and
as many times had Lady Flora bestowed on Tellus a Suit of curious embroidered
Tapistry, since the Nuptials were celebrated betwixt Thomasio and his loving
Consort; during which time he had, by his Industry, much increased that little
Stock he began with; nothing now so much perplexed him, as the want of an Heir,
on whom to bestow this parsel of Estate, if Death should Summon him to his
Grave: At last, to his exceeding Joy, his Wife proved to be with Child, and in
process of time was delivered of a goodly Boy, who was Christened by the Name
of William. This Child, as he was long in coming, so was he the more welcome
unto them, and so much the rather, because that Lucy (so was his Wife named)
was now so stricken in Years, that he had ^ittle hopes of having another;
wherefore he resolved to bestow some Cost on the ^ringing up of his Son Billy,
his ambitious Thoughts soared so high, that he swore by ^is Plow-share if his
Son lived, he would ^ake him a Schollard, not only to write and read
ordinarily, but if need were to make a Bill or a Bond, and to write a Letter,
^^at he might not be beholding to the Vicar ^f the Parish upon every occasion:
Ac^ordingly, no sooner had his Son come to some Maturity of Knowledge, but he
bought him a Horn-book, and put him to School to an Old Woman that lived in an
Almshouse, who so indoctrinated him, that in a short time he had learned the
Criss cross-row, which made Thomasio think his Penny a Week well bestowed on
him, so that he told his Son, If he proved a good Boy, when he had learned his
Horn-book, he would buy him a Golden Primmer; nay, that he should likewise have
a Plum-cake into the bargain; which so encouraged young Billy, that in a short
time he claimed his Father's Promise, for he was now in the last line of that
Folio book. Whereupon Thomasio going to the Market, after diligen^ enquiry for
such a Volume, he at last did light on one according to his hearts desire, on
the cover whereof was pictured St. George a conquering the Dragon, the sight
whereo^ did no doubt implant in young Billy's Hear^ the Seeds of Valor and
Heroic Thoughts and prognosticated to the World what ^ Champion this would
prove, whose valor^ous Acts should afterward be proclaimed by Fames golden
Trumpet* and fill each corne^ of the habitable Earth with the Report o^ his
deserved Praises.

Billy now plied his Book with might a^^ main, having gotten to the end of the
(...), before others who began with him ^^d attained half way; and now to
encourage him the more, his Father bought him several Ballads, as of Fair
Rosamond, The Blind Beggar of Bednal Green, King Edward the Fourth and the
Tanner, etc. but amongst them all, none of them pleased Billy so well, as the
Song of that Arch Pyrate Sir Andrew Barton, and that Heroic Poem of
Chevy-Chase, of which last the worthy Sir Philip Sidney used to say, That the
hearing thereof (though Sung no better than by a Country Crowd) stirred up his
Heart more than a Trumpet; well therefore might it be a great Motive to Billy
to undertake such high Adventures, as afterward (God willing) we shall declare
unto you.

And now Billy will be no longer under the Tuition of a Dame, as knowing by
natural Instinct, that a Woman's Domination is most Imperious; wherefore his
Father provides him a Schoolmaster, one Snip a Tailor, who for his Dexterity
in Singing, was advanced to the Dignity of Church-Clerk of ^he Parish; which
Office, and keeping of a School, found him with Powder'd-Beef, and ^he Vales of
his Trade furnished him with Cabbage. Two Years went Billy to School with this
Master, in which space of time he had learned to read so well, as gave his
Father extraordinary content, so that now he buys Billy a choice Library of
Books, viz: The History of Tom Thumb, Robin Good Fellow, The Friar and the Boy,
The Three Merry Wives of Green-Goose-Fair, The Sack full of News, A Hundred
Merry Tales, etc. And now he thinks his Son sufficiently provided for Learning,
as concerning the Reading part, his next care is, to learn him to Writ^ and
cast Account, and then he fears no but he may live in any place in England yea,
and if that the Stars should be propi^tious to him, he might in time be advanc^
to a Justice of the Peace his Clerk: Therefore seeing that Snip could not
write, he i^ treated the Vicar of the Parish to take some pains with his Son,
and if he made Billy (...) cunning at his Pen, as he himself was a^ his Plough,
he promised him to Fallow his Glebe Land for him for nothing: Upon these
Considerations the Vicar took Billy under his Tuition, but advised Thomasio
that whilst his Son learned to write, tha^ he might not in the mean time forget
hi^ Reading, to buy him some pretty Book to read in, which might draw him
theret^ with some delight. Thomasio replied, H^ had been at great Charges that
way a^ ready, but for his Sons good, he would n^ stick out for a small matter*
So the next Fair, taking his Son along with him for the choice of his Volumes,
at a Pedlars Stall he bought him these Books following: The Garland of Good
Will. The Garland of Princely Delights. Pasquill' s Jeasts. Scoggin. Long Meg
of Westminster. Doctor Faustus. Friar Bacon. The Seven Wise Masters. The
Gentle-Craft. Jack of Newberry.. Reynard the Fox. Diogenes. History of
Fortunatus. George a Green. Bevis of Southampton. Guy of Warwick Palmerin of
England. Huon of Bourdeaux. Valentine and Orson. Don Beliavis of Greece.
Parismus and Parismenes. The Seven Champions of Christendom. Destruction of
Troy. History of King Arthur. Amadis de Gaul. Tom a Lincoln, the Red Rose
Knight. Pheander the Maiden Knight. The Knight of the Sun. The Mirror of
Knighthood. Hero and Leander. Children in the Wood. Tom Stitch the Tailor.
Knight of the Burning Sword. Argalus and Parthenia. King and the Cobbler. Nine
penniworth of Wit for a Penny. The Man of Kent.


Billy was not a little brag of his Books for he imagined he had now as good a
Library as the best Scholar in Christendom: but nothing tickled his Fancy so
much in the reading of them, as thos^ Romantic Stories of killing Gyant^ and
Dragons, which many times did s^ far transport him, that he thought him^self to
be really engaged in these imaginary Fights; and so intent were h^ Thoughts
upon them, that Death^ image sleep could not divert him; (...) that when
Morpheus, with his leade^ Mair, had knocked down others a-slee^ in their Beds,
the Thoughts of the strange Adventures did so run in (...)* Head, that he would
rise in his sleep, and getting a Bed-staff in his hand, lay about him as if he
were mad, imagining he had encountered with some Giant or other strange Monster.

The Servants that lay in the same Room with him, being disturbed thus with his
Fegaries, complained to their Master, who thereupon chid his Son, telling him,
That People which labored hard, must not be disturbed of their natural Rest,
for by that means they could not perform their work. And therefore he threatened
him, If he played any more such Pranks, he would not only put him to Plow, but
also take all his Books from him; for he imagined it was his Books that wrought
that Indisposition in him. Yet notwithstanding all his Threatenings, Billy's
mind did so run of his Knightly Achievements, that he still continued in his
old course, for one night dreaming he was encountering with a terrible Dragon,
he got up in his sleep, and taking the Bed-staff in his hand, began to lay
about him according to his old manner. Now it so chanced, that thorough often
redoubling his blows, he at last struck the Plowman such a blow on the Pate,
that the Blood trickled down his Ears. The Plowman being betwixt sleeping and
waking, feeling the smart of the blow, started out of his Bed, and taking a
Plow whip in his hand, which stood up there ready in a corner, he began to
exercise the same on Billy's body, laying it on so soundly, that had Billy been
in such a sleep as St. David the Champion of Wales was, in the enchanted Garden
of Ormondine, yet must the smart thereof needs have waked him; but Billy took
all patiently, imagining it to be the blows of the Dragon's Tail; having read
that Knights Errant are subject to such Adventures. And now the Plowman being
weary of belabouring him, went to Bed; Billy also returned to his Cabin, but
the smart of his blows were such, as would not suffer him to sleep one wink all
that night; enough to have spoiled a young Knight Errant, had not his mind been
so fully fixed on Knightly Adventures.

Next Morning Billy was so soar that he could not go to School, and being asked
how he came to be so, he told them, It was with encountering of a mighty Dragon,
whilst he attempted to rescue a King's Daughter that was bound to a Stake: And
so run on i^ a wild Discourse, what a terrible Duel he had with him, according
as he had read in the seven Champions, of the Combat there betwixt St. George
and the Dragon But his Father understanding, by his Plow-man^s broken Pate,
what Whimsies still possessed his Son's Noddle, repented him that ever he had
put him to School, and accursed the time that ever he bought him these Books,
the original cause, as he imagined, of Billy's Distemper; and so in a Rage,
getting all his Books together, the Knights and the Giants had been all burnt
in one Bon-fire, had not Billy with Tears, and his Wife Lucy with Entreaties,
rescued them out his hands.

And now Billy, instead of going to School, is put to keep Sheep, which he
liked far better than going to Plow, because he had read of some Kings and
famous Knights that had been Shepherds, but in all his Romances (by which he
was solely directed) he had never read of any one of them that ever held Plow.
In this lazy kind of Life he had leisure more than enough to peruse his
Romances over a fresh, in which he neglected no time; so that he could give a
perfect account of each particular in any of these books. And now weighing with
himself what immortal Fame those Knights had gained, he resolved to become a
Knight Errant himself, being now (as he thought) of strength and Age sufficient
enough to cope with any Giant, yea, though he were as big as Sir Ascapart is
described in Bevis of Southampton, or Colbrand the Dane, whom Guy of Warwick
slew.

But considering with himself, that a Knight without a Lady is like Ling
without Mustard, or a Bag-pudding without Suet, he therefore began to think on
what Female he should place his Affection, at last he resolved on a lusty
strapping Wench, a neighboring Farmer's Daughter, one who for her height
might have been Second to Long Meg of Westminster, and as small in the Waste as
a Mill-post in the middle, such a one as the conceited Fellow could by no means
be persuaded to marry, alleging, That of Evils the least is still to be
chosen; but Fancy that Loves without showing reason why, presented her to Billy
as the Phoenix of the Age, and therefore he resolved that she, and none but she,
should be the Loadstone of his Affections. But her Name being Joan Grumball, he
thought was too mean for her, now that she was to act her part on the Theater
of Honor; he therefore took the same liberty as Cardinals do when they are
elected Pope, to change their Name, and resolved in his thoughts, that
henceforward she should be called The Fair Dulcina; and now his thoughts are
wholly fixed on Love, wherefore in imitation of those Amourists he had read of
in his Romances, he frequents Solitary places, wrings his hands, and exclaims
bitterly on Cupid for bringing him into that miserable Thraldom. O impetuous
Love (said he) with what heavy burdens do thou load thy poor Vassals^? How
hard are thy Dictates, and how intricate the Meanders thou bring thy
Captives into? O pierce the Heart of that cruel fair One, that she may at last
consider of the Miseries that I endure for her sake; but thou art Deaf as well
as Blind, and will not, or rather can not hear: For how can we imagine thee
to be a God, who art so unjust in all thy Actions, to fire the Breast of one,
and freeze the other; to make her Heart more obdurate and harder than the
Adamant, and mine like Wax, fit to receive any Impression thou art pleased to
put upon it. O Dulcina, the only Joy of my Heart, assure thy self that no
Mortal Man whatsoever, is, or can be, so much thy Servant and Slave as my self.
Then concluding with a Sigh for its period, he would again wring his hands,
throw himself upon the Ground, and make such sad Faces, that had Dulcina seen
him, she could not choose but have melted into Compassion, even as a pound of
Butter does melt with the heat of the Fire.

But as this Passion of Love makes the some wise Men mad, so does it again
quicken and revive the Wits of others, making their Fancies soar in a higher
pitch than ordinary, as may appear by this our Billy, who though of himself as
dull a Clod of Earth as ever Prometheus put fire into, yet being thus wrapped up
in Love, as a Baby in Blankets, he grew very Poetical, and taking Pen and Paper
in hand, writ these lines following in praise of his Dulcina.

Most sweet Dulcina, whose Beauty does surpass
Our common Beauties, as the Flowers does Grass*
Or as pale Cynthia in a Winters night,
Surpasses all the Stars that shine so bright:
Or as the Pewter Spoon scoured (so good)
Does far excel those Spoons are made of Wood:
Or as rich Diamonds far exceeds course Pearls,
So does Dulcina all our Country Girls.
Or as a Cedar which does stately grow,
Does far excel those shrubs that are below;
Or as a Paremain does exceed a Crab,
Or as an honest Woman does a Drab:
Or as a Sunshine day excels a foul,
Or as a Nightingale exceeds an Owl:
Or as sweet Cream does Butter-milk excel,
So does Dulcina bear away the Bell.
As Christmas-Pye more high esteem does bear,
Than Pyes are made at other times of the Year:
Or as a Damask Rose excels a Nettle,
Or as fine Gold exceeds all other Mettle;
Or as a Silver Thimble does surpass
Twenty of those same Thimbles made of Brass,
So does my sweet Dulcina so lovely brown,
Excel the chiefest Lasses in our Town.
Billy was not a little proud of his Verses, for he conceited himself to be
near as good a Poet as a Knight Errant, and yet he thought withal, that he
could not well be the one without being the other, they being two as
inseparable Companions as a Whore and the fox. And now having proceeded thus
far in his business, his next Care was, how to get a Squire, for a
Knight Errant without a Squire, is like powdered Beef without Mustard: He
therefore considered with himself, he must of necessity be furnished that way,
not only to have a Companion in his Travels, but also to be a witness of his
Valor, and upon occasion to send on an Errand to the Lady of his Affections,
according as he had read that Knights-Errant formerly had done. Much were his
Thoughts perplexed in the choice of a fit Person for this purpose, sometimes
pitching upon one, and then upon more serious Thoughts, rejecting him and
fixing on another, being more curious in his Choice, than many a Man is in
choosing o^ his Wife: At last he resolved upon one that was his Father's Taskers
Son, an^ getting him one day to help him Fold hi^ Sheep* he there imparted his
mind to him telling him such Rhod^mantado Story of Conquering Kingdoms and
Islands and Captivating Giants and Monsters and how after all these Victories,
that he himself should be Crowned King of some great Country, when he would
make him a petty King or Viceroy under him; that the young Man was easily
induced to condescend unto his Motion. So agreeing to be as secret in the
business as they could, that their Fathers might not come to have any knowledge
thereof, for spoiling their Preferment. Having Folded their Sheep, they
departed home, intending to put their Resolutions into action as soon as might
be.

CHAP. 2. How Sir Billy and his Squire went forth to seek Adventures; Their
Encounter with a Scarecrow, and how he came to a Castle to be Dubbed Knight.
NOW were Billy and his Squire very busy in providing Materials for their
intended Journey, when their Design had like to have been quite spoiled by an
unexpected Accident, which came to pass as follows.

Billy, according to his wonted course, frequenting Solitary places, and
bitterly exclaiming against the Tyrannies of Cupid, was one day overheard by a
neighboring Farmer, who searching for some strayed Sheep, was by that means
brought into that uncouth place, where he heard Billy to make this sad Relation.

O Dulcina, the Joy of my Heart! How does the Remembrance of thee add new Life
to my drooping Spirits? O sooner shall the Sea cease to Ebb and Flow,* or
Hyperion to run his daily course, than I shall cease to be Faithful to thee!
What though Jason was False to Med^a, and Paris to Oenone! Yet never shall it
be said that thy Knight did prove disloyal, that Billy was false to his
Dulcina. No; know I will be as true to thee, as St. George was to his Sabra,
Guy of Warwick to his Fair Phelice, or Bevis of Southampton to Josiana. O how I
long to make thy Name renowned by the Deeds of arms which I shall perform, that
Babes unborn in time to come may read in Books, those valiant Acts which I
shall do for thy sake! O how many Thousand Pagans shall I destroy, and set
their Cities on flames of Fire, like the Battlements of Troy, and make their
blood run down the Chann^ls, and all for the love of my Dulcina! But thou alas
regardest no^ my Love, but art as deaf to my complaints, as the hard-hearted
Creditor is to his poor Debtor. O Dulcina! Dulcina! the fairest Wench that ever
trod upon Shoe of Leather, regard my moan, and pity the sad pains that I
endure for thy sake. O be as kind to me as Rosalinde was to St. Denis the
French Champion, or the fair Jew to St. James the Champion of Spain.

Then taking the verses out of his pocket, which he had made in the praise of
his Dulcina, he repeated them with such a groan, as if she had been the only
Goddess in the World worthy to be adored. The Farmer who stood all this while
unseen to mark his discourse, hearing him talk of Giants and Champions and
Streams of Blood, was struck into a mavelous amazement; but at last hearing
him to repeat the Verses, he conceited with himself that he was infected with
an itch of posy, which he judged to be far worse than the Plague* and therefore
went and told Thomasi^ that his Son was turned a Poet, but that he might as
good almost see him hanged, for he would never be worth a Groat as long as he
lived. Now by my Dun-Cow (said Thomasio) I prithee Neighbor tell me what these
Boets be? in Vaith (says the Farmer,) they are a strange kind of People, who
if they get a shilling in their Pocket (for they se^dom can reach above such a
Sum) they never leave till they have spent ten Pence out of it: They are very
dry Fellows, for they can never quench their thirst with drinking: And
though-by reason of their Poverty few English Women will have them, yet they
say they are wedded to nine Outlandish wenches whom they call Muses. They talk
of a great deal of land they have lies in a place called Pernassus-hill, but by
my fay I believe it is but barren stuff, for never an Usurer will lend a
farthing on morgage on it, else sure it had been all forfeited long ago;
Sometimes perhaps a Gentleman will lend a half Crown or Five Shillings upon it,
but no sooner is that Money spent, but they will Morgage it to another, which
makes me Wonder how these Gentlemen are Cheated, because they show them
Writings; But I Will warrant ye they ^ever get a Penny of a Lawyer, for they are
too cunning to be Cheated with such Noninoes; and yet never stir, sometimes
they make such Plaguey Songs, that when they are Sung in our Market, they make
the Maids to melt like the butter in their basket to hear them: but as sure as
Eggs with too long Boiling will prove to be hard, they have but little or
nothing for the making of them, for a new Suit on their Backs is as strange as
to meet with Frosty weather at Midsummer; So that if you would never so fain be
revenged on them, their Coats are so thin, they will not endure a brushing: nor
is it to any purpose to Sue them at Law, for they are indebted Twenty Shillings
more than they are worth at the Alehouse.

By my Hallidame (said Thomasio) if I thought my Son Billy would prove such a
Boet, I should heartily wish he had never been Born; but now I think on it, I
have a trick in my head that I believe will Spoil his Rimeing, I will take him
away from keeping of Sheep, and set him to Threshing, and Forceing him to work
hard from Morning till Night, I warrant you he will have but little Mind of
making of Verses. Indeed (said his Neighbor,) you have hit the Nail on the
head, for I tell ye, this Poetry proceeds all from Idleness, for I that was
brought up hard to work, did never make a Verse in all my Life; But I wonder
why at first you would bestow so much learning on him, for though a little be
not amiss, to read now, and then a Chapter to drive away the time, yet you will
find, that if once they go any further, the more Bookish the more Blockish: for
then go about to learn them how to hold Plough, and as good go about to empty
our Horse-Pond with a spoon. Therefore I advise ye Neighbor to do as you say,
and you will soon see that working hard will put him quite besides his Poetry.

Accordingly the next morning Billy was set to Threshing, and so narrowly
looked to for plying his Work, that he had no breathing time for his Lovesick
Fancies, and quite took off the edge of his Stomach for Versefying: his whole
care and study being now how to get himself rid of this thraldom, that he might
go in persuit of his Knightly adventures, and Fortune, that ever favors noble
Enterprises, soon put a golden opportunity into his hand, for his Father was to
go to London to pay his Rent, which with some other business that he had would
detain him there the space of three days* Billy resolving to let no more time
slip, now that Fortune was so favorable to him, acquaints his Squire Ricardo
therewith, bidding him to provide his things ready, for Fame called aloud unto
them to hasten, and injured Ladys and wronged Captives cried for help from his
victorious arm; wherefore as soon as his Father was set out on his Journey they
began to prepare for theirs; and going first into the stable, they singled out
two of the ablest Plough-Horses, whom Sir Billy, now that they were preferred
to be Horses of Service, changed their names from Brown and Bayard, by which
they were before called, unto the more stately names of Belerophon and Pugnoto,
choosing Belerophon to ride on himself, and bestowing Pugnoto upon his Squire.

Their next care was for Armor for themselves, and that had the Queen of Chance
provided ready for them to their hands, for Thomasio being Constable of the
Parish, the Town Arms for the Trained Bands was laid up in his House, with
which they armed themselves Cap-a-pe; but their chiefest care was in the choice
of their Swords, not minding so much for the defense of themselves, as for
weapons wherewith to offend their enemies: they therefore chose two Bilbo
blades, hand broad, such as would cut off a Giants head at one Blow; and now a
new, thought came into Billy*s head, by what name to call his Sword, because 't
was proper for a Knight Errants Sword to have a name; but after he had
Scratched his head a little, it came into his Pate and so the Sword was icleped
Rosero. Their Lances were two Pikes, cut in two by the middle; and for other
weapons or accoutrements they rested contented, till such time their manhood
could purchase them better. Ricardo was very importunate to carry a Wallet of
Victuals along with them, but Sir Billy told him it was against the Law of Arms
for Knights Errant to carry with them any Money or Victuals, they being to be
provided for at every Castle they came unto.

It was at that time of the year when these Champions set forth, that Ceres had
Clothed the earth with a rich Suit of all Sorts grain, and that the full ears
began to humble their flowery tops as in a graceful acknowledgment to thank the
Husbandman for his painful Toil* Now that they might not be seen, they set
forth in the night time, when by the next morning at such time as Aurora had
opened her purple Doors, and gave notice of the approach of Titan, they were
gotten from Home the space of Twelve Miles; not minding whether they went, but
only so that they went forwards. It happened that in their way was a field of
standing Whea^ in which the owner had placed a great ^care-Crow upon a Pole to
Frighten the ^irds from eating his Corn; this being ^laced of a good height,
and being of as ^errible a shape as they could make it, Billy imagined to be a
Giant, and therefor with a loud voice thus spoke unto it; Thou Blanderon,
Colebrand, Amarant, Ascapart, or what ever else thy name be, I Charge thee to
come and humble thy self before the worthy Knight Errant Sir Billy ^f
Billerecay, or look for what my Con^uering Arm shall do unto thee. But seeing
^he Scarecrow returned him no answer, ^e in a furious mood set Spurs to his
Horse, and with his Lance bare the ^care-Crow to the ground, which in its ^all
tumbling before his Horse, the Horse stumbling thereat, came over and over with
Sir Billy. In the mean time ^he Farmer and his Son who owned this Corn chanced
to come by, who seeing ^is Wheat thus Shamefully spoiled, far more than the
Birds could have done ^urt, taking up the quarrel of his Scarecrow, he with a
good Battoon laid upon ^he Ribs of Sir Billy, who was scarcely ^ble to stand
being much bruised, with ^he fall of his Horse. But Ricardo seeing ^is Master
thus roughtly handled, thought ^t was his Duty to take his part, and therefore
with his piece of Pike, which he called a Lance, running with hi^ Horse
furiously at the Farmer, and missin^ of him, with the force which he use^
pushed himself clear over his Horse^ Head; The Farmers Son seeing them ^hu^
bent upon mischief, and (as he thought) more upon Spite to do them an injury,
than any skill they had in doing it having a good lusty Ashen Towel i^ his
hand, he fell a Rib-roasting of Ricardo, who ^eeling the blows Smart, bellowed
like a Town Bull; Sir Billy hearing this loud outcry of his Squire although,
he were Soundly paid off himself, yet called to Ricardo, and told him it was
against the Law of Arms to as^ his Enemy Mercy. What tell you me o^ Arms (said
Ricardo) when he has so beaten me, that I believe I shall never be abl^ again
to lift my Arms up to my Head* The Farmer and his Son, upon these words, stayed
their hands, demanding them the reason why they had without any cause given, so
trampled upon an^ spoiled their Corn? Tell me (said Si^ Billy) what Giant was
that I overcame and by what spells and Negromantic Charms you have caused me
and my Squir^ to undergo these blows we have felt? which ^f you refuse to do, I
swear by the River ^f Styx, and by the Honor of all Knight Errants that ever
were yet in the World, ^ will make you such an example to posterity, that Babes
unborn, in recounting the mise^ies of unfortunate People, shall use your ^ames
for a Memorial.

The Farmer and his Son by his Dis^ourse judged him to be Frantic, and
therefore expecting no other Satisfa^tion for their Corn, but what they shall
have by beating them, began a-fresh ^o Bastinado them, so that Ricardo cry^d
out, Murder, Murder; But Sir Billy ^hinking it all to be done by Inchant^ent,
took it very Patiently. At length ^he old man having more compassion ^han his
Son, desisted from striking, and Ricardo seeing a little breathing ^^ace, got
away as fast as he could, ^eaving his Master to shift for himself, ^ho also
getting up his Horse as well as is batterd Body was able, and mutter^g terrible
imprecatious against Negro^ancers and Inchanters, he rode after ^icardo, whom
he much blamed for de^rting him in such an Honorable en^^unter. I cannot tell
(said Ricardo) ^^t I think in such Encounters there is ^ore Blows than Honor
to be gotten, and therefore my Council is, that we r^ turn home again, and
leave this work (...) killing Giants and Monsters, to those w^^ have nothing
else to do.

These words so angered Sir Billy that in a great rage he said; O the lump of
Ig^orance, can thou imagi^^ that Honor is to be gotten by lying (...) Bed?
No; That is a thing which is to (...) attained by Difficulties and dangers. Did
not thou see how I made the Gya^^ to fall before my Victorious arm^ What Giant
(said Ricardo) I saw n^thing but only a Scarecrow, and wou^^ to God it had
stood there still althoug^ it had been the strongest Giant the ever was made to
Scare away Bird^ This (said Sir Billy) comes by thy I^norance in Books of
Chevalry, I tell the that which thou tookest for a Scare-Cro^ was the tall and
terrible Giant Bland^ron; but these things are done by Neg^^mancy, and the
reason why we suffer these Blows in this first encounter, was because I have
not received the order (...) Knighthood, for in all Books of Cheva^^
whatsoever, we never do read that e^^ any Giant did beat a Knight Erran^ but
that always the Knight did beat Giant: And therefore I am resolved, (...) at
the first Castle I come to, I will request to be made a Knight by the Lord
thereof; which is a thing that ought not to be denied to those who have sworn
themselves true Sons of Mars, and spend their Blood in relieving distressed
Ladies, and those that are oppressed.

Ricardo was very hard to be persuaded, (for it was then about the time when
Mortals used to break their fasts, and his custom used to be rather to neglect
his work than the satisfying of his Stomach,) had not the great hopes of his
Master's being suddenly Knighted, and the entertainment he should have at the
next Castle, diverted him; And to see that fortune is sometimes Favorable to
Knights Errant, they had not rid long before they came to a sumptuous building,
wherein lived an ancient Esquire, who kept a very bountiful House, and
courteously entertained strangers that came to him. Thither rid Sir Billy and
his Squire, and meeting one of the Servants in the Yard, asked him if the Lord
of the Castle was within? The Servant stared upon them, seeing them so
Ridiculously habited, and seeing Sir Billy have on some pieces of Armor, which
he had never seen before, but only such as hung up in his Masters Hall. I tell
you (said he) this is no Castle, nor is my Master any Lord, save only that he
is Lord of the Manor. I perceive (said Sir Billy) that thou art ignorant of
what belongs to Knights Errant, and therefore go tell thy Master, that the
most Heroic and invincible Knight, Sir Billy of Billerecay, would confer with
him. Tell me then (quoth the Fellow) how long thou and the Springal that
tends on thee, have been come out of Bedlam, and perhaps I may acquaint him
with your being here, else may my Master be angry with me, for of all scents,
he loves not that which comes out of Bedlam. These words put Sir Billy in a
great rage, drawing out his Morglay, and Brandishing it about his head, that he
looked like the picture of St. George fighting with the Dragon. The Fellow
seeing him draw out his Killing Iron, knowing it to be dangerous meddling with
edge Tools, told him he would presently acquaint his Master; But Sir (said he)
my memory is bad, and therefore I must entreat you once more to tell me your
name. I tell thee (said Billy,) It is the Victorious Knight Errant, Sir Billy
of Billerecay. A killing name, and a killing look, (said the Fellow) I doubt my
Master will be afraid, but yet for my own Safety I will adventure to tell him.
So going into the House, he found him Discoursing with Gentlemen, to whom he
said, Sir, there is without the Vincible Knight, Sir Billy of Billerecay,
desires to confute with ye. The Gentleman laughing at his simplicity, looked
out to see what great Don this same should be; But when they saw two such
Anticks* clad in patches of Armor like Mars his petty-toes, they could not
contain, but were ready to burst with laughter at such a rediculous sight; And
therefore expecting to find rare sport in their conversation, they went all
forth to give him Entertainment, whom Sir Billy accosted in this manner.

SIR, I am one, who for the public good have taken upon me the Exercise of
Arms, for to revive the Honor of Knight Errantry, which too long has lain;
neglected in the world, to the great prejudice of distressed Damsels, wronged
Ladies, and Captived Knights; and now since the World has been Pestered with
Giants, Monsters, and Inchanters, there is none can be ign^rant, and which I
and my Squire felt to our Cost but very lately; for Encountering with a terrible
Giant, notwithstanding I gave him a total overthrow, yet were we set upon by
two wicked Negromancers, who by their cursed Magic Art gave us many terrible
Blows, which we were not able to withstand, and as I conceive the Reason is,
for that as yet I have not received the Order of Knighthood, my request
therefore is, that since I have devoted my self to the public good* I may be
kindly entertained in this Castle, and that the Lord thereof will du^ me
Knight, according to the Ru^es of that Heroic Order of Knights Errant.

The good Old Squire hearing Sir Billy's oration, could not choose but smile,
and being one of a pleasant Disposition, he resolved to Sooth him up in his
Fancy, thereby to make himself and the Gentlemen his Friends the better sport,
therefore fixing his eyes on Sir Billy, with a grave Countenance thus spoke to
him.

How highly your noble resolution is to be commended, I want words for to
express sure you imitate the Arts of the valiant Hercules, whose Labors were
for the suppressing of Tyrants, and righting such persons as were wronged. Know
then, Sir you are very welcome to our Castle, an^ for the Order of Knighthood,
we shall take such a course, that you shall not go without it, lest the World
should be destitute of those many Successes which are destined to your
Vi^torious Arm.

These words were very pleasing to Sir Billy, but much more to Ricardo, who now
was in good hopes of recruiting his wambling Belly, which wanted the usual mess
of Porrege that he used to have for his Breakfast before he went to plough;
therefore alighting off their Horses, and committing them to the care of one of
the Servants, they walked in with the Gentlemen, and were by the Master of the
House kindly entertained. But it would have made a Horse break his Bridle with
laughter, to see how the young Knight Errant and his Squire were put to their
shifts in getting off their Armor, which after some difficulty they
accomplished, and were as soon Complemented by the Gentlemen there present, Sir
Billy returned them the like Civilities, but with as many absurdities, as a
Citizen at Court, or as a Clown at a Dancing-School.

After some little discourse, the Gentleman of the House invited Billy and his
Squire to take a repast of Victuals provided for them, which was Courteously
accepted by Sir Billy, but especially by Ricardo, whose barking Stomach cried
aloud for a supply. The Gentlemen there present desired excuse to sit down with
them, but with great Admiration beheld how the Knight and his Squire laid about
them in this Teeth-Encounter; more Valiant, and far more Fortunate therein,
than in the Encounter with the terrible Scarecrow.

After they had sufficiently refreshed themselves, Sir Billy's Teeth now lying
Idle, his Tongue having free liberty to speak, he began his Speech in this wise.

There is no undertakings whatsoever so Honorable and necessary to mankind at
this of Knight Errantry; were it not for them, how would Giants and Monsters
overcome each Country, destroying all with Rapine and Violence; It is the
Knights-Errant unconquered Arms that delivers distressed Knights and Ladies
from their Imprisonment in Enchanted Castles; who overcomes Magicians and
Negromancers, putting an end to their Devilish Enchantments, but only the
undaunted Prowess of Knights-Errant. Did you ever hear o^ any Dragons,
Griffins, or Sagitaries slain and destroyed, but by the invincible Valor and
Matchless Magnanimity of Knights Errant? In brief, they are the Avengers of
Injuries, the Righters of Wrongs, the Supporters of the distressed, the
Defenders of the Peaceable, and quellers of the riotous. The want of these
Heroic Persons in this last Age, has been the cause of so many Villainies that
have been committed, none more able nor more willing to suppress outrages, than
Knights-Errant; To this Honorable Function have I therefore devoted my self,
beseeching you most Mighty Monarch of this Famous Castle, for the Consummation
of my intended purposes, to bestow on me the Honor of Knighthood, whereby I
may be enabled to perform such feats of Arms, that Babes unborn may read with
Wonder the Valiant Acts performed by me.

The Courteous Old Gentleman hearing his Extravagancies, and willing to make
some pastime with his folly, as also that his Friends might have some Jovial
Divertisement, he freely granted him his request in these Words.

Most noble Youth, in whom appears the early sparks of Martial Resolutions, who
would seek to quench the Flames of Magnanimity which I see already enkindled in
your Breast; that were to deprive posterity of ^he knowledge of your renowned
Actions: therefore know your request is granted, you performing those Services
which Knights-Errant are bound to do; Namely, this Night to watch your Arms,
and manfully defend them against any one that should seek to oppose ye, thereby
showing your self worthy of the Honor to conferred on ye, and the next day we
shall Dub ye Knight accordingly.

Sir Billy thanked him very heartily, ^ndertaking the Charge, and performing it
most Valiantly, as you shall hear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. 3. Sir Billy watches his Armor; and is made Knight by the Lord of the
Castle: his ill success in running at the Quinten: with other things which
happened.
NOw had the Curle-pated Waggoner of Heaven finished his Diurnal course, and
driven his panting Steeds down to the Western Hill, and Nights black Wings had
Maskt up the light in gloomy Darkness, when the renowned Champion Sir Billy of
Billerecay having refreshed his Spirits with the sprightly Liquor of the
spreading Vine, undertook according to those Presidents he had read in Books of
Chevalry, to watch his Arms for that Night: accordingly they were seated in a
very convenient place, where if any opposition should be offered unto him, he
might have full liberty to bestir himself; the Gentleman wishing him to be very
watchful, because the place he said was troubled with Devils and infernal
Spirits; which yet notwithstanding nothing daunted Sir Billy's Courage, so much
was his Heart fraught with invincible Valor, that he dreaded no Danger
whatsoever.

Whilst Billy was thus fixed in watching his Armor; to try his Manhood, the
Master of the House, with the other Gentlemen, persuaded a Groom, a lusty Stout
Fellow, to Encounter with him, promising, if he overcame him, a good reward for
his Pains. The Fellow, willing to show the Gentlemen some sport, undertakes the
same; but thinking it more pleasant to overcome without blows, he intends to do
it by Stratagem; and to this purpose, there being a Bears skin in the House, he
clothed himself therewith and putting a Vizard on his Face, and carrying on
his shoulder a lighted Candle in the Rind of a Pompion, cut out with the
resemblance of Nose, Eyes, and Mouth, it looked most dreadfully, but least
those should not take the wished Effect, he carried in his hand a good Ashen
Towel to defend himself. Being thus Accoutred, in the dead of the Night, when
darkness had clothed our Hemisphere, save only a faint light which Cynthia gave
through the dusky Clouds, he approaches to the place where Sir Billy stood with
his drawn Sword to Encount^r any that should oppose him. At the first sight
thereof he was in some little Fear, as having never read in all his Books of
Errantry, of such a fearful Apparition; but his Earnest desire of being Dubbed a
Knight, made him slight all danger; so that with his great two handed Sword, he
struck at the Groom with all his might; but Fortune herein was Favorable to
him, for the blow lighting on the Pompion Lanthorn, broke it all in pieces, and
i^ an instant extinguished the Light, which made Billy verily believe he had cut
the Devil's head off: Encouraged wherewith he so redoubled his blows, that the
Fellow thought he would send him to the Devil indeed, imagining the cracking of
the Pompion had been the cracking of his Bones; wherefore giving him a fair
pair of heels, he hasted from his Clutches as hard as he could drive.

This Victory thus obtained, Sir Billy imagined himself no less than a Second
Hercules, resolving to undergo whatsoever attempt should happen unto him; In
the mean time the Gentlemen with all the Rhetoric they could use, were
persuading the Groom to make a Second on set on Billy, but fear standing at the
Gates of h^^ Eyes, put back all persuasions which they could use; whereupon,
willing to have the Frolic continued, one of the Gentlemen undertook the
Adventure; and putting on a Buff Coat, a Helmet on his head, and taking a Sword
in his right Hand, and a lighted Torch in the other, he marched directly to Sir
Billy, who very watchfully attended his coming: And now Caliope, thou sacred
Sister of the Muses, assist my Pen in describing this Jest, Earnest Combat.

Assist my ^^embling and unable Quill,
O all ye ^owers that haunt Pernassus Hill.
This young Gentleman, whom for Distinction sake we will call Orlando, seemed
with great fury to make a pass at Sir Billy, who seeing his bright Sword coming
directly toward him, went backwards, but not as the Ram to return with the
greater fury, but with the same mind as Cowards, who run away from the Battle,
only to be killed further from their fellows. Thus retreated he back until at
last his back touched a Brick Wall, when all on a sudden remembering the Goddess
he had devoted himself unto, it put fresh Vigor into his Veins, and crying out,
O Beauteous Dulcin^ assist thy Servant, he laid about him with as much Courage
as Alcides when he encountered with the Nemaean Lion, so that the Gentleman, to
defend himself, was forced to use his utmost skill, but his Torch being longer
than Sir Billy's Sword, he crossed the Fire thwart his Face, which put Sir Billy
again to the retreat; but it would have made one to split with laughter, to see
how the Gentleman coming up to Sir Billy, and having given him three or Four
slaps with the flat of his Sword, he would fly back again as it were for fear,
whom Sir Billy then would eagerly pursue; Thus did they make good their ground
for several times, when at last Mr. Orlando wearied as well as satisfied with
the divertisement, ran quite away from Sir Billy, whom the Conqueror would not
pursue, it being his duty then only to watch his Arms.

Next Morning no sooner did Auro^a begin to display her Golden locks, and the
Sun to gild the Horizon with his Radiance, but the Gentleman, accompanied with
the Master of the House, went all together to visit Sir Billy, and to
Congratulate with him for his great manhood in defending his Arms. Arms (said
Sir Billy) I think I have been Encountered this Night with the Fellest of the
infernal Region; but had they had the strength of Ascapart who could bear a
Knight at Arms and his Horse under his Arm; or the skill of Proteus who could
Transform himself into what Shape he pleased; or the cunning of Ulysses who
could free himself from the Charms of the Enchanting Sirens, yet should I have
repelled them all by the help of this my Sword Rosero. Then recounted he to
them the dangerous fight he had with the burning Be^r, whose Head he broke all
in pieces; as also his Encounter with the Knight of the flaming Torch; all
which he expressed very highly to his own prowess, yet imputing it in a great
part to the Succor he received from the beautyful Dulcina, the Empress of his
affections, and to whom all Ladies in the World for beauty ought to become her
Tributaries.

They all very much applauded his manhood, and the great happiness of the Lady
who had such an undaunted Champion to her Servant. And now it was concluded by
all hands he was worthy to receive the Honor of Knighthood, which was
immediately conferred on him by the Lord of the Castle, (for so did Sir Billy
account it to be) in this manner.

Sir Billy being Armed from Top to Toe so well as those uncouth pieces could be
patched up, attended on by his Squire Ricardo, was brought before the Master of
the House, who was placed in the Hall, being mounted on a Chair of three
ascents high: Sir Billy coming before him was commanded to Kneel, which being
done, the Old Gentleman struck him such a blow on the Neck with his Sword, as
Sir Billy had cause to remember his Knighting, and then said to him, Arise thou
Victorious Knight at Arms, the Killer of Giants, and queller of Monsters, the
most Renowned Sir Billy of Billerecay; Ricardo seeing such Honor as he thought
done to his Master, began to applaud his Fortune that ever he became Squire to
so brave a Knight; and his belly being recruited with better Victuals than ever
his teeth were acquainted withal before, he thought himself not inferior to
the King of Spain, and accordingly demeaned himself, which humor of his the
Servants of the House so well followed, that he became no less conceited than
his Master, who now being made Knight, was Company only for those of the better
So^t.

Now to complete their mirth, it so happened that at the same time there came
two or three Friends to visit this Gentleman, who seeing Sir Billy strutting it
in Armor, much wondered what the Antic meant, to be so clad in a time of
general Peace; but being informed by the aged Gentleman of his Extravagant
Humors, they were highly taken with the conceit, and resolved to sooth him up
in his Rediculous Fancies, whereupon one of them Accoasted him in this manner.

*Most Magnanimous Knight, whose Heroic Actions will hereafter be sounded
forth by Fames Silver Trumpet; we hearing of your resolution to revive again
the Honor of Chevalry, which too long has lain neglected in these times of
Ease and Idleness, came to congratulate this your Noble intention, which will
hereafter Eternize your Name with Fame so far as Phoebus shall dart forth his
Golden Rays; How happy therefore will that Poet be, whose lucky fate shall
guide him to record your never dying Facts, and thrice happy will that noble
Lady be, on whom you shall please to cast your Affection, having such a
Champion to Vindicate her Honor, the Sound of whose Name carries Victory
before him.

Sir Billy stood gaping with his Mouth wide open, greedily to suck in those
praises which were bestowed upon him; Ricardo as greedy of Fame as his Master,
asked the Gentleman, if that Poet, Historian, or writer, who recorded his
Masters Acts, did not also set forth the Deeds of Squires Errant? Billy
laughing at his Squires simplicity, told him, that was a needless question,
since the Knights and the Squires actions were as inseparable as a Fish and
Water, without the one the other Dies; Only the Knight was to be praised for
his valiant Acts, and the Squire for Obedience to his Commands. But where then
(said Ricardo) is the reward of his Service? For that, said Billy, after the
Knight has finished his Conquest, he commonly makes him the Captain of some
Castle, or Governor of an Island, according as he finds his abilities
answerable thereto. Never question my abilities (said Ricardo) in any such
things, for he that knows how to govern himself, knows how to govern a Family,
and he that can govern a Family, need not fear but he can govern an Island.

This discourse betwixt Sir Billy and his Squire made the Gentlemen to laugh
heartily; who now consulted together upon what attempt to put this new made
Knight, at last they agreed to set up a Quinten, which is a cross bar turning
upon a pole, having a broad board at the one end, and a bag full of Sand
hanging at the other; Now he that ran at it with his Lance, if he hit not the
board was laughed to Scorn, and if he hit it full and rid not the faster, would
have such a blow with the sand Bag on his Back, as would sometimes beat them
off their Horses.

But this Exercise disliked Sir Billy, because as he said, it was not comprised
in the Rules of Knight Errantry, which was to succor distressed Ladies, to
kill Giants and Monsters, to raze down enchanted Castles, and destroy
Negromancers, (...) punish Tyrants, and to succor the W^^*dows and Fatherless;
and therefore he refused to make one in any thing but what pertained to Knight
Errantry; yet with much entreaty he permitted his Squire Ricardo to try his
Fortune therein; whils^ he, with the Gentleman of the House, and some Ladies
there present, being mounted on a seat made for that pupose, did there sit to
behold it.

The Gentleman which encountered Sir Billy was the first that ran at the
Quinten, who performed the same with great agility, riding with such swift
speed as if his Horse scorned to touch the Ground, whereby he came off with
great applause. The next that ran was a Servant of the House, Steward to the
Gentleman, who hitting the board too full, ever he could pass away, had such a
blow with the sand-bag as almost felled him off his Horse* Next Ricardo was
persuaded to take his turn, whose Horse being thought not swift enough for such
an Enterprise, the Gentleman lent him one of his best Geldings, on which being
mounted in a great Saddle, he began his race, which was so swift, that Ricardo
fearing falling, Curbed him with the Bitt, whereat the Horse fell to Curvetting
and Rising with his fore Feet; whereupon Ricardo threw away his Lance, and
held with both his hands on the Pummel of the Saddle; The Horse being thus
freed from his Reins, ran with Ricardo on his back all about the Ground, where
multitudes of people were assembled to behold the Sport, which caused such a
laughter amongst them, with loud Clamors and Noise, as Cannons make when they
disgorge their Fiery Vomits, or that of Nilus precipitated Cataracts, which
Deafens all the people that dwell thereabout.

Sir Billy was exceeding wroth at this disgrace of^his Squire, threatening
Revenge on all those who rejoiced at his Misfortune; but the Gentlemen pacified
him all they could, telling him it was only the Fortune of War, and though
Knights Errant were of themselves invincible, yet their Squires were not always
so. That therefore it would be convenient for him to try the adventure himself
to recover the disgrace of his Squire; for though succouring distressed Ladies
and Killing of Giants were the main properties belonging to Knights Errant, yet
that they accustomed themselves also to Justs and Tournaments, which were near
of kin unto the Quinten. That he need not doub^ but by the might of his
invincible Arm^ and the assistance of the Lady of his Affe^ctions, but he
should be victorious i^ whatsoever he went about. These an^ the like words so
Encouraged Sir Billy that he swore by the honor of his Knigh^hood, he would
encounter with the Quinten although it were the Devil himself.

The Gentlemen having now wha^ they desired, soothed him up, until he wa^
mounted on his Bellerophon, for he would ride no other, professing that
Bucephalu^ the Horse of King Alexander was no^ comparable unto him; so taking
hi^ Lance in his hand, he rid with all hi^ might at the Quinten, and hitting
the Board a full blow, brought the Sand-Ba^ about with such Force, as made him
mea^s;ure his length on the Ground. This dis^grace of the Master, caused a
loude^ laughter than that of the Servant, but i^ Sir Billy it wrought such
shame and Con^fusion, as had almost banished in him a^ further thoughts of
Knight Errantry wherefore the Gentlemen, to keep up the humor, told him, that
this was done b^ the envy of the wicked Negromance^ Soto; who was an utter
Enemy to a^^ Knights Errant. And might it not (...) ^said Sir Billy) for want
of invocating ^he help of the Lady of my Affections, the Beautiful Dulcina? O
yes ( quoth Orlando) that has often happened to several other Knights before
ye; St. George the valiant Champion of England, for want of invo^ating the
assistance of his Lady Sabra, ^nduced a Seven years Imprisonment in a Dungeon
in Persia; the Renowned Monte^ion Knight of the Oracle, never entered unto any
Combat, but he implored the help ^f his Lady Philotheta, which made him ^rosper
in all his undertakings. Paladine ^f England used always to crave the
Assi^^ance of his Lady Nonparelia, and the Honor of Chevalry, Don Beliavis of
Greece, in all his Combats evermore called ^ut upon the Princess Florisbella
Daughter (...) the Souldan of Babylon. Let me therefor advise ye, as one Born
to Acts of Che^alry, to have always in your remembrance ^he Laws of Knight
Errantry, that neither ^agicians, Giants, Negromancers, nor Monsters, may
hereafter ever have any ad^antage over ye.

Sir Billy upon this, imputing all his (...) luck to the want of a due
observation (...) the Customs used by former Knights ^rrant, resolved to be
more careful there^^; and thinking this Council of Orlando to proceed from the
Sage Frison, Famous Enchanter which he had read in his Books of Knighthood) he
retur^^*ed him many thanks, vowing hencefo^^*ward to have his Lady Dulcina
always his Thoughts, she being the Mirror Beauty, Map of Modesty, and
non-parall^^ of all perfections of her time.

And now being in this resolution, an^ having accomplished his Business in
ref^^rence to his receiving the Order of Knigh^^hood, he resolved to depart
from then^ to seek out adventures, to the great gri^ of his Squire Ricardo, who
notwithstan^^ing his disgrace in running at the Qu^^ten, was loath to depart,
having his Be^^ stuffed every day with store of meat, (...) Bottles of Wine,
things unknown in (...) Fathers House, and knew not well wh^^ they should come
to such another Cas^ to be so well entertained; He therefo^^ conjured by the
Honor of his Knig^^^hood, and as he desired hereafter to Co^^quer Islands, and
Enchanted Castles, not (...) depart so hastily, but to remain there ^^^til they
had participated further of (...) Lord of the Castles bounty.

Sir Billy, whose mind ran upon Hon^^ more than upon his belly, to check (...)
Squires Gluttonous Appetite, began^ ^ead to him this Lecture of Sobriety.

How happy was the Golden Age, when ^en fed only on Acorns and Nuts, and those
Drink was Water from the Cristal ^pring; when those two wrangling Words ^f Meum
and Tuum were not known in the World, but men's hearts and Houses were ^pen, and
every ones Dwelling was a gene^al rendezvous; when instead of Cups and Dishes,
they Drank out of the Palms of their Hands, having not need of Coin nor Golden
Oar, for all things were-in common ^o them. Then could not the Weight of (...)
Fee Poize Justice to which side she pleased, and Men's Love was pure downright,
not having learned the Hipocrisy of Com^lements. The Hob-nail'd Swain whistled
^ot then to his Teem, for the Teeming Ground gave all things freely without
Till^age, and, Roses and Flowers produced themselves without the help of
Gardners. The Bees were not confined to Hives, but freely left their Honey in
the clefts of the Rocks and Hallow Trees, carrying no sting but Honey in their
Tails. The Name of Lawyer was not known unto them, and their thoughts were as
chaste as the Vestal Nuns. The Sheep and Lambs fed securely, nor did the Steer
or Ox dread the slaughtering Butcher. The Silk Worm did not then work to cloth
Gallants with Pride, and i^*stead of Down-Beds their lodging was on (...) cold
Ground, they needed nor Physician^ because they knew not what sickness mean^
and want of excess kept them free from Diseases. Those were rightly termed the
Golden Days, not that Gold was then s^ plentiful, but because men had no need
of it^ The Covetousness of which is the cause of (...) the mischiefs in the
World; Thefts, Rapines, Murders, False-Swearings, Lying and Deceit, all
proceed from the desire o^ Gold, as does Sicknesses and all manner of Diseases
from Gluttony and Excess* Rouse up thy self therefore Friend Ri*cardo, and give
not thy Mind to eat*ing and Idleness, for Fame calls u^ aloud from the Bed of
Sluggishness, an^ the way to Honor is by Hazardous A^*tempts.

Ricardo regarded not much his Ma*sters discourse, as one whom* no argu*ments
could convince against ease and eating, but that it was the most delight*som
Life that Mortals in this World ca^ attain unto; But Sir Billy, whose mind ran
more upon fighting than feeding* would by no means condescended t^ stay any
longer, wherefore taking hi^ leave of the Lord of the Castle (as h^ termed it)
as also of the other Gentlemen, who were very well pleased with the
divertisements he made them, he and his Squire having buckled on their Armor,
and mounted their Steeds, betook themselves unto their Journey.

CHAP. 4. Sir Billy being dubbed Knight, Marches forth to seek, Adventurers:
His encounter with Poppet-Gyants: His Imprisonment in a wooden Enchanted
Castle; and Entertainment by the Sage Freston.
WHilst Sir Billy and his Squire were thus Acting the Pageant Knight, Old
Thomasio who was returned from ^aying his Landlord his Rent, being ^n formed of
the Departure of his Son, and (what was most dear to him) two ^f his best
Horses, he broke forth into ^uch a sad Lamentation, as would have grieved a
Heart of Flint to hear it, Cur^ng the time that ever he put his Son to ^chool,
but more, that ever he bought ^im any Books of Knight Errantry. Saying, They
were all composed of mere witch*craft, and therefore not fit to be suffere^ in
a well governed Commonwealth. An^ now seeing he could not come at his Son* he
resolved to be revenged on his Books* but being ignorant in all sorts of
Learn*ing, he associated to him Sir John the Curate of the Parish to peruse
them, an^ whom he condemned for faulty to be cas^ into the fire.

Billy had locked up all his Library i^ a very large Chest, of which he carried
the Key always about him, and therefore Old Thomasio caused it to be broke
open* The first Book they laid hands on, wa^ Sir Bevis of Southampton; This
(said the Curate) is the Father of our English Ro*mancers, made upon a Knight
who lived i^ the time of King William the Conqueror* but has in it an Ell of
lying to an Inch o^ Truth. And by my fay (said Thomasio, a Liar they say is as
bad as a Thief, an^ therefore into the Fire he shall go, althoug^ he were a
killer of Giants and Dragons* The next that came to hand was the First and
Second part of Amadis de Gaul in English: The Original of this (said the
Curate) is French, of which there is abo^^ thirty Parts, but we in English have
(...) Six of them. And by Plough Share (sa^^ Thom^sio) that is too much by
above five of them, and therefore he shall accompa^y his fellow Sir Bevis in
the fire. Next (said the Curate) here is Palmerin D'oliva in three Parts,
Primaleon of Greece i^ three Parts, Palmerin of England in three Parts, and
Palmendas in one, all these are one continued History of an Emperor of
Constantinople, called Palmerin D*ovila, his Son Primaleon, and Grandson
Palmerin of England, and others. By my fay said Thomasio) these Palmerins and
Amadisses were notable Cutting and Slashing Blades, which made a great
disturbance in the World, but we shall reconcile them all in one fire together,
notwithstanding they were such big Fellows in their time.

The next (said the Curate) is Don B^lianis of Greece, one who could cut two or
three Giants in two by the middle at a stroke. Were he Achilles of Greece (said
Thomasio) he should go to the Fire, and ^f I had the Author of his History he
should likewise accompany him for his abominable lying. The next (said the
Curate) ^s Paladine of England, one also of French ^xtraction, but more modest
in his expressi^ns than Don Bellianis: His Modesty said Thomasio) shall not
excuse him, but he ^all to the fire, were he as big a Frenchman as Charlemain.
But what, Sir John, (...) that Book which has a Curtain draws ove^ the Letters
in the beginning of it? Thi^ (said the Curate) is worthy to be pre*served, it
being the History of Argalus an^ Parthenia, written by the Divine (...) Mr.
Francis Quarles. Why (said Thomasio^ was not that Argalus a Knight Errant O no
(quoth the Curate) but one who w^^ premised for the pattern of Virtue, and
ex*ample of true Love and Magnanimity.

These words gave the noble Argalus* reprieve from the Fire, but the next the^
laid hands on felt a worser Fate, which was the Mirror of Knighthood in Nin^
Parts, for which Thomasio would he^^ no excuse, but said, that the fire wou^^
purge it from all its lys, wherewith the and other Books of Knight Errantry
(...) abound; whereupon it was cast into (...) Fire; as also, the Four Sons of
Amo^^ Arthur of great Britain, Arthur of lit^^^ Britain, Valentine and Orson,
Parism^^ and Parismenus, Montelian Knight of (...) Oracle, Ornatus and Artesia,
the Se^^ Champions of Christendom, Guy of W^^^wick, Cleoctreon and Cloryana,
Chin^^^ England, Galien of France, (...) Prince of Greece, Tom a Lincoln the
(...) Rose Knight, Huon of Bordeaux, (...) the Maiden Knight, and all other
Books of that Nature, of which he would spare none; and indeed he had none of
the more refined Sort, such as the Countess of Pembrook's Arcadia, Bentevolio
and Urania, The Illustrous Bassa, Grand Cyrus, Astreo, Palexander, Eremena, the
banished Virgin, Coralbo, Ariana, Clelia, Cassandra, Cleopatra, Pharamond,
Iphigenis, Grand Scipio, and some others; These I conceive either were not
written in his time, or too dear for him to purchase. Some Books of Poetry he
had likewise amongst them; but all Thomasio's spite being against Knight
Errantry, he let the Books of Poetry escape the Fire, yet judged them not good
for any thing, unless to be put under Mutton Pasties or Apple-Pies.

In the mean time while these things were acting, Sir Billy was pursuing his
Knightly Adventures, little thinking what a fiery trial his Knights Errant were
put to at home. And long he thought the time until he might meet with some
Adventure which might Crown his undertakings, being fully persuaded that now he
was made Knight, no power whatsoever could withstand the force of his
Victorious Arm. In the mean time his Squire was devoutly praying to meet with
such another Castle wherein to recruit his wambling belly, which was every five
or six hours incessantly craving for a supply. Having thus rid about three or
Four Miles, they came to a Market Town, where at that time was kept a Fair, in
the middle whereof was a stately Inn, in which was a Poppet-Show to be seen, to
which purpose they had hanged out a painted Cloth, whereon was this written,
Within this place is to be seen, the Fight betwixt little David and Goliath the
Giant of Gath, as also of other Giants killed by David's Servants.

Billy having read the Writing, and finding that Giants were within, he
resolved to encounter with them; (...) alighting from his Horse, he gave him to
Ricardo to walk, whilst he went to kil^ the Giants, and following the multitude
he came to a door where a Woman sat t^ take Money of them who would see the
Show; Billy knowing that Knights Er*rant were privileged to pass any whe^^
without Money, refused to pay, where upon he was stopped from going in, at
which incensed he drew his Sword, threatening Death to any who should oppose
him; and so without any further opposition, ran into the Chamber where the
Giants were placed upon a Table ready to be shown: Sir Billy no sooner saw
them, but quick as lightning he fell upon them with his trusty Sword Rosero,
making such havoc amongst them, that the Master of the Show, like a man
distracted, ran out crying, help, help; Murder, Murder; for his Giants were
killed before the fight begun.

This hideous outcry presently raised a confused rabble, who running in fell
upon Billy, belabouring him as he had done the Poppets, who yet so valiantly
behaved himself, that twice or thrice he put them to the retreat, when at last
came the Constable attended with six or eight rusty Bill-men, who commanded him
in the Kings Name to keep the Peace. Thou wicked Negroma^cer (said Sir Billy) I
defy thee, and all the Giants in the World: And with that fell upon the
Constable with might and main, dealing such blows as Hector when he hewed down
the Greeks. But alas what can single valor do against a multitude, Hercules
himself may be overmacht by number, One of the watchmen coming behind him,
Cowardly knocked him down with his Halbert, and now there lay sprawling on the
Ground our young Bevis, our Amadis, Palmendos, or what you will please to call
him. In the mean time the people abroad had seized on Ricardo, demanding of him
what madman that was he came withal, and for what reason they went so clad in
Armor? That Magn^nimous Hero (said Ricardo) which you saw, is the Victorious
Knight at Arms, Sir Billy of Billerecay, and I his Squire Don Ricardo, Born to
be the Governor of an Island when my Master can conquer i^; the reason why we
go in Armor is, because it is the Custom of Knight Errants, and Squire Errants,
so to do. These words made the people to think they were a couple of madmen,
and therefore securing their Horses, they put both the Knight and his Squire in
the Cage.

Billy enclosed in this wooden Tenement, began to rage exceedingly: Vile
Miscreants (said he) the off*spring of Vipers and Poisonous Toads, Enemies to
Magnanimity, and Foes to true Chevalry; think not although by your damned
spells you have Captivated my Body, yet I question not but by the help of the
Sage Freston I shall be delivered from your Enchantments; Then will I work my
revenge upon you, laying the lofty Battlements of your buildings which seem to
vye with the Pyramids of Egypt, equal with the dust, like to that glorious
Phrigian City of King Priamus, now overspread with stinking weeds, and
loathsome Puddles; your Wives and Children I will send into banishment, and
bring you into such intolerable Th^aldom, that the Torments of Sisiphus,
Tantalus, nor Oedipus, shall be comparable to those I will inflict upon you.

These his raging words made the Boys to hoot at him, whilst Ricardo sat
sighing to see his hopes of an Island come to a Cage, which yet his Master
would needs persuade him was done by Enchantment: Have you not read (said he)
how the seven Champions of Christendom having killed the Giants which belonged
to Leoger the Knight of the black Castle, yet by a Magician they were cast upon
a Bed, from whence they could not stir until they were delivered by St. Georges
three Sons. But said Ricardo, I cannot Imagine that he was a Magician that put
us into this Cage, but such another man of Office as we have at Billerecay,
which they call a Constable, because he had in his hand a ^ainted Staff, which
showed him to be a Man i^ Authority. That (said Billy) proceeds from your
Ignorance, not knowing that a Magician can transform himself into what shape he
pleases; does not the Devil sometimes take upon him the likeness of a Bro^^er,
sometimes of a Horse*Courser, sometimes of a Bum-Bayliff, under which Shapes ^e
acts so many Roguries, for no Man of himself can do such wickednesses, but only
the Devil that assumes their Shapes.

Whilst the Knight and his Squire were thus discoursing, the Constable came to
fetch them before a Justice, at which news Ricardo wept bitterly; but Billy was
so firm in his determination that you might as soon have removed the Earth from
its Center, or stopped the Sun in his diurnal Course, as to have caused him to
alter his mind, or think that those Books of Knight Errantry, were not
undoubted verity, and as true as the voice of Jove it self. The Justice, though
grave and solid in his office, yet was one who much delighted in mirth and
harmless Sport, who being informed of all what had passed, much admired at the
ones boundless extravagancy, and the others harmless simplicity. The Master of
the Show made a grievous complaint against him of the wrong he had sustained;
Never (said he) after a Battle did you behold the dismembered Limbs of
slaughtered Carcases lie so Scattered about as in this Skirmish; here lay an
Arm, there a Leg, especially my Giant Goliath was so bemangled, that his
ruinated Carcass was not fit for a Scarecrow. At that word Scarecrow, Ricardo
stepping forth said, My Master never has so ill Fortune as when he encounters
with Scarecrow Giants* And thereupon told the Justice of the blows they had
received by encountering with the Scare Crow Giant, as is related in the Second
Chapter.

The Justice was so highly pleased with this discourse, that he resolved with
himself to further the humor; and so giving the Master of the Show ten pound
for damage, he discharged the Constable of him, and invited the Knight and his
Squ^re home to his House, where he feasted them Royally, which made Ricardo
begin afresh to have a good opinion of Knight Errantry, for feeding was more
agreeable to his Nature by far than Fighting. And now Sir Billy began a little
to be more reconciled to reason, and to discourse without rageing, whereupon
the Justice desired him to honor him so much as to give him an account of his
forepassed Life, that by that means posterity might be informed of his Heroic
Acts, and by reading his Life leave an Example for posterity to imitate.

Sir (said Billy) Courtesy is one of the virtues inherent to Knight Errantry,
and I having received so many Favors from you for my self and my Squire,
cannot in g^atitude do less, than to give you an impartial account of what you
desire, which yet howsoever is but only the beginning of what I intend shall be
performed by my Victorious Arm.

Know then (said he) most worthy Governor of this Famous City, that the place
which will be for ever Honored by my Birth, is the Town of Billerecay in the
County of Essex; my Parents happy in producing a Son of such Magnanimity as the
Gods have endued me with, to be the preserver of Innocence, and avenger of
wrongs. In my blooming youth it was my Fortune as other Knights Errant have
been, to be Captivated by the beautiful looks of the fair Dulcina, the Mine,
the Magazine, the Commonwealth of Beauty; one upon whom Nature and curious Art
have done their best to sum that rare perfection which ^ranscends the power of
belief. For the Love of this peerless Parragon, this Phaenix of perfection,
have I took upon me this order of Knight Errantry, not doubting but by my
Victorious Arm, to make her Name as Famous as was that of Cloryana the beloved
Mistress of the renowned Knight Cleocreton Prince of Hungary.

The Justice commended him highly for his resolution: But (said he) most
valiant Knight, I wonder that in all this time you do not acquaint the divine
Lady of your Affections with your proceedings, who no doubt must needs think
long to hear of your Achievements; Besides, it was always the Custom of
Knights Errant to employ their Squires on such Embassies, therefore you having
such a peerless Non-parelia to your Lady, cannot in Civility to her omit such a
thing.

Now by the Honor of my Knighthood (said Sir Billy,) next Morning no sooner
shall Phoebus guild the Mountain tops with his refu^gent beams, but I shall
send my Squire Ricardo with a Letter to that Queen of Love the beauteous
Dulcina. And thereupon borrowing Pen Ink and paper of the Justice, because
Knights Errant never carry any thing about them, but only Mouths to Eat, and
Swords to fight, he writ to her in these Words.

Sir Billy's Letter to Dulcina.
MOST Beauteous Dulcina, the joy of my Heart, and Goddess of my Affections; by
whose influence my Arm becomes Irresistible, so that Giants fall down at the
first stroke of my Valor. I make no question but the Fame of my deeds will
arrive to your knowledge before this my Letter, by which thou may understand
how victoriously I proceed. And all by the power of your incomparable Beauty,
which I have and will maintain to be unmatchable. As for the Particulars of my
Adventures, I leave them to be related by my trusty Squire Ricardo: as also how
for thy sake I suffered Imprisonment by a wicked Negromancer, with an Enchanted
staff, and how I was delivered from his damned Spells by the help of the Sage
Freston, in whose Castle I now remain till I receive an answer from thee, which
I shall expect with all Impatience: till then farewell, thou Elixar of all
Beauty, the first and best original of all fair Copies, thine ever constant
Knight.

Sir Billy of Billerecay.


Having finished his Letter, he showed it to the Justice, whom with Sir Billy
we must now call the Sage Freston; who applauded it exceedingly, as the highest
piece of ingenuity that Art ever contrived; telling him, that that Ladies heart
must be more obdurate than Marble whom such language could not mollify. Billy
was mightily pleased with his expressions, and calling his Squire Ricardo unto
him, he thus expressed himself.

My trusty Squire, I must now employ thee upon a weighty affair, which I am the
more willing to do, knowing thy abilities answerable to thy good intentions,
hereupon I have deputed thee my Ambassador, Nuncio, or Messenger, to deliver
this Letter into the hands of that abstract of true Beauty, whose radient look
strikes every gazing eye stark blind, and keeps the amazed beholder under the
stupid tyranny of Love and wonder; I mean the Beautyful Dulcina, the Mistress
of my Affections, and Sole Commandress of my undertakings; and see thou do it
in a garb and posture worthy the Servant of so illustrious a Knight, that
afterward it may be Inroled by him that shall Write my History with
Commendations to thy Eternal Fame.

Ricardo was much surpised at his Master's superabundant Rhetoric; but loath
to lose a place of so good entertainment, where instead of fighting was full
feeding, and no gashing nor slashing but only of Loins of Beef, Shoulders of
Mutton, and good fat Capons, all which suited extraordinary well with his
Stomach; But what most of all troubled him, was, that he was to go he knew not
whether, to deliver a message to he knew not who; and therefore grumbling told
his Master, that he Commanded him impossibilities, to find out a Lady of which
there was none such but only in Imagination.

O thou lump of Ignorance (said Sir Billy) know thou not Joan Grumball?
whose form is such as might call the World to Wars, and make it hazard all its
Valor for her Beauty; she it is that is the Dulcina thou art to go unto, and
offer up my Service at the shrine of her Beauty. Jone Grumball (said Ricardo)
why she is the lustiest Lass in all our Town, either to fill Dung-Cart, drive a
Wheel-Barrow, or carry grains to serve the Hogs; but for Beauty in my opinion
she is no more to be compared to Betty our Parson's Maid, than is Mr. Offly's
white Hind unto your Fathers brindled Cow, however I will carry the Letter to
her, and doubt not but I will Complement with her as well as the best Squire
that ever served Knight Errant since Knight Errantry was in Fashion.

CHAP. 5. Ricardo is sent with a Letter to Dulcina, in the mean time Sir Billy
encountreth with a monstrous Giant in defense of the Tantabilan Princess, whom
he Manfully overthrows.
NExt Morning no sooner had Aurora arose from Aged Tithona's Bed, and scattered
the light from off her Saffron* Wheels, but the nimble Knight Ricardo shaking
off sleep from those silken Fumes that do bind the Senses, arose from his Bed,
and having taken a lusty Breakfast, he then told his Master he was ready to
perform his Commandment in delivering his L^tter to the fair hands of his
beautiful Lady Dulcina, alias Joan Grumball; and question not but to bring you
an Answer according to your desires; Nor shall I arrogate any of the Honor of
your Achievements to my self, though in many of the Encounters I bore equal
blows with you, but whatsoever is due to your praise therefore, it shall be
wholly and solely yours.

Had not Sir Billy's mind been wholly taken up on thoughts of Knight Errantry,
he might easily have perceived how grossly his Squire had abused him; but he
imputing it all to duty, and respect which he bore to his Valor, was contented
with praise though never so rediculous. And therefore delivering him the
Letter, with many Commendations reiterated to the Mistress of his Affections,
he took his leave of him, who mounting on Pugnoto, his trusty Steed, leaving
his Armor behind him to the care of his Master* who promised to stay till his
return, he took his Journey toward Billerecay, where we leave him for a time,
the whilst our Pen shall wait upon his Master.

The Justices Servants mindin^ to put a trick upon this our Knight Errant,
dressed up the Footboy in Woman's Apparel, adorning him with Rings, Bracelets,
and other Jewels; so that he seemed to be a complete Princess, which part he
was to act, attended on by two youths who went to School in the Town, and were
to personate her Brothers. These being accoutred in this manner, were by the
Steward of the House conducted to Sir Billy, who was walking in a Garden,
Contemplating of the perfections of his Dulcina; Being come before his Princess
Nicosia (for so was she called) kneeling upon her knees thus spoke to him.

Most Renowned Knight, whose Valiant Acts the World both admires and dread, who
were it born for the comfort of all in distress, and for the Terror and
punishment of presuptuous Offenders. If ever pity, that poor comfort of
Calamity, creep into your Heart, I beseech you take Compassion of a distressed
Princess whom unjust Tyranny has banished from my Native Habitation. Having
proceeded so far, Sir Billy, who was as courteous as he was valiant, would not
permit her any longer to kneel, but raising her from the ground, he said, Most
peerless Princess, although my Honor of Knighthood might claim such observance
at your hands, yet know that Courtesy Harbors in Heroic Breasts, who are
readier to give Benefits than to receive Thanks; let me therefore know your
requests, wherein you have been wronged, and question not but by the help of my
Victorious Arm you shall be righted.

Sir (said she) my native Coun^ry is* Tant^bilus, my Father the unhappy Prince
thereof, unhappy in having such a Daughter, whose Beauty and Breeding might
have been a comfort unto him, although it proved the cause of his undoing; for
Fame having (how worthily I know not) blazed abroad my perfections thorough
diverse Countries, it came at last to the ears of a great Magician named
Diabolo, the Lord of an Enchanted Castle, standing on the Confines of Arduro,
from whence he sent a Letter to my Father, desiring to have m^ in marriage,
which if he refused, he threatened to take me by force, and in stead o^ a Wi^e
to make me his Concubine. Thi^ Message was ill resented by my Father, bu^ much
more by me who was to be his alte^ idem, or second self; for when I understood
what he desired, or rather to say mo^^ truer, what he demanded; I brake fort^
into such a violent passion as possessed the Mad Orestes when he was distraught
(...) Wits, who had seen the Picture of Alect^^ or with what manner of
countenance Mede^ killed her own Children, needed but ta^^ my Face for the full
satisfaction of his kno^ledge in that point; vowing rather to (...) buried in a
Grave, than Bedded with suc^ a loaths^m person. My father seeing (...) in such
a deep Passion, comforted me all he could, vowing to lay his Crown at stake,
and venture both his Life and Kingdom, ever he should obtain me at his hands;
and so sending away the Messenger with a flat denial, he returned again to his
Master, who full fraught with Indignation to have his suit rejected, threatened
revenge in the highest manner that could be inflicted. And to that purpose
raised what forces he could, and having store of Money, hired to his aid a
mighty Giant, of whom, our People were so afraid, that they fled before his
Face like trembling Doves before the swooping Eagle, or the timorous Hare from
the pursuing Greyhound. So that in ^ine he drove him quite out of his Kingdom,
into the Land of Lycaon, whether he sent him a Messenger, that if in two Months
time he could provide him a Champion that would fight with his Giant, if he
overcame him, he would restore his Kingdom again unto him, but if the Giant
overcame his Champion, then should I be at his will and disposal. Now most
worthy Knight, hearing the Fame of your memorable Adventures, and how you have
vowed ^our self to the Honor of Chevalry; my Father sent me his distressed
Daughter, accom^anied with these my sorrowful Brothers, to crave your aid
against this cruel Giant, not doubting but of your accustomed goodness as
former Knights Errant have used to do, you will Succor distressed Innocence,
and quell the pride of this daring Giant, which will be for your eternal Fame,
and memorize your name with Honor to all posterity.

Sir Billy gave great attention to this discourse, and as if the wrongs of the
Tantabilan Princess had infused fresh vigor into his breast, he swore by the
Truncheon of Mars, that the Giant had not long to live; but then he began to
think with himself whether he should perform this adventure before the return
of his Squire; to which the Justice under the name of the Sage Freston, told
him, that he should not neglect such an opportunity wherein his own honor,
with that of the Princesses preservation were so highly concerned. That the two
Months time wherein the combat was to be performed ran on a-pace, and that if
he should meet with any disaster in the performance thereof, he would be aiding
and assisting to him as he was in his deliverance from the enchanted wooden
prison* Hereupon Sir Billy animated with these persuasions, resolved to set
upon the Giant the next day*

Whilst these things were Acting, some other of the Servants had fashioned the
representation of a Giant, of a monstrous bulk, but more monstrous countenance,
so that his very looks were able to daunt any one, but he who had such an
invincible Courage as Sir Billy. This Giant was armed with a Pole-Axe
answerable to his Stature, and so framed, that one behind him could make him to
move his weapon, shake his head, and any other Action of his Body as if he were
alive; then for speech, a hallow Trunk through his Head into his Mouth,
delivered what they would speak by him. Before him they had dug a pit,
covered with a Trap-Door, on which whosoever trod was sure to fall there in.

The next morning, to make Sir Billy the more hearty to fight, there was made
for him a quart of rich Caudle, which was carried up to his Bedside by the
Sage Freston's Daughter, a Gen^lewoman of an incomparable Beauty, which might
have tempted any person, unless such a one whose heart was Cloistered in Ice,
but Knights Errant are always chaste as well as valiant, and her perfections
wrought in him no greater Flame than the Glowworm shoots at the cold bre^^ of
Night.

Soon after this refection he rose from his Bed, when meeting in the Hall the
Sage Freston, he demanded of him wh^^ Damosel it was that in the shape of (...)
Angel appeared to him that Morning, an^ whether there were any she^Angels o^
no? for this (said he) could not be a^ illusion, because I feel by my Stomac^
the comfortable effects thereof. The Sage Freston told him, it was the Damose^
Muriell, sent by the wife Vrgand^ Lady of the Fortunate Cave, who wa^ always a
great help to Knights tha^ undertook the de^ence of distressed Ladies.

Billy then called for his Armor, saying, he would not turn his head until h^
had confronted the Giant, desiring the Sage Freston to go along with him to be
a witness of his Valor, to which he willingly condescended, saying, he would
no^ only attend him himself, but also tha^ his Servants should go along with
them* so mounting their Horses they rode about the space of half a Mile, when
(as it wa^ concluded on amongst them before) on^ came riding toward them as
swift as the nimble Hind or skipping Roe trips it (...) the Flowery Lawns, who
brought them word that the Giant in persuit of the Tantabilan Princess, was
come within a quarter of a Mile of that place, where he stayed for the coming
of any Champion that should oppose him in defense of the Lady, as also that he
was resolved to try the Combat on Foot, and therefore desired that his Enemy
would do the same.

No (said Billy) never shall it be said that I owe any part of my Victory to
advantage, for had he the strength of Hercules who conquered all that ever he
fought withal, or two such Giants joined together, yet would I not fear to
encounter with them both, since it was never known that a Giant did kill a
Knight Errant, but always the Knight did beat the Giant.

With such manner of discourse they came to the place were the Mock-Gyant was,
Then Sir Billy alighting from his Horse gave him to one of the Servants to
hold, and drawing his Sword, marched directly toward the Giant, but before he
came to the place were the Trap Door was laid, the Fellow that was placed
behind the Giant thorough his Trunk, delivered these words unto him.

Forbear proud Knight to advance an^ f^rther, unless it be upon thy Knees to
beg pardon for thy Life; for if thou do (mark what I say) I shall cut off
thy head, and fix it on a pole to scare Birds, thy Body will I slice into thin
pieces for Cooks to make Pies withal to cheat their hungry Customers; thy Arms
and legs will I throw into the fields to be devoured by Ravens and Vulters; and
thy Guts and Garbage to the Swine, to fill therewith their hungry Paunches.

But Sir Billy nothing daunted at those proud speeches, kept on still his pace,
until he came upon the trap door, which giving up, down he slipped into the pit,
all the way as he was falling, calling upon the Sage Freston for help. The
Servants seeing him fall, gave a shout like to the roar of a whole Herd of
Lions, or such as the Artillery of Heaven discharged along the cleaving sky,
and running with hasty steps to the place, one more forwarder than the rest was
caught in his own* device, and slipped in after Sir Billy, who l^uder than he
shouted before, cried out for help, help, Sir Billy was no sooner down but he
recovered his legs, and hearing the other come thundering after him, he
imagined it verily to be the Giant, who all the while Sir Billy was belabouring
him, cried out with might and main, Murder, Murder. The old Justice hearing
this outcry, caused the Trap-Door to be removed, when by the light Sir Billy
could see his adversary at his feet, to whom he said; yield thy self vile
Miscreant, and acknowledge the wrong thou have done to the Tantabilan Princess,
and I will save thy Life, else look to ^e served in the same manner thou
threatnest to use me, for most just it is to render to every one according to
his deservings.

The Justice hearing the danger his man wa^ in, called to Sir Billy, desiring
him to hold his hand, and he would engage for the Giant; and knowing delay
dangerous, he let down a rope into the pit, desiring Sir Billy to take hold of
it that they might draw him up, and let the Giant remain there, and starve and
rot in the Dungeon.

Sir Billy willingly embraced the proffer* as accounting the Giant quite
vanished, and so taking hold of the rope was drawn up, to his double Joy, one
of having conquered the Giant, and the other for his deliverance from that dark
Dungeon. The Sage Freston congratulated his Victory with great expressions of
Joy, whilst in the mean time the Servants had conveyed the mock Giant away. But
most of all the Tantabilan Princess extolled his valor unto the skies, saying,
what he had done in her defense, was far beyond what eve^ was performed by
Amadis de Ga^le, Huo^ of Bourdeaux, Palmerin of England, ^almerin de Oliva, or
Don Belianis of Greece* or any other Knight Errant whatsoever, who had fought
in defense of wronged Ladies* Sir Billy tickled with these praises strutted
like a Crow in a Gutter, saying, Most excellent Princess, what ever has been
performed by my valor, comes infinite^^ far short of your deservings; and as
for your Enemy the Magician Diabolo, if he refuse to surrender the Crown again
to your Father, let me but know of it, and I shall take such sharp revenge on
him and his, tha^ Tigers, and Panthers, shall be accounte^ merciful in respect
of the Cruel^y I will she^ upon them.

Sir (said the Tantabilan Princess) I a^ so far beneath the Riches of your
Merits it can be no honor to your Name to rank m^ in the Number of your
humblest Servants Sir Billy thought all these Complement^ spoken to his
Commendation, and therefore was as proud of this Victory ove^ the Giant, as the
Macedonian Monarc^ for the conquest of Darius, saying, that the Gods prolonged
his Life, he would free the world from all such Giants and hateful Monsters.

All their discourse tending thus highly to the applauding of Sir Billy's
Valor, they mounted their Horses to return to the Sage Freston's, all the way
they rid nothing sounding forth but Panegyricks of Billy's praise, which were
so welcome to him, that who so viewed his looks, might perceive thereby how
inwardly his heart was contented. But having continued there a day or two, and
hearing no News at all of Ricardo, he fell into a deep Melancholy, and (as is
the use of Lovers) frequented Solitary places, and being doubtful what Answer
he should receive from his beloved Dulcina, betwixt Hope and Despair he
breathed forth this Sonnet.

'Twixt cheerful Hope and comfortless Despair,
Strangely perplex't, full sore amazed I stand,
Hope seems to show the Weather will be Fair,
And dark Despair says Tempests are at hand.
Venture says Hope, Despair does bid me slack;
Hope pricks me on, despair does pull me back,
Have well says Hope, Despair does bid me doubt,
Trust me says Hope, Despair says Hope is vain,
Shrink not says Hope, Despair cries, not so stout,
Labor says Hope, Despair does show no gain.
Good hap says Hope, Despair says contrary,
Hope bids me live, Despair would have me die.
Thus 'twixt these two at point of Death I live,
In hope of good, yet fearing froward chance,
In you it lies a happy hap to give,
To bring me out of this despairing Trance.
Oh help me then, that thus on knees do cry,
Assure my Hope, or in Despair I die.
In these Meditations we will leave Sir Billy for a while, to tell you how his
Squire Ricardo sped in his Journey to Dulcina.

CHAP. 6. How Ricardo in his Journey toward Billerecay met with an Aged
Palmer, who gave him an invisible Ring, with which he cheats an Innkeeper; as
also what a Trick he served a Bedlam and a Tinker.
RIcardo, as you heard in the former Chapter, being sent on an arrand to the
Lady Dulcina, bethought himself by the way, that if he returned back to
Billerecay, old Thomasio would apprehend him for stealing of his Horse, and
therefore began to doubt whether Squire Errantry would protect him from the
Gallows. To prevent which disgrace, he resolved upon the first opportunity to
sell his Horse, and with the Money to maintain himself until he could get into a
more safer Service than that of Knight Errantry. Wandering therefore through
bypath as his most ready way, at such time as the days bright burning eye
cast scorching Rays upon the parched Earth, he sat him down under the Covert
of a broad spreading Oak, and being full of thoughts not knowing what to do, he
spyed coming toward him an aged Palmer, one who seemed by the downfall of his
mellow years, that Nature had brought him near to the door of Death. This
Palmer whose cold Age had Frosted his gray Hairs, said to him, Ricardo Esquire
to the Famous Knight Errant Sir Billy of Billerecay, I am sent to thee from the
Goddess of Fortune, with the Invisible ^in^, made by the Famous Negromancer
T^e^ia, whereby thou shall perform to thy Master such Services as shall exceed
all those which were ever done by any ^quire to the best Knight Errant that
ever wore Sword.

Then did he instruct Ricardo in the use of the Ring, how putting it on hi^
Finger he could be seen by nobody, but as soon as it was off he appeared as
visible as any other, by which he might both please and pleasure himself in
diverse Feasts. It happened at the same time some Maids going by to milk their
Cows, Ricardo to try the virtue of his Ring, putting it on his finger, fell to
kissing the Maids, which put them to the squeak, feeling his Mouth but seeing
no body. Ricardo was so far transported with Joy of this Ring, that he could
scarcely believe so great a truth, not daring to trust his own Eyes, but
fearing it to be only some flattering Dream or vain Vision; yet by one
infallible Argument he found himself to be awake, which was, that he was
thoroughly an hungry. In the mean time the old Palmer was vanished away;
wherefore Ricardo resolved, the first thing he did to seek out for
Belly-Timber, putting his Ring in his pocket, that at a convenient time it
might serve to discharge his Reckoning.

He had not gone long in his way before he came to a stately Inn, where
alighting, he commanded the Hostler to look well to his Horse, and give him as
many Oats as he would eat; and walking into the House, with as much state as if
he had been a Man of some special Note, he called for a Room and a pint of
Canary, with both which he was quickly accommodated. Then asked he what
provision they had in the House? with the best of which taking a small repast,
he commanded a Capon to be laid to the Fire for his better Accommodation;
during the time while it was Roasting, the Host and he drank two or three Pints
of Sack. The Capon being ready he fell to it with an extraordinary Stomach, and
with as quick a dispatch washed it down with the brisk Canary. But now the main
matter of all, the Reckoning came to pay, which for his Horse and himself
amounted to seven Shillings. Ricardo putting his hand into his Pocket as if to
draw out his Money, slipped on his Ring, whereby in an instant he became
invisible. This sudden* ^light of their Guest, with the loss of their
Reckoning, put them all into such amaze that they stood senseless transformed
with Wonder. Ricardo in the mean time slipped into the Stable, and getting out
his Horse, mounted him, Galloped away as fast as he could. This made the
Hos^ler to Swear like a Culter, that the Horse should unty himself, and run
away with the Saddle on his Back, for they could see no Man that rode thereon.
And now both Host, Hostess, and Hostler, concluded it was no other than the
Devil, who had come thither in ^^e likeness of a Guest, to punish her for false
Scoreing with a crotched Chalk, and the Hostler for Tallowing of Horses Teeth,
and Cheating them of their Oats by a half peck with a false bottom.

In the mean time Ricardo was gotten quite out of danger, Hugging himself in
conceit for the Trick he had served the Innkeeper, and now he fears no
Colors, knowing his Ring a sure preservative against all dangers; But because
his Horse was not so invisible as himself, he resolved to leave him behind, and
to that purpose bargained with a Farmer for a Weeks keeping, at the end of
which he promised to come again and pay him. Then taking his Journey toward
Billerecay, fearless of Stocks, Prison, or Gallows, on the way he overtook a
Bedlam and Tinker, who had newly been taking a lusty cup of Rum-booz at the
Bowzingken. With these Ricardo willingly consorted, minding to make some
further experiments with his Ring; so asking them where the best Liquor was to
be had, as men very well knowing that way, they soon returned him this pleasing
answer. Master; if you will give us half a dozen, we will help you to such
nappy Liquor whose dancing sprightly bubbles defy degenerou^ Fears, and raise
up poor afflicted Heart^ to the highest degree of Mirth and Jollity.

Ricardo willingly embraced the motion, and so joining Company, the struck down
a by-path until they came unto a Woods side, by which stood a thatched Cottage
with Loam Walls and a Clay Chimney, and though it had no sign without, it had
that within which a sign signified, Viz. Beer which would make a Cat speak, and
such transcendant Ale, that York, Chester, Hull, Nottingham, Darby, nor
Gravesend with a Toast, could Parallel it. Here did they sit and tipple
Supernaculum, until such time as they all grew Boozy; Ricardo promising to pay
for all, thinking when the Reckoning came to pay to escape away with his
invisible Ring; But his Fortune had like to have proved very bad, for in
striving to suddle the other two, he got so drunk himself that he fell fast
asleep, as also did the other two. In this Swinish condition they lay ^noreing
four or five hours, at last the Tinker awaked, and seeing his two Comrades
fast, and remembering the Golden promises Ricardo had made, he thought to ri^^e
the Nest before the Birds were flown; and diveing into his Pockets, he found
nothing there, but only the Ring, and a knife and sheaf, which Ring he thought
to have been as brazen as his Kettles, and therefore was about to throw it
away, and with the knife to have Cut his Throat for cheating him of his Golden
Expectation; Howsoever the Ring he put on his Finger, when instantly the
Hostess came in to look after her Guests, but not seeing the Tinker, who by
wearing the Ring was become invisible, she fell to Jogging the other two to
know what was become of the Tinker? the Tinker Judged her to be mad to ask for
him before his Face, and therefore said, what a P -- is the Old Jade blind she
cannot see me? The Old Woman hearing his voice, but seeing no Body, asked,
where are ye, where are ye? with that he gave her such a Box on the Ear, as
tumbled her down upon Ricardo, whose fall awaked him out of his sleep, and
hearing the Tinker to Curse and Bann because his Hostess could not see him, he
thought he had gotten away his Ring, and fe^ling in his Pocket found it so
indeed, wherefore he was ready to swound away with fear, but recollecting
himself he called to the Tinker, saying, Honest Brother-give me thy Hand, which
the Tinker doing, he nimbly slipped the Ring from off his Finger, and as nimbly
put it on his own, whereby the Tinker again became visible, but Ricardo was no
where to be seen.

The Hostess seeing such Juggling tricks, began to call out for her Money, with
such a loud voice as waked also the Bedlam, who asking for his Master, I think
(said she) your Master is the Devil, for the Tinker and he are in Dock out
Nettle, sometimes seen and sometimes not, and here is Seven Shillings and six
pence to pay, and now the Young Devil is fled, which I much marvel at, for I
think none of you both have any Crosses about ye to scare him away.

Whilst they were thus arguing the case* Ricardo slipped away from them, taking
his course directly toward Billerecay, where how he sped we shall declare in
the next Chapter.

CHAP. 7. How Ricardo delivered his Letter to Jone Grumball, with her Answer to
it. And several Explcits performed by Ricardo with his Invisible-Ring.
IT was at such time of the day when the Curl pate Waggoner of Heaven had well
near finished his Diurnal Course, and was driving his panting Steeds down
toward the Western Hill, when the Renowned Squire Errant Ricardo entered into
the Town of Billerecay, bending his course directly toward the House of Jone
Grumball, to whom he delivered Sir Billy's Letter, with much obsequiousness,
telling her such Stories of his Master's Valor, his Honor of Knighthood, and
of the great affection he bore to her, that her heart began to melt toward
him, even as a pound of Butter melts before the Sun. But being she could not
read her self, she sent for a Journey-man Shoemaker to the further end of the
Town to read it, one who bore good will unto her, and was at that present
inditing a Letter to make her know the affection he bore her; Crispin having
read it over, and understanding he had a Knight to his Rival, was very much
troubled, but Jone Grumball was so well pleased with the Sugar Candy Words he
sent unto her, that she vowed her self unto him both Body and Breeches, asking
Ricardo many questions concerning him; all which he answered in such lofty
Language, amplifying his prowess, the respects all people showed unto him, with
the faithful Love he bare unto her, that she was more and more entangled in the
Lime-Twigs of Love, vowing and protesting her self his for ever.

Crispin by these presages finding his Suit like to have but a cold reception,
to avenge himself on Ricardo, by whose speeches he thought Jone's Heart was
estranged from him, he therefore ran to old Thomasio, telling him his Son's
partner in stealing away his Horses, was at that instant at Jone Grumball's,
whom he might easily take, and by that means know what was become of his Son,
as also of his Horses.

Thomasio quick as lightning taking a Constable along with him, went to Jone
Grumballs, and seizing upon Ricardo, threatened him with all the punishments he
could reckon up, as Hanging, Burning, Drowning, Killing, Stabbing, and twenty
other kinds of Death besides, if he told him not where his Son and Horses were.
Ricardo nothing daunted at his Domineering, but intending to put a trick upon
him, told him that his Son was become one of the greatest Lords in the World,
that Kings and Queens craved his Assistance, and Lords and Ladies implored his
help; that he commonly killed half a dozen Giants for his Breakfast, and bathed
his Sword in the Blood of Monsters and Dragons every day; That his Master was
at that present in the Sage Freston's Castle, where the most excellent Princess
Tantabilus courted his Love, but that he had vowed himself only to the Service
of his Beautiful Dulcina; In sum, that his Master was a Knight, and he was his
Squire, and that therefore by the Laws of Knight Errantry, they were not to be
troubled nor molested wheresoever they came.

But Thomasio being minded not to be put off with such Noninoes, charged the
Constable to carry him before a Justice of Peace, to which Ricardo willingly
consented, whether they immediately addressed themselves; The Justice having
heard the Allegations on both sides, persuaded Thomasio to go along with
Ricardo, and see by fair means to bring his Son home again, and if he were so
obstinate he would not r^turn, to take away their Horses, which would be a
means to spoil their Knight-Errantry, and that they might go the more lovingly
together, he called for a Bottle of Sack to drink them into Unity. The Bottle
was no sooner set on the Table, but Ricardo vowed himself Master thereof, and
thereupon slipping on his Invisible-Ring, he boldly steps to the Table, and
clapping the Bottle of Sack under his Coat, marched away with it not being
descerned by any. The Justice and Thomasio were stricken into a wonderful
Amazement to see the Bottle go away without hands as they thought, but much
more when they missed Ricardo: And now remembering what strange stories he had
told of Billy, they concluded that both the Master and the Man were turned
Conjurers, and therefore dreaded what further mischief might by his means be
showed unto them.

In the mean time Ricardo was walked to Jone Grumballs with his Bottle of Sack,
never pulling off his Ring till he came within the House, that not any one
might take any Notice of him. Here did he tell her what a trick he served the
Justice, and that therefore he must make all the have he could to his Master.
Jone was very well pleased with the Jest, but much more with her part she had
in the Sack, and having drank a Health to Billy, she desired Ricardo to stay so
long till she got a Letter in answer to his Master, which by the Schoolmaster
of the Town was performed for her in these wo^ds.

My dearest Knight,
WIth what Joy I Jone Grumball the Lady of thy affections received your Letter,
may better be (...) by Imagination than words, for hear^^g of ^he ardent Love
that you bear unto me, set forth in such Rhetorical Elocution, it fared with
me as with a Beggar, who on a sudden finding a rich Treasure, can scarce
believe his own Eyes, but fears it is a Dream or some fond Illusion; Even so my
dearest Knight did it happen unto me, hardly could I believe my one Ears, much
less imagine that so Heroic Renowned a Champion as thou art, would become
the Lodestone of my Affections; But know that I am as much over Head and Ears
in Love as thou; Nor do not think me light for yielding so soon; for what Heart
can hold out at the Battery of thy E'oquence, thou being a Conqueror of
Affections as well as Giants. I shall think the time long till I hear from thee
again, much more till such time I see thee; till when I subscribe my self

Thine in indeared Friendship Jone Grumball.


Ricardo having received the Letter of her, promised to be very careful in the
delivery of it; and she for her part promised him, that when she came to be his
Knights Lady, she would be a good Mistress unto him, and help him now and then
to a Bitt which her Knight should never know of. Ricardo with these promises
went away well satisfied, yet resolved with himself to keep secret the virtue
of his Invisible-Ring.

But he was not so mindful of returning to his Master, as to act some Waggeries
with his Invisible Ring, which he thought was a better Trade than his Master's
killing of Giants, or relieving distressed Damsels and Ladies; And Fortune was
very favorable to his intentions herein, for he had not gone far, but his
Stomach (which was most commonly craving) invited him into an Inn to refresh
himself, where a Couple of Bailiffs, or Shoulder flappers, were sitting down to
dinner with a Shoulder of Mutton and a Capon, having the same day seized on a
poor Man's Goods for an inconsiderable value, which they Sold and Imbezzel'd
away at their pleasure, to the utter Ruin of the poor Man, and maintenance of
their Luxury and Drunkenness; going shares with the Buyers of their seized
Goods, which by this means they make the greatest part their own. Ricardo
understanding what Harpies they were, how that they lived by others Ruins,
resolved to put a Trick upon them; and therefore they being set down to their
Victuals without saying Grace, as Men unacquainted with any Goodness, he
presently slips on his Ring, and conveys the Capon under his Coat, giving to
each of them a blow on the Mouth with his Fist, which though they perceived not
from whence they came, yet felt they it smart to some purpose; and each
thinking the other had struck him, the one snatches up the Shoulder of Mutton,
and therewith struck his fellow on the Face, who half blinded with Greese, and
his Clothes all besmeared with dripping, to revenge the affront, got up the
platter, and throwing it at the others head, beat him over a Joynt-stool, who
half dazzled with the fall, yet recovering his legs, took the Loaf and therewith
brake the others head, who in requital snatched up a Flaggon of Beer, and
dashing it in his Fellows Face, he so laid on him with the Pot, as if he
intended to make Mummy of his Flesh. Ricardo all this while stood by, laughing
heartily to see how they mawled each other, and still at opportunity served
lending to each of them some blows on the Face, which they not knowing from
whence they came, sought to retaliate upon one another. Ricardo to make his
revenge more complete, spying a pair of scissers in the Window, took them and
cut off their locks of hair; so that when they were parted fighting, what wit^
their bloody Noses, battered Faces, an^ crapt Hair, they looked most rufully.

But now another Quarrel began (...) arise the Capon is missing, and the tw^
Bailiffs joining in one, Swear that the Host had couzened them of it whilst
they were fighting; He on the other side call^ them cheating Rogues, and that
the^ quarrelled on purpose to steal away h^^ platter, and defraud him of his
Reckoning* but vows though they had undone hi^ Neighbor, they should not undo
him with their cheating tricks; and thereupon sends for a Constable, vowing he
would be paid both for his Meat and the Platter. Ricardo seeing matters brough^
to this pass, marched away with his prize* leaving them to wrangle it out as
the^ could. Now he had not gone far, bu^ (as if he had been born for the
punishment of Knaves) he overtakes a Horse-Courser, one who had shaken hands
wit^ Honesty as no fit Companion for his Calling. Him Ricardo accosts,
proffering hi^ a Dinner, and Wine to wash it down (...) the next Town they came
at, which the Horse Courser kindly accepts, wondrin^ at this new Friendship,
and thinking (...) had got some young Cully flusht wit^ Money, whom he was
resolved to Milk dry ever he parted with him. So away they went to the next
Town, and entering an Inn, called for Accommodations to their Capon, which was
presently brought them, and the Glasses of Wine trouled about lustily.

Whilst they were thus in their Jollity, there came in a Man from the former
Inn, who had seen Ricardo's coming thither, but not his going away; And
remembering how the Capon and Platter were missing, and seeing such utensils
upon the Table, he challenges Ricardo with it, whereupon a great contest arose;
The Horse-Courser who had thought he had gotten a prize of his Companion,
fearing it would prove a blank if he were brought in Partner^ of his Stealth,
began with the first to fall foul on him. The Hostess seeing she had got Cheats
to her Guests, was as busy in calling for Money for their Reckoning, so that
the whole House was on a sudden in a great Uproar. Ricardo knowing that all
their stir was aimed at him, thought it high time to shift for himself, and
thereupon slipping on his Invisible Ring, took the remainders of the Capon and
threw it in his Hostesses Face, and sent the Platter on the same Arrand to the
Horse Courser, who therewith half blinded, and sadly mortified, began to cry
out in a hideous manner; and that the Informer might not go Scot-free, he also
up with a Quart pot, and therewith knocked him down, and then Triumphantly
marched away.

No sooner was he gone, but the Hostess a little recovering her self, falls
foul upon the Horse-Courser, saying, he had brought the Devil into her House;
but notwithstanding the Devil and all his Imps, she Swore she would make him
pay for all the harms was done before he went. The Horse-Courser excused
himself, saying, he met with him by chance, and that she might see by his
battered Face and broken Head, he was none of his Confederate. The other
Fellow, who had lain all this while in a swound, being now a little revived,
began to rail upon him more than the Hostess, so that the poor Horse-Courser,
though more battered than the other two, could not tell what to do, for
notwithstanding all the excuses he could make, nothing would be believed but
that he was the Devil's partner in all this mischief, and therefore should
suffer for him if he did not produce him.

Now was the Horse-Courser at his wits end, not knowing what course to take;
sometimes he prayed, sometimes he swore, wishing all the Imprecations upon
himself he could reckon up, if he knew the least who it was came with him; but
let him use what Oaths and Protestations he would, they could gain no Credit
with them; but sending for some of their Neighbors to help them, they resolved
to throw him into the River to try him for a Witch; but whilst they were
preparing to do it, the Host of the former Inn, with the Bailiffs, hearing how
their Capon and Platter was conveyed thither, came to seek for it; These
Bailiffs knowing the Horse-Courser* as most commonly Brethren in Iniquity are
acquainted together, got a reprieve for him till the matter could be more
deliberately discoursed.

And now they began to reckon up their Mischances, and to show their Wounds,
and considering the manner how it was done, they concluded it could be no other
than the Devil to punish them for their Sins. Then began the Host to tell the
Bailiffs of their Swearing and Cruelty, how many ungodly practices they used to
get people in their Clutches, and having them there, how unconscionably they
used them. The Bailiffs on the other side tell the Host and Hostess of their
fals^ Reckonings, Scoreing with a crotched Chalk, and when people were near
fuddled, carrying away Flaggons before they were half empty, and frothing them
up again, making them pay for whole ones; as also how they gave information to
Padders and Men of that profession, the quality of the Guests that Lodged at
their Houses. The Horse-Courser was also accused for diverse deceits in his
Occupation, so that if his picture be drawn to the Life, you shall find him by
his qualities to be no other than a Cousening Knave.

In the mean time their supposed Devil, Ricar^o, was gotten beyond the length
of their Clutches, leaving them to lament their Losses; and now he was minded
to return the next day to his Master, and to that end went directly to the
Farmer's where he had left his Horse; But a new trouble appeared unto him, for
he had no Money to pay for his Horse-keeping; but that difficulty was soon
over, for passing by a Usurer's House, he heard Money clattering on the Table,
and the Door being open, putting on his Invisible-Ring, he went in, where a
Poor Man who had borrowed Ten Pounds of this Usurer, was now come to pay it;
which being told, and the Bond Canceled, the Usurer put it up in a Bag of his
own, all which Ricardo eyed very narrowly, and no sooner had he laid it on the
Table but Ricardo as soon took it away. The Usurer, whose Eye like his Heart
was always on his Money, seeing his Bag to creep away so insensibly, was quite
confounded with Amazement, as it would* move a Dog to see a Pudding stir, and
began to call upon him: who before was seldom in his thoughts, fearing the
Devil, whom he Judged to have drawn away his Bag, would next come for him; and
therefore vowed a Reformation of his Course of Life; That he would never more
take the Rigor of a Forfeiture as soon as the day was past, nor under color
of Bonds Writing and Procuration, make the Borrower pay at least Ten or Twelve
Shillings in the Hundred; Nay rather than fail, to be preserved from this
Danger, he would build an Almshouse to maintain them who had been Ruined by
his Extortion.

Now you will say it had been good Hanging this Usurer whilst he was in this
^umour, lest he should be of the same mind with a Master of a Ship, who in a
great extremity of Danger, promised our Lady to offer at her Altar, a Candle as
great as the main Mast of his Ship; And when one of his Mates jogging him, told
him he had promised an impossibility; Tush Fool (said he) we must speak to her
fair in time of need; but if ever I come ashore, I will make her be content
with a Candle of six to the Pound. But Ricardo was somewhat more Conscientious
in his doings, for being got s^fe out of the Usurers House, he put some of the
Money in his Pocket, and waiting for the poor Man's return, gave him the rest,
bidding him to be a good Husband with it, and pray for the Squire of the
Invisible*Ring for his good Fortune. And s^ leaving the Poor Man overjoyed, he
wen^ toward the Farmers, when passing through a Meddow, he saw a Maid Milk^ing
of a Cow, who was sweetly singin^ forth this Song.

When first on Love I cast my wanton though^
But yet not minding him for to obey,
For freedom sure I thought was better ough^
Than serving him his Servitors does s^^^
For what to Hungry Lovers is relief (...)
But Sorrow, Anguish, Discontent and Gri^^
But yet my mind is not so fully set,
(For Maidens minds are subject unto change,)
But if I could a faithful Servant get,
Whose Love would not be subject for to range,
I soon to Love should yield a due subjection,
And he should Master be of my Affection.
For Maidens Hearts they are not like to steal,
Obdurate, hard, will no Impression take,
But tender, soft, when Cupid's Darts they feel,
Which in their Hearts will soon Imp^ession make,
No Fort so strong but may be won at last,
No Mind so fixed but it may change as fast.
Ricardo stood amazed at the ravishing Harmony of her Voice, comparing it to
the Melody of the Thracian Poet Orpheus, when by his Songs he attracted Beasts;
Trees, and Stones to follow him* or rather to the Harmony of the Seraphick
Choires; wishing himself all Ear to listen to her Song, the pleasingness
whereof so insensibly crept into his Heart, that he became a Thrawl unto her;
But first he began to consider whether Squire Errants might have their
Mistresses as well as Knights; and many weighty Arguments pro and Con passed in
his thoughts; but Love so over-swayed them all, that he became solely
captivated to her Affections, and therefore was she no sooner risen from
Milking her Cow, but he accosted her on this manner.

Most beautyful Mistress, the attracting Harmony of your Angelical Voice has
so captivated my Heart, that I am become a Sworn Servant to your Virtues, and
therefore among all the Days of my Life, I must account this the Happiest
wherein I had the Honor first to see you; Nor think you have met with an
ordinary person which seeks thus to gain an Interest in your Graces; for know I
am no less than a Squire-Errant to that Renowned Knight at Arms, the invincible
and Victorious Sir Billy of Billerecay, whose Fame begins to sound all the
World over, and whose History is to be Writ with a brazen Pen, and enroled in
the Book of Fame; Let me entreat you therefore to accept of me for your
Servant, by which you may come to be as Famous as Dulcina my Masters Lady, and
in process of Time the Wife to a Governor of an Island.

The poor Maid who had never before been acquainted with any Love-Rhetorick
above that of a Ballad, or in the Plow-Mans dialect, Vaith Jone I Love thee;
stared upon him as one stricken into a sudden amazement; at last she said to
him, Pray Sir do not use such hard Words, you scare my Cows, and spoil my
milking. Ricardo finding he was not rightly understood, went toward her,
thinking to Salute her; but the Wench as nimbly avoided him, threatening to cry
out if he approached any nigher to her; whereupon slipping on his
Invisible-Ring, he thought to gain his purpose that way. The Wench seeing him
so vanished on a sudden, and feeling such smattering about her lips, without
perceiving any thing, threw down her Milk-pail, and ran homewards as fast as
her Legs could carry her, so that on a sudden she was gotten out of Ricardo's
sight, who seeing her fled, thought it in vain to pursue her but went on in his
intended Journey, until he came to the Farmers.

Now so it was that this Maid whom he had so Courted was the Farmers Daughter,
who seeing Ricardo coming, squeaked out as if at the sight of some Spirit or
Hob-goblin; having before declared how she was served a Milking, and now crying
out, This, this is the Devil that haunted me. But the Farmer himself knowing
Ricardo, persuaded her to the contrary, telling her it was the Man that had
left his Horse with him. And so entering into the House, after some discourse,
Ricardo told the Farmer of the affection he bore to his Daughter, and the
better to gain his good will, how he was the Squire to a Knight Errant, who
Conquered Kingdoms at his Pleasure, and how himself should be a Governor of an
Island at least: and for that which had befell his Daughter, it was only things
done by Enchantment, to which Knights Errant and their Squires are very Subject.

The Old Farmer wondered at his words, taking him now for another manner of Man
than at first he judged him to be, and therefore freely gave him his Consent,
as overjoyed to have the Governor of an Island for his Son-in-Law; but when
this was motion'd to the Daughter, she looked on it with as much disdain as
Penelope Courted by the Beggarly Irus. Now by my Ferkens (quoth she) for ought
I know, this Squire Errant may be no better than the Knave of Clubs to the King
and Queen of Hearts, and therefore let his Master Conquer Kingdoms and Islands
for whosoever he will, but this skip-jack, this Hocus Pocus shall never be any
Husband of mine.

This answer was something a cooling Card to Ricardo, but comforting himself,
upon her Father's words, he thought that time might alter her mind, and for the
present he knew not what to do with a Wife if he had her. He therefore resolved
she should be his Mistress, and to bear the Name of Dowzabella, which Name he
promised to make as Famous by his Acts as that of Sabra the beloved Mistress of
St. George, or Philotheta the Lady of Montelion, Knight of the Oracle. Away you
Fool, said the Wench, and spare your strength to throw a Cudgel at a Pare-Tree,
or your Activity in being the best Man at a match at Football; and meddle not
with a Sword as a Weapon out of your Element, but betake you to a stail as most
fit for your Employment.

My dearest Dowzabella (said Ricardo) be not so cruel to me in thy expressions.
Hey day (said the Wench) what have we here; I was Christened Mary, and they
call me Moll, and must I now be named Dowzabella? Now I wish that for your
Pains (if any one will be so mad as to Marry ye) that your Wife from a
Squire-Errant, will advance ye to be Knight of the Forked Order; And so Sir the
way lies plain for you to be gone, for your Room will be more acceptable to me
by far than your Company.

Ricardo hearing these Words, thought it in vain to stay any longer there, and
therefore paying the Farmer for keeping his Horse, desiring Dowzabella to
retain a better Opinion of him, he mounted his Steed and returned toward his
Master.

CHAP. 8. How Ricardo delivered his Message to his Master, and of the Challenge
made by Sir Billy against all comers, in Honor of his Mistress Dulcina.
SIR Billy had waited with great impatience the coming of his Squire, desirous
to know how his Letter was entertained by his Mistress Dulcina, as also wanting
his Company in pursuance of more Adventures, when to his great Satisfaction his
Squire arrived, with the Joyful Tidings of the kind reception he had of that
peerless piece of Beauty as he styled her, Aggravating her perfections to such
a height, as if she had been changed from a Blowze to an Angelical ^eature
since Sir Billy saw her. And to complete his Joy the more he delivered him the
Letter from her, which having received how often did he read, and read again
the Superscription of it, it being directed to that Puissant and Magnanimous
Knight at Arms, the most redoubted Sir Billy of Billerecay; but when he had
read the contents therein contained, he was so transported with an Ecstasy of
Joy, as if he had been placed in the Apogean or Zenith of all happiness. And
can it be possible (said he) that my Lady Dulcina takes such Notice of the
Actions of her Knight? has Fames Trumpet already blown my praise unto her Ears?
What then will it be when I shall have performed such Acts worthy to be
Eternized in Fames eternal Bead-Roll.

As he was thus applauding his own supposed happiness, his Host the Sage
Freston came in, who seeing Ricardo, welcomed him with great demonstrations of
Love, inquiring after the welfare of his Lady Dulcina, and how he sped in his
Message unto her; to all which Ricardo gave very plausible answers, according
to what he thought would best please his Master. When (said he) I first came to
that Idea of Beauty, she was sweetly breaking the yielding Air with her
Harmonious voice, which so sweetly she breathed forth, as was able to make the
Rocks to dance, and surly Beasts stand attentive to hear her; the whilst her
white hands (in whose comparison all whites are Ink) was sewing with a Needle,
which with so pretty a manner made his passage too and fro thorough the Cloth,
as if it were loath to have gone from such a Mistress, but that it hoped to
return thitherward very quickly again. Thus did her Voice and Hands keep pace
in an equal proportion, as if her hands were won by the Attraction of her Voice
to work, or her Voice were taught to Sing by the Harmonious consort of her
hands. But when this Mirror of Beauty did cast an Eye upon me, and with what a
due Reverence I approached to deliver my message unto her, she left off
Singing, and with such a smile as Venus the Queen of Beauty gave to Anchises,
she received the Letter from me, being impatient till she had read the Contents
thereof, which both by her words and looks I found to be very satisfactory unto
her. But Ricardo, said the Sage Freston, you have not as yet told us what Song
your Lady or Mistress was then singing when you came unto her? O that said he,
can I well Remember, for I have seen it in a Ballad glewed upon many an Ale
house wall, and it begins thus.

When as King Henry ruled this Land,
The Second of that Name,
Besides his Queen he dearly Loved,
A fair and Princely Dame, etc.
Indeed said the Sage Freston, I guessed it was either that or the Ballad of
Chevy-Chase, as consisting the one of Love, the other of War, being both
Concomitants of Knight Errantry. Now by the Honor of my Knighthood (said Sir
Billy) I question not but in time to perform such Acts as shall surpass ever a
Percy or Dowglass of them all, and make Work for all the Ballad-makers that
shall live in succeeding Ages, when they have once read the History that shall
be written of my Life; And therefore Ricardo let it be your Care to provide for
our sudden departure, since Knights Errant were not born to sleep out their
time in the Beds of Ease, but to be still seeking out for Adventures, as Men
made all of Fire, of such undaunted high erected Spirits, as to make the Dead
quake in their Graves to think of them.

Ricardo, who was always more addicted to feeding than fighting, as one who had
indented with the Grave to bring all his Limbs thither, and not to lose one
Joint of them by Quarrelling; liked not at all of this proposal, having found
better Entertainment from the Gentleman than he could expect from his Master;
yet trusting to the virtue of his Invisible*Ring, by which he questioned not
but to help himself in all his Extremities, he freely condescended unto it. But
the Sage Freston desirous to see what was contained in Jone Grumball's Letter,
thus spoke to Sir Billy. I make no question most Heroic Knight, but the Lady
of your affections, who is so much Honored in having such a Servant, has so
pleased your expectation in her most gracious Answer, as has given you
satisfaction in her Love and Loyalty unto you; and were it not an high
presumption in me to beg such a boon, I should think my self happy in the
perusal of such lines as must needs fall from such a mellifluous Pen.

I were very unworthy, said Sir Billy, of such transcendent Favors I have
received from you, should I deny you such a small request; and thereupon he
showed him her Letter; which when the Sage Freston had read, as it were in
admiration, he brake forth into these expressions. O the excellency of Natural
Wit! the Magazine of Eloquence! rich Soul of Language, a tenth Muse, whom all
the Muses Court; the whole Monopoly of Wit, a branch of Minerva's Olive, well
worthy the Affe^tions of the most Heroic Knight in the whole World; How happy
art thou Sir Billy in the Choice of such a Mistress, whose parts are so
transcendent, she may well be styled the Epitomy of all Perfections.

Sir Billy was not a little proud of his Ladies praises, verily conceiting her
to be such a one as the Sage Freston had painted her forth, the Wonder of
Nature, and Quintessence of perfection; saying, he would have a Solemn Justs
proclaimed in the next Prince's Court he came at, wherein by the strength of
his Invincible Arm he would maintain his Lady Dulcina to be the Phoenix of
Beauty, and the Non-parelia of this Age: and accordingly gave order to be gone
the next Morning, but that Ricardo stayed his Journey by a new devised Trick,
which he brought to pass in this manner.

Sir Billy used every Evening to walk in the Garden, with his hands indented
one with another, as melancholy as a Gyb'd Cat, his Thoughts of Chevalry being
made so habitual to him, as it was now become part of his Nature; In this
posture as he was walking, his trusty Squire slipping on his Invisible-Ring,
saluted him with a Crab-Tree Cudgel ^^erthwart his shoulders, laying it on so
^ustily that Sir Billy thought himself engaged in one of those imaginary fights
which he had read in his Books of Knight-Errantry, and drawing his Sword began
to strike, but knew not at what, at last he heard a Voice which spoke to him in
this manner.

Sir Knight before thou do depart,
From forth the place whereas thou art,
Thou must maintain thy Ladies Fame,
Against any shall oppose the same;
Which if thou do refuse, then know,
Thou shall receive full many a blow.
Sir Billy hearing a voice, but seeing no Body, might have thought it an
Illusion, but that the blows which he felt assured him the contrary; wherefore
to avoid receiving any more, he thus said, whosoever thou art that thus
speak unto me, know thy mind shall be fulfilled; But let me desire to know
from whence this message came, that when I have finished the Adventure, I may
know by whose appointment I undertook it. To whom the voice answered, I am a
Spirit sent from the wise Urganda the Lady of the Woods, to warn thee not to
stir whilst thou have performed my Command, else shall I haunt thee with
revenge whethersoever thou go. And having thus said, he withdrew himself
without the Garden Gate, and slipping off his Invisible-Ring, came walking
toward his Master, who with great earnestness told him of this Adventure, and
so both of them together went to the Sage Fres^on, and acquainted him with it,
wherefore it was agreed on all sides that a Challenge should be written, and
Messengers sent abroad into all parts to publish the same; which Challenge Sir
Billy himself would needs endite, which he did in these words.

Whereas the renowned Knight at Arms Sir Billy of Billerecay, has by the
Command of the wise Urganda the Lady of the Woods, taken upon him to Justify
and Maintain his Lady Dulcina to be the Paragon of Beauty above all others.
These are to certify that the said Sir Billy is ready by force of Arms to
maintain the same, at the Castle of the Sage Freston, against any that shall
oppose it, either by Justs, Turnament, or any other Martial Exercise belonging
to Knight Errantry.

Signed Sir Billy.


Eight days after was the time appointed when those Martial Exercises should be
performed, in the mean time Messengers were sent abroad to publish the same in
all the Towns thereabouts, which caused much Wondering amongst many people, who
this Sage Freston should be, and of Justs, and Tournaments, which few could
remember ever to have heard of, but the Messengers soon resolved the Riddle,
informing them of the mad Whimzies of Sir Billy, and how all was intended by
their Master for sport and divertisement, whereupon many Gentlemen thereabouts
promised to come, and to bring some of their Servants accoutred like Knights
Errant, to encounter with Sir Billy, but how they sped in their enterprise you
shall hear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. 9. How Sir Billy was forced to run from his Challenge, the Mirth Ricardo
had at a Wedding, what a Trick he served an Old Fornicator, and how he went in
pursuit of his Master.
AMongst other places whether the Fame of this Challenge did spread, was the
Town of Billerecay, wherein dwelt Thomasio the Father of Sir Billy, who hearing
of his Sons challenge, resolved to encounter him with a Justices Warrant for
the recovery of his two Horses, and if it were possible to change his Son from
a Knight Errant to a Plough-Man again, and withal threatening to have Ricardo
severely punished; to which purpose he easily obtained a Warrant of the same
Justice from whom Ricardo before had taken away the Bottle of Wine. And being
thus arm^d with better Authority than his Son had for his Knight-Errantry, he
took his way directly to the Sage Frestons, where he had taken Sir Billy
Napping, had not Ricardo by chance heard of his coming: for Thomasio whom Age
had brought to the downfal^ of his mellow Years, being, as most Old Men are,
very Tuchy and Choleric, could not forbear to give out threatening Words what
he would do unto them, before he had gotten his prey into his hand. Wherefore
Ricardo having notice of his intent, was minded to frustrate his expe^^ation,
and giving his Master Billy notice thereof, he speedily packed him away,
himself staying behind to see what would be the event thereof, not doubting
when the worst came, to come off well enough by the help of his Invisible-Ring.

And indeed he quickly found himself to have need of such help, for Thomasio
finding his Son Billy to have escaped his hands, resolved Ricardo should pay
for all, and so by virtue of his Warrant seized upon him, threatening him with
so many punishments, and such diversity of Torments, that if words would have
done it, Ricardo had dyed a Thousand Deaths: In this passion he was hurried
before the Sage Freston, who (as we told you before,) was Justice of those
parts; to whom Thomasio made a grievous complaint, how that Ricardo was both a
Thief and a Conjurer, that he had stolen his Horses, and enticed away his Son,
and for ought he knew made him away, and therefore desired he might be severely
punished* But Sir (said he) if you have not a car^ he will escape your hands,
for he has learned Hocus pocus tricks during his Knight Rascality, by which he
can make himself and Bottles of Wine to become Invisible, as he served our
Justice not long ago; and therefore I do accuse him for a Witch, and that as a
Witch he may be burnt to death at a stake.

To this Ricardo answered, that he had done nothing but what was warrantable by
the Laws of Knight-Errantry according as his Master had informed him; for (said
he) did you ever read in any Books of Chevalry that Knights-Errant and their
Squires went about to seek out Adventures on Foot? and therefore since his
Master must have Horses, who could furnish him better than his Father? Nor are
we (said he) to be troubled or molested for whatsoever we do, since Knights
Errant are Lawless, and if the Knights be Lawless, by consequence the Squires
are Lawless too.

Ricardo's words made the whole Company to laugh; when in the very nick of time
came the Justice of Billerecay, from whom Ricardo had taken the Bottle of Wine,
invited thither by the Fame o^ Sir Billy's Challenge; Ricardo seeing him come,
thought it was time to be gone, thinking he would disclose the Trick he had
shown him, which indeed he quickly did in all its circumstances; but the
strangeness of the thing could gain no Credence with the Sage Freston, who said
he would try if he could serve him such a Trick; and thereupon commanded three
or four Bottles of Sack to be fetched and set on the Table; Ricardo seeing and
hearing all what was done, thought it now high time to act his part, and
thereupon slipping on his Ring, he seizes upon two of the Bottles, and clapping
them under his Coat, marched cleverly away with them, to the Astonishment of
all there present, especially to the Sage Freston, who now began to think that
Ricardo and his Master, instead of two simple Fellows were a couple of crafty
Knaves.

But notwithstanding Ricardo went away laughing with his Booty, yet was his
heart sorrowful, as dreading what would be the effects of that which they had
done; for though he put great confidence in his Invisible-Ring as a sure
protection for him in all his extremities, yet hearing how vehemently Old
Thomasio had accused him for Witchcraft, and that if he should be taken
unawares* before he could put the Ring on his Finger, it might be taken from
him, and all his forepassed actions laid to his Charge; which last he had
committed he thought would be none of the least, in abusing him by whom they
had been so kindly entertained; for now he perceived that notwithstanding all
his Masters brags of Conquering Castles and Islands, the purchase they were
likeliest to get was only a Jayle. He therefore resolved not to expose himself
to any danger more than needs must, and to that purpose kept the Ring on his
Finger until he traveled many Miles, whereby he prevented his being taken by
those which the Sage Freston had sent after him. For these two Justices after
his departure, seeing how they were deluded, had sent both Horse and Man to
take him; some of which Ricardo saw pass by him, enquiring of every one they
met after such a person; When a new project came into Ricardo's Head to make
them leave off their pursuit, which was this.

He gets behind an Oak, and making an hideous noise, as it were the croaking of
Ravens, bellowing of Bulls, an^ braying of Asses mixed together, which made them
all stand still as amazed at what they heard; and having gotten them so
together, with a loud bellowing voice thus he said.

I am the Oak which the ancients of Old Consecrated to Jupiter, in whose Name I
straightly charge ye to pursue no further after Ricardo Squire to the Invincible
Knight at Arms Sir Billy of Billerecay, seeing he is one whom we have taken
into our safe Protection, and whosoever shall offer him the least Injury, we
shall be severely revenged on him.

The messengers hearing such a hideous Voice, and seeing no person,
notwithstanding they rounded the Oak Tree twice or thrice about, were
wonderfully amazed, not knowing what to do; and there being never a
Knight Errant among them (which fear no danger, but are foolhardy in all
attempts) they thereupon concluded to return home, as being sufficiently
warranted, by the voice which they heard, which when Ricardo saw, he laughed
heartily to himself at those Sons of fear, as Men who were afraid of the Swords
which themselves wore, and affrighted at the clashing of their own Armor.

The messengers thus returning homewards with a sleeveless excuse of a
fruitless Arrand, Ricardo passed on his way, but still diversity of thoughts
perplexed his mind, what Course of Life to take; whether to seek out his Master
Billy and pursue Squire Errantry, or to live by the shifts of his
Invisible-Ring, at last he resolved with himself to go to his Master, knowing
his Necessities to be so great, that without his help he was not able to
support them, having left behind him both his Horse and Armor, by which he
appeared (at least in show) not like a Knight Errant, and therefore neither he
nor his Squire acceptable to those places whether they should come.

Now as he traveled along (often taking a sup of the Bottle to cheer his
heart) he overtook a Fiddler who was going to play at a Wedding at the next
Village, with whom Ricardo consorted, and to endear his Company the more, as
they went, sitting down under an aged Oak, whose spreading boughs sheltered
them from the heat of Sol^ burning rays, which with his orient tresses cast a
radient luster over the world, there they ^mpti'd the remainder of the two
Bottles; and new having their Spirits heightened with the generous Wine, they
went Merrily on till they came to the House where the Wedding was kept.

Here the Bridegroom and Bride entertained Ricardo right heartily, and a great
Company being met together, there was Fiddling, Dancing, Singing, Kissing and
Playing, which so delighted the Heart of Ricardo, that now he forgot both the
affrightment of the Justice Freston, and also the necessity which his Master
Billy might be in, for the Amorous smiles, and Odoriferous Kisses of those
Country Wenches, were such enticing Charms unto Ricardo, that he thought
himself in Elysium being in their Company. And now the Nuptial Couple were
going to Church, to tie that Knot with their Tongues which afterward they
could not untye with their Teeth; having the Fiddlers playing before them, and
all the way thither strowed with Rushes, though afterward Nettles might more
properly serve the turn.

Now in most parts of Essex (where this Wedding was kept) it is a common Custom
when Poor People Marry, to make a kind of a Dog-Hanging, or Mony-gathering,
which they call a Wedding-Dinner, to which they invite Tag and Rag, all that
will come; where after Dinner upon Summons of the Fiddler, who sets forth
his voice like a Town-Cryer, a Table being set forth, and the Bride set
simpering at the upper end of it; the Bridegroom standing by with a White Sheet
overthwart his shoulders, as if he did penance for the Folly he had committed
that day; whilst the people invited to it, like the Soldiers of a Country
Train-Band, March up to the Bride, present (their Money) and Wheel about.

After this offering is over, then is a pair of Gloves laid on the Table, most
monstrously bedaub'd about with Ribbe^* which by way of Auction is set to Sal^
at who gives most, and he whose hap ^^ for to have them, shall withal have a
Kis^ of the Bride, which many times is no^ much worth, because her breath is
not (...) sweet-scented as her Gloves.

Ricardo who had some Money still left^^ that which he had taken from the Usure^
was very liberal at this Wedding, an^ very bountiful amongst the Maids of (...)
Kisses, two things which indeared h^^ very much to their Company. And (...) the
juice of the Malt began to wor^ their Crowns, and every Coridon had selected
his Lass to conferr with; Amongst the rest an Ancient Batchellor, whose Head
was covered with an Hoary Fleece, and whom one would have thought to have had
nothing but Ice in his veins, and earth in his Vissage, had gotten in his Arms
a brisk Lass, as youthful as the early day, Hugging and Kissing her, as if he
meant to make a perpetual feast of her lips. Ricardo beheld this with an
envious Eye, and thinking it unequal that January and May should so twine
together, he resolved to hinder their Conjunction, and to that end having put
on his Invisible-Ring, sat down close by them to hear their discourse, where
unperceived he could here the Old Letcher make great asseverations of his
affection to her; coloring all under the notion of Love, although his thoughts
were as lustful and as libidinous as a Goat. The Wench a crafty Baggage, one
well skilled in Venus School, seemed with some Coy words to push him away from
her, and then with a flattering smile to allure him again. He seeing his words
not prevalent enough to batter the Fort of her supposed Chastity, gave her
Golden promises, remembering what he had read in the Poet.

Nor less may Jupiter to Gold ascribe,
For when he turned himself into a Bribe,
Who can blame Danaae or the brazen Tower;
That they withstood not the Almighty Shower.
Never till then did Love^make Jove put on,
A form more bright and noble than his own.
O the powerful oratory of a Golden Tongue, his gifts prevails with the
Damosel, she consents so it may be done privately; Si cast non caute, a fit
place they agree upon; and he being hot upon the spur will admit of no delay.
Ricardo heard all their discourse, and followed them as close as the shadow
does the Sun, until they came to the place appointed; And now a new parley
began betwixt them, for the Wench belike having had false dealings before,
would do nothing without Money in hand, with that the old Letcher told her out
twenty Shillings be*ing the price agreed on betwixt them which the Wench very
wary in her ba^gaining, would likewise tell over if i^ were right; which whilst
she was doin^ Ricardo laid hold of it, and snatchin^ it out of her hands
bellowed forth the Words.

Thou Rogue and Whore must go with me,
Away to Limbo presen^ly.
These words struck them into a panick fear, so that instead of an Amorous
heat, a chilling sweat overrun their trembling Joints, and a sudden amazement
made their Hair to stand an end; whereupon they betook them to their Heels, and
fear adding VVings to their Feet, in an instant they were out of sight. Ricardo
was well pleased with their flight, he leaving behind him his Cloak, and she
her Scarf, besides the Money he had gotten before, so that now he thought
himself well satisfied for what he had spent at the Wedding, besides the
pleasure he had in spending his Money; whereupon he resolved to proceed on in
his Journey; where how he found his Master, and what befell Sir Billy after his
parting from him, shall be declared in the next Chapter.

CHAP. 10. Sir Billy's encounter with a Dancer on the Ropes, how he was carried
before a Justice of the Peace, and set free by Ricardo by the help of his
Invisible-Ring.
SIR Billy, after he had parted from Ricardo, was in a very bad condition, for
Money he had none, without which it is but bad Traveling either amongst Friends
or Foes; and though he had read that Knights Errant never carried any Money
about them, but that they were to be entertained Gratis wherever they came,
yet it troubled him not a little that he was equipped neither like a Knight nor
Squire, having left both his Horse and Armor behind him at the Sage Frestons,
yet had he still his trusty Sword Rosero, which sword he prized at a very high
rate, as that wherewith he was to obtain all his future Conquests. In this
disconsolate posture he marched along both weary and hungry, until such time as
night with his black shade began to shut in the day, and Phoebus with his
Golden locks went to rest himself upon the pillow of fair Thetis Bed, when to
his comfort he came to a sumptuous Inn, adorned with a most stately Sign, which
he, according to the Fantasies of Knight Errantry that always run in his mind,
took to be a Castle for the relief of those of his profession, into which he
boldly entered, and meeting with the Host, who for his bulk was big enough to
command an Host of men, encountered him in this manner.

Most worthy Governor of this Famous Castle, know that I am one who for the
good of my Country have devoted my self to the exercise of Arms, for the relief
of distressed Knights and Ladies; against which Honorable intentions envy has
always bent the force of her malic, by employing the help of wicked Inchanters
and Negromancers to hinder their designs, of which my self am an example, who
by the malice of a wicked Magician am deprived of my Horse and Armor, as also
of the Company of my trusty Squire Ricardo, than whom never had Knight Errant a
more trusty Servant; therefore according to the Law of Arms I request
entertainment in your Castle, as formerly Men of our profession used to have.

The Host being (as most of their profession are) a merry Man, hearing him talk
so extravagantly, and having himself read some Books of Chevalry, whereby he
the better understood what manner of people they were; He therefore resolved to
humor him in his follies, and by his humors tole Customers to his House,
whereupon he returned him this answer.

Sir Knight Errant, for such at first sight I judged you to be by your
kill-Dragon ^ook; you are heartily welcome to my Castle; for I suppose you to
be no less than either Son to Amadis de Gaul, Huon of Bordeaux, or the renowned
Don Belianis of Greece, whose Heroic Acts have been Trumpeted about thorough
all the World by the Pens of most Famous Historians. And indeed right happily
are ye come, since hard by is an Adventure to be performed, which if ye do
atchieve will eternize you^ Name, and make ye Famous to all posterity.

Perform it (said Sir Billy) and make ye a doubt of my performance? I tell ye
if it were as difficult as the twelve labors of Hercules; be it Monster,
Giant, Dragon, or Fiend of Hell, I shall not fear to encounter with him. Now so
it was that in another Inn of the Town, there was a Show of Vaulting or Dancing
on the Ropes, which had gotten all the Custom from this our Host, wherefore he
thought by Sir Billy's Fool-hardiness to spoil his Sport of Dancing, or at
leastwise to make such divertisement as might gain Guests to resort to his
House.

But Sir Billy's Stomach wanted a recruit, and therefore would admit of no
further parley, but desired the Host to accommodate him with some Victuals, and
the next Morning (said he) by that time Phoebus begins to appear in the East I
will prepare my self for this Adventure; whereupon by the Hosts command some
Victuals was set before him, on which he fed very heartily, and having
refreshed himself, desired of the Host to tell him the Nature of this
Adventure? For (said he) Knights Errant are only to fight in a rightful case,
and therefore if this Adventure be for the relief of the distressed, or for the
vindication of some worthy Ladies Honor, I shall perform it; But if the Case
be unjust, for the maintenance of wrong, and upholding of Tyranny, then are we
fo^bidden by the Law of Arms to draw our Swords in their defense; therefore
resolve me in this doubt, that I may employ my Manhood accordingly.

The Host hearing his speech, thought he would fit him for a story accordingly,
and therefore replied in this manner.

Renowned and invincible Knight at Arms, the revenger of wrongs, and succorer
of the oppressed; that you may be ascertained of the Justness of your
undertakings, know that near to this Castle there lived an ancient and
Hospitable Knight called Sir Gratiosa, who for the comfort of his Old Age had
only one Daughter named Praxada a Lady of transcendent excellencies, to whom
the Queen of Love might serve for a foyl; her Beauty such as was able to make
Hercules to turn the spit, and cleave his Club to make the Fire; and as chaste
as the ha^dned ro^k, or a picture cut in A^ablaster, so that you might as soon
tempt a Votary to Sin, or remove a Scithian rock, as shoot a Fire into ^er
chaste breast. The Fame of these her excellencies spread so far, that at ^ength
it came to the ears of a certain Negromancer named Oscanus, who knowing such
Jewels were ready to be snatched at by every person, resolved to ingross her to
himself; but knowing his ill Nature to be such that ^er Father would never
consent she should be his Wife, he therefore thought it in vain by fair means
to see to obtain her; and knowing by his Devilish spells, and wicked
Enchantments, that she used every Evening at such time as Phoebus was Inning
his Chariot in the glooming West, to Walk in a Meadow near adjoining to their
Castle, he sent thither a Spirit in the likeness of her Father, who by cunning
insinuations and sly persuasions, inveighed her to walk into a Grove hard by,
where he had placed some Armed Men, that by main force took her and brought her
away with them unto the place of his abiding, where now he keeps her full sore
against her will; and to amuse the people that none should attempt to rescue
her, he by the help of a Magical Staff which he holds in his hands, seems to
dance and fly in the Air; And it is said that by the Fates it is so decreed, that
the Lady shall (...) be delivered until such time as some Valiant Knight to
whom it is ordained to end all his Enchantments, shall by his Manhood overcome
him, and tumble him down from an Enchanted Rope whereon he treads, whereby his
Magical Arts shall have no power, and the Lady be delivered from her indurance.

Now by the Honor of my Knighthood, ( said Sir Billy,) I shall not cease until
I have pursued this wicked Negromancer, and put an end to his Devilish
Enchantments, whereby the Lady may be delivered. You do very well in that,
(said the Host,) for what greater Honor can there be, than to succor those
that, are in distress, and to punish all such wicked doers that by Diabolical
arts seek the harm and destruction of others.

Whereupon it was concluded, because Sir Billy was weary with Traveling, he
should the next way go to Bed; But all that Night he could take no rest for
thinking of the Combat he should have the next day; And in these thoughts he
continued till the Rosy Morning had drawn her Sable Curtains and let in the
day, when rising from his Bed, he made himself ready, and the better to enable
himself for fighting called for a Breakfast, which the Cook-Maid over hea^ing,
You Call (said she) with Authority, as if you were some great person, I wish
you have Money to pay for that you have called for already. Discourteous
Damosel, ( said Sir Billy,) that know not what belongs to the Law of Arms,
have thou remained all this time in Ignorance, and know not that Knights
Errant are privileged from paying any thing wherever they come; when did ever
the renowned Montelion, Sir Egre, or Pheander the Maiden-Knight, carry any Money
about them? The Wench by his Discourse thought that either he was Lunatic, or
that he had abused her in hard Words, and therefore was minded to have a Game
at Scold with him, had not her Master interposed, bidding her get her about her
Business, for at that instant came in three or four of his acquaintance, to
whom he had imparted his design, who saluted Sir Billy with Words befitting a
Man of his profession, especially one of them, who spoke to him in this manner.

Most puissant Knight, whose Warlike Acts have already filled Fames Golden
Trumpet, and whose renowned deeds of Arms will hereafter be inscribed on
ever-during leaves of Brass; We being informed by the renowned Governor of
this Famous Castle, of your intentions to encounter with the Flying
Negromancer, could do no less than come to congratulate and applaud this your
so honorable undertaking, which may sufficiently evidence to the World the
great need that Knight Errantry should be again revived, which too long has
lain sleeping in the Grave of Oblivion, to the great increase of Negromancers,
Magicians, and Inchanters, which now uncontroled do practice their Diabolical
Arts.

I Swear (said Sir Billy) by the bloody Falshion of fiery Mars, that there is
no Trade, Calling or Occupation, so good nor beneficial to Mankind as Knight
Errantry; were it not for them how would Tyrants and Monsters overrun the
World; Dragons, Satyrs, Lions, and other ravenous C^eatures depopulate whole
Countries, had not St. George killed the burning Dragon in Egypt, how had that
Country been destroyed, and had not he with the other six Champions of
Christendom overcome Leoger Knight of the Black-Castle, how would the Shepherd
have been revenged of him for the Ravishment of his Daughter, and how would the
King of Babylon at that time been freed from his Enchantment? How would
Magicians and Negromancers work Mischief in every place, were they not taken
down by our invincible hands; as I intend (my Lady Dulcina being propitious to
me) to work with this wicked Inchanter to day, and to set the Lady Praxada free
from her Imprisonment.

Th^se last words were spoken with such a confident boldness, as if the work
were already done, and instantly he would have gone about it, had they not
persuaded him that the Inchanter appeared not so soon in the Morning, (for they
were resolved not to let him go till the Rope-Dancer had gotten a great
concourse of people about him) and to that end one was appointed to bring them
word when the time was fit for the purpose. In the mean space Sir Billy held
them in a long discourse concerning the loss of his Armor, and how his Squire
was separated from him, imputing it all to the malice of Magicians and
Inchanters, who are evermore envious against Men of his profession* Whilst they
were thus talking, the Messenger gave them Notice, that then was a fit time for
him to come; wherefore they acquainted him that the Magician was now acting his
freaks. Then let me alone (said he) show me but the place and the business is
done; asking them also if they would not go with him to see how he would
undevil the Negromancer? who excused themselves with a pretense of fear; Fear
(said Sir Billy) is a passion wherewith Knights Errant are unacquainted, whose
Hearts Scorn Danger, and dive for honor into a Sea of Blood; therefore if you
are afraid stay behind, for I am resolved not to shun any Danger wherein the
honor of our Knighthood is concerned.

And so being directed by a Boy which they sent with him, he went the next way
to the Inn, where he soon spyed his supposed Inchanter Vaulting on the Rope,
with Jack-Pudding showing Antic Tricks to make the people laugh; whereupon Sir
Billy drawing his Sword, cried out to them with a loud Voice, Come down you
wicked Inchanters, Sons of the Devil, the ingredients of wickedness, that have
contracted in a Soul the Body of all Mischief, you that have practiced Villainy
from your Cradle, and from the dug sucked mischief more than Milk; the Monopoly
of Vice, and Hieroglyphick of all ill. Come down I say, and deliver up the Lady
Praxada, and submit your selves to the mercy of the Invincible Knight at Arms,
Sir Billy of Billerecay; or I shall in an instant send your Souls to the
burning Banks of Acheron, that Flaming Torrent, where the sad Furies bathe
their ugly Limbs, there to be tormented, and burn with everlasting Flames of
slinking Pitch.

All the Spectators were extremely amazed at Sir Billy's oration; some thought
him to be a Madman; others, that it was a device of the Dancing Master for the
diversion of the Company, and amongst the rest Jack-Pudding was of the same
Opinion, who to add to their Mirth turned up his Bum to Sir Billy, which so
incensed our Knight Errant, that he gave him a prick on the Buttock with his
Sword that made Jack to roar and bellow like a Bull. The Dancing Master seeing
that Sir Billy was in earnest, in a great fear leapt off the Rope, and with the
fright fell flat along, which Sir Billy spying, leapt upon him, and setting the
point of his Sword to his Breast, said, Yield thy self thou foul Inchanter, and
deliver me the Keys wherein thou have imprisoned the Lady Praxada, or else I
shall instantly send thy Soul to accompany those wicked Magicians and
Negromancers which have formerly been put to Death by Knights Errant before me.

I know of no Keys (said the Dancing Master) nor have any thing in my Pocket
save only a paper of Verses which was sent me by a Friend in praise of my
profession. Let me see them (said Sir Billy) and that instantly, that I may
know by what wicked Arts thou practisest ^hy Enchantments. I practice no
Enchantments (quoth the Danceing-Master) and therefore take away thy Sword and
thou shall see what is ^n it. Whereupon the Company persuaded Sir Billy to let
him alone whilst he had read what was written; which being granted, the
Dancing Master pulled it out of his Pocket, and it being read, contained as
follows.

Sir, hearing by Fames Trumpet your Ability,
In the performing rare feats of Agility,
I thought I could no less do in Civility,
Than give you praise for this your Doubility,
Which far (alas) transcendeth my Debility,
My weak, infirm, faint, impotent Fragility,
And therefore I implore you in Humility,
That as you are descended from Gentility,
But not one whit allied unto Nobility,
That you will Pardon this my Imbecility,
Of which I hope there is a Possibility,
Because that I in you find great Stability,
That you will Pardon my Muses Sterility;
So wishing unto you a long Tranquillity,
And that your Calling may have great Vtility,
To all Spectators and Friends Visibility.
Sir Billy hearing such hard cramp words, would not believe but that they were
plain Conjuring, and therefore Swore by the Bloody Falshion of Mars he ^ould
Cut off his Head, and would also have been as good as his word had not the
people ran in and held his hands. In the mean time the Dancing Master got away
and sent for a Constable, whom when Sir Billy spied, he strived to get out of
their hands, crying with a loud Voice, Come all ye infernal Spirits whatsoever,
and with your Damned Magical Charms do your worst, I am prepared to encounter
with ye all. But the Constable a sturdy robustious Fellow, taking him by the
Collar, struck up his heels, and disarming him of his Sword, said unto him, Sir
Errant Rascal, or Mad-brain'd Fool, what whimzey possessed thy Idle Coxcomb to
make such a disturbance amongst the People; Think thou Proud Princocks to
encounter with a Company, and art not able to grapple with a single Person; If
you know not how to use your Liberty, but in playing such freaks, I shall
bestow you in such a place where your whole employment shall be to pick straws.
And so would have had him the next way to the Cage, but understanding there was
a Justice of the Peace in the Town, he thought it more Convenient to have his
advice in the matter, and therefore was dragging Sir Billy thither, when in the
intrim his Squire Ricardo, who (as we told you before) went in pursuit of his
Master, coming that way, soon espied them, and having understood by one of the
Fellows the occasion of his so handling, he resolved to succor him out of their
hands, and to that purpose putting on his Invisible-Ring he followed them to
the Justices, to whom the Constable, the Dancing Master, and especially
Jack-Pudding made a grievous complaint, aggravating his offense in several
circumstances, as that he had not only hindered him the taking much Money, but
disabled both himself and his Man from further performances, the one by his
fall, the other by the Wound which he had given him; besides the affrightment
of the people, and breach of the King's Peace, in drawing his Naked Sword, and
doing what in him lay to have mischief'd others.

Ricardo all this while stood by unperceived, but diligently marked what was
done, and seeing the Constable to lay his Masters Sword on the Table, he
snatched, it up, and drawing it out of the Sheath, flourished it about his
Head, which the Company seeing, it struck them into a sudden amazement to see a
Sword so flaunt it about without ever a hand to guide it, so that fear adding
Wings to their Feet, they ran as if Old NicK were behind them. Sir Billy was as
much amazed as any of them, but that it might not be thought that Knights
Errant were daunted for any thing, he stirred not a jot. And now the Coast
being clear, Ricardo Counterfeiting his Voice, said to Sir Billy, I am an
Invisible Spirit sent from the wise Urganda, the Lady of the Woods, to deliver
thee out of the hands of thy Enemies, therefore follow me and thou shall be
safe. And with those words passed away, still flourishing the Sword about his
Head, whom Sir Billy followed directly step by step, verily imagining he was
Succord by some divine power according as he had read in his Books of Knight
Errantry, many of the people saw him as he went along, but durst not come near
him their fear was so great, so that they passed clear away, none being so
hardy to follow after them.

CHAP. 11. Ricardo going to recover his Masters Horse and Armor, acts a very
pleasant Adventure in an Inn, with other things which happened.
RIcardo having brought his Master quite out of danger, let fall his Sword for
Sir Billy to take up, and conveyed himself away by a Compass to meet him with
his Invisible-Ring off, because his Master should not know by what means he was
set free, nor yet the virtue of his Ring, which he was always resolved to keep
secret to himself. Sir Billy wondered as much to see his Sword laid on the
Ground before him without hands, and was at first in a quandary whether he
should take it up or no; but being verily persuaded it was the will of the wise
Vrganda that he should shift for himself, he took it up and went his way, but
he had not gone far, when Ricardo met him, who seeming to wonder much at their
so accidental meeting, fell to embracing him, with many expressions of Joy for
this their so happy rencounter, desiring his Master to tell him what Successes
he had met with since their last parting.

My trusty. Squire (said Sir Billy) I were not worthy to be thy Master should I
deny thee so small a request; Know then that after such time I parted from
thee, (occasioned by the unfortunate pursuit of my Father, by the malign
influence of some Cross-grained Planet, or rather the hatred of wicked Spirits
and Negromancers which they bear to Knights Errant) wandering whether Fortune
was pleased to guide me, I came to a certain Castle, where I heard of an
Adventure of a flying Negromancer. And so related all had befallen him as you
heard before; only imputing his Misfortunes to the Malice of Magicians and
Inchanters, and how he was rescued from them by Vrganda Lady of the Woods, with
the Miraculous Brandishing of his Sword, and dropping before him.

Ricardo heard all with great seeming attention, and now began to counsel his
Master, that seeing that Knight Errantry was attended with so many troubles and
dangers to leave it off; but Sir Billy would by no means condescend thereunto;
saying, That the immortal Honor attained by Arms, could not be purchased
without much hazard and danger, the rugged Paths leading thereunto being
altogether Paved with Perils; an Ounce of Honor costing a Pound of Blood. And
therefore (said Ricardo) since the purchase is so dear, far better it is to let
it alone; what avails Honor in the Grave, nor will it without Money purchase
the Belly full of Victuals.

Sir Billy was so incensed against Ricardo for these as he thought Cowardly
expressions, that in a great rage he burst forth into this exclamation. O thou
Dasterdly Son of Fear, thou offspring of Clinias and Dametas, that would
sooner creep into a Scabbard than draw a Sword; that at the approach of danger,
art ready to run away from thy self, like the Satyr that ran away at the Noise
of the Horn which he himself blew; being ready to Sink at the very Name of
Wounds and Scars, as if thou had indented with the Grave to bring all thy
Limbs thither. Think thou such a Cowardly passion and fear shall ever take
possession of the least Limb about me? No, know that I am of such undaunted,
high, erected Spirit, as may make the Dead Quake in their Grave to think of me;
who if I should not live to enjoy the Honor purchased with my Blood, yet will
I leave the World my Executor, to whom I will bequeath the rich inheritance of
my Memory.

These thundering words made Ricardo to quake with astonishment, so that fearing
to exasperate hi^ Master any further, he condescended to accompany him in the
pursuance of his Knightly adventures. But now their. chiefest care was for the
Recovery of their Old Horses, or else to be furnished with new. Sir Billy was
of opinion that Knight Errantry would warrant them to take Horses in any place
where they could find them; but Ricardo who valued his Life more than Sir Billy
did his, and who of all Deaths dreaded that most of being Hanged up in the Air
like a Dog, was altogether against it. He therefore (trusting to the virtue of
his Invisible Ring) told his Master, that if he would abscond himself for a
little space, in some place where he might know to find him again, he would
undertake through his Ingenuity, to help them to their Old Horses. But how can
this be done (said Sir Billy,) without force of Arms, and wh^ more propper for
Arms than my self, Did you ^ver read of any Squires Errant that took upon
themselves adventures without the help of their Masters? No, as I am to
participate ^f the purchase, so will I also of the peril in ^btaining it.

But Ricardo would by no means yield to that, telling his Master, That the way
to get their Horses again must be accomplished by Policy, and not by force of
Arms; and thoug^ he knew him to be as valiant as the Renowned Hercules or the
valerous Champion St. George for England, yet many times were things brought to
pass by weak means, which the greatest strength nor Manhood could do.

Billy overcome by these reasons, condescended to stay behind in a place they
agreed on, and Ricardo with much confidence went forward in his Jorney, making
all the have he could to get to the place where he had left old Thomasio,
before he was gone away with the Horses; and such have he made that he got
thither by such time as bright Phoebus began to Inn his Chariot in the Glooming
West; where after some small enquiry, he found he had taken up his Inn with an
intent to be gone the next morning betimes. Ricardo who loved sport as well as
Business, was resolved if possible to have some that Night; and thereupon
putting on his Invisible Ring, entered the Inn, going from Room to Room to view
each Company and hear their Discourse, which generally was of Sir Billy's
strange escape, some saying one thing* and others affirming another: but Old
Thomasio with Mouth full bore, said, That i^ was none other than that young
Rascal Ricardo, who s^^ce his rambling with my Son is turned an arrant Witch,
and I am afraid ha^ bewitched my Son to take this Vagabond Cours^ of Life he
leads.

Ricardo hearing these words, as he thought very Derogatory to an Esquire
belonging to a Knight Errant, could forbear no longer, but as Thomasio was
busy inveighing against him, he gave him such a Chuck under his Chin, that he
well near bit his Tongue asunder, which mad the Old Man to bellow like a Bull,
not knowing whom to blame for his hurt, nor would the Company be persuaded
otherwise but that it was only himself which did it, every one of them
protesting they meddled not with him* Ricardo had much a-do to forbear laughing
outright, but that he might not be heard, he passed on further, and in a by
Corner he spyed a young Man and a Lass at close hug together, he hanging at her
lips as a Padlock on a Pedlars Pack; whereupon he drew close to them, and by
their discourse perceived they were two Servants in the House who had appointed
a Friendly meeting that Night together, the time and place being both
nominated, which Ricardo took special notice of, resolving to make one of their
Company, and to that purpose searched about till he came to the Chamber which
by their description was to be their meeting place. Here he staid expecting
their Company, not minding to hide himself, as being secured by his
Invisible-Ring, nor indeed was there any need thereof, for presently after, had
Night hid the Face of the Earth with her Sable pinions, and the Jolly Charioter
hurl^d her black Mantle over the Hemisphre; whereupon those Guests who lived
near repaired home, and old Thomasio, and the rest who lodged there, went to
their Beds, the better to rise betimes the next Morning.

And now was the time come for the two Lovers to meet, which for their more
security they did severally; and first the Wench, a long strapping Jade, come
in as gingerly as if she trod on the points of Needles, or slippery Ice, who
having stripped her self, and got into the Bed, immediately followed her Mate, a
stout lubberly Fellow, but brawney Backed, sufficiently able to satisfy her
appetite: He also pulling off his Clothes, went to Bed to her; which Ricardo
perceiving, and that their Clothes lay apart from the Bed, he got them up under
his Arm, and as softly as was possible, carried them out of the Room with him;
and finding the Key in the Door with as much silence as a dark Night was
capable of he locked it, and finding all the whole Household bathing their weary
Temples in the dew of sleep, after he had set open the Street-Door for a free
passage for himself to go out, he with a Stentorian voice cried out, Fire, Fire
in the Maids Chamber; which so alarmed the House, that in an instant they were
all gotten to the Chamber Door, which finding locked, they rapt and bounced at
it as Men who said we must and will come in. The two Lovers who were busy in
their Amorous embraces, hearing such a noise, were more amazed than Circes
Prisoners when they felt themselves turned into Beasts; and searching for their
Clothes, when they could find none, were almost at their Wits end.

Those on the other side who were busy at the Door, hearing them not come to
open it, thought they were smothered in the Fire, and at last with much a do
broke open the Door; but seeing no Fire, nor any sign of Fire, they struck a
light and walked in, where scarching narrowly, they found the two Lovers
stark-naked under the Bed. This unexpected sight turned their fear into an
exceeding laughter, but the two poor ^overs were so confounded with shame that
they could not speak* imagining the Devil had been there himself in proper
Person and fetched away their Clothes. And now their Mistress who also had come
running headlong in the fright, began to introgate them, how and by what means
they were there together, and where were there Clothes? When the Wench looking
wistly upon her, spyed a Man's Hose on her Leg, which she knew to be a
Gentleman's that often frequented the House, and that Night was come thither;
whereupon mistrusting that which indeed happened to be true, she started up of
a was sudden, and ran as fast as she could to her Mistresses Bed, into which
she entered, and no sooner there but she found her self in the Gentleman's Arms
who owed the Hose her Mistress had on: He thinking her to be his, and the
Mistress of the House; But before he could ask her any questions what was the
cause of this hurley burley, some of the people were come running after the
Wench, and there found that the Mistress was equally concerned with the Maid.
And now the Gentleman was as much abashed as the young Man before, not only to
see himself taken in that manner, but also with one whom he esteemed a far
greater disparagement than if it had been her Mistress; nor could he well tell,
being acted in the dark, if this same were not his former Bedfellow, thinking
her Mistress might put a trick upon him. The Mistress her self seeing things
thus acted, slipped into another Room, and putting on some other Clothes,
appeared amongst them as one whose Soul sa^ enthroned with Spotless Innocence,
and sought to persuade the standers by, that the Maid had only run thither to
hide her self, deeply protesting (which she might easily do) that the Gentleman
was as innocen^^^^s her self.

But now here was another question, how the Gentleman should come into the
Mistresses Bed? Now old Thomasio who had also risen with the rest, alarmed at
the Noise of a Fire in the House, would needs persuade them, that all was done
by Enchantment, telling them what had happened in his Town, as also what they
had seen in their own, how his Son's Sword without help of Hands marched away
of it self; The Mistress of the House seconded him therein, affirming it must
needs be so, else how could the Gentleman be brought into her Bed; but one of
the Guests affirmed, that he thought it was rather the Charms of the Petticoat
than any other Magical Charms.

Whilst they were thus arguing the case, Ricardo was as busy in ordering of
the Clothes he had brought out of the Chamber, which he fixed upon two poles,
and having some glimmering light by the help of the Moon, he writ these Verses
on a piece of Paper, and pined them to the Clo^ths.

To punish Leachery, and for no Theft,
These Clothes were took away, and here are left.
By this time the Morning began to dawn, and the blooming light to bl^sh from
the East; the Sun by degrees gilding the Horizon with his radiance; whereupon
Old Thomasio resolved not to go to his Bed again, but to prepare for his going
home; and to that end went into the Stable, and bringing out his own and his
Son's Horse, laid Sir Billy's Armor on the one, intending to ride on the other;
and having fitted all things to his purpose, hung his Horses at the Door,
whilst he went in to pay his Reckoning. Ricardo who stood by all this while
undiscerned, neglected not this opportunity, but untying the Horses, got up,
and away he went with them as hard as he could drive.

Some of the Servants seeing the Horses thus to run away as they thought of
themselves, told Thomasio what had happened, who with a Sorrowful Countenance
looked after them, as who should take his last farewell of them. Now the
vengeance light on that ^i^ked Varlot (said he, wringing his hands, and tearing
the little remainder of his Hair from off his Head) did not I tell you that
what was done in this House to Night was done by Enchantment, and so by
Enchantment are my Horses taken away; This is that incarnate Devil, that Devil
in Hose and Doublet, Ricardo, the very abstract of all faults, the impostume of
all corruption, and the perfection of all wickedness; It is he that has stolen
away my Horses, it is he that has persuaded my Son to all this foolery of
Knight Errantry, the Devil's Factor for all ungraciousness, and the very
epitomy of all evil.

In the mean time Ricardo having gotten on Horseback, made as much have as if
he had been flying from Death, so that in short space he was gotten clean out
of sight; nor did he much slacken his pace till he came where his Master was,
who having spyed him with the two Horses, he was ready to leap out of his skin
for Joy, being more glad than is the teeming Earth to see the longed for Sun,
or the tired Seaman to descry Land; My trusty Squire (said Sir Billy) more
welcome art thou unto me, than was the wandering Ulysses after his Ten Years
Travels to the chaste Penelope; nay far more welcome than Health to the diseased
Person, or drink unto the thirsty Soul. And thou my trusty Steed Bellerophon,
never shall thou more for any danger whatsoever be parted from me, whom I will
keep as close unto me, as gripe of Fist or lips of Lovers when they melt in
Kisses.

But Ricardo thinking himself not safe so near, desired his Master to mount his
Horse and be going from thence; but Sir Billy would not stir till he had
surveyed his Armor, and finding his due-order, he armed himself, and then
bestriding Bellerophon, which he had not done in many a day before, he pranced
on his back in as much state as the renowned Hector before the Walls of Ilium.
So proceeding on their way, which according to the Nature of Knights Errant,
is, never out of their way, they came to a Town where was a Fair kept that day,
which Sir Billy Fancied to be the Camp of some Pagan Army, and therefore
resolved to set upon them, and with his single prowess to overcome them; where
how he sped in his attempt, you shall hear in the Chapter following.

CHAP. 12. Sir Billy's ill success in his adventure against the Pedlars: How he
was rescued by Ricardo by the help of his Invisible-Ring: With other things
that happened.
SIR Billy seeing before him so many Booths and Stalls, with a multitude of
people amongst them, called to Ricardo, and said, My most faithful Squire,
partaker with me in all my Troubles and A^ventures; Now are we come to the
brink of Honor, the inheritance of Fame, that great engagement to great
purposes, which shall raise our Names from the black edicts of a Tyrant Grave.
Know then that this is the Camp of that wicked Monster, the cruel Pagan Prince
Brontes, who with an Army of mis^reant Soldiers wandreth about the World
spoiling and destroying all wheresoever he comes; Now is the time come for my
Victorious Arm to put a period to all his mischiefs; this is the allotted
season to put an end to his damnable designs, and to raise a Pyramid of praise
to my self by destroying such a brood of insolent Vermin. And therefore Ricardo
stand thou still and be a Spectator of my valerous performances. And
therewithal putting his Lance into his Rest, offered to run against the
multitude; which Ricardo seeing, with a voice as loud as the bawling of the
Oyster-Wives at Billingsgate, cried unto him; Ah Wretch be^e^t of sense, see
thou that is not an Army of Pagans, but very Christian men, yea such very
Christian Men as inhabit in our Parish; I tell thee misled Master of mine, it
is a Fair, and such a Fair as is kept by Pedlars at our Town of Billerecay on
the 22d day of July. But Sir Billy who imagined every thing to be as he had
read in his Books of Knight Errantry, would hear no reason, but spurring
Bellerophon with winged have rode to the Fair, and instantly overthrew two or
three Pedlars stalls. Vile Miscreants (said Sir Billy) whose wickedness is such
as makes the Earth groan to support your weight; to whom Murders are but
resolute acts, and Treasons matters of small consequence; Now shall my enraged
Blood tickle it self with a pleasing revenge for satisfaction of your misdeeds;
sending so many of your Souls to Pluto's grizly habitation, as shall make
Charon to sweat with wafting you over the Stygian River.

The Pedlars who had been damnified by Sir Billy's adventure, hearing his
terrible threatening words, and seeing the spoil he had already done, thought it
was best to be stir themselves; and snatching up some poles, the broken
remainders of their Stalls, they set upon Sir Billy on every side, some before,
and some behind him, that at length they knocked down the Knight Errant, who lay
streaking for Life under his Horses heels. Then began they to gather up their
Wares, which confusedly lay strewed upon the Ground; Here a parcel of
Jews-Trumps quite out of Tune, their Babies, Rattles, Tumblers, Boxes, all
Trophies of Sir Billy's Manhood, who lay all this while in a Trance.

Whilst these things were a doing, Ricardo that he might see the end of his
Master's adventure, having secured his Horse, slipped on his Invisible Ring,
and following after, saw all what had betided him, which made him almost half
out of Love with following any* more the pursuit of Knight Errantry: Yet not to
leave his Master in this distress, whilst the Pedlars were busy in gathering
up their Goods, he went and pulled him from under his Horses Feet, where he lay
as senseless as was his undertaking the Adventure, with a broken head, and no
doubt his brains had flown about had he had any in his Skull.

Ricardo having gotten his Master from under his Horses Feet, wrapped his own
Cloak about him, and so carried him away. Invisible, when returning to fetch
his Horse, he found the Pedlars had seized on him, who having scrambled up
their Goods for fear others as Knavish as he Foolish might filch some from
them, not finding the Man any where, seized upon the Horse, resolving that
should make good the damage they had sustained. Ricardo seeing what was done,
and judging by it of their intent, resolved the Game should not go so, and
having on his Invisible Ring, and a good Battoon in his hand, he struck the
party with the same who had hold of the Horse, he feeling it smart, and not
knowing from whence the blow came, with as much eagerness struck at another,
and that other again at a fourth, so that in an instant, parts taking, six or
seven of them were together by the ears. Whilst this Game at Handy-Fists was
thus playing, Ricardo shifted away with the Horse, and they having soundly
battered each other, and not knowing well why this quarrel was begun, began to
have a breathing space, but then looking for the Horse from whence they all
hoped for satisfaction, and finding him to be gone as well as his Master, they
each of them thought the other had conveyed him away, whereby a new quarrel
arose betwixt them, and from words again to blows more sharp and eager than
before.

But the case was not so Tragical on their side, as it was on Ricardo's, who
returning with the Horse to his Master, found him without sense or motion, as
one inroled in the register of death, and ready to cast off the robe of Clay,
and drop into the Grave. Ricardo finding him in this condition, was almost at
his wits end, not knowing what to do, nor whether to have him, his Master by
going about to redress wrongs, having committed so many, that scarce was any
place safe for them to resort to.

In this uncouth condition, as he was ruminating what to do, came by an Old Man
with Grizly Hairs, one whose Fortunes were out at the heels, as his Clothes
were out at the Elbows, in sum, a Beggar, whose hourly wants made him trudge
from place to place for relief. He hearing Ricardo's complaint, and imagining
his Master to have been one of the H^gh-Pad, and therefore wanted a place to
repose himself, told Ricardo that if he would go along with him, he would help
him to a convenience answerable to his desire, a place which by the coverture
of tall spreading Trees, was invisible to the Rays of the Sun, and hid from
the radiance of each sparkling Star Recardo entertained this motion as a voice
from Heaven, and with many thankful words accepted of his proffer; so taking
Sir Billy up on the Horse for fear of being persued, they hasted away, and by
direction of the Old Man came to a place where Solitariness it self might be
said to dwell, being Situated in the midst of a Thicket of Trees,
Quick-set-Hedges, and Bushes; here did they enter into a Cottage erected on
purpose for the entertainment of Beggars, Mumpers, and such kind of people,
where they freely spend the Coin they get in begging, having general
randezvouzes there at certain times of the Year. To this stately Mansion did
they bring that Victorious Knight at Arms, Sir Billy of Billerecay, where
having disburden'd his Horse of him, they carried him to a Bed, who all this
while lay as if his Soul were Eclipsed from his Body. Now Ricardo being
solicitous for a Surgeon, this old Mumper who was skilful in making of Clymes
and raising blisters on legs to move people to compassion, and healing them
again at his pleasure; he voluntarily undertook to be Sir Billy's Chyrurgion;
and administering some small matter unto him, our Knight, as if new risen from
some Trance, began to open his Eyes, and after two or three yauns, stretching
out his legs, and fetching a deep sigh, he said, Think not proud Pagans though
you have unhorsed me, for to prevail: It is not all your Magical Charms that
can daunt my Valor, or make me to repent my enterprise upon ye. When looking
aside, spying the Old Beggar, whom for distinction sake we will call Gerion.
And thou cursed Prince Brontes (said he) who art the head of this mischievous
rout, now shall thy wickedness return upon thine own head, and the punishment
that I shall inflict upon thee be so terrible, that Babes unborn shall tremble
at the recital of it.

Ricardo hearing his Master talk so Idly, began assuredly to think that all
his pretentions to Knight Errantry, was but a mere feigned thing, and that
though he had entertained and feasted at some Gentlemen's Houses, under the
notion of such a Person, it was more to make sport with him, than any reality
that was in it; so thus his hopes of being Governor of some Fam^us Isla^d,
began to dwindle to a mere nothing; and hearing his Master to proceed in his
extravagant discourse, he thus interrupted him. I think ( Sir Billy) all things
considered, it had been better for you still to have been at home keeping your
Fathers Sheep, and I in his Barn threshing of Corn, than wandering thus about
the World like Vagabonds, seeking of impossibilities, and dreaming of finding
Castles in the Air; for to no other end has been all our attempts as yet, our
only purchases having been Blows, Bastings, and Bastinado's, instead of Crowns,
Kingdoms and Principalities.

Sir Billy turning him on his side, as well as his bruised Body would give him
leave; Friend Ricardo (said he) thou speak as one ignorant in Arms, and
therefore I shall the more bear with thee; Oh! if those worthy Knights, Sir
Huon of Bourdeaux, Sir Amadis de Gaul, Sir Palmendis, Palmerin of England,
Palmerin D*oliva, or those other renowned Heroes mentioned in Books of Knight
Errantry were now alive, how would they laugh at thy Ignorance, what would
thou reap thy Harvest before thou Sowest thy Corn, gather thy Fruit before the
Trees be grafted, drink the Wine ever the Vine be planted? did not St. George
suffer seven years imprisonment in a Dungeon in Persia, before he came to be
King of Morocco and Egypt; what troubles did the Famous Chiron of England
endure, before he obtained the Beautiful Cassiopia in Marriage? How many
Crosses, Troubles and vexations, suffered the renowned Montelion Knight of the
Oracle, before he enjoyed the Beautiful Lady Philotheta for his Wife? There is
nothing to be obtained without much Trouble and Hazard; he that will Travel
upon the Sea, must address himself to abide the Peril of every storm; he that
will enjoy the sweet content of Felicity, must undergo all the hard haps of
envious adversity; and he that will in this spacious World seek the Advantage
of Honor, must look ever he attain it to meet with many Misfortunes.

But those Men you spoke of (said Ricardo) spent their time in killing of
Giants, Monsters, and Tyrants; whereas all your Encounters have been only
against Scare-Crows, Poppet-Shows, and Pedlars, whereby you have received more
Ignominy than Honor; And therefore my resolution is, that if henceforward you
will not be ruled from running your self into needless dangers, mistaking Inns
for Castles, and Fairs for Armies, I shall resign up my Squire-Errant-ship, and
leave you alone to the pursuance of your Follies.

Sir Billy was so angry with Ricardo at these words, that could he have come at
him, there had been a mortal affray between the Knight and his Squire; but his
bruises and Sores would not admit him to stir. Now whilst they were in this
consternation, came in the Constable, attended with Four or five rusty
Halberts, bringing with them a young lusty sturdy Rogue, who being taken in a
notorious Thievery, upon promise of Favor had confessed all that he knew
concerning this House, how it was the receptacle of their stolen Goods, and the
randezvouze of them that stole them.

Upon that information, the Constable made a strict search through all the
House, securing every one he found therein; But Sir Billy whose thoughts were
wholly taken up with what he had read in his Romantic Histories; seeing the
Constable and his Guard, cried out, Oh ye haters and tormenters* of Knights
Errant, ye off spring of Pluto and Cerebus, always envious of the good of
Mankind, may mischief and sorrow go along with ye, may hearts discontent, and
Sore affliction be play fellows to keep you Company; may Poison be your* drink,
and Gall, nay worse than Gall, the dainties that ye taste. Think not ye wicked
Negromancers, whose exercise is Murder and sullen Tragedies, think no^ (^ say)
with all your Sorceries and Charms to prevail against me, who am ordained by
the Fates to be a Scourge and plague to all such wicked Miscreants.

These words listened to attentively by the Constable, made him to wonder what
kind of Person this should be; and being told that he was a Knight Errant, I
have heard (said he) of Knights of the Garter, Knights of St. Michael, Knights
of the Golden Fleece, and several other sorts of Knights, but never of
Knights-Errant, and therefore I rather take him for a Knight-vagrant, and as a
Vagrant I apprehend him, till I know further from whence his Honor is derived.

Proud Magician (said Sir Billy,) who know not what belongs to true Honor,
think not to escape my hands without Chastisement, Maugre the power of the
Stygian Prince thy Hell-bred Master, and all his infernal band of Devils. The
Constable hea^ing him rave in this manner, like a Bull stung by Hornets, or
like one of Bacchus frantic raging Nuns, imagined him to be one who was scarce
Master of his Wits, and therefore thought him to be an object of pity rather
than of punishment; but casting his head aside, and seeing Sir Billy's Armor
lie on a side Table, he thought them not things fitting for a Madman to have
in possession, and therefore bid one of his followers to take and secure them.

The Fellow no sooner commanded but was getting them up on his Back to carry
them away; which Ricardo eyeing, slipped on his Invisible-Ring, and following
after him, no sooner was he out of the Constable's sight, but he strikes up his
heels, and giving him three or four buffets on the Face which almost dazel'd
him, he takes the Armor and throws it into a by place all but his Sword, which
he draws, and brandishing it about his head, runs toward the Constable, who
seeing it come directly against him, threw down his Staff, and betook him to
his heels; his followers seeing their Captain thus to run, and the Sword to
come brandishing toward them, were also ready to run away from themselves,
like the Satyr that ran away at the Noise of the horn which he himself blew,
and therefore casting away their weapons, ran after him for Company. Ricardo
seeing the Coast clear, went back again toward the fellow from whom he had
took the Armor, who by this time was come again to himself, but seeing also a
Sword without hands flaunting it toward him, he roared out like a Town-Bull,
and taking example by others, thought his Legs the surest defense, and so with
hasty steps ran as it were from Death it self.

Ricardo could not but smile to see how his project took, and taking off his
Invisible-Ring, returned to old Gerion the Beggar, who was as much amazed as
the rest, and would have ran likewise if he could have done it to any place of
safety. But as for Sir Billy who beheld all what had happened, he was nothing
daunted, but rather more confirmed in this Romantic opinions; being verily
persuaded that this help came from the wise Vrganda for his deliverance, and
that by her protection he should never fail in what he undertook. So calling to
Ricardo, he said, See thou not thou Nullifidian in Knight Errantry, what care
the immortal powers do take of those that practice Chevalry; not all the Charms
nor Negromantick spells Magicians use, can do the least prejudice against a
Knight Errant, and yet thou out of a Cowardly fear would leave off this
Honorable exercise, for what can be more honorable than a valiant mind, that
knows not fea^ nor Death, Souls of that Fire, they will catch ^ Bullet flying,
scale a Wall battled with Enemies, stand breaches, laugh at the thunder of the
Cannon, call it Music fitter for a Ladies Chamber than the Field; and when
over their heads the Element is darkened with darts, fight under the shade of
it, and ask no other Roof to hide their heads in; such Men are to be honored
as adventure upon such designs, that have no more probability than is enough to
keep them from being impossible. And therefore I am resolved still to follow my
first resolution in pursuance of Knight Errantry, that after-ages may read with
admiration the deeds performed by my invincible Arm, and Babes ^nborn speak of
the Matchless achievements done by my Valor.

CHAP. 13. The Woeful story of a Tailor and his Sweetheart, how they were
Hanged in a Barn; and how the Murderers were taken by the means of Sir Billy
and a Constable.
RIcardo was not so attentive to his Master's discourse, as he was solicitous
for his future safety, knowing assuredly that the Constable having gotten more
aid, would return again afresh in pursuit of them, and then began to mistrust
that Knight-Errantry would not protect them from the Constables Whip; so
imparting his mind to old Gerion the Beggar, what he should do therein, was by
him told of a more secret place, as free from search as it was from beholding
the Sunbeams, to which it was never visible since first it was made a Naskin
for the Canting-Crew. But Sir Billy by no means would be persuaded to remove,
resolved he said to see the utmost of this Famous Adventure, which put Ricardo
into a great consternation, not knowing what to do, for to tell him of danger,
was but to cast Oil into Fire, and made him more furious to stay, he therefore
resolved to sooth him up in his folly, and to catch this Buzard in the
Woodcocks spring; wherefore slipping on his Invisible-Ring, and clapping him
on the shoulder, he uttered forth these Words.

Sir Knight, whose Fame about is Hurled,
Throughout the Universal World,
Whose praises to the skies do Mount,
And Babes unborn shall it Recount;
The wise Urganda does by me,
Command that thou from hence do Flee,
Therefore make have, use no delay,
But with Ricardo pack away.
Sir Billy hearing a voice and seeing no body, was verily persuaded this was
some Messenger from the wise Vrganda to have him depart, and therefore calling
hastily to Ricardo, he said unto him, My trusty Squire, I shall now condescend
to thy request, in going away from this same place, having received a Command
from the wise Urganda therefore, whose Words to me I esteem as Oracles, and
whose Commands, as Laws unviolably to be observed. Ricardo therefore making no
delay, mounted his Master on Bellerophon, and taking old Gerion up behind him
on his own Horse, away they marched, directed by the old Beggar, until such
time as they were clear out of danger from all pursuers. It was then at such
time of the day when as the high pitched Sun invades the Earth with his hottest
Beams, bearing an equal distance betwixt foregoing and ensuing light; The
scorching Rays of Heavens Charioteer beating so hotly upon them, made them
desirous to take shade under the Coverture of some leavy Canopy, when looking
about for the fittest place, they spyed an old Barn encompassed about so with
Trees, as scarce discernable through their leavy branches.

H^ther being come, they entered the same, which they h^d no sooner done, but
there ran out thereof a lusty young Man with such swiftness, as if each step
strived to overgo the other, so that he was soon vanished from their eyes, which
attended him so long as he was discernable, wondering what should be the cause
of this have; when casting their eyes, they saw a Maid Hanged on a beam, whose
Soul had taken a final farewell of her body; and over her a young Man newly
hanged whose soul was ready to dislodge, and to sink into the House of Death;
but Ricardo and o^d Gerion percei^ing some motion in his Body, gathered by
thence, that he was not as yet quite ^ake'd up in deaths cold embers: and
therefore cutting the rope, they by chasing him, and some other means which
they used, brought him to Life, and at last to such a degree of Life as to
digest his thoughts in words, which the first he used were, to desire their
help to take down that Maid, and see if any means might recover her, which yet
he doubted was impossible; whereupon they cut her down, but all their
endeavors about her were fruitless, for cold-faced Death Natures bo^d
pursivant had closed up her eyes in an everlasting sleep, which when the young
Man perceived, fetching a deep sigh, he breathed forth this sorrowful
lamentation:

And what can fortune add more to the completing of my miseries, who cannot
look beyond the prospect of my consuming grief; being one whom the fates have
marked out for a feeler of the extremes of miseries; mis^rable below the ^each
of pity, whose heart is nothing but a Stage of Tragedies; all the happiness I
have being this, that Fortune cannot throw me in a degree of being more
miserable.

Sir Billy took great notice of all which passed, imagining thereby some Famous
adventure would fall out to be performed by him, and therefore spoke thus unto
the young Man. Distressed ^night (said he) for so thou seem by thy sorrowful
lamentation, do but inform me what humane Wretch has thus wronged thee and thy
virtuous Lady, and let him be Giant, Monster, or Devil, he shall be chastized
by my victorious Arm; for to this end have I taken upon me the profession of
Kn^ght Errantry, to right wronged Knights and Ladies, and to rid the World of
such Monsters of Nature, whose delight is only mischief, and whose Trades are
continued Acts of cruelty.

The young Man who was but as it were newly revived out of a Trance, hearing
Sir Billy's discourse, replied; Sir, I am neither Knight, Squire, nor yet good
Gentleman, but a Tailor by Trade, living in a village hard by; And this Maiden
who is here dead, the Daughter of a wealthy Farmer in the same Parish, both of
us born to misfortune and sorrow; In our very infancy we contracted an
indissolvible bond of Friendship betwixt us, and as our years further
increased; so our affections grew more and more; and arriving to those years
wherein the God of Love makes the hearts of his subjects to dote more upon a
Mistress than an old man on his heaps of Gold; I then began to reveal my
affections unto her, which found such a Friendly reception, that by mutual vows
and promises we contracted our selves each to other. But the foul pale Hog
Envy, that banquet^ her self in others miseri^s, repining at our happiness* had
caused the heart of a certain Smith of our Town to be Captivated by the
charming looks of m^ Rosaro (for so was my Love called) who with much
earnestness declared his affection unto her, usin^ many vows and protestations
of the reality of h^^ Love; but her heart was so deeply linked to m^ that
whatsoever she was, was only mine; she ga^^ him so sharp a denial, that his
Love converting (...) hatred, he burnt with revengful fury against her, and
from thenceforth waited only for an opportunity to put his designs in
execution, which at last he brought to pass as you see, for confederating
himself with a couple of Fellows, the Devils Factors for all wickedness, and
such whom an honest Man can neither see nor speak of without a blush. These
having intelligence that Rosaro was to go to an Aunt of hers that lives hard
by, and that I was to accompany her, way laid us, and having seized on us,
brought us to this Barn, where over-powring our weak resistance, and having
brought cords with them for the Execution of their damned intents, they in
conclusion hanged us up as you saw.

Sir Billy listened very attentively to this discourse, and being exceedingly
moved at it, he swore by the bloody Falshion of Mars, that ever Don Phoebus had
run his diurnal Course three times about our Hemisphire, be would take such
exemplary punishment on the Smith and his perfidious Mate^, that Babes unborn
shall tremble at the narration of it. Whilst he was thus speaking, the Smith
whose guilty Conscience feared a discovery, having found out his Companions,
returned again with an intent to murder Sir Billy, Ricardo, and old Ge^ion, to
prevent their giving any knowledge of him, But having entered the Barn, and
seeing the Tailor alive whom they supposed to be dead, they immediately set
upon him, and were as quickly set upon by Sir Billy; and this being the justest
cause he fought in, his success was answerable thereunto, for at the second
stroke he cut the Smith so deep a gash on the Wrist as made him to drop his
Club, and quite disarmed him of any further resistance, which being by the
Tailor espied, he snatches up the Smiths Club, and seconded by Ricardo, they
Jointly set upon the other two; and now were many blows given and received on
each side, when old Gerion whose courage was still good, though his strength
infirm, not loving to be Idle when so necessary a work was to be done, being
armed with a great walking staff, as commonly Beggars go so guarded, he gave
one of the Rogues such a rap on the pate as made him to stagger, and seconding
it with another, laid him at his Feet streaking his heels; the Third party
seeing this, would have run for it, but being surrounded by them all four, he
was forced to abide his fate, and whilst he was defending himself against old
Gerion and Ricardo, who faced him with their Weapons, Sir Billy being behind
him, gave him such a wound on the head as felled him to the earth, and sent his
Soul to dwell in the lower Regions, there to inhabit with the damned in burning
Beds of Steel, Roasted in Sulpher, and washed in de^p vast gulphs of Liquid Fire.

The Smith in the mean time, through the loss of so much Blood as issued from
his Wound, was fall^n into a deep swound, so that he seemed for the present to
be inroled in the Regiment of Death, but his Companion who had been knocked down
by old Gerion, being of a strong robustious Nature, reviving again, began for
to bustle, as if he would again try for the Victory; which being perceived by
Sir Billy, he ran to him, and with his Sword gave him such a Blow on the head,
as made him once more to measure his full length on the Earth, and then setting
his Foot on his breast, and the point of his Sword to his Throat, he said to
him; Vile M^screant, or rather Devil in Hose and Doublet, the impostume of all
corruptions, and abstract of all wickedness; Now will I send thy Soul to be an
inhabitant in the glooming dwellings of Dam^ed Spirits, there to bathe it self
in pools of Scalding Oil and Sulpher, which thou have worthily deserved by
contracting such a Load of Guilt that lies heavy on thy blood-thirsty
Conscience.

The Murdering Villain hearing such thundering Words, roared out like a Town
Bull, craving and crying out for Mercy, when a new crotchet coming into Sir
Billy's noddle, he said unto him, I yield thee Mercy though unworthy of it, but
upon condition that thou go and present thy self upon thy knees as vanquished
by my Yi^^orious Arm, unto the Lady of my Affections, the most renowned Dulcina
of Billerecay, and this you shall Swear to do upon my Sword. I willingly yield
to your conditions (said the dissembling Villain) and shall swear Faithfully to
perform it. Whereupon Sir Billy let him rise, and was about to give him his
Oath, which the young Man perceiving, and that he intended to let him go; Sir
(said he) It is not fase nor convenient so to do, for this Man being a
Murderer, ought according to the Law to be had before a Justice of the Peace,
to be by him examined and secured, that he may receive the reward of his
deserts. Sir Bi^ly having heard what he said, with a vehement indignation
replied, Thou speak ( said he) like one altogether ignorant of the Laws of
Knight Errantry; ought not the Conqueror to dispose of the Conquered as he
pleases? was not he su^dued by the Force of m^ invincible Arm, and therefore to
be by me d^^pose^ of according to my own will and pleasure; now since my valor
whereby I conquered him came by the inspiration of my Lady Dulcina, ought not
she in retribution thereof to have the honor of this submission, as being
magnetically performed by her. But this ( said the Tailor) is so notorious a
villain; and his crime so Capital, that being once got free, he will never come
near her, nor ever make any submission unless he be forced to do it to the
Gallows. Why, said Sir Billy, have I not his Oath to perform it? His Oath,
quoth the Tailor, is not to be regarded, for he who fears not to commit
Murder, will make no Conscience to forswear himself.

Whilst they were thus arguing the Case, the Constable of the Parish, who had a
Warrant for the pressing of some Soldiers, being guarded with Four lusty men,
came to that place, it being a Common receptacle for sturdy loytering Beggars
and Vagabonds; when beholding the floor imbrued with Blood, and strowed with
dead Carcases, he demanded the cause of this so sad a Spectacle? to whom Sir
Billy being about to reply, he was interrupted by the Tailor, who declared all
the whole business in manner as you heard it before; and withal adding, that
Sir Bi^ly being a Knight Errant, was resolved to send that murdering Rogue that
was alive to a certain Lady named Dulcina, but earnestly desired his Journey
might be staid, that the Hangman might not be disappointed of his due.

Yea, said Sir Billy, I am by profession a Knight Errant, my Trade is to kill
Giants and Dragons, and to relieve oppressed Ladies, and distressed Damose^s,
to release captivated Knights from their Imprisonment, and to bring to
confusion the Hellish brood of Negromancers and Inchanters. Sir (said the
Constable) if you are so good for fighting, you will be the fitter to serve the
(...) and therefore I press you for his Majesty's service. I understand (said
Sir Billy) that thou art a Constable, but altogether ignorant in thy Office,
for if thou had read Books of Chevalry, thou will find that Knights Errant
are subject to no King nor to no Laws. Sir (said the Constable) if you are
subject neither to King nor Laws, then you are a Vagabond, and as a Vagabond I
must apprehend ye.

Sir Billy hearing his Knighthood so vilified and degraded, was in a great
rage, and drawing his Sword, he bid the Constable defend himself, for he should
dearly abide the Blasphemy he had uttered against ^o Honorable an Order; and
thereupon began to fall upon him with all hls might. Ricardo and old Gerion
seeing the madness of S^r Billy, stepped to him to have stand his hands, but
the more they strived to hinder him, the more he laid on. The messenger that
should have gone to the Lady Dulcina, seeing them thus to bestir themselves,
betook himself unto his heels, which the Tailor perceiving, cried out to follow
him, whereupon they left off fighting, and ran after him, all but Sir Billy,
who now was an absolute Conqueror, at least in conceit.

The Smith who had all this while lain in a swound, his Soul now seemed to
re-enter his Body, and he freed from this Counterfeit of death, rose up, and
stood upright on his Feet; and seeing Sir Billy with a wrathful countenance and
a Sword in his hand, he fell on his knees, and humbly implored his Mercy. I
grant you Life (said Sir Billy) but upon Condition that as your fellow before
you ha^ engaged, you also present your self on your knee^, to my Lady Dulcina,
as conquered by my Victorious Arm.

By this time was the Constable returned bringing the fellow along with him,
with his hands tied behind him; and to prevent further mischief, no sooner was
he in the Barn, but closing with Sir Billy, struck up his heels, and disarmed
him of his Sword; whilst the others seized on the Smith. The Constastable would
also have tied Sir Billy's hands had not Ricar^o and old Gerion interceded for
him; However Sir Billy raved like a mad Man for the Loss of his Sword,
threatening the Constable, whom he branded with the Name of Magician, Sorcerer,
Negromancer, and a hundred such other names as he had read in Books of Knight
Errantry. The Constable taking him for one whose brains were crazed, gave
little rega^d unto his words, but told him he should have his Sword; Only in
the mean ^^me he must go before one of his profession, a ^ighter of wrongs, a
reliever of the oppressed, and who by virtue of a piece of Paper can send a Man
to an Enchanted Castle, kept by furious Giants, so strong and unpregnable, that
none can deliver him out of it, but he that is armed with the Sword of Justice.

Show me one of those Enchanted Castles (said Sir Billy) and if I do not take
it by my Valor, and the strength of my unconquered Arm, Then let my Name be
for ever razed out of the Honorable (...)-role of Knights Errant, and I
esteemed for a Ca^pet Knight, a mere Toast and Butter, afraid of my own Sword,
and affrighted with the clashing of my own Armor.

The Constable hearing Sir Billy's resolution, could not choose but smile,
telling him he would help him to the sight of this Enchanted Castle, and now
all parties being ready, laying the two dead Bodies upon Sir Billy's and
Ricardo's Horses, and the two Prisoners pinioned and guarded by the Constables
attendants, they set forwards toward a Justice of the Peace his House, where
how they sped you shall hear in the Chapter following.

CHAP. 14. Sir Billy's entertainment at the Justices House, his Oration in
praise of the Golden Age, with his challenging the Coroner to fight in defense
of Knight-Errantry.
THIS Justice that they were going to was a very merry conceited Gentleman,
which made the Constable the more willing to have Sir Billy to him; and by the
way to sooth him up in his Fancies, he told him that the Lord of the Castle
whether they were going, was descended in a direct Line by the Fathers side
from the Famous Montelion Knight of the Oracle, and by the Mothers side from
the Renowned Amadis de Gaul; That all the brave Heroes mentioned in the Mirror
of Knighthood were near of Kin to his Ancestors, as also that Don Belianis of
Greece, Parismus, and Pheander the Maiden Knight, were his great Grand-fa^hers
first Couzens. Ricardo heard all their discourse, with great attention, and
hearing him nominate only foreign kindred, he asked the Constable how it came
to pass that his Ancestors marched into such remote parts, and not rather into
their own Country, and if they did, what Kin this Lord of the Castle was to Guy
Earl of Warwick, or Bevis of Southampton.

I have heard (said the Constable) by Tradition, and they say it is recorded in
the Chronicles of Mi^onicon, that Earl Terry who was sisters Son to Guy, was
Nephew to Euphrosina this Lord of the Castle's great Grandfathers Aunt, and
that Sabere Sir Bevis his Uncle was Nephe^ in two descents to Earl Terry. Thou
speak (said Sir Bi^ly) as one well versed in the study of Knight (...), and
indeed it has been often in my own thoughts, that I am descended from
Valentin^ or Orson, Don Flores of Greece, Palmerin of England, or some of those
renowned Champions whose Names flourish in the Book of Fame, because I feel in
my self those sparks of Fire kindled in my breast, which do stir up noble minds
to vali^nt performances.

By this time they were come to the Justices House, where before they were
examined, the Constable acquainted him with the humor of Sir Billy, and what
discourse he had had with him, which pleased his Fancy extraordinarily; but
having a great respect to Justice, he first sifted out the Business concerning
the two dead Corpse which were brought before him, and upon examination sent the
Smith and his partner to Prison, retaining Sir Billy still with him, and using
such respect to him as he thought was most correspondent to a Knight Errant.

Sir Billy whilst the Justice was examining the Prisoners, busied himself with
viewing some old Helmets, Corslets, and Lances which were hanged up in the
Hall, being to his thinking far richer Hangings than the best Tapistry that
could adorn it. And now the Company being gone, Sir Billy was invited to a
Banquet of several dishes suitable to the season; but ever he would sit down to
participate of it, he began a long Oration in praise of Frugality, to usher in
the great need of Knight Errantry, which with an audible voice he delivered in
these words.

Thrice happy was that time which men do call the Golden Age, not because Gold
was then plenty, but for the Innocent and harmless li^es of those that lived in
it: being contented with those things which Nature produced of it self; Their
Meat was the Roo^s of the Earth, Nuts and Acorns, dainty Fare, and for Liquors,
they had recourse to the Crystal Spring; the Earth brought forth Roses and
flowers of it self, without the Midwifry of Gardeners, and the common wealth of
Bees instead of stings carried Honey in their Tails. Those contentious words of
Me^m and Tuum were not known in the World. Men contented themselves with
Clothes made of the Fleece as it came from the Sheep, which they wore only for
Warmth, for Pride was then a stranger on the Earth. The Lambs fed securely by
the Lions side, and Warm Zephyrus breathed forth a continual Spring. In those
days there was no bandying of War Nation against Nation, nor did men dare in a
thin ribb'd Bark to cross the Ocean for uncertain gain. There was no need of
threatening Laws to be prescribed in Erass, for men knew not what it was to
offend. Justice was then blind indeed, and could not see to take any bribes.
There was no need of Italian Padlocks, for Lust then was a Vice unknown. But
after corruptions began to increase, that bribes and Rapes were ripe in every
place, when the stronger sought to oppress the weaker, and great Thieves sat on
the Bench to condemn the little ones; when Ladies innocence could not defend
their chastity from the assaults of wicked and viceous Men; when vice came thus
to predo^inate, then was this Valiant and chaste order of Knight Errantry
invented, whose office it is to relieve the oppressed, vindicate Ladies, help
Orphans, rescue those who are in Prison, and pull the pride of Tyrants down ^
and of this noble order am I, which howsoever maligned and opposed by wicked
Magicians and Sorcerers, yet is there no Order, Calling, nor profession in the
World, so necessary to humane kind as this; And though I desire not to be the
Trumpeter of my own praise, what I have performed herein, (besides the witness
of my Squire Ricardo, the Author of my History, for every Knight Errant has an
Historian to declare his Acts) will in after-ages make known the Noble
performances which have been achieved by me.

The whole Company applauded Sir Billy's speech, and said, it was great pity
so necessary an Order of Knighthood should remain dormant so long, and how
happy the succeeding age would be, that should read with wonder the noble
Achievements performed by his Victorious Arm. Which words puffed up Sir Billy
with such a timpany of pride, that like the Bladder he was ready to burst with
the Wind of vain Glory. And now being tickled with the undeserved praise, he
willing to sit down with them at the Banque^, where he could scarcely feed
himself for ^e^ding the Ears of his Auditors with discourses of his Adventures,
in the mean time the Justice sent for the Coroner to come with all the speed he
could, for fear Sir Billy, who was a ^ain witnes^ in ^he business, might have a
magget in his Head to be gone, an^ therefore the better to retain him, he spa^e
to him in these words.

Most Renowned Knight, who though but young in Years, yet art Old in Fame and
experience of Arms, whose (...) out-strips all praise I can bestow upon thee;
Had the divine Homer, one of the Muses first Priests, been Contemporary with
thee, how proud he would have been of s^ s^^lime a subject to heighten his
Fancy; a subject adequa^e to Apollo himself, and his whole Quire of Daughters.
^^w b^^ign must I esteem those Stars whose influence directed thy Foot steps to
my Habitation, hoping that as Ulyss^s ^^^municated his Travels and Adventures
to Queen Dido* so from his own mouth they should receive a relation of those
^^^le Achievements performed by him, whereof (...) had been so liberal in
publishing of them.

Sir Bi^^y needed no sp^r to be put forward in such matters* his Tongue was
ever ready to run Post in (...) thing which he thought tended to his own
praise, and therefore without any more entreaty he began a long discourse of
his entrance into Knight Errantry, how he became enamored on a most Beautiful
Lady named Dulcina; his entertaining Ricardo to be his Squire, and of their
first encounter with a tall Giant in a Corn Field, whom he overthrew by main
strength of Arms; how he was Knighted by the Lord of a Castle, and how in
relieving of a certain Queen, he encountered with another mighty Giant, in
which by the envy of certain wicked Magicians he fell into a deep Cave, from
which he was delivered by the Sage Freston; and so ran on in a rambling
narration of all his Adventures, as you heard in the foregoing History; but
still imputing all his misfortunes to the malice of Negromancers and
Inchanters, who are always enemies to Knights Errant. Yet shall not their
malice (said he) deter me from prosecuting my revenge against those wicked
Miscreants, Giants and Sorcerers, till I have rooted out the whole Generation
of them from off the face of the Earth.

Scarcely had Sir Billy finished his d^scourse, when there came to the Door a
fellow cunning in showing Tricks, such as we call a Hocus Pocus, or Hictius
Doctius, who knowing the Justice to be a merry Man, thought by showing his Art
he might get some Money there; the Justice understanding his employment, was
very glad of the occasion, to divert Sir Billy, and keep him till the Coroner
came; He therefore brought the Fellow to the Company, and bid him for to show
his skill. Sir Billy had never seen any of these Legerdemain Tricks before, and
therefore his Spirits were struck into admiration, and his Soul intrance'd with
wonder. Ricardo all this while stood by, and seeing his Master struck into such
an astonishment, thought to make some sport, as well as the Jugler, and
slipping on his Invisible Ring, when Hocus had laid his Tin Boxes and Balls on
the Table, and was feeling in his pocket for some other Instruments of
activity, he takes them up and puts them in his pocket: Hocus seeing his Boxes
and Balls Hi Presto to be gone, was more amazed than Sir Billy was at his
Tricks; but thinking some of the Company might do it to make themselves merry,
and loath to challenge any in particular, he thought to catch them by craft, and
therefore pulling out a Jack in a Box, some Counters and Dice to do more feats
withal, he lays them as it were carelessly upon the Table, yet still had a
special eye who took them. Ricardo thought what was his drift, yet dreading not
his policy, boldly steps to the Table and quickly made them Invisible. The
Jugler seeing the rest of his things to be gone thus without hands, stood like
one that was stupefied, or like Stags at a gaze, as if his understanding were
in an ecstasy. At last he swore there was some Conjurer amongst them, whose Art
was far transcendent above his, for he did but play the Devil in Jest, but they
had played the Devil with him in Earnest. At this the whole Company burst out
into such a laughter as if they had for ever banished all melancholy from their
Society. This exceeding mirth made Hocus more vexed then before, so that he
began to swear like a Culter, for having now lost his Tools, he might even shut
up Shop for any thing he could do.

And now a new project of mirth came into the noddle of one of the Company, who
persuaded the Jugler that Sir Billy had taken away his things, and that to get
them again, there was no way but using him roughly, which he should not need
fear to do, because Sir Billy what ever he bragged himself to be, was but a
mere Hony-sop, a dish of skim'd Milk, whose Feet was his best defense, and his
Tongue his best Weapon. The Jugler animated herewith, steps to Sir Billy and
said, Sir, I understand you have gotten my things, and therefore pray give me
them again without any more Fooling; which if you refuse to do, I shall make
you such an Example of my wroth and Indignation, as shall make you curse the
time that ever you saw me.

Sir Billy hearing such threatening words from one he thought so much beneath
him, in great anger replied; Thou wicked Inchanter, unworthy to live upon the
Face of the Earth, who have made a league with Hell, and a Covenant with the
Devil to be his Servant; Think not by thy wicked Charms to escape my fury, for
if thou had as many hands as Briareus, and in every hand there were a Sword,
yet would I encounter with thee, my Valor being such, as to know ^o fear in my
self, yet to teach it others that have to do with me. And thereupon drawing his
Sword began to lay on load upon Hocus, who seeing Sir Billy was in earnest,
thought his best refuge to be his Heels, running with such hasty steps as if
his feet scarce touched the Ground, being more swift in his flight than Daphne
when she fled from the embraces of Apollo; whereupon the Company gave such a
shout as made the House to Ring; their loud exclamations cleaving the yielding
Air, like the roaring of a whole Herd of Lions, ( or if it could be) greater
than the Noise of Ten Irish Funerals.

Sir Billy seeing his flight so swift, thought it in vain to pursue him any
further, and thereupon returned in as great State as the Macedonian Victor from
the Conquest of Darius. The Justice meeting him congratulated his success,
giving him as much praise as if it had been the thirteenth labor of Alcides;
the other persons also each one in proper words sought to magnify this his
enterprise, although an attempt so inconsiderable, that had the Jugler had but
as much valor as an Humble-Bee, with a dozen of dangerous words in his mouth,
he might have resisted him with a Bull-Rush.

By this time the Coroner was come to the House, and a Jury impannelled to
enquire about the two dead Persons; The first witness tha^ was examined was Sir
Bil^y, who being requested to tell his knowledge in the particulars, spoke as
follows.

You shall know Courteous Gentleman, that by profession I am a Knight Errant,
an Order of all others the most beneficial to mankind, which were it highly
cherished as it is deserving, it would encourage many noble Spirits to the
profession thereof, by whose manly prowess all Tyrants and oppressors of the
Poor being suppressed, we should have no need of Lawyers, Attorneys, nor
Soliciters, who pretending to right people in their causes, do them more wrong
by their extortions and Fees, than they received by the parties against whom
they sued. In the prosecution of these Knightly adventures, it was my Fortune
or rather lucky Chance to come to an old ruinated Castle, attended only by my
Squire Ricardo, and an Old Gentleman, one of the Knights of Industry; Into this
solitary Receptacle being entered to shade us from the burning beams of the
refulgent Sun, we espied there a most sad and dolorus spectacle, a Woman
hanged, and a Man hanging, with little hopes of Life in either; which we had
scarce leisure to view, when a lusty stout robustious fellow rushed from forth
the place, and winged with have, ran away as swift as the sweeping stream or
winged Arrow. He being gone, we cut the young Man down, who was near entered
into the Territories of Death, yet by helps that was used, he was brought again
to the possession of Life, as you see there standing before ye, but the Woman,
who was the Lady of his Affections, notwithstanding all endeavour^ which we
used, we could never persuade her sullen Soul for to re-enter into her Body,
but Life's Ca^dle was quite extinct in her.

Whilst we were thus fruitlesly employed in the recovery of the Maid, the
murdering Villain who had ran from us before, now returned again with two
others who had been partners with him in his Butcherly design, and set^ing upon
us, thought to have made us a morsel for the Jaws of Death, and with their
Clubs have signed our Passport into another World, but I perceiving what was
their intentions, drawing my Sword, and invocating the Lady Dulcina for aid,
set upon the Villains, and in an instant* brought two of them to the Ground of
which Death, the Graves Purveyor, took possession of one, the other soon after
recovered, whom we brought unto you, as also the third, who though he ran away
from me, yet was brought back again by my Squire Ricardo and the Knight of
Industry, with some others who came into our assistance, although had I been
alone, the strength of my Victorious Arm had been enough to have Conquered them
all.

The whole Company highly appl^uded Sir Bi^ly's valor, as a true Son of Mars,
that derides Death, and meets with Triumph in a Tomb. Afterward was the Tailor
examined, as also old Gerion, and Ricardo, who agreeing all in one Tale, the
Jury found the Maids to be wilful Murder, and the killing of the Fellow done
in their own defense.

The Justice being a bountiful Housekeeper, invi^ed the Coroner and Jury, as
also Sir Billy, Ricardo, and old Gerion to Dinner, which he had caused to be
provided for them against they had done. After Dinner the Justice and Coroner
fell into a deep discourse, the Coroner being of Opinion, that the Order of
Knights Errant was a needless, Idle, unnecessary employment, for that the Laws
being so open, wrongs might be redressed, and the oppressed eased far better by
the Law, than by their Swords, which o^^entimes for want of due knowledge of
the case, did far greater wrong than right: And as for Books of Chevalry, he
Judged them to be very prejudicial to a well-governed Commonwealth, wherein
Men might bestow their time better than in reading Figments, impossibilities,
and in many of them incitements rather to looseness and Vanity, than any
instructions to virtuous Living. To this the Justice replied, That Knights
Errant have in former Ages been applauded by learned Persons, for such was
Hercules, whose going about and destroying Giants and Monsters, was no other
than Knight-Errantry, and for which they honored him as a God; and then for
reading Books of Chevalry, what prejudice could come by reading them? for the
subjects of them being known to be fabulous and figments, no man's faith is
beguiled, nor any persuaded to believe them as a truth; rather on the contrary,
where the minds of the vulgar are not busied in some such pleasant arguments,
they fall upon matters which less concerns them, and become troublesome Judges
of the State and Church wherein they live, and therefore it has been accounted
great Policy to divert Men's Fancies by reading such Romances*

Many other ways might be invented ( said the ^oroner) to divert Men's Fancies,
than this destructive one of reading such Books, which the better they are
Writ, the more dangerous they are, for some young people are so in^entive upon
them, that they imagine themselves to be such as they read of; And such a one I
suppose this young man to be, who by reading Books of Knight Errantry, would
Fool himself into a conceit that he is a Knight Errant. But such people so
conceited ought not to be soothed up in their Follies, but rather sharply
reproved, and if that will not mend them, then either let them be sent to
Be^lam, or Whipped at a Carts-Tayle, until this foolish humor be Whipped out
of them.

Sir Billy was in such a rage to hear these words, that the Icy Current of his
frozen blood kindled up in agonies as hot as flames of burning S^lphur,
fretting and fuming like a piece of Gumm'd Velvet. Monster of all wicked Men (
said he) whom I cannot name without spitting after it for fear of being
poisoned; could thy malice vent it self in nothing but speaking against the
most noble Order of Knight-Errantry? nor know I whether thy envy or arrogance
be greatest in it, nor what punishment is equivalent to such high presumption;
yet shall not thy male pertners escape unpunished if my trusty Sword sail me
not, and therefore if thou art as valiant of thy hands as thou have been
prodigal of thy Tongue, I challenge thee out into the field to fight with me;
which if thou shall deny to do, I shall proclaim thee the most Cowardly Carpet
Knight that ever wore Sword, only valiant in Voice, but at the fight of an
Enemy ready to run away from thy self.

The Coroner who was a Man well skilled at his Weapon, and with Courage
answerable to his skill, scorning to be out-braved by such a Princocks, was
resolved to chastise his folly, and therefore told him, that though it were
beneath him to answer one so inconsiderable, yet least his rashness should take
that to be fear which was only contempt, he would answer him at any time,
place, or weapon he should appoint; bidding him be sure in making his words
good of what he had promised, or else he would be a shame unto the Order he did
profess.

And I quoth Ricardo, Squire unto the renowned Knight Sir Billy of Billerecay,
do challenge the Squire that belongs to the Knight which is to fight with my
Master, at any Weapon he shall propose to fight withal, so it be such a Weapon
as former Squires to Knights Errant used for to fight withal. This unexpected
Challeng^ of Ricardo put all the Company into a merry kind of amazement,
endeavoring by all means to have the humor go forward. There was at that time
attending on the Coroner a young Man much about the Age and stature of Ricardo,
who hearing this Challenge, desired his Master he might accept of it, which
being granted him, he told Ricardo he should be answered at his own Weapon, at
the time and place when their Masters did fight. All things being thus agreed,
they next consult of the time and place when, and where it should be done; Sir
Billy would have had a fortnights space, and that in the mean time Messengers
should be sent abroad to declare by sound of Trumpet in all Market Towns and
general assemblies of this their fight; But the Justice and Coroner not willing
to have a private divertisement made so public, would not agree to it; so at
last it was concluded to be the second day after, in a large Meadow behind the
Justices House, during which time the four Combatants prepared themselves for
the Encounter, which how it was performed on both sides, we shall in the next
Chapter (the sacred nine assisting in our endeavors) in full and ample manner
declare unto you.

CHAP. 15. Sir Billy's Encounter with the Coroner: How he was relieved by
Ricardo: His admirable description of his Mistress: With Ricardo's Counterbuff
thereto.
SOON had wide* mouthed Tatling Fame dispersed the News of the combat betwixt
Sir Billy and the Coroner, so that at the day appointed there was a great
concourse of people to behold the same. The Old Justice had the day before
highly caressed* Sir Billy; and his Daughter a Virgin of about sixteen years of
Age, gave him all the encouragement she could, bestowing a Ribbon upon him to
wear on his H^t, telling him that if he overcame him he should be her Knight,
and that she should account her self the most happy Woman in the World to have
such a Servant.

I think my self extraordinarily engaged to you for your goodness, said Sir
Billy, and doubt not Madam of my success, it being in the vindication of those
noble Knights, Amadis de Gaul, Sir H^on of Bourdeau^, Don Belianis of Greece,
Palmerin of England, Orlando F^rioso, Don Flores of Greece, Sir Guy of Warwick,
Bevis of Southampton, and abundance of other noble Heroes, who spending their
time in Arms, dyed in the Bed of Honor, whose memory this foul Miscreant seeks
to deprave, and that with such opprobrious words, enough to raise the Ghost of
those deceased Worthies out of their Graves, to vindicate their own Honor, had
not the Fates allotted me in this latter Age to be a Brother of that noble
Society, for the punishment of all those who shall offer to villifie such a
noble, profitable Honorable Order.

You have reason in what you say, (replied the Damosel,) for should such noble
Orders fall into contempt, it would be a great discouragement to virtuous
ent^rprizes, and then for want of such persons how would the World be pestered
with Tyrants, Oppressors, and merciless persons, Dragons and Monsters would
abound in every place, and Giants so increase, that the habitable World would
be turned into a mere Desert.

Whilst they were thus discoursing, there came a Messenger to Sir Billy to bid
him make ready for the encounter, for his Antagonist was upon entering the
Lists; whereupon Sir Billy buckled on his Armor, which was something difficult
for him to do, each piece being so ill proportioned to the other; and now thus
Armed, as he thought Cap-a-p^, he marched into the field against his Enemy, who
was attending him, clad in a Buff Coat, with no other Armor but his Sword.
Ricardo and the other young man came into the field, habited for to fight, and
with a resolution answerable to the Courage of their Masters. And now a general
expectation was fixed in the minds of the Spectators* each promising to
themselves an assured Victory, but the Eyes of most there present were fully
fixed on Sir Billy, who marched in as great state toward the Coroner as Hector
the Trojan Prince before the Walls of Ilium, and being come near to him, he
said, yield thy self Prisoner to my conquering Arm, else shall thy Life pay for
thy Tongues presumption. I crave no favor, said the Coroner, but look to thy
self, else will the Honor of Knight Errantry lie in the dust; and thereupon
they began to lay on at each other, Sir Billy with much strength and fury, the
Coroner with Courage Joined with skill by which he so much o're-matched our
young Knight Errant, that notwithstanding he earnestly invocated his Lady
Dulcina, and implored the assistance of the whole Mirror of Knighthood, the
Coroner so bestirred him, that putting by the thrust of his Sword, he closed
within him, and strikeing up his heels, took his Sword from him, telling him he
was not fitting to wear any such Weapon, without he knew how to handle it
better.

This Combat gave more cause of laughter than admiration, Sir Billy having
promised so much and performed so little. In the mean time Ricardo and the
Coroners Man began a more mirthful Combat between them; for Ricardo by virtue
of his Invisible-Ring feared not any danger he should be exposed unto, which
made him so forward to challenge the other. With much Courage and resolution
these two Petty Toes o^ Mars did fight it out for a while, but when Ricardo saw
his Master lie at the mercy of the Conqueror, and himself hard bes^ed, he
thought it was hig^ (...) for him to fly to his old shifts, and therefore
skipping about in antic manner to make the people laugh, and counterfeiting a
flight, he slipped on his Invisible-Ring, and then returning with great
confidence, ^^id on load upon the Coroner, who feeling the blows, and not
seeing the hand that gave him them, was struck into such a Panick fear, that he
ran away as swift as the Eastern wind, or shafts shot from a Russian Bow.
Ricardo seeing his flight too swift for him to overtake, turned to the other,
and as one that had all his thoughts bound up in Choler, he laid on load with
might and main; The young man seeing how his Master had run for it before,
thought it was in vain for him to stay behind, especially when blows came so
thick and fast, and therefore betook himself to his heels; Ricardo following
him, sometimes strikeing him on the Back, and sometimes tripping up his heels,
making him tumble over and over, which caused a great laughter in the people,
to see the Master and Man after they had obtained the Victory, to run away as
they thought from their own Shadows. Sir Billy, who lay fret^ing vexed with
this disgrace, seeing them both run away, presently an imagination came into
his head, how the Sage Freston had sent him relief, and therefore rising, and
taking up his Sword which the Coroner for have had dropped as he ran, he
flourished it about his Head, saying, Come all ye Miscreants, Foes to Knight
Errantry, come I say and see how the Fates Favors those who are followers of
this noble Order, against whom no strength of Arms nor Magical Charms is able
to prevail, having always some to succor them in their greatest distress; And
thou Sage Freston, how am I bound to thee for thy special aid in all my
necessities, how would this Vile Monster have Domineered had he prevailed over
me; how would the Honor o^ Knight Errantry have been deprest, had I miscarried
in this Action; How will after-Ages read the History that shall be written of
me with admiration, what perils I have endured for the Honor of Knight
Errantry. Whilst he was thus V^unting, the Coroner who had by this time run
himself out of breath, feeling no more blows, nor seeing any one; ashamed of
himself for this Cowardice, he returned back again toward Sir Billy with more
fury and indignation than before, and laying about him as furiously as Achilles
on the flying Trojans, he had given Sir Billy a total overthrow, had not
Ricardo, seeing his Master in such danger, left following the young Man, and
come to his rescue, and seeing it was no time to delay, he laid upon the
Coroner, giving blows as thick and fast as when he threshed Corn before he
turned Squire Errant. The Coroner feeling the smart of the blows, and seeing
nothing by which he received them, was struck with a deep amazement, like a Man
gone a far Journey from himself, or like unto Prisoners when they felt
themselves turned into Beasts, so that instead of running from his Enemy, he
was ready to run away from himself. Sir Billy who was always more valiant of
his Tongue than his hands, seeing the Coroner stand struck with astonishment,
as if he had looked on the Gorgons Face, began to brustle up himself, speaking
such Gigantick words, that if his deeds were to be measured by them, each one
that heard him would have taken him for a Man of Valor. But Sir Billy was one
of them who could speak much and do but little, for the Coroner exasperated at
his words, ran upon him, and by main strenght overthrew him, and doubtless had
killed him on the place, had not Ricardo also run upon him, and tumbling him
over Sir Billy, by that means gave his Master leave to rise again. The Company
seeing them thus in earnest, fearing it would grow to more mischief than was
intended, resolved to part them, which Ricardo perceiving, he left the two
Combatants, and getting out of sight, pulled off his Invisible-Ring, and
returned back, limping all the way as one wounded in the Encounter. This bred
more wonder in the Company than any thing that had passed before, How Ricardo
should come to be hurt, seeing, to their thinking, he ran away before he
received any Wound, or the least matter that should cause him to hault.

Ricardo, e're he came at them, began to exclaim on this manner. Accursed
place, that even val^rous Knight Errant, or faithful Squire, should come into
it, surely the Stygian Prince, that general Adversary of human Nature, haunts
this place, who by his wicked Emissaries has so belabored me, as if he
intended to make Mummy of my flesh; but could I but see this black Prince of
Acheron, or any of those his infernal Messengers which thus carried me out of
the fight, he should see I would not fear to encounter with him; but thus to
beat and misuse Men unseen, is both Cowardly and base, and quite contrary to
the Rules of Knight Errantry.

The Coroner and his Man hearing Ricardo's discourse, declared how they were
also served, showing several Cuts and gashes of a Sword on their Clothes, with
some slight hurts on their Bodies, protesting it could be no other than a
Spirit. This made them all amazed but only Sir Billy, who would needs persuade
them it was a punishment inflicted on them by the Sage Freston, who was an
Enemy to all those who opposed Knight Errantry, and a special Friend in all
times of distress to them who practiced the Rules of that noble Order.

But ( replied the old Justice) how comes it to pass that Ricardo, who is at
least a retainer to Knight-Errantry, should also be punished by him, as well as
these who are professed Enemies of that Order? That is deservedly inflicted on
him (replied Sir Billy) because not many days before I came hither, his foolish
Tongue was venting some speeches derogatory to that noble profession; Nay, so
far did his folly prevail with him, that he would have persuaded me to have
left off pursuing of Knightly Adventures, and to have spent the remainder of my
days in Ease and Idleness, had I not been endowed with a heart betwixt whom and
fear there is an antipathy, my known disposition being such, as to scorn those
dangers which would make a Coward tremble to think on.

Ricardo had much a-do to forbear laughing outright, to hear his Master talk so
rediculously, as also (...) think how he had possessed the Coroner and his Man
with a firm belief that they were beaten by Spirits, but by this means all
thoughts of fighting any more being quite laid aside, the Justice invited them
all unto his House, and that there might be a thorough reconciliation betwixt
them, the Coroner led Sir Billy by the hand, and his Man the Squire Ricardo.
Here did the Justice express his bountiful nature by the great entertainment he
gave them, which was such, as if Ceres and Bacchus had taken up his House for
their habitation. The Justices Daughter, who had before so graced Sir Billy,
being extremely taken with his extravagancies, to follow on the humor,
entertained him in these Words.

Most noble Knight, whose prowess is far above my expressions, blind Fortunes
Mincion in Valorous attempts, having a Spirit of greater confidence than can
give admittance to any thoughts of Cowardice* more welcome is thy presence to
me, than that of Ulysses to the chaste Penelope after his Ten Years absence at
the Seige of Troy. How happy is that Lady which has so renowned a Champion to
her Servant, more Fortunate is she in her Choice, than was Sabra the King of
Egypt's Daughter in St. George, the Beautiful Rosalinde in St. Dennis of
France, or the renowned Philotheta in that of Montelion Knight of the Oracle*

Indeed ((...)) the Goddess of my affections is such a one, that should I go
about to describe her, I must use the help of the most precious things, and
invocate the learnedest of the Nine Muses for my assistance. Her Hair, that
Amorous Cordage, like to a rich and artful Coronet, shows like to Cur^ains for
Beauties Chamber. Her Forehead, Beauties Sphere, shows like to a Mount of
bleached Snow. built upon two Ivory Arches. Her Eyes those starry Jewels, such
as might Captivate Love, and her Eyebrows enough to Work miracles with their
Mag^ck Circles. Her Cheeks like two banks of fairest Flowers enrich't with
sweetness, like mingled Baths of Milk and Roses. Her Ears those watchful
Sentinels, need no Jewels to Adorn them, her Ears themselves being all Jewels.
Her Nose such where Ze^^yrus delights to sport. Her Lips are melting Rubies,
where Love plants and gathers Kisses. Her Teeth like Ivory pales, which enclose
a Tongue made up of sweetest Honey. Her Breath comes stealingly from her, as if
it seemed loath to come forth from so delicious a Mansion, but that it hoped to
be drawn in again to that well closed Paradise. Her Neck shows like a Silver
Pillar, more white than Towers of pollisht Ivory. Her Breasts, those Twins of
Miracle, are like two Hillocks betwixt which a Thousand Cupids lie. A Wast as
strait and clean as Hermes Rod, or Circes Wand. Her Belly, Natures Kitchen,
round soft and Plump, more tempting than Gold to a greedy Usurer. Her Thighs
like soft Ivory pillars, suppor^ers of that goodly frame I have already
described. Her Knees so well compacted, that Nature therein observed her
choicest Symmetry. Her Legs, Cupid's Columns more straighter than the thighs of
Jove. Her Feet, such as with their pace do move a band of Beauties., In brief,
such a one as may serve for a foyl to Cupid's Mother (...) looks (...) turn the
saddest Night to day, (...) first and best original of all fair Copies.

This description of his Mistress struck the Justice's Daughter into amazement,
as taking her to be a piece whom Nature in the Composing had taken the choicest
excellencies from diverse others to make one every ways complete; but knowing
Lovers are partial in the description of their Mistresses excellencies; that
she might be the better informed, finding Ricardo alone, and in a merry humor,
she desired him to inform her fully in the accomplishments of his Masters so
celebrated Lady.

Ricardo, who was almost weary of his Squire Errantry, and perceiving that his
hopes of being Governor of an Island would not amount to be Monarch of a Mole*
Hill; and that all his Masters projects and designs were but mere Chymera's and
Idle imaginations; was resolved therefore to leave off this kind of Vagabonding
Life, and if his Master would not be persuaded to go home, to leave him in
pursuance of his folly; being therefore fearless of his displeasure, he thought
to give the Gentlewoman a more Comical but truer description of this Lady of
perfections, which he performed in this manner.

To begin with her upper parts, Her hair (said he) hangs down her neck like
crawling Snakes, curiously pleated into Elf-Locks. Her Forehead like a piece of
new-furrowed Land, or like the parched Earth in the heat of Dog Days. Her Eyes
like two Mill-pits continually running over, on either side of which hangs two
Souses or Ears, of such a prodigious greatness, that were they cut off and
Tanned, would serve a Cobbler a Month for Clouting Leather. Her Cheeks are like
two shrimpled skins of parchment, and her Nose comparable to that in the
picture of Mother Shipton. Her Mouth opens and shuts like a Carrier Pouch, and
her Teeth are like to an old Park-Pale. Her Lips resemble those of the
Hogs-Fac'd Gentlewoman, and her Tongue sounds as loud as Bow-Bell. As for her
breath, I must crave the help of the Poet to describe it.

But for her Breath, (Spectators come not nigh,)
It lays about, God bless the Company,
One Kiss, and eighteen Words of her alone,
Put down the Spanish Inquisition.
Thrice blessed we (quoth I) when I think on,
The former days of persecution;
For were it free to kill, this griesely Elf,
Would Martyrs make, in compass of her self:
And were she not prevented by our Prayer,
By this time she corrupted had the Air;
The Man in the Bears-skin, baited to Death,
Would choose the Dogs much rather than her Breath.
Then for her Neck, it is like a pair of Stairs up to a Belfry, and her
shoulders able to bear the biggest Jest that can be put upon them. Her Dugs are
like two ore-worn Foot-Balls, and her sides resembling the planks of a
Cheese-press. Her Wast would waste half an hours time to go about it, being
^all and slender as a Windmill-Post. Her Belly is like to the Tun at
Heidleburge and her Buttocks and Thighs correspondent thereunto. In brief, she
is one made up of Natures most deformities, a natural Vizard, like a Winters
Apple shrunk up together, and half rotten.

The young Gentlewoman laughed very heartily at Ricardo's description of this
Lady Errant, and thought it might be more Consonant to the truth than that
delivered by Sir Billy. That Ricardo ( said she) perhaps may be the reason that
your Master does not carry the picture of his Mistress along with him, as
formerly Knights Errant were wont to do, by which they used to Vindicate their
Beauties in Justs and Tournaments against all opposers. It would no^ (said
Ricardo) be worth a painters time to bestow so much cost on so ill-favored a
piece. And I suppose my Master Fancies her more by imagination, than any thing
really what she is.

Whilst they were thus discoursing, old Thomasio (Sir Billy's Father) having
heard of the encounter his Son was ^o perform with the Coroner (to whose Town
Fame had trumpetted the report) he resolved now to be even with him, and to
take such a course as should for ever spoil his Knight-Errantry. He therefore
being Armed with the Authority of a Justice of ^he Peace, and attended by three
or four lusty fellows, seized upon Sir Billy unawares; and with an angry
countenance, scattered in ruddy flakes of Wrath, like to a chased Boar whom
eager Hounds have at a Bay, he thus spoke to him.

Thou impudent Rascal, which without restraint of shame or Modesty do wander
about under the notion of a Knight Vagrant; nor will I take that Course with
thee as we do with our Horses; first I will shackle thee, and if that will not
do, but that thou will still run at random, then will I have thee put in such a
pound, where Old Men and Young Men are much alike, for neither go far; I mean
(Sirrah) a Prison, which is a place where a doublet with buttons is more out of
Fashion than Trunk Breeches; where people wear out their Lives like an old
Suit, the faster the better; a house of meager looks and ill smells; so cursed
a piece of Land, that the Son is ashamed to be his Fathers Heir in it. And
thither Sirrah shall thou go, if thou will not be ruled, maugre all the
Witchcraft of thy doubty Squire Ricardo, who by his wicked spells stole away my
Horses from the Inn, whom I will cause to be punished in a more exemplary
manner than thy self.

Ricardo heard all these words, but trusting to the virtue of his Ring, he
feared not what Thomasio could do unto him. But Sir Billy was struck with such
a deep amazement at this sudden surprizal, as if he had stared on the Gorgons
Face, and looked like ^irces Prisoners when they found themselves Metamorphised
into Beasts; at last recovering the use of his speech, he thus spoke to old
Thomasio.

Unhappy Father, destructive to thy Country, and envious to posterity that is
to come, who by thy obstin^cy wilt deprive after Ages of the benefit they might
have received by my unconquerable Valor. But the Justice seeing him to run
into his former extravagancies, and being now wearied with his impertinencies,
he resolved to send him by force home with his Father, and therefore bid him
prepare to go, and that willingly, or else he would take such a course with
him, as should for ever spoil his Knight Errantry.

But Sir Billy pleaded it was against the Law of Arms to deal Injuriously with
Knights Errant, who ought to be hospitably received wherever they come, as
Men who had denoted themselves for the good of their Country, and that they
were above any Law of Justices, ^or^under the Cognizance of any Magistrate, as
being fellows to Kings and Princes, many of which had been of that profession
t^emselves. But the Justice would not suffer him any longer to run on in his
wild extravagancies, but commanded his Servants to lay hold of him, and also to
fetch in Ricardo, that they might be both pack't away together; but this was
easier commanded than performed, for Ricardo sl^pping on his Invisible-Ring was
no where to be seen; yet c^n^^d^ring the Justice was now about to order them
sower sauce to their sweet Meat, he was resolved to have one bout with them
before he went, and therefore whilst old Thomasio was making his complaint to
the Justice, Ricardo standing behind, ^lapt his hand on his Mouth so often on
and off, that the old Man could say nothing but fa fi fum; whereupon the
Justice taking him to be an old doting Fool, and that his Son was the more
excusable, as taking his folly originally from his Parents; he therefore bid
him hie him Home again, and both of them ply their Business better, or else
instead of being pittyed for their folly, they might be soundly l^sht for their
Knavery.

Ricardo listened very attentively to the Just^ces di^course, and seeing he was
so liberal of his Whippi^g cheer, he was resolved to bestow a cast of his
office upon him; so stepping unto him, he so pulled and tweaged the Justice by
the Nose, that he roared and bellowed like a Colchester-Bull. Now was the whole
House in a great Consternation, hearing the Justice so to take on; Old Thomasio
all the while crying out upon Ricardo, calling him Witch, Wizard, Negromancer,
Sorcerer, Soothsayer, Charmer, Devil, and all the other opprobrious names he
could reckon u^.

The Justice herewith was in a terrible Scare, an^ commanded Ricardo should be
immediately laid hold on; but being searched for in every place he could no
where be found. Sir (said Thomasio) this Ricardo is the left hand of the Devil,
a right Lancashire Witch, who can change himself into what shape he pleases;
and who knows but that he may turn himself into a Flea, and so skip into your
Daughters Bed; I tell you it is a dangerous thing, and if she should prove with
Child, a Man might easily guess who was the Father.

The whole Company could not forbear laughing at Thomasio's discourse, but the
Justice was more exasperated against him than before, thinking their whole
design to be more out of Knavery than simplicity, and therefore commanded that
both Thomasio and Sir Billy should be set in the Stocks, whilst Rica^do was
looking up to accompany them, and then he would take such order with them as he
thought fitting. But (...) Stocks happening to be broken at that time, the
Const^ble to secure them put them both in the Cage, which so exasperated our
Knight Errant, that he swore by the fiery F^^shion of bloody Mars, he would
either free himself from that captivity, or lo^^ his Life in the Adventure. And
so having al^ his thoughts bound up in Choler, like mad Orestes, in a great
fury, he ran with all his might against the Bars of the Cage, and like another
Bajazet beat out his own Brains.

Old Thomasio seeing what had happened, was struck into a mavelous
astonishment, so transformed with Wonder, that he stood like to a breathing
Stone. The Justice hearing what had happened, went likewise thither, as also
his Daughter, and the rest of his Family, who beholding this dismal sight, were
also marvelously astonished. The Coroner being not yet gone, a Jury was
impannel'd, who found him guilty of self*Murther, whereupon he should have been
buried in the Highway, with a stake driven thorough him, But for the honor of
Knight-Errantry, and being the last, and like to be the last of that Order, he
was buried in the Churchyard of that Parish, accompanied with an extraordinary
multitude of People, and upon his Tomb were these Verses inscribed.

Under this Clod of Clay,
Alas and well-a-day,
Lies Billy of Billerecay.
He Giants did subdue,
And Monsters overthrew,
Now death our Knight has slew.
Here let him rest in Peace,
Who living did not cease,
Fresh troubles to increase.
Books Printed for, and Sold by J. Blare, Bookseller, at the Looking glass on
London Bridge.
THE Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet of Rarities, Or, The Ingenious
Gentlewoman, and Servantmaids Delightful Companion.

Arithmetic, A Treatise fitted for the Use and Benefit of such Tradesmen as
are ignorant in that Art; teaching the nature and use of Fractions, both Vulgar
and Decimal, by a new and easy method, made familiar to an ordinary Capacity:
Also, the Mensuration of Solids and Superficies. By John Airs, likewise his
Copy-books of several sorts.

The ^ey of Commerce, showing the true method of keeping Merchants Books, after
the Italian manner of Debtor and Creditor, in one hundred and twenty
Propositions, containing most Cases relating to Merchandise, with a Practical
Wast-book Journal and Ledger, and transfer the balance thereof, as an
In^entory to a new Ledger. Designed for the Help and Assistance of Young
Merchants, at their first Entrance (...) their Apprenticeship to their Masters.
By J.H. ^f London Merchant.

The Grounds of the French Tongue: Or, a new ^^ench Grammar, according to the
present Use, and ^odern Orthography. Digested into a short, easy, (...)
accurate Method. With a Vocabulary, and Dia^^gues. For the Use of Young
Merchants, and others, ^^at are now going to France. Price 2 s.

Russell's Seven Sermons, viz.
1. Of the Unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. 2. The Accepted Time and
Day of Salvation. 3. The end of Time, and beginning of Eternity. 4. Joshua's
Resolution to serve the Lord. 5. The way to Heaven made Plain. 6. The Future
State of Man; or a Treatise of the Resurrection. 7. Mercy remembered in the
midst of Judgment.
The Accomplished Seamans Delight.

Pearls of Eloquence: Or, the School of Complements.

The History of Arg^lus and Parthenia.

The English Fortune-tel^er, by J.P.

The Secretary Guide, directing to write Letters. With a Collection of the
newest Songs.

The Famous History of Amadis of Greece: Or the Knight of the Burning Sword.

Ari^totle's Legacy.

The famous History of H^^o and Leander.

Russel's little book for little Children.

A Description of Kent and Sussex; Or a View of all the Cities, Towns and
Villages in each County.

At the aforesaid place, is Sold Books of Divinity, History, and Navigation, b^
Wholesale or Retail, (...) Reasonabl^ Rates.


