EXAMEN Astronomiae Carolinae: T. S. OR, A SHORT Mathematical Discourse:
CONTAINING, Some Animadversions upon Mr. THOMAS STREETS Astronomicall Tables
of the Celestial Motions Wherein his Errors and Mistakes are clearly
detected, and the Author hereof justly vindicated from his unjust Aspersions.
(In an APPENDIX to the said ASTRONOMICAL Treatise.) By Vincent Wing, Mathemat.

Prius intellige, and tunc increpa. LONDON, Printed by W. Leybourn, for G.
Sawbridge, at the Bible upon Ludgate Hill, 1665.

HONORABILI VIRO HENRICO NOEL ARMIGERO (Honoratissimi Baptistae Noell and
Hicks, Baronis de Elmington and Ridlington, Vicecomitis de Campden, FILIO
SECUNDO)

HOC OPUSCULUM QUALECUNQ INFAVORIS SUI COMMEMORATIONEM HUMILLIME.

D. D. D. Vin. Wing.

To the Impartial READER.
Courteous Reader,
FInding the very Fundamentals of Astronomy, not only undermined and much
battered, but my self lately abused in Print, by that grand Calumniator, Mr.
Thomas Street; I have here undertaken, in a few Pages (so far as my urgent
occasions would permit) to inform the World of the injustice of his actions,
giving you a brief view of some of the most notable mistakes, and
imperfections, committed in his late pretended Restoration of Astronomy. Yet
(I confess to all) there is no man living that more values and esteems the just
Attemps and Endeavors of those that are the Authors of any commendable
Invention, then my self; yea, though it be but mean and ordinary, but
especially ought we so much the more to esteem it, when the same is of a higher
and more Sublime Speculation. But had our Antagonist been true to the Art be
professes, and (by the best of his endeavors) but rectified the
Planetary-motions, Eclipses, etc. and made them more consentaneous to the
Heavens, then was before performed, there might have been some ground for his
suppositions; but the contrary clearly appearing (as may be seen in the
following pages) it shows the very ground and foundation of his Superstructure
to be sandy and imperfect. Neither does the fixation of the Aphelions and Nodes
of the Planets, any whit avail him, as the judicious Reader may find, by
comparing his Tables with remote Observations, which (in some measure) we shall
hereafter exhibit in the following Tractate, wherein you may see the manifold
absurdities that follow upon his Suppositions. But I hope the more Learned are
already sensible of the truth, and I believe (also) they will conclude that
it is impossible for any man (from the Observation of the and Anno 1639.) to
determine the Suns greatest Horizantal-Parallax to be only one fourth part of a
min. and no more, (which is but one twelfth part of that quantity the noble
Tycho observed) for admit the Parallax of from was 6 min. (as all our late
Astronomers grant); yet that is not enough (as I conceive) to determine a thing
of that consequence, in regard no Tables extant do agree exactly with the
Observations of her place, but differ from some of the Tychonick Observations
about a quarter of a degree, as his own Tables witness, which doubtless arises
through the Refraction of this Planet, always near the Horizon when the
Observations were made; And besides, in that remarkable transit of Venus sub
sole, juxta Horizontem, her Refraction from the Sun might near aequalize her
Parallax so near the Finitor, which you shall find agreeable to the
Observations and Testimony of Walter Maestlin, Hortensius, and others, as we
shall show hereafter. And this may further appear from Tycho's Observations of
her place made near the Horizon, which cannot be brought to the touchstone of
Truth, neither can the best Artists in the World make their Tables to represent
her place so exactly, with Observations, as they may the places of the other
Planets taken at a farther distance from the Horizon, when they were freed from
Refractions, as is well known to all that are Artists; and therefore why Mr.
Street, or any man else, should grudge for declaring our dissent from his new
Suppositions; I am ignorant, especially when they see (as they may in the
subsequent discourse) that Astronomy is made infinitely worse thereby, and that
the Planetary motions cannot near so exactly be found out and determined, as
otherways they may upon our Hypothesis, which is the main thing aimed at in
all our Theories and Calculations. But I refer these things to the
consideration of the judicious, hoping shortly to satisfy them in a more ample
measure; in the mean time I commend these few lines to your serious perusal,
and rest

Dat. Luffenhamiae Die 27 Februarii A. C. 1664/5. Your affectionate Friend,
Vin. Wing.

Ad Amicum suum ingeniosum Vincentium Wing.
Quam been convenient Vincens and mobilis Ala!
Hic calcat Populos haec super astra volat.
Vincas Vincenti tales certare nec ausos,
Scilicet ex nuiu quam been ligna Stupent.
B. D.

EXAMEN Astronomiae Carolinae, T. S. OR, Short Animadversions upon Mr. Thomas
Streets Astronomical-Tables of the Celestial Motions.
SECT. I. Wherein is proved (by the indubitable Observations of the best, and
most learned Astronomers) that Mr. Tho. Streets Tables of the Suns true place
are not consentaneous to the Heavens, but very considerably differ from the
most accurate Observations of all Ages.
FIrst, for the better confirmation and clearing the truth of our Assertion, We
shall remove some Obstructions (out of the way of Tyroes) about the Parallax
and Refrastion of the Stars, and especially Venus, that thereby the uncertainty
of our Authors Suppositions may be the more apparent; and afterward we shall
examine his Tables of the Suns place, and compare them with the most accurate
Observations of all ages, whereby I shall clearly make it appear that (in stead
of a further Restoration of the Planetary Motions) he has fallen much short
of that exactness which is required, and already (in a large measure) performed
by others. And this I shall principally prove by the Observations of those two
excellent Astronomers, that noble Dane Tycho Brahe, and our late worthy
Countryman, Mr. Edward Wright, unto whom assents, not only the two famous
Astronomers, Kepler and Longomontanus, who were contemporary, and his
assistants; but since, the learned Bullialdus, Ricciolus, Eichstadius, Argol,
Gassendus, Norwood, and all other the most curious Observators, both of this,
and other Nations, except Thomas Street alone, who perhaps will strenuously
endeavor to shelter himself under his false supputation of Parallaxes, but
that cannot defend him, as we shall afterward show; for the greatest quantity
of the Suns Parallax when he is fully freed from Refractions, in his Altitude
of 45 degrees. above the Horizon is but 1.38. which is so inconsiderable a
quantity, that neither Mr. Thomas Street, nor any he can procure to assist
him, are able (by the best Observations they can make) to determine it more
exactly, though he rashly (without any sufficient proof by Observations)
diminishes it to one 12th part of that quantity, which the Noble Tycho most
curiously has experimented from manifold Observations made with his large and
costly Instruments, which for excellency was such, as never any Age afforded.
All which Tychonick Observations, of the Suns true place (being faithfully
compared with Mr. Streets Tables, and my own, I shall hereunder insert. Ut ex
tanta observationum harmonia ( inquit Longomontanus lib. 1. Theoric. cap. 2.)
quae in Tychonicis apparet, cum interpolata atque hiante veterum dissonantia
comparata, posteritas justam occasionem nanciscatur D. Tychonis singularem
industriam hic and ubique grata mente agnoscendi, etc. And then speaking of the
Suns Altitude, he shows his great care therein. Quae autem Altitudines
meridianae Solis nunc ex Tychone sequuntur, duobus and interdum etiam tribus
maximis and absolutissimis Quadrantibus, et insuper maximo circulo aequatorio
Declinationis Caelitus acceptae, atque inter se limitatae sunt, adeont (nisi
aere aliquando fortassis densiore omnem sensibilem errorem excludant, etc. So
that from hence we see the admirable care and industry of Tycho in making his
Observations. And besides I think Mr. Street will grant this, That never any
Astronomer, before, or since his time, was ever so completely furnished with
such rare, exquisite, and truly admired Instruments, as the said noble Lord of
Knudstrop, T. B. who expended no less then 200 Attique Talents of Silver
toward the Restoration of Astronomy, and rectifying the true place of the
Sun. But would our Antagonist but acknowledge that which the noble Tycho, the
learned Kepler, Longomontanus, Gassendus, Bullialdus, and all our modern
Astronomers have observed about the Refraction of the Stars, he would never
seek for any helps from the to assist him, seeing it was so near the Western
Horizon, and Venus in less altitude then the Sun; so that (if any truth may be
had from those most excellent Observations that several Astronomers have made)
she must then of necessity be subject to a greater Refraction then the Sun,
though Mr. Street would persuade the contrary in the 25 Page of his Appendix)
and the rather in respect of the Crassitude of the aereall-Sphaere. But this
our Author never so much as considers, or at least, not according to the Rules
of Art, as may be seen in the 76 Page of his Book, where (upon this account) he
has quite lost himself, and so is not able to perform what (peradventure) he
might otherwise intend. But because he may still contend about his doings
herein (though to as little purpose as to throw stones against the wind), I
shall here (before I come to Demonstration) show from many select Observations,
that the Refraction of Venus from the Sun, might then (in all probability) be
as great, or greater, then the Parallax of Venus from the Sun. But if our
Author will not understand the truth thereof, what better Character can we
give him, then that of Horace to one in the like case?

-- Hic nigerest, hunc tu Roman caveto. Now albeit the Refraction of the Stars
is (in some measure) demonstrated in the Optics of Vitellion, Alhazen, and
others; yet it was never discovered to any purpose, until the rising of that
great Luminary, Tycho Brahe, so that without controversy those Observations of
the Suns true place made by the ancient Astronomers, must needs come much short
of truth (which may be a good Monitum to Mr. T. S.) all which at this day we
find fully made good by the collation of manifold Observations; and therefore
says Kepler in Astron. Optic. page 143. Magno Astronomiae damno in
investigatione motus solis and Aequinoctiorum factum est, ut Refractiones a
Veterlbus fuerint ueglectae, etc. Yet Pliny gives us a clear Testimony of the
truth thereof, Lib. 11. Hist. Not. Cap. 13. in these words, Qua nam ratione;
cum solis exortu umbra illa hebetatrix sub terra esse debeat, semel jam
acciderit, ut in occasu Luna deficeret, utroque super terram conspicuo sidere.
Hence we may see (by this ancient Observation) that both the Sun and Moon, when
they was in opposite places, distant one from another, a perfect Semicircle;
yet for their Refraction above the Horizon, they appeared of a far lesser
distance.

The like experiment we have of latter years, set down by Maestin in Thesibus^e
Ecclipsibus, published Anno 1596. whose words in These. 55. are these. Anno
1590. die 7. Julii nos hic Tubingae, solis centro supra Horizontem emergente,
vidimus Lunam ab austro aliquot digitis jam deficientem, duobus pene gradibus
elevatam: and contra Lunae centro sub occasum descendente, notavimus solis
supra ortum duorum graduum altitudinem. Which in plain English infers thus much
(Mr. Street) that when the Center of the Sun arose above the Horizon, he saw
the Moon almost two degrees high, Eclipsed some Digits on her South side. And
contrariwise, when the Center of the Moon touched the Western Horizon; He noted
the Suns Altitude above the East, two degrees, and yet the Moon did set before
the middle of the Eclipse. Hence we may conclude, that the Refraction of each
Luminary was near a degree and half.

Again, the Lantgrave of Hessen (as it is mentioned, fol. 22. Epist. Tychonis)
did on a certain night most exactly observe Venus to stand still (as it were)
upon the Horizon, for the space of a quarter of an hour, and then suddenly to
vanish. Kepl. in Astro. Optic.

Bernard Walter in Libro Observationum, testifies the same of Venus, and the
other Stars, affirming Astra saepe supra Horizontem apparere, cumrevera sint
infra. The Stars oftentimes appear above the Horizon, when they are truly
beneath it.

But let us hear further what the same Author says, Anno 1489. die 6. Martii
circa occasum solis, dum videlicet in medio Caeliesset 25. sol per armillas in
25. 15. Venus per alium circulum, Ecliptica solemn dividente, in 27. 15. inventa
est: Sed circulo latitudinis solemn mediante, utisolet circa Horizontem, in alio
loco, puta in 25. 30. reperta est. Again, Die 7. Martii, sol per aspectum
armillarum 26. 15. Venus ex Ecliptica 28. 15. Ex circulo latitudinis 27. 38.
And the reason thereof you may have in these words, Item, ne diutius lecturos
lateat quomodo processerim, quodlocus Veneris quasi in eodem instanti adeo
difformiter repertus sit; est not andum, quod circa horizontem astra apparent
propter radios fractos super horizontem, cum secundum veritatem sint sub eo.
Here our Author (by these Observations) plainly shows, That the place of Venus
taken in the Horizon, is sensibly differing from her place in the Heavens, as
he carefully experimented (observe it Mr. Street) so that he thence concludes,
That the Stars (in respect of their fracted rays) do appear above the Horizon,
when, according to their true places, they are under it. Now I hope there are
none that will deny the truth hereof, but such as take pleasure in their own
foolish fancy, who very aptly verify that saying, Contra omnes sapere disipere
est.

Let us here further see what the learned Maestlin has observed about the
Refraction of the Stars, and especially Venus. Si nostris per Radium
Astronomicum factis Observationibus fides sit habenda, non raro invenimus
veneris supra Horizontem altioris distantiam a sole juxta Horizontem posito,
esse notabiliter minorem, quam si eodem die ejusdem distantia a sole altiore,
and e vaporibus magis libero caperetur. Ergo solis altitudo per vapores, etiam
per aeris super ficiem altior justo apparuit. Unde and ipsum, and alias stellas
similiter supra Horizontem apparere posse, cum infra adhuc sint, pro
impossibili non habemus, sed certo concludimus.

Moreover in the year 1596. the Hollanders navigating along the Northern Ocean
into Nova Zembla, to seek a passage into the Oriental Seas, they tell us, That
being under the Elevation of the Pole 76 degrees. oppressed by a night three
months long, in a frozen-Sea, they concluded (according to Astronomical
Principles) having taken their farewell of the Sun, Nov. 3. he would not return
again to their View before the 11th. of Febr. 1597. but yet it so happened
(through the crassitude of the aereal Sphaere) that upon the 24 of Jan. (17
days before the due time) they saw the supreme margin of the Sun begin to
appear in the very point of the Meridian, so that his Refraction above the
Horizon was above 3. degrees and a half. Kepl. Paral. in Vitell. p. 138.

The learned Hortensius (speaking of the uncertainty of Tychoe's Observations
of the place of Venus, by reason of her Refraction, to which she is commonly
subject) lets not to affirm, That the true distance of Venus from the Sun, or
from the fixed Stars, can in no wise be determined exactly. Sed pro varia
Altitudine, nunc majorem nunc minorem diversitatem inducit, and maxim circa
Aequinoctia and Solstitium Hybernum, etc. which is excellently proved by the
Observations of T. B.

Also in the year of Christ 1632. in the Month of Febr. Capt. T. J. Wintering
in an Island of America, found the apparent time of the Sun rising 20 min.
sooner then the true ought to have been, as may be seen in the Description of
his Voyage, Page 64. whence it follows, That the Suns Refraction was almost 3
degrees.

Lastly, Tycho Brahe so diligently observed the just quantity of Refractions in
the place where he lived, viz. Huenna, that we may certainly conclude, That the
Stars are continually refracted in and about the Horizon, and yet not in all
places alike, (as Tycho experimented after he came into Bohemia) for (as I
showed in my Almanac 1663.) in montanus places the Refraction is small, and
sometime almost nothing; in places near the Sea, it is, in a manner, equal at
all times of the year; and sometime again the Refraction is great and
prodigious, which accidentally may happen in those maritime parts, where the
Air is gross and thick; for the thicker and fuller of Vapors the Air is about
the Horizon, the more it refracts the Star. So that from hence we may conclude,
That the just quantity of the Refraction of the Stars (which Astronomers
continually observe) cannot at all times be determined with certainty,
especially when they are in, or near unto the Horizon.

Now from these Observations of learned able Mathematitians, we may clearly see
how prodigiously the Stars are oftentimes refracted; and especially Venus, when
she is near the Horizon, as we shall afterward evince by indubitable
Experiments, and Demonstration Geometrical, whereby the judicious may see how
dubious and uncertain a thing it is, to determine the Suns Horizontal Parallax
to be only one fourth part of a minute.

Yet I am not ignorant of Kelper's Opinion, Epit. Astron page 479. where he
says, That if the Parallax of the Sun be 3 min. the Parallax of Mars in his
nearest proximity to the Earth must be greater. Atque Observavi ego (says he)
Parallaxin Martis nequaquam esse sensibilem. Whence he imagines, That the Suns
distance from the Earth is more then 1200 Semidiameters. Again page 886. he
supposes the Parallax of Saturn to be 8, Jupiter 15, the Sun one min. or 60,
the Parallax of Venus in her Conjunction with the Sun about 4 min. o. sec. and
Mars in Opposition of the Sun 2 min. 30. sec. which (says he) is scarce
observable for the explication and circumradiancy of his beams. But this is but
one Doctors Opinion, however I shall conclude with Kepler, That the Suns
distance is greater then 1200 Semidiameters, namely 1460. Whereas Ptolomy makes
it but 1165. Copernicus 1142. Tycho 1150. but our Antagonist increases it to
13755. Semid. and so makes the Globe of the Sun to be 258309 times greater
then the whole Earth.

Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Whereas Ptolomy, Albategnius, and
Alfraganus made it but 166 times greater, and Tycho only 139 times. But I
perceive our Antagonist would be singular, and counted absolutum Astronomiae
Restauratorem, but the contrary will appear, and that (absque summa cura, and
diligentia adhibita) he has most erroneously stated the dimensions of the
Caelestial Sphaeres, not duly considering some Observations, and wilfully
rejecting others; for, ut quoties is antecedentium Astronomorum Observationes
placitis suis non congruere cernit, toties eas limitet, castiget, emendet,
rejiciat, aut male invertat. But why could not Tycho (who was so curious and
diligent) discover these rare secrets after he had made so many singular
experiments about the Parallax and Refraction of the Stars? Certainly had there
been just cause, or any real Observations of his, that would have made for
these new suppositions, he would have seen it before our Antatagonist, but no
such thing being by him (or by any other) perceived, neither sufficiently
proved by Anno 1639. we can esteem his invention to be only, Purum figmentum,
ex falsis, incertisque observationibus natum.

But to make a just Experiment of Refractions, and of the inequality and
different degrees thereof; Take an empty Basin, or other Vessel, and in the
bottom thereof place a piece of Silver, so that it cannot remove, then recede
so far from the same till you just lose the sight of the Silver, which done,
let one pour in fair Water into the Basin; and though you exactly keep your
place of standing, yet shall you see the Silver refracted, and appear all to
your eye; and the further you fill the Basin with Water, the more refracted,
and the higher above the brim of the Basin will the Silver appear. So that by
this experiment you may see the reason of Refractions, and after what manner
they may be augmented or diminished, according to the crassitude of the medium,
or areal Sphaere.

Again, if you place two pieces of Silver in the same Basin, one above another,
and then go so far from the same till you see the Center of the one agree
exactly with the Center of the other, then (as before) fill the Basin with
water, and you will plainly see the Center of the lower piece of Silver much
more refracted then the other; which absolutely overthrows that in-artificial
Discourse of T.S. about Refractions, as we shall see afterward.

If then this be granted, (as it must of necessity) it will follow, that the
nearer any Star is to the Horizon, the more it will be refracted in respect of
the crassitude of the Air, and multiplicity of the vapors upon, and near to,
the Superficies of the Earth.

Having now presented you with the former undeniable Observations of most
learned Astronomers, we shall next (for the information of Mr. Thomas Street)
propound the Demonstration following (agreeable to the former experiment of two
pieces of Siver put into a Basin) whereby he may clearly see (if he be not
wilfully blind) that the Refraction of (in her with, anno 1639.) was greater
then the Refraction of the Sun.

In this Diagram, let A denote the Center of the Earth, A Y its Semidiameter, D
M N the extreme limit of the aereall Sphaere, X E part of the Orb of, and T S P
part of the Orb of the Sun.

Now suppose O (in the anno 1939.) be the Sun, her place in respect of the
Earth; I say the lines B, O, pass right forward toward the eye in Y, till they
come to s a, the points refringent, where falling obliquely upon the
Atmosphaere, they are both refracted upwards, as from, or rather B astronomical
diagram O to Z S, the Sun appearing in S, and Venus in Z; so that the
Refractions of B and O are not alike, because the crassitude of the aereall
Sphaere Y s in Venus, is greater then it is in the Sun represented by Y a.
Hence (seeing that the Refractions are greatest in the Horizon, or little or
nothing toward D) common reason, as well as Demonstration, will tell us, That
the Refraction of in this position will exceed the Refraction of the Sun.

But let us hear the senseless Discourse of our Antagonist about Refractions.
Let the Planet (says he) be free from the Suns contact, and grant as great a
Refraction as any man can desire; I say that the space between them can only
be diminished (in like manner as the Suns vertical Diameter in his rising or
setting seems less then his Horizontal) but no Contact, etc.

Admit (as before) that Y be the eye of the Observator, D the place of the Sun
when he is elevated 45 degrees, and free from Refractions, T the place of the
Planet in the Horizon; I say the line of vision t s passes directly toward
the eye, till it fall oblique on the aereall Sphaere in s, from whence it is
refracted upward from s to a, so that the center of the Star appearing in B to
the eye of the Observator, the visible distance of the Center thereof from the
Center of the Sun must in this situation be equal to B D, which is much less
then their true distance T D: Hence I conclude, That if the Sun be in the
Horizon at O, and Venus at the point l, (16 depressed) and so no Contact as in
that respect; yet because the Center of in l is more refracted then the Center
of the Sun above the Horizon at O (as appears by the former Demonstration and
experiments) there must necessarily be a Contact, contrary to Mr. Streets
supposition.

Besides we read in Authors, (as you may see above) That, more then any of the
other Planets, has been very prodigiously refracted in and about the Horizon,
yet we stand not here in any need of such Refractions; all that is required, (in
that remarkable, 1639.) is not above 3 or 4 min. which though small, yet it is
sufficient to defend our assertion: however, though the just quantity thereof
may be drawn into question, yet it appears (as I said) but mere rashness, ob
rations praealligatas, to determine the just quantity of the Suns Parallax
from that Conjunction, as I formerly hinted in my Monitum ad Astronomos, much
less to make their Refrastions equal. Therefore what can I say further, but
with Horace.

Jubeo stultum esse liben er. One of the greatest Arguments Mr. Street uses
is from the Observations of Mr. Horrox, whose Writings I never saw; but he
tells us, Page 12. A.C. That comparing his Observations with others, he has
sufficiently proved, that the greatest Parallax of in is scarce at all
observable, and never amounting fully to a minute, by which, and his excellent
Telescope Observations of in the, with her apparent Diameter at that time, and
other good Arguments, he determines the Suns Horizontall Parallax to be one
fourth part of a minute, and no more.

First, I would gladly know how he can make it appear, that the Parallax of
Mars in his Acronical-Phases, is never so great as one minute; but I believe we
shall find him as short in this, as in the rest, when we consider that the
greatest quantity thereof (according to our limitation) contains only 2 or 3
min. but I need not stand to prove the invalidity of his assertion in this
particular, in regard it is of the same nature with the former, and cannot (as
I conceive) be determined exactly for the Reasons above given about
Refractions; and the rather in respect of its small quantity. Neither can our
Antagonist be ignorant, that the best Tables in being are not so well restored,
but that the place of observed, varies sometime from them a 5th. and 6th. part
of a degree; nay, sometime a 4th. part, as may be experimented from his own
Tables, and therefore if there was no other Arguments, yet this were sufficient
to show how uncertain, yea, and impossible a thing it is to determine a
business of such weight and importance from the Conjunction of the Sun and
Venus: for though the Parallax of from in Altitude be six min. yet (as is said)
the Refraction of supra something diminishing it, there can be left no ground
at all for his suppositions, as may in due time more fully appear by our future
Endeavors.

Neither can the apparent Diameter of in observed in that eminent Conjunction,
anno 1639. stand him in any stead at all, for according to his own words, Page
76. the Semidiameter of Venus was observed about 39. which better agrees with
our limitation, then with his own; for if the Semidiameter of in her mean
distance be 12. according to AB, (which is proved by Telescope Observations)
the apparent Semidiameter of in her, must be about 45. as may thus appear.

In the anno 1639. the distance of the Earth from the Sun was (according to A
B) 98370. and the distance of from, 72048, hence the distance of from the Earth
26322. of which part, (making the apparent Semid. of in media distantia, 12.)
we limit the true Semid. of 5. 82 equal to B C.

Then in the Rectangle, Triangle AC B from astronomical diagramthe Legs A C
26322. B C 5. 82. we shall find the angle of her apparent Semidiameter B A C to
be 45. which is but a very little greater then Mr. Horrox sets down, but we
shall find this diminished too; for if we do but consider that if a dark body
(as in was) be put between any bright body and the eye, it will seem somewhat
less then indeed it is, or will appear to be in another Situation, which you
may very easily experiment by holding a stick crosswise between your Eye and a
Candle, so as the flame may be seen both above and beneath the same stick,
whereby that part of it comprehended by the flame, shall be much less then the
other parts of it, that are freed from the Rays thereof, as if on both sides
somewhat were scraped or shaven away, (as Capt. Geo. Wharton judiciously
observes) which is an undeniable truth, and agreeable to the following
Aphorism delivered by the learned Mathematitian, Dr. John Wallis of Oxford,
which is this, Corpus lucidum dum radiis suis corpus opacum lambit, ipsius
marginem ita perstingere solitum est, ut si non nihil inde abraderet, and
corpus opacum paulo minus apparere facit, quam revera est.

I could here produce a Cloud of Witnesses against our Author in this
particular, and show him, that it is altogether impossible to determine the Suns
Horizontal Parallax to be just 15. and no more; but I shall now for brevity
sake forbear, and the rather, because I am fully assured that it cannot be
decided by no former Observations, no not by the most exact that ever was made;
and therefore I shall rest upon Tycho's Observations, as the most exact, and
give you the agreement of Mr. Streets Tables and my own therewith.

Autumnal and three Vernall Aequinoxes, observed at Alexandrio in Egypt by
Hipparchus.
obit. Alexandri Street s d Dif. Wing. s d Dif. Mesor. 30 c. 0. 37. 52 37 + 52
0. 27. 34 27 + 34 Interc. 1 Mane 0. 24. 16 24 + 16 0. 13. 52 13 + 52 Interc. 1
Merid. 0. 24. 43 24 + 43 0. 14. 19 14 + 19 Interc. 3 Med. no 0. 14. 40 14 + 40
0. 4. 9 4 + 9 Interc. 4 mane 0. 15. 8 15 + 8 0. 4. 35 4 + 35 Inter. 4 Vesperi
0. 1. 50 1 + 30 29. 50. 55 9 + 5 Mechir 27 mane 29. 55. 5 4 - 55 29. 56. 43 3 +
17 Mech. 29 med. no 29. 51. 4 8 - 56 29. 49. 29 10 + 31 Pham. 1 in c. 29. 15. 3
8 - 57 29. 52. 40 7 + 20

Some of Tycho's Observations made at Uraniburg.
Mar. Loc. obs. Street Dif. Wing. Dif. ^. 14 3. 17. 40 3. 13. 12 4 + 28 3. 18.
6 0 + 26 ^. 11 1. 3 35 1. 0. 15 5 + 20 1. 5. 13 0 - 22 ^. 11 0. 37. 0 0. 31. 31
5 + 29 0. 36. 27 0 - 33 ^. 12 1. 21. 30 1. 16. 28 5 + 2 1. 21. 23 0 - 7 ^. 11
0. 53. 5 0. 47. 42 5 + 23 0. 52. 37 0 - 28 ^. 11 0. 37. 10 0. 33. 19 3 + 51 0.
38. 15 1 + 5 ^. 10 29. 54. 43 29. 50. 8 4 + 35 29. 55. 5 0 + 22 7. 10 29. 56.
20 29. 51. 56 4 + 24 29. 56. 53 0 + 33 ^pt. -- ^. 13 29. 36. 0 29. 38. 49 2 +
49 29. 35. 20 0 - 40 ^. 12 29. 21. 57 29. 24. 32 2 + 53 29. 21. 2 0 - 55 ^. 13
29. 51. 45 29. 55. 55 4 + 10 29. 51. 24 0 - 21 8. 12 29. 23. 30 29. 26. 21 2 +
51 29. 23. 57 0 + 27 0. 12 28. 53. 30 28. 57. 47 4 + 17 28. 54. 18 0 + 48 2. 10
27. 26. 15 27. 30. 22 4 + 7 27. 26. 54 0 + 39 4. 13 29. 56. 30 29. 58. 31 2 + 1
29. 55. 1 1 - 29 6. 14 1. 24. 10 1. 27. 21 3 + 11 1. 24. 22 0 + 12

Nineteen Observations of the Suns true place, made a London by Mr. Edward
Wright; compared with his Astronomia Carolina, and my Astronomia Britannica.
Time at London Loc. obs. S O Street. S O Dif. Wing. S O 1594 july 25 11. 29.
52 11. 32. 6 2 + 4 11. 30 50 0 1594 octo. 18 4. 42. 42 4. 44. 45 2 + 3 4. 41.
32 1. 1595 april 8 27. 54. 16 27. 51. 13 3 - 3 27. 54. 36 0. 1595 sept. 11 27.
44. 27 27. 48. 9 3 + 42 27. 54. 7 0. 1596 mar. 13 3. 10. 48 3. 6. 39 4 - 9 3.
11. 14 0. 1596 apr. 24 14. 9. 40 14. 5. 31 4 - 9 14. 8. 0 1. 1596 aug. 10 27.
24. 24 27. 24. 59 0 + 35 27. 23. 11 1. 1597 mar. 11 0. 57. 48 0. 53. 21 4 - 27
0. 58. 21 0. 1597 mar. 12 1. 57. 55 1. 52. 39 5 - 16 1. 57. 35 0. 1597 mar. 13
2. 56. 58 2. 51. 56 5 - 2 2. 56. 50 0. 1597 mar. 14 3. 56. 0 3. 51. 12 4 - 48
3. 56. 3 0. 1597 apr. 30 19. 39. 22 19. 38. 16 1 - 6 19. 40. 42 1. 1597 may 2
21. 35. 48 21. 33. 46 2 - 2 21. 36. 2 0. 1597 july 24 10. 48. 8 10. 50. 34 2 +
26 10. 49. 14 1. 1597 aug. 9 26. 11. 36 26. 13. 20 1 + 44 26. 11. 21 0. 1597
sept. 22 9. 3. 26 9. 8. 39 5 + 13 9. 5. 3 1. 1597 sept. 30 16. 59. 57 17. 3. 56
3 + 39 17. 0. 12 0. 1597 octo. 6 22. 38. 13 23. 1. 52 3 + 39 22. 58. 8 0. 1597
octo. 12 28. 56. 34 29. 1. 2 4 + 28 28. 57. 24 ^.

In this Synopsis is inserted the place of, as it is set down by Mr. Wright,
page 310. and seq. the former 7. whereof are supputated from Mr. Streets
Tables, and the rest are taken according to his own Calculation, as I find it
set down in his Almanac, 1663. But our Antagonist may (perhaps) say, that
because we do not admit of so great a Parallax in as Mr. Wright did, therefore
this place ought to be corrected, and made agreeable to the true Declination.
To this I answer, That the difference is so exceeding small, the error will be
insensible. But how near his Tables agree with Observation, the Reader may here
see.

SECT. II. An Examination of Mr. Streets Tables of Eclipses.
HAving now made it appear by the Testimony of most accurate Observations, that
our Antagonist has much failed in the true place of the Sun, of which, I hope,
the judicious are fully satisfied: I shall next show the Reader some of the
gross Errors he has committed in his Doctrine of Eclipses; and to that end, I
shall exhibit all those curious Observations made by the noble and learned
Tycho Brahe, which without controversy, are the most exact that any Age ever
before afforded.

A Synopsis of 21. Lunar Eclipses observed at Vraniburg, by noble Tycho Brahe.
Temp. ap. modii Eclipsis Vranib. Street. s d Orb: Str: s d Dif. Di. Wi. d h
1573 December. 8. 8. 3 26. 50. 3 26. 53. 59 3 + 31 1 + 55 1576 Octo. 7. 11. 25 24.
33. 52 44. 28. 9 7 - 0 0 + 33 1577 April 2. 8. 50 22. 40. 38 22. 42. 32 2 + 19
2 + 31 1577 Sept. 26. 13. 3. 13. 27. 18 13. 20. 3 6 - 48 1 - 7 1578 Sept. 15.
13. 24 2. 21. 56 2. 23. 53 3 + 57 0 + 15 1580 Jan. 31. 10. 10 21. 24. 27 21.
17. 0 8 - 17 1 + 21 1581 Jan. 19. 10. 0 10. 1. 2 9. 59. 45 0 - 40 1 + 12 1581
July 15. 17. 0 2. 44. 52 2. 48. 41 4 - 54 0 + 17 1584 Nov. 7. 13. 9 25. 51: 18
25. 52. 37 1 + 47 3 - 7 1587 Sept. 6. 9. 30 23. 11. 36 23. 17. 4 4 + 7 1 + 9
1588 Mar. 2. 15: 2 22. 44. 8 22. 44. 46 1 20 0 + 30 1590 Dec. 30. 7. 0 19. 6.
19 19. 12. 46 5 + 6 2 + 15 1592 June 14. 10. 20 3. 14. 37 3. 4. 45 8 - 39 2 +
11 1592 Dec. 8. 7. 41 27. 12. 45 27. 15. 23 4 + 49 0 - 9 1594 Octo. 15. 19. 16
5. 31. 41 5. 27. 3 5 - 59 0 + 26 1595 April 13: 16. 30 3. 20. 48 3. 18. 35 1 -
56 3 29 1595 Octo. 7. 20. 29 24. 19. 48 24. 11. 59 7 - 27 1 - 38 1596 April 2.
9. 25 23. 5. 28 23. 11. 56 8 + 39 1 + 29 1598 Febr. 10. 18. 7 2. 27. 6 2. 20.
55 7 - 18 3 + 1 1598 Aug. 6. 7. 37 23, 22. 13 23. 26. 6 2 + 50 0 + 59 1599 Jan
30. 17. 56 21. 6. 45 21. 6. 51 0 + 40 2 + 24

Hae 21. Eclipses Lunares (says Longomontanus, Lib. 2. Theoric) maxima exparte
in Huena, binis, ternis, and quaternis interdum accuratissimis organis Tychonis
Brahe; tum quoad initia, tum exitus, tum phases reliquas notabiles, quantum
quidem Caelum permiserat, ea diligentia acquisitae sunt, and ad veram
Luminarium reductae, quae nunquam ab antecessoribus praestita est.

Although the true place of the Sun cannot (for the reason above given) be
determined so exactly, but that it may still be called into question by the
future attempts of others, yet here (I hope) Mr. Street will have the modesty
to acknowledge the Errors of his Tables in this particular, if not, I shall
contend no further, for I believe nothing will satisfy. Yet upon his
submission, I will (if he request it) show him away, whereby he may yet
correct, and make his Tables more consentaneous to the Heavens. But what should
I trouble my self, when we see the Gentleman so self-conceited, and proud of
his own doings, which gives occasion for some to think that he is not in a
capacity to learn, unless it be to mock and jeere, which he is now Doctor at,
but I shall leave him here, and wish his Errors had not been so evident and
clear, yea, to his very best Friends.

Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

SECT. III. Wherein Mr. Streets Tables of the Praecession of the Aequinoctial
Points and Places of the fixed Stars, are briefly examined.
NExt in contradiction (as it were) of all the Observations that Astronomers
have made of the places of the fixed Stars, for the space of 1900. years before
Tycho; he has most apparently failed of that due exactness that is, and ought
to be had: for if we look backward from Tycho to the time of Hipparchus and
Timocharis, we may not only in their times, but in all the intermediate ages to
this present, perceive his Tables to swerve continually from truth. And now, to
the end, we may see the verity of our Assertion made manifest and apparent to
the Eye of every one; I shall here present my Reader with the following
Synopsis.

Varii Authors. Anni Christ. Locum Stellarum Observe. Di. St. degrees. m. Di. W.
degrees: m. Timocharis A. 284 Siica. 21.59. 1 + 9 0 - 16 Hipparchus C. 120 Siica.
23.59. 1 + 21 0 + 3 Menelaus Post Christum. 99 Siica. 26.15. 1 + 58 0 + 57
Ptolomie Post Christum. 139 Siica. 26.43. 2 + 15 1 + 3 Ptolomie Post Christum.
139 Cor. 2.30. 2 + 16 1 + 17 Albategnius Post Christum. 879 Cor. 14.5. 0 + 33 0
+ 4 Azophus Post Christum. 937 Cor. 15.12. 0 + 13 0 - 14 Ebennesophim Post
Christum. 1364 Cor. 20.40. 0 + 26 0 + 17 Walther Post Christum. 1504 Spica.
16.40. 0 + 17 0 + 14 Verner Post Christum. 1514 Spica. 16.53. 0 + 12 0 + 9
Tycho Brahe Post Christum. 1601 Spica. 18.16. 0 + 0 0 0

Here you may see the Errors and Defects of Mr. Streets Tables of the places
of the fixed Stars unmasked, and laid open to the View of every Reader,
insomuch that the judicious do not a little admire, that (after his whole eight
years labor) he should so far miscarry in a business of this kind, as not to
heed either the Observations themselves, or that excellent rectification of
their places that our modern Astronomers from thence have made, About a year
since there came to my hands a Letter, from an ingenious Mathematitian, wherein
(among other things) were these words; There was never any Astronomer, either
of this, or other Nations, that ever so erroneously stated the places of the
fixed Stars, as Mr. Street has done, making their places much greater in
Longitude, then Observations will warrant, etc.
and yet verily I am so charitable, as to think his intentions were good, and
that he had not the least thoughts to rob the divine Urania of her comely
Furniture, but rather to deck her in better Feathers; however, he may yet do
well (for his Credit-sake) to show some Reasons for his doings, and tell his
Readers for what cause it is, that he so much dissents both from the Heavens,
and all other Astronomers, which if he please publicly to communicate, we
shall be ready to gratify him for his pains, according to the utmost of his
demerit; in the mean time, let him but seriously peruse the Observations of
that ever honored Dane, Tycho Brahe, and diligently compare them with the
ancient and modern Observations, and he shall find the progression of the fixed
Stars (equal to the praecession of the Equinoctial) to be annually 51 Seconds,
or thereabouts; which quantity the learned Kepler most wittily retains in his
Rudolphine-Tables: neither does those learned Astronomers, Lansberg, Argol,
Ricciolus, Bullialdus, or any other late Writers, much dissent from the same
quantity; and yet now at last Mr. Tho. Street (as it were in Opposition to all
these worthy men, yea, the Observations themselves) makes their annual
Progression only 48 Seconds.

Quod si dificiant Vires, audacia certe,
Laus erit.
But let me tell Mr. Street, that the Progression of the fixed Stars in
Longitude is (before his endeavors) so accurately rectified by sundry learned
and judicious Artists of sundry Nations, that it is but mere rashness in him
(or his adherents) to dissent from that quantity of motion so well already
established by Observations, insomuch that to introduce Novelties into
Astronomy, when there is neither reason, nor sufficient Arguments convincing
us of the necessity of the attempt, is ( Magnum et manifestum insaniae genus)
the greatest folly in the World, and ought not to be passed over in silence. Si
proximus deliquit, commone eum errati.

SECT. IV. Wherein is showed, that if the Aphelions and Nodes of the Planets
are always fixed, it is then altogether impossible for Astronomers to determine
exactly the true places of the Planets in all Ages.
OUr Antagonist (contrary to the Observations of all Astronomers, both ancient
and modern) has fixed the Aphelions and Nodes of the Planets under the eighth
Sphaere, and so ties them always, to one certain and determinate point therein,
which is so far from Reason and Observations, that manifold Errors and
Incongrueties do arise thereby, as we shall afterward show. In the mean time I
must tell him, there is no real or sufficient ground for his Suppositions,
seeing daily experience evinceth the contrary, and tells us, (and all others
that have eyes) that their motions have no such dependence upon the eighth
Orb, (which is immovable, and infinitely removed above them) but are moved by
an inward moving force, (which doubtless is the great and glorious body of the
Sun, placed in the Center of their Vortex, there being rest in the Superficies,
or Sphaere of the fixed Stars, and motion in the intermediate parts of the
Planetary Systeme) which appears more clearly in the Moon, whose Apogaeon and
Nodes (in respect of the celerity of her motion about the Earth) are observed
to alter their places daily, not being tied to any extraneous point whatsoever.
But what need I stand to give any further Reasons, in regard the most ancient
Observations, and also those in this present Age clearly confute this erroneous
Supposition, as all the learned that are conversant in Cael stiall Observations
and Theories Astronomical, do well know and observe; howbeit, if I should not
produce some Observations exactly made, and compare them with his Tables, he
will (I believe) neither understand the truth, nor see his Errors and
Mistakes, though already obvious and apparent enough to the more learned and
judicious: therefore I shall here present the ingenious Tyro with such a scale
of Observations, and compare them with his own Tables, as I think will
absolutely convince him of his Error in this his most great and weighty
enterprise.

At pulchrum est digito monstrari, and dicier, hic est. But because their
motions are slow, it thence follows, That if their places be exactly rectified
to any certain or determinate point of time, there can be no sensible
alteration, or error arising in their motions for that age; but let the
interval of time be considerable, and it will appear, and be as conspicuous as
the Sun at noonday, that they are not fixed, as he alleges, but have their
proper motions (some more and some less) as Observation do manifest, to which
all our late learned and most industrious Astronomers do unanimously consent
and agree. And this may excellently be proved by Observations of Jupiter, whose
Aphelionis observed by all Astronomers, to move far more slowly then any of the
other Planets; but if (according to Mr. Streets Supposition) we make it equal
to the progression of the fixed Stars, we cannot then (by the best Calculations
we can from thence deduce) come to obtain his place exactly, either in
preceding or succeeding Ages. But that I may avoid prolixity, I shall now
exhibit such Observations (though not many in number) whose truth and
certainty are so conspicuous to every one, that (without dispute) they cannot
be questioned by him, or any other.

First, I shall produce an Observation of Saturn made by the ancient Assyrians
or Egyptians in the year from Nabonassar 519. upon the 14 day of the Month
Tybi, at six in the Evening, (which our Author mentions, page 104. A. C.) at
which time was exactly in Conjunction with the following Star in the left Winge
of the Virgin, but was more Southward then the Star, two Digits, or five min.
in respect of Latitude: Ptol. Lib. 11. Cap. 7. Magni Operis.

According to Mr. Streets Tables, the Star wasin 6 degrees. 58 30, which (if true)
should also be the place of Saturn; but you shall find by his own Calculation,
that the place of then was in 7 degrees. 16 50, differing from truth 18 min. 20
sec. in Longitude, whereas my Tables in A. B. agree to 4 sec. giving the place
of in 8 degrees. 57 1, and the place of the Star in 8 degrees. 56 5, etc.

Secondly, In the 83 year from the death of Alexander, and 18 day of the Month
Epiphi, in the morning, the Star of Jupiter was seen to cover or hide the South
Ass^llus. This was anno ante Christum 241. September. 4. at two hours 30 mane, in
respect of the Meridian of London. Ptol. Lib. 11. Cap. 3. Magni Operis
Astronomici.

But our Antagonist (being willing to save his Credit, and Cheat the World with
his doings) has not produced this famous Observation, nor so much as mentioned
it in any of his Writings (which doubtless was because he saw it impossible to
make his Tabl's agree thereto); therefore to undeceive his Readers, I shall
here give you the Calculation thereof from his own Tables.

Calculus loci ex Tabb. Thomae Street.
S 0 Log. did. a -- 5.72072 Anno Chri. 1 0. 13. 54. 30 Log. did. a Terra --
5.00039 Sub. 300 3. 14. 52. 30 0 -- Ante Chapter 300 8, 29. 2. 0 tang. 79. 13. 11
10.72033 Add 40 4. 13. 59. 0 0 Add 19 7. 6. 34. 47 R. tang. 34. 13. 11
9.83257 September 20. 11. 29 tang. 34. 30. 13 9.83719 Dies 4 19. 59 tang. 25.
3. 6 9.66976 Hor. 14 2. 54 Sum. 59. 33. 19 Elongatio Scrup. 13 3 Differ. 9. 27.
7 Parall. Ano med. 9. 10. 10. 10 Pro Latitudine Long. Helioc. 2. 25. 22. 10 0
Longit. 5. 4. 22. 36 Sin. 69. 0. 26 9.97015 Commntatio 2. 9 0. 26 Sin. 59. 33.
19 9.93556 Parall orb. ad 9. 27. 7 Tan. 0. 23. 53 7.84182 Loeus Sid. 3. 4. 49.
17 17.77738 Praeces. ad 3. 3. 44 Trn. 0. 22. 3 7.80723 Long. Geocen. 3. 7. 53.
1 The Latitude of North.

The place of the Star at the same time was in 8 34 44 69, with North Latitude
4 0, so that the difference of Longitude was 41 min. 43 seconds, and of
Latitude 18 min. 3 seconds, whereby the distance of their Bodies should be 45
min. 28 seconds, which is an Error so intolerable, that our Antagonist cannot
but blust to behold it. But if he be not satisfied of the truth of the
Observation, let him read Ptolomie at the place above quoted, where he shall
find these words, Anno 45. Dionysiano, die 10. Virginionis, sed a monte
Alexandri anno 83 mensis Epiphisecundum Aegyptios die 18 mane, visus est
occultare Asellum Austrinum.

I confess, they might be distant 7 or 8 min. and yet in respect of the
Vibration of their Beams, Jupiter might seem to cover the Star; but had the
interval of their Bodies been as much in quantity as his Tables do admit of,
then certainly the Observator would not have said, that the one Star covered
the other exactly, as the words of Ptolomy infer. Besides, Mr. Street might
have taken Notice how near other Tables agree thereto, as Longomontanus,
Bullialdus, and diverse others; but he that will make the Aphelion of to be
always distant from the first Star of Aries, 5 fig. 9 degrees. 15 min. or indeed any
other limited quantity, shall never reconcile, nor make his Tables to agree
with the most approved Observations of all Ages.

I could here enumerate many other Observations of the like kind, as that of
Timocharis mentioned by Ptolomy, Lib. 10. Cap. 4. who, Anno ante Christum, 272.
October. 12. hor. 3. mane, observed Venus (at Alexandrid) exactly to be contained
upon the former Star of the 4. in the left Wing of the Virgin, whereas his
Tables differ above half a degree from truth. But because our Antagonist may
wrest the Observation to his purpose, I will give you the words of Ttolomy,
according to the most ancient Latin Copy, fol. 111. Anno 13. Philadolphi
interdies 17. and 18. Mesori, vidit Timocharides stellam Veneris jam
comprehendisse secundum veritatem, super stellam in extremitate alae Virginis
meridionalis. And Copernicus renders the words thus, Quod Venus visa fuit
occupasse stellam, Lib. 5. Cap. 23. So Lansbergius, Praecept. 15. and fol. 172.
Observat Astron. And Logomontanus, Lib. 2. Theoric. Cap. 19. Veneris stella
cernebatur exact obscurasse oppositum Vindemiatrici in 3 10., ubi and Venerem
haesisse observatio habet. Yet I know, Bullialdus Astron. Philolaic. fol. 350.
Thinks it was not absolutely a central Conjunction. Cum certum sit
explicationem radiorum Veneris prius subtraxisse stellam oculo, quam
interpositus fuerit ille Planeta inter fixam and oculum observatoris. So that
we may conclude, That if Venus did not exactly cover the Star; yet it was so
near, that she seemed to be contained upon it: And therefore how our Antagonist
can excuse his Error, I cannot tell. But (...).

Again, for a further confirmation of his Errors, take that ancient
Observation which Ptol. Lib. 10. Cap. 9. shows, was made in the 13th year
Secun-Dionysium, Capric. 25. ubi (...). That is, The morning Star of Mars was
seen oposite, or adjoined to the Northorn forehead of the Scorpion.

This was in the year before Christ 272. Jan. 17. Hor. 14.24. in the meridian
of London: At which time, we thus compute the place of, according to the Tables
of Mr. Street.

Calculas loci ex Tabulis Thomae Street.
s Anno Chri. 1. 9. 2. 3. 36 Sub. 300 6. 1. 6. 0 Ante Chapter 300 3. 0. 57. 36 Log.
did. a 5.205245 Ante Chapter 300 3. 0. 57. 36 Log. did. (...) a 4.994459 Anni ad
20 7. 18. 4. 24 Anni ad 8 3. 1. 13. 46 Dies 17 8. 54. 31 tang. 58. 23. 18
10.210786 Hor. 14 18. 20 Serup. 24 31 R. tang. 13. 23. 18 9.376611 Ano. med. 1.
29. 29. 8 tang. 59. 55. 57 10.237380 Long. Helioc. 5. 22. 5. 11 tang. 22. 20.
58 9.613991 Longit. 9. 21. 57. 5 Dif. 37. 34. 59 Paralax. Commutatio 3. 29. 31.
54 Parall. ad. 1. 7. 34. 59 Long. Geocen. 6. 29. 40. 10

The place of Borealissima frontis was in 1. 26., so that his Tables in this
Observation failed one degree and 46 min. from truth, a monstrous mistake!

Infinite Observations of this kind might be produced, to show the falsity of
our Authors Tables; but I shall neither trouble my self, or my Readers any
further at this time, (I having more weighty Affairs continually to employ my
self about) yet I shall advise him (as one that wishes well to his Studies) to
write hereafter something to the purpose, and more civilly (as becomes a
Servant of the Divine Urania) to argue and dispute Controversies in Astronomy,
inutramque partem; especially when the thing is dubious, and scarce
determinable by the most judicious. For my own part, as I love not busy
Disputants, so would I advise my Readers to beware of their Sophistical
Arguments; for it is no ill advise.

Percontatorem fugito, namgarulus idem est. SECT. V. Wherein the Cavil of Mr.
Street (in his Appendix) against our Demonstration of the transit of Subsole,
is removed.
BUt our Antagonist being mindful of the public good, would teach us how to
calculate the Angle of the visible way of Mercury with the Ecliptic, when he
passes between the Earth and the Sun, which method is no other, then what we
have formerly made use of, as we shall hereunder demonstrate, only in the
performance thereof (because it could breed little Error in the matter aimed
at (which is the Arch intercepted between their Centres) we took their true
distance for ease of Calculation, whereas, according to exactness, we more
properly ought to have taken their visible distance at the Earth. But had our
Demonstration been false, as our Antagonist seems to infer, which will in no
wise be granted him; yet in a matter of that nature, where little or no Error
arises thereby, it had been more commendation to keep silence: But he forgot
that council.

At melius fuerat nonscribere, namque tacere
Tutum semper erit --
Now that I may prove that the Geometrical Method he makes use of, is no other
in effect, then what we delivered, we shall instance in that remarkable
Mercurial Eclipse, Anno 1661. April 23. (which was by us foretold, Part. 2.
Ephem.) wherein the Latitude of at the time of the true Conjunction was 3. 3,
but at 4 h.17 20. after the true (when Mercury was exactly in her South Node)
the Sun was in 13. 39 48, and Mercury in 13. 23 0. of astronomical diagramthe
same Sign, their distance 10.48. in respect of the Earth. Therefore in this
Figure, let A. represent the Center of the Sun, E Z H O his visible body, H D a
part of the Ecliptic, P the Pole thereof, B the place of at the time of his
Conjunction with the Sun, A B his latitude from the Ecliptic 3 3, D the South
Node of Mercury, A D the distance of the Sun from the Node 16 48 which is equal
to the Parallax of the Orb of in the Earth.

Then in the Triangle D A B, having D A 16 48 and A B 3 3, we shall find the
Angle A D B 10 degrees. 17 min. and consequently we shall from hence find the Arch
B C greater by a quarter of a min. and A C the nearest appropinquation of their
Centres 3 0, whereas, taking their Heliocentric or true distance, (as we there
did for ease of Calculation) it will be 3 2. Or according to his Demonstration
(which comes to the same thing) in the Triangle D P B, from the sides D P 90. P
B 89. 56 57 with the comprehended Angle B P D (= D A) 0. 16 48, we shall find
the Angle P D B 79. 43, whose Complement is the Angle B D A 10. 17, and
consequently A C will be found 3 0, as before.

Thus Mr. Street may see that our Demonstration is true, only taking the true
distance for the visible, the Error (in the matter aimed at) is only 2, or a
30th. part of a minute: a thing so inconsiderable, that it had been more for
his Credit to have spared his pains in that particular, yet Homo sum, humani
nihila me alienum puto.

To let pass the Errors of our Antagonist committed in some of his
Demonstrations in A C. (which are only obvious to the judicious) I could here
enumerate many gross mistakes by him committed elsewhere, as that in his
Ephemeris 1654, and the false Demonstration he there made about the Aequation
of civil days; but I am not so envious and malign, as to muster up the
bypast slips and mistakes of any Author, especially such as are ingenious and
deserving, though (really) Mr. Street is altogether inexcusable, but I hope
better things of him hereafter. In the mean time, let Mr. Street take notice,
that I value not his Bugbeare at the conclusion of his Monitum, where (thinking
himself too weak to encounter me in a Combat of that nature) he threatens (as
those use to do that set Scare-Crows) lest I hear from others as well as from
himself. But it is but Mr. Streets hopes, and vain desires doubtless: for I am
of Opinion, That no man whatsoever (much less those that are Artists) will so
much as attempt any thing of that nature, unless they had occasion. But I shall
leave our Antaganist at this time, and refer him for the rest to my Astronomia
Britannica, where he shall see (when published) such firm and real
Demonstrations both in the Sphaeric and Theoric-parts of Astronomy (if he
understand Latin) as may be useful for his Instruction, of which I shall give
him a taste shortly, and so bid him farewell.

Aliquod dictum, quod non dictum prius.
A SHORT VIEW OF Astronomia Britannica.
The whole Work consists of these Parts.
1. LOgistica Astronomica, quae continet Doctrinam Fractionum Astronomicarum
integram, tum in numeris Naturalibus, tum Artificialibus. 2. Trigonometria, seu
Doctrina Triangulorum (analytica and Practica), quae comprehendit dimensionem
omnium Trigonorum, tam planorum, quam Sphaericorum, cujus open dimensiones
Caeli, Terrae, universique Mundi orbis (modo admirabili) dignoscantur. 3.
Doctrina Spaerica, quae exhibet Longitudines, Latitudines, Declinationes,
Ascensiones, ortus, occasus Intercapedines, Parallaxesque singulorum Planetarum
ad cujuslibet Sphaerae positum, and quo pacto Figurae Caelestes erigi possint.
4. Theoria Planetarum, quae Nova, accurataque Methodo Super Hypothesi
Copernicana, veros Motus and Configurationes omnium Planetarum computare docet.
5. Tabulae, novae Astronomicae, ex quibus singulorum Planetarum Motus, and
Luminarium Eclipses, mira promptitudine Colligantur.
Congruentes cum Observationibus accuratissimis Nobilis Tychonis Brahaei.

Cui accesserit Observationum Astronomicarum Synopsis compendiaria, ex qua
Astronomiae nostrae certitudo affatim elucescit.

Opus Exoptatum,

Non modo Astronomis, Astrologis, sed and Theologis, Historiographis, Nantis,
Medicis, and Poetis, Perutile and jucundum.

Authore Vincentio Wing.

The Reader may take notice, That the method of calculating the motion of the
Planets (as it is laid down in the fifth Book) is not only more accurate, but
also far more easy then has yet been taught by any; for there the Parallax of
the Orb in every one of the Planets (by help of the New Tables divised and
composed by the Author) may be found by inspection only: And their Latitude may
also there be had with the like ease, without Trigonometrical Calculation.

A Work so generally useful and exact, that the Author hereof intends shortly
to make it public.

FINIS.

