THE Great Evil OF PROCRASTINATION. OR, The Sinfulness and Danger of Defering
Repentance. In Several DISCOURSES.

By Anthony Walker, D. D. Rector of Fyfield in Essex.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the Kings Arms in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1682.

TO THE HONORABLE THE LADY Frances Shane.
Good Madam.
I Easily foresee your Ladyship, will be somewhat surprised to find your
honorable Name prefixed to so inconsiderable a Piece; And I confess you^ may be
justly ^empted to think, what the great Augustus said to him, who entertained
him with a slender Supper, and with rancid Oil: I knew not before that you and
I were so familiarly acquainted, and it may increase your wonder to find your
Name before the Sermons preached at their Funerals, whose very Names it is like
you never heard before.

For the first, I acknowledge I have much cause to wish the Present I make you,
were more proportionable to your Ladyships merit, and more worthy your
Acceptance, but the less it deserves, the more it needs the shelter of such a
Patronage, and how mean, and even affectedly plain, soever the manner of
handling them is, the Truth and Duties treated of are of great concern and
moment, and highly useful and necessary; and though as to the main, they come
too late, (which is your Ladyships Praise and Happiness) to assist and direct
you; your early Piety, and eminent Virtue, being already so far advanced, in
what they are designed to excite in others: Yet they may Comfort you, and
Encourage your Progress in that good course, you have so far, and so happily
proceeded in already, and may remain as a Testimony of the just Value I have
for that serious Strictness you own and practice, in the Work our great Master
has given us to do: and wise Vigilance you use to be found so doing,
whenever He shall come to call you, and may gratify my innocent Ambition, to
let others know the Honor you have allowed me in your Friendship.

As to the second, it is true the occasion of printing them is wholly owing to
two Funerals, but this was merely accidental, for they were extorted from me,
by those who were indeed Auditors at Church, but not Guests at the Funeral,
and therefore I have divested them of that Character, by omitting the
Testimonies I then gave to the Memory of my Friends, that that might give no
Diversion to the main Design.

But Madam, I fear your Ladyships quicker thoughts will start a third
Objection, more difficult than either of the former; that is, suspect I deal
with you, like some nonsolvent Debtor with his impatient Creditor, design to
while you off with this poor Trifle, instead of paying the Debt you have so
long expected, and so often demanded, that is, the fuller Account of the Life
of your incomparable Aunt, and the Collection of her excellent Papers.

Madam, I must own my self indebted to your Ladyship in this particular, as
also to the Expectations and Desires of many other worthy persons, to whom the
short Memoirs annexed to her Funeral Sermon have been so useful, and therefore
so acceptable. And therefore I ingeniously confess, I think my best Plea will
be to plead guilty of too much Delay, though I want not just Excuses to
alleviate the Fault: but I rather choose to renew my Promise of the speedyest
Diligence, when this small Work has past my Hands, to reassume and finish what
I had so many Months since made a good Progress in, and by Gods Permission and
Assistance shall draw the Portracture of that great modern Pattern of Piety,
out of her own Papers; showing the Steps by which, and Method in which that
blessed Saint arrived at that eminent Height, in the power of Godliness, and
kept her self in the Love of God. And I hope I shall not again desist from that
Undertaking, till your good Ladyships Desires be gratified, and Commands obeyed
in that particular, as they shall be with all sincerity and readiness in all
things else (for I know you can enjoin nothing but what is Just and Honorable)

By good Madam, your very good Ladyships most Faithful, and most Obedient
Servant A. Walker.
March, 9. 1680/1.
AN ADVERTISEMENT To the Christian Readers, Especially His own Parishioners,
concerning the Publication of these Sermons.
Most Loving, and much Beloved Neighbors.
IT will, it is like, seem strange to you, that I single out these plain Sermons
to be made public, rather than any of those many I have delivered to you in
the long course of my Ministry, and some of which it is possible you may judge
more worthy of the Light, and would have rather chosen for your Use; It is fit
therefore I give you an account of the Publishing these. Let me therefore first
assure you, it was not Originally my own Inclination which led me to it, but
the earnest Entreaties of others.

And how stale soever this Pretense is, yet when ever it is true and real, (as
it is very much so in my present Case) it retains its weight, and is a just
Apology, at least as much as such an Undertaking needs.

Being sent for in the latter part of the last Month, to Preach a Funeral
Sermon in London, for a very kind and worthy Friend, I was desired by one of
his near Relations to Print it, which I resolvedly refused; requesting and
obtaining to be excused, without Unkindness or Offense taken. But though I had
silenced the first Motion, I found it harder to resist a second, for before I
left the City, I was set upon by one, who heard Occasionally, as not Concerned
in the Funeral, who pressed me with so much earnestness in his own Name, and as
he told me, in the Name of many others who engaged him in it, for the first,
and in Discourse, for the second also, Preached at the same Church upon the
like Occasion, some while since, adding an Offer to pay the Charge of the
Impression, which though kindly meant, I judged indecent to accept of. We
parted without my yiedling farther, or promising more than that I would
consider of it: which some days after my Return I did accordingly.

In this Deliberation, I well knew the plainness of these Sermons, and how
unfit they are to bear their Censure, whom nothing pleases but height of
Phansy, sublime Notions, and elaborate Periods. On the other side I could not
deny the Weight of their honest Argument, who desired to have them. viz. The
Benefit they reapt by hearing them, and the desire and hope that themselves
with many others might reap more by reading them. Hereupon I thought the Hazard
of my Reputation, (as to Eloquence and Learning) was but a small Stake to be
ventured against the hopes of doing good to Souls, and might be safely
ventured, and would be profitably lost, if the other were attained and won. And
for the probability of that I concluded the Judgment of the Hearers was not to
be despised; For if our Church allow, (as it does allow) a Judgment of
Discretion to private Men in greater Matters, much more may they claim it in
what so nearly concerns themselves: as to know what most Convinces, Instructs,
Affects, and edifyes them.

It Is true, I confess, the Preacher best knows what Pains and Study his
Composures cost him, and is highly concerned not to do Gods Work negligently,
nor offer to him what cost him nothing, yet for all that, the Hearers best know
what sinks deepest into their Hearts, and most powerfully awakens them, and
draws them from Sin to God. As the Cook may best compute the Charge in the
Kitchen, and what Cost and Art was bestowed in dressing of the Feast, yet the
Guests at the Table are better Judges what pleases their Pallates, agrees with
their Stomachs, and by an easy Digestion turns to good Nourishment, and
ministers both Health and Strength, as that often does, which wants the highest
Seasoning. Plain and honest Christians like their Spiritual Food never the
worse, though it be not disguised like an Oleo or French Dish, till they cannot
know what is set before them. And St. Paul who had good Skill, as well as good
Authority in these Matters, exhorts us to strive to Excel, to the edifying of
the Church, rather than to be Barbarians to our Hearers, and leave them so to
us, though they should admire us much, for understanding us little, or not at
all.

When such Thoughts as these, had inclined me to Gratify the desires of the two
former, I concluded to add the third, which had been acceptable to some of your
selves. And I hoped they all together might be useful to you, for whose Sakes I
chiefly esteem myself to live and work.

The Scope and Substance of them all, is ultimately the same, and like Lines
drawn from distant and opposite Points, they touch and end in the same Center,
against Procrastination, or delaying a sound and thorough Turning unto God. And
indeed this is so useful and necessary a Point, that there is no String I have
so often touched upon in my Ministry, and have had I confess, some remote
Thoughts of Publishing for your Benefit, no less than twelve Discourses upon
several Texts, handling the same Design with great Variety, even as these three
do at present.

And I will neither be afraid, nor ashamed to Whisper to you, though some
over-hearing me should make a bad use of it, what has caused me to bend my
Ministry so frequently this way.

When I had been some time engaged in the Sacred Office, (though I began
neither hastily nor early) having, I hope from God, a great sense of the Weight
of that Employment on my Heart, and desire to do good to Souls, and being
conscious to myself of my Inabilities, amongst other Means I used to acquire
some Sufficiency, one was to enquire of the most Learned, Grave, Conscientious,
and Experienced Ministers for Direction; and one Query I propounded was, what
Subjects, or what Texts, they had found most useful, and most successful, to
Awaken, Convince, and Convert their Hearers. To which a very Holy, Learned,
Aged, and Experienced Minister replied, by naming a Text against
Procrastination; adding he never found his Ministry so successful upon any, as
upon that Subject, upon which very Text I have preached many Sermons since, and
never any with more Approbation or Acceptance, and I humbly hope not without
Benefit to many Souls. This was the first Occasion which led me to so frequent
Preaching upon Texts, from whence I might pertinently press you to speed in the
Work of God, and to discover the Sin and Danger of Delay. But I have had two
great Arguments since to confirm me in this Practice; the one from a great
Example, the other from a very comfortable Experience.

The Example is that of the never enough Celebrated, Apostolical Divine and
Preacher, the Holy and Blessed Archbishop Usher, who in those useful Sermons,
preached at Oxford, though Printed but from imperfect Notes, taken from his
Mouth, and now in the last Edition added to his Sum and Substance of Christian
Religion, in which he seems to design a gradual chaining such Texts together,
as may bear Discourses tending to lead men from a State of Nature, through
Grace to Glory begins with Heb. 4.7. He limiteth a certain Day, saying to Day,
etc. Upon which he has two Sermons Entitled speedy Conversion, the only means
to prevent Imminent Destruction, as if he had told them all his following
Labors would be lost, and do them no good, if they did not yield first to cast
off their Delays, etc.

The Second is from my own Experience, the most signal Seal and Crown God ever
vouchsafed to honor my Ministry by, being gained in the pressing the same
Argument.

This I tell you with innocent Freedom, to beget in you an esteem of this
Subject, men seldom profiting by what they undervalue. And though God confines
us not to one Subject (nay expects we reveal to you the whole Counsel of his
Will) much less confines himself, but works by what Instruments he pleases, and
by what Tools he pleases in their Hands, yet a good Opinion of the Medicine
helps the working, and is half a Cure, and we like a Remedy that carries a
Probatum est, has been approved useful. There Is more hope that may help us,
which has been helpful unto others; It Is good being in Gods Way, and not only
our Expectations may be raised, but our Faith strengthened for receiving good
by those Means, by which others have received it already.

I therefore Exhort, Beseech, and Ad^ure you by all the most Serious and Sa^red
Words I can use to you, by all the Awe wherewith you Revere Gods Au^hority, and
by all Submissive Grati^ude, by which you Prize the conduct ^f his wise and
faithful Methods and Counsels, and by the quickest Sense you ^an as wise Men,
have of your infinite and eternal Interests, as ever you hope ^o see Gods Face
in Peace, or escape ^is everlasting Wrath, and would not ^nstead of lifting up
your Heads with Boldness, and exceeding Joy at the ^oming of our Lord, cry to
the Rocks ^o fall upon you, to hide and cover you from his Presence. Rouse up
your selves, shake off your loytring Humor cast away every Weight that Cloggs
you in your Speed; and what you do, do quickly. Who knows what a Day may bring
forth? therefore now or never, now is the accepted Time, now is the Day of
Salvation. Therefore seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while
he is near, there is a time when he will not be found. They shall seek me early
but shall not find me, the Sluggards early is too late with God; God has long
waited to be Gracious, but he will not always wait, nor shall his Spirit
always strive. God has long expected you, he thinks long, and even longs for
your Return. How long ye simple ones, how long will ye love Vanity, how long
shall vain Thoughts lodge within thee, will thou not be made Clean, when shall
it once be? Make not God lose his Longing lest abused Patience kindle into such
Fury as shall burn to the nethermost Hell, and none can quench it.

It Is hard to stop my running Pen in such a Current, but I will check it, and
refer you to the Sermons for more pressing Arguments. These things have been
often ecchoed in your Ears, enough to make them tingle; I now put them into
your Hands and Houses, and lay them before your Eyes, read them attentively,
consider them Wisely, practice them Faithfully, and Pray earnestly that God
would bless them to you, as I shall not cease to do in your behalf, and set
this little Book in some conspicuous Place, that it may be your Remembrancer
when you do but glance your Eye upon it; and as often as you see it, ask your
Consciences, have I yet obeyed the Errand, on which God sent that little
Messenger? Am I ready for Christ; have I finished the work God sent me into
this World for; bear I such Fruit as God expects from every Tree he plants in
the Vineyard of his Church?

Now the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has so loved us, as to
give us his dearly beloved Son to Dye for us, and will speedily send him again
to Judge us. That great lover of Souls who has sworn he desires not the Death
of a Sinner, but would have all Men to be Saved, and come to the Knowledge of
the Truth, enable you in this your Day, to know the things which belong to your
Peace, before they be hidden from you; that when ever he shall come who has
said so often behold I come quickly, you may lift up your Heads and not be
ashamed, and your Hearts may Echo with Faith and Joy, even so come Lord Jesus.
So Prays, dear Neighbors,

Your faithful Monitor, and Willing Servant in the Things of Christ, Anthony
Walker.
Fyfield March 9, 1680/1.
THE CONTENTS.
Sermon. I.
AGainst the Neglect of present Readiness for our Lords Coming.

Upon St. Luke 12.40. Be ye therefore Ready also.

In which is showed, wherein our Readiness for Christ's Coming consists, and the
Duty is pressed by many Arguments.

Sermon. II.
AGainst putting off the finishing our great Work, upon St. John 9.4. I must
Work the Works of him that sent me while it is Day: The Night comes when no
Man can Work.

In which is showed what this Work is, and Diligence urged, because it is Work,
and Speed, with respect to the Time allowed, and limited for the doing of it.

Sermon. III.
AGainst the want of present fruitfulness in our Lords Vineyard.

Upon St. Luke the 13.6, 7, 8, 9. A certain Man had a Figtree planted, etc.

In which the whole Parable is succinctly Opened and Applied, and speedy
Fruitfulness proved the only means to prevent cutting down.

A SERMON PREACHED At St. Buttolphs Algate, on Friday the 18th of February
1680/1, at the Funeral of Mr. Nathaniel Duckfeild Citizen of London, and
Inhabitant of the said Parish.
St. Luke 12.40. Be ye therefore Ready also.


It Is the great Design of every faithful Minister, to save himself and them that
hear him, and nothing more naturally contributes to that good Work, than a
serious preparedness of Heart on the part of the Hearers: and on the Preachers,
a Word seasonably fitted to the Occasion by which God calls them to attend to
it. And if any thing next to the Grace of God, can awaken men, to awful
Apprehensions of the World to come, it is convincing Evidence of their uncertain
Continuance in this World: and unavoidable necessity of their certain Departure
out of it. And this is no where written in more legible Characters than on the
Hearses of our Friends with whom we have had familiar and daily Conversation
and were a few Days since as likely to have attended us to our long Homes, as
we were to follow them to their Beds of Silence. And for this Reason the wise
Man tells us it is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to go to the
House of Feasting: For that is the end of all Men, and the Living will lay it
to his Heart. Eccl. 7.2.

Supposing therefore that your Eye has affected your Heart, and that this
solemn and mournful Object of our worthy and obliging Friend, now shut up from
us i^ the close Confinement of a Coffin, hat^ disposed your Hearts to receive
what i^ Fit and Reasonable to be learned from it The Work on my part is to
render my Discourse suitable. That the Ordinance we are exercised in, may answer
the Providence which brought us to it. That there may be an Harmony in the
parts which are to be joined into one piece. For God has two Books, one of his
Works, another of his Word. Both described by David in Psalm. xix. and we are to
turn a Page in either of them: To learn a Lesson in the School of Nature, and
in the School of Grace. And I desire these may answer each other, as the
Windows did in Solomon's Temple, Light over against Light.

Our Text, our Lesson, or if you will our Sermon, from the Book of Providence,
is not only to view a man like our selves, Mortal and actually dead: But a man,
not past the vigor of his years and strength, and the other day in perfect
health summoned to his Trial, to stand at Christ's Tribunal, to receive his
final doom and sentence. And I think no Text in Scripture Echoes more vocally
to this than the words I have read. Be ye therefore Ready also. The illative
Particle, therefore has an aspect also on the Context, and it looks both
backward and forward, to what went before in the 37. and 39. verses, and what
follows after in this.

In the Verses pointed at, before the Text, are laid down, the blessedness of
the ready, and the misery of the unready. Rewards and Punishments are the
Instruments of Government. Hopes and Fears are the Spurs and Bridles to quicken
to Good, to restrain from Evil. Therefore if you would enjoy the Good it is
Natural to hope for and desire, or escape the Evil it is Natural to fear and fly
from. Be ready. The blessedness of the ready is described by the honor every
such servant shall receive from his Lord and Master when he comes, He will gird
himself, and make them sit down to meat, and come forth and serve him. And for
greater assurance, like Pharaohs dream, it is doubled, v. 37. begins blessed are
those servans, and v. 38. ends blessed are those servants. The misery of the
not ready is described by the condition of an Householder surprised by Robbers,
who break through his House, with the supposed consequences take away his Goods
and Life, so that the sum is, seeing such ready servants shall assuredly be
blessed. And such unprepared Householder shall be miserably ruined. Let others
happiness be your encouragement. And let others harms be your warnings that ye
be ready.

But the duty is of such vast importance that it is pressed yet farther with a
Reason at the back of it. For the son of man comes in an hour when ye think
not. It Is the Motto and brand of a Fool to say non putaram, I never thought of
this, excuss therefore this stupidness, shake off this folly and bethink your
selves, there is no watch in the night, there is no hour in the day when Christ
may not come, therefore be ever preparing and prepared to meet him.

I have thus brought the occasion and the Text together; and led you through
the Context to the Words, as clearly and as briefly as I could. So that nothing
remains but to make the best improvement of them that I can. Be ye ready.

First, It Is vox Respectiva. The very word implies a respect to somewhat. He
that is ready, is ready for some person or some thing. And it is so obvious the
naming of it is next to needless. It Is for the coming of our Lord.

Secondly, It Is vox Praeceptiva. It Is a word of command from our Great Lord and
Master, making that our duty, which is our greatest interest and happiness.

Thirdly, it is vox Directiva. Directing us to that, in which our true our only
wisdom, which makes wise unto Salvation does consist.

Fourthly, It Is vox Comprehensiva a very large and comprehensive word in two
regards, first, including all things which concern our being Good and Happy.
For to be ready for Christ, implies our being complete in Christ. There Is a
receiving fullness of Grace from him.

2. It implies our going to Heaven with him. For they that were ready went with
him in to the marriage, Matthew. xxv. 10. there is our happiness.

Secondly, It comprehends all persons, ye, that is all: this indefinite is
Universal: as, Thou, in the Commandments is every one: So here Ye signifies All.

These put together fall naturally and without any strayning into this Doctrine.

It Is every man's indispensible Duty and highest Interest to be presently Ready
for Christ's coming. A Principle of Duty to Gods Authority requiring it. And a
Principle of Wisdom for our safety necessitating it; are the two unshaken
Pillars on which this Truth is so firmly built, that it can never be moved. No
Cavils from men or Devils can overturn it; no evasion can ever dispense with
men's Obligation to it. But as long as man is bound to do what God bids. Or
believe what God tells him. As long as it is the part of a wise man to escape
the utmost misery, and to desire and pursue after infi^ite happiness and glory.
So long will this truth abide more fixed than the Earth. Yea established in (and
as) the very Heavens. So that I shall say no more for its confirmation in this
place, but proceed, 1. To show wherein this Readiness consists. 2. What is
required on our parts to attain to it. 3. Press the performance with most
cogent Arguments.

But because a wise Builder will carry off the Rubbish, and clear his Ground
before he lays his Foundation, I shall

First, Negatively show you wherein Readiness does not consist, or what is not
sufficient to make you so. And this is very needful to be done, because
prepossession of the mind by error, hinders the Truth from entering, and leaves
no room in the Heart to entertain it. And too many are prone to rest satisfied
with that which will deceive them, supposing it is enough to make their
condition safe and happy, and would go farther, did they not verily think they
had gone far enough. Many says Seneca had become wisemen, had they not thought
themselves already such. And Gregory Nazianzen, the greatest hindrance of
proficiency, is an Opinion of sufficient proficiency. It Is no wonder those
Mariners strike Sail, who think themselves in safe Harbor. Nor that he sets
by his Staff, and takes up his rest who verily believes, he is at the end of
his journey.

Now, to pass by the excuses, many make for neglecting to be ready, there seem
to be six things which men are prone to trust to, as sufficient to make their
condition good and safe, which really are not so. 1. Their being born of Godly
Parents. 2. Being of very good Natures, or sweet Dispositions. 3. Being
Baptized and using and enjoying the means of Grace. 4. Outward Conformity to
the Letter of the Law in the practice of Moral Virtues and Duties. 5. Being of
the true Church, or of such a Party or persuasion. 6. Believing in Christ or
presuming rather that they do so, without those Fruits which prove their Faith
to be Holy and Lively. It would require more time, than our present streights
will allow, to speak fully to all these, it must suffice to Nonsuit every of
these Pleas, in a word, to undeceive those who are prone to deceive themselves
with shaddows, and appearances, instead of Realities. For it is an error very
incident to weak and partial minds, (as we are all prone to be partial to our
selves) to judge every thing which is good, to be enough, and good enough. Which
is a great mistake as you may be easily convinced, by a plain similitude. Your
money may be very good, both for Metal and Stamp, and as current as any in the
Kingdom. Yet twenty Shillings of such money will not pay a Debt of ten pounds.
What Is the reason? Not because the money is not good: but because there is not
enough of it. So in our present Case, these things I have named will not make
us ready for Christ, why so? Not because they are not good in their place and
kind, they are good in tanto, but not in toto, but because they are not good
enough In degree and measure. Therefore I beseech you think not I condemn or
dispraise them; or discourage your attainment of them. I only warn you not to
rest in them as sufficient, to make you ready for Christ, or fit to go to
Heaven. For this they cannot do.

First, not the being born of Godly Parents, tho it is a great mercy to be so,
and is attended with many advantages, and many have put confidence in it. How
often do we hear it from the Jews mouths we are Abraham's seed, we have Abraham
to our Father, John viii. 43, 39, and St. John Baptists warning them against
it, think not to say within your selves we have Abraham to our Father, Matthew.
iii. 10. intimates their hearts were full of it, and placed much confidence in
it. But our Savior tells those very men John viii. 44. Ye are of your Father
the Devil. And St. John Baptist call these a generation of vipers. It Is not
generation from the best men, but regeneration from the good Spirit, must do
our business, non nascimur, sed ^enascimur Christiani. Men beget children not
as good men but as men, and therefore beget not good men, but mere men. As
Circumcised Israelites begot children which needed Circumcision. And the best
dressed Wheat grows up again with Chaff. So those whose Parents were Circumcised
in heart, come into this world with a Foreskin on their hearts, which must be
taken off. Whatever becomes of the dispute of the Original of the Soul. It Is
without dispute that Grace in the Soul is not by traduction but by infusion and
acquisition.

Secondly, Not good Nature, or the sweetest disposition. I deny not but there
is a vast difference betwixt the tempers of men. As great as any thing can
make, but the Sovereign Grace of God. Some are such Ishmaels, such Nabals,
Caligulas. Others such Jonathans, Titus's the darlings and delights of mankind.
So sweet, so affable, kind, obliging, ready to good, that nothing below the
Image of Christ is more lovely than the impress of such a temper. But still the
best of Nature is but Nature, and the Fruit of the unp^un'd Vine will be but
wild Grapes, and by Nature we are all Children of Wrath. Not Sons of God or
Heirs of Heaven.

Thirdly, Not being Baptized, and enjoying and using all the means of Grace. I
tell you therefore first it is a very great Mercy and Favor of God to allow
thee these privileges. I tell you secondly, it is thy duty, and thou do very
well to attend constantly on them, it is well thou were Baptized, thou do well
to hear the the Word, pray to God, keep thy Church, etc. Yet I tell thee
thirdly, thou may go to Hell after all this, yea and have a hotter place
there, than one of Tire and Sidon, than the men of Sodom and Gomorrah, who
never heard of, or enjoyed such things. Nay I tell thee fourthly, it is one of
the commonest, and most dangerous practical errors of them within the Church,
to think to Compound with God, and excuse themselves, for the neglect of the
Duties those Privileges oblige them to, by a formal using of these
Privileges. And therefore there is nothing in which the Scriptures are more
express and copious, than in warning men against this mistake. And that both in
the Old Testament and New. Jeremiah tells them, they trusted in lying words,
who cried the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. And continued in
their sins. Jer. vii. 4. to the 12. and Chap. ix. 26. He levels Judah and
Israel for being Uncircumcised in heart with Egypt, Ammon, and Moah, who were
Uncircumcised in Flesh. I beseech you read with attention, yea with fear and
trembling the second Chapter to the Romans, especially from the 17. verse, and
you will find that Circumcision may become Uncircumcision, and so Baptism as no
Baptism. And that he is not a Jew, who is one outwardly, but he that is one
inwardly. And Circumcision which profits is not the outward in the Flesh and in
the Letter: but in the Heart and in the Spirit. And St. Peter tells expressly
that the Baptism which saves is not the washing of the flesh: but when we can
answer with a good Conscience the questions usually propounded in the
Administration of it, 1 Pet. iii. 21.

So for Prayer: Isaiah supposes they may make long Prayers, whose hands are
full of blood. And David that some men's Prayers may be turned into sin. And
Soloman tells you that the Prayer of the wicked, and of him that turns away his
ear from hearing the Law, shall be abomination. The blind man John ix. 31.
could see the truth, that God hears not sinners, such as allow themselves in
sin. And David says of himself, if I regard iniquity in my heart God will not
hear my Prayer. If thou have gifts to Pray like an Angel, and yet live like
an Incarnate Devil, thou may indeed be Gods remembrancer. But it is but to put
him in mind to take vengeance on thee. As the Philosopher said smartly to the
wicked mariners, who began to Pray when a storm arose. Hold your peace, hold
your peace, for the Gods will certainly destroy us, if they take notice you are
hear. Not that I would discourage a Simon Magus to Pray to God. Acts viii. 22.
But then let him repent of his wickedness. And take Eliphaz's Counsel Job xxii.
23, 26. Put iniquity far from (...) Tabernacle. So may thou lift up the Face
unto God, and Pray unto him a^ ^he shall hear thee; tho sincere Prayer (...)
make thee leave sinning, or sin will make thee leave Praying sincerely. Yet
many cry Lord, Lord, who shall never go to Heaven.

So for Hearing, Romans ii. 13. Not the hearers of the Law, are just before God,
but the doers of the Law shall be justified. For whosoever hears Christ's
sayings, and does them is like to a wise man who builds his House upon a
Rock. But he that Hears and does them not is like a foolish man which builds
his House upon the Sand, and when the Floods beat upon it, it will fall, and
great shall be the fall of it. Matthew. vii. 24, 27. For they only are blessed
who hear the word of God and keep it. Nor will the approving and praising of
the Preacher, but the practice of his Doctrine, render your selves approved, or
turn to your praise with God, see Ezech. xxxiii. 31, 32.

So for the receiving the Holy Sacrament, tho that blessed Ordinance be too
much and too shamefully neglected, yet ^ayst thou eat Christ's Body, and drink
^^s Blood Sacramentally, and swallow down the pledges of thy own Damnation in
so doing. 1 Cor. xi. 29. and bring upon thy self the guilt of Christ's Body and
Blood verse 27. Consider well 1 Cor. x. 2.5. For both the Sacraments. They were
all Baptized unto Moses in the C^^^d, and in the Sea, and did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, (for they all drank
of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. But with
many of them God was not well pleased. And seeing the means are so evidently
appointed for the sake of the end, and to lead us to the attainment of it. It Is
matter of just wonder, how men can so impose upon themselves, as to rest in the
means instead of the end. The Stairs are the means by which you ascend to your
Lodging Chamber, but if any man should therefore strip himself and lie down
upon the Stairs, he might find both a cold and hard Lodging, how warm and soft
soever the Bed is which stands in ^he Chamber at the Stairs head.

Fourthly, Not outward Conformity to the Letter of the Law, in the practice of
Moral Virtues and Duties. Not but that this is very amiable and very necessary,
and cursed be the man that will dispense with himself or others to neglect it:
and it cannot, without great ignorance, or greater malice be charged on any,
because they show the insufficiency of this, and urge you to more. I confess an
Ungodly honest man is half a Contradiction. But I declare a Godly Knave is a
whole one. For he may be sincerely Just and Honest in his Dealings with men,
who wants a sense of Religion toward ^od. But he is a gross Hypocrite toward
God, who pretends to Religion, and allows himself to deal unjustly with his
Neighbor. Not that I exclude the Duties of the first Table from being Moral,
but in common speaking those of the Second are chiefly understood. And they
are, Natura notiora, more easily discerned by the light of Natural Conscience,
and he may see his duty in what is easily known, who sees it not in what is
harder to discover. (How shall he love God whom he has not seen, who loves
not his brother whom he has seen?) But he is without excuse who pretends to
know and do the hardest. And will neither know nor do the easiest.

A sober and honest Conversation in the fight of men is a fair body of a
Christian but there must be a Soul and Spirit to enliven it, as he said to him,
who wondered that a Statue with such perfect lineaments, could neither go nor
stand. Deest aliquid tnius. There wants a living Principle within. With the
putting off the Old man according to the Conversation, and putting on the new,
there must be a renewing in the Spirit of the mind, Ephesians. iv. 23. Many Heathens
excelled in the exercise of Virtues, Aristides, Cato, Regulus. And yet if you
will believe St. Augustine they were but splendida peccata, shining sins, they
wanted both right Principle and end, and the sprinkling with Christ's Blood. We
must add Faith to our Virtue, as well as Virtue to our Faith. See that you do
the great things of the Law, but besure you leave not undone the greater things
of the Gospel. A lively work of Faith to purify your hearts, unite you to
Christ, and make you partakers of his Spirit for sound Regeneration, and
through Conversion, without this you are undone for ever.

Fifthly, Not being of the true Church, or of this or that Party or Persuasion.
It Is a wonder so many should be cheated with so groundless an error; not only
Papists, who have an Hypothesis which tempts them to it, That the Faith of the
Church, and Treasury of the Church, may be Communicated to them by being
Members of it. But many others crying I am of Paul, I of Appollo, I of Cephas.
A true Son of the Church, one of the Godly Party, one of the Friends. But I
beseech you take notice. It Is not being of the truest and best Religion in the
world will save you, but being true to that Religion, and living up to it.
Salvation was of the Jews. Theirs was the Religion God dispensed Salvation in,
yet all Jews were not saved. All are not Israel who are of Israel, nor all the
children of Abraham's Faith, who were the children of his flesh.

Surely Judas was of the true Church, when he was of our Lords own Family; and
yet went thence to his own place, a place to which you would be loath to follow
him. Be thy head never so Orthodox, as to the Articles, of Faith if thy life be
Hetrodox as to the Rule of Practice; the goodness of thy Faith will be so far
from excusing the badness of thy Life, that it will greatly aggravate thy
Condemnation; and the more clearly thou know thy Masters will and the more
firmly thou believe it, with more stripes shall thou be beaten for disobeying
it. Tho bad Company occasions many men's damnation, and good Company may be an
help to; yet never was it, never shall it be a cause of any man's Salvation. I
mean that he should be saved, merely for professing the same Religion, with
them who are saved, tho not for the Professing but Practicing of their Religion.

Lastly, Not believing in Christ, or presuming rather they do so, without any
Fruits of Faith to prove it true and lively. God forbid I should make any
sinister reflections on the Doctrine of our Church, and a Doctrine so clear in
Scripture as that of the Justification and Salvation of sinners by Faith in
Christ, yea by Faith alone. God who regarded the lowliness of his hand maid,
when his Son was Conceived: has had regard to this humble lowly Grace, as to
the Conceiving Christ in our Hearts. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
Faith. It Is appointed to receive Christ Jesus, and to make us the Sons of God
by so doing. And whosoever believes in him shall not perish but have
everlasting life. John iii. 16. I know no other way of Salvation for my self; I
teach no other way to you, yet after all, I say to you, look well to your
selves, that your Faith be Faith indeed, not a dead faith, not a bold
presumption, not a self delusion. The stronger and purer the Liquor is with
which the Poison is mixed, the more dangerous will its Operation be. I fear the
Poison the Devil infuses in this Holy, this pure Doctrine of the Gospel, kills
multitudes for want of caution. I beseech you therefore be very cautious lest
you be deceived in your Faith. The question is not whether Faith will save thee
and makes thee ready for Christ. But whether thou indeed have Faith that is
true Faith. It Is certain Faith alone justifies a sinner: but as certain, that
that Faith which is alone justifies no sinner. The Eye alone sees. The Hand
alone works; but if the Eye or Hand be alone, that is, separated from the Body,
they neither see nor work. Tho Faith justifies us as a passive Grace receiving
Christ, and the gift of Righteousness by and with him; and Sanctifies as an
active Grace; yet it is the same Faith that does both, and if it do not both, it
will do neither. With the same Hand we receive what is given us, and with the
same Hand we work what is enjoined us. The same Faith that receives Christ as a
Savior, engages you to serve him as your Lord and King. And the same Faith
which justifies your Persons, must Sanctify your Natures, Act. xxvi. 18. And
purify your hearts, Act. xv. 9. And work by love, and make you new Creatures
in Christ, 2 Cor. v. 17. if it ingraft you into him; and will constrain you to
live to him, if you do in good earnest believe he dyed for you; and if your
Faith have not these Fruits to prove it true and living, it makes you not ready
for Christ, thou rather dreamest thou believe in Christ; than do so really,
and whilst thou art in this stumber, thy Lamp will go out, like the foolish
Virgins, Matthew. xxv. 8. and thou will have nothing to meet Christ with when
ever he comes.

Thus have I showed you negatively what will not make you ready for Christ, tho
too many flatter and befool themselves that it will, and will not suffer
themselves to be convinced of their error till it be too late to redeem and
mend it. I earnestly exhort you, and most heartily beg of God you may never be
found in that number.

And now I proceed to the positive part, to show wherein Readiness for Christ
consists, And

First, To be ready for Christ is to be a Good man, a Righteous man, an Holy
upright Godly Man. One who desires to do the whole will of God sincerely: both
by ceasing to do evil, and learning to do good, denying and abstaining from all
known sin, and applying himself to perform all known Duties: with a Conscience
void of offense both toward God and toward men. To be heartily Religious,
Just and Sober, Crucifying the Flesh with its affections and lusts. Walking
before God with respect to all his Commandments, in a word, to be Christ's true
and faithful servant.

For the Scripture is express and plain, that God will do good to them that are
good and upright in their hearts. Psalm. cxxv. 4. That he will give eternal
life, to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for Glory and
Immortality. Romans ii. 7. and Christ himself has told us that Not every one
that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: but he
that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. vii. 21. and St.
Paul. If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye: but if ye by the Spirit mortify
the deeds of the body ye shall live, Romans viii. 13. And again. Be not deceived
God is not mocked for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he
that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that
sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life eve lasting. Gal. vi. 7, 8.
And the terms upon which St. Peter assures you of entrance into the Everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are that ye abound in Faith,
Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly kindness, Charity.
2 Pet. i. And David in Psalm xv. gives the description of a Citizen of Sion:
who shall dwell in Gods Holy Hill, by the same measures. And in Gods name says
Psalm l. 23. To him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the
salvation of God. And lastly it is Christ's promise. Where I am there shall also
my servants be, John xii. 26. And indeed it is the Scope and import of the
whole Scripture both Old Testament and New, to show that wicked and bad men
shall go to Hell, and only Righteous and good men shall go to Heaven. Psalm iv.
3. Know that God has set apart him that is Godly for himself. But Psalm ix.
17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell. Ezech. xviii. 20. The Righteousness
of the Righteous shall be upon him and the wickedness of the wicked shall be
upon him. John v. 29. They that have done good shall come forth to the
Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the Resurrection of
damnation. For we must all appear at the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his body, according to what he has done
whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. v. 10.

And I beseech you, neither to censure, nor misinterpret, this method of
proceeding; by beginning to declare in such general terms, wherein Readiness
for Christ consists. But consider the wisdom of God leads me in it; for tho the
Scriptures do treat of these things some times more accurately and distinctly,
yet for the most part they speak of them in these general expressions. And that
for Wise and Holy Reasons. For the Scriptures were written not only for the
Wise and Learned, but for the unwise and Ignorant, for Babes in Christ and
beginners, as well as for grown men and Proficients. For the Lamb to waid in,
as well as for the Elephant to swim in. Now for the sake of the first sort, who
are not able to discern critical differences of things: nor to comprehend the
more mysterious and intricate expressions, nor to understand Artificial and
Figurative words: in which some times the Truths of the Gospel are wrapped up and
veiled: It seems very agreeable to the goodness of God to condescend to the
weakness and capacities of those, to whom he speaks.

And to propound the way of Life and Death, to Heaven and Hell, in such general
and easy terms, as all may understand. And such as are suited to affect a
Natural Conscience: and to be an initial and leading way to the receiving, what
the Gospel speaks more distincly and accurately to those, who are awakened to
be inquisitive, and rendered capable of what is more high and difficult, by the
use of general words, and easy to be understood: Such as these are, with which
I have begun: To be ready for Christ, is to be a good man: for none but such
shall go to Heaven.

Secondly, To be ready for Christ is to be a good Christian. And what that
implies we shall best understand by our Baptismal Covenant in which we enter
upon the profession of Christianity. Now as in that God promises to accept us
as Members of his Son, to own us for his Children and make us Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven: so we on our parts engage and promise three things, first to
renounce the World the Flesh and the Devil. Secondly to believe all the
Articles of the Christian Religion, viz. with an Applicatory Faith. Thirdly, to
keep Gods Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our
life, and he that keeps this Covenant is a good Christian; and as a Child of
God shall inherit his Kingdom: and is ready to go to it when ever Christ comes.

Now these three, answer the three great Graces, which are the condition of the
New Covenant. Repentance, Faith, and new Obedience. And tho the last is
included in, and be reduceable to the first: because no man truly repents of
past disobedience: who resolves not, and who endeavors not, to yield
unreserved obedience for the future; and therefore the two former are often put
alone for the full and whole condition of the Gospel Covenant. The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, repent and believe the Gospel. Yet I hope we may
inoffensively reckon them all three distinctly: especially considering that tho
they all have a general respect to the whole Holy Trinity, yet they may not
improperly be said to have a peculiar reference to the distinct Persons, to
whose name we are expressly Consecrated in our Baptism. The Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, Repentance toward God, that is the Father, Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ. So St. Paul expressly speaks, Acts xx. 21. New Obedience toward
the Holy Ghost, who is the immediate Author of Sanctification, and to walk in
newness of life is to walk in the spirit, Gal. v. 25. And to be led by the
spirit, Romans viii. 14.

If therefore thou would be a good Christian, and as such ready for Christ.

First, With Holy shame and Godly sorrow turn from sin and creatures, in which
thou have too long sought satisfaction, to God as thy all-sufficient portion
and happiness.

Secondly, Come to him by Christ the great and only Mediator, who has made our
peace with him, and wrought that reconciliation by which alone thou art capable
of enjoying him.

Thirdly, yield up thy self to the conduct of the Holy Ghost, as thy
Sanctifier, to enable thee both to believe, and to bring forth the Fruits of
Faith, in new obedience, as testimonies of thy sincere thankfulness: love being
best seen in keeping the Commandments.

Thirdly, to be ready for Christ, you must, 1. be Justified. 2. Sanctified. 3.
Exert and exercise that Faith, by which thy person is Justified, and thy Nature
sanctified, in watching for, and preparing against Christ coming. The two
former may be called our Habitual readiness, such as the Wise Virgins had, even
whilst they slumbered and slept. The third our actuals Readiness, such as
theirs was when they awaked, and trimmed their Lamps.

The two first put us into a safe Estate of Readiness for Christ coming, the
third into a comfortable present disposition to meet him at his coming.

The first gives us a Title to Heaven. The second a fit qualification for
Heaven, the third an immediate and proximate disposition for Heaven, and
confident hope of our admittance into it.

The two former concern our dying without danger, the third our dying without
fear of danger, willingly, joyfully, triumphantly. Singing with old Simeon nunc
dimittis. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. And St. Paul's
Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. And St. John's
veni domine Jesu, Even so come Lord Jesus come quickly.

A word of every of them; First to be ready for Christ, thou must be Justified
to give thee Right and Title to Heaven. For we are all by Nature Children of
wrath, Ephesians. ii. 3. And can claim no Inheritance but Hell, as our due. And we
are hold under an unalterable Covenant, Do this and live, Rom x. 5. Which
exacts and will abate nothing of perfect personal Obedience; which God knows,
and our selves must acknowledge we are far from having performed, or any ability
to perform: and an inexorable Law which denounces a curse against all that
continue not in all that is written, Gal. iii. 10. And an inflexible Justice,
which can neither be bribed nor forced. Not bribed because it is Justice: not
forced because it is Gods. And all these keep the passage to Heaven more
strictly, than the Cherubim with the Flaming Sword did that of the Tree of
Life: and there is no hope or possibility of getting in till these be satisfied,
which in and of our selves we can never do.

It Is an eternal and immutable Truth, who ever is once a sinner, can never come
to Heaven till his sin be pardoned and done away: and his person Justified in
the sight of God.

If there were no other Texts in all the Bible, (tho there are abundance more
of like import) that must be erazed and cancelled, before an unpardoned sinner,
as such, can have any hope. Romans iii. 23. For all have sinned and come short of
the glory of God: Being justified freely by his Grace through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
Faith in his Blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins, etc.

Now whether Justification be wholly comprehended in forgiveness of sin, as
many great Divines do hold: or besides Pardon, it include somewhat which must
render us Righteous in the sight of God: As neither fewer for number, nor less
for name and note have taught, I list not to Dispute: Polemical Divinity fits
not the Pulpit: and is never less seasonable than at a Funeral. Dust cast on
fighting Bees soon ends the fray.

This dust of Death sprinkled amongst us should mind us of our Work or Hives.
And wherein soever the strict notion of Justification does consist, this I may
say is without Controversy, that we must be pardoned and accepted as Righteous
before we can stand in Gods sight: and both these we must have by Faith in
Christ. His Blood and Obedience purchase both, and our Faith must receive them
and apply them that we may be Justified.

First Pardon. Ephesians. i. 7. In whom we have redemption through his Blood, even
the forgiveness of sins. Be it known unto you therefore men and brethren, that
through this man is preached to you the forgiveness of sins. And by him all
that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses, Acts xiii. 38, 39. And 1 John i. 7. The Blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, and if any man sin we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: and he is the
Propitiation for our sins: Chap. ii. 1, 2. And in the Institution of his Holy
Supper he gives this Reason for the drinking of the Cup. Matthew. xxvi. 27, 28.
Drink ye all of it. For this is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for
many for the remission of sins. And in Gal. iii. from the 5. to the 15. too
long to be transcribed. God's Justifying the Heathen by Faith, and the Just's
living by Faith, are argued from Christ's being made a Curse for us.

Secondly, Righteousness: He is the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. xxiii. 6. He
was made sin for us; 1. A sin offering, That we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. v. 21. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all
to condemnation: even so by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men, to Justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners: so by the obedience of one shall many be made Righteous, Romans v.
18, 19. Read the whole Chapter, not to say the whole Epistle, the chief Scope
of which tends this way. 1 Cor. i. 30 Christ is made unto us of God
Righteousness, which made St. Paul so earnestly desire to be found in him, not
having his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through
the Faith of Christ. The Righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil. iii. 9.

Secondly, We must be Sanctified by his Spirit, as well as Justified by his
Merit. This must qualify and make us fit for Heaven. The pure in heart shall
see God. Mat. v. 8. And without Holiness none can see the Lord, Heb. xii. 14.
For into the New Jerusalem, shall in no wise enter, any thing that defiles,
neither what soever works abomination or makes a lie. Rev. xxi. 27.

Without being Sanctified no man is fit, 1. For the Place. 2. For the Company.
3. For the Work of Heaven.

First, Not for the place. It Is his Holy Heaven, Psalm xx. 6. All the Types of
it were Holy, Paradise, the Tabernacle, the Temple, yea the Hill on which it
stood: even a temporary and transient manifestation of Gods Presence or Glory
Consecrates the place: how much more Holy then is that place which is the
Habitation of Gods Holiness and Glory as Heaven is called, Isay lxiii. 15. That
part of the Temple where the Ark stood under the Wings of the Cherubims, the
type of Gods constant residence (for the Mercy Seat was his Throne, and he
dwelt betwixt the Cherubims) was called the most Holy, the Holy of Holies; the
Holiest of all: how Superlatively Holy then must that place be, of which this
was but a figure.

What ever God Sanctifies by his presence must not be defiled by the approach
or touch of any unclean thing. When God appears to Moses in the Bush or Joshuah
in the Vale, both must put off their shoes from their feet, because the ground
was holy on which they stood. Paradise could bear our first Parents no longer,
when they had sinned away their Innocence. Nay the Angels fell from Heaven,
when they fell from the Holiness in which they were created.

And Possession, (which you call Eleven Points) could not secure their stay.
And think thou with an unsanctified heart, which bears Satan's Image to be
admitted into that place, from which that very Image cast them out. It Is said
some Vessels are so delicate and pure that they will hold no Poison, but crush
and break in pieces to be rid on it. Should one sinner get into Heaven with his
unchanged, his invenomed Nature, Heaven would cleave under him as the Earth did
under Korah, Dathan and Abiram, rather than not discharge it self of him. Yea
when he saw his own loathsomness in that pure place, he would save and prevent
their labor who would cast him out, and partly for shame to be so unlike the
rest, and partly for the unagreeableness of the place to his expectations and
desires, he would leap down headlong, rather than tarry there. As Vzziah when
the Leprosy arose in his Forehead, the Priests thrust him out of the Temple,
yea he himself hasted to go out, 2 Chronicles. xxvi. 20. And the expression is
remarkable concerning the Angels which kept not their first State, they left
their own Habitation, Jud. verse 6. for though Michael and his Angels fought
and cast them out, Rev. xii. 7, 8, 9. Yet they were soon weary of Heaven, and
of their Holy Habitation, and ready enough to leave it of their own accord,
when they had made themselves so unlike to it.

And what ever they think, who look upon Heaven as a reserve, when they can
stay no longer in this world, to be chosen rather than the place of Torment:
and fancy it like a Tu^kish Paradise, a place of ease and sloth, to eat and
drink, and gratify their sensualities, from an absurd misunderstanding of some
allusive and Figurative expressions; yet if an unsanctified man, with his heart
full of his present Antipathies against the Holiness of that place, should step
in thither, it would certainly be the most irksom and disagreeable place he
ever came in, and more like a Purgatory than a Paradise, and never was he so
uneasy, as he would be there, nor was ever creature so much out of its
Element, as such a man would be. And how strange or surprising soever this may
seem, its easy to convince you of its Truth by Principles of Reason. For
likeness is the cause of liking, and Satisfaction arises from the sutableness
of the Object to the Subject that receives it. Many things have an intrinsic
Excellency in themselves, and are very desirable to those, to whose capacities
and dispositions they are suited: which are not so at all to others. Honey is
very sweet to an Healthful Palate: but bitter to the Tongue which is dried and
scortched with a Fever. Meat and drink are very pleasant to an hungry Stomach,
but their sight or smell will make him Sick who is troubled with a nausea or
loathing: Music and Songs greatly delight a cheerful airy spirit, but to him
that is of an Heavy heart, are like the taking away a Garment in cold weather,
Prove. xxv. 20. And to him that is tired out for want of rest, one hours Sleep
would be more welcome, than the best Melody of Voice or Instrument.

We are never well but when we are where we would be: and we would never be out
of our own Element. The Worm in the Earth, the Bird in the Air, the Fish in the
water, not only live, but each in his Place does grow, and sing and play. But
change their Element, and presently they languish and dye.

Sin and this World are a sinners Element, and put him into Heaven whilst he
continues such, and his Heart would dye within him as soon as he found where he
was. The Air of that purer Region, that Holy Climate would be to him as Ireland
is said to be to Spiders, Toads and Vipers. His Conversation must be in Heaven,
whilst he lives, Phil. iii. 20. to whom Heaven would be Heaven indeed, that is,
a place of Bliss and satisfaction when he dies.

Secondly, The Company: And this makes an unsanctified person more unfit for
Heaven, and would render his being there yet more uneasy to him.

Can two walk together except they be agreed? Amos iii. 3. And there is just
such agreement betwixt a wicked unsanctified sinner, and all the Company in
Heaven: as there is betwixt Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, the Seed of
the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent. You may find what Company there is in
Heaven by that short, yet full Muster-Rowl of that Heavenly Host, Heb. xii. 22,
23, 24. The sum of which is this, that in the City of the living God the
Heavenly Jerusalem, there are God the Judge of all, Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant, an innumerable company of Holy Angels, the General Assembly and
Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven, and the spirits of just
men made perfect.

Now if amongst all these, a more narrow search be made then, was amongst all
the creatures for an help for Adam, The return must be made us then, non est
inventus. There was not found for Adam a meet help, Genesis ii. 20. So amongst all
these will not be found a meet Companion for an unsanctified sinner. Not God:
for he has been used to say to him, Depart from me, I desire not the knowledge
of thy ways. What is the Almighty that I should serve him? Job xxi. 20. And God
will take him at his word, they will never come together, nor will he now be
served or enjoyed by him.

Not Christ, for of him he said, this man shall not reign over me, Luke xix.
14. What therefore should he do in his Kingdom? Or how can he have Fellowship
with him, who trampled his blood under his Feet? Not the Holy Spirit whom he
always resisted, grieved, vexed, fretted, and did despite unto; whilst he was
striving with him, to render him a meet Habitation for God.

Not the Holy Angels, for he never caused their Joy in Heaven by his
Repentance: and they can not be glad to see him there. Not the Spirits of just
men made perfect: for the beginnings of that perfection in the first lineaments
of Christ's Image on their hearts and lives: and the initial participation of
the Divine Nature made them the Objects of his scorn and hatred. Whom tho his
Brethren by Nature, he loved just as Cain did Abel: and for the same reason, 1
John iii. 12. Or as Ishmael did Isaac, or Esaw Jacob, or as a Wolf does love a
Sheep. The Righteous is abomination to the Wicked, Prove. xxix. 27. And what a
kind of Heaven would it be for an unsanctified man to be shut up with such
Company as he hates with the worst of Antipathies: and vilifies with the
bitterest censures, and most despightful scorn?

Nor could the Company of Heaven like him better than he likes them. For God is
not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, nor shall evil dwell with him,
Psalm. v. 4, 5. Christ says to them depart from me, ye that work iniquity,
Matthew. vii. 23. The Holy Spirit will not entertain him, who would never open
the door to him, knocked he never so earnestly and long, but all ways shut him
out of his heart. It Is the Offices of the blessed Angels to gather out of the
Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity: and to cast them
into a furnace of fire, Matthew. xiii. 41, 42. And they will do their Office
impartially. As for the Saints, as they could give them no Oil to help them in
Matthew. xxv. 9. So would they give them no countenance, should they get in
without it. Moses accuses them, John v. 45. The souls under the Altar cried
against them whilst they lived, Revel. vi. 9. And shall judge them when they
dye, 1 Cor. vi. 2. The whole Herd makes head against a blown Deer. Those Loyal
Subjects will not harbor such Traitors against their Lord and King. Then shall
be the great Excommunication: and the Church of the first born will put from
amongst them every wicked person, as 1 Cor. v. 13. injoyns. Therefore Oh
unsanctified sinner bethink thy self in time. To which of the Saints will thou
turn, Job v. 1.

Thirdly, The Work of Heaven: which he has neither skill to perform, nor time
nor heart to learn, renders an unsanctified man as incapable of Heaven as
either of the former. For the Work of Heaven is to serve the Lord incessantly.
And his servants shall serve him, Rev. xxii. 3. To do his Will so perfectly,
that it is fet as a pattern how to do it on Earth: Thy will be done on Earth as
it is in Heaven, Mat. vi. To love the Lord with perpetual extastes, and
ravishments of Soul: to Worship him that sits upon the Throne, and give him
glory, throwing down their Crowns at his feet, and saying thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory and honor, and power, to sound forth Eternal
Hallelujahs, and not to cease either day or night, from crying Holy, Holy,
Holy: to him which was, and is, and is to come, Rev. iv. To sing the Song of
Moses, and the Lamb who redeemed them from the Earth, and made them to his
Father, Kings and Priests to offer up the pure incense of Eternal Praises. And
such as this being the incessant endless employment of Heaven, I beseech you
give me leave with freedom, to Appeal to your Consciences, who either never
Pray nor Praise: or slubber over a few formal Devotions, for custom sake, and
to stop the Mouth of Conscience with the greatest weariness, as the most
irksome task and druggery of your lives, and are so tired at a Prayer or
Sermon, that nothing tries your patience like it: or seems so tedious, and so
much the more as the service is more spiritual and searching: what would you do
in Heaven? what corner would you find to sleep in? How many wearyed and longing
Eyes would you cast upon that Glass of Eternity, which will never be run out:
How tedious would that everlasting Sabbath seem, when you so often ask of these
below, when will they be gone. Amos viii. 5. I entreat you therefore be
convinced of the indispensible necessity of Sanctification to make you fit to
go to Heaven with Christ. For either God must change the Nature of Heaven, to
fit it to thy Fancy, which he will never do: or thy heart must be made like
it, even Holy and Heavenly to savor and delight in the things of God, or else
Heaven it self would be no Heaven to thee.

In a word: without Justification thou can not go to Heaven as a state of
happiness tho thou would: and without Sanctification thou would not go to
Heaven as a state of Holiness tho thou might. See Col. i. 12. Giving thanks
to the Father who has made us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in light. Mark! It Is an Inheritance: thou must be made a Son to have a
Title to Inherit: there is Justification. But it is an inheritance of the Saints
in light, and thou must be made a Saint and Child of Light, to be meet to enter
into the possession of it. There Is Sanctification, 1 Cor vi. 9, 10, 11. Know ye
not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived
neither Fernicators nor Idolaters, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God, and
such were some of you, how then came they to be capable? But ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of our God. Here you have them both expressly. St. Paul again tells
you, Romans viii. 30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified. In which place
also we have both these, the first explicitly: you must be justified before
you can be glorified, the second implicitly, for therefore glorified signifies
perfectly sanctified. Grace is glory in the Bud and Blosom. Glory is Grace in
the full blown Flower and ripe Fruit: Now as no ripe Fruit without a Blosom, no
full blown Rose without a Bud; so no Glory without Grace preceding. From glory
to glory. 1 Cor. iii. ult. That is from Glory inchoate in Grace on Earth, to
Glory consummate in Bliss in Heaven. As childhood is before manhood, and he
that never was a child, shall never be a man: So he in whose heart Christ was
never formed by the immortal seed. Who never was born of the Spirit. Who never
as a new born Babe desired the sincere Milk of the Word to grow thereby, shall
never arrive at the Stature of the fullness of Christ, shall never attain to
that perfect Image of the Son of God, to which all his, are Predestined to be
Conformable: shall never be a perfect man in Christ, nor appear before him
perfect in Zion, to follow the Lamb upon that Holy Mountain.

The Conceptions which the best men have of Heaven, are very low, obscure and
imperfect, but certainly those which ignorant and profane men have of it, are
strangely absurd and brutish, or it were impossible they should ever hope to
get thither, till their sins be both pardoned and subdued; for it is next to a
contradiction to think they can reign with Christ, in whose mortal Bodies, or
immortal Souls sin is allowed, and continues to reign. For, least of all in
this sense, can corruption inherit incorruption.

Thirdly, Tho the two things, we last insisted on, are the main to constitute
us Christians, and blessed is he that has attained them; to be Justified and
Sanctified: yet one thing is farther necessary, if not to the Esse, the Being,
yet to the been Esse the well Being of a Christian, to render us completely and
actually ready, for Christ's present coming:

They that had their Lamps lighted, and Oil provided in their Vessels, yet
slumbered and slept: and tho their Lamps were not gone out, they burnt dim, and
wanted new trimming. The brightest Coals will vail themselves with Ashes, if
they be not blown off. And the clearest waters will contract a slime and muddy
Sediment, by long standing; and so will our Graces, decline, wax Faint, and
languish: if they be not exerted, stirred up, and exercised: which makes it
most needful, to be daily acting that Faith a fresh upon the promises, by which
we are justified, and actuating that Grace anew, by which we are Sanctified.

There are many expressions in Scripture whereby this duty is enjoined, as
trimming our Lamps, Matthew. xxv. 7. Having our loins girded, and our lights
burning, Luke xii. 35. stirring up the gift of God, 2 Timothy i. 6. which in the
Greek is an eligant Metaphor, signifying the blowing off the Ashes. Giving all
diligence to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. i. 10. Proving our own
selves, 2 Cor. xiii. 5. Growing in Grace, 2 Pet. iii. 18. Going on to
perfection. Reaching forth to those things which are before: pressing toward
the mark for the price, Phil. iii. 14. Being Righteous still, and Holy still,
Rev. xxii. 11. that is, let him take care to be more and more so, by holding
fast what we have, Rev. iii. 3, 11. By keeping our selves in the Love of God,
Jud. 21. Looking for and hastening to the coming of the day of God, 2 Pet. iii.
12. With many more, but the most frequent and most significant is Watching.
Watch therefore for ye know neither the day nor the hour when your Lord does
come, Mat. xxiv. 42. xxv. 13. Mark xiii. 35. and 37. What I say unto you I say
unto all Watch. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men, be
strong, 1 Cor. xvi. 13.

Now this charge given us in the Text, to be ready, as it, in the first place,
requires our speedy care to get our sins pardoned, and our peace made with God,
and our hearts changed, and our Natures renewed to the Image of God, so it
farther puts us upon a daily strengthening our Faith, and renewing our
Repentance, laboring after assurance, standing upon our constant guard, and
endeavoring to be always in such a posture, as we would be willing, nay glad,
to be found in, when ever Christ shall come. To Watch against sloth, security,
worldly cares, relapses into sin, or what ever may overcharge our hearts, and
render us liable to surprise, or to be overtaken with that day at unawares,
read Luke xxi. 34, 35, 36. To rise speedily from our falls into sin, by present
Repentance. To be watchful against all temptations to sin, and occasions of
backsliding or declining.

For admitting, that on Gods part, (whose gifts and calling are without
Repentance, Romans xi. 29. and who loves unchangeably, and to the end, them whom
he takes for his own, Joh. xiii. 1.) Those who are truly Justified and
Sanctified, cannot fall totally and finally, from that estate: because God
upholds them with his hand: and none can take them out of his hand, because he
is stronger than all, Joh. x. 28. 29. and the Righteous are an everlasting
Foundation, Prove. x. 25. because the Foundation of God stands sure, having
this seal the Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy ii. 19. and these two, Deus
Providebit, and Christus Oravit, Gods Providential care over them, and Christ's
constant intercession for them: will preserve them to, and at the last. Yet
were it as possible on Gods part, as it is on theirs: It would be very sad for
David and Bathshebah, to have dyed like Zimri and Cosby, as they sinned like
them; and for St. Peter to have breathed out his soul, in that breath, which
was polluted with denying and forswearing of his Master; and for any man to dye
without, at least a General Repentance for every sin; and Particular Repentance
for every gross and known sin, and therefore we must be upon our constant Watch
and Guard.

Especially considering this Watchfulness is appointed as a means to preserve
us from falling, ( Watch and Pray lest ye fall into temptation, Mark xiv. 38.)
By him who designs the means, as well as the end. And has no where secured the
end to them, who disobey and tempt him, by neglecting of the means, and for
want of Watching. Admitting again they cannot break their Necks, (as the usual
comparison is) wholly lose their Spiritual life: yet may they break their Legs
and their Arms, and all their other Limbs, and go maimed and halting to their
Graves. And may incur many dreadful evils to themselves, besides the dishonor
they bring to God, reproach to the Gospel and scandal and offense they give to
others: for they may by grieving the Spirit provoke him to suspend his
influence: may wound their own Conscience: weaken their Graces, lose their
Comforts: fall under desertion: pull down Temporal vengeance on themselves: be
brought into bondage by the fear of death: lessen their reward in the Kingdom
of Heaven, tho they should not wholly be shut out: yea may make it justly
questionable, to themselves and others: whether they were ever Justified and
Sanctified indeed, or had any more than a name to live. All which do so
infinitely out weigh the short, the paultry, the filthy pleasures of sin that
their sloth, and neglect of Watching may gratify them with: that I hope they
may abundantly convince you of the necessity of adding this last care, to what
went before, to be presently ready for Christ: and to keep your selves so, by
Watching and standing always on your guard; till he shall come and give you the
blessing promised to those he finds so doing, Matthew. xxiv. 46.

I shall now proceed to an useful improvement of this weighty truth, that it is
the indispensable duty, and highest wisdom of every man, to be presently ready
for Christ's coming, and I shall endeavor it in four Uses.

1. Instruction. 2. Reprehension. 3. Examination. 4. Exhortation.
Although I shall slide over the three first, little more than naming the
particulars, the last being that which I chiefly design.

First, It will be very useful to Instruct, and direct you, what is to be done
on your parts that you may become thus fit and ready for Christ's coming; or to
attain those things, in which this readiness has been declared to consist.

I take it for granted, that some thing is, yea very much is, incumbent on us,
to be done on our parts: and that wretched Opinion, that we may neglect duty to
Gods Revealed will; upon pretense of devolving all upon his Secret Decrees, is
fitter to be exploded and abhorred amongst Christians, than confuted. The Text
supposes it when it bids ye be ready. And another Text expresses it, which
tells you: The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self
ready, Rev. xix. 7. And both the Jaylers question, Sirs what must I do to be
saved? Acts xvi. 30. And the answer to it imply so much. And that common saying
of St. Austin has obtained Universal consent, That he who made thee without
thy self, will not save thee without thy self. It being therefore taken for
granted, that we can and must do somewhat: let us now enquire, and so direct
you what it is.

First, Be thoroughly convinced of thy own unreadiness: Sense of want is the
first, the most Natural and most effectual motive, to seek supply. Jacob would
never have sent his Sons, much less his Benjamin, into Egypt to buy Food, if
the Famine had not pincht him, and his Household in the Land of Canaan. The full
soul loatheth an Honey Comb, but to the hungry soul even bitter things are
sweet. They who are whole care not for the Physician, but the sick will both
send for him, and Fee him willingly. Christ calls those who are weary and heavy
laden with the burden of sin, Curse of the Law, sense of Gods wrath, and it is
well if these will come, there is most hope of them, but for others, he may
stretch out his hand all the day long, and they regard it not. There was enough
said before to convince thee of thy unreadiness, if thou be an Unsanctified
man, this is only added to persuade thee to consider it, and to yield to
conviction of thy sin and misery.

Secondly, Be persuaded of the infinite concernment of this matter: the water
will rise no higher than the Spring Head: and the motion will answer the weight
which causes it, a small weight produces but slow motion, but a great and
heavy one, such as is quick and violent. They that have slight thoughts of the
concerns of another world, it is no wonder they are so little concerned about
them: But they that consider well what is the Consequence of not being ready
when Christ comes, what it is to have all the doors of Grace and Mercy, Hope
and Glory shut against them, what it is to lose an Immortal Soul, which the
gain of an whole world could not compensate. What it is to be driven from God
and Christ, and the Regions of Bliss, with a depart ye Cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: to be shut up in that Dungeon of
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, under
the gnawings of the Worm, which shall never dye, and in midst of a fire that
shall never be quenched: in a word, they that wisely lay to heart this Truth,
that the enjoyment or loss of infinite and everlasting happiness; and the
suffering or escaping endless and unconceivable torments, infallibly depends
upon being, or not being ready for Christ, when he comes by Death or Judgment,
will have other thoughts of these things, and will be awakened by them to make
ready in good earnest. Which I heartily wish we all may.

Thirdly, Get clear and distinct knowledge of the main Grounds of Religion.
Knowledge is a loading Grace, the new man is renewed in knowledge, Col. iii. 10.
And without it the heart cannot be good, tho it be too often without a good
heart. But of all Knowledge, get as full and clear a Knowledge as you can, of the
Covenant of Grace: by which alone the enmity is removed, and reconciliation is
made, between an offended God, and lost mankind. And herein especially study to
know the Mediator of this Covenant, as to his Person, Natures and Offices, and
the Efficacy of his Death, Resurrection and Intercession: with the terms upon
which he will receive thee as one of his redeemed ones: and what returns he
expects from thee. What be those sure Mercies of David that Covenant conveighs,
and what Obligations they are brought under, who are received into it, the
Knowledge of these things is so useful, so necessary, so excellent,
comprehending the true knowledge of Salvation: it is hard to desist from farther
enlarging upon it, or pressing of it. An Interest in this Covenant, being the
only means left us, for our Eternal safety and welfare.

Fourthly, Frequently reflect upon thy Baptismal Covenant. I know no one thing
in all the world, more hopefully likely to restore the life of sollid
Christianity to the world, which is so miserably decayed and dead in it, than
this would be.

For, first, It would mightily restrain sin, the bane of Christianity: to
remember how solemnly we have renounced all the temptations and inducements to
it: and no less provoke us to Faith and Obedience, the two great Pillars upon
which Christianity is built: to think what Vows of God are upon us, and make us
say with David. I have sworn, and I will perform it that I will keep all thy
Righteous Judgments, Psalm. cxix. 106.

Secondly, It would put warmth, and Holy fire, into all our Devotions, which
are mostly so formal cold and dead. To consider what mutual engagements have
past betwixt us, and that God to whom that Mediator through whom, and that
blessed Spirit, by whose assistance we perform them. They being all, by true
interpretation, farther inforcements o^ those engagements, as were easy to
show in all the particulars of Prayer, Hearing the Word, and Receiving the Holy
Supper.

Thirdly, It would heal our Divisions, and close up our Breaches, and restore
that blessed Spirit of Love and Peace. The Bond of Perfection and Badg of
Christ's Disciples, and help us to keep and hold the Unity of the Spirit in the
Bond of Peace, as you may see from the Apostles arguing, Ephesians. iv. 4, 5, 6. To
call to mind, that we are all Baptized into one Body, joined to one Head,
received into the Family of one Father, obliged by the same Laws, made
Candidates and Expectants of the same Jerusalem above, which is the Mother of
us all.

And what would have so beneficial an influence upon the life of Christianity,
cannot fail to prepare us for the coming of Christ. I therefore again enforce
my importunate requests to you: that you would often and daily meditate upon
your Baptismal Engagements to the great God.

Fifthly, Apply thy self sincerely and seriously, to the use of all Gods means:
with an earnest expectation and design, to receive from them, what God has
appointed them to conveigh to those who use them aright. Men for the most part
use them customarily, and for fashion sake, expecting little from them, and
receive as little as they expect. They proving dry Breasts and empty Channels.
But if thou would use them as thou should, thou would find it good to
draw nigh to God, and that he never bid the house of Jacob seek his face in
vain. It Is the Nature of means, to come in the middle, between what a man can
do, and what he can not do, to help him by what he can do, to attain to what he
can not do. In order to be ready for Christ, some thing a man can do, some
thing he can not do. He can Read, Hear, Pray, Consider, stir his Natural
affections, Love, Fear, Hope, Desire, by weighing what he knows. Some things,
as yet, he can not do. Repent, turn to God, believe Savingly, for these are the
gifts and work of God. Now God has set the first in the way to the second, as
it were in the middle betwixt what he can do, and what he can not, that by
doing what he can at present: he may gradually come to ability to do, what he
cannot yet do, and by degrees may ascend thither; whither he could not reach
(per Sal^um) at once: I will make this plain by an easy comparison. A man
cannot at one stride step up into the Room above him, ten foot higher than the
floor he stands on: but if there be a Pair of Stairs, he can set his Foot first
on the lowest, than on the second, third, and by degrees ascend a second,
third, fourth Story, tho ten or twenty Foot above the place from whence he
first began. Just thus, there is a Jacobs Ladder of many Rounds, set up between
Heaven and Earth. We cannot step at once from Nature to Grace, from Earth to
Heaven; but we may begin at the foot of this Ladder, and climb from the first
Round to the second, and then the third, and so to the top, and gradually by
the help of this Ladder, and the hand of the Spirit leading us up, we come to
that, which without this we could not reach by the means of Grace, we attain
Grace: and by Grace, as a means we attain Glory. I therefore again press you to
Read, Hear, Pray, Meditate with honest industry, and an humble expectation of
Gods blessing upon his own Institutions, and thy labor shall not be in vain in
the Lord.

Sixthly, Allow your selves due time and leisure for these things. Be good
Husbands of time; no thrift is more commendable. Eternity depends upon it. And
as I would specially commend unto you the strict Sanctifying the Lords day: a
thing much out of use, which is one of the most visible Causes, why the power
of Godliness, withers and dwindles so much away. (For it is easily observable
that Religion thrives and prospers proportionably to the improvement of this
day: and flourishes, or is trodden down, according as this Fence is kept up, or
neglected.) So let me earnestly commend to you, the setting apart some Portion
of time every day, for God and your souls. That as God has the Tribute of a
Day-Sabbath out of the Week: He may have as it were an Hour-Sabbath out of
every Day. As there was a continual Morning and Evening Sacrifice daily under
the Law: so there should be at least, Morning and Evening time allowed for
Spiritual Sacrifice under the Gospel.

And here I cannot, I dare not, forbear to caution you of this great City;
against the over lavish spending of whole Evenings in Public Houses, and at
your Clubbs. (Tho it is easiy to foresee it may offend, both those, whose guilt,
and whose interest it touches, for both these are teachy things) not that I am
so rigid as to censure moderate Diversion, and Friendly Conversation. But I
fear, yea I greatly fear, there is a fault, yea a great fault in this matter.
If after your Shops, your Counting House, and Business, and the Change have
taken all the day, the Coffee-House, the Tavern, and the Clubb, shall take up
all your Evening. What Is left for God, for Souls, and for Eternity? And thou
returnest home so late, that thy Family is in Bed, or half asleep, and thy head
full of Stories and News, at least, if not of something worse: How slenderly,
cursorily, and uncomposedly is God like to be served, in Family and Closet, if
not shut out of both? And what if Christ should come and find you doing thus?
Could you expect his Euge bone serve? well done good and faithful servant, or
not rather his frown, with why have thou served me thus?

Seventhly, If thou would be ready for Christ; get thy heart furnished and
prepared, as that Room was where he eat his last Passover, Mark xiv. 15. Cast
out all thy Lusts, and cast off every weight; but above all keep thy self from
thine own iniquity, foster no bosom sin, enter into league with none. Tho
'twill be hard enough to get rid of others, yet thou'ld be easilier quit of
twenty others than of such an one.

A darling sin, a bosom sin, a peccatum in deliciis, is of all sins most
offensive to God, most dangerous to our selves. One Dalilah was too strong for
Sampson himself: and he could not stand before her, before whom a thousand men
fell at one time: but she cost him his Eyes and his Life. Every sin is a snare,
and a cord to entangle men; but none so much as his Own sin. His Own
iniquities, (there is the Emphasis) his Own shall take the wicked himself, and
he shall be holden with the Cords of His sins, Prove. v. 22. Whether it be the
sin of thy Natural Constitution, or thy Calling and Profession of life: or the
time and place thou live in; or that long usage and custom has indeared to
thee. (For from these four quarters, this blasting wind, usually blows upon
men) and made as a right Hand, or a right Eye: or as the spots to a Leopard, or
skin to an Ethiopian. This sin, what ever it be, is the plague of thy heart,
the most Mortal Disease of thy Soul, and thou must set thy self with all thy
might, both to find it out, and cast it out, and mortify it. 'Twas David's
Argument for his uprightness, that he kept himself from his own iniquity, Psalm.
xviii. 23. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine
iniquity. And so must thou if ever thou expect acceptance with God.

It Is bad to be forced, or ravished, by Sin and Satan: it is worse to yield
consent to one act of defilement, or Spiritual Uncleanness: but it is worst of
all to be married to them, and this thou art by fostering a Bosom darling sin.
This yields the constant use of Soul and Body to his impure embraces. This
keeps Possession for him, and opens the Door as often as he knocks, and he
enters in and dwells there. David's lust to Bathshebah, tho very foul, is called
a Wayfaring man and a Traveller, 2 Samuel xii. 4. But where a darling sin is
harbored, there Satan is at Home in his own House. This makes thy condition
almost desperate, and nothing, but a speedy Divorce can prevent its being
altogether so.

Eighthly, Disintagle and unchain thy heart from the inordinate love and cares
of the things of this world. Account thy self a Stranger and a Pilgrim here.
Know that this is not thy rest, thou have here no continuing place. But
especially take Gods. Counsel to Hezekiah, Isa. xxxviii. 1. Set thine house in
order, for thou shall die, and not live. Prevent in time of Health, the
distractions the unsetledness of thy worldly Affairs may and will give thee in
the last Stage of thy life: leave nothing which may hinder thy following Christ
readily, without once looking back, when he is about to lead thee out of this
world. Remember Lots Wife. Luke xvii. 32. Readiness to go into another world,
Supposes Readiness to go out of this.

Lastly, Call in the assistance and help of others. It Is the Character of a
wiseman, that he is (...) inquisitive. When John Baptist came Preaching
Repentance, and showing them their danger, that the Ax was laid to the root of
the tree: And that every tree that brought not forth good fruit should be hewed
down and cast into the fire, Luke iii. 9. They all fall to asking, verse 10.
The people asked of him, what shall we do then, verse 10. The Publicans, Master
what shall we do? ver. 12. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him saying,
What shall we do? verse 14. Also Christ's Hearers, John vi. 28. said unto him,
What shall we do, that we may work the works of God? And the afrighted Jayler
cried out, Sirs what must I do to be saved, Act. xvi. 30. But where is the man
that moves such questions now adays? Or asks the way to Zion? If you feel the
least grudging of a Distemper in your Bodies, the Physician is sent for
presently. Or fear a flaw in your Estates, you run to the Lawyer: but every man
thinks himself Physician skilful enough for his Souls Distempers, and Lawyer
good enough for his Title to Heaven. And tho The Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and the people should enquire the Law at his mouth, because he is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. ii. 7. Yet tho he be A Messenger one of a
thousand, an Interpreter to show to man his uprightness, Job xxxiii. 23. To
declare to him whether his Spiritual condition be good and safe, and such as
makes him ready for Christ, yet may he sit in his study till he dye before any
come to interrupt him with such business.

It Is true indeed, it may be you will send for him when you are Sick, I blame
not this, better then, than not at all; provided it be not too late, as too often
it is. When the Physician leaves you and gives you over as hopeless: and you
are drawing on, and have scarce any use of Sense or Reason left. As the Foolish
Virgins beg for Oil, when sickness and the approaching pangs of death, gave
them that smart Alarm. Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him.
And then you would be getting, when you should be using it, what your whole
life was lent you for. And then you would be taught in one quarter of an hour,
(and when the indispositions both of Body and Mind, have made you past
learning, or at least very unfit to learn) what is a Lesson hard enough for
many years, even the calmest and least disturbed of them: and when thou did
enjoy a sound Mind in a sound Body.

I beseech you friends resolve me; nay rather resolve your selves; if it be
good to consult your Spiritual Guides then, is it not better to do it sooner?
whilst you are capable to take their Counsel, and have time to follow it? and
if they may do you good then, may they not do you more good in a fitter season?
Why then will you choose the less before the more, and the worse before the
better? I therefore with repeated importunity again entreat you call in all the
help you can, both from experienced humble Christians, who make it their
business in good earnest, to be ready for Christ themselves. And also from your
faithful Pastors, Who watch for your souls. Soloman tells us twice, that in the
multitude of Counselors there is safety, Prove. xi. 14. xxiv. 6. and has a
vae^soli, woe to him that is alone, Eccl. iv. 10. He that trusts in his own
heart is a fool, Prove. xxviii. 26. And he that trusts to it is little better.
For besides its deceitfulness and our Natural Partiality to our selves. Our
ignorance and inadvertency needs much help, from the prudence and fidelity of
others. Choose therefore some ferious Soul-friend, to whom thou may, with
modesty and freedom, lay open thy Spiritual state. And as I told you before,
that nothing is worse than a Bosome-sin. So nothing is better than such a
Bosome-friend, to help thee into Abraham's Bosom, and the Arms of Christ. And
this for the first Use of Direction, which I have enlarged much beyond my first
intentions, and therefore will be very brief in the two that follow next.

Second Use Reprehension, I shall name three sorts only to be reproved for
sinning against the Truth we are handling. First, Those profane ungodly
sinners, who are so far from endeavoring to be ready against Christ's coming,
that they rather live without any sense of Death and Judgment, and Christ's
coming at all: saying, at least in their hearts, and in their lives, with those
Scoffers walking after their own lusts, 2 Pet. iii. 4. Where is the promise of
his coming? As if they had made A Covenant with death, and were at an agreement
with hell, As the Prophet describes them, Isay. xxviii. 15. Who rather work out
their own damnation with security, presumption, and provocation: than their
Salvation with fear and trembling. But such monsters of men, under the disguise
and shape of Christians, are fitter to be abhorred of all, than reproved of
any. These Leviathans esteeming our Scripture Artillery, as he in Job lxi.
27.28. Does Iron, Brass, and sling-stones, as stubble, straw or rotten wood.
Tho God can make these feeble weapons, mighty in his time to pull down the
strongest holds of Satan.

Secondly, Those who tho they believe these things in general, and approve
them, and commend others for making ready for Christ: yet neglect the practice
and performance of them: resting in some common hopes, some faint desires, some
outward observances, some ineffectual half endeavors; and rather wish they
were ready for Christ, than take care to be so: and will rather put it to the
venture, than be at the pains of any Spiritual Industry to be ready in good
earnest, which is the very case of multitudes of common Christians.

Thirdly, Those, who tho they are convinced they ought, and also resolve they
will get ready, and stick at nothing which may make them so; yet put off and
delay from day to day, and year to year. Semper victuri, as Seneca calls them,
all way about to do it, but never do it; always learning but never coming to
the knowledge of the truth. Stick in the birth and therefore are unwise, Hos.
xiii. 13. And indeed nothing makes a man a greater fool, or more proves him to
be such, than this, to know what should be done, and to resolve to do it, and
yet never set about it. And therefore God brands them with this reproachful
Character of folly which men are so impatient of. He that was so very busy in
taking care for many years, ^ears presently Thou fool this night. And ^o the
Foolish Virgins who had Lamps and Vessels to hold Oil, yet filled them not. And
indeed what folly greater, than for men to go to Hell with their Eyes open? To
know their danger, and yet to play and dally with it till it surprise and snap
them, and to stand where the Bullets fly thickest: and yet neither get an
Armor, nor hasten their escape, to be out of reach of Gunshot? What will, if
this will not, prove men to be indeed foolwardly?

Third Use, Examination; Expect not from me here, a large enumeration of the
signs of Grace: I design not that. But a brief trial of thy readiness for
Christ. Try thy self therefore, as to that whether you be ready as the Text
requires. There is no knowledge more necessary, or more worthy of a wise man's
pains; than the knowledge of himself, and his Estate toward God. It has
obtained the Authority of a Celestial Aixome, even amongst Heathens. Know thy
self. (e coelo descendit (...).) And questionless it may be obtained, if we
believe either St. Peter or St. Paul, for the first bids us give diligence to
make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. i. 10. Therefore surely he thought
it feasible. The second injoyns us thus, Examine your selves whether you be in
the Faith: prove your own selves: know you not your own selves, how that Christ
is in you, except you be Reprobates? 2 Cor. xiii. 5. Doubtless therefore he
judged we might without special Revelation, even by serious self-examination,
know this of our selves.

First, Therefore try it, by the verdict of thy own Conscience, ask it soberly,
and let it answer freely, and it will speak and not lie. Great is the force of
Conscience on either side, both to acquit and to condemn, Romans ii. 15. Their
Conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing one
another. And if the blind Consciences of the darkened Gentiles, had this power,
how much more the Consciences of Christians, enlightened by the Gospel, and
assisted, at least by the common influences of the Holy Spirit.

Bring in thy Bill therefore, to this Grand Inquest: before these, mill
testes, thousand Witnesses. 'Twill not write Ignoramus on it. It Is Magni
Judicii prejudicium, a Petty Sessions to the great Assize, a previous Judgment
to the last and most awful one. Neither bribe it, nor stop its mouth, and it
will speak as he would have it, whose Deputy it is. The spirit of a man is the
Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly, Prove. xx. 27.
That which is most hid and secret, this light will discover, find out, and
manifest. The things of a man, the spirit of a man, which is in him, knows: tho
none else can, 1 Cor. ii. 11. And therefore the Testimony of our Conscience
yields great rejoicing: when it witnesses our Simplicity and Godly Sincerity. 2
Cor. i. 12. And St. John tells us, If our heart condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God, 1 Ephesians. iii. 21. Weigh not thy self therefore in the
false balance of other men's Opinions. Nec te quaesiveris extra, as Persius
could advise. But get into thy Closet, retire, be still, Commune with thine own
heart, Psalm. iv. 4. and let it speak freely, 'twill answer like an Oracle of
God.

Interrogate thy heart in this, or such like manner: Have I with desire
desired? Have I with a thirsty Appetite panted after this readiness for Christ?
Have I with constant and restless diligence endeavored to attain it? Have I
arrived, at least, at some settled hope, that if Christ should now come, I
should be found of him in peace?

Secondly, By the scope and tendency of thy life, by the Fruits thou bear:
Examine whether thou art a Tree, which if now cut down, must be Fuel for the
fire which shall burn for ever; or building Timber, for the House not made with
hands, Eternal in the Heavens! If others may know us, and we may know them, by
the Fruits which either bear: why may we not much rather know our selves by
them? the frame of our hearts, and the scope of our lives, are great
indications, whither we are going. If our hearts be in Heaven, and our
Conversation be in Heaven, our soul, shall be received there. If thou fix thy
choice, thy delight and love, on right hand blessings; thou shall stand at
Christ's Right hand, at the last day. If thou walk in the straight and narrow
way, it will lead thee to, and into, the straight gate, which gives entrance
into Life. But the broad way of Hell, will never lead any man to Heaven.

Thirdly, By thy willingness to dye: thy looking for, and hastening to the day
of God: and loving the appearance of Jesus Christ. Not but that Nature may
recoil and shrink: and the flesh may draw back, and be loath to part: for even
where the Spirit is willing the Flesh is weak: but upon sedate recollection,
the willingness of the Spirit will fortify the weakness of the Flesh; and cry
out Go forth my Soul, for he is a gracious Lord, thou art going now to meet.

Fourth Use, Exhortation. I hasten to that in which I designed the chief
improvement of this truth; that is, to exhort and quicken you, to the speediest
diligence and care, to get ready for Christ's coming. And tho I desire to work
both upon your Consciences and your Affections; to set before you your
Obedience and your Interest: to urge you in point of duty, and in point of
wisdom, and to press you to avoid both the sin and danger, procrastination will
involve you in: yet I shall not curiously distinguish the motives, to rank each
Series by themselves. But as God has twisted his glory and our happiness so
close together, in great wisdom and mercy, that we cannot promote the one, but
we advance the other: nor neglect the one, but we destroy and lose the other.
So is it in our sin and danger: they are prevented, or incurred together: and
therefore I may well wreath into one chain, the motives which concern either of
them, to draw you out of your delay: and twist them into one cord, wherewith to
quicken and accelerate your motion.

And not to heap up here, the many Scriptures, which speak so home and plainly
to this matter: but to leave them to fall in, to enforce each motive, to which
they more properly belong; I shall begin with that which stands so near the
Text, that it is urged in the same verse, as a reason to enforce the duty. Be
ye therefore ready, for, or because, The Son of man comes, at an hour, when ye
think not.

The first Motive is taken from the uncertainty of the time of our death, and
our Lords coming. And the Inference is so obvious, that the Light of Nature,
and common Reason has clearly discovered it, and excellently enforced it.
Because thou know not, says Seneca, where death will expect thee, expect
thou it in every place: and because thou knows not when it will meet thee, do
thou look for it at every time. And he has so many apposite passages, in one
Epistle, written upon the occasion of the sudden death of Cornelius Senecio,
'twere easy to fill a Page with what might be pertinently extracted thence,
and looks more like a Christian Homily, than the writing of an Heathen
Moralist. But they that can, and will consult the whole, may find it, Epist.
101. in his works. For we need not go down to Askelon to whet our styles, to
make them pungent on this subject. We may Feather these Arrows from the Wing of
the Holy Dove. No Nail is fastened more surely, or driven to the head with more
reiterated strokes, by the hand of the Spirit, than this; to quicken us to be
presently, to be always ready: to watch, to have our Loins girded, our Shoes
on our Feet, our Staves in our Hands, our Lights burning, because we know not
the time, neither the hour of the day, nor the Watch in the night, wherein our
Lord will come. And he that may come in any one, should be prepared for in
every one. It seems to be the very design and reason, for which God has hidden
from us the knowledge of Death and Judgment: to prevent security and putting off
our preparing for it, 1 Thessalonians. v. 2. Your selves know perfectly that the day of
the Lord so comes as a thief in the night, therefore let us not sleep as do
others, but let us watch and be sober, verse 6. So 2 Pet. iii. 10. The day of
God will come as a thief in the night. See the inference, verse 11.12.
Therefore what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation and
Godliness? looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God. That is,
hastening to be fit for it, So in Rev. iii. 3. If thou shall not watch, I will
come on thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon
thee. I Will content my self with naming but one place more, Mark xiii. 32, 33,
36. Of that day and that hour knows no man. Take ye heed, watch and pray: for
ye know not when the time is. Watch ye therefore (for ye know not when the
master of the house comes, at Even or at Midnight, or at the Cock crowing, or
in the morning) lest coming suddenly, he find you sleeping. And what I say to
you I say to all, Watch. Many go to bed well, and sleep their long sleep, awake
not till in another world. Many go abroad well but their journey leads them to
their long home, and they return not to the place from whence they went. What
is another man's case may be thine, therefore be thou ready.

Secondly, All delay is dangerous. If thy House be on fire a timely diligence
may quench it, but a short neglect may leave thee both poor and harbourless. A
breach in a Sea wall, if left but open to the next Tide, may prove irreparable,
and drown a Country. If an invading Enemy have time to entrench, 'twill be
harder if not past thy skill, to drive him out. A green Wound may be easily
Healed, but if thou let it alone till it Rancle, Fester, and Gangreen; it may
cost thee thy life. If a Suit be Commenced against thee, it is dangerous to let
it run till it come to Execution, or an Outlary: these and an hundred such
allusions might be given, to show the case 'twixt God and us. His wrath is
kindled, kiss the Son lest it break out into a consuming fire. Sin and Satan
have invaded thy soul, let them not entrench and fortify, but drive them out
quickly. Thou have wounded thy Conscience, get quickly some Balm of Gilead,
some Balsome of Christ's Blood before it Fester, Gangreen, and be incurable.

God has a Controversy with thee, and is entering his Action. Agree with thine
adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him, lest at any time the
adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer,
and thou be cast into prison, verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means
come out thence, till thou have paid the last farthing, Matthew. v. 25, 26. And
of how much greater importance the matter is, so much more dangerous is it to
delay. The folly is less to run an hazard where the loss is small, and easiely
repairable: but it is madness to defer where Estate, and Liberty, and Life, and
All Is at stake, and this case is more than such: for thy Soul, and Heaven, and
God are lost for ever, if thou be surprised unready.

Thirdly, This delay is sinful, as well as dangerous; all Commands, relating to
it, are in present force. The Imperative Mood has no Future Tense. They are
not like some human Laws, whose Obligation Commenceth not, till some months
after they were Enacted, these bind semper, and ad semper, all ways, and at all
times: for it is never lawful to be unready for Christ. To be Unjustified,
Unsanctified, Unmindful of his coming, in an estate of enmity against him, or
alienation from him.

Fourthly, There are farther many explicit clear and plain Commands, injoyning
this present and speedy performance. When thou vowest a vow to God, defer not
to pay it: for he has no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have vowed.
Better it is that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow, and not
pay. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, Eccl. v. 4, 5, 6. Where
note, that to defer paying, is not to pay. Now let us apply this to our great
Baptismal Vow, in keeping which, I showed, our readiness for Christ consists.
And here is an express Command not to defer our being ready for him. Ecclesiast.
xviii. 22. Defer not until death to be justified, is the good counsel of the
Son of Syrack, and very consonant to the Commands of God.

Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him. Sin
has made God thy enemy, this life is the way in which thou art passing on to
Death and Judgment, as the end of it. Therefore in thy life before death; and
because thou have no assurance of thy life, beyond the present time, (for who
knows what a day may bring forth) therefore presently agree and make thy peace
with him. And as Ananias said to Saul, Acts xxii. 16. Arise why tarryest thou?
be baptized, improve thy Baptism, wash away thy sins; and call upon the name of
the Lord. And what thou do do quickly, lest God take thy delaying, for a
denying to obey his will.

Fifthly, It Is a sin against the Light of Nature, which teaches all to hasten
speedily, into some place of safeguard when they are in danger. Not only men
by use of common Reason, but the inferior Creatures yield Obedience to this Law
by Natural Instinct: how will they run, how will they fly to shelter when what
would hurt them, either pursues, or hovers over them. Shall the Cony shoot into
its Burrow in the Rock, as soon as ere it spies a Dog? And shall not that
Bandog of Hell, (from which David Prays to be delivered, my darling from the
dog,) Which hunts for our souls, scare us to the Rock of Ages, and the holes of
that Rock, the Wounds of Christ? Shall the silly Chicken, by the shadow of the
Kite, be driven to its damm: and shall not we betake our selves to him, who
offers to gather us as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings: when that
great Vulture, that preys on men, is ready to gripe us, with his fiery Talons?
Oh how has sin, not only unmanned us, but degraded us, below the basest of the
Creatures: and erazed and Cancelled, the most legible of all the Laws of
Nature, the Law of self-preservation?

Sixthly, It Is an error against common Prudence, and the Principle thou actest
by in least concernments. There thy Rule is, better too soon, than too late. If
for the Fair or Market, if for a Journey, or to see a Show or Play, How early
will thou rise? How timely will thou go to get a place? And stay two hours for
them, rather than venture to come one minute too late, and hazard to lose that
which will not stay for thee: yea to meet thy Companions in sin, and to
gratify thy Lusts? How afraid art thou to come too late. And yet for God and
thy Soul, thou think all is in good time, tho thou set out never so late.
What is, if this be not, to be wise to do evil, but to have no knowledge to do
good? And surely this will be no small aggravation of men's faults, when it
appears they wanted Prudential Rules of Conduct in nothing, but the things of
God; which argues their despising of them, as if not worthy to employ their
wits, or thoughts about. That man in the Gospel who could contrive so
prudently, to fit his Barns to his Crop, and both to his Belly, and all to his
Lusts, Take thy case eat drink and be merry: How does God reproach him, and
disappoint him with a vengeance? For not being at least, as wise for Heaven, as
for Earth, Thou fool this night shall thy soul be required of thee: then whose
shall those things be? For so is every one, who lays up treasure to himself,
and is not rich toward God, Luke xii. 20, 21.

Seventhly, It Is a sin against the Examples of all wise and good men. All the
Wise Virgins were ready for the Bridegrooms coming. It Is the Character of a
wise man, to take time by the fore-lock. Soloman, says, A wise man's Eyes are
in his head, Eccl. ii. 14. To see before him. And God expressly, Deuteronomy. xxxii.
29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end, to do this then is to be wise. So, Be wise O ye Kings, what
proves them so? To serve the Lord with fear, to kiss the son left he be angry
and they perish from the way, Psalm. ii. 10, 11, 12. And David, that man after
Gods own heart, (and surely nothing is more according to the heart of God)
gives this testimony of himself. I made have, and prolonged not the time to
keep thy Commandments, Psalm. cxix. 60. And Abraham, when God made a Covenant
with him, deferred not to Seal it, with the painful Seal of Circumcision, the
self same day, as is Emphatically noted, Genesis xvii. 23. And when he was tempted
to offer up Isaac: He rose up early in the morning to go about that hard work,
Genesis xxii. 3. And the Disciples when Christ called them, immediately left the
Ship and their Father, and followed him, Matthew. iv. 22. And when God called the
Jayler, Act. xvi. The same hour of the night he was Baptized: he and his
straight ways, verse 33. See this Cloud of witnesses, and go not in a different
way from what they went in, lest thou never arrive at the place they are gone
to.

Eighthly, It Is a sin against a great many warnings, and loud calls of
Providence, Every Knell thou hear, should toll thee into Christ: every
Funeral thou see, should carry thee out of delays. Much more when death comes
into thy House, thy Bed, thy Bowels, and snatches away those halves, those
pieces of thy self, an Husband, Wife, Child. Yea every symptom of thy own
decaying Tabernacle; Gray hairs are here and there upon thee: the dimness of
thy sight gives the a prospect of approaching darkness: the faltring of thy
speech minds thee of the House of silence: the stooping of thy back and head,
shows thy inclining to thy Grave: and thy feebleness to go may remember thee,
that ere long thou must be carried forth by others. And all the turning of
things upside down: and perplexing and fleeting uncertainty of Affairs in this
troublesome world: may, and should provoke thy speediest care to get an
enduring substance, and to seek quickly a place in that City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God.

Ninthly, It Is a sin against, not only, means of Conviction, but actual
Conviction, yea and resolutions made on that Conviction. I am persuaded few men
live under any tolerable Preaching of the Gospel. Who do not see a need of
making ready for Christ: and do not thereupon some times at least resolve to do
it? Which gave occasion to that Proverb, that Hell is paved with good purposes,
is full of those who resolved never to go thither: but while they stood
dallying and resolving: that now they would, and then they would. First this
year, and then next, they would Repent and turn to God, amend their ways, and
make ready for Christ. And their modo, modo, was sine modo, and when they were
about to rise, like the Sluggard they lie down again, to take the the other Napp^
Death takes them Napping indeed, and betwixt their making good resolutions, to
do what they ought; and making good those resolutions by performing them;
Christ comes and takes them away, and their purposes and promises of amendment,
serve for nothing, but to aggravate their Condemnation, for breaking of them.
And assuredly, nothing will sharpen the Sting, and envenom the teeth of the
never-dying Worm, more than the remembrance of such convictions stifled, and
such resolutions broken by delay, till 'twas too late to perform them.

Tenthly, This work can never be done too soon, therefore there is no pretense
left for delay, for fear of being ready too early: thou can never be
Justified too soon, Sanctified too soon, be good too soon, be at Peace with God
too soon. I know indeed there are wretched Notions of, and prejudices against
Religion, which the Devil would infuse into men's minds, from whence it would
follow, that it is safe, yea better to let it alone, till we are Old, or come to
dye.

As that Religion is only an Art of dying happily, that Christ is an Austere
Master, and thou shall never see merry day in his service. That 'twill make
thee Melancholy, Emasculate thy Spirit with Superstitious fears, render thee
morose, unsociable, a burden to thy self and others. But these cursed slanders
smell so rank of the Father of lies, it is needless to confute them amongst
sober Christians. Yet in a word,

Religion is a Discipline of living holily, in order to dying happily, of
walking, with God here, that we may rest with him hereafter. And Christ is meek
and lowly in heart, Matthew xi, will neither provoke nor despise his servants,
and his yoke is easy, and burden light to those who willingly come under them,
and will neither gawl their Necks, nor break their Backs: there is no true
Peace but in reconciliation with God; nor Joy but to the Righteous, for light
Is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm xcvii.
11. Thou have put gladness in my heart more than when corn and wine increase,
Psalm iv. 7. When the returning Prodigal was received into his Fathers favor,
then they began to be m^rry. The Kingdom of God (of his Grace) is Righteousness
and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Yea believing in Christ, before we see
him, intitles us at least, to joy unspeakable and full of glory, and tho others
will not be persuaded of it, because they never felt it, rather let them be
persuaded to be fit to feel it.

For Soloman has told them, a stranger does not intermedle with it. But in
themselves all wisdoms ways are pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. And
not to honor the rest of those paultry slanders, with a particular
confutation: that cannot unman us in a base sense, which rather makes us more
than men in a noble one: what rectifies, refines, exalts our Reason, what
moderates, directs, subdues our passions to its conduct. What inlightens,
purifies, and pacifies our Consciences. What bows and melts down our wills,
into subjection to the will of God. And in a word, renues to the Image of
Christ, and makes us partakers of the Divine Nature, can not be guilty of
what is objected. And all this, is done by that, which makes us ready for
Christ, and therefore we can never either seek or find it too soon.

Eleventhly, But it may be done too late, that is, be gone about too late: as
thousands have found by sad experience. And O that their harms may be our
warnings, that we increase not that unhappy number. The Foolish Virgins would
have Oil at last, were it to be either begged or bought: and afterward they
came, Mat. xxv. 11. With their Lord, Lord, but then the door was shut. It Is ill
leaving these things to an after-game. Remember Esau, who afterward would have
inherited the blessing (which he despised before) but then he was rejected,
though he sought it earnestly with tears, Heb. xii. 17.

When once the Master of the House is risen and has shut the door, you may
strive to enter, but must lose your labor, Luke xiii. 24, 25. I pray Read with
consideration and Holy fear, Prove. i. from the twenty-fourth to the end, and
note especially verse 28. Then shall they call upon me but I will not answer:
they shall seek me early but they shall not find me. What they thought all in
good time, and even early, for this work, they will find to their shame, to their
sorrow and eternal ruin: was much too late in Gods esteem. Tho God has
promiss'd to accept us when we come, He has no where promiss'd more time in
which to come: the present is all we are sure of, Now is the accepted time, 2
Cor. vi. 2.

Twelfthly, It Is more than time 'twere done already. If we wake not, if we rise
not of our own accord, it is high time to do it, when our Master calls us: if we
go not out to meet him, it atleast becomes us to open to him when he comes and
knocks. If we prevent him not by offering free possession of our hearts,
there is no excuse left if we resist him, when he strives to take it, If our own
hunger, and even starving at the Hoggs Trough (with the prodigal) will not
drive us to him: Yet at least the killing his Fatlings, preparing his Wine,
making a Feast and inviting us so kindly, Come for all things are ready, should
do it, and hasten a mutual readiness in us: now God has long called us, Turn
ye turn ye why will ye dye? Come unto me and I will refresh you. The Spirit and
the Bride say come. How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? He has
long stood at the door and knocked, even till his head be wet with the rain, and
his locks with the dew of the night. He has long striven by his word, by his
Spirit, by his Ordinances, by his Providence: by his Mercies, by his
Judgments, as we say by fair means, and by force. He has long since made fat
Provision for us, and most lovingly invited us, and told us all is ready,
there is nothing wanting at the Feast but Guests. And is it not more than time,
that we had answered, opened, yielded, come long since; when he does even long
to see us there: when shall it once be?

Thirteenthly, The sooner the better, admit thy delay should not prove
damnable, it will certainly be very detrimental, thou wilt lose much by it, tho
thou lose not all. The sooner thou come, the welcomer thou shall be. The
youngest Disciple was the beloved Disciple. His soul desires the first ripe
fruits. Gods rod was of Almond wood, the Tree which Blossoms first of all the
Plants. Josiahs great encomium was: He sought the Lord God of his Fathers when
he was young, but twice eight years old, 2 Chronicles. xxxiv. 3. It Is argued amongst
Divines from what Age children are accountable to God for themselves, some say
from five, some say from seven years old: but all conclude that from the time
they can discern betwixt Good and evil, they are bound to refuse what is evil,
and to choose what is good. Again, the sooner thou art ready, the stronger will
thy Grace, the surer will thy Comforts be, and the greater thy Reward in
Heaven, as thou have longer glorified God on Earth: and all the while thou
stayest unready, thou art gathering either Woormwood, or Hemlock, the best is
bitter, the worst is deadly; bitter Repentance if thou be ever ready. And thou will cry out with Austin, Nimis sero te amare coepi: too late, O Lord, did I
begin to love thee. Rather therefore resolve with the Orator, Nolo tantiemere
poenitentiam, He not purchase Repentance at so dear a rate, or deadly damnation
if thou be never ready.

Fourteenthly, The longer thou stayest, the harder will the work be, each day
lays on a stone upon the Wall of Separation, thy sins are building betwixt God
and thee; and the higher it is raised the harder it will be to climb over. Thy
iniquities increase the Floods, like Ezechiels waters, and the stream which was
at first but Ankle high, or to the Knees, and fordable at least, will become
impassible, and in the deep waters they shall not come nigh him. The longer
thou art going from God the farther off thou wilt be, and the more difficult will
thy return be found. Rooted Habits are hardly eradicated, and Custom in sin
becomes a second Nature. And as easily may the Leopard change his spots: or the
Ethiopian put off his skin, as he learn to do good who is accustomed to do
evil, Jer. xiii. 23. Custom in sin, will take away the sense of sin, and harden
the heart like the nether Millstone. Therefore Exhort one another daily,
while it is called to day, yea rouse up your selves lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. iii. 13. Nemo repent fit turpissimus,
no man arrives at height of wickedness all on the sudden, but by degrees. Even
depraved Nature has some modesty left to restrain it, and that must be bafled
to make it impudent in sin, and braze its forehead, to be past blushing. A
fresh water-Souldier dops his head and shrinks at the discharge of single
Muskets, but he that is flusht with often coming safely off, despises Vollies,
and marches erect where the Bullets fall like a storm of Hail, and at last will
run upon the mouth of Canons. Experience breeds hope in evil as well as in
good: and because men have long continued unready for Christ, and yet found no
danger in it, they flatter themselves they never shall. And Because sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily: therefore the heart of the sons
of men is fully set in them to do evil, Eccl. viii: 11. And so what was always
hard to do: at length becomes next to impossible to be done, Especially
confidering,

Fifthteenthly, Thy strength declines, as well as thy work grows more
difficult; and according to the old Verse, Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus
erit. He that is unfit to day, will be more unfit to morrow; for besides the
decays of Nature, which are not to be despised, where the work is wholly to
begin, the offers of Grace will be more rare and faint, the motions of the
Spirit will be less frequent, less importunate. He has neither delight nor
list to knock at that door, which has been barred so long against him; nor to
expose himself to new repulses, where he has been so often grieved, and his
help rejected, and ere long he will be gone for ever, and woe be to thee when
he departs from thee.

Si ter pulsanti nemo respondet, abito. The Courts on Earth Record the third
contempt for contumacy, and proceed to Sentence. And does the Court of Heaven
keep no Records? He seals up thine iniquities in a bag: and are not these
things written in his Book. What folly is it, to lay the heaviest burden on the
weakest beast! to leave that care and work to thy decrepid Age: When the
Grasshopper shall be a burden, which the vigor of thy youth can scarcely
struggle with?

Sixteenthly, Thou will not be served thus thy self, do as thou would be done
to. How irksome to thee is a loytring servant? As vinegar to the teeth, and
smoke to the Eyes, so is a sluggard to them that send him, Prove. x. 26. Thou
expectest thy servant shall attend on thee, before he serve himself. Which of
you having a servant Plowing, or feeding Cattle, will say unto him by and by,
when he is come from the field, go sit down to meat? And will not rather say
unto him, first make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy self and serve me,
till I have eaten and drunken: and afte^ward thou shall eat and drink; thou wilt
rid thy House of him, who will serve himself before his Master: and make him
stay his leisure, and what shall God do to such an one? His are a willing
people, and all delay implies unwillingness. We would never do, what we are
loath to do, if we durst omit it, not love but fear begets such motion: and
it is love to our work, which makes our working acceptable; God had as lieve you
should do nothing, as do what you do, without, or against your heart.

Seventeenthly, Nay! You do not only hate delays in men: but you cannot bear
them at the hand of God; if you be in distress, in pain, or danger, you cry
out, O God make speed to save us: O Lord make have to help us, answer me
speedily, Lord tarry not, and if he do you grow importunate. Make have O God to
deliver me: make have to help me O Lord, Psalm. lxx. 1. Make have unto me O God,
O Lord make no tarrying, verse 5. if not half impatient, Hear me speedily, O
Lord, my spirit fails, Psalm. clxiii. 7. My soul is vexed, but thou, O Lord,
how long, Psalm vi. 3. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever! How long
will thou hide thy face from me? How long shall I take Counsel in my soul
daily? How long shall my enemy be exalted over me? Consider and hear me, O
Lord, my God, Psalm xiii. 1, 2, 3. If not quite so, and desperate, with that
wicked King. Why should I stay, or wait for the Lord any longer, 2 Kings vi.
33. And if God should when thou roarest for horror of Conscience, or art as on
a Rack with exquisite pains of Gout, or Stone, or but the Toothache: answer
thee with such delays as thou do him; and say; why such have, all in good
time, I am not at leisure, forty years hence, or twenty years hence I Will help
and ease thee; be content, I cannot come yet, but when I have nothing else to do
I Will help thee. How would this hope deferred make thy heart sick? And it is well
if thou refrain Blaspheming him, as one that mocked thee: and yet God must
suffer all this at thine hand, be provoked and grieved forty years long, yea
fifty, threescore years, and wait, and call, and cry, and reason with thee, and
entreat thee, to return, to get ready for him, but all in vain, thou turnest a
deaf Ear to him, and art as the deaf Adder, which refuses to hear the voice of
the charmer charming never so wisely. And wilt neither dance to his piping, nor
weep at his mourning to you. Consider this you that forget God, how, how
unkindly you take it, to be forgotten of him: and you that delay so many years
to be ready for him, how ill you can bear his delaying but a week or day, if he
be not ready to relieve and help you in your fears and sorrows.

Eighteenthly, You Will not deal thus with others as you deal with God, as if
'twere only safe and faultless to despise him, not with your betters, good
manners will not suffer that: you say, It Is fitter you should stay for them,
than they for you. Not with a Friend or Neighbor; but will rise at midnight,
to lend him what he needs, or but to light his Candle. Not with an Enemy, but
wilt Heap coals of fire on his head to melt him, or oblige him with preventing
kindness: not with a Beast but if it Low for Food wilt serve it: or if it fall
into a ditch, be it an Ox or Ass, wilt straightways pull it out, tho on the
Sabbath day, Luke xiv. 5. Nay you will not make the Devil dance attendance, at
the rate, you trifle with Almighty God, if he but whistle to you, you know his
meaning and obey it, a nod, a beckon of his finger is enough; you are dry
Tinder to the first spark of Temptation he cast on you, and you are quickly in
a flame. But to Gods Holy motions, tho they be hot as coals of Juniper, you are
like green wood: no blowing will suffice to dry, or make you kindle. Nay, would
I could say, that too many were not too quick and nimble for the Devil himself,
save him the charge and trouble of a temptation; run to his work before he bids
them, like high mettled Horses, start before the sign can be given, and run
full speed without either Switch or Spur. And yet meanwhile quite foundred, and
down right lame in the ways of God: that neither Spur nor Whip, can mend their
pace. God has not left himself without witness, that he might leave thee
without excuse: his grads are in thy sides; his hand has fixed them in thy
very soul: for as he has planted punitive affections in thee, to be his rods
to whip thee for thy past offenses, such as shame and grief. So has he
quickening affections to excite thee to thy duty; such as hope and fear, and yet
thou will kick against these pricks, be it never so hazardous, never so hard to
do so. How often have thou felt these stings strike to thy very heart, and yet
like a restive Horse, thou will rather winch, or kick, or run backward, or fall
down, than go forward as thou ought. When sickness has assaulted thee, and
grim Death has stared thee in the face, with its ghastly visage: how have thy
knees smote against each other, like Belshazers! Thy Countenance waxed pale,
and trembling seized thy joints; and anguish and horror surprised thy
Conscience. Like Cain; apprehending that Every thing that met thee would kill
thee; and what killed, would damn thee. Yet after all this, thou returnest to
thy old security, yea like heated water thou becomest more cold, or softened
Iron, more hard than e're before.

Ninteenthly, If there be any spark of Ingenuity left in thee, let us try to
blow up that. Christ went not thus lingringly about the work He undertook for
thy sake. But he left the Mansions of Glory, and came down from Heaven, more
willingly than thou can be persuaded to go thither. Lo I come to do thy will
O my God. In the volume of thy look it is written of me. He came leaping over
the hills, skipping over the mountains. Conquering all difficulties in the way.
With desire he desired to eat that Passover he knew was to be his last, and
himself immediately to succeed it. I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, and
how am I straightened till it be accomplished? And when his hour was come he
delays not one hour longer, but went to Jerusalem where he was to dye. When
they sought to take him, he called the Traitor friend, which kissed him into
their hands, yea offered himself to them of his own accord, whom seek ye! I am
he, and when that word had struck them down, he let them rise, and bind, and
carry him away, tho he had more than twelve legions of Angels ready for his
Rescue. 'Twere endless to reckon up those many Arguments you meet with in
History, to show how readily he went about that dreadful work, and how active
he was in his Bloody Passion. Read, Believe, Consider these things well: and
for shame make more have to be ready to attain that blessedness with him: for
the procuring which, he was so ready to be made a curse for thee.

Twentiethly, This thy delay wounds God in his tenderest part, his Eye, his
Heart, his Bowels. A wound is troublesome where ere it is fixed, but neither so
painful nor so mortal in an Arm or Leg, as in some vital part. To wound God in
the Foot of his Providence, the Arm of his Power, or Hand of his Justice, is a
provocation, but not like wounding him in the Eye of his Pity, Heart of his
Grace and Mercy, and the Bowels of his tender Compassions. All the most amiable
and endearing Attributes of God, shine most resplendently in this work of God;
to give his Son for sinners: and for sinners to refuse this Gift, despise this
Love, make light of it, as not worth receiving, or preparing to receive it,
what can be more provoking?

But set aside at present, the consideration of all the rest, and think what
the abuse of his patience alone amounts to: Rev. ii. 21. I gave her space to
repent and she repented not: was the most killing Article in Christ's charge
against Jesabel. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long suffering: not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance, Romans ii. 4. This is the sin by which men Treasure up wrath against
the day of wrath. For as Gods long suffering should be Salvation to us, the
abuse of it becomes the surest, and the sorest Damnation. Laesa patientia fit
furor, abused patience turns into fury. And God swears in his wrath at last,
They shall never enter into his rest, who had grieved him, by refusing the
tenders of it, forty years together.

Twenty firstly, This delay turns thy light into darkness, thy very Prayers
into sin, for either thou can not Pray as thou ought, for the coming of
Christ to Judgment, come Lord Jesus come quickly, or thou Prayest against thy
own life, and so against thy own heart: and do but mock God: and would not
have hi^ take thee at thy word, as St. Augustin^ bewaylingly confessed, when he
Prayed for Continence, before his Conversion, An^ domine, sed non modo, Lord
hear me, bu^ not yet, because he was afraid to lose h^ pleasing Lusts. So when
thou say, The Kingdom come, either thou considerest no^ what thou say, or
only say it in c^stom and formality: for neither would thou have the Kingdom
of his Grace come which thou wilfully opposest: nor the Kingdom of his Glory
for which thou r^fusest obstinately to be ready; and not hi^ would afright thee
more than pregna^^ symptoms of its near approach and spe^dy coming; and
would, as in a by wor^ men say Witches do: say thy Prayers bac^ward, let not
thy Kingdom come: b^ stay I pray thee till I be ready for it.

Twenty secondly, Tho thou delay and loyterest: yet other things do no Time
tarrys not, that is in perpetual Fl^ and sliding on, thou may take off t^
Weights of thy Clock, and stop its Motion but thou can not stop the Course of
t^ Sun in the Firmament as Joshuah did. N^ bring it back as it was by Isaiahs
Pray in Hezekiahs case; which was an Emblem of the adding more years to his
life, as well as a sign, that God would do it. Thou may turn thy Glass
sideling and hinder its running, but can not withhold thy Pulse from beating,
all whose strokes are numbered by that God which made it: and which number it
shall not exceed. Death tarries not, but is riding Post upon the Pale Horse: he
never draws Bitt. He neither Baits, not stays, till he has reached his
journies end, and done his errand: which is to Arrest thee, and take thee up
behind him, and carry thee to him who sent him for thee. Once more Judgment and
Damnation tarry not. There Is swift destruction hasting toward them, who hasten
not to be ready for Christ. And it is spoken very Emphatically, 2 Pet. ii. 3.
Whose Judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their Damnation slumbereth
not. There are but two impediments of speed, as one observes upon this place,
either lazying in Bed, with the sluggard: a little more slumbring, a little
more folding of the Arms to sleep, before he rise: or loytring with the
sloathful, when he is up; but both these are expressly denied: neither slumbers
in Bed, nor lingers when risen, therefore all impediments to speed are taken
away.

O therefore rouse up thy self, flee, tarry not, What meanest thou o sleeper?
Arise, there is a storm upon thee, call upon God in good earnest, and hasten thy
escape from this stormy wind and tempest. One word; the Philistines are upon the
Sampson; roused that drowsy sinner, tho he slept on an enchanted Pillow, the
knees of his Dalilah. O that a greater and more frightful word, might waken
thee! Hell and Damnation, the Devil and his Legions are upon thee: leap out of
Dalilahs lap, and with repentance for sleeping there so long, flee to the Arms
of Christ. Make thy self ready for Abraham's bosom. Is it not high time to fly
to the City of refuge, when the Avenger of blood is at our very heels, and
wants but one step to reach us with the fatal thrust! therefore as Jonathan
cried after the Lad, but meant it as a warning to David to escape the wrath of
Saul. So I to you, Make speed, have, stay not, 1 Samuel xx. 38.

Lastly, This tempting to Delay, is the Devils last and worst stratagem against
thy soul. It Is true, he will if he can, keep thee in ignorance, sensuality,
profaneness, formality without once suffering thee to think of God or Heaven, of
Death or Judgment, of thy soul and its concernments. But if thou get out of
this Dungeon, and begin to see the light, and by some startling Providence, or
rousing Sermon, be put in mind of these matters, and so resolvest to look
better to them, and to turn to God, and prepare in earnest for death, and for
the coming of Christ, because thou see the indispensible necessity of all
this.

Then will Satan disguise himself into an Angel of Light, and not only allow,
but applaud all those thy purposes: that he may be less suspected as the Author
of the last suggestion, with which, as his Masterpiece, he intends to assault
thee, to thy utter ruin; and therefore he will whisper to thy heart, to this, or
the like purpose. Repent and turn to God! Ay, God forbid thou should not;
save thy soul and get to Heaven! Yes what should thou do else? Who but a
fool or a madman would neglect it? Who would, who can, dwell with everlasting
burnings? Thou deservest to be damned, and damned again, if thou would not
resolve to be saved and go to Heaven. But let me mind thee yet of one thing:
thou know it is an old saying and a true: fair and softly goes far, no more
have than good speed: it is all in good time for these matters yet: the work is
not so hard, as some would make thee believe; God is merciful, and Christ dyed
for sinners, and God has sworn he desires not their death: and said that At
what time soever they repent, he will receive them. And besides thou art young
and strong, and have many businesses to mind, and men must not neglect their
Callings, and providing for their Families: and after these are done, then
may thou mind Religion, with less distraction, having settled and dispatched
thy other necessary Affairs first; and tho thou be pretty old, such and such
as thou know are ten or twenty years older, and pretty lusty still and thou
may live as long as they.

And suppose the worst come that can, that thou should be taken sick: it is
time enough, then to repent, and cry God mercy; and thou may send for thy
Minister to comfort thee, and get good people to Pray for thee, and it is but
repenting, and that thou may do then, for True Repentance, you have often
heard, is never too late, and therefore why should thou divert thy self from
thy business, and put thy self into a way thou will not like so well, when thou
know it better, as perhaps thou think thou shall. For I must tell thee
tho Religion have its use, yea and sweetness, yet no Rose grows without its
prickles, thou may find some thing in it, which thou wilt like better on a
death Bed, then at present: and here he will besprinkle it, with some sly and
sinister reflections. And farther, 'twas very well this thing was in thy heart,
God knows thy purposes, and good meanings, and he approves them, and will
accept them, tho thou should never perform them, at least, not at present.
These, and such as these, are the suggestions wherewith the Devil will assault
thee, to entangle thee in farther delay, and if by this guilding, he can make
the swallow this poisoned Pill, it is ten to one, thou art lost for ever; he
knows well, this is the most critical juncture in thy whole life, and thy being
a Saint or a sinner for ever, almost wholly depends upon it. If when thou art
enlightened, convinced, resolved to turn to God in earnest, and to hear his
voice to day, while it is called to day, and do say and hold. And deferrest
not to pay what thou have vowed: my life for thine, thou art safe. But it the
Devil play this last Engine so cunningly, as to demolish the Fort of thy
resolutions, abate thy present Fervours, cool thy warmed Affections, turn thee
from thy purposes, especially if he have done it twice or thrice before, I will
not say thy case is desperate; but I should be unfaithful, and false to thy
soul if I should not tell thee it is very dangerous, See Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6. and
2 Pet. ii. 20, 21, 22. I beseech you therefore by the Mercies of God; by the
Blood of Christ, which he shed to Justify you, and by the love of the Spirit,
which he first purchased, and then sent to sanctify you: That you Watch be
strong, and acquit your selves like men, and take to you all the A^mour of God,
that you may resist the battery of this worst of Satan's Engines, and defeat the
most dangerous of all his stratagems, to involve you in Procrastination: by
giving up your selves speedyly to God, and Christ, according to what ever
convictions, have been upon you, that you ought; and resolutions, that you
would so do, and be ready quickly.

I would add no more, did not one word remain, which may seem fit, to clinch
and rivet that Nail, I have been forcing home, with so many blows. And I shall
take it out of your own mouths. Methinks I hear some say, why so many Arguments
in so clear a case? and others ready to make the number occasion of their
laughter, and others, 'twas good, if it had not been so long: but it was cruel
tedious.

Well, be it so, admit it had been delivered at this length, (which yet by the
way it was not) let me in cool blood, debate the case with these Objectors,
before we part. Is the case so clear in thy opinion, that it is superfluous to
multiply Arguments to prove it? Out of thy own mouth shall thou be judged thou
sloathful servant. Why do thou continue to Rebel against thy light? Why do
thou still delay? That Is enough which does the work it is designed to: but
that is too little which does it not. The Motives may be enough to leave thee
inexcusable, but they are not enough for thee, till they effectually persuade
thee to leave thy sin, and escape thy danger. And for the next, must I bear
your petulent scorn, for remembering you of returning to God, with such a
number, and shall it cost you nothing, to forget him days without number? Do
you now laugh because the Motives are so many? And what will you do, when God
shall laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes, because these
many were too few to make you take warning? To make you wise to prevent them,
and escape them.

Is it so tedious to you to hear your sins Arraigned and Condemned a long hour.
And what is it to God to be dishonored and provoked by them all thy life long?
Is it a load which breaks the back of thy Patience, to hear Motives multiplied,
to turn thee Speedily? And is it no dangerous trial of Gods Patience, to load
him with thy multiplied sins, as a Cart is laden with Sheaves and pressed down?

If it be wearisome to hear thy sins reproved? How much more Just is Gods
complaint, They have wearied me with iniquities, and made me serve with their
sins! In a word, if I have been thought long in calling you to turn to God: how
long does God think your refusing to return? And how tedious will it be, to
bear the eternal reproaches of thy own heart, and lashes of thy own enraged
Conscience, for that refusal? Which nothing can exempt thee from, but taking
the Council I have so plainly given. Consider what I have said, and the Lord
give us understandings, and hearts to close with it, that when ever Christ
comes He may find us Ready. Amen.

A DISCOURSE Showing the Sinfulness and Danger of Putting-off our Great WORK:
BEING The Substance of a Sermon delivered at the Funeral of Mr. David Geer, at
St. Botolph's- Aldgate.
Upon St. JOHN ix.iv. I must work the Works of Him that sent me, while it is
Day: The Night comes, when no Man can work.


THis Chapter contains the History of one of the chief Miracles, which our
Blessed Savior wrought whilst He was in this World: That is, His opening the
Eyes of the Man which was born Blind. And it is Recorded more largely, than any
of his wonderful Works, (except his Raising Lazarus from the Dead) for it fills
a whole long Chapter to declare, the Occasion of it, the Work it self, and what
followed upon it: and affords Matter of so many useful and choice Observations,
it is some difficulty to pass them by: For it did not only Confirm his Mission
and Doctrine to be from God; but the very Miracle it self was Doctrinal; the
Man's being born Blind, figuring that Spiritual Blindness under which we are
all Born; and Christ's Healing him, and the Manner of it, showing from whence,
we must expect the true Eye Salve. But I must confine my self, to what the
present Solemn Occasion directly minds us of.

The Words I have read, were pronounced by our Lord, as an Introduction to the
Work, when he addressed himself to the Performance of it; and discover his
Faithful Obedience, and Excellent Wisdom in improving the Seasons, for
fulfilling the Works his Father sent him into this World for: And commend to us
a Truth of general Use, and universal Obligation; tho our Lord vouchsafes to
apply it to Himself, in this particular Case.

I confess, the Words have not the Form of a Precept; but they have the Force,
yea, more than the Force, of a single Command, and press the Duty more Home,
than if it had been said expressly, Work while it is Day: For First, They are an
Example given in the Person of him whom we are bound to imitate and follow;
whose Works are Vocal, and whose Actions are our Instructions. He being the Son
of God, and our Lord and Master, saying, I must work,; it is as if a Son in the
Family should say to the Servants, or a Wealthy fore-handed Man to his poor
Neighbors, who have nothing but their Hands to Live on: What ever you do, I
must mind my Business; I must labor, and not squander away one Day after
another; my Father will not suffer it in me; and I should quickly be undone by
such a Course. Such Words, spoken in their own Persons, are more awakening,
more pungent, than if they only bid them mind their Business: For they smartly
and sarcastically reproach their Sloth, and upbraid them for their Loytering.

For if the Master of the Family will not bear it in a Son, much less will he
in a Servant; and if he that is well beforehand, must be industrious to prevent
Poverty and Want; much more must he, that has but from Hand to Mouth.

But the quickening Influence of the Example is not all: For, Secondly, The
Reason by which it is enforced, shows it extends to many. For when He had said,
I must work, etc. while it is Day; when he comes to give the Reason of it, he
says not, The Night comes, when I cannot work; but, When no Man can work;
('it is St. Chrysostom's Note) thereby clearly implying, that the Duty reaches
all, whom the Reason of the Duty reaches: and amounts to thus much; That every
Man who has Work to do, which must be done by Day, and cannot be done by
Night, must hasten to dispatch it, while the Day lasts; lest he be surprised
and prevented by the Nights Approach.

Having thus briefly cleared my Passage to what I design, by showing, that the
Words, tho spoken by our Lord of Himself; yet are fairly Applicable unto
others, and may have Efficacious Influence both upon their Duty, and their
Wisdom, to engage them to improve their Opportunities speedily, for the Work of
God, and their own Souls; which I could make good by more than Twenty of the
best Expositors, both Ancient and Modern, if 'twere needful. I shall now
proceed to grasp the Strength and Scope of the whole Verse, into one full and
comprehensive Observation, always Useful, and to the present Occasion very
Seasonable.

Take it in these plain Words, and easy to be understood:

The Consideration of the Work we have to do, and the Time allowed, and
limited, for the Doing of it in, indispensably oblige us, to the utmost Speed
and Diligence, in the Doing of it.

I conceive, these Expressions are fairly Commensurate with the Text: And, as
they leave out nothing, which is material in it; so they add nothing to it, but
what is evidently Comprehended in it; as will be farther manifest, by
explaining these Three Particulars.

1. What is meant by this Work we have to do.

2. What is the Time or Season allowed to do it in, called in the Text a Day,
or While it is Day.

3. What is the Limitation, by which this Time is bounded, and to which it is
restrained; which is partly implied in calling it a Day, which is a definite,
and measured Portion of Time, partly expressed in the word Night, which puts an
End and Period to the Day.

These, as they relate to Christ, (which I touch, because he first applies them
to Himself, and shall after wholly wave and supersede) were as to his Work: To
prove Himself to be the Son of God; the True, the Promised Messiah: To reveal
the Will and Counsel of his Father, to the World: To show to Men the way of
Salvation, and Eternal Life: To declare the Covenant of Grace, and Preach the
Gospel: And to manifest both Himself, and his Doctrine to be of God, by working
many, and mighty Miracles; and by speaking, as never any other Man spoke; and
doing such Works, as never any other Man did; and Approving Himself mighty both
in Word and Deed, before God, and all the People, Luke 24.19. till he had
confirmed the Faith of them who believed in Him, and left the Incredulous and
Obstinate without Excuse: And such was the Work of Opening the Eyes of him that
was born Blind, Recorded in this Chapter; and the Words he spoke upon that
Occasion.

Secondly, For His Day. It was the Time allotted him of his Father, to continue
in this World; the Season of his Ministry, the Space in which a Restraint was
laid upon the Powers of Darkness, from hindering him to fulfill all that was
foretold concerning him, and to accomplish all that was needful to be done,
for his Father's Glory, and his Peoples Salvation, before his last Suffering.

Thirdly, The Night was his Death, and going out of this World; the Hour of the
Wicked, and the Power of Darkness, to which he was to be subject in his
Passion, St. Luke 22.53. in which, according to his Father's Determinate
Counsel, he did voluntarily suspend his Power of working Miracles, and would
not deliver Himself; but suffered Himself, first to be Apprehended, and then
Condemned to Dye, and then by Wicked Hands to be Crucified and Slain, Act. 2.23.

I have thus briefly glanced at the Meaning of the Words, as they relate to our
Savior, to whom they were primarily applied; that this may facilitate the
Understanding of them, as applicable to our our selves; to which I shall
confine my self, in the Handling and Improving of them: And therefore, the Work
to be done, as it concerns us, is to believe in Jesus Christ. This is St.
Chrysostom's; from Joh. 6.28, 29. What shall we do, that we may work the Works
of God? Jesus answered, and said unto them, This is the Work of God, that ye
Believe on Him, whom. He has sent. That is the Work He has enjoined us,
according to 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment, That ye Believe on the Name
of his Son Jesus Christ. Our Work is to Repent sincerely of our Sins, and turn
to God with our whole Hearts, and to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance.

Thus Gregory the Great, upon the Fourth Penitential Psalm: What are these
Works of his Father, which he says, Are to be wrought by Day, and not by
Night? Nisi agri intellectualis cultura; The Tillage and Cultivating of our
Souls; which the Prophet Jeremiah's Description of Repentance, agrees well
with, Jer. 4.3, 4. Break up your Fallow Ground, and sow not among Thorns:
Circumcise your selves unto the Lord, and take away the Foreskin of your
Hearts: Kill the Thorns and Weeds of your Lusts and Corruptions, by plowing up
the Roots of them, by the Plough of Godly Sorrow, Mortification, and Amendment
of Life. This Work is, To work out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling,
Phil. 2.12. In a word, It is to become good Men, good Christians, and to live
as becomes those who profess to be such; to get our Peace made with Heaven; to
be fit to Dye; to Glorify God, and to save our own Souls; which is the One
Thing necessary, the Work God has sent us into this World for.

Secondly, The Time, the Season, allowed us to do this Work in, is the Day of
our Natural Life; as a Good Expositor upon the Words, The space of every Man's
Life, is his Day: Therefore, as the Shortness of the Day quickens Workmen to
Industry and Sedulity, lest the Darkness of the Night should over-take them, in
the Midst of their Endeavors, and before their Work is finished: So we,
knowing the Time of our Life is but short, should be ashamed and afraid to
loyter, and freeze in Sloth and Idleness; and must not delay at all, lest our
Opportunities slip from us, past Recovery. And farther, Our Day is the Day of
Grace, while we have the Sun of Righteousness shining in the Light of the
Gospel; and while we have God's Ordinances without, and the Motions and
Assistance of his Spirit within, before the Means of Salvation be taken from
us, or the Blessing be taken from the Means: And God's blessed Spirit, for our
often quenching, grieving, and resisting of Him, and refusing his proffered
Aids, and gracious Help; withdraw, and leave us, and Blackness of Darkness
over-shade, yea over-whelm, our Minds; as the Dreadful Beginnings of Eternal
Night.

Thirdly, By Night, which limits our Day, is to be understood (as may be
gathered from the Opposition betwixt these two) the contrary, to what is meant
by Day. And therefore it signifies our Natural Death, or any notable Degree or
Tendency toward it. Loss of our Senses, Reason, or such decays of them, as
make us incapable of Acting as Men, in our great Concerns: Or the setting of
the Gospel Sun: the removal of God's Kingdom and Candlestick: God's departure
from us, and taking away his Light and Guidance: His Grace and Spirit; without
which, we can do nothing but wander, and wilder, and lose our selves and do no
Work, but what has Death for its Wages; and find no way, but what leads down
to Hell. To Sum up this plain Explication in the easiest Words I can: We are
indispensably bound, and it infinitely concerns us, to make have to Believe,
Repent, get our Peace made with God, and to be ready to Dye, while God spares
our Lives, and continues the Gospel, and the means of Grace amongst us, and
offers us his Help, by the frequent motions of his Spirit. For as this Work may
be happily done by Day; that is, while these Mercies are continued; so if they
be taken away, and Night over take us, before our Work be done, it is
impossible it ever should be done; and we must be undone for Ever.

I now return to the Observation, into which I graspt the scope, and substance
of the Text, which was this. The Consideration of the Work we have to do; and
the Season allowed, and limited for the doing of it in, oblige us
indispensably, to utmost speed and diligence in the doing of it.

The Holy Scripture is very copious, and full in pressing both speed and
diligence, upon the accounts this Observation intimates, it shall suffice to
name a few at present for Confirmation, Isa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord while He
may be found, Call upon Him while he is near; which supposes, what Psalm. 32.6.
expresses there is a Time, in which there is no coming near Him, Like 13.24.
Strive to enter in at the straight Gate: for many, I say unto you, will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able: when once the Master of the House is risen,
and has shut the Door, Joh. 12.35. Yet a little while is the Light with you;
walk while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you: for he that walks
in Darkness, knows not whither he goes: While ye have Light believe in the
Light, Eccles. 9.10. Whatever thy Hand finds to do, do it with thy Might: for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave, whither
thou go. And of how much greater consequence thy Work is, so much greater in
Reason, should be both thy Speed and Diligence.

I now proceed to the proof of the Observation, and to show the Reasons, why
it is so necessary to be Speedy and Diligent about this Work: and because those
Reasons are usually most cogent and forceable, which are drawn from the Nature
of the thing, which is to be confirmed by them, I will take them all from the
Text it self, which is like some well-stor'd Mansion, or noble Seat, which is
Furnished with all needful Provisions, within its own Bounds.

And First, Because it is Work.

Secondly, Because a Convenient Season is allowed to do it in.

Thirdly, Because this Season is of Uncertain Continuance, will not last
always, and may slip from us suddenly, 'ere we be aware.

First, It Is Work: Work with an Emphasis; our main-business, not our
by-business, though too many make it so. The great Errand, upon which God sent
Us into this World. Moses tells Us, it is not a vain thing; but it is our Life,
our Life is lent Us for it; and our Life depends upon it, Deuteronomy. 32.47. The
Comfort of it here, and the Safety of it hereafter; another manner of Work than
heaping up Riches, for that is a vain thing, Psalm. 39.6. with Job it is the only
Work of true Wisdom, Job. 28.28. And unto Man he said; Behold the fear of the
Lord that is Wisdom, and to depart from Evil, is Understanding. A Man, a Wise
Man, who only deserves the name of a Man, should count nothing else
comparatively worth his Care.: it is David's Vnum petii, Psalm. 27.4. The one
thing he desired of God, to enjoy Opportunities to help him in this Work. It Is
Solomon's Totum hominis, the whole of Man's Duty and Happiness, Eccles. 12.13.
Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter, fear God and keep his
Commandments; for this is the whole of Man. It Is St. Paul's great Race. His hic
labor hoc opus, 1 Cor. 9.24. So Run that ye may obtain; so Fight (against your
Spiritual Enemies) as Men that are in earnest, make not vain Florishes, only to
beat the Air: So strive, that you may Win and Wear an incorruptible Crown; in a
word, from our Lords own Mouth, it is primum quaerendum, Mat. 6.33. Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, and His Righteousness; and the unum necessarium, St.
Luke 10.42. But one thing is needful: Signally, and Eminently the Work of God,
which He has given Us to do, Joh. 6.29.

Now this Consideration, that Religion, the Glorifying God, the Saving of our
own Souls, is Work, our great Work implies these Five things.

1. It Is necessity it must be done. 2ly. It Is priority, it must not be
postpon'd, but first done. 3ly. It Is difficulty, it must not be trifled in; but
done with all our Skill and Might. 4ly. It Is perfection, it must not be done by
halves. 5ly. It Is certain Reward; all Work shall have it is Wages.
All which Mighty Weights, one would think, might stir a quick and vigorous
Motion, in the most rusty Engine; I mean, the most restive lazy Soul: if we
would hang them on, with due and frequent Meditation.

Let Us consider them a little, one by one.

First, Because it is our Work it must be done, what ever else be left undone,
or we must be undone Eternally, by, and for, neglecting it. Remember the Doom
of the Sloathful Servant, who neglected to get, what he knew he should have
had, and had Opportunity to have provided, St. Mat. 22.13. Bind him Hand and
Foot, and Cast him into utter Darkness. You may Read his Fault in his
Punishment; one is the Anagram of the other. He bound his own Hands and Feet
with Cords of Sloth and Negligence; and now His Master causes them to be bound
with Chains of Vengeance. He Slept away the Light vouchsaft him, as if it had
been Night: and now he shall have Darkness to extremity; but such as will never
yield him Rest or Sleep.

This being our Work, it is so necessary, it must not be neglected by any
means, upon any pretense whatever; though it were to give outward Attendance on
Christ himself, as he told Martha plainly, preferring Mary's sitting at His
Feet, to hear His Word, and minding this one needful thing, before all Martha's
troublesome Diligence; in which, she was Cumbred with much Serving, to make
Provision for Him; it is more necessary then to Eat; therefore, Job esteemed
God's Words, more, not only than his Dainty, but his Daily, his Necessary Food,
Job. 23.12. St. Paul, but to promote this Work in others, says, Necessity is
laid upon me, and Woe be unto me, if I Preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. And
may not we, should not we all say, Necessity is laid upon us, and Woe be unto
us, if we Believe not, if we Obey not the Gospel?

It Is more necessary than to Live; Holy Men of God have willingly spent their
Lives to help others in this Work. Neither count I my Life dear to me, so that
I might finish my Course with Joy, and the Ministry which I have Received of
the Lord Jesus, to Testify the Gospel of the Grace of God, Act. 20.24. Yea, our
Lord himself counted this His Meat and Drink, and refused his bodily Food, even
when He was Hungry, to Feed on this, St. John 4.32, 34. Yea, He esteemed it so
necessary, that He came down from Heaven, endured the Cross; and Bore the Law's
Curse, and his Father's Wrath, to Accomplish it.

In a word, The End is more necessary than all the Means conducing to it; and
next to God's Glory, our own Salvation is the ultimate End of all we have, or
are, or do; and therefore, more necessary than them, all put together. When
some told good Dr. Reignolds, He would Kill himself with Studying and
Preaching, advised him to spare himself; He replied, Nec propter vitam vivendi
perdere causam: He would not to save Life, neglect that, for which God gave him
Life; and for which alone, it is worth while to Live. Good Lord! That Men can
find time for every thing else, and account the most trivial Matters worthy of
their Care; and can find neither, for this great, this necessary Work.

'Twas a smart Sarcasm, which the Great Augustus cast upon the Gaulish Ladies;
when He saw them playing with their Dogs in their Laps: Have the Women in this
Country no Children? Implying that 'twas a shame to neglect their Children; and
to prefer their Dogs into their Place. So may I say with Wonder and Amazement:
Have these Men no God to Serve, no Soul to Save, no greater, no better Work to
do, than to mind their Pleasures, and their Profits; their Follies, and their
Lusts? As if nothing might be slighted, but what of all things ought least so
to be: the Work, God sent you into the World, and called you into His Church,
for your only Necessary Business. O besottted Sinners, Who has bewitch't you,
thus to pervert the Design of God, and to misunderstand your own Interest?
Awake, awake, Rouse up your selves, show your selves Men; and make that your
Business in good earnest, which God has made your great, your only necessary
Work.

Secondly, Because it is Work, it claims Precedence, it must not be Post-pon'd,
thrust back; but first dispatched, and not give place to our By-business: this
is your Method in all other Cases. First Work, then Recreation, if any time be
spare, when Work is Finished. You send not your Children to their Play in the
Morning, and bid them go to School, when they have played enough: but first to
school, and let them play when they have learned their Lesson. The Heathen
could say, A Jove principium, we must begin with God, and our Lord bids Us
first seek God's Kingdom, and its Righteousness.

Christ is Alpha, and Omega, The First, and the Last, Rev. 1.11. And we must
begin and end with Him, make His Service our first Care, and His Glory our last
End. And Reason says, Work must be First, because that may be wisely left
longest undone; which will occasion least Prejudice, if it be left quite undone
for Ever. Now if this Work be done, thou art safe and well, though you have no
time to do the rest: yea, if time fail, you will not need the rest: for time,
and the use of Temporal things dye both together, and are raked up in one
another Ashes: and when thou art got to Heaven, thou wilt want neither House nor
Land, nor Meat nor Money, nor secular Knowledge nor Honor, nor Wife no^
Children; but God and Christ will be enough, and more than All to thee, and
'twill never grieve thee there, that thou had not got this, or the other
thing, to leave behind thee: but on the other side, if beginning at the wrong
end, thou have accomplished all thy designs, brought all thy Ends together, and
obtained more than Heart could wish, and want nothing but an Interest in
Christ, and readiness to Dye; and then be snatched away to Hell, (like the Rich
Foot in the Gospel, who never dreamt of that amidst his Plenty:) The
Remembrance of what thou once was Master of, will yield thee no more Relief,
than Dives's faring Deliciously on Earth, contributed to the cooling of his
Tongue, when he was tormented in those Infernal Flames.

Thirdly, Because it is Work, it is difficult; all Work has something hard in
it, else 'twere miscalled to call it Labor: All Arts require painful Study,
and all Study causes Wearyness. But, Omnium I ^fficillima, ars faecilitatis,
The Art of being Happy, is of all the Hardest, because of all the most
Excellent. The Righteous are hardly saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. The Way to Hell is
broad and smooth, of easy Descent: But the Way to Heaven is strait and rugged,
and must be climbed with Labor. I say not this to fright you out on it, but to
provoke your Diligence. It Is a Greek Proverb, The Gods give Nothing, but sell
All that is Good. The Price they sell it for, is Labor. When a Leader tells his
Soldiers, before a Storm or Battle, how Valiant and Stout their Enemies are,
and what Men of Mettle they must grapple with; it is not to daunt them, or give
them an Excuse to turn their backs, and run away; but to inflame their Courage,
and whet their Valor. So when the Scripture tells us, Our Adversary the Devil,
is a Roaring Lion; it is not to scare us, but make us watchful, and to provoke
us to Resist him Manfully. And when it tells us, We wrestle not with (weak)
Flesh and Blood, but Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6. it is to mind us to gird
on our Armor, and bestir our selves with becoming Boldness, and stand our
Ground with Resolution: The things Religion is compared to, and the Emblems of
a Christian, speak it to be hard: A Fighting Soldier; a Contending Racer; a
Wrestling Combatant; a Laborious Husbandman; a Trading, Traveling Merchant.
Many Corruptions must be mortified; Right Eyes plucked out, Right Hands cut
off. Many Temptations must be resisted, many Enemies must be vanquished, many
Graces must be acquired, many Duties must be learnt, and practiced. And, Who
can reckon all this Easy, and like to cost no Pains, but he that never tried,
never considered what it is to be a Christian indeed? Therefore, flatter not
your selves, that you can attain it, how and when you please: But learn this
Discipline betimes, Exercise your selves to Godlyness continually, stand upon
your Guard, take to your selves the Whole Armor of God: But above all, betake
thy self to Christ's Protection, and God's Assistance: That when thou art weak
in thy self, thou may be strong in Him; that thou may Do all Things
through Christ that strengthens thee, tho thou could do nothing in thy self:
That thou may be Strong in the Lord, and the Power of his Might: Yea, may
be more than Conqueror, through Him that loved thee; and bids thee, Be of good
Cheer, because He has overcome for thee.

Fourthly, Because it is Work, it must be carried on unto Perfection: It must
not be begun only, and continued in a little, but finished; or else as good
never a whit, as never the better: As in a Race, you must run to the End of it,
and come timely to the Goal; or you had as good not start, at the giving of the
Sign.

You know the reproach and loss that Builder incurred, in the Gospel-Parable,
who began to Build, but was not careful to Finish; and the Galations, though
they ran well for some time; yet because they gave over, and made an
unseasonable halt, are called Fools, and compared to Men bewitch't, for
stopping in so good a Course. He that puts his Hand to the Plough, must not
look back. Lot's Wife went out of Sodom, yet she never reached to Zoar. Christ
had many Disciples, Who Walked with Him a while, and then forsook Him, and
Walked no more with Him, Joh. 6.6. and their short Discipleship profited them
nothing. Beginning in the Spirit, will not advantage those who End in the
Flesh. When the Righteous Man turns away from his Righteousness, and commits
Iniquity, and does according to all the Abominations that the Wicked Man does;
Shall he Live? All his Righteousness which he has done, shall not be
mentioned: In his Trespass that he has trespassed, and in his Sin that he has
sinned, in them shall he Dye, Ezekiel. 18.24. He that is but half a Christian,
shall be wholly Damned.

It Is the End, which Crowns the Work. Rev. 3.11. Behold I come quickly; hold
fast that thou have, that no Man take thy Crown, and 2.10. Be thou Faithful to
the Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life; if the Salt lose its Savor,
it is fit for nothing but the Dunghill. Eternal Life is promised to them, Who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory, Romans 2.7. Let us therefore
endeavor to Perfect Holiness in the Fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Remembering what
Christ Wrote to the Church of Sardis, who had a Name to Live, and was Dead,
Rev. 3.2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready
to dye: for I have not found thy Works perfect before God. Thou can not be
ready to dye in a good sense: if the best things in thee, be ready to dye in so
bad an one.

Fifthly, Because it is a Work, it shall be Rewarded. This I add, that you may
not want encouragement, amidst so many difficulties. And I hope, we may
innocently speak God's Language, without suspicion or danger, of poisoning it
with the fond Opinion of Merit How often do we read, thy Work shall be
Rewarded? and, Who rendereth to every Man according to his Works; and verily
there is a Reward for the Righteous, and the like. Every Work shall have its
proportionable Recompense. The same Chapter which gives us this Rule, He that
comes to God, must believe, that HE IS, and that He is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek Him, Heb. 11.6. gives us the Example of Moses having Respect to
the Recompense of the Reward, Verse. 26. Every Work shall have its Wages: If we
do our Own Work, we must be our Own Pay-Masters; and, if the Devil's, we must
expect no better than he uses to give. But if we be Speedy, Faithful,
Diligent, in this Work of God, we may expect, and shall not be disappointed, of
God's Reward; yea, that He Himself will be our Exceeding great Reward, as He
promised the Father of the Faithful, Genesis 15.1. and will perform to all his
Children. Let us therefore, not be weary in Well-doing; for in due time we
shall Reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6.9. Wherefore, Whatsoever you do, do it
heartily, as to the Lord; knowing that of the Lord, you shall receive the
Reward of the Inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.24. who is not
Unrighteous, to forget your Labor of Love, Heb. 6.10. If this were not a Work
appointed, and enjoined of God, all our Recompense might be, Who has required
these Things at your Hands? But seeing it is the Work of God, we so run, not as
uncertain, that is, not as uncertain of Assistance; for He will help us to do
His own Work: nor of Acceptance; for He cannot but be pleased to see His own
Work carried on: nor of a Gracious Reward; for He is Faithful, who has
promised; and the Promise of Eternal Life, is made by that God who cannot Lie,
Tit. 1.2.

Therefore, my Beloved, be ye Steadfast and Immovable, always abounding in the
Work of the Lord; forasmuch as you know, that your Labor is not in vain in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

And This may suffice to provoke our Speed and Diligence, from the First
Consideration, That it is Work; implying its Necessity, its Precedence, its
Difficulty, its required Perfection, and its sure Reward.

I proceed to the Second Reason, While it is Day; that is, because a fit Season
and Opportunity is vouchsafed and allowed us, to do this Work in. A Day: That
is the Time of this present Life, and the Enjoyment of the Means of Grace,
outwardly in the Gospel, and inwardly by the Assistance of His Spirit. And let
us consider this as a Day; 1. For Quality. 2. For Quantity.


First, For Quality: God called the Light, DAY, Genesis 1.5. The Day is, Tempus
Lucis, the Time of Light; affording us necessary Help, to see to do our Work.
Therefore, the Day is appointed for Labor, because it is a fit time for it;
Psalm. 104.22, 23. The Sun arises: Man goes forth unto his Work, unto his
Labor, until the Evening. If any Man walk in the Day, he stumbleth not,
because he sees the Light of this World: But if a Man walk in the Night, he
stumbleth, because there is no Light in him, St. John 11.9, 10.

The Time of this Life, is called Light, in Opposition to Death, which is a
State of Darkness; and the Grave, which is the House of Darkness; the Land of
Darkness, as Job describes it, chapter 10.21, 22. Before I go, whence I shall not
Return, even to the Land of Darkness, and the Shadow of Death: A Land of
Darkness, as Darkness it self, and of the Shadow of Death, without any Order;
and where the Light is as Darkness. And Chap. 18.18. He shall be driven from
Light into Darkness, and chased out of the World. Once more, Chap. 33.28, 30.
He will deliver his Soul from going into the Pit, and his Life shall see the
Light: To bring back his Soul from the Pit, to be enlightened with the Light of
the Living.

And the Season of Grace is called a Day, from the Similitude of the Fitness of
a Natural Day, for the Works of this World; and of the Day of Grace, for the
Works of the World to come: and from the Likeness of the Causes, of either of
them. The Rising of the Sun, and its Presence, makes Day; and nothing but the
Sun can make it: not the Moon, or Stars, in their greatest Brightness. So the
Son of Righteousness, as Christ is called, Mal. 4.2. arising and shining, in
the Beams of the Gospel, can only make this Spiritual Day. It Is not the
Twy-light of Nature, nor the Glow-Worm-light of Arts, and Humane Learning; nor
the Moonlight of the Law; but the Sun-light of the Gospel, that produces it.
Christ is the true Light, Joh. 1.9. And in the next Verse after the Text, he
says, I am the Light of the World. See also St. John 8.12. And in Old Simeon's
Song, St. Luke 2.32. A Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy
People Israel.

And therefore, before Christ's Coming, the World was overwhelmed with
Darkness: But, as the Prophet Isaiah had long before foretold, upon His
Appearing, The People which sat in Darkness, and the Shadow of Death, saw
great Light spring up, Matthew. 4.16.

Therefore Zachary sung at the the Birth of his Son St. John Baptist; Thou
Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest: For thou shall go before the
Face of the Lord, to prepare His Ways; to give Knowledge of Salvation unto His
People, by the Remission of their Sins, through the tender Mercies of our God,
(which Words are an Excellent Description of the Gospel) whereby the Dayspring
from on High has visited us; to give Light to them that sit in Darkness, and
in the Shadow of Death; to guide our Feet into the Way of Peace, St. Luke 1.76,
77, 78, 79.

Now, the Presence of the Day lays a great Engagement upon us to be working.
Solomon enforces that Exhortation, Eccles. 12.1, 2. Remember now thy Creator
in the Days of thy Youth; by this Argument, While the Sun, or the Light be not
darkened: While the Vigor of thy Senses, and thy Reason last, and thy Life is
spared to thee. And you may see the same Reason improved by St. Paul, with
Respect to the Day of Grace, Romans 13.12, 13. The Night is far spent, the Day is
at hand: Let us therefore put off the Works of Darkness, let us put on the
Armor of Light: Let us walk Honestly, as in the Day. And Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were
sometimes Darkness, but now are ye Light in the Lord: Walk as Children of
Light, and have no Fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness. And again:
1 These. 5.5, 6, 7, 8. Ye are all Children of the Light, and of the Day: We are
not of the Night, nor of the Darkness. Therefore, let us not sleep, as do
others; but let us watch, and be sober: For they that sleep, sleep in the
Night; and they that are drunken, are drunken in the Night. But let us who are
of the Day, be sober, putting on the Breast Plate of Faith and Love; and for an
Helmet, the Hope of Salvation.

If a Man have Haste of Business, he will Wake and Rise before the Sun, as David,
Psalm. 119.147, 148. I prevented the Dawning of the Morning, and cried; Mine
Eyes prevent the Night-Watches: At Midnight will I Rise; or eke out the Day by
Candlelight. The good House-Wife's Candle goes not out by Night, Prove. 31.15,
18. But admit it be excuseable to sleep by Night, and God may wink at the
Closing of our Eyes, while Darkness covers us, (the Time of that Ignorance God
winked at, Act. 17 30.) yet it is Intolerable to do so, when the Sun shines in
its full Strength.

Now, he calls all Men, every where to Repent. Wherever the Light of the
Gospel shines, to show how much they need it, it is (as we use to say) a burning
Shame to burn Daylight: And we cannot upbraid a Sluggard more smartly, than by
drawing open his Curtains, and letting in the Sun upon him; and demanding, What
think thou? Did God Almighty make that glorious Light to sleep by?

Secondly, A day for Quantity; and that both in Extension, Limitation,


First, A day Extensively: A whole day, not a Minute, not an Hour. The Lord
affords you sufficient time, to do the Work he has set you; and expects from
you: A Day is a fair Proportion for a Days Work; and this Allowance of
Convenient Time, will leave Sinners very inexcuseable, and greatly aggravates
the not Fulfilling what is required of them. Romans 10.21. All day long have I
stretched out my Hands to a disobedient, and gainsaying People. St. Matthew.
20.6. Why stand ye here all the day Idle. It heightened God's Wrath against
Jezabel, that He gave her space to Repent of her Fornication, and she Repented
not, Rev. 2.21. The Lord is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any
should perish; but that all should come to Repentance, 2. Pet. 3.9. And we
should Account this Long-suffering, Salvation, a great Opportunity to promote
our Salvation. And this Goodness, Forbearance, and Long-suffering of God,
should not be despised, nor securely trifled away; but should lead us to
Repentance ( Romans 2.4.) speedily and quickly: And the rather, because, though
God waits to be gracious, He will not wait always; and though He strive long,
and knock often, He will cease both to strive and knock, when He finds it is in
vain: And though He allow you a whole day; yet, by way of Limitation,

Secondly, It Is but a day; and that word carries its Limits with it. A day is
Pars Temporis mensurata, a measured stated Portion of Time. Are there not
Twelve Hours in a day? Joh. 11.9. He says not a Month, a Year, an Age; lest we
should be encouraged and emboldned to Security: But a Day. And He often puts us
in mind of this: Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to
Day. Verse. 15. Whilst it is said to Day, if ye will hear His Voice, harden not
your Hearts. And more expressly, Chap. 4.7. Again, He limiteth a certain Day,
saying in David; To day, after so long a Time as it is said to Day, if ye will
hear His Voice, harden not your Hearts. Called the Day of this or that Man. Oh,
that thou had known, at least, in this thy Day, the Things which belong unto
thy Peace, Luke 19.42. And the Day of Visitation, Verse. 44. and 1 Pet. 2.12.
And this Day may be shortened: There are Winter-dayes, and Dies dimidiati, Days
cut off in the midst, when the Sun goes down at Noonday, as is threatened, Amos
8.9. And we find most frequent Instances of it, in them who Live not out half
their Days, as is threatened against some, and fulfilled upon many; who are cut
short, in the Noon, in the Morning, in the Dawn of their Days. There are short
Graves good store in every Churchyard: And the Arabian Proverb says, The Old
Camel carries the Young Camel's Skin to the Market.

Nay, it is abbreviated, and shrunk up into a Moment, a punctum Temporis. Now,
Now is the Accepted Time, now is the Day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2.

This is the Second Reason, A Day to Work in, and but a Day; therefore, be
speedy and diligent, lest you be prevented, lest you be surprised and
benighted. For,

Thirdly, The Night comes, wherein no Man can Work: That is Death, at the
farthest; which will cut us off from all Opportunities, and Possibilities, of
farther working; and disposes of every Man, according to the State in which it
finds him: as is figuratively expressed by that of Solomon, Eccles. 11.3. If
the Tree fall toward the South, or toward the North; in the Place where the
Tree falls, there it shall be. As the Man is fit to go to Heaven, or to Hell,
when he Dies; so he must continue unalterably for ever. Or,

2. This [Night] may signify the Setting of the Sun of Righteousness, the
Removal of the Gospel, the Taking away God's Kingdom, or Candlestick, out of
its place; and leaving us in a dismal Night of Ignorance, Error, Idolatry,
destitute of that true Light, which alone can guide our Feet into the Way of
Salvation. Or,

3. That woeful Night of God's Departure, and giving us up to our own Heart's
Lusts, to fill up the Measure of our Iniquities, for grieving, resisting,
quenching of his Spirit. And though God neither take us out of the World, nor
take away the Means of Grace from the Places we live in: Yet, if he take his
Spirit, his Blessing, his Grace away from the Means, it will be a Woeful Night
indeed: For He says, Woe be unto them, when I depart from them, Hos. 9.12. We
can neither have Heart to work, nor Success in working in so dark a Night.

But this Consideration, That Night hastens to over-take us, should quicken us
to work, because Night is 1. A Reckoning Time. 2. A Resting Time.


First, A Reckoning Time. If no Account were to be given of the Loss, or
Improvement of our Time, our Loytering might be more excusable; at least,
because it would be less Dangerous, although it were not less Sinful: But every
Man must give an Account of himself, and of his Work, to God, Romans 14.12. And
Night is the time, when we shall be called to that Account. Your Servants have
the Day to do your Work, and at Night you take an Account of them, how they
have done your Work in the Day. St. Matthew. 20.8. When Even was come, the Lord
of the Vineyard says unto his Steward, Call the Laborers, and give them their
Hire. Our Lord will certainly come, and take an Account of His Servants, for
His Talents committed to them: Matthew. 25.19. After a long time, the Lord of
those Servants comes, and Reckons with them: And then, Woe be to the
Sloathful Servant: Verse. 25, -- 30. Cast ye the Unprofitable Servant into utter
Darkness. He shall have Night enough, even the Horror of Eternal Night; who had
turned his Day of Working, into a Night of lazy Sleeping. Judgment follows
Death: It Is appointed to all Men once to Dye, and after that the Judgment, Heb.
9.29. I beheld a Pale Horse; and his Name that sat on him, was Death, and Hell
followed with him, Rev. 6.8.

Secondly, Night is Resting Time. The Day is for Labor, the Night for Rest.
Man goes forth unto his Work, unto his Labor, until the Evening, Psalm.
104.24. But till the Evening.

Night is Resting Time, In Mercy to Laborers. In Justice to Loyterers.


The First may cease their Labor, and have no further Toil in VVorking: The
Latter must cease, and have no further Opportunity, to Finish their Work.

First, Night is Resting Time in Mercy to them, who have Labored faithfully in
the Day: They shall not be always toyling, and wearying, and wearying out
themselves with hard Labor: But when Night comes, They shall rest from their
Labors, and their Works shall follow them, Rev. 14.13. There remains a Rest
for the People of God, Heb. 4.9. After an hot and scorching Day, there shall
come a cool refreshing Evening. They that have born the Heat and Burden of the
Day, Shall have a Time of Refreshing come from the Presence of the Lord, when
He shall send Jesus Christ, Act. 3.19, 20. And They shall rest in their Beds,
and enter into Peace, who have walked in their Uprightness, Isa. 57.2. As God
will not suffer them to be Tempted above their Strength; so not to be wrought
beyond it.

Hold out therefore, Christians, faint not; Yet a little while, and He that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Let him that is Righteous, be
Righteous still; and let him that is Holy, be Holy still. And mark the
Encouragement Christ backs this Exhortation with: Behold, I come quickly; and
my Reward is with me, to give to every Man as his Works shall be, Rev. 22.12.
And to put it out of doubt, he adds, Surely, I come quickly: As if He should
say, It Is but a little while, a little longer, and your Trouble is over, your
Work is done for ever.

Christ takes notice of all your Labors in his Service, and all your
Persecutions, and Reproaches, and Slanders, with which proud, formal, or
profane Men, will load and oppress you; if you be sincere and faithful to Him:
And He will ere long set you out of their reach, and the Devil's too. It Is
worth observing, that all the Epistles to the Seven Churches begin thus; I know
thy Works, Rev. 2.2, 9, 13, 19. 3. 1, 8, 15. And such Additions follow: Thy
Labor, thy Patience, thy Tribulation, thy Dwelling where Satan's Seat is; thy
Service, thy Faith, thy Charity. And bids them Hold fast, and be Faithful to
the Death, and He will give them a Crown of Life; and tells them, He will come
quickly. Is Israel oppressed, and shall not God take Notice of it? See Exodus
3.7. I have surely seen the Affliction of my People, and have heard their Cry,
by reason of their Taskmasters; for I know their Sorrows.

God's Israel shall not be always in the Egyptian Furnace, nor in the Howling
Wilderness; but He has a Canaan for them, a Promised Land on the other side of
Jordan, of Death. When the Disciples are toyling by reason of contrary Winds,
and the Ship is tossed, (Corruptions and Temptations are full in their Faces,
as they sail Heavenward) Christ will come to them, and they shall have a Calm;
and the Ship will be presently at the Land, whither it was going: For the
Oppression of the Poor, for the Sighing of the Needy, I will now (now
presently) arise, says the Lord; I will set him in Safety, from him that
puffs at him, Psalm. 12.5. You heard before, that Work implies Difficulty: It
cannot he denied, but there is some Hardness in the Work of Religion: It Is
called Labor of Love. There is Labor, though Love sweeten it, and ease it.
The Flesh is weak, even where the Spirit is willing. Our Life of Christianity,
is a Warfare; and such as admits neither Peace nor Truce; but constant, either
Watching or Fighting, against most dangerous Enemies; being so subtle, so
malicious, so powerful, so restless. And God will not hold us always to such
hard Service: But the Time is hastening, when He will say, Thy Warfare is
accomplished; and as He says, He will not contend for ever; for the Spirit
would fail, and the Souls which he has made, Isa. 57.16. so He will put a
Period to all their labors, sorrows, and wrestlings; at farthest, Death will
bring thee thy Quietus, a Writ of Ease; and when Night comes, (and it hastens
apace) thou may lay thee down in Peace, and take thy Rest; for thy God has
made thy Bed for thee; and He will make thee dwell in Everlasting Safety.

Cast not away therefore your Confidence, which has great Recompense of
Reward; for ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the Will of God,
ye might receive the Promise: For yet a little while, and He that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry. Heb, 10.35, 36, 37. And when He comes, He will
not come empty-handed: And Be not weary in well-doing; for in due time ye shall
Reap, if ye faint not. And as Jos ph said after his Advancement, God has made
me forget all my Toil, and my Father's House, Genesis 41.51. so when the
approaching Night overtakes thee, and thou shall be gathered to Abraham's
Bosom, and Sleep in Jesus; not so much as a frightful Dream shall interrupt thy
Repose, or disturb the Satisfaction of thy everlasting Rest. Let the Foresight
and Belief of this, quicken thy Industry, while the Day continues. And remember
that of Solomon, Eccles. 5.12. The Sleep of a Laboring Man is sweet. If thou
have done, if thou have loved the Work of God in the Day; He will not only give
thee the Sleep of his Beloved at Night; but the harder thou have wrought, and
the more thou have been wearyed at it, the more welcome, the sounder, and the
sweeter will thy Rest be.

Secondly, Night is Resting Time (that is, a Time when they shall have no
farther Opportunity to finish their Work) in Justice to the Loyterers. Then
Time shall be no more, Rev. 10.6.

Now, that Night above described; of Death, of the Setting of the Gospel- Sun,
or God's Departure from a Soul, (for what follows will respect sometimes one,
sometimes another of them) will put a Period to their Working, upon a
sevenfold Account.

First, By reason of its Darkness, in which they cannot see to work. He called
the Darkness, Night, Genesis 1.5. The Sun went down, and it was Dark, Genesis 15.17.
You know this to be so by Experience, in every Revolution of the Natural Day.
Darkness is nothing but Privation of Light; and when Light is withdrawn,
Darkness must needs follow. When the Evening is shut in, the Black and Dark
Night (as Solomon calls it) succeeds presently; spreading its sable Wings over
the whole Hemisphere: So that, Men can neither see their Way to guide their
Feet, nor their Work to guide their Hands.

No Phrases or Expressions of Speech, are more common than these; The Way of
the Lord, The Path of Life, Walking with God, Coming to Christ, Going to
Heaven; and such like implying Motion.

Now, How can any of these be done in the Darkness of the Night? How shall we
keep the Right Path, that is so beset with so many By-ways on every side?
By-ways of Error on one hand, and By-ways of Wickedness on the other, if we
have no Light to guide us? In Reference to this, is that Passage of our
Savior: Walk while ye have Light, lest Darkness come upon you: For he that
walks in Darkness, knows not whither he goes, St. John 12.35. Because
Darkness has blinded his Eyes, 1 John 2.11.

And as there is great danger of losing, and turning out of the Right Way; so
there is no less of stumbling and falling in it, if we have not Light to show
us the Stumbling Blocks and Snares, the Devil and his Instruments lay in our
way, that we may avoid them. If a Man walk in the Night, he stumbleth, because
there is no Light in him, Joh. 11.10.

And we need the Light no less to guide our Hands in Working, than our Feet in
Walking. Who, but a Fool or Madman, would attempt any curious Work in the Dark?
To Paint, to Carve, to make a Clock or Watch, or but to write a Letter? Now,
the Work we have to do for God, and our Souls, beyond all peradventure,
requires the clearest Light, to see to do it well. How can we believe, repent,
obey, or try these Graces by the Law or Gospel, when we cannot fee the Rule by
which they should be measured. While Christ the Son of Righteousness shines in
his Ordinances, and by his Spirit, there is a Day; and you may see to work the
Work God sets you: But when that departs, you are presently be-nighted, and
cannot take one Step, or draw one Line aright. The Naral Sun only enlightens
the Medium, and discovers the Object; but infuseth not a Visive Power into the
Eye. It opens not the Eyes, it makes not blind Men see: Though it makes things
visible to them that can see, yet make Night by setting. But this Sun makes Day
in an extraordinary manner, it gives Light and Sight both. When St. Paul was
called and sent to Preach the Gospel, his Commission ran thus: I send thee to
open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, Act. 26.18.

How dismal a Night must therefore follow, when this Sun is set, which leaves
Men both Blind, and in the Dark? That Light which discovers what our Works
are, can only direct how they may become such as they ought to be. John 3.21.
He that does Truth, comes to the Light; that his Deeds may be made manifest,
that they are wrought in God. And it must be by that Light, we must see to do
God's Work. Improve it therefore, while you have it, before the Night, the time
of Darkness overtake, yea overwhelm, you.

Secondly, No Man can work in this Night, because it is incapable of any Light.
When the Natural Light of this World leaves us, and Night draws the Curtains of
Darkness round about our Habitations, and the whole Space 'twixt Heaven and
Earth, is nothing but Obscurity, we can relieve our selves with the Artificial
Lights of Candles, Lamps, or Torches: But this Night resists such Remedies, and
is Incurable. It Is gross Darkness, like Egyptian Darkness, which might be felt,
but not removed; too thick for the faint Beams of any Candle to pierce through,
disperse, or scatter. If you lose, and loyter out your Day, you cannot redeem
your Error, or eke out your Working time by the borrowed Light of Art. As in
the New-Jerusalem there needs no Candle, Rev. 22.5. so in the utter Darkness,
(which seizes on all, without that Blessed Place of Light) no Candle is
allowed, or would do any Good. The Candle of the Wicked shall be put out, Prove.
24. 20. It Is observable, God calls His Ministers Lights. Ye are the Light of
the World, Matthew. 5.14. John was a Burning and a Shining Light, John 5.35. and
the Station of his Gospel Ordinances a Candle-stick, Rev. 1.12. But Churches,
and Ministers, and Ordinances, are only for this Life, there is no use of them
hereafter. Christ walks in the midst of them: and when he with-draws they
signify nothing. O ye Loyterers, think not to make Candle-Light-Work of your
Eternal Concernments, when the Sun is down. Here the Candle and the Sun shine
both together. And when the Sun sets, the Candle is put out for Ever.

You know, I suppose, where the Custom prevails, of multiplying Tapers,
Torches, Candles, about the Herses, and upon the Tombs, and Graves of the Dead;
and singing Masses, Dirges, Requiems for them: and there Last are just as
profitable for their Souls, as the First are serviceable to their Eyes, when
Death has closed them.

Christians, I beseech you, as you love your Souls, beware of these Cheats, and
venture not your eternal Estates upon such after-Games, and Work out your own
Salvation, while you live; and trust not to their Superstitious, and Covetous
Frauds, who undertake to do it for you when you are Dead.

Thirdly, Men cannot work when Night is come, because the Night is Unfruitful:
If you think to work then, or try to work then, you will most certainly but
lose your Labor. I may use the Apostle's Expression, at least allusively,
Unfruitful Works of Darkness, Ephesians. 5.11.

If Men should Plow and Sow by Night, and no Day follow, no Fruit would come of
all their Cost and Pains. We need the Sun, not only to see to work by; but also
to influence our Work: He must warm, and cherish, and ripen all by his Heat, as
well as direct the doing of it by his Light. When Night comes, you cannot work
to any Purpose or Advantage. Suppose you could cry and knock as earnestly and
loud, as did those Foolish Virgins at Midnight, Matthew. 25.10. it would prove
as useless to you, as it did to them; or those you read of, Prove. 1.28. Then
(when this Night is upon them) Then they shall call upon Me, but I will not
answer; they shall seek Me early, (as they think, perhaps it is spoken
Ironically) but they shall not find Me: But they shall eat of the Fruit of
their own way, (Oh bitter Fruit!) and be filled with their own Devices, Verse.
31.

And as I touched before the Folly of those, who trust to the Prayers of
others, when they are dead: So let me earnestly admonish and entreat you, not
to defer Praying for your selves, 'till you are a Dying. I use the word Praying
Comprehensively, for Penitential Devotion, and being sincerely Religious. I
would not be too severe, but I would be faithful to you; and therefore, I must
tell you, I think it extremely dangerous to defer till then. I know you are
ready enough to remember the Old Proverb, True Repentance is never too Late;
But I beseech you, forget not the Second Part of it, Late Repentance is seldom
True.

How often have we seen the most earnest Penitential Vows of Men, upon their
Sick Beds, grow Weak and Dye; as those who made them grow Strong and Lively?

I would write nothing, but what is most serious upon so weighty a Subject: Yet
because many are prone to retain such a Passage, who would forget a graver
Sentence, give me Leave, without Offense or Censure, to add the Translation of
those Proverbial Verses; which signify, that the very worst of Men are ready to
pretend Reformation, when they are Sick; though they never intend it, when they
are Well: They were fitted to the Times, in which they were made, when the Name
of a Monk signified a Devout Man.

The Devil was Sick, the Devil a Monk would be:
The Devil was Well, the Devil a Monk was he.
Trust not your deceitful Hearts, to so deceitful a Time; neither defer your
Repentance, till you are so unfit to perform it. But while your Strength is
firm and your Reason sound, and all your Faculties, in their Vigor, set upon
this Work, which you will find hard enough for your best Abilities; lest it prove
like Day-Work, attempted in the Night, altogether Fruitless.

Fourthly, You cannot work when this Night comes, because it will strip you of
your Furniture and Tools, with which you should perform it. When Morning-Light
appears, Men Rise and Dress themselves, and take their Tools, and go forth unto
their Work and Labor: But like that Old Man at Gibeah, Judge. 19.16. They come
out of the Field from their Work at Even: and then they strip themselves, set
by their Tools, and go to Bed to take their Rest. While the Day of your Life,
and God's Grace are continued, you have Talents to trade with, and Tools to
work with; but when Night comes, they must be all laid by: Use them therefore
while you have them.

Suppose a Man had borrowed of his Neighbor some useful or necessary
Instrument, for a Work he is much concerned to finish; or a Scholar a Book,
which he is much concerned to Read; but both were lent but for a Day, and must
be returned at Night: How hard would One Labor, how closely would the Other
fit to his Study? Concluding thus: I must not Loyter now, for this Work must be
done; and I cannot do it without this Instrument; and this is but lent me till
Night, and then 'twill be fetched away. While the Day lasts, God furnishes you
with Tools fitted to your Work: You have Ministers, you have Bibles, you have
Sermons, you have Sacraments, you have all appointed Means of Grace, and you
have Eyes to read, and Ears to hear, Reason to understand, consider, and judge,
Consciences to check you, Affections to excite and quicken you: But when Night
comes all will be taken from you. Then the Lord will say, Take the Talent from
him, Mat. 25.28. And if you do not your work while you are furnished with all
these Helps, What can you hope to do when all are gone?

Fifthly, No Man can work after this Night is come, because this Work is
expressed by entering into a Gate or Door; and Night is a Time of shutting
Doors. Josh. 2 5. About the Time of Shutting the Gate, when it was Dark. All
the Day the Gates of the Cities stand wide open, to afford free Ingress and
Egress to all Comers; and the Doors of your Houses stand open, or but upon the
Latch, and yield an easy Entrance; but when the Day is shut in, you Lock, and
Bolt, and Bar, and make all fast, that none can enter.

Now, there are Two Sorts of Gates, or Doors, which must be entered before the
Sun set, and they be shut.

1. God's Gate, into which Man m^st enter. 2. Man's Door, into which God must
enter.
First, God's Gate. Open to me the Gates of Righteousness. This is the Lord's
Gate, Into which the Righteous shall enter, Psalm. 118.20. Enter in at the
Streight-Gate, Matthew. 7.13. Now, God's Gate stands open all the Day: But at
Night, the Door is shut, as the Foolish Virgins found to their Shame and
Sorrow, St. Matthew. 25.10.

God has Four Gates, which stand open to Returning Sinners all Day long; but
shall be all shut up at Night: The Gates of Grace, of Mercy, of Hope, of Glory.

First, The Gate of Grace. Grace is God's Free Favor, that Perfection of the
Divine Nature, which inclines Him to do Good to Men, without any External
Motive of His own Accord. This Gate stands open all the Day. God waits to be
gracious, and stretches out his Hand all the Day long, to invite, to plead with
Sinners, and to beseech them to accept His Grace and Favor: But if they
despise His Goodness, and will not be persuaded to come in, He will cast off
for ever, and be favorable no more: He will even forget to be Gracious, and in
Anger shut up His tender Mercies. For so I find the Psalmist expressing his
Fear of this Doom, Psalm. 77.79.

Secondly, The Gate of Mercy. Mercy is that Attribute of God, by which His
tender Compassions are stirred up, to pity His Creatures in their Misery, and
(as it were) to sympathize with them; to be afflicted in all their Afflictions.

This Gate stands also open all the Day; and it even grieves Him to His Heart,
to see the Misery Men hasten toward, by their Sin and Folly: And He warns and
calls them most pathetically; Turn ye, turn ye; Why will ye Dye? Ezekiel. 33.11.
And is in a Merciful Contest with Himself, as you may read Hos. 11.8. How shall
I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make
thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My Heart is turned within Me, My
Repentings are kindled together: And resolves, that as yet, He will not execute
the Fierceness of His Anger; nor as yet, Return to Destroy them; because He is
God, and not Man.

But if all His Weeping over them will not make them Mourn, if all His
Relenting Compassions will not melt them; Their Hardyness will harden Him,
because His Softness did not soften them; and His Mercy will be turned into
Fury: and in the Spring-Tyde of their Misery, his Mercy will be in the Lowest
Ebb. And instead of weeping any more over them, He will Laugh at their
Calamity, and Mock when their Fear comes, Prove. 1.26. And His Mercy will be
clean gone for evermore: And though this Gate stood open to them till they
Dyed; yet He will not show these Wonders of Mercy to the Dead; the Dead shall
not arise to have, and praise him for them. His loving Kindness shall not be
declared in the Grave, nor His Faithfulness in Destruction. His Wonders shall
not be known in the Dark, nor His Compassions in the Land of Forgetfulness,
Psalm. 88.10, 11, 12.

Oh therefore, follow not after Lying Vanities, to the forsaking of your own
Mercies! But while this Gate stands open, fly into it, as the Manslayer would
into the City of Refuge, before God shut it up, and shut out you (as certainly
He will, when Night is come) and you be left to the Cruel Mercies of that
Avenger of Blood, that Eternal Misery, which presses after you so fast, so
close, so hard.

Thirdly, The Gate of Hope. This stands open all the Day. While Men live and
enjoy the Means of Grace, there remains Hope, that they may obtain God's
Favor, and escape His Wrath. The Common Proverb is true in this Sense, That
while there is Life there is Hope; as S^lomon tells us, To him that is joined to
all the Living, there is Hope, Eccles. 9.4. We meet with this Expression in
Hos. 2.15. I will give her the Valley of Achor, for a Door of Hope: Which may
admit these Interpretations amongst others; Either that the Possession of this
Valley, being part of the Promised Land, was as an Earnest, and an Argument to
hope, they should possess the Whole: Or, that Achan being now stoned, and the
accursed Thing removed, there was Hope, that God would again be with them, and
drive out their Enemies before them. So the Continuance of Day is a Door of
Hope, that He who has given the Means of Grace, will also give His Grace, yea,
and Glory, at the last; and that He who spares our Lives after they have been
forfeited, may remit the Forfeiture, that we may not Dye eternally.

And indeed, it is the right Use of This, that upholds God's People, in all
their Streights and Fears: In their Affliction and Misery, while they feed on
Gall and Wormwood, they recall to mind, that God's Compassions fail not: And
because, through the Lord's Mercyes, they are not Consumed; therefore have they
Hope, Lam. 3.20, 21, 22. And it is the Abuse of this, which holds up Wicked Men
against the Gripes, the Nippings and Warnings of their own Hearts, those secret
unseen Lashes, and Wounds of their own Consciences, are so frequently
inflicting: They know, God is Merciful, and Christ dyed for Sinners; and they
hope, they may yet Repent, and be Happy, and partake of all this. And this
keeps their Hearts from breaking with Horror, and succumbing under a Load,
which is truly insupportable. But when Night comes, this Door shall be shut so
close, no Beam of Hope will dart in, so much as at the Keyhole. But all their
Hope will vanish and perish; and be as the Spider's Webb, and giving up the
Ghost: Their Hope shall be cut off for ever, and the dreadful Terrors of
Everlasting Despair shall seize upon them, and multiply their Sorrows; their
Condition being as hopeless, and helpless, in their own Apprehensions: and
Misery shall come upon them in its Perfection, because no Hope remains of ever
escaping. And this is the most envenomed Sting of the never-dying Worm, and
that which makes the Pit of Hell to be, what it is so truly called, Bottomless.

Fourthly, The Gate of Glory; That stands open too, till Night: That is, the
Kingdom of Heaven, in the highest Sense. The Place, in which God most fully and
openly Communicates Himself to Saints and Angels; and bestows the Compleatest
Happiness, the Reasonable Nature can be capable of; into which, who ever come,
shall never sin nor sorrow more: but be made perfect in Holiness and Happiness,
by the clearest Vision, and most intimate Fruition of God Blessed for ever. But
at Night, a Door shall be shut, to keep all those for ever out, who were not
ready to go in with the Bridegroom, into the Marriage, Matthew. 25.10.

In David's Language, They shall never see Light, they shall never Inhabit
God's Holy Hill: In St. Paul's, They shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God: In
St. Peter's, They shall have no Entrance administered into the Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; nor attain the Salvation of their Souls. In St.
John's, They shall in no wise enter into the New-Jerusalem. In our Savior's,
They shall never see the Face of God in Heaven; nor be with Him, to Behold His
Glory; nor Follow the Lamb upon Mount Zion; nor Drink of the Rivers of
Pleasure, which are at God's Right Hand: Nor be filled with those Joys, which
are at His Right Hand, for evermore.

Hasten therefore, while these Gates are open: And as Men, who are Journeying
to a City, where at Even the Bridge is drawn, and the Gates are shut, and the
Keys are carried to the Governor, will be sure to come before that Hour; lest
they be exposed to the Enemy, or to the Coldness and Darkness of the Night,
without either safe Shelter, or convenient Lodging: So let these Confiderations
quicken you, lest you be be-nighted, and find too soon the Folly of your coming
too late, to enter into the City of God.

But Man has a Door too, into which God must enter; and this will be shut at
Night. Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the Door, and Knock; if any Man open to
Me, I will come in, and Sup with him, and he with Me.

There is a Door of Knowledge: The Key of Knowledge Opens it. When the Eyes of
our Understandings are enlightened, opened, to know God in Christ; and to
receive the Knowledge of His Will. God comes into the Heart through this Door,
when the Eyes of our Minds are so opened, as to know God and Christ a right; so
as to Know them, is Eternal Life, Joh. 17.3.

And a Door of Faith, through which Christ comes, when He enters to dwell in
our Hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17.

And there is a Door of Repentance, by which Sin is turned out, and God is
admitted into our Souls.

And, Lastly, There is the Door of Holy Affections, Love, Desire, Delight in
God. These are (at least) the Hinges, upon which the Door of our Hearts turn.

Now, these Doors may all be opened to let in God, while the Day lasts; and He
will come in, and make His Abode with us: John 14.23. Jesus said, If any Man
love Me, he will keep My Words: And My Father will love him, and We will come
unto him, and make Our Abode with him: But when Night comes, they will be shut
for ever.

Hasten therefore to open them while you may; lest when you would, it prove too
hard for you, and be above both your Skill, and your Power. You know, a Door
that is opened daily, opens easily: But Doors, which stand long shut, it is hard
to make them stir, or open them, without great Violence, that shakes them, and
even breaks them in pieces: The Timber will swell, the Hinges will rust, the
Wards of the Lock will be cankered, and the Bolts will even grow into the
Staples: And so will it, by Proportion, be with your Hearts, if you keep the
Door long shut against God. Nay, He may in Anger clap on a Padlock on the other
side, shut thee up Judicially in Unbelief, and Impenitency; nail and barracado
up the Door for ever; because He knocked and called so long, and wooed so
earnestly in vain. Cant. 5.2. Open to Me My Sister, My Love, My Dove, My
Undefiled; for My Head is filled with Dew, and My Locks with the Drops of the
Night. Then after many idle Excuses for her Delay, Verse. 6. I opened to my
Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn Himself, and was gone: My Soul failed,
when He spoke. I sought Him, but I could not find Him; I called Him, but He
gave me no Answer.

Take heed, lest this (or worse) be thy Case: Refuse not to open at the first
Knock, the first Call, the Motions of His Spirit, the Checks of thy Conscience,
the Admonitions of the Word; lest He Knock no more, or refuse when thou shall
open at thy own Leisure, to come near the Door. The Servants which shall be
blessed, are They that wait for their Lord; and when he comes and knocks,
open to him immediately, Luke 12.35.

Rouse up your selves therefore, and speak to your Souls in David's Language,
and as much as may be with David's Zeal, Psalm. 24.7, 9. which he witnessed by
the Ingemination of them; Lift up your Heads, Oh ye Gates; and be ye lift up,
ye Everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. Who is this King of
Glory? The Lord of Hosts, He is this King of Glory. And take heed that dreadful
Place be not fulfilled upon you; Isa. 6.10. (the most dreadful Word God can
speak, till he say, Depart ye Cursed) Make the Heart of this People fat, and
their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; lest they be Converted, and I Heal them.
A Place Six times repeated in the New Testament, to make us mind it; lest by
our sinful Shutting the Door, we provoke God Judicially to shut it up for ever.

Sixthly, No Man can work when this Night comes, because it is an abiding
Night: There is no Day on the other side of it. We say, To Morrow is a New Day;
what we cannot do to Day, we may do to Morrow: But there is no Morrow beyond
the Night of Death. It Is appointed to all Men once to Dye, (but once) and after
that the Judgment, Heb. 9.29. No Second Day of Life allowed to them, who have
misspent and lost the First.

Job said long since: There is Hope of a Tree, that if it be cut down, it will
sprout again; and that the tender Branch thereof will not cease: Though the
Root thereof wax old in the ground, and the Stock thereof Dye; yet through the
Scent of Water, it will bud, and bring forth Boughs like a Plant.

But Man dies and wastes away; yea, Man gives up the Ghost, and, Where is
he? As the Waters fail from the Sea, and the Flood decays and dries up; so
Man Lies down, and Rises not till the Heavens be no more. They shall not
awake, or rise out of their Sleep, Job 14.7. -- 12. And the Heathen Poet long
ago observed the like of the Sun. The Sun's Set and Rise, Set and Rise again:
But We, when We Set, are covered with Eternal Night. No repeated Light or Day
succeeds.

O therefore, timely and wisely Improve the Present! That had need be done
well, which can be done but once; and admits no doing it again, to remedy the
Errors of doing ill at first: And such, above all things, is the Work of
Dying, and finishing our Days Work, before the Night surprise us. The Proverb
tells us, Three Things require greatest Caution, and most prudent
Circumspection, Marriage, Battle, Death: Upon this Account, Because their
Consequents are like to last. Yet the First of these excludes not all possible
Relief. Good Counsel may reclaim, Patience may bear, and Wisdom may improve the
Inconvenience, or the Death of the Party, which makes the Yoke unequal and
uneasy, may take it off the Grieved Party's Neck, that it shall not always
gall here: And at farthest, Death will Dissolve the Bond, that it shall not be
always troublesome.

And the Second, though dangerous, is not wholly desperate: He that has lost a
Battle, suffered a Defeat and Rout, may Rally and Recruit; and though it cost
him Dear, may learn Experience for more wary Conduct, and may expect a more
Propitious Fortune. But he that Dies Unpardoned and Ungodly, that is, before
his Work is done, he is undone to all Intents and Purposes; no Remedy, or Hope
of Remedy, remains to all Eternity.

And as the fore-nam'd Reasons show it impossible to Work when this Night has
actually overtaken us; so the Last which follows, should excite and quicken us,
to the uttermost, to be beforehand with it. For,

Seventhly, This Night makes have. The Text tells you, It comes; and I tell
you, and Experience tells you, and Christ (in effect) tells you, It comes
apace, it comes quickly.

Time is painted with long Wings; and no Wings are pruned for so swift a
flight: It flows like a Torrent, and sweeps us away with it: There Is no
stemming this Tide. And it is as Uncertain, as it is Swift: Thy Pulse beats
incessantly, and thy Breath is puffing out, and drawing in each Moment; and
thou know not, that the One shall repeat its Strokes; or the Other, be
Restored thee once more.

This Night comes, like a Thief in the Night: When we lie still and sleep, that
wakes, and is in perpetual Motion.

And this may suffice for the Proof of this Observation:

That the Consideration of the Work we have to do, and the Time allowed and
limited for the Doing of it, should engage us to the Utmost Diligence, and
Speed, in doing of it.

I now proceed to the Useful Improvement of this Weighty Truth, with equal
Plainness.

And if the Work we have to do, and the Season allowed and limited for the
doing of it in, engage us to such Diligence and Speed in the doing of it. This
serves,

1. To Justify those, who act according to these Engagements.

2. To Condemn those, who neglect them, or act contrary to them.

3. To Exhort and Excite us all, to act suitably to them, by showing all
Diligence and Speed, about our Great Work.

First, This Justifyes the Wisdom and Zeal of those, who Live up to, and act
according to these Engagements. And I wish to God, the Number were Greater,
that deserves such Encouragement. But because they are so few, therefore do
they need it the more: For Good Company confirms Good Resolutions; and when
many walk together, they embolden each other, and mutually strengthen one
another Hands and Hearts. But the Narrow-Way, which leads to the
Streight-Gate, being found and trodden by so few; and they meeting with so much
Opposition, to stop them in it, or divert them out of it, do greatly need all
the Encouragements that can be given them: For Profane, Ungodly Men hate them,
and Proud and Formal Pharisees despise them, and reproach them: And all that
are so busy in doing the Work of another Master, are mad against them for their
Diligence about their Master's, and their Father's Business. He that departs
from Evil, makes himself a Prey, Isa. 59.15. God's Heritage is a Speckled
Bird; the Birds about her, are against her, Jer. 12.9.

The Law of Enmity betwixt the Two Seeds, is more unalterable, than the Laws of
Medes and Persians. It discovered it self betimes, in Cain and Abel, in Ishmael
and Isaac; the Two signal Types of the Two Visible kinds of Persecution, which
have prevailed in the World ever since; by the Mouth of the Sword, or the Sword
of the Mouth.

Cain, who was of that Wicked One, slew his Brother; and wherefore slew he him?
Because his own Works were Evil, and his Brothers Righteous, 1 John 3.12. And
Ishmael Mocked, Genesis 21.9. which in St. Paul's Language, is, He that was Born
after the Flesh, persecuted him that was Born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. And
as the Apostle added, for the time in which he wrote, as it was then, so is it
now: So may we, for the times in which we Live; and so will they have cause to
do, who shall Live after us. For the Rule, 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live
Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, is as Universal for Ages and
Places, as Persons; no Temporary one, to expire like an Antiquated Law, but
will last while this Evil World lasts; and they shall find it, in one kind or
the other. And where the Laws pinion the Hands of Cain, the Tongue of Ishmael
will be Lawless; and where they dare not kill their Bodies, their Throats
(those open Sepulchers) will swallow them alive, like the Grave; and with Black
Mouths, full of Lyon's Teeth, will rend their Names, and tear their
Reputations, till they wound their very Souls. If a Volly of Lies, or a Shower
of those envenomed Arrows, bitter, railing, and opprobrious Words, will stop
you in, or fright you from your Work. The Father of Lies has more Tongues,
than Argus had Eyes, or Briarius had Hands; and will find Monstrous Heads
enough, both whose Ears grow upon one side.

But let none of these Things move you; neither count your Lives, nor your
Names dear to you; so that you may Finish your Course with Joy, Act. 20.24.

St. James urges to Patience thrice in a Breath, with one of the Arguments in
our Text. Jam. 5.7, 8, 9. Be patient, Brethren, unto the Coming of the Lord. Be
patient, stablish your Hearts; the Coming of the Lord draws nigh, Grudge not,
behold the Judge stands at the Door.

Gratify not the Devil, or his Instruments, so much as to grow Remiss at your
Work, for fear of their Reproaches: But keep on your Way; though the Dogs bark,
thou wilt soon be past them, and out of the Noise. It would be a dear Purchase,
to buy their Silence at the Price of abating thy Zeal for God. St. Peter
teaches you a safer and better Way to do it; even by Well-doing, and by a good
Conversation in Christ, to make them ashamed to speak Evil of you. This is the
most Innocent Revenge you can take on them; to resolve, the more they deride
you, or reproach you for your Work, the more earnestly to mind it, and to
follow it the more diligently. And it is the best Security for your selves, to
prevent being disturbed: He that minds his Business intently, has no Ears to
hear, nor Leisure to take notice of, what is designed to interrupt him.
Convince them, you are led by a better Spirit, by being able to bear with
Meekness, their loudest Slanders, and most spightful Reproaches. While they
cannot bear the Silent, and undesigned Reprehension, your Diligence and Zeal
reflects upon their Sloth and Trifling, in the Work of God, and their own
Souls.

It Is an Immutable, and Eternal Truth; that the glorifying God, and saving our
own Souls, is our Supreme Concern, and deserves our First and Highest Care; and
who ever acts according to it, shall in spite of Men and Devils, be justified,
as a Wise and good Man, in so doing. And their Master's Euge, Well done good
and faithful Servant! enter thou into thy Master's Joy, will put it out of
doubt, and controversy for ever. And Wisdom shall be Justified of her Children;
though Fools condemn, and the Sons of Belial Blaspheme both the Mother, and her
Offspring.

He that has Truth on his side, and Reason on his side, and a well-guided
Conscience on his side, has God Himself on his side; and need not trouble
himself, who, or whatever is against him. And thus it is certainly with every
one, who makes Religion his Business in good Earnest. And even the Men, whose
Mouths Reproach you, in their Hearts must Reverence you: And their Consciences
will approve, what the Interest of their Lusts provokes them to condemn in
others, that they might escape, being condemned of themselves.

Be not discouraged therefore; but take Heart; Remember He that said, In the
World you shall have Trouble; said in the same Breath, Be ye of good Cheer, I
have Overcome the World, John 16.33. Marvail not Brethren, that the World
hates you; It Is a good Sign that you belong to God. If you were of the World,
the World would love its own: But because Christ has chosen you out of the
World, therefore the World hates you, Joh. 15.19. It Is the same World which
hated Christ, before it hated You, (and killed him too) and The Servant is not
greater than his Lord. And He foretold; If they have persecuted Me, they will
persecute you.

If you be Reproached for the Name of CHRIST, or stigmatized with Nicknames,
for your Care in serious following His Work, care not for it; it shall in due
time turn both to your Honor and Advantage. Garments, which were thought
Uncomely, and judged Ridiculous on vulgar Backs, have become Modish, been
esteemed Decent, yea Adorning; and have led the Fashion, when Persons of Honor
have thought good to wear them. The Cress which was so Infamous, and the
greatest Scandal in, and to the World, became the most Honorable Ensign, when
the Great Constantine had placed it in his Banners, to lead his Victorious
Legions. A Deforming Scar adds Beauty to a Soldier, and is a Mark of Honor,
and Trophee of his Valor, though received from an Enemy's Hand. Most
ignominious Names, which were imposed as Brands, to make Men hateful, have
changed their Nature; and so the Design has been spoiled, by applying them to
Virtuous and Excellent Persons. It Is confessedly a vile and hateful Thing, to
be an Heretic indeed; yet, What wise Man will blush to hear himself so called
by a Pagan, Jew, or Papist? nay, will not rather glory in it? As St. Paul did
Act. 24.14. This I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers; believing all things, which are
written in the Law, and in the Prophets.

I have enlarged on this beyond my first Intentions, to remove a base
Stumblingblock, and a most dirty, nay most devilish Scandal out of your Way,
(which, whosoever first kindled, has run like Fire in the Stubble, God in
Mercy quench it) that is, That if a Man be zealous in Religion, live as if he
did believe indeed there is an Heaven and Hell, and that the Way to either, is
such as the Word of God describes; that thinks it is Duty, and his Wisdom, to
work out his own Salvation with fear and trembling: That ownes he has a work
appointed him of God, which requires the whole Man to perform it, and therefore
applies himself to it accordingly: In a word, That dares not venture his
Eternal Estate upon a few easy Ritual Observances, without the Life and Power
of Godlyness; and thinks Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, to be of equal, or rather
more Concernment, than Tything of Annise, Mynt, and Cummin; though he neither
despise, nor neglect the latter in their Place. Such a Man must have sinister
Reflections made upon him, be he Minister, or be he private Christian; there is
a secret Inquisition to inquire into him; and they return him suspected of some
kind of Heretical Pravity: He is not Right; He is at least half a Phanatick; He
is not through Paced; not a True Son of the Church; and what not! that Sloth
and Formality can invent, to hide its own Shame, by loading Holy Diligence in
the Work of God, with opprobrious and sinister Suspicions.

This is a dreadful Stumbling Block; the Good Lord remove it, for His Mercy
sake. I cannot see what the Devil can do more dangerous, than this; To persuade
Men, it is their Interest to be Wicked; to force them to be cold and negligent
in Religion, in their own Defense; and to fright them from keeping Pace with
God in His Ways, or being employed in His Work, with all their Might; for fear
of being thought and called, what would render them more Obnoxious, than the
deepest Profaneness, or foulest Debauchery: And their Zeal would be as dangerous
to them, as Paul's Learning was to him in Festus's Judgment; quite beside
themselves, Too much Zeal has made them Mad.

Good Lord! What do such Men think of the Holy Bible, of our Blessed Savior's
Example, and Holy Doctrine, of the Primitive Christians, and Holy Martyrs? Were
all these stark mad? That all must be esteemed so, who endeavor to follow
them, though (Alas!) at too great a Distance. And, What do such Men think of
the Tremendous Day of Judgment? Or, Do they indeed believe, there shall be such
a Day?

I fear, if these Obscure Papers chance to fall into the Hands of some of these
Hot Men; they may be ready to act the Part of Demetrius, and my self be in
danger to suffer that of St. Paul, Recorded Act. 19. For Guilt is a very
Teachy, and a very Vindictive thing. But, I appeal to the Searcher of Hearts, I
design not the Reproach of Our Church; but its Vindication: In which, Blessed
be God for it, are Thousands that Preach, and Ten Thousands that Learn and Obey
the Truth as it is Jesus; and Have not so Learned Christ, as to render their
Profession, or the Church in which they were taught it, Unsavory (...) but
Sweet as Ointment poured forth.

And if, this notwithstanding, any be found, who to Compensate for their Want
of the Power of Godilness, and Good Morality, in Sobriety and Righteousness; by
a furious Zeal, and mighty Noise, for the little disputable Things, (which all
confess to be but the List of our Cloth, and Hem of our Garment, to keep the
One from Rending, and the Other from Raveling) shall appeal to the Church, as
its only true and genuine Sons. I sincerely expect the Justice from my Mother,
that she will declare such Sons, to be Esteemed by Her no better, than Augustus
called his Niece and Daughter, his Sores and Ulcers.

But my Business in this Place, is not to Reclaim the Guilty, but to Defend and
Encourage the Innocent; in the sincere Endeavors, and serious Practice of that
faithful industry, which Christ expects from them, in His Work, while the Day
to work in lasts; and which the Church, in His Name, by the Voice of Her
Ministers, (and by Mine amongst the rest, tho the Meanest amongst many) calls
and excites them to.

Take Courage therefore, Christians, ply your Work; He th^^ gave you this Rule,
and set before you His own Example, looks on, and is greatly pleased to see you
follow it. And if any be so hardy, as to Discourage or Reproach you, it matters
not, as long as He will own, and Crown you: And if Christ Justify you, what
need ye care who shall Condemn you?

The Second Use is to Condemn those, who neglect these Engagements, or act
contrary to them. What meanest thou, O Sleeper! Arise, Is it not more than
time, thou had began thy Work, when it is high time thy Work were finished;
when many Younger than thy self have brought it to Perfection, rest from their
Labor, and have received their Wages? Why stand you here all the Day idle?
Matthew. 20 6. who cannot plead the Excuse of those, who answered, No Man has
Hired us: For you have been called to work an Hundred, yea a Thousand Times.
Why are ye slack to go up to P^ssess the Land which God has promised? Is it
not a Land that flows with Milk and Honey, that abounds with Rivers of Pleasure,
and Fullness of Joy? O Fools that are so slow of Heart to believe!

And greater Fools, if ye believe it, and yet lie still, and with the Sluggard
cry, A little more Sleep, a little more Slumber, a little more Folding of the
Arms to Sleep; till Death and Judgment take you Napping.

Can thou sleep so securely on both Ears, as never to hear, or be affrighted
with a Dream, of those upbraiding Words; Matthew. 25.26. Thou Wicked and
Sloathful Servant: And the Thoughts of that dreadful Sentence: Take from him
the Talent: And cast ye the Unprofitable Servant into utter Darkness, there
shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth? Verse. 30. How will thy Mouth be
stopped, when thy Lord shall say to thee, Out of thine own Mouth will I Judge
thee, thou wicked sloathful Servant? Thou knew that I was an Austere Man,
Luke 19.22. Thou knew that I had given thee a Work to do of great
Importance; and that I would certainly call thee to a strict Account,
concerning the Performance of it: Why then did thou not attend it, as it
became thee, as it concerned thee? It Is sad to be Condemned by another; but to
be Self-condemned, is of all the saddest: And such will be the Case of every
one, who under such Opportunities as thou enjoyest, neglects the Work that God
has given him to do; and given him so frequent, and so faithful Warnings, to
dispatch in time. The Lord of that Servant will come in a Day when he looks
not for Him, and at an Hour when he is not 'ware; and will cut him in sunder,
and appoint him his Portion with Unbelievers. And that Servant which knew his
Lord's Will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall
be beaten with many Stripes, St. Luke 12.46, 47.

The Third and Last Use, to which I shall Improve this Truth, is Exhortation.
And I beseech you Brethren, suffer me with all possible Earnestness to Exhort
you, and with all humble Importunity to entreat you, to use the Speed and
Diligence about this Work, which the Case requires; yea, excite and provoke
your selves, and one another, by the Greatness of your Work, and Shortness of
your Time; by Conscience of your Duty, and Sense of your Interest, to acquit
your selves as becomes Wise and Good Men, in an Affair of such infinite
Consequence.

And because the Text seems to have a most direct, yea, its primary Aspect upon
us Ministers, (with all submiss, and inoffensive Modesty I beg it of you)

First, Holy Brethren, suffer this Word of Exhortation: What ever others do,
let Us mind the Work of him that sent us, as becomes us, and follow the Example
of our Master. Is there a Must for Him? Is there a Necessity laid upon the
Great Apostle, and a Woe to him, if he Preach not the Gospel? Is there a Curse
denounced against him that does God 's Work Deceitfully, Negligently, Slightly?
And, Are those Epithetes so Odious, Dumb Dogs, Greedy Dogs, we have not
Patience to hear them, though God Himself imposed them? Does a Sleepy Watchman
imply a Contradiction in the Terms? And, Is it most Intolerable for the Steward
to be found Unfaithful, beyond all the Servants in the Family? And yet, Shall
we run the Hazard of branding our selves with these hateful Characters? If the
Lights of the World be Darkness, How Great will that Darkness be? I^ the Salt
of the Earth be Unsavory, Wha^ is it Good for, or wherewith shall it be
Seasoned?

I question not, but you have often read the Three last Verses of Zech. 11. and
would to God you would read them once a Day; at least, that you would dwell
upon the Meditation of them one retired Hour. Not to vex the Words with forced
Interpretations, nor to vex your Heads with studying Evasions; but to awaken
your hearts to do your Duty, and escape your Danger, I will transcribe the
Words faithfully:

And the Lord said unto me, Take unto thee yet the Instruments of a Foolish
Shepherd: For Lo! I will Raise up a Shepherd in the Land, which shall not visit
those that be cut off; neither shall seek the Young One, nor heal that that is
Broken, nor feed that that stands still: But he shall eat the Flesh of the
Fat, and tear their Claws in pieces. Woe to the Idol Shepherd, that leaves the
Flock! The Sword shall be upon his Arm, and his Right Eye: His Arm shall be
clean dried up, and his Right Eye shall be utterly darkened.

However others may think good to treat me; I would Reproach no Man, Expose no
Man, Provoke no Man, Grieve no Man: They that are Guiltless, are not concerned:
If any be Guilty, and being so, are Convinced, Awakened, Quickened to their
Duty, they have more reason to be thankful, than to be angry.

Of all Men living, we Ministers have most cause to mind our W^^k with Speed
and Diligence, both as Men, and as Ministers.

First, As Men. We have Souls to save, as well as our People; and we must take
heed to our selves, that our selves may be saved: And to that end, we had need
take care to be Good betimes: For it is an Old Observation, That of all Orders
of Men, wicked Ministers are most hardly, and most rarely Reclaimed and
Converted. For which, many Obvious and Convincing Reasons are given, which I
will not digress to Enumerate. God will be Sanctified in them that draw nigh to
Him; and they must be Holy, which bear the Vessels of the Sanctuary.

And as Ministers, giving no Offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not
blamed; but in all things approving our selves, as the Ministers of God, 2 Cor.
6.3, 4. From the Highest to the Lowest, from the Bishop to the Deacon, all must
be Blameless, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.

How shall we Quicken others, if we be dull our selves; or lay those Burdens
upon others, which our selves will not touch with the least of our Fingers?
Thou that Teach another, Teach thou not thy self? Thou that Preachest a
Man should not Steal, do'^^ ^hou Steal? etc. see Romans 2. from the 18th. to the
25th.

A Careless Minister provides Excuses for his People, and Reproaches for
himself. Admit the Meat be Wholesome; yet it will turn Men's Stomachs, if it be
Dressed with Unclean or Leprous Hands. The Snuffers in the Sanctuary were to be
of Pure Gold. The Iniquity of Eli's Sons, made Men Abhor the Offerings of the
Lord. The Example of a Careless Life will pull down more in One Day, than the
warmest Exhortation can build up in Ten. Would thou therefore promote God's
Work effectually in others, Convince them thou believe thy self the Truth,
and the Necessity of what thou pressest on them.

Secondly, Ye that are Parents, labor to season early the tender Hearts of
your Children, with a Sense of Religion, and their Great Work. Youth is the Age
of Discipline, and the Seed-time for their whole Life. Train up a Child in the
Way wherein he should go, and when he is Old he will not Depart from it. The
First Impressions are most Lasting. It Is a great Honor to be entrusted with
the Education of one Child, and to have Opportunity to form it for God's
Service. As you were the means of their being Born, and the Occasions of their
being Born in Sin; you owe them, both in Love and Justice, your Best
Endeavors, that they may be Born again, and made Saints.

The Third and Last Branch of the Exhortation, is to All in general; though
more especially to Young Persons: 1. To a Speedy Setting about their great
Work. 2. To a Diligent Progress in it, when it is Begun.


First, To a Speedy Setting about this Work. Young Man, I say unto thee, Arise:
And Oh! that Christ would vouchsafe to accompany this Word with such a Power of
His Spirit, as might render it as effectual to some Dead Soul, as they were
upon the Dead-Son of the Widow of Naim. Luke 7. Awake thou that sleep,
stand forth from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light. Suppose thou
heardest God say to thee, as in the Parable; Son, go work to day in my
Vineyard, this present Day; and though thou have neglected His Call heretofore,
yet now Repent and go.

But because it often is with Young Persons (if I may make such an Allusion) as
it was with Lazarus, when Christ called him forth of his Grave; Joh. 11.44. He
that was Dead, came forth bound Hand and Foot, with Grave-Cloaths, and his Face
bound about with a Napkin: Therefore, Jesus said unto them, Loose him, and let
him go. When they begin to be quickened, and have some Sense of the Necessity of
speedy Walking in the Ways of God; yet their Heads are bound about, they are
muffled, and blind-folded with Prejudices, and cannot see their Way; and bound
Hand and Foot with Grave-Cloaths, hampered and shackled with former Customs and
Objections, that they can neither walk in God's Way, nor work for Him: I will
endeavor to loose them, and knock off their Fetters, and remove the Lets and
Hindrances of their Motion, and their Speed; and I shall do it briefly: For
though there may be many Foolish Cavils, there can be neither wise, nor strong
Objections, against the present Setting about God's Work; that they should
either need much Time or Pains to Remove them.

First then, it is Objected, That Religion is too serious a Work for Young
People; as the Philosopher said, Young Men were not fit Hearers of the Precepts
of Morality; but, Postquam deferbuit aetas, after the Heats of Youth are boiled
over; after their Lusts and Passions have spent themselves, and they have Sowed
their Wild Oats, as your Common Phrase is. The Heat of Youth is a kind of
Sickness; and no wise Physician administers in the Height of the Paroxisme;
but stays till the Fit be over. It Is a Degree of Drunkenness; and we Reprove
not the Drunkard 'till he be Sober, and come to himself.

Answer. These Comparisons prove nothing, and are as easily slighted as
produced. For the main Objection:

It Is true, Religion is a very serious Thing; and therefore, the fitter to
restrain the Extravagancy of Youthful Lusts; which, by how much the more
Impetuous they are, by so much the stronger Curbs they need, to restrain and
keep them in Order: And it is the Excellency of the Word of God, and its high
Commendation; that it is an Antidote strong enough to purge out such a Poison.
Where-with-all shall a Young Man cleanse his Ways? By taking heed thereto,
according to thy Word, Psalm. 119.9. For a Man to indulge his Lusts, and profess
Religion, I confess, were a way to desecrate and pollute so Holy a thing. But
Religion minded in Sincerity, will subdue and mortify them; And give Subtilty
to the Simple, to the Young Man Knowledge and Discretion, Prove. 1.4. Though
Youth has its Inconveniences, which Religion will Correct; it also has its
Advantages which Religion will Improve. It Is more Vigorous and Active, more
Susceptive and Retentive, more Free and Dis-engaged, more Unprejudiced and
Dis-incumbred, than the following Stages of Life: And therefore, most
acceptable to God, and fittest to be Consecrated to His Work.

Religion will Relieve against the Incommodities of Youth, and give the
Prerogatives of Age, and make them Men in Knowledge and Gravity, who are but
Youths in Years: For Honorable Age is not that which stands in Length of
Time, nor that is measured by Number of Years; But Wisdom is gray Hair unto
Men, and an unspotted Life is Old Age. Wisd. 4.8, 9. yea, gives Prerogatives
above it: For Young David was Wiser than his Teachers, and had more
Understanding than the Ancients, because he kept God's Precepts. Yea, the Wise
King carries the Disproportion very high, when he tells us, Eccles. 4.13. That
a Poor and Wise Child, is better than an Old and Foolish King.

Religion therefore is not too serious even for a Child, seeing it can make a
Child Serious; nor in danger to to be prejudiced by the Levity of Youth, seeing
it can Cloth even Youth with Gravity.

Secondly, A Second Objection against Early Piety, is suggested by
Superstitious Fear, that they shall Dye presently, if they grow Devout; as some
Fools think they must, if they once make their Wills.

Answ. How absurdly do Sinners suffer themselves to be abused by the Devil, and
their own vain Hearts? They now begin to be fit to Live, therefore they must
presently Dye! How inconsequent is this Conclusion! How Unreasonable such
Reasoning! As if God would suffer none but Fools and Knaves, to Live; and those
Wicked Men, with whom He is Angry every Day, and for whom He has Prepared the
Instruments of Death; and Has whet His Sword, and bent His Bow, and made all
ready for speedy Execution, if they turn not, Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13. God calls the
Righteous, Lights; and he has more use for them to Shine in the World, than to
whelm them Under the Bushel of Death, as soon as he has set them up, to Shine
in a Crooked and Perverse Generation.

It Is Bloody and Deceitful Men, against whom the Sentence is pronounced, That
they shall not Live out half their Days: But of Wisdom it is said, that Length
of Days is in her Right Hand, and in her Left Hand Riches and Honor, Prove.
3.16. And St. Peter 1.3, 10. He that will love Life, and see good Days, let
him refrain his Tongue from Evil, and his Lips from speaking Guile. Let him
eschew Evil, and do Good.

Finally, We find this Encouragement given to the Good Man, Job 5.26. That he
shall come to his Grave in a full Age, like as a Shock of Corn comes in, in
his Season.

Early Piety putts any Man out of danger of Dying ill, but it puts no Man in
danger of Dying soon.

Thirdly, A Third Objection is drawn from Profane Proverbs, of the Devil's
m^king to fright Young Ones; or at least, to excuse them: Such as, A Young
Saint, and an Old Devil; Soon Ripe, soon Rotten; mis-applyed to this Matter,
and such like.

Answ. It Is true, I confess, very often, (and it is Just with God it should be
so) That a Young Hypocrite, proves an Old Apostate: And they who studied more
to appear, than to be, Good; shall cease to appear, what they cared not to be:
And those who took up the Form of Godlyness, without the Power, shall lose the
Credit of their Form, for neglecting the Substance of the Power. And They who
would not receive the Love of the Truth, that they might be Saved; shall be
subject to strong Delusions, to believe Lies, that they may be Damned, 2 These.
2. because they took Pleasure in Unrighteousness, even while they made
Pretensions unto Righteousness. But the Way of the Just is as the Shining
Light, which shines more and more unto the Perfect Day, Prove. 4.14. The
Righteous shall hold on his way, and he that is of Clean Hands shall be
stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. Those that be Planted in the House of the
Lord, shall Flourish in the Courts of our God; they shall still bring forth
Fruit in Old Age; they shall be Fat and Flourishing, Psalm. 92.14.

And he that Blossoms in the Spring of his Youth, shall bear Ripe Fruit in the
Autumn of his Years: And the Young Saint shall be an Old-Angel.

Fourthly, They think they may Live long, they have time enough before them;
they that Begat, and brought them Forth, are yet Alive; and the World is full
of Men and Women, older than their Parents; and they find themselves of as
strong a Constitution, as the best of them; and therefore, hope they may Live
as long as the Oldest of them: and have time to begin this Work, and finish it
too, though they think not on it yet many a Year.

Answ. What May be, has always a May not be, of equal Possibility. Thou
may Live Twenty Years, and thou may Dye in less than half so many Days.
For, What is your Life? It is even a Vapor, that appears for a little Time,
and then vanishes away, St. Jam. 4.14. A Puff of Light Air, soon blown away:
The Healthiest Constitutions, are always as liable to External Accidents, as
the most Crazy; and usually more subject to Infectious, and Contagious
Diseases. And I appeal to your own Observation, whether, (compare one Family
with another) the Number of Deceased Children, do not far exceed that of
surviving, both Parents and Brethren. Therefore, trust not to that, which has
deceived so many; nor lean upon that broken Reed, (The Hope of Long Life) which
has more than wounded the Hand, has shivered under Thousands, that put much
Stress upon it, and let them drop into the Infernal Pit, from whence is no
Redemption.

Fifthly, The Example of most Young People; and why may not they venture, as
well as others?

Answ. It Is too true, too many Young People defer their Repentance, and delay
their Work: But it is as true, it is like to cost them Dear, and prove their
Ruin; and if thou will be Damned for Company, thou art more Cruel to thy self,
than Kind to them. The Most are the Worst; and we are warned against following
a Multitude in evil. The many are in the broad, the bad way, and the way to
life is found by few. We must live by Rule, not by Example: and if thou will
needs follow Precedents, choose the wisest, not the most. And those are they
that take Time by the Fore-lock, will not part with the Substance, to catch at
the Shadow, nor neglect the Present, in hopes of the Future; which is
uncertain, whether it shall ever be: Nay, most probable, it shall not; and most
certain, it may never be.

Sixthly and Lastly, The strongest Objection is raised from abused Scriptures.
That Poison is most dangerous, and diffuseth it self most speedily, and
incurably, which is administered in the strongest Liquors. When the Devil had
Impudence to tempt the Lord of Glory, he had Cunning to assault Him with this
Weapon; It is written, He shall give his Angels Charge over thee, etc. And so,
when he sets his Snares for poor Men, if he can Wire-draw a Text, to make a
Ginn of it, if he can abuse the Word, and make what should be a Light to our
Feet, and a Lantern to our Paths, to guide us to Heaven, an Ignis Fatuus, or
a Will-i'th'Wisp, to amuse us, and wilder us, and make us lose our selves in
Bogs, and among Precipices; he has done his Business, and concludes he is sure
of us.

Now, amongst many, these are not the seldomest pressed to serve his Design:

At what time so-ever a Sinner repents him of his Sin, I will put all his
Wickedness out of My Remembrance, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.11. And as he will
Curtail, and leave somewhat out; so he will put a Signal Emphasis upon what he
expects should wound and kill. At what time so-ever; though never so late: And
that in the 20th. of St. Matthew, They that went not into the Vineyard till the
Eleventh Hour; at Five a Clock, but one Hour before they all left Work; yet
these fared as well, Had every Man a penny, as much Wages, as They that went in
the Morning, and bore the Burden and Heat of the Day.

But abeve all, the Thief on the Cross; that is his Goliah's Sword, that is his
Enchanted Spear, his trusty Truncheon! What need you make such haste? Remember
you not the Thief on the Cross? He was Nailed to the Fatal Tree, a Thief, a
Miscreant, as wicked a Villain, as ever lived; and yet you know, he Repented,
and went that very Day to Paradise; which it may be he never thought on before,
nor ever desired, or prepared himself to go to. These I confess, are deadly
Weapons, and he makes many Mortal Thrusts with them, and wounds and kills
Eternally, unwary, and unarmed Sinners; therefore take your Shield to Repel
them, lest they pierce you through and through.

Answ. These I confess would bear a larger, and more Elaborate Confutation: But
I hope, a briefer One may serve; and a little Armor well put on, may render
you impregnable.

First therefore, As to that of Ezekiel, without insisting upon the Exactness
of the Words, as they are set down in our New Liturgy, and Correct what was
more subject to mistake in the Old One.

I deny not, but that Whenever a Sinner Repents him truly of all his Sins,
from the Bottom of his Heart, God will show him Mercy: But I deny, that he who
sins Presumptuously, in Confidence of Future Repentance, is sure, nay, or
likely to obtain it.

Vain Man! Is it as easy to Repent, as to Sin? Can thou Lift thy self up out
of a Deep Well, because thou can Throw thy self down into the Bottom of it?
Does not this depend immediately upon his Help, whose Gift Repentance is? Must
not God give thee both Space to Repent in, and Grace to Repent with, if ever
thou Repent in truth? And though he has often promised Pardon to Repentance,
he has never promised Repentance to Presumptuous Sinners; but contrarily, To
wound the Head, and Hairy Scalp of them, who go on in their Iniquities. This
Course hardens thy Heart against God, that it cannot Repent: and may justly
harden His Heart against thee, never to give thee Repentance; it being but a
Peradventure, in the most favorable Case. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. If God Peradventure
will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth, and that they may
Recover themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who are led Captive of him at
his Will. Though all Sin is dangerous; yet none sin so desperately, as those
who sin upon Presumption of Repentance.

As to that of the Eleventh Hour: Take heed of stretching Parables too far.
However, remark the Words in Matthew. 20.7. When he went out at the Eleventh
Hour, and said, Why stand ye here Idle all the Day long? They answered roundly,
Because no Man has Hired us. This is a fair Excuse. They come soon enough, who
come at the First Call; and they go to work in due time, who go as soon as they
are sent, or their Work is set them. But, What is this to you, who have been
called a Hundred times,; yea, commanded to your Work a Thousand? He that being
often Reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without Remedy, Prove. 29.1. how well soever he may speed, who obeyes the First
Warning God gives him.

As to that of the Thief on the Cross; who went on a Sinner, and came off a
Saint: As the Cross of Christ was a scandal to many at the First; so the Cross
of this Happy Thief, is an Unhappy Occasion of stumbling and falling to not a
few, to this very Day. But many have been the Answers, which have been given,
to remove it out of the way; that no more may stumble at it:

There were Two Thieves Crucified at that time, and but One Repented; and thou
may prove the Impenitent One: and, What will thy Case then be? But that is the
very least that can be said. There is but this One Example in all the Bible;
and this One is Recorded, that none might Despair; and but this One, that none
may Presume. And this being a single Instance, (we say, One Swallow makes no
Summer) thou may as well Spur thy Ass, till thou make him speak, because
thou read, Balaam's Ass once spoke with Man's Voice, (as Holy Mr. Greenham
smartly upbraids such Men's Folly) as promise thy self the like.

But consider the Time; it was when our Lord was Crucified in greatest
Ignominy; and He thought good to show His Royalty, and an extraordinary
Munificence, to counterballance the Infamy of His Dying on the Accursed Tree;
and it was a thing becoming His Wisdom and Goodness, to give a Signal Instance,
and Early Proof, of the Efficacy of His Death, and His Father's Acceptance of
His Obedience. And it is a great Word one speaks upon it; You may as well expect
Christ to be Crucified again, as expect such another Instance of such unusual
Mercy.

Kings may on their Coronation-Day open the Prisons, and let loose Offenders,
such as they will not Pardon afterward, in all their Reign. The Conduits may
then flow with Wine, though they run Common Water always after: And the
Thief's Case was Extraordinary, which might in some Measure entitle him to
Extraordinary Favor. He Pleaded Christ's Cause openly, Rebuked his
Fellow-Sufferer, Owned a Rejected Savior, when the Priests and Elders not only
Condemned Him, but Mocked and Blasphemed Him; and when His own Followers fled
and forsook Him, and were either afraid, or ashamed to Own Him. And was, as one
calls him, The Apostle of the Apostles; aptly supplying Judas's Room: For, whom
he (who was a Thief, Joh. 12.6.) had Betrayed to the Cross, this Good Thief
Preached, whilst he was upon it.

More Objections might have been Started, and as easily Answered, and more have
been said to These; but I hope, this may suffice.

I beseech you therefore, All, especially you Young Ones, into whose Hands this
may fall; up, and be doing, Defer not a Day, not an Hour longer, e're you set
upon this Great Work; Grieve not the Blessed Spirit, when He knocks, when He
calls at the Door of thy Heart. Say not to Him, as Faelix did to Paul; Go thy
way now, when I have a Convenient Time, I will send for thee; lest that Time
never come, or He despise thy sending for Him, who have rejected Him so often,
when He came of His own Accord. But take heed you be not Discouraged at the
Beginnings of a New Work: First On-sets are most Difficult. It Is the Neck
unaccustomed to the Yoke, that winches and complains of it: A little Wearing
it, will make it Easy. He that has begun well, has half Finished. As it is
safest to Resist Evil, in the Beginning; so it is the wisest Course, to begin
quickly and resolvedly, what is Good, and must be done: The Engine which is
hardly set a-going, is easily continued to move, when it is once in Motion. It
has been observed, most are Converted Young, that are ever Converted truly. O
ye Young Ones, Confirm that Observation by your Speedy Turning unto God! But
then, resolve to proceed in your Work with Diligence, which is the Last Thing
to be spoken to.

I might in this place, add more Motives to quicken your Speed: But I shall
rather refer you back (at present) to those in the preceding Discourse; and
subjoyn here those Considerations, which may provoke your Diligence: Amongst
which, a Place will be found to touch this String again conveniently.

Now, in this Exhortation to Diligence, Three Things will be requisite, to
render it more effectual: 1. To Caution you against the Hindrances, which
Obstruct it. 2. To Direct you to the Helps, which Promote it. 3. To Lay down
the Motives, which Provoke to it.


First, That you may proceed with Diligence in the Work of God, beware of the
Hindrances, which would Obstruct it: Which are of Two sorts:

The First, we may call Doctrinal, or in Opinion.

The Second, Real, or in Practice.

I shall briefly point at Three of either sort.

1. Take heed of esteeming it so Easy, that it needs it not.

2. That, on the contrary Extreme, you judge it not so Difficult, and even
Impossible, that no Diligence can effect it.

3. That you think not so Meanly, and Basely of it, that it does not deserve it.

When a Business is propounded to be done, if it appear under any of these
Notions, no Wise Man will attempt it with any Vigor: For, Why should he bestow
a great deal of Pains and Labor, when he plainly fore-sees, it is either
needless, and may be spared, or will prove useless, and must be lost. But if it
appear very Hard and Difficult, but yet Hopeful and Possible to be attained;
and withal, most Necessary, and very Excellent, and Advantageous: This will
Excite and Raise that Soul, that has any Principles of Prudence, Generosity,
or Care of its own Good.

First, Account not this Work so Easy, as it is most evident too many do; who
under fullest Convictions, and professed Acknowledgments, that there is such an
Heaven and Hell, as the Bible describes; and that it so infinitely concerns
them to obtain the One, and escape the Other, as is there declared; yet Live so
securely, and negligently, that they proclaim to all the World, they think it
next to Impossible, to miscarry; and swear by their Hopes of Salvation, as the
most Sacred Asseveration; while they are running headlong in the Broad-way,
that leads to Destruction.

Surely, these must think God's Work very Easy, who flatter themselves, that
they can carry it on sufficiently, while they are serving the Devil, and their
Lusts, with both Hands greedily. It may not be impertinent to mind such Men of
the Romish Fryar's Lenten Sermon; which, before many Cardinals, and Great Men
of that Court, he began abruptly thus:

St. Peter was a Fool, and St. Paul was a Fool, and all the Primitive
Christians were mere Fools; who took such a deal of Care and Pains, to please
God, and save their Souls; and thought the Way to Heaven, was by Self-denial
and Mortification, Prayers and Fasting; by Severities, and denying the Pomps of
this Wicked World: And You at Rome, indulge your selves in Ease and Sloth, live
in your Lusts and Luxury, and spend your Time in Pomp and Pleasure; and yet
account your selves very good Christians; and doubt not, but you shall be
saved: But, at last, You Will be found the Fools, and They the Wise Men.

For it is the part of Wisdom, to proportion the Means to the End; and it is
great Folly, to waste Time and Strength, and make a great Stir and Bustle about
that, which may be done (as you say) with a wet Finger; and it is so also, to
act coldly and faintly in that, which cannot be accomplished without great
Industry.

I beseech you therefore, beware of such an Opinion, as will greatly tempt you
to be Remiss in the Work of God; and remember who bid, Strive to enter in at
the Streight-Gate; withal, telling you, That many of those who strive, shall
not be able to get in: What then shall become of them, who strive not? The
Violent take the Kingdom of Heaven. As he that Asks faintly, bespeaks a Denial;
so he that Acts faintly, will be surely Disappointed.

Besides what was said before, it were easy to add many Evidences, to prove
this Work to be Hard; and that it is very Reasonable, it should be so. The Way
is Steep and Slippery, it is hard to climb it; the Enemies are Many and Mighty,
that Oppose thee; thy Skill and Strength is small; Nature will recoyl, and draw
back; and single Nature is hardly overcome: and Custom of Sinning, is a Second
Nature; and doubtless the Difficulty, and no Discipline, is so hard, as for him
to learn to do Well, who has been accustomed to do Evil. Self is a bold
Competitor with God; and must be used Roughly, or it will be served before Him,
and set up above Him: And for thy own Dear Sake, thou will be prone to cry, as
David for his Darling Absalom; Deal gently with it, for my Sake: And, by a
strange Fondness, thou will spare the Traitor, which watches to destroy thee.
Though Christ Rejected the Temptation, Favor thy self, with a Get thee behind
Me, Satan; yet when such Sugared Words are offered thee, thou wilt hardly discern
the Poison that is mixed with them.

And there are many Reasons, why God has made his own Work hard; that those
who Wear the Crown, may Win it first: For a Man is not Crowned, unless he
strive Lawfully: That he may appear Impartial, in Rejecting Loyterers, and
Rewarding Laborers: That his Servants may have Opportunity to exercise those
Graces, which else there would be no occasion for: That Rest may be sweeter
after Labor: And that God's Grace may be Magnifyed, in assisting their
Weakness; and Satan may be more Confounded, in the Disappointment of all his
Stratagems.

Believe therefore thy Work to be hard; that thou betray not thy self to Sloth
and Remissness, to thy own Eternal Ruin.

Secondly, Yet run not into the other Extreme, while thou avoydest this; and
dash not against Scylla, while thou avoydest Charybdis: Conclude not, it is
Impossible to finish it by Labor; because it is so, to accomplish it without
Labor. Despair of Success kills all Industry; and a supposed Impossibility of
Attainment, naturally produces Despair. When once we say, There is no Hope; the
next word will be, Why should I wait any longer? Why should I strive any more?
But, Be not Sloathful; but Followers of them, who through Faith and Patience
inherit the Promises. Faith and Patience will do that, which Sloth and the want
of them can never do.

And watch carefully against that Snare, Satan lays in the way of so many; If
I be not Elected, all my Labor will be in vain: I cannot alter God's Decrees.

Vain Creature! What have thou to do with God's Decrees? Who made thee of His
Council? Mind thou what is written in the Word, Which is nigh thee in thy
Mouth, and in thy Heart: Not what is written in the Secret Records of Heaven.
Read Deuteronomy. 29.29.

The secret things belong to the Lord our God: But those things which are
Revealed, belong to Us, and to our Children, for ever; that we may do all the
Words of this Law. And Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 14. This Commandment, which I command
thee this Day, is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. It is not in
Heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go up for us to Heaven, and bring it
to us, that we may hear it, and do it. But the Word is ni^h unto thee in thy
Mouth, and in thy Heart, that thou may do it. See, I have set before you
this Day, Life and Good, Death and Evil Compare Romans 10.6, -- 9. This is the
Word of Faith which we Preach; If thou Confess with thy Mouth, and believe in
thine Heart, thou shall be saved.

Not, if thou be Elected, thou shall be Saved, whether thou believe, whether
thou workest out thy Salvation, or no: This is to begin at the wrong End; as if
a Man would begin to Build a House at the Roof, and Build downwards; Build the
Roof in the Air, before any thing were laid on Earth to bear it up. St. Peter
teaches another Method, 2 Pet. 1.5. Giving all Diligence, add to your Faith
Virtue, etc. For if these Things be in you, and abound, they make you, that you
shall be neither Barren nor Unfruitful, etc. And, Verse. 10. Giving Diligence to
make your Calling and Election sure. First Calling, then Election; and
Diligence to know, and to make sure Both.

How many Scriptures speak the same Sense, (nay, it is the Scope of all the
Scripture) with Gal. 6.7, 8, 9. Whatsoever a Man Sows, that shall he also
Reap; for he that sows to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but
he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting. And
let us not be weary in Well-doing; for in due Season we shall Reap, if we faint
not.

Therefore, neither scare thy self from thy Duty, nor flatter thy self in thy
Negligence, by any Decrees of God, which are hidden from thee, and thou art a
Stranger to. But quicken and comfort thy self with this Truth, which is written
as with a Sunbeam from Heaven; That no Decree of God shall ever shut him out
of Heaven, who with sincere Faithfulness, and humble Diligence, attends God's
Work, according to his Written Word: Neither shall any Decree of God admit him
into Heaven, who securely and slothfully neglects it. And if after thou have
got over that Stumbling Block of Feared Impossibility; yet thou stickest, and
art frighted at, the Difficulty: Consider, it is no greater than the Wise and
Holy God thinks fit to make it, and that for Righteous and Holy Reasons; and He
knows how to proportion every Man's Work to his Abilities: And as He will not
suffer any of His to be Tempted above their Strength; so neither will he task
them above their Sufficiency, they shall receive from Him. And thou may
Counter-ballance the Hardness of thy Work, by weighing its Necessity, its
Excellency, the Assistance He is ready to afford thee, the Acceptance He has
promised thee, and the Superlative Greatness of the Reward prepared for thee.
So that thou may say; I reckon that the Sufferings of this present time, are
not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be Revealed in us, Romans
8.18 For our light Afflictions, (and yet the Patient Bearing them, is the
hardest piece of our work) which are but for a moment, work for us a far more
Exceeding, and Eternal Weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. as Joseph said, His Glory
in Egypt made him Forget all his Toil, and his Father's House: So I may invert
the Words; Thy Father's House will make thee (in one Hour) forget all the Toil
of the Brick-Hills, and Bondage of the Egypt of this World: Though to the
Corrupt Sense of Flesh and Blood, Wicked Men seem to have the Advantage of Good
Men, in respect of their Work; yet Good Men have the Advantage of them
infinitely, in respect of their Master. The Saints may have Hard Work, but they
have no Hard Master; but One who will help them to do their Work, and yet
Reward them, as if themselves had done it. But Sinners have an Hard Master,
with their Easy Work; and one hours Payment of their Wages for the Works of the
Flesh, will be more Afflictive, than the Labor of an whole Life would have
been, in the Mortifying of them.

The Third Hinderance of thy Diligence, to be a avoided, is a low, a mean, a
base Opinion of the Work, as if it deserved it not. The Proverb says, That
Jupiter is not at leisure to attend little things; and the high-soaring Eagle
stoops not to catch Flies: Nor will a Wise Man fish with a Golden Hook, to take
Fish of low Value. But a better Authority asks us; Wherefore do ye spend Money
for that, which is not Bread? and your Labor, for that which satisfyeth not?
Isa. 55.2. And, What Profit has he, who has labored for the Wind? Eccles.
5.16. and Reproacheth them, who weary themselves for very Vanity, Hab. 2.13.
and warns us Not to labor for the Meat that perishes, Joh. 6. And it is truly
a Reproach to a Man, to bestow much Pains on that which will not answer it. And
if the Devil, or thy own Heart, can mis-perswade thee concerning God's Work,
and turn the same Weapon against thy Diligence in it, which God has formed
against thy Laboring in theirs; 'twill have the like Effect to make the
Miserable, which God designed, by the Right Application of it, to make the
Happy.

Study therefore the Excellency of this Work, which directly tends to rescue
thee out of the Basest slavery to Sin and Satan, to repair thy Decayed Nature,
to restore and recover the Image of God, and make thee Partaker of the Divine
Nature; to fill thy Soul with Peace, and the Angels of Heaven with Joy; to
deliver thee from the Hurt, and Fear of Death, and from Eternal Vengeance; and
to fit thee for, and bring thee to Eternal Glory, in God's Kingdom: And, were
there nothing else to be said of it, or for it, that Work must needs be
Excellent, which renders them more Excellent than their Neighbors; and
denominates them the Excellent of the Earth, and such as the World is not
Worthy of, who are Employed in it. And that Work cannot be Mean or Base, which
the High and Glorious God injoynes, loves to behold us at, will reward with
Incorruptible Crowns of Glory; and differs only in Degree, but not in Kind,
from the Work in which all Great and Noble Souls shall spend, or rather enjoy
in Eternity, with increasing Joy and Satisfaction.

The Hindrances of your Diligence, which I call Real, or in Practice; and
which I warn you to beware of, are these Three:

First, Ignorance, (or Unskilfulness) how to set about it, or to manage your
Work aright. There is no Work or Business can be done well, without some Skill
and Experience; not the Meanest, or Easiest. The Plough-man, and the Thresher,
Isaiah takes notice of, Chap. 28.26. His God does instruct him to Discretion,
and does Teach him. It Is an easy thing to Read; yet deliver the Book to him
that has not learnt his Letters, and bid him Read, He says, I am not Learned,
Isa. 29.12. he cannot do it. A Man that is Master of his Trade, and skilful at
it, will dispatch more in an Hour, without Noise or Bustle; than another Man,
who bungles at it, with much Toil and Sweating, in an whole Day. A Man that is
Instructed to the Kingdom of God, brings forth readily out of his Treasury,
Things New and Old. Matthew. 13.52. He that knows his Way, goes on cheerfully,
and rids Ground apace, and loses no time by stopping to Inquire, or Recover
what he had lost, by turning into Bypath.

As Knowiedge is a leading Grace, and influenceth all our Work; and the
Prudence of a Man will direct his Way: So Ignorance is the Root of Error, and
the most Universally Destructive. He cannot do God's Work with any Comfort and
Assurance, who knows it not; but is sometimes right, and sometimes wrong,
always Anxious and uneasy to himself: Putting Darkness for Light, and Light
for Darkness; calling Good Evil, and Evil Good. The Blind swallows many a Fly,
commits many a Sin, he knows not to be Sins; and if he does good, it is but by
Chance; he loses the Advantage of it, because he knew it not to be so; and
therefore, could not do it in Faith: For whatever is not of Faith, is Sin,
Romans 14. ult.

The Heart cannot be Good without Knowledge, nor thy Work Good without a Good
Heart.

Wisdom is the Principal Thing (to direct thee in thy Work;) therefore, Get
Wisdom; and with all thy getting, get Understanding, Prove. 4.7. No Man can aim
Right, that Shoots blindfold.

Ignorance will blind thy Eyes, that thou can not see thy Mark, God's Glory,
and thy own Salvation. The Text is express, That in the Night no Man can Work:
And one Reason given to Confirm it, was, Because it is too dark to see to work
in. The most thou can do in the Night of Ignorance, is to grope like a Blind
Man; and how thou art like to Finish so curious a Work, in such a case, I leave
it to thy self to Judge: Therefore, provide against so Real, and so Great a
Hinderance.

The Second Real Hinderance is, The Indulging of the Flesh, and a Desire to
gratify it, by the Inordinate Love of Ease and Pleasure. If this Humor
prevail, and thou be Delicate, Soft, and Tender, thou will shrink and give
back, at the first Difficulty which steps forth to meet thee. He is not fit to
make a Soldier, that can endure no Hardship. Thou therefore endure Hardness as
a Good Soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3. He that loves Pleasure, shall be
a Poor Man, Prove. 21.17. And who so loves his Ease, Poverty shall come upon him
as an Armed Man. They can never serve God acceptably, who serve their Lusts and
Pleasures willingly: And they Who are Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of
God, may possibly attain a Form of Godlyness, but will certainly Deny the Power
of it, 2 Timothy 3.4, 5. For the Pleasures of this World, choke the Seed of the
Word, and they bring forth no Fruit unto Perfection, Luke 8.14.

The Third Real Hinderance, is, Encumbrance with Multitude of Cares, and
Worldly Affairs. This over-charges the Heart, and distracts the Mind, that it
cannot wait on God. No Man can serve God and Mammon. Our Breasts are too
narrow, to lodge so many, and so contrary Inmates. We cannot look Upwards and
Downwards both at once. If, Carmina secessum scribentis and otia poscunt, a
Poet's Thoughts must be free, and disintangled; Religion requires it much more:
Enter thou into thy Closet, and shut to thy Door, to shut out Distractions.

I deny not, but while we Live in this World, we need the things of this
World; and we may lawfully seek them, and use them: But then we must seek, and
use them lawfully; which is done, when we keep them at due Distance, allow them
(at most) but the Second Place. Use them, as if we used them not; remembering
the Time is short, and that the Fashion of this World passes away. If Hagar
domineer, and begin to despise her Mistress Sarah, she must be made to know,
she is but a Bond-Maid, and she must be cast out.

Next to them who cannot find an Heart to serve God, they are to be pittyed who
cannot find Time to serve Him: And the truth is, they therefore can find no
Time for this Work, because they can find no Heart to it; and they therefore
can find no Heart, because the World has stolen it away. It Is said by the
Prophet, Wine and Women take away the Heart, Hos. 4.11. And it is as true,
Riches and Business, and Multiplicity of Affairs, and a Crowd and Hurry of
Employments, take it away no less. If some Men can scarce find time to Eat and
Sleep, as well as they love their Bodies; What Time do you think, they will
find to Read, and Pray, and Meditate, and search their Consciences, and purify
their Souls? Of all Remote Advantages, which Religion may have, I esteem none
Greater than Retirement, Vacancy, a Time to be still, and Commune with our
Hearts, call our Ways to Remembrance; to think, and consider, and to have
Leisure to Converse with God. I acknowledge the Truth of Solomon's Vae soli,
Woe to him that is alone; yet it is as as true, Vae nunquam soli, Woe to him
that will not, Woe to him that cannot; but, most of all, Woe to him that dares
not be alone!

The Second Branch of this Use, is to Direct you to the Helps which will
Promote your Diligence; which amongst others, are these:

Willingness, Love, Wisdom, Speed, Industry, Courage, Constancy, or
Perseverance.

First, Willingness, or a Good Will to your Work. The willing Man, will be a
Diligent Man. Willingness is the Rise, or leading Step to Diligence. It Is not
only Oil to your Wheels, but the very Wheels themselves: And Men drive
heavily, like Pharaoh's Chariot's, when the Wheels were taken off, when they
want a Willing Mind to what they are engaged in: When on the contrary,
Willingness makes them like the Chariots of Aminadab, Cant. 6.12, sets them on
the Chariots of my Willing People, as the Margin there. The First Work upon
the Soul, is described Psalm. 110.3. Thy People shall be Willing in the Day of
Thy Power. In God's Offerings for the Tabernacle, the Directions were to
Receive them from them who brought them with a Willing Heart, Exodus 35.5, 21,
29. And when they were Willing, they bring more than enough, Exodus 36.5.

Willingness will need a Bridle, rather than a Spur. That Picture of Diligence,
drawn by Solomon's Pen, of the Virtuous Woman, has This inserted, as the Soul
of all the Rest; She works Willingly with her Hands, Prove. 31.13.

Willingness to your Work, will help your Diligence in it many ways; For it
will make you Docible and Careful to learn your Work. You use to let Children
choose their Professions; knowing they will learn that soonest, they have most
mind to. 'Twill make you Cheerful and Ready in the Undertaking it. We use to
say, There is nothing to a Willing Mind. What the Naturalist says of the Hand,
the Moralist says of the Will; It is the Instrument of Instruments.

A Man treads that Path, in which his Will leads him, as if he did not feel the
Ground he goes on. It Is the best Sauce; all things Taste, as it does Season
them: And Things are Dear or Cheap, according to the Ptice it sets upon them.
It will make Men Serious, and in good Earnest; they will netiher speak faintly,
nor act coldly, about what they have engaged their Wills in. They will not
trifle, as those do who are in Bivio, know not their own Minds, nor what
themselves would have.

Be Willing therefore to your Work; that will make you Diligent at it.

Secondly, Love to your Work, will double your Diligence about it. Love is the
Flower, the Cream of Willingness; nay, the Quintessence and Spirits of it. If
Willingness gives Feet, Love will give Wings. Jacob served Seven Years for
Rachel; and they seemed but as so many Days, because he Loved her. The Servant
that Loved his Master, would refuse the Freedom the Law provided for him; and
would have his Ear bored at his Door-Post, and be his Servant for ever; not by
Constraint, but Choice.

No Work is Hard, no Commands is Grievous, to him that Loves. It Is a mighty
Weight, and excites both quick and constant Motion. It offers a pleasing,
welcome Violence; and constrains to follow whithersoever it leads, without
Struggling or Resisting.

Love fulfils the Law, and keeps the Commandments; yea, is a Law unto it self,
and the strongest Scepter to rule and bow Men to Obedience; and when it is
Perfect, Obedience will be so too.

Get therefore thy Heart possessed with Love to God: These Cords will bind
thee, will Charm thee to thy Work; and there is no fear, but thou will be
Diligent.

Thirdly, Wisdom. This is the Soul of Diligence. A Man may make a great Bustle
to very little, yea, to very ill purpose, if he be Destitute of Wisdom, to
Contrive and Manage his Work to the best Advantage. The Ant, which is the
Natural Emblem of Diligence, is said to be Exceeding Wise, Prove. 30.24, 25.
Torpet robor sine Prudentia: Strength is good for little, without good
Contrivance to direct; and Wisdom is profitable to Direct, Eccles. 10.10. and
it Strengthens the Wise more than Ten mighty Men, that are in the City,
Eccles. 7.19. Which made Wise Solomon conclude, That Wisdom is better than
Strength, Eccles. 9.16. What will a well-rigg'd Ship do with a full Gale,
without a Pilot, but dash against the Rocks, or run upon the Sands? Or a
Hot-mettled Horse, without a Sober Rider, but heat and melt himself, to his own
Ruin?

Wisdom will many ways assist Diligence; for it will contrive, and find out
fit means, to bring Purposes to pass; or will readily close with them, when
they are discovered. There is a Diligence in the Head, as well as of the Hand;
to Forecast, and Contrive, as well as Execute. And it will know fit Seasons,
and fasten on them, and improve them.

There is a Season for every Thing, and a Time to every Purpose under the Sun:
And it is Wisdom, which both knows these Seasons, and knows how to use them.
Labor well timed, is the Life of Labor. One Blow upon the Heated Iron, will
do more than Twenty while it is Cold. It will also foresee Hindrances, and
prevent and obviate them: It will make Suppositions, and put Cases, and provide
accordingly: And carry with it, what it hopes it shall not have Occasion for;
yet would not want it, in case there should. It will sit down, and consider
what it has to do, and what it will cost to finish it; and then provides
accordingly. Prepare thy Work without, and make it fit for thy self in the
Field; and after Build thy House. And lastly, It will proportion Labor to
Strength, that it may hold out, and not be tired.

Fourthly, Speed, and timely Application to thy Work, is neither the Least, nor
the Last Help to Diligence. Expedition is the Life of Action. It Is next to
doing no Time, to resolve not to do till next Time. You would count him no
Diligent Servant, who lingers and trifles; and has not begun, when others have
half done their Days Work. I made haste, and prolonged not the Time, to keep
thy Commandments.

Alexander being ask't, How he Conquered the World so soon, so young, by Thirty
Years Old? Answered, By Deferring nothing.

And Caesar, Emulous of his Glory, pursued it in the same Methods; and used to
be quicker in his Marches, than the Wings of Fame; and prevent the Report of
his Coming, by being the First Messenger of it: That his Enemies saw him com^
before they heard he was coming; and fell on immediately: That he often came
upon them, and over-came them, all at once; and the Battle was often hot,
before the Day was so.

Speed has the Promise of Success; They that seek Me early, find Me, Prove.
8.17. Speed Rises at the First Call; and the Diligent Man bespeaks the
Watchman to awake him, that he may not over-sleep himself: And neither cheats
it Self, nor mocks God, with the Uncivil Civility; I Will go, Sir, by and by.
Modesta negatio procrastinatio: Delay is but a mannerly Denial, at the best;
and but a Mask for the Rudeness of a flat Refusal of Duty: And those, who are
ashamed bluntly to say, We will not, disguise their Disobedience, by saying, We
will here-after. But this Language is never found in the Mouth of Diligence.
God charges us concerning our Brother; Say not to him, Go thy way, and come
again to Morrow, when thou have it by thee, Prove. 3.28.

Speed lays no Blocks in its own way, invents no Occasions of Delay; seeks no
Excuses, like idle Boys, who lose their Books, or hide their Hats, to have some
Pretext to play the Truants, and stay from School. It Is the Slothful Man, who
says, There is a Lion in the way, a Lion is in the Streets, Prove. 26.13. When
he is quickened to his Work, cries out, Would you have me run into the Lyon's
Mouth? Would you have me undo my Self, and Family, and be swallowed up with
Poverty, by neglecting my Shop to run to Church; and my own Calling, to mind
God's Work? The Way of the Slothful, is an Hedge of Thorns, Prove. 15.19. He
would go if he could, if he durst; but he dare not stir, for pricking his Legs:
He shall be called Fool or Phanatick, be Jeered and Laugh't at by his Old
Companions, and made the Drunkard's Song, and Talk of all the Town. It Is safer
to take Time and Leisure. Fair and Softly, goes far in a Day: That Is soon
enough, that is safe.

Thus Idle Men will frame Excuses, as Idle as themselves; but the Diligent does
not so: Nay, he will remove the Real Ones he meets with, to his Power; he will set
Hand, and Shoulder both, to work; and try in earnest, to remove Impediments.

When Men are in haste, they will break open that Door with the Foot, which
cannot be unlocked with the Hand. The Nightingale, that Diligent Singer,
porches with her Breast against a Thorn, that Sleep may not hinder her Melody.
Aristotle, that Diligent Student, sat with a Brazen Ball in his Hand, over a
Basin, that if he chanced to nod, the falling Ball might alarm, and raise him
to his Study. Yea, he is grieved at the very Heart, when he meets with those he
cannot overcome; and Sits, or Stands, as upon Thorns, and could even bite the
Chain which holds him.

Thus a Man, that is preparing to Worship God, or to set apart a Day to
retire, to spend in Devotion, in Prayer and Fasting, in Examining his Heart and
Ways, and Trying his Estate toward God. If some Occasion intervene, to hinder
him, some Company surprise, and unseasonably interrupt him; it saddens, and
makes him Melancholy all the Day; and he sends his Heart into his Closet,
where he would be himself; and stays, where he is held against his Will,
dumpish, and without an Heart: And secretly cries out against the Violence he
suffers; O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from it? And looks, and
longs, and sighs secretly; When shall I come, and appear before God? Where-as
the Sloathful Man hugs himself, and blesses his propitious Stars, that furnish
him with such Excuses, to stop the Mouth of his own Conscience, or save his
Credit with his Pious Neighbors: I was resolved fully to be there, to have
done so or so; but just as I was going, in came such and such, or this or that
fell out, which hindered me that I could not do what I was fully minded.

Lastly, Speed will help thy Diligence, because it will put thee in a Readyness
to act with the first Opportunity, and provide it self of all that is requisite
for doing so: It takes up its Horse over Night, that the Morning may not slip
away, while he is catching. They that furnish Posthorses on the Road, keep
them ready Sadled and with Bit in Mouth. The Diligent Mariner will get all
Aboard, that he may hoyst Sail, as soon as ever the Winds comes fair. The
Diligent Servant has his Loins girded, quite ready, all his Clothes on, to
his very Girdle; which being upper-most, he puts on last; and his Light
burning, that he may open to his Lord at the First Knock, Luke 12.35.

Thus these Two will mutually influence, second, and assist each other: A
Diligent Mind will quicken thee to Speed, and Speed will many ways promote and
help thy Diligence in working.

Fifthly, Industry is another great Help to Diligence. Industry is the bending
of our Minds, with all our Might, to make any thing our Business; and to regard
it chiefly. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God. We say, a Man does a thing de
Industria, when he does it for the nonce wi^h the settled Resolution* and full
Purpose of his Heart; as Barnabas exhorted them of Antioch, To cleave unto the
Lord, Act. 11.23. Set your Hearts upon all these Words, which I testify among
you this Day; for it is not a vain thing, Deuteronomy. 32.46. When a Man makes it the
Chief Design he drives at, and the Scope he aims at; and is indiff^rent about
the Success of other M^tters, provided this may succeed well.

This Industry will avoid Diversions, will not be turned out of the way; but
Seeks the way to Zion, with his Face thitherward, Jer. 50.5. As it is said of
our Lord, who had set His Heart upon the Work of God, to be done at Jerusalem;
Men might read it in His Face: Luke 9.53. His Face was as though He would go to
Jerusalem.

It will Cast away every weight; and if it cannot, Enatare cum sarcinis, escape
with its Pack on its Back, will quit it readily, let it sink or swim; rather
than endanger Drowning with it, or for Saving of it.

Industry will Redeem the Inconveniences, brought upon it by what it could not
prevent. An Industrious Man, if he has been staid against his Will, will Ride
the faster, and the later, to recover his Journeys End. An Industrious Student
will eke out his Day by Candlelight, to Redeem the Time, those Thieves of Time
and Learning, impertinent Visitants, had stolen from him.

Thus, in the Work of God; How Diligent will Industry make a Man, when he comes
to be convinced indeed, and sees the Greatness and Concernment of his Work?
How much he is cast behind by former Negligence? How Ignorant at Man's Estate,
of what he might, and should have learned, whilst a Child? How far from the
Kingdom of Heaven? In what danger of being be-nighted? How will he bestir
himself? Yea, he will serve himself of all Occurrences, and hook in Advantages;
Viam aut inveniet, aut faciet, and will make what he cannot find, to s rve his
great Interest; will Spiritualize, and Extract Heaven out of Earth, and press
the very World, against its will, to serve him some way in the Work of God:
And the Clog which is fastened to his Foot, to keep him down, if he cannot shake
it off, he will tread upon it, and turn it to a Footstool, to lift him up, and
raise him higher.

Sixthly, Courage. The Diligent Man must be Valiant, or he will not long
continue Diligent. The Opposition, and Discouragements, which cross the way of
Goodness, will spoil his Pace, who is not armed with Zeal, Resolution, and
Patience. Shall that Man put to Sea, who cannot see the Waves toss or hear the
VVind bluster? They must be Valiant for the Truth, who will be Diligent to seek
it, or hold it fast. Animus, Vis, Audacia, commeatus Virtutis and Faelicitatis:
Courage, Hardyness, and Resolution, are the Guardians and Companion of Virtue
and Happiness. The Two most Impregnable Forts against all Assaults of unkind
Fortune, are Bearing and Forbearing. Fortitude will inspirit Diligence, and
blow it into Flames, and make it like Coals of Juniper, which many Waters
cannot Quench. 'Twill mind him, that more fall in Flight, than Fight: And that
it is both more Honorable, and more Safe, to stand our Ground, than run away.

This Courage will despise Danger, and dares grapple with Difficulties; and
scorns to use the Coward's Shield, (The Back) to turn it toward them. He is
never like to do God's Work to any purpose, that must ask the Devil's Leave to
do it, or the World's either: But he must study to attain an Holy Greatness of
Spirit, and True Gallantry of Mind, who resolves to be Good in spite of Satan,
and all his Instruments. Resist the Devil, (says St. James) and he will fly
from you, 4.7. Whom Resist steadfast in the Faith, says St. Peter, 1-5.9.
Contend earnestly for the Faith, says St. Jude, verse. 3. In nothing Terrifyed,
says St. Paul, Phil. 1.27. And again; Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit
you like Men, be strong, 1 Cor. 16.13. Only take heed you presume not to stand
in your own Strength, (that is the way to fall;) But, Be strong in the Lord, and
in the Power of his Might: Take to your selves the whole Armor of God, that
you may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil; that ye may be able to
withstand, in the Evil Day; and having done all, to stand, Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 13.

This Courage will help your Diligence, because it will enable you to venture
the Expense your Work requires of you; and dare lay out in Confident Hope of an
Advantageous Return. The Diligent Merchant will hazard his Goods to Sea, though
some have met with Shipwracks in a Storm, and others have lost all by Pirates.
The Diligent Husbandman will cast his Seed into the Dirty Earth, though some
has been Buried under the Clods, or Rotted by Inclemency of Weather: So this
Courage will make thee venture bo h Cost and Pains, and Time too, in God's
Work; and not to Serve Him, with that that costs thee nothing; will not suffer
thee to say, It Is a Vain thing to serve Him; and lost Labor, and Unprofitable,
to pray to Him: But will boldly conclude, In due time we shall Reap, if we
Faint no^. Again, 'Twill fortify thy Patience, to wait from Seed-time until
Harvest. He that believes, shall not make haste, Isa. 28.16. And willing to
tarry the Lord's Leisure. The Vision is for an appointed Time; but at the End,
it shall speak, and not lie: Though it tarry, wait for it; because it will
surely come, it will not tarry, Habb. 2.3. And, as we have Need of Patience,
that after we have done the Will of God, we mig^t receive the Promise: For yet
a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Heb.
10.36. So this ^ourage will help you to it, as the Apostle plainly implys, when
Verse 35 he bids them, Not cast away their Confidence, which has great
Recompense of Reward.

Lastly 'Twill help thy Diligence, in that 'twill make thee Patient to do, as
well as suffer; to undergo Labor and Pains, deny thy Self, and thy own Ease;
be willing to Sweat at that Work, for which thou know, it is not too much to
Bleed. Non veniunt gratis magna bena, sed veneunt nummus labor est: Good Things
come not on Free-Cost; they are sold, Labor is the Money by which we buy them.
And this will make thee Judge the Purchase Cheap, at this Price. Welcome Toil,
that leads to Rest! Welcome Poverty, that makes Rich toward God! Welcome Death,
that wafts us over to Eternal Life! Yea, not only look for Labor with
Contentment, but take Pleasure in Difficulties; as the Graver likes his Wood or
Stone the better, the harder it is in Cutting.

Lastly, Constancy and Perseverance. This compleats, and fills up thy
Diligence. When a Man holds on his way, keeps going on and on; that Man is like
to finish his Journey. It Is a small Praise to Begin well, unless you Continue.
Ye did Run well, Gal. 3. But, Fools that they were, they were Soon weary on it.
It comes to little, when Men work by fits and starts. Frustra fit, quod per
Frusta fit; What Is done by piecemeal, will never be wholly done; or will prove
but a patcht Business, at the best. Many Strokes drive home the Nail; and many
Drops do wear the Stone. In the Morning sow thy Seed, and in the Evening
withhold not thy Hand. Eccles. 11.6. The Holy Fire was never to go out upon the
Altar; and there was a Continual Sacrifice to be Offered upon it. Wait on thy
GOD continually, Hos. 12.6. The Diligent Man's Motto, is, Nulla dies sine
Linea: He lets no Day pass, without some Progress.

The Old Apologue of the Race run by the Hare, and the Snail, (seemingly an
unequal Match) shows what Advantage comes by Constancy: The Hare had quickly
left the Snail so far behind, they were out of sight of one another; But then
she fell a-grazing, basking in the Sun, and at last, sell fast a-sleep: But the
Snail kept on; it is true, she went but softly, but she went Constantly, and
that won; came first to the Goal.

This Constancy intermits not. Magnae Diligentiae est nunquam feriari: It Is a
great piece of Diligence, to keep no Holy Days.

Diligence has not an Ague; a Sick-Day, and a Well-Day; an Hot Fit, and a
Cold; but keeps Uniform, and like it self: and though it does but jog on, while
another stays a while, it will go its Mile. It Is patient Con^^nuance in
Well-doing, and going from Strength to Strength, and growing in Grace, which
makes Men Happy.

Constancy declines not, flags not, prevents tyring Violent Motion grows
fainter and fainter, till it ceases quite; but Natural Motion is stronger and
swifter, the longer it has lasted.

Diligence is not a Winters-Sun, it declines not; not Joshua's Sun, it stands
not still; not as Hezekiah's, it goes not back: But as David's, Psalm. 19 Which
is as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a Strong Man to
run a Race. Not to go Forward, is to go Backward. If we lose but a Stroke or
two, it is as with a Water-Man Rowing against the Tide, the Stream carries him
back, if he force not onwards by Arms and Oars. A Christian's Work is not like
a Handy-Craft-man's; he may leave, and lay it by, and find it when he returns
to it, as he left it: But Ours will unravel; no Knot will hold it, but Constant
Exercise. When you hang by your Instrument, and leave Playing, you let down the
Strings; and 'twill take a great deal of time, to Tune it again. 'Twill be so
with thy Heart, When an heavy Bell is Raised, it may be Rung with Ease and
Pleasure; but it asks much tugging to get it up, when once it is down.

Be Constant therefore at thy Work; give not God cause to complain, as He did
of Ephraim, That Thy Goodness is as the Morning-Dew; soon dried up.

Constancy knows no Period, but Perfection: Like Caesar; Nil actum credens, dum
quid superesset agendum; Stops not, till it arrive at Hercules's Pillars; will
work as long as it has any thing to do. Nature will not leave its working,
till it has finished its work. Living Creatures cease not to grow, till they
have attained full Stature, and just Dimensions: And so 'twill be with the New
Creature. Ephesians. 4.13. It gives not over, Till it come to a Perfect Man, unto
the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ.

As good never a whit, as never the better; all is lost, if we hold not on till we
finish. The Stony-Ground brought no Fruit to Perfection, Luke 8.14. but its
Crop was as the Corn on the Housetop, Psalm. 129.7. which withers before it
grows up; and is made the Emblem of a great and sore Curse. And 'twas the
Unwise Builder, that began to Build, but was not able (was not careful) to
Finish, Luke 14.30. Add therefore this last Care to all the rest, To be
Constant in thy Course of Diligence.

Constancy added to the rest, will make thy Diligence Complete and Perfect; and
Perfect Diligence will bring thy Work to full Perfection.

I now come to Conclude All, by Exhorting you in the Emphatical Language of the
Text, to work your Work, to provoke you to the utmost Care and Diligence about
it. And the Motives are so many, so obvious, and so cogent, it is hard to
determine which to begin with: it is harder to know how to make an End; but
hardest of all to rank them into the best Method, and most convenient Order.
Give me Leave therefore, to pour them out before you, as they offer themselves
on an Heap; that every one may take that which likes him best, that which
affects him most: And, I beseech you, improve them to your best Advantage.

But before I come to propound particular Motives; Let me suggest to you, which
is a weighty Consideration, That it is the General Design, and Scope of the
whole Bible, to direct us in, or provoke us to this Work, All Scripture is
given by Inspiration of God; and is profitable, for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness: That the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to every Good Work, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. But chiefly,
to this Great Work.

And this will be yet more evident, if we consider it, in the several Parts.
All the Scripture may be reduced to these Seven Heads: The Doctrines, the
Precepts, the Exhortations, the Promises, the Threatenings, the Examples, and
the Prayers therein Recorded. And I shall give an Instance or two, how every
one of these is chiefly designed to be Subservient to this End.

This is the Total Sum, placed at the Foot of the Account, when the Wisest of
Men had Cast it up exactly: Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter:
Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the Whole of Man. For God
shall bring every Work to Judgment, with every Secret Thing; whether it be
Good, or whether it be Evil, Eccles. 12.13, 14. As if he had said, When we have
said all that can, all that may be said; this is, in one word, the Sum and
Substance of the Whole. All the several Lines, from how different Points soever
they are drawn, terminate and end in this, as their Center: Be Diligent in
God's Work.

What does the Doctrine teach us, but To deny Vngodlyness, and Worldly Lusts;
and to live Righteously, Soberly, and Godly, in this present World? Looking for
that Blessed Hope, and the Glorious Appearing of the Great God, and our Sa^iour
Jesus Christ. That there is a God Infinitely Glorious in all Perfections, who
has made all Things for His Glory; and Man especially, to pay Him that Tribute
of Glory, which is due to Him from all His Works. That Man has an Immortal
Soul, more worth than all the World: And that there is an Eternal Estate after
this Life; an Heaven, and an Hell: And that Man's great Business is, to attain
the One, and escape the Other: That there shall be a Resurrection both of the
Just, and Unjust: That God will bring every Work to Judgment, and render to
every Man according to their Works: That They who have done Good, shall go into
Eternal Life; and They who have done Evil, into Everlasting Punishment: That
the Good and Faithful Servant, who was Diligent in God's Works, shall receive
his Master's Euge, and be Advanced: But the Wicked and Sloathful S^rvant, shall
be Bound Hand and Foot, and cast into Utter Darkness, for his Neglecting it.

What do the Precepts enjoin us, but To Love the Lord with all our Heart and
Soul, with all our Strength, and all our Might? To Serve Him with a Perfect
Heart, and with a Willing Mind? To Glorify Him in our Spirits, and our Bodies:
To Work out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling: To Seek for Immortality,
and Eternal Life, by patient Continuance in Well-doing: To Strive to Enter the
Streight-Gate: To Give all Diligence to be admitted into Christ's Kingdom.

In a word, The Sum of them is, to Command us to Honor God, and be Wise to
Salvation. And Thou have Commanded us to keep these Precepts diligently, Psalm.
119.3.

As to the Hortatory, Swasory, Argumentative Part of the Scriptures; it is
chiefly employed to allure us to this Work: To draw us by the Cords of a Man,
or to fright us out of our Negligence, and drive us as with Whip-Cords: To
Convince us by the Clearest Light: To Advise us by the Wisest Reasons: To
Beseech us by the Sweetest Mercies: To Warn us by the Sorest Dangers: To
Persuade us by most Cogent Arguments: To Oblige us by most Indispensible
Engagements. In a word, To Prevail upon us by whatever the Frame, and
Constitution of our Nature, is capable of being moved by, to mind our Work in
Earnest; or to leave us for ever inexcusable, if we slight it, or trifle at it.

As to the Promises; It Is said in general, That Godliness has the Promise of
the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. And these Promises are, for
Number, many: Some who have reckoned them up, affirm them no fewer than Six
Hundred: For Nature, Great and Precious: For Certain^y, Immutable; being
bottomed on the Truth of Him, who cannot Lie. He is Faithful, that has
Promised: And the Sum of them all, is to give the strongest Assurance, that God
will Reward them that Diligently seek Him; and that with exceeding great
Rewards: A Crown of Glory, an Eternal Kingdom, an Incorruptible Inheritance,
Fullness of Joy, and Everlasting Life.

And the Threatenings, which are as Terrible, as the Promises are Comfortable,
the severest Wrath of God being Revealed from Heaven in them; are all Levelled
against those, who prefer the Devil's Work before God's, or are Remiss and
Careless in it. How shall we Escape (Great Damnation) if we neglect so Great
Salvation? Upon the Wicked He shall rain Snares, Fire, and Brimstone, and an
Horrible Tempest; this shall be the Portion of their Cup. A Cup of Trembling
indeed, a Cup of Bitter and Poisonous Mixture; and yet the very Dregs of it
shall be wrung out to them, and they must suck them up.

What hot and burning Thunderbolts, are such Sentences as these charged with?
Cursed be the Man, that does the Work of God deceitfully: He that Believes
not, shall be Damned: Unless ye Repent, ye shall all Perish: The Ax is laid to
the Root of the Tree; every Tree therefore, which brings not forth Good
Fruit, shall be Cut down, and cast into the Fire unquenchable. If any Man love
not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha: The Lord Jesus shall
be Revealed from Heaven, with His Mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking
Vengeance on those who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ; who shall be destroyed, with Everlasting Destruction, from the Presence
of the Lord, and the Glory of His Power. And Hundreds more, which sound and
signify as dreadfully as these. Thou can not hear such Sentences pronounced
without Affrightment, unless thy Heart be like Leviathans hard as the
Nether-Mill-stone: And, How will thou bear the Execution, when thou come to
feel it?

The Histories and Examples, to which I Reduce the Parables, which are seigned
Histories, the Scope of all these, is to show God's Care of good Men, and the
Pleasure He takes in those, who delight and love to do His Work with Diligence:
Such as Abel, Enoch, and the Holy Patriarchs; Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, Moses, Joshua, Caleb; and after David, Jehosophat, Hezechias, Josiah,
etc. with the Holy Apostles, and Saints, Recorded in the New Testament: Or His
Wrath against Wicked Men, and the Vengeance He inflicts upon Ungodly and
Unfaithful Ones; such as Cain and Cham, and the Ten Spies, who brought up an
Evil Report on the Good Land, and discouraged their Brethrens Hearts from
seeking it: such as Nadab an Abihu, who offered Strange Fire; and were paid in
their kind, with as Strange a Fire, which devoured them. Such as Hophni and
Phineas, those Sons of Belial, who polluted their Priesthood, and caused Men to
Abhor (Oh horrible Wickedness!) the Lord's Service. Such as Judas, Ananias, and
Saphira, Demas, the Foolish Virgins, Dives, and the Slothful Servant, and
abundance more; all which are written for our Admonition, and are as Glasses,
in which we may see what to expect. These were our Examples, to the Intent we
should not lust after Evil Things, as they also lusted, 1 Cor. 10, 6: nor be
Idolaters, nor Commit Fornication, nor Tempt Christ, nor Murmur, nor do the
Devil's Work in any kind, nor neglect God's Work in any degree; taking heed,
lest that God, who spared not them, spare not us: Nay concluding, that He who
is Impartial, and no Respecter of Persons, will not spare us; but if we sin
like them, we shall suffer like them.

And, on the other side, let us be Encouraged by the Happy Issue of Good Men's
Industry, and Faithfulness, To show the same Diligence, to the full Assurance
of Hope unto the End: and Not to be sloathful, but Followers of them, who
through Faith and Patience, inherit the Promises, Heb. 6.11, 12. knowing that
our Labor shall be no more in vain, than theirs was: But if we walk in the
same Path, it will lead us to the same End; and if we mind God's Work as they
did, we shall be Rewarded as they were.

Lastly, The Prayers Recorded in the Scriptures, which make a greater Part of
it, than is commonly taken Notice of, have most of them a direct Aspect upon
this Work; either to beg Opportunities for doing of it: One thing have I
desired of the Lord, That I may dwell in the House of the Lord for ever, to
behold His Beauty, and to enquire in His Temple. When shall I appear in the
Presence of God! My Soul longs, yea even faints, for the Courts of the
Lord: My Heart, and my Flesh cries out for the Living God. A Day in thy Court,
is better than a Thousand. I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my
God, etc. Or for Grace and Help to do it: Teach me to do thy Will, O my God:
Teach me thy Statutes, Incline my Heart to thy Testimonies. Lead me in the Way
Everlasting. Or for a gracious Acceptance of our Endeavors about it: Let my
Prayer come up as Incense, and let the Lifting up my Hands be as a
Morning-Sacrifice, Acceptable in thy Sight. Or Lastly, For Pardon of our
Neglects, and the Imperfections which cleave to us, in performing of our Work.
The Good Lord pardon every one, that prepares his Heart to seek God, the Lord
God of his Fathers, though he be not Cleansed according to the Purification of
the Sanctuary.

But, What need I glance at any other Instances, when of the Six Petitions of
that most Incomparable Prayer, which our Lord Himself has taught us, Five of
them look directly this way.

Much of our Work consists in Prayer; and Prayer is to influence all the rest
of our Work: And as our Prayer must be Fervent, Effectual, a Working Pray^r, a
Wrestling with God; so must we pray, that all the rest of our Work may be: That
we be not Sloathful in Business, but Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord.

Thus you see, that one Principle End for which the Holy Bible was written, was
to quicken and provoke us to Diligence in this Work of God: Which Consideration
alone, might, if improved as it ought, be a Spur, a Goad in our sides,
sufficient to excite us, and might save the pains of adding more Motives: Yet I
shall subjoyn them briefly; and with them, shut up this whole Discourse.

The Motives to provoke our Diligence in this Work, which occur obviously, are
so many, it is hard to couch them together in the Conclusion of a Discourse. I
shall propound some, and must be forced to omit and pass by many: And though I
pretend not to Exactness; yet to avoid being confused, I shall draw them from
some distinct Heads.

First, The Nature of the Work calls for it; as being the best, Work and
deserves, the most Necessary and requires, very Difficult and needs, yet very
Possible; and therefore, encourages our utmost Diligence.

The Motives to be drawn from these, might be made appear very Forceable; but I
forbear to urge them further, because they have been, in some Measure, touched
before.

Secondly, The Nature of Diligence may allure and move us to it: As we say of
Virtue, It is its own Reward; so may we say of Diligence, It contains
Incentives to it, in it self. As living Things move by an Innate Principle, as
heavy Things sink downwards by their own Weight, and the Fire ascends by its
own Lightness; so Diligence may make Men Diligent for its own sake, it is
attended with so many Commendable Properties. Hear what the Scripture says of
it in general; The Hand of the Diligent shall bear Rule, Prove. 12.24. To which
agrees the Greek Proverb, (...); All things are made its Servants. The Hand of
the Diligent makes Rich, Prove. 10.4. Diligentia factitia fortuna; Diligence is
an Artificial Good Fortune. Vnica Naturae, and Fortunae victrix; Two things are
most hardly vanquished; Nature, and Ill Luck; yet Diligence will Conquer both:
The Reluctances of Nature, and the cross Accidents of Bad Fortune.

The Soul of the Diligent shall be made Fat, Prove. 13.4. The Thoughts of the
Diligent tend only to Plenteousness, Prove. 21.5. See thou a Man Diligent in
his Business? he shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand before Mean Men,
Prove. 22.29.

In particular, There are Three Motives to be drawn from the Excellency of
Diligence, to make us fall in Love with it, and to excite us to it; viz. the
Consideration of what it is, 1. To our selves. 2. To others. 3. To God.

First, Be Diligent in this Work; for it will be very Comfortable, it will
yield you the sweetest Peace of Conscience. There is nothing under Heaven, a
Man had need be so careful to please, as his own Conscience; or that he should
revere, and stand in so great awe of. Now, the Man who loves the Peace, or is
afraid of the Disquiet of his own Conscience, had need be Diligent. Hear what
St. Paul says of it; 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our Rejoicing, the Testimony of our
Conscience, That in Simplicity, and Godly Sincerity, we have had our
Conversation in this World.

And let me tell you, Diligence and Faithfulness, in the Work of God, is the
only Thing, upon which Peace and inward Comfort do depend, and from which it
arises. Oh, the sweet Reflections that follow the Remembrance of it! Yea,
disappointed Diligence will yield more Peace, than successful Sloth: For our
Comfort depends upon what belongs to our selves, not upon what is without us,
and beyond our Power.

Duty and Diligence, that is our part; Success, and to give Attainment, that is
God's part. And it is the Conscience of discharged Duty, which yields us
Comfort; If it were possible for such an one to go to Hell, it would mitigate
and ease the most stinging part of his Torment.

A Great Man used to say, He despised all Glory, for which he had not Labored.
Laetius est quoties tibi magno constat honestum. One Man, who has gained an
Estate by his own Industry, takes more Pleasure in it, than Five who stumbled
upon it unlook't for; and it dropped, as we say, into their Mouths.

Labor gets the best Stomach, and a good Stomach is the best Sauce; and so a
good Conscience is the best Feast. That Bread is sweetest, which we Earn. Jus
dat Labor: Such Bread is not Gritty; we Eat it without Regret.

As a Minister, who thrusts himself into that Office, as a Trade to get Money,
as a Means to relieve a Broken Fortune, as a Ladder to climb the Pinnacle of
Honor; and neither designs the Glory of God, nor Good of Souls: If this Man
should by chance Convert a Sinner, it would yield him no Comfort, because his
Heart tells him, He neither designed it, nor desired it. So if another, whose
Soul is set to save them who hear him; yet plough upon the Rock, and see not
the desired Success upon Men; yet shall he assuredly find it with God. Though
Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be Glorious in the Eyes of the Lord, and my
God shall be my Strength, Isa. 49.5. And St. Paul; We are to God a sweet Savor
in Christ, in them that Perish, and in them that are Saved, 2 Cor. 2.15.

When earnest Endeavors hold the Plow, and hearty Desires sow the Land, the
Crop shall assuredly be Peace and Comfort.

And Diligence is as Honorable, as Comfortable: Nothing reflects a greater
Glory upon a Man, than Sedulity. And those who are too Lazy to imitate him,
will yet either Admire, or Envy him; and to be Envyed is as Honorable, as to
be Envious is Base.

Diligence ha^h such an Interest in every Man's Conscience, that it cannot but
obtain Applause and Approbation; and they will Praise it, who will not Practice
it. And as the prosperous Success of Good Men's Industry, is the Fuel of Bad
Men's Envy; so let the Envy of such Men more and more kindle, and inflame thy
Diligence.

Secondly, With Respect to others. A Good Man has no greater Care nor
Pleasure, next to the saving of his own Soul, than to promote the Salvation of
others. It Is the Voice of a Cain; Am I my Brother's Keeper? He which Converteth
another from the Error of his Ways, shall save a Soul from Death, and shall
cover a Multitude of Sins, Jam. 5.20. And by scattering those Clouds, shall
himself Shine as the Stars, for ever and ever, Dan 12.3.

One Diligent Man, who is active in the Work of God, may be as a Soul to put
Life and Spirit into a great many: Your Zeal has provoked many, 1 Cor. 9.2.
It Is agreat Blessing, to be a Blessing to others; and he is the greatest
Blessing to others, who leads them to the Attainment of Eternal Blessedness. No
Man does me so much Good, as he that makes me Good; and no Man does so much to
make me Good, as he that gives me good Example. He Is most like to have good
Servants, who himself works with them; who says not, Go, ye; But, Come with
me, or, Let us go. The spreading and flourishing Estate of Religion, was
foretold by the Prophet Zechariah, in Chap. 8. 21. in words very remarkable to
this purpose: The Inhabitants of one City shall go to another, saying, Let us
go speedily to Pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts: I will go
also.

The Emperor Parti^^x's his word was, Militemus: A Lion to their Captain,
would make an Army of the most fearful Creatures fall on.

Gideon taught his Soldiers by Exampel: Look on me, and it shall be, that what
ye see me do, that shall ye do, Judge. 7.17.

Alexander used to March First: And Q. Curtius tells us, That in storming a
City, he was the First that leap't down off the Walls amongst the Enemies;
which made his Soldiers even fly down after him.

Caesar used to leave his Horse, and go on Foot in Hard Marches, that the
Private Soldiers might not be discouraged with those Hardships, in which their
General bore the First Part. 'Twill get a Crazy Man a Stomach, to see an Hungry
Man feed.

Be Diligent therefore in this Work of God, that thou may make others so:
And besides the Benefit which they shall reap, it will redound to thy
Advantage. All the Good they do, shall in some measure be acounted thine,
beeause thou were the Occasion of their doing of it. Remember that of the Poet:
Ergo opera ejus mea sunt; All the Exploits of Achilles's Valor, are challenged
by Ulysses, because he brought him to the War.

Thirdly, But all that our Diligence can be, either to our selves or others, is
as nothing, in Comparison to what it is in God's Account. For though, next to
pleasing God, it is very considerable what Influence it may have upon our own
Good, or the Good of others; yet our main Interest is, and our Business ought
to be, to please Him; according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.9. We labor
(or are Ambitious, as the Original Word signifies) that we may be Accepted of
Him; because we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ; that every
one may receive the Things done in His Body, according to that he has done,
whether it be Good or Bad.

Now, God esteems our Diligence, and Faithfulness in His Work and Service, to
be our honoring and glorifying Him; as is employed in that Place; Sam. 2.30.
Him that Honors me, that is, Serves me Diligently; which Eli's Sons had
neglected; and by that Neglect, were accounted to despise Him: So, This People
honors me with their Lips, Matthew. 15.8. which was indeed, but a Mock-Honour,
because it was no more; but had been Real Honor, if it had proceeded from
their Hearts. And we Glorify God in our Bodies and Spirits, 1 Cor. 6.20. when
we dedicate both to His Service. And Christ says, Hi Father is glorified, when
His Disciples bear much Fruit, Joh. 15.8. which is the Effect of Diligence.

Sloth may do a little; but it is Diligence, which does much. And it Honors
Him many ways.

First, His Authority. It Is the Honor of a Lord or Master, to have his
Servants exactly Obedient, and Observant of his Will; to go when he bids them,
come when he calls them, and do what he enjoins them readily, and with all
their Power; as the Israelites promised to Joshua, Chap. 1.16, 17, 18. which
was greatly for his Honor: So our Diligence in God's Work, gives Him the
Honor of being a Wise, a Righteous, a Gracious, an All-sufficient, a Faithful
GOD; Fit to Rule us, Able to Protect us, Careful to Reward us; and in all,
makes His Praise glorious.

Secondly, It Honors His Goodness and Excellency, when we declare we prefer
the Enjoyment of Him, infinitely before all other things; and make it manifest,
we count it worth our utmost Cost, and Pains, and Care, (and all that Diligence
includes) to attain it: Proclaiming openly, The Pearl is so Precious, it is
impossible to purchase it too Dear. And we make a good Bargain, if we get it,
though it Cost our All. And if it Honor Him so much, it cannot Please Him a
little; and therefore, shall not fail of a Sure, an exceeding Great, and an
Everlasting Reward: For that He is a Rewarder of them that Diligently seek Him,
is the First Principle, and the very Cornerstone, on which Religion is Built,
Heb. 11.6.

The Next Head, from whence we might draw Motives to Diligence, is the Evil of
Sloth: For Contraries expel each other.

Now, Sloathfulness is out of measure, Evil. The Greek word, (...), Malus,
Wicked, as we commonly render it; in its Primary Signification, is Ignavus,
Sloathful; to intimate to us, that Sloth is the Root and Mother of all Evil.
Matthew. 25.26. Thou Wicked and Sloathful Servant. The Sloathful Servant, is the
Wicked Servant.

Sloth is the Devil's Anvil; He Forges and Fashions all his Temptations on it:
And thence produces, and by it induces Men into the greatest Sins and Dangers.

As of Idleness comes no Goodness; so all Evil issues from it. When the Devil
had been cast out; yet upon return, finding the House empty, he re-entred with
Seven worse than himself, Matthew. 12.44. And the Last End of that Man, is worse
than the First.

If thou have been Convinced, and begun to leave thy wicked Ways, and set thy
self to be Religious; but art Cold, Remiss, Formal, Sloathful, in it; the Devil
will return upon thee, with a kind of Revenge, for quitting his Work, and
making an Escape; and will clap more Bol^s, and stronger Irons on thee. If a
Prisoner should break the Goal, and as soon as he is out, stand begging at the
next Door, fit tippling at the next Alehouse, lie down and sleep by the
High-way-side; What would his Escape avail him, but cause him to be locked up
faster, and be watch't more narrowly, and be used more hardly? Tho thou have
escaped from them who live in Error, and be of the True Religion, and have
a Form of Godliness, and resolvest to become a good Man; yet if thou be either
afraid or ashamed to be Zealous in Religion, wilt not add the Power to the
Form, wilt not be true in thy Practice, of thy true Principles, it will avail
thee nothing. Read with Attention, 2 Pet. 2. Three last Verses; If after they
have escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; they are again entangled therein, and overcome: The
Later End is worse with them, than the Beginning: For it had been better for
them not to have known the Way of Righteousness, than after they have known it,
to turn from the Holy Commandment delivered to them. But it is happened to them
according to the True Proverb: The Dog is turned to his own Vomit again; and
the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the Mire.

I will touch the Evil of Sloth, as I did the Good of Diligence, with respect
to Our Selves, to Others, to GOD.

First, It Is most certainly Mischievous, yea Destructive to thy Self, to be
Sloathful in Religion, and deal in God's Work with a slack Hand. There Is a
Passage in Prove. 18.9. which, well considered, may mightily awaken us. He that
is sloathful in his Work, is Brother to him that is a great Waster. Let us
understand this, as a Spiritual Aphorism, with respect to the Work which
concerns our Souls; and then it implys thus much: By the great Waster, is to be
understood a Flagtious Wicked sinner; who lives in Sin^ which waste Conscience,
as the Schools expressly call gross scandalous Sins, committed against common
Light. Peccata vastantia Conscientiam: Blasphemy, Swearing, Damning, Whoredom,
Debauchery, Malicious Slandering those who are Good, etc. By the Sloathful in
Business, is meant one, who though he be free from Profaneness, and the open
Excesses of the great Waster; yet has no Heart, no Life, no Love, no Care to
be Religious in good Earnest, or mind the Work of God; but goes on a Dreaming
Pace, performs a few Customary Duties of Religion, for fashion-sake. To be
Brother to one, signifies to be in the same Condition, born to the same
Inheritance, Children of the same Father, Members of the same Family.

Now, the Result of this is to let us know, that the Condition of both these is
alike Miserable, alike Hateful to God, and Dangerous to themselves; alike I
mean for Kind, though it may be not for Degrees: He that is busy in the Devil's
Work, and he that is sloathful in GOD's Work: The Tree which brings forth bad
Fruit, and the Tree which bears no good Fruit: He that is against GOD, and he
that is not for GOD: He that Prophanes His Name, and he that will not Glorify
His Name; are both of the Black Regiment, though they may be of different
Degrees: And their Pay may be more or less; yet they have the same Quarters
provided for them: The One may go to Hell with more Infamy, entering the
Fore-gate, in the View of all Men; the Other may slip in at the Back Door, with
less Noise or Notice; but they will certainly meet there: They are own Brothers,
and have Title to the same Inheritance: Though the Spiritual Hector, which has
cast off all Restraints, and Sense of GOD, may be admitted to an Elder
Brother's, that is, a Double Portion; yet the Other will undoubtedly come in
for a Child's Portion also.

Now, this Negligence will hurt, yea ruin Men, Two ways; Naturally or
Necessarily, Morally or Meritoriously.

First, The Natural and Necessary Consequent of Negligence, is Poverty and
Want: The Desire of the Sloathful kills him; for his Hands refuse to Labor.
The Sluggard will not Plough, by reason of Cold; therefore shall he beg in
Harvest, and have nothing.

The Grasshopper, which sings away its Summer, dies for Hunger when the Cold
comes. I went by the Field of tke Sloathful, and by the Vineyard of the Man
void of Understanding: And lo, it was grown over with Thorns, and Nettles had
covered the Face thereof; and the Stone-wall thereof was broken down. Then I
saw, and considered it well; I looked upon it, and received Instruction: Yet a
little Sleep, a little Slumber, a little Folding of the Hands to sleep. So
shall thy Poverty come as one that Travelleth, and thy Want as an Armed Man,
Prove. 25.30, 31, 32, 33, 34.

Secondly, It ruins Meritoriously: It provokes God to destroy, as a Just
Punishment of Disobedience to the Command that requires Diligence. If any Man
will not Labor, neither let him Eat, 2 These. 3.10. He deserves to be burned,
who will not hasten out of that House which is on Fire about him. There is a
dreadful Place, Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the Work of God deceitfully.
And Mal. 1. is so large, and so full to this purpose, as nothing can be more:
It Is too large to Transcribe; I entreat you to turn your Bibles, and read it
considerately to the End; especially from the Sixth Verse: It concludes thus,
after Rebuking them for despising His Name, in offering polluted Bread, and the
Blind, and the Lame; with many other Expressions, which imply Neglect and
Sleightiness in his Service: Verse. 14. But Cursed be the Deceiver, which has
in his Flock a Male, and Voweth and Sacrifices to the Lord a Corrupt Thing. As
much as to say, who had Opportunities and Abilities to serve God better; yet
through Sloth and Negligence, presumes to serve Him worse. The Servant who hid
his Talent in a Nap^in, when he should have traded for his Master with it, is
first punished with the Loss of his Talent; Take the Talent from him: And then
with sorer Vengeance, Bind him Hand and Foot, and cast him into utter Darkness.
Not only those who robbed and spoiled them; but those who neglected to Relieve
Christ in His poor Members, Shall go away into Everlasting Punishment. And
other Negligence in what God requires, will meet with a Proportionable Doom.

Secondly, Negligence in God's Work, casts a great Damp upon others, weakens
their Hands, and discourageth their Hearts: The World is exceeding prone to be
taken with such Examples as gratify their Lusts, and indulge their Ease.

Now when Men, who are too ready of themselves to be Slack and Remiss in these
Matters, see you, who are their Betters, Slight and Sloathful; How will they
argue from, and improve so bad a Precedent? and say to themselves, It Is safe to
do so; as the Apostle argues in another Case, 1 Cor. 8.10. Shall not the
Conscience of him that is weak, be emboldned? So may I in this; Shall not
others be imboldned to be as Careless as thy self? And so thou will destroy thy
Brother, for whom Christ Dyed: And sin against his Soul, and sin against
Christ, and against thy own Life, all at once.

And I appeal to your own Consciences, What is it that makes Forwardness and
Zeal in Religion, and Diligence in God's Work, be looked upon with so shy and
suspicious an Eye in most places? Yea, with Disgrace, Reproach, and Scorn, as
if it were more ado than needs? But the general Coldness and Deadness of Men,
called Christians, and professing themselves the Servants of the true God: And
if any do tacitly reprove them, by being more forward, they will Revenge
themselves with the Lowdest Reproaches, and Infamous Reflections of Affectation
of Singularity, Hypocrisy, Hair-brained Zeal, and what not: And so, when their
Spiritual Interest urges them, and Conscience urges them to Diligence in their
Great Work, they dare not endeavor it for fear of Jeers and Scorns, and being
laughed at for their Singularity; and as Men, who would pretend to be wifer than
their Neighbor; and are either cog'd out of the Power of Godlyness, by the
flattering Example of the Lazy; or Bug-bear'd out on it, by the Reproaches of
Singularity. But Woe be to him, by whom such Offenses come! It were better a
Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and he were cast into the Sea, than that
he should offend one Little One, who believes in Christ, St. Matthew. 18.6.

If it be so dangerous to be Partaker of other Men's Sins, What is it to be the
Author of other Men's Sins! And if no Murderer of Men's Bodies has Eternal
Life, What shall become of those who thus Murder Souls! Consider our Lord's
Words; St. Matthew. 23.13. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites! Ye shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men; for ye neither go in your selves, and
them that were entering in, ye hinder.

Thirdly, Thy Sloathfulness in God's Work, greatly dishonours Him; not merely
as it disobeys Him, but by the Sinister Reflections it makes upon Him; as if
His Work deserved no better. It Is Natural to us, when we see any Design pursued
Remisly, to conclude, It Is not worth the while to bestow more Pains about it;
and consequently, it greatly provokes him: For He that despises Him, shall be
lightly esteemed. God regards the manner of our Duties, as much, nay more than
the Duties themselves: It Is not the doing Good pleases Him so much, as the
doing of it Well: Not only Eat, but so Eat; Let a Man Examine himself, and so
let him Eat: Not only Read, Pray, Hear; but Read Considerately, Hear
Attentively, Pray Earnestly: So Read, so Pray, so Hear; or else thou may do
all these more to thy Hurt, than Benefit: As the Apostle speaks of some Men's
Eating and Drinking their own Damnation. Not only serve God; but Keep thy Heart
diligently, when thou art about it: And be not Sloathful in this Business; but
Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. The Lukewarm, is the worst
Temper; God will spew such out of His Mouth, Rev. 3.16.

The Fourth Head, from whence we may draw Moitves to excite our Diligence in
this Work, is by making Comparisons: And this will yield us several very Cogent
Ones.

First, Compare God and the World, and thy Self with thy Self, in reference to
These; thy Worldly Self, with thy Religious Self: And Alas! What vast odds
appears, even at the first View? What are all the Things, yea and all the Men
of the World put together, in Comparison of Him? To whom will ye liken God? or,
What Likeness will ye compare to Him? Behold, the Nations are as the Drop of a
Bucket, and are counted as the small Dust of the Balance; he takes up the
Isles, as a very little Thing: All Nations before Him are as nothing; and they
are counted to Him less than nothing, and Vanity, Isa. 40.15, 17, 18. What
miserable Comforters, what deceitful Helpers, when their Breath goes out, and
their Thoughts perish? Yea, before that, while they Live, and are in their Best
Estate, they are altogether Vanity. How Weak, how False, how soon Weary, are
all the Men in the World, in Comparison of the Almighty, All-wise,
All-sufficient, most Faithful, and Unchangeable God? How Empty, how
Unsatisfying, how Perishing, how Deceitful, what Lying, and Vexing Vanities,
are all the Honors, Profits, Pleasures, thou can pursue, or hope to catch;
in Comparison of Him, who is the only full, pleasing, satisfying Object of the
Heart of Man?

Now argue hence: If Men, if thy Self yet seek for these, with so great Warmth
and Heat, with so much Life and Vigor; and Rise up Early, and Sit up Late, and
Wear out themselves, and Labor as in the Fire, to grasp these Shadows: What
Zeal, what Diligence should we use in the Work of God, that we may please Him,
and enjoy Him for Ever?

Solomon observes, That Many seek the Rulers Favor, Prove. 29.26. How will Men
fawn, and flatter, and crouch, and debase themselves, and comply with the
Humors, nay the Lusts of them, who can Advance them? Though the Psalmist, who
was a Mighty Prince himself, bids us not to Put Confidence in Princes, nor in
the Sons of Men, in whom is no Help, Psalm. 146.3. And giving the Reason for it
ver. 4. directs us ver. 5. showing us in the Enjoyment of whom true Happiness
Consists. Happy is the Man, who has the God of Jacob for his Help, whose Hope
is the Lord his God, who made Heaven and Earth, and keeps Truth for ever. And
Psalm. 118.8, 9. It is better to Trust in the Lord, than to put Confidence in
Man; than to put Confidence in the Greatest, or the Best of Men. And if Men
will be so Diligent to please a Landlord, a Justice, a Master, or a Father; How
much more Careful should we be to please the Great God of Heaven? And the
Apostle argues Heb. 12.9. We have had Fathers of our Flesh, and we gave them
Reverence; Shall we not much rather be in Subjection to the Father of Spirits,
and live? And God himself, Mal. 1.6.

And so, for the Things of the World: No Study or Contrivance of the Head, no
Labor nor Travel of the Hands or Feet, is thought too much: How did Jacob
Serve for Rachel? See how he describes his Diligence, Genesis 31.40. In the Day
the Drought consumed me, and the Frost by Night; and my Sleep departed from
mine-Eyes. And it is easier to find an Hundred following him in this, than Two
or Three in his Wrestling with God, and not letting Him go till they obtain the
Blessing: Most Men being serious about Trifles, and only trifling and dallying
about this Serious Work, The One Thing necessary: Spending their Money for that
which is not Bread, and their Labor for that which satisfies not, Isa. 55.2.
Forsaking the Fountain of Living Waters, and hewing out broken Cisterns, that
will hold no Water, Jer. 2.13. Being wise to do Evil, but void of Knowledge to
do Good.

Compare thy Self with other Men: How many Younger than thy Self, have got more
Knowledge? How many Poorer than thy Self, can spare more Time to Read, and
Meditate, and Pray? How many of weaker Parts, and under smaller Helps, and
entrusted with fewer Talents; yet have far out-stript thee, in your common
Master's Work: And thou will say, It Is like; it is well done of them: And thy
Judgment approves and praises them.

For shame then Practice thy Self, what thou can not but applaud in Others:
Yea, let Shame (to find thy Self out-stript by so Many, that were once behind
thee, and are so still in many Respects) quicken thee to double thy Diligence,
till thou recover and over-take them; yea get again before them.

Again: Compare thy Self with GOD, if thou be not afraid to entertain a Thought
of so unequal a Comparison. (Lord, What is Man!) a Worm, a Clod, a Bubble a
Shadow: Yea, Man in Honor is like the Beast that perishes, and in his best
Estate is altogether Vanity. And yet, as Mean and Inconsiderable a Thing as
thou art, thou stand upon it, thou will have it thus and thus; and thy Will
must be done with Diligence, and thy Work with Care, and with Exactness; and
art presently upbraiding those about thee, for the least Neglect, with, What do
I keep you for? And wilt rid thy self of such unprofitable Encumbrances; and
wilt not retain an Idle, Faithless Servant in thy Family; a Jade in thy Stable,
a Barren or Unthristy Creature, amongst thy Ca^ttle; or a Fruitless Tree in thy
Orchard. And, How dare thou be such, toward the Great King of all the Earth,
as thou will not suffer any of thy Fellow Creatures to be toward thy self; who
art so far below Him, so Inconsiderable a Nothing, in comparison of Him?

Once more, Compare the Sweet and Easy Indulgence the Gospel has provided for
thee, in the Work of God, with the Hard Service imposed and exacted under the
Law; and the Gracious Assistance offered and communicated under this
Dispensation, with the little Help afforded then. How Chargeable and Costly
were the Sacrifices? How Long and Tyring the Journey's up to Jerusalem? How
Insupportable the Yoke of those Observances? And, How small the Aids afforded?
What would thou have done then, if thou stickest, if thou grudgest, if thou
repine at what is now expected, and shall be accepted. As Naaman's Servants
said wisely to their Master. My Father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some
great Thing, Would thou not have done it? How much more, when he says unto
thee, Wash and be Clean, 2 King. 5.13? If God, if Christ, had bid thee do some
Harder Work Would thou not do it, to save thy Soul for ever? How much more,
when he has made the Way more Easy, than of Old; and offered and assured
greater Help than then, to enable thee to do it.

Lastly, Compare thy Work for the True God, with what Idolaters and Hypocrites
perform to False Ones, or to the True One Falsely. That you may be moved to
Jealousy, with those which are not a People, and provoked by a Foolish Nation,
Deuteronomy. 32.21. How do the Worshippers of Baal cry whole Days, and Cut themselves
with Knives and Lances, till the Blood gushes out? How do the Profelytes of
Rome Whip themselves, pour out their Money to their wily Priests, which make
Merchandise of them, for Masses, Indulgences, etc.? How do they Lavish out
Gold, and Impoverish themselves and Families, to enrich the Shrines of Dead and
Dumb Idols; and undergo hard Penances, and tedious Pilgrimages? And all in
vain, led only by a False Opinion of Meriting, by what God will despise. And,
How Profuse will Hypocrites be? Thousands of Rams, and Ten Thousand Rivers of
Oil: Yea, what is Dearer still, The Firstborn of their Bodies, for the Sin of
their Souls, Mich. 6. How! Shall not only the Queen of the South, but the Great
Whore of the West, Rise up against you, and Condemn your Sloth?

Fifthly, We are under many Great and Indispensible Engagements to Diligence,
in this Work. We are bound in Conscience, and it is our Duty that we must. We
are bound in Gratitude, upon receiving so many Talents and Opportunities, by
which we may. We are bound in point of Interest, our own Safety and Happiness
depends upon it; and it is our Wisdom, if we will thus work. A word of every one
of these, may serve.

First, It Is our Duty, and we are bound by His Authority, who is our Lord. He
has commanded us to keep His Precepts diligently. The First and Great Command,
is, To Love the Lord our God, (which is the very Soul and Life of this Work)
with all our Heart, and all our Soul; with all our Might, and all our Strength.
Every Step in this Way, must be trodden heedfully: See that ye Walk
circumspectly; not as Fools, but as Wise: Not at Peradventure. Keep thy Heart
with all Diligence, Prove. 4.24. Joshua's Words are very pressing, Chap. 22.5.
Take diligent heed to do the Commandment, and the Law which Moses the Servant
of the Lord charged you, to Love the Lord your God, and to Walk in all His
Ways, and to Keep His Commandments, and to Cleave to Him, and to Serve Him
with all your Heart, and all your Soul.

As we must agree quickly with our Adversary; so we must give Diligence to be
delivered from him. We must not only Work at, but Work out our own Salvation.
As we must Receive the Word with all readiness; so we must take most Diligent
heed to the Things we have heard; lest at any time we let them slip, Heb. 2.1.
We must be Zealous, and Repent: We must Believe with all our Hearts: We must
Love Christ in Sincerity: We must Obey from the Heart the Form of Doctrine
delivered to us.

In a word; We must do all God's Work, as in His Sight, remembering He stands
by, and looks on; and, as near as may be, as the Saints and Angels do in
Heaven: And to be sure, that is Diligently indeed. It Is our Duty.

Secondly, We are bound by Gratitude and Ingenuity; which Bond, like Silken
ones, should be the Stronger for its Softness. If a Friend lend Money, or a
Stock to Trade with, which he that wants cannot Trade at all; this is a great
Engagement upon those who Receive it, to Trade the more Industriously. Thus God
has dealt with us; has Trusted us with Talents, and with Opportunities, and
expects the best Improvement of them Why is there a Price put in the Hand of a
Fool, to get Wisdom, seeing he has no Heart there-to, Prove. 17.16?

When God sets up His Tabernacle, it is to this End, That Men may seek him in
it, Act. 15.16, 17. The Kindness of that Benefactor is abused basely, who
furnishes him with Tools, who will not use them.

Leave, Opportunity, Help to do our Work, is as great an Obligation, as can be
laid on any Ingenuous Man, to make him Diligent. How often does Christ say, He
that has Ears to Hear, let him Hear, Luke 8.8, 10. As we commonly ask, What
did God give you Eyes, and Ears, and Hands for; but to See, and Hear, and Work?

Thirdly, We are bound by Interest, and it is our Wisdom to Promote this Work;
for the Advantage redounds to our selves. If thou be Wise, thou shall be Wise
for thy self; and if thou Scornest, thou alone shall bear it, Prove. 9.12. God
sets us not to Work, as Pharaoh did the Israelites, to Make Brick for his
Buildings: But we work for our selves, though He sets us our Work; and we shall
Suffer Loss, if our Work abide not. Blessed is the Man that hears Me,
watching daily at My Gates, waiting at the Posts of My Doors: For whosoever finds
Me, finds Life, and shall obtain Favor of the Lord. But he that sins
against Me, wrongeth his own Soul; all they that hate Me, love Death, Prove.
7.34, 35, 36.

Men are greatly Ambitious, to be accounted Wise; and it is the Greatest Wisdom,
to be Wise to Salvation: And so is that Man, who understands his own Interest
so well, as to do his Work with Diligence. Do it therefore so, and it Shall be
thy Wisdom and Understanding, Deuteronomy. 4.6.

The Last Head, from which I shall draw Motives to excite your Diligence, is
Example; Than which, none can be more fit and proper, in this Subject: Man is
naturally prone to be led by Example, especially in Working; and the Principal
Force of the Text, depends upon our Savior's urging our Duty by His own
Example; I must work the Works of Him that sent Me.

Now, we have great Variety and Multitude of Examples, to draw us, yea provoke
us unto Diligence; no less than the whole Creation; nay more: For all the
Creatures, and the Creator Himself, are our Examples herein. God Himself is
Purus Actus, as the Schools call Him; a Spirit, an Active, Quickening Spirit;
all Life, Activity, and Motion; who is Eternally Busy, never Idle, Unimploy'd,
or Acting Wearily or Faintly. My Father hitherto Works, and I Work, says our
Lord. And the whole Creation, like its Maker, had naturally na Sloathful Piece,
'till Sin and Vice had taught them to be such; and even since, the Worst are
Busy in their Wickedness, and Diligent in doing Mischief; which should Shame
us, and Provoke us, to outdo them in our Better Work.

But I Will briefly touch this Argument by Parts. And,

First, The Inanimate Creatures. What David calls upon them to do, Psalm. 148.
they do most Diligently; Obey the Law of their Creation, Fulfill their Maker's
Will, and Do the Work He made them for. The Sun, the Moon, and Stars, and all
the Host of Heaven, give both their Light and Influence; move Swiftly,
Regularly, and Constantly; measure to us Time and Seasons, by their Equal
Revolutions; and never stop, unless He bids them; and yet one Word of His,
checks them in their full Career; and they Stand, or go Back, as He commands
them. The Wind, the Rain, the Hail, the Snow, the Storms and Tempests, and the
Meteors do the like. The Sea Ebbs and Flows, raises its Billows, or smooths its
Face at His least Beck. The Earth gives forth its Strength, for Man and Beasts;
rests, and is quiet, or Quakes and Trembles at His Word; yea, Cleaves asunder
under those He bids it swallow down. The Trees bring for their Fruit, or cast
their Leaves, at His Appointment; and know their Spring and Autumn. And all the
Bruit Creatures are Strangers to Sloth, and Enemies to Disobedience; but
Patterns of Diligence and Wisdom. The Ant, the Turtle, the Crane, and the
Swallow, keep their Seasons, and do their Work in them; and the Stolid Ox, and
Stupid Ass, know their Owner, and their Master's Crib; and will wear His Yoke,
who Feeds them.

Secondly, The Devil and Wicked Men: For, Fas est ab host Doceri: Satan
Compasses the Earth, and walks about in it, goes about continually seeking whom
he may devour; is always contriving Mischief by his Wiles, Depths, Methods,
Stratagems; or acting it by Temptations, which he multiplyes one after another,
that if one succeed not, another may; as he did with our Lord Himself, for
Forty Days together. Beelzebub, the God of Flies, is more importunate than any
Fly, desiring to winnow, even the Disciples, as Wheat is winnowed: To sift Men
to the Bran; a Phrase importing utmost Diligence: Always restless, never
weary; and gives not over till Restrained, and Chained up by a strong Hand. And
Wicked Men are like him: They accomplish a Diligent Search, they weary
themselves to commit Iniquity; and cannot Sleep, unless they cause some to
fall. Commit their Wickednesses with both Hands greedily: And take more pains
to go to Hell, than would suffice, if well employed, to bring them to Heaven.

And Oh! What a Shame is it, that Satan's Envy against God, and Malice against
Man, should make him more Diligent in his Work; than our Zeal for God's Glory,
and Love to our own Souls, can make us in the Work of God, for our own
Salvation! And, What pity is it, that so bad a Master as wicked Men serve,
should be served with more Vigor, Industry, and Life, than the Lord of Glory,
whom we pretend to serve, and profess we believe to be the Best of Masters.

Thirdly, The Saints and Angels in Heaven. They Cease not Day or Night, to give
Glory to Him that sits upon the Throne; crying Holy, Holy, Holy! The Cherubims,
in Ezekiel's Vision, were represented by Wheels; and there, and always, having
Wings, both Emblems of Velocity, and Speedy Diligence.

And, as they be set for our Patterns in the Lord's- Prayer, while we are
taught to pray for Grace, To do God's Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven,
we either ask we know not what, or we do but mock God, if we endeavor not to
Serve Him with the same Diligence, as near as we can attain it; where with the
Host of Heaven serve Him constantly.

Lastly, The Example of God Himself, Blessed for ever, whom we are so often
required to imitate: Be ye Holy, for I am Holy: Be ye Perfect, as your Father
in Heaven is Perfect. This beyond all, should constrain us to show forth our
utmost Diligence. Shall God be so Sollicitous to promote our Salvation? and,
Shall we slight and despise it, as if it were not worth Regarding? God the
Father, employed His Blessed Thoughts about it, from all Eternity; devising
Means to bring home His Banished, that they should not be Expelled from
Himself; to Reconcile His Mercy, and His Justice; to Punish the Sin, and Spare
the Sinner; and made all his Glory pass before Him, in the Accomplishment of
it; displayed all His Attributes, in their brightest Luster; and, in a word,
gave His Son, the Dearly Beloved of His Soul, in whom He took Infinite and
Everlasting pleasure, to be made a Man, and then to be made a Curse. And God
(the Son) came down from Heaven, for us Men, and for our Salvation. And having
done so, spent His time in the World, according to the Ends for which He came
into it; which was to Glorify His Father, do His Will, and do Good to the Souls
and Bodies of Men: and He did it all with a Zeal, that even Consumed and Eat
Him up; and made the Foolish World say, He was Mad, or Besides Himself; as they
are ready to do of all that follow Him. And at last, after a Life spent in
preaching whole Days, and praying whole Nights, and Working mighty Miracles;
He Finished all with a Willing Obedience to the most painful, shameful, and
accursed Death; and even now He is in Heaven, He is as Diligent as ever, making
Intercession without Intermission; and watching and ordering all things for the
Good of those, who shall be Heirs of Salvation.

And the most Holy, and most Blessed Spirit, is as busy and sedulous, as
either of the Former; knocking, calling, striving, warning, wooing Sinners, to
return to God, to be so Wise as to be contented to be Happy upon God's Terms;
which, in one word are, That you Work out your Salvation with Fear and
Trembling; and improve your Seasons with meet Diligence, while you have them:
Working while it is Day, before that Night over-take you, in which no Man can
Work: Which, that we all do, The Good Lord vouchsafe us that Grace and Wisdom,
which may Assist us, and Direct us, to do accordingly. Amen.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE SHOWING The sinfulness and danger of unfruitfulness under the
Gospel, containing the substance of some Sermons Preached upon
St. Luke xiii. 6, 7, 8, 9. A certain man had a fig tree planted in his
Vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon and found none.

Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, behold these three years I come
seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none; cut it down, why cumbereth it
the ground?

And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I
shall dig about it, and dung it:

And if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that thou shall cut it down.


AS time is measured out to us, by the revolution of days, and months, and
years; so is Gods patience magnified toward us, by multiplying the returns of
them. And as his Patience is magnified, so is our Account increased, and
Impenitency aggravated according to the number of the portions of time which
pass over us: and the more we have wasted, and sent home empty to him, that
expected fruit from us in them all, the more we have cause to expect and fear
that every next, and new one, should be our last: for God will not always bear
the disappointment of his expectation, but tho he bear long, will not forbear
always, but will at length curse to a withering, or cut down for burning, the
barren Tree, which bears either none, or no good Fruit, year after year. This
consideration has induced me, in the beginning of another year, to choose this
Parable to discourse of, to press you with all the earnestness I can, after so
many years, of provoking unfruitfulness, to tempt Gods long-suffering no
longer, by impenitency and barrenness under the Gospel, lest if being let alone
this year also, you continue only encumbrances of Gods Vineyard: He continue no
longer to spare you, nor Christ to interceed for you, that you may be spared,
nor good men be able to prevail for you, nor your own Consciences have any plea
left; but that ye be cut off, without pity on Gods part, without remedy on
man's, and without excuse on you own.

There is not a place in all the Holy Scriptures, wherein Repentance, and that
both sound and speedy, is more vehemently urged, and more emphatically enforced
than the beginning of this Chapter. For as those who heard our Lord urge the
similitude of the Creditor and Debtor, (laid down in the two last verses of the
preceding Chapter,) against procrastination; may seem to have taken occasion
thence, to tell him the story of the Galileans, Whose blood Pilate had mingled
with their Sacirfices; so our Lord takes occasion further to improve that his
Doctrine against neglect and deferring Repentance by applying that story now
told him, and another of eighteen men on whom the Tower of Siloam had fallen
and destroyed them: which were both true and real Stories, of things which had
actually, and lately happened: and were fresh in all men's memories and mouths.

Now these being very awakning examples, and startling instances of sudden and
surprising Judgments. Our Savior according to his great wisdom and
faithfulness, will not let slip so fair an opportunity to press his hearers
from them, to speedy and sincere Repentance. As if he had said, these were not
greater, not more flagitious sinners, than their Neighbors, no, nor then your
selves: and yet these things, you hear and know, happened unto them, and as bad,
or worse, may happen unto you, nay will, unless you Repent: and now especially,
since God has given them to be such warnings to awaken you; If you do not now
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Your impenitency, aggravated by slighting
such an alarm as their fall gives you; will provoke God to meet with you some
way or other; and if in any case he cut you off before you have Repented truly,
you perish unavoidably, and that for ever.

Little did the Galileans think, when they went to offer Sacrifice, they should
themselves be made a Sacrifice. Little did the Eighteen men who were in or nigh
the Tower of Siloam, well and safe, and secure from fear, think to be crushed to
death in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, and yet these things befell them
both.

And so may it be with any of you: when you are at Church, when you are busy
in the Streets, when you are safe and merry in your Houses, some unthought of,
some unsuspected calamity, may suddenly surprise: therefore Repent speedily
that you may be always ready, for all events, and to meet what ever Message
Gods Providence may send.

But of such importance is this duty, and so earnest is our Lord to fasten this
nail surely, that he reiterates his strokes to drive it home, and therefore
adds this Parable, after the wise Application and improvement he had made of
two real stories so apposite to his purpose. And this is Historia ficta, though
not a real History of things actually done, yet a Picture of things usual, and
likely to be done: which strikes the Fancy, and by that the Judgment and
Conscience, with a quicker and more smart stroke, than what is delivered in
plain those most expressive and significant words.

Methinks upon the reading of this Parable of the Fig Tree, we may cry out as
the Holy Apostle, does upon the writing the like Parable of the Olive Tree,
Rom, xi. 22. Behold the goodness and severity of God: but with this twofold
difference.

First, There they were both executed, here Mercy and Goodness only is
exercised, Justice and Severity only threatened.

Secondly, There they are employed upon several Subjects, or persons: Goodness
on the Gentiles, Severity on the Jews: here both are conversant about the same
object.

First, Behold his Goodness in several respects. 1. It Is great Mercy to be
Planted so advantageously in the Vineyard, in so Fat and well prepared a Soil:
and so well Fenced and secured from annoyance, both of Beasts and Weather, by
an Hedge and by a Wall. 2. It Is Mercy to be forborne so long, and suffered to
stand year after year, notwithstanding its unfruitfulness. 3. It Is Mercy to
have the Intercession of the Dresser of the Vineyard, and to have that
Intercession prevalent and accepted for it; and thereupon to allow it more
time, and more pains and cost to be bestowed upon it, in digging and dressing
and dunging of it.

Secondly, behold his Justice too. 1. It Is just with God to expect Fruit of a
Tree so Planted, to come with expectation of it, to call it to account, and
take severe notice of its unfruitfulness. 2. It Is just to upbraid it and
reproach it, for Cumbring the ground, and to pass Sentence against it, to cut
it down, for so long and so often disappointing of his desires. 3. It Is just to
proceed to actual cutting down without remedy or pity, after more pains and
cost bestowed upon it in vain, and to no purpose.

We cannot have a better Commentary upon this Text than the seven first Verses
of the fifth Chapter of Isaiah. I will therefore transcribe them. Now will I
sing to my well beloved a Song of my beloved, touching his vineyard: my well
beloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful hill. And he fenced it, and gathered
out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choyest Vine, and built a tower
in the midst of it, and also made a wine press therein: and he looked that it
should bring forth Grapes; and it brought forth wild Grapes. And now O
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge I pray you betwixt me and my
Vineyard. What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done
in it? Wherefore when I looked for Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes? And
now go to, I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard, I will take away the
hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up: and break down the Wall, and it shall
be trodden down. And I will lay it wast, it shall not be pruned nor dug: but
there shall come up briars and thorns, I will also command the Clouds that they
Rain no Rain upon it. For the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of
Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant Plant: and he looked for Judgment,
but behold oppression, and for Righteousness, but behold a cry. I shall leave
it to your selves to make the Parallel, and such observations, as may help you
by one, to understand the other. And I will now proceed to the easiest and
plainest explication of the Parable that possibly I can. And let us divide it
into its parts, that they may be explained in the better order. Of the four
verses of which it consists, the two former, six and seven, belong to the Lord
of the Vineyard: and the two latter, eight and nine, belong to the Dresser of
the Vineyard, of those two which relate to the Lord of the Vineyard, the former
tells you what he did, the latter what he said. Of the two which relate to the
Dresser of the Vineyard, the former contains his Intercession that it may be
spared: the latter his Concession that it should be destroyed, upon supposition
of its continuing unfruitful.

I shall now explain them in this order I have named them, and all as concisely
as I may, and with respect to the Application which I chiefly intend.

In the sixth we have four things to be opened. 1. Who this Lord of the
Vineyard is, and the three things he did. 1. Had a Fig Tree Planted in his
Vineyard. 2. Came to seek Fruit of it. 3. Found none. First the certain man,
the Lord of the Vineyard is the Lord Jehovah, the great God possessor of Heaven
and Earth, as appears by Is. v. 7. before named, Ps. lxxx. from the seven to
the sixteenth very fully, and by St. Matthew. xx. 1. and xxi. 33, 4^. The
Vineyard is, in the primary intention of the Parable, the Synagogue, the Church
of the Jews, which God had planted with so much, love and care, as is declared
in the forenamed Psalm lxxx. 7, 8. But by just Analogy and proportion, is the
Catholic Church of God under the Gospel. And any particular Church, in any
Nation, to which God does vouchsafe his Gospel, Word and Ordinances.

The Fig Tree planted in this Vineyard, is any particular Church, with respect
to the Catholic or Universal Church, of which it is a Part or Member. Or any
particular person, man or woman, with respect to that particular Church, in
which he lives, and partakes of Christ's Institutions.

The Fig Tree is a Tree of- a Fruit-bearing kind, Naturally apt to bring forth,
sweet and good Fruit, Judge. ix. 11. not barren by Nature, like an Asp, or Elm
or Willow: nor bad Fruit as the Thorn, of which men expect not to gather sweet
Fruit, Luke vi. 44. Of thorns men do not gather figs. So man endued with
Reason, Conscience, Will, Affections, is capable to know, choose, love, fear,
serve God, and obey him.

Now that it may not seem incongruous, to speak of a Fig Tree (which is a Plant
of another kind) in a Vineyard. You must know: though the Vine Plants, as being
most, gave denomination, (as Denominatio est a potiori) Yet it was usual with
them, both to sow Corn in Vineyards betwixt their Vines. Deuteronomy. xxii. 9. Thou
shall not sow thy Vineyard with diverse seeds: And also to plant Trees of
another kind, partly to support their Vines, which are a weak and tender Plant,
and partly to make the better improvement of their Ground: and none more
commonly than Fig trees. Which makes it so frequent to name them together, sit
every man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree.

The planting this Fig Tree in the Vineyard, signifies the calling any Nation
to the knowledge, and profession of the Gospel, and making them a Church, as a
part of the Universal Church: or it is the receiving a man or woman into the
Church by Baptism. See the expression in the very Letter, Romans vi. 3, 4, 5.
Know ye not that as many of us as were Baptized into Jesus Christ were Baptized
into his death, and if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death, etc. So that he uses the Phrases of being Baptized, and Planted, as
signifying the same, or explaining one the other. So that every one of you who
have been Baptized, are thereby Planted in Gods Vineyard: admitted to partake
of the Ordinances and Privileges of the Gospel Church, and thereby obliged to
the Duties, Consequent upon those Privileges. As a Tree which stands in the
Orchard is bound (as I may say) to bear part of that Fruit, which the Master
and Owner of the Orchard looks for.

His coming to look for Fruit, is a most obvious Allusion, to the custom
amongst men, to go into their Gardens, and Orchards, to fee what Fruit the
Trees bear, or whether they bear any, which they have caused to be set in them.
Cant. vii. 12. Let us go early into the Vineyards, let us see if the Vine
flourish, whether the tender Grapes appear, and the Pomegranates put forth. And
is the same with Isa. v. 2. where God says, He looked for Grapes, which verse
7. he interprets, He looked for judgment and righteousness, and which he speaks
in plain words, without any Parable. Psalm. xiv. 2. The Lord looked down from
Heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand
and seek God, and is equivalent to what is expressed by another sense, viz. of
hearing. Jer. viii. 6. I hearkened and heard but they spoke not aright, no man
repented of the evil of his doings, saying what have I done: and might, were it
needful, be illustrated by many other Scriptures. In a word, it is as much as
if it were said, God comes to look after every man, whether they fulfill their
Covenant of Christianity, which they made with him when they were Baptized, and
planted in his Church.

Lastly, His finding no Fruit, is Gods disappointment; as to what he greatly
desires, looks for, yea even longs for. No true Repentance, no sound Faith, no
sincere Obedience, no Reformation of Life, no hearty turning unto God, no
Holiness and Righteousness, no serious care, nor vigorous Zeal to glorify God,
and save their own souls, or as it is, Hos. iv. 1. No truth, no mercy, no
knowledge of God in the land, but swearing, lying, killing, stealing, committing
adultery, and breaking out till blood touches blood, and no man reproves one
another for these evils, but are ready to strive with the Priest if he reprove
them for them, verse 2, 4. Such rotten and vile Figs are all the Fruit they
bear, or at best, a few leaves of empty Profession, and some cheap formal
duties, and lip labor, and drawing near to God with the body, while their
hearts are left behind, and are far from God, being set upon other objects, and
God has no true, nor real love, or fear, or acceptable service.

And in that it is said a Fig Tree, in the singular number, it implies, that
every particular Church, every individual and particular person, shall be
strictly looked after, they shall not be hid in the thickness of the Trees, not
lost in the crowd, nor escape or remain less discovered, then Adam and his
Wife, who in vain attempted to hide themselves from the presence of the Lord,
amongst the Trees of the Garden, Genesis iii. 8. Which I only point to, by way of
Allusion. Every Tree, every person shall be particularly inquired after, and
sought out: if there be but one unfruitful Tree it shall be discovered, the
Lord of the Vineyard will certainly find it out, and so will he every one that
is so, one by one, be they never so many that are such.

You have heard what the Lord and owner of the Vineyard did. Planted a Tree, a
Fig Tree, which is naturally capable of bearing Fruit, in his Vineyard, a good
soil apt to nourish it, and as 'twas just he should, came and sought Fruit, but
was unjustly disappointed. Hear now what he says.

Then said he to the dresser of the Vineyard, behold these three years I come,
seeking Fruit on this Tree and find none, cut it down, why cumbreth it the
ground?

I shall explain these words with the like brevity, and then sum up the
improvement of them together.

And here four particulars must be explained.

First, Who is to be understood by the Dresser of the Vineyard, and why he is
told of the Fig Trees unfruitfulness.

Secondly, What is meant by the three years in which he came seeking Fruit of
it.

Thirdly, What is meant by the Sentence, to Cut it down, and why the Execution
of it is enjoined to the Dresser of the Vineyard?

Fourthly, What is meant by the Cumbring of the Ground, which contains the
reason to justify the severity of the Sentence of cutting down.

First, who is to be understood by the Dresser of the Vineyard, the most
general opinion is, that it is the Minister, or in complex consideration the
Ministers of the Gospel, Coetus Apostolorum, as a good Expositor expresses it.

But I meet with other Opinions of which I shall name four.

First, It Is Jesus Christ. In various Parables, God and Christ sustain various
persons, as St. John xv. 1. God himself is the Vine-dresser, Christ the Vine,
and particular Believers the Branches. I am the true vine, my Father is the
husbandman, ye are the branches. But here Christ is the Dresser of the
Vineyard, to whom God has committed the care of his Church. To be sure it is he
who is the great and prevailing Intercessour: and by reason of the Intercession
that the Dresser here makes, Lord let it alone this year. Some Interpreters
refer it to him, as St. Ambrose, bonus cultor in quo ecclesiae fundamentum, etc.

And Theophilact, This Dresser is Christ who would water them with his Doctrine
and his Passion, who had been fruitless under the Law and Prophets.

Secondly, The Civil Magistrate in a Christian State, who is to be the keeper
of both Tables, to see to the maintenance of the true Religion toward God, as
well as civil honesty amongst men. Who are promised to be Nursing-Fathers to
the Church, Isa. xlix. 23. and therefore must look to the Children of it. One
principal branch of a Fathers care being that his Children be trained up in the
Nurture and admonition of the Lord. To become fruitful in the Works of
Righteousness, and to coerce and restrain those who are otherwise. David having
declared his resolution, Psalm. ci. ult. I will early destroy all the wicked of
the Land, that I may cut off all evil doers from the City of the Lord.

Thirdly, the third Opinion is, that it is every good man in the Church which
Prays for others. As St. August. Bonus cultor omnis sanctus in Ecclesia qui
orat, etc. Or it is by way of Allusion every man's own Conscience, the Soul being
the Vineyard, Conscience the keeper of it. They made me keeper of the
Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept, Cant. i. 6. Nothing being
more common than for God to convince men's Consciences of their faults and
unfruitfulness, to bring them to Repentance and amendment. which is congruously
expressed here. O sinner I have come three years seeking for Fruit on thee, and
find none, and thereupon bids Conscience do its Office. Check, Rebuke, and even
torment them for it.

Fourthly, But the most received Opinion, and what may seem most proper, is
that it is the Ministers of the Gospel. The ordinary Gloss, makes it the
Apostles. St. Gregory Ordo Praepositorum. It Is properly their work to plant,
and to water what is Planted, to dig and to Manure the Lords Garden, I have
planted, Apollos watered, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. iii. 6.

Now there may be these reasons, why God directs his speech to the Ministers,
and tells them of the peoples faults. 1. To awaken them to Repentance and
amendment if they have been accessory to them, as the good Lord pardon us, it is
to be feared we too often are. 2. To provoke them to their duty, that they may
not contract guilt by their negligence, what God spoke to Ezekiel in another
comparison, may well be applied in this. Eze. iii. 17, 18, 19. Son of man, I
have made thee a watchman unto the House of Israel: therefore hear the word
from my mouth and give them warning from me. When I say unto the wicked thou
shall surely dye, and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the
wicked from his way to save his life, the same wicked man shall dye in his
iniquity: but his blood will I require at thy hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked
and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way he shall dye in
his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.

So here I have made thee the Dresser of my Vineyard, if thou do not thy duty
to make the Trees Fruitful, they shall be cut down for their unfruitfulness,
but I will lay their unfruitfulness to thy charge. But if they continue Barren,
notwithstanding thou have done thy part to make them bear Fruit, they shall be
cut down, but thou have delivered thy own soul. 3. To provoke them to Pray for
them, God loves to have Intercession made for his people, and wonders when none
will do it. Isa. lix. 16. He wondered there was no Intercessor. Ezekiel. xxii. 30.
I sought for a man amongst them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the
gap before me for the Land, that I should not destroy it: and I found none,
therefore I powered out my indignation upon them and consumed them. And Joel
ii. 17. it is enjoined expressly. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord
weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say; spare thy people, O
Lord, and give not thy heritage to reproach. When Sodom it self was to be
reckoned with, and God came down to see whether their sin was as great as the
cry of it proclaimed it to be. He will first acquaint Abraham with it, that he
may Pray and plead for them, and never left granting till he left asking on
their behalf. And when God threatens to consume the Israelites, as in a moment,
Moses and Aaron Fell on their faces, Number. xvi. 45. and Aaron at Moses direction
took a Censer in his hand, and put on Incense, the Type of Prayer, and stood
between the living and the dead, and made atonement, and the plague was
stayed, and Psalm. cvi. 23. He said he would have destroyed them, had not Moses
his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath. And here as
soon as ever the Dresser of the Vineyard hears the doom, cut it down, he falls
to interceeding, Lord let it alone this year also. And indeed mutual Prayer
betwixt Ministers and people is exceeding needful and an indispensable duty.
See Ephesians. iii. 14, 20. Col. i. 9, 12. 1 Thessal. v. 23. and 2 Thessal. iii. 1.
Brethren Pray for us that the word of the Lord may have free course. Heb. xiii.
18. Romans xv. 30. And I justly fear the neglect, or cold performance of this
duty is one great cause of the small success of the Ministry, and the
unfruitfulness of the people, I exhort and earnestly beseech you that it may be
mended.

Secondly, The second thing to be explained in this verse is, what is meant by
the three years. And there are a great many Interpretations given of them, to
touch but a few. Eman. Sa out of St. Ambrose, expounds it thus. He came to
Abraham in Circumcision, to Moses in the Law, to Mary in his Incarnation, that
is to the Jews by these; but they were not purified by Circumcision because
they were uncircumcised in heart, not Sanctified by the Law, because they were
ignorant of its virtue, not justified because they knew not the Grace of God
and would not repent. Itaque nullus in Synagoga fructus inventus. St. Gregory
Interprets it, of the Law of Nature, the written Law, and the Gospel. Others of
the three sorts of Governments by which God disciplined that people to
Obedience, Judges, Kings, H. Priests, but all in vain.

Theophilact, of the three Estates or Periods of man's Age, Youth, Manhood, Old
Age. Or rather thus, Childhood, Youth, and the Mature Estate of Manhood, then
remains only the fourth of Old Age, and if the errors and unfruitfulness of
those, be not redeemed by the fruitfulness of this, then there is no hope, but
down it must for ever. Others literally of the three years of Christ's public
Ministry.

I will name no more, nor stay to censure these, but I rather suppose the true
meaning to be, without any mystery in the number, that it signifies many times,
a definite number being put for an indefinite, I have come again, and again,
and again, that is, very often. And there is a Conjecture why he pitches upon
three years, drawn from an observation which Naturalists make, that if the
Fig Tree begin not to bear within three years after its planting, it will never
bear after. But to pass that also as an uncertain thing and so anicity, it is
sufficient to interpret it for often, the ternary Number being used so, almost
Proverbially, Si ter pulsanti, etc. As if he had said, I have waited long and
come often, looking for Fruit, and hitherto my expectation has been
disappointed, therefore I am weary of forbearing, and will suffer the abuse of
my patience no longer, Cut it down, that is, execute against it the deserved
Judgment. And as this is enjoined to his Ministers to be performed by them, it
implies, 1. That the Fruitless Tree is worthy to be Cut down, and is actually
under the Sentence of Condemnation, tho the Execution may be deferred by way of
Reprieve. Every unfruitful sinner under the Gospel, is in a state of actual
condemnation, there is only a small respiting for a while, and a short reprieve
allowed to afford him time to sue out his pardon, according to that from our
Saviors own mouth, St. John iii. 18. He that believes not is condemned
already. So he that repents not is condemned already. 2. He bids his
Ministers Cut them down, that is, cut them off by sharp reproof, and cutting
rebukes, and Church Censures; cast them out of my Vineyard, my Church, from my
Ordinances that they may be ashamed, that they may be afraid, that they may be
awakened. 3. To show the unavoidable certainty of it if they continue
impenitent, let them know what will certainly be their end, Jer. xv. 1. Cast
them out of my sight, declare they shall be cast out, and Jer. i. 10. I have
set thee over the Nations, to root out, to pull down, to destroy, to throw
down, that is, to declare who shall be so dealt with, and I will make it good,
what is bound on Earth shall be bound in Heaven. Say to the wicked it shall be
ill with him, thou also shall be cut off, as before the Text, you shall all
likewise perish, that is unless you repent. 4. Why cumbreth it the Ground. This
contains the reason of the Righteous Sentence of cutting down, and intimates
that God never proceeds to severity without cause. And ye shall know that I
have not done without cause, all that I have done in it, says the Lord God,
Eze. xiv. 23. It Is a reproachful upbraiding the Fruitless-tree, the word is
rend'red variously: it signifies to make unprofitable, why takes it up a room
to no purpose? and keeps out a better, and robs others both of nourishment and
influence, by drawing the fatness of the soil, and casting a malignant shade!
And teaches us that a man who continues in the Church impenitent. 1. Robs God
of the Glory which would redound to him, if he brought forth the Fruits of
Righteousness which he ought, for Christ says his Father is glorified when his
Disciples bring forth much fruit, John xv. 8. and commands that our Light shine
before men that they may see our good works, and glorify our Father in Heaven.
And St. Paul tells us, that the fruits of Righteousness are by Jesus Christ to
the praise and glory of God, Phil. i. 11. which Glory God loses by every Tree
which stands on his ground and bears no Fruit. 2. Such a man does abundance of
mischief by his bad example: imboldens others to be, and continue, as bad as
himself, and hinders and discourages them from being better. 3. Disparages the
Soil, causes the way of truth to be evil spoken of, Gods Ordinances to be
vilified, and his name to be Blasphemed, and his faithful Ministers to be
reproacht as if they were the causes of all that wickedness, which they mourn
over, and endeavor to reform with all their might. As we say of servants or
beasts that thrive not, look ill, are in bad plight, they shame their keeper,
as if he starved them, or allowed them not what is sufficient. So when you who
have been Baptized, lead bad lives, and go on in impenitency, you give great
scandal, cause much offense, and put an excuse into the mouths of those who
profanely neglect and slight Christ's Institutions; and when they are exhorted
to frequent them, or reproved for neglecting them, they have this answer ready,
why so much ado about these matters? we see those who use them most, are never
the better, but as bad or worse, than those who seldom or never meddle with
them, what a shame is it to be thus reproached, and to be so ill furnished to
refute it? It Is a great offense that is given by this means, but woe to the man
by whom the offense comes, it had been better for him, to have been plunged in
the Sea, then Planted in the Vineyard. For God will severely avenge these many
evils, which are the Consequences of their unfruitfulness, unless speedy and
sincere Repentance, and amendment, prevent the Execution of the denounced
Sentence.

And this may suffice for the meaning of the two first verses of the Text,
which concern the Lord and Owner of the Vineyard, both as to what he did, and
what he said. And may be summed up in this short recapitulation. The Great God
has in much mercy admitted you into his Church by Baptism, and has often
come, to see whether you do, and long expected that you should, make good that
solemn Covenant you then made with him, by bringing forth the Fruits of sincere
Repentance, sound Faith, and Universal, unreserved new Obedience; but hitherto
has not found them, but the quite contrary.

And therefore bids his Ministers, and you by them, with attention and
admiration take notice of his past goodness, and that he takes severe notice of
your continuing badness, and provoking disappointment of his expectation and
patience, and therefore pronounces Sentence against you, to cut you off from
his Church by his Spiritual Sword, and that he will cut you off from the Land
of the Living, for your robbing him of his Glory, for your hindering others by
your bad example to be better, or imboldning them to be as bad as your selves,
and causing his Holy Institutions to be evil thought of, and evil spoken of, as
if they were useless and of no efficacy, and his Holy name to be blasphemed.

I now proceed to the other two which concern the Dresser of the Vineyard; the
former of which contains his Intercession that it may be spared a little
longer, and tried one more, if yet it may amend. The latter his concession that
if it do not, then the denounced Sentence take place, and be put in execution,
there remaining no shadow of pretense for farther arrest of Judgment.

I shall endeavor the Explication of these with the greatest clearness,
plainness and brevity I can, in order to the Application of them, which I again
tell you I chiefly intend.

In the former, His Intercession, are two particulars. First, an express Prayer
in behalf of the barren tree, in which are included two requests, one for
respiting the Sentence, and allowing it more time, Lord let it alone this year
also. The other for leave, to bestow more pains and cost about it, digging and
dunging. Secondly, An implied promise on his own behalf, that if his Lord will
give him leave, and spare the Tree, he will spare neither cost nor pains, but
will do all that Art and Industry can perform, he will dig about it, and dung
it, do the best and the most he can to make it fruitful.

First, The express Prayer for the barren Tree: Lord let it alone this year
also, etc. In which the first branch is for more time. The second for leave to
bestow more cost and pains upon it. Note hence. 1. It Is the duty of Gods
Ministers to Pray for the people, yea even for the unfruitful, and impenitent
amongst them. Isa. lxii. 6, 7. I have set watchmen upon thy Walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace, day nor night: ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence: and give him no rest till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth. 2. They must not excuse their
faults, tho they may and must beg pardon for them, that would rob God of the
Glory of his Mercy, and harden them in security, against repentance and
amendment. He tacitly acknowledges the culpableness of their past
unfruitfulness, and confesses Gods goodness in suffering them to stand so
long, while he Prays it may be let alone this year also; it was mere Mercy to
let it stand so long: and it will be more Mercy to let it alone a little
longer; therefore, O Lord, Let it alone this year also, even for thy Mercies
sake. 3. He asks not three years more, but one year, after three years
barrenness and disappointment, they must ask modestly who would prevail: one
years forbearance more, is a great Mercy to them, who have sinned away many
already. Every day, every hour should be precious to a Reprieved man, to sue
out his Pardon, and make his Peace. He is now upon his good Behavior, this is
his last trial if he continue and persist in his old wont, Execution proceeds,
as against one, of whom there is no hope, of proving better.

The Second Branch of his Prayer, is for leave to bestow more cost, and pains,
upon it, Till I dig about it, there is labor and pains; the Ministerial Office,
when truly and faithfully discharged, is really very laborious. We beseech you
brethren know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you, and esteem them very highly for their Works sake. 1. These. v. 12,
13. Those who labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1. Tim. v. 17. Tho the Ministry
be a great dignity, yet it takes denomination, from duty and service. We Preach
not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord: and our selves your servants for
Jesus sake, 2 Cor. iv. 5. And our Lord himself gives his Apostles both a rule
against exercising Lordship, and sets himself as an example of it, Lu. xxii.
26, 27. It shall not be so with you, but he that is greatest among you, shall
be as the youngest, and the chief as he that serves. For I am among you as he
that serves. It Is well known the word so often used in the new Testament for
the Ministry, (...) signifies the most painful labor. Such as of those who
sweat, and by their speed in their Travel raise the dust, and digging is one of
the hardest kinds of labor, such as the unfaithful Steward openly confesses
too hard for him, I cannot dig, Luke xvi. But tho Ministers should labor
wherever they are, they may not labor where they please. Paul and his
Companions in labor were forbidden of the Holy Ghos^ to Preach the Word in
Asia, And when they assayed to go into Bithynia the spirit suffered them not,
Act. xvi. 6, 7. They are Laborers but it is together with God, 1 Cor. iii. 9.
And must have their station assigned by him. And as the Lord of the Harvest
must be prayed, To send forth Laborers into his Harvest, St. Matthew. ix. 38. So
his leave must be obtained to continue and bestow more labor, in what field
soever he assigns them to work, in and when his Vineyard has provoked him by
disappointing his expectation, and not answering past labor and charge
bestowed on it. He passes this Sentence against it, it shall not be pruned, nor
dug, And I Will command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it, Isa. v. 6.
As it is not a small Mercy to have faithful and painful Ministers, so it is one
of the greatest Judgments to have them removed, and to be put under such as are
described, Zech. xi. 16. and therefore God should be sought by earnest Prayer,
to vouchsafe the Mercy, and avert the Judgment. Next he asks to bestow cost as
well as pains, there must be dunging as well as digging; it is chargeable
mending barren Land, yet we must not stick at this. See 2 Cor. xii. 14, 15.
Parents must lay up, and lay out too, for their children. I will gladly spend
and be spent for you.

Secondly, these words imply a promise on his own behalf, as well as contain an
express Prayer on behalf of the people. Lord if thou will be entreated to let
it alone this year, I will dig about it and dung it, I will do all that Art and
Industry can do, I will not be wanting on my part to perform the most, the
best, All that I can, to make it Fruitful. Note, first, in general, they who
would prevail with God, must add endeavors to their Prayers, it is but a
tempting and mocking God to do otherwise, Ora and Labora; and it is a good
direction, the Adage gives, Manus ad Stivam, oculus ad Coelum. The Hand on the
Plough, and the Eye lift up to Heaven is the Emblem of the thriving Husbandman.

And Soloman has both these passages in one Chapter, Prove. x. 4, and 22. The
hand of the diligent makes rich, and, The blessing of the Lord it makes rich.
He tempts God, who only Prays, and labors not. He despises God, who only
labors and Prays not. But he honors and pleases him, and shall be blessed of
him, who joins both together. Remember how Moses concludes the nintieth Psalm.
Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish the work of our
hands upon us: yea the work of our hands establish thou it. The Prayer for
blessing on their work, shows the concurrence of their Works and Prayer. The
hard Heart and the soft Hand, are both hateful to the Lord: but the soft Heart,
and the hard Hand are his delight; my meaning is, an Heart that melts in
Prayer, and an Hand that is grown callous, and brawny, with industrious
Constancy, in diligent Labor.

Let me close this, with what I judge a very necessary and seasonable advice.
When your Ministers visit you in time of sickness to exhort you, and comfort
you, and pray with you, it is usually one part of our exhortation, that if God
spare you, and restore you to health, you would show forth the truth of the
repentance, you profess when you are like to dye, by bringing forth Fruits meet
for Repentance, if God restore you and suffer you to live. And it is one part of
our Prayer, that God would vouchsafe to restore you, and afford you more time,
to perfect your Knowledge, your Faith, your Repentance, and what ever else may
make you more fit to dye, with safety, and with comfort. Now if God be pleased
to hear our Prayers, and to spare you and restore you, does not this lay as
great an obligation upon us Ministers, as may be, to apply our selves to you,
when you are so recovered, to put you in mind of the promises you made, whilst
you conceived your selves in danger of death.

And as great an engagement upon you, to expect from us, and accept at our
hands, willingly and thankfully, our b^st endeavors to assist you and provoke
you to be such, as you wish you had been, when you thought you should have
dyed. If the Vine-Dresser here promise, that if God will spare the barren-tree,
one year more, after he had threatened to Cut it down, he will on his part do,
all that Art and Industry can do, to make it Fruitful, applying his care to it
particularly, besides the general Husbandry he bestows upon the whole Vineyard.
I think no inference can be drawn more clearly, than that when God has
threatened to cut you down by death, and the Prayers of your Minister, and
others have prevailed with God to defer the Sentence, and spare you a little
longer, it is incumbent on you, both to desire and accept his help, and on him
to offer and afford it you and to do al^ his Christian Charity, and
Min^sterial-Off^ce can help him to do, that those, ends may be attained, for
which God spared you, If he spared you in his Mercy. And you should be as
willing to send for your Ministers when you are recovered, and they as ready to
attend you, as when you were in danger; how much this is practiced I know not,
but how necessary it is that it should be, I appeal both to your Consciences,
and to this Text. And therefore exhort with earnestness it may.

But I must give the meaning of this place, or expression, till I shall dig
about it, and dung it, more particularly, because much of the Application I
design will have dependence upon it. Donec ablaqueavero, and stercoravero. It
is an allusion to what is most usual, and most useful, to be done, to barren
trees. 1. Open the Roots, remove the clung Earth, and the hungry Loam, the cold
and binding Clay from about them, lay them open to the Weather, let in the Sun
and Rain, and expose them to the influence of Heaven, the nourishing Dew and
refreshing Air, cut the stunted, and starved, and bark-bound Roots, that they
may sprout afresh, put out young Fibers, shoot out new Suckers, and draw
nourishment to feed them: and lay good Mendment, mellow Dung, some richer Soil,
and Earth that is tender, well prepared, to warm and nourish them, that the
Roots may have fit nourishment, and may be made fit to attract it, and receive
it. And if any thing can, this will make the Tree bear Fruit, it is all that Art
and Industry can do: and it is capable of. What could have been more? Isa. v.
4. So a Minister that interceeds for a people or person that they may be
spared, must add to his Prayers all that Spiritual wisdom can teach him, and
Holy industry can assist him in, to make them better, that they may bring forth
the desired Fruits of Righteousness. But to be more particular, I find much
said concerning both these expressions, but I confess nothing which gives me
satisfaction, I shall therefore, passing by all others, confine my self to one
Interpretation, which appears to me, most proper and pertinent, of any I meet
with in others, or occurred to my own thoughts.

But before I name it, I must premise one Caveat to prevent an indecency, and
to preserve a decorum, that you may not take offense at the comparison, I am
about to make, as unseemly or rude; the word Dung, is even of a noysom sound,
as being in itself a loathsome stinking, and defiling thing: but it is not to
be looked on, under that notion, in this place: but in a more benign
acceptance, drawn from its usefulness, which is to warm, to mellow, and
communicate a prolifick virtue to the Earth, and the Plants, to make them Fat
and flourishing, and exuberant in bearing Fruit.

And tho Dung on your Clothes or Bodies, in your Houses or your Walks, would be
loathsome, and a foul annoyance; yet in your Fields, and Orchards, it looks
well, and smells not ill; but is desirable, and even comely, because it is
necessary and very useful. And suppose yet to prevent indecency and harshness
to the Interpretation, I am about to give, we mollify the very word, till I
may manure it, and lay mendment to it; for in the scope of this Parable, not
the bad, but the good quality of the Dung is to be considered, not how it marrs
by its foulness, but how it mends by its fatness.

This premised to prevent prejudice, I now tell you: that by Digging, and
Dunging, I conceive may most properly be meant applying the Law, and the
Gospel: the Threatenings, and the Promises; Gods Judgments and Mercies: and the
most earnest terrifying sinners, impenitent bold and daring sinners; by the
first, to bring, them to repentance toward God, and the alluring, wooing, and
persuading, brokenhearted, awakened, trembling sinners; by the other, to Faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ.

First, Digging breaks the Ground, the Spade of the Law, the Plough of the Law,
breaks up the fallow Ground of the Heart as the Prophets phrase is. Gods wrath
revealed from Heaven, against the unrighteousness and ungodliness of men: in
his terrible threatenings, and awakning Judgments, startles the obdurate sinner,
rends the rock he is planted on: tears in pieces his hardened security, and bold
presumption, turns up the tough, the cold, and clungy Soil, in which the very
roots of his Heart are shut up, and fastened, and which chill and stunt his
growth, that he cannot thrive or bear Fruit. And then the Dew and Rain, then
the kind and benign influence of the Sun, may reach and cherish him: then the
good Soil, the fresh mendment, the prolifick Manure, and the mellow tender
Mould, may be applied and come near. Even the tender Mercies of God, and the
warm blood of Jesus Christ, and the precious promises of Pardon, Life, and
Grace, by which these are offered and applied. It Is observed, and practiced,
that to apply blood to the Root of a Tree, a Vine especially, is the best and
most proper means to make it fruitful. And Historians tell us, that the Valleys
and Gardens about Jerusalem, were rendered Fertile beyond expression, almost to
a Miracle: by the abundance of blood, which flowed down (by the Vaults, made on
purpose to conveigh it away, under the Temple,) from the multitude of the
Sacrifices which were offered there. And I am sure there is nothing comparable
to the blood of the great Sacrifice, of our Lord Jesus Christ, to make a barren
Heart fruitful, especially if it be first well dug about by the Spade of the
Law, and the Roots of it laid bare and open to receive the due application of
it.

And he that will or does interceed, to have a barren, an impenitent people
spared; must add to his Prayers for them, his best his utmost endeavors with
them, to dig about them first, by convincing them of sin, rebuking and
reproving them cuttingly, till like St. Peter's Hearers Acts ii. They be tricked
to the Heart. By denouncing the Laws, Curse, and Gods Judgments. By showing
them their lost and undone condition, by stripping them of all their excuses,
and false confidences, by teaching them the necessity of a speedy and sincere
repentance, and by urging and pressing them to fly from the wrath to come, and
removing all their presumptions of peace and safety, (while they continue
ignorant, and destitute of Gods Righteousness) which lie like cold Earth, and
clungy sullen Loam, about their Hearts, and hinder them from drawing any
nourishment which may make them thrive, or bear the Fruit which God expects.

And when this is done, then lay fresh Mould, and mellow tender Earth about
them, then offer and apply unto them the promises of Pardon, Peace and Life,
through the tender Mercies of our God, in the blood of our dear Redeemer Jesus
Christ Exhorting, inviting, persuading, beseeching, alluring, and by the Holy
violence of Love, even constraining and compelling them, to turn, come in, and
be reconciled to God. And if any thing, will make a barren tree, bear Fruit; If
any thing will make a stubborn, and an hardened sinner yield, and relent, repent
and amend, and bring forth Fruit to God, this will do it.

And if it bear fruit, well; and if not, then after that, thou shall cut it
down. This last Verse of the Text contains the Dresser of the Vineyards submiss
concession, and willing yielding, to the putting the Sentence of excision, and
cutting the Fruitless Tree down, as most equitable and just, if it still
continue Fruitless after more patience, and more pains and cost allowed it, and
bestowed upon it in vain.

If it bear Fruit. It Is an imperfect Speech, in which somewhat is expressed, and
somewhat suppressed, which is ta be supplied and understood, a form of speaking
which men use when they speak with emotion, vehemence, and a great Pathos.
Aposiopesis, or Anantopodoton, a figure proper to, and of frequent use in the
Attick dialect. It Is seldom hard to supply it, and make the Sense perfect, in
this place it is very easy, and obvious. Thou shall suffer it to stand, and not
cut it down. Our Translatours have done it briefly, yet sufficiently; well: As
we use to say, when we exhort, persuade, threaten, promise, with an employed
condition, if you will do so or so, well and good, if not, then take what
follows. So here, if the impenitent sinner, will repent and turn to God, and
bring forth fruits meet for repentance, then God will put all his past
iniquities, out of his remembrance, and will spare and not destroy him. And
there is, if I may so speak, a great efficacy in the suppressing of the answer,
the Lord of the Vineyard gives consent, by his silence, and says much, by
saying nothing, but leaves it to be taken for granted, he yields and is content
it should be so. Annuit, such a gracious holding of his Peace, is as
significative, as if he had said, as elsewhere: Say to the Righteous it shall
be well with him. And this manner of intimating has mind, has its great
usefulness, it gives the highest degree of assurance, never doubt it, question
it not in the least: no man Plants Trees in his Orchard, merely to make Fuel
of, but to bear Fruit: and had a great deal rather they should stand, to answer
that end; than cut them down to be burnt; and when they answer his first desire
and design, will never do it.

As I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
rather that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your
evil ways, for why will ye dye, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11. The Tree which has been long
barren, the Christian which has been long unfruitful, yet if upon digging and
dunging, if upon new endeavors, and fresh application made to him, he bear
Fruit, I need not tell it you, you may be sure on it, and take it for granted,
he shall be spared, and not cut down. He shall surely live, he shall not dye.
Ezeck. xviii. 21.

But if not, Then after that thou shall cut it down. If it do not bear Fruit
after all this patience with it, in sparing it another year, and all the cost
and pains of digging and dunging it, then cut it down and spare not, I have no
more to say for it, I Will never speak word more in its behalf.

They, who after long barrenness add a secure and obstinate unfruitfulness,
against a fresh indulged patience, and renewed calls, warnings, and means to
make them fruitful, to bring them to repentance and amendment, shall be surely,
suddenly, severely cut down, without excuse, apology, or pity. According to
that of Solomon, Proverbs xxix. 1. He that being often reproved hardneth his
neck shall suddenly be destroyed and that without remedy. He flees to the pit,
let no man stay him.

We may sum up the meaning of these two Verses, in this short recapitulation,
by way of Paraphrase; as if he had spoken plainly to this Sense. O Lord I
humbly acknowledge thou have exercised great long-suffering, and showed much
mercy already to this sinful people, to this, and that impenitent man, and
woman, yet I beseech thee for thy mere mercy sake, spare them a little longer,
try them yet once more: and give me leave, opportunity and an heart, to
convince them of their duty, to make them sensible of their danger, to persuade
them to do the one, and avoid the other, and I promise and engage my self, by
thy Grace to do all that Art and Industry can do: all that Christian Charity,
and my Ministerial Compassions and Office can do, proportionable to those
Talents and Abilities thou have vouchsafed to entrust me with, to bring them to
Repentance. And if by thy blessing, those endeavors succeed and prosper: I
know, O Lord, Thou will of thy goodness pardon what is past, and spare them,
and Repeal thy Sentence, and repent thee of the evil denounced against them,
But if after thy granting what I have Prayed, and my performing what I have
Promised, they will take no warning, but continue secure and obstinate, as
hitherto. Then, Lord, do with them as thou please, execute upon them what
seems good in thine own Eyes. Thy Justice will be clear; I shall be free from
their blood; they will be without excuse, and all the fault, and guilt, will
light upon their own heads. Cut them down and spare not. I will not, I cannot
speak one word more, in their behalf.

Thus I have as concisely as I could, and with the most easy and familiar
expressions, explained this excellent Parable; and now divesting it of the
Figurative and borrowed words, I might set before you the Propositions and
Observations in which the Scope and Strength of it is comprehended.

First, When God has received any man into his Church by Baptism, He expects
he should, and will strictly take notice whether he does perform his Baptismal
Covenant.

Secondly, Every man professing Christianity, and not living of his Covenant of
Christianity binds him, is actually under a Sentence of condemnation.

Thirdly, God is graciously ready upon Intercession made to him, to grant a
Reprieve, and respite Judgment, and try such men whether they will return and
amend, and if they do, will spare and Pardon them. But,

Fourthly, If this forbearance, and goodness of God prevail not to make them
Repent and return, God and man, Heaven and Earth conspire and resolve the
speedy, the severe, the immutable, the Righteous destruction of such men.

I might proceed upon all, or single out some one of these, and give clear
Evidences, of the truth; and convincing Reasons of the Equity, and
Righteousness, of them. But I wave that method at present, and shall conclude
all with an Application the whole to our selves, suitable to the Explication
which has been given.

And this Application may be twofold. First, looking upon the Fig Tree as a
Type and Figure of the Church in this Nation, which with respect to the
Catholic or Universal Church, as the Vineyard, is as a particular Tree Planted
in it. And so the Application mightily alarums us all, to live as that Holy and
Excellent Religion, God has vouchsafed to us, requires and directs us. For
fear of, and under the Penalty, of being deprived and bereaved of it. And
pulled up by the very Roots, out of that good Soil we are Planted in, or stripped
of our defense and laid wast, and both the wall demolisht, and the hedge thrown
down, to let in upon us, the little Foxes, and the great Wild-Boar, to spoil
our Branches, and to turn up our Roots. And I the rather touch this because the
very Letter of the Text comes home to us in terminis, and fits our
circumstances as exactly as if it had primarily been adapted to us, and
designed for us.

Amongst other Interpretations of the three years, given in the Explication;
one was the Governors under which the Church had been Defended and Disciplined
to Obedience. How Parallel is this to our Case? We have enjoyed the Gospel, the
True Reformed Protestant Religion, under three Protestant Princes of Glorious
Memory. The famous Queen Elizabeth, the Learned King James and the Royal Martyr
King Charles the first.

In all whose Reigns God came and looked for Fruit suitable to his cost and care,
and our opportunities; but how much his expectation was disappointed, we may
with shame and sadness reflect, if we call to mind the gradual declining from
the power of Godliness, and Zeal for the Life of our Holy Religion. And if that
convince us not, the stretching out his hand against us, and the bloody
confusions by which he threatened to cut down our Church, and the busy designs
and proud hopes of our restless Enemies may. And yet then he raised up, and set
over us, our present Gracious King, (whom God in his infinite Mercy preserve
long to us) who has given us, and the world, so many open, and public
assurances, of his maintayning the True Protestant Religion, and under his
Government we yet enjoy it. God letting us alone this year also, and if we now
bear Fruit, Well: if we live answerable to the Gospel, yet continued to us, in
Righteousness, Sobriety, and Godliness, we have yet hope we may be spared, and
the Gospel, and the True Religion continued to us; but if we provoke him, and
in this Year, which is as a Year of our Reprieve, and trial: we prove, or
continue, as bad as heretofore, or rather grow worse, Profane, Loose, Lukewarm,
Formal, Contentious, Factious, proud, Censuring, Reviling, Worrying one
another, casting all the fault, and the blame, upon others, as like to bring
upon us the evils we fear, and excusing, flattering and indulging our selves in
our Lusts, and refusing to bring forth the pleasant and excellent Fruits, which
our most Holy Religion is naturally apt to produce, wherever it has possession
of men's Hearts in truth. What can we expect but that Gods vengeance find us
out, and he rid himself of us.

And proceed to put his Sentence against us, in execution and cut us down, as a
Protestant Church, even by the Roots, and let in upon the Nation, the heaviest
plague, that ever an Holy God in his fierce wrath, avenged the despising and
abuse of his Gospel by. I may, I hope without offense, declare my just fears,
that if Christ should use as strict a scrutiny toward us, as he did to the
Church of Ephesus, Rev. ii. He would not find so many good things amongst us,
as he owns he found in that Church, and there commends them for, verse 2, and
3, and that he would find more evils in us, than he there charges them with:
which is only because they had declined in their Zeal, left their first love,
verse 4. and yet let us with fear and trembling read and consider what he
writes to that Church, verse 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent, and do the first works, or else I will come unto the quickly, and
remove thy Candlestick out of his place except thou repent.

I might also Parallel the case of most of the other Churches with our Church,
and the threats denounced against them, with what we have cause to expect and
fear, thereby to provoke us to be speedy, and zealous to repent, while this
Year of Grace lasts: left his provoked patience, both hasten the expiring of
this Year, and also expire, and end with it, and the thing which we fear, come
upon us, in its perfection. I mean the loss of our Religion, because we have
not improved it, as we ought to have done. Let us not slatter our selves,
though we had not so visible, and near a prospect of our dangers, God can
easily make his Decrees bring forth, and his Vengeance overtake us, yea
overwhelm us, tho we saw no Instruments prepared, to bring it about. Those
Seven Churches, have many Ages since felt the direful effects of his threatened
Judgments. And seeing he spared not them, Oh that we could timely, and wisely
fear, lest he also spare not us. I know the Nation is startled and awakened,
and there are great thoughts of Heart, great searchings of Heart deservedly
about this matter, and if any be asleep in such a storm, its to be suspected
it is those, for whose sake this tempest is most likely to te upon us. And I
know there are many projects to prevent the evil, we have so much deserved, and
may so justly fear. But there is one means, which if it were as easy to
prevail with men to practice, as it is obvious to be discovered, would alone
save us, or put a blessing, upon what ever else might be innocently propounded,
to bring us unto safety: and no good man need be afraid, or ashamed, to
propound it: and he must be a very bad man, who will not be ashamed, to
reproach it, or reject it. And it is what Christ gives to the Church of
Laodicea, Rev. iii. 19. Be zealous and repent. It Is that which St. John Baptist
gave, when wrath was coming apace, and the Axe was laid to the Root of the
Tree. St. Matthew. iii. 8. Bring forth fruits meet for repentance. It Is that
which our present Parable suggests: If it bear fruit, Well: this will cause an
Arrest of Judgment: this will procure the Repeal of the pronounced Sentence.

In what words shall I propound this Counsel, with what Arguments may I so
press it, as to render it effectual, with what Motives shall I enforce it, that
it may be prevalent?

I have many things to say, when I come to apply the Parable personally, to
urge you to repent to save your souls. And surely it is a great word, to save
our Souls, but may I not say, it is a greater word to save a Church, to save our
Religion, in which, and by which, our Souls must be saved: and thousands, and
millions of Souls may be saved, if that be saved, and may (humanely speaking)
be lost for ever, if true Religion be lost; and if it be lost by our default,
where shall the loss of all those souls be charged? How warmly, how
Pathetically does the great Apostle warn his dear Timothy in this affair, in a
case of like concernment? And how does he reiterate the charge to make all
sure? O Timothy keep that which is committed to thy trust, 1 Timothy vi. 20. And 2 Timothy i. 13, 14. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me,
in faith and love. And, That good thing which was committed to thee, keep by
the holy Ghost. And he must transmit to others what was committed unto him. 2 Timothy ii. 2. The things which thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the
same commit thou to faithful men who shall be able to teach others also. We owe
to Posterity, what we received from our Progenitors. He leaves his name as a
blot, nay as a curse to his descendents, who intercepts, and robs them of, the
Care and Providence, and noble acquisitions of their common Ancestors. And he
deserves in the Prophets. Phrase to be esteemed the Tail, and not the Head,
whose Lusts cut off, what the Wisdom and Industry, of great Grandfathers
intayled of late, and far removed Nephews, for support and Honor. And how
shall we answer it to God, our Consciences, and the succeeding Ages. If we sin
away that Holy Truth, that excellent Religion, which God vouchsafed to Plant in
this Nation, with his own Right Hand, and those from whom we had our lives
transmitted to us, verdant and flourishing, being watered by their Pious Tears,
and fatned with their dearest Blood? A Religion not patcht up of cunningly
devised Fables, nor devised by cunning men, to gratify their Lusts, and serve
their base and worldly Interests. But the Everlasting Gospel, brought by the
Eternal Son, from the bosom of him, who is Truth it self, and the Fountain of
it; and adapted to the promoting of his Glory, and the true Interest of Souls,
the repairing, and restoring them to their highest perfection, Conformity to
the Divine Image, participation of the Divine Nature, and full and endless
enjoyment of God. A Religion founded upon the Prophets and Apostles, having
Jesus Christ for the chief Cornerstone. A Religion that dare bear the test of
the true Lydian-Stone; The Law and Testimony, because it is not conscious to it
self, of any counterfeit metal stamped and imposed on unwary minds, by its
Authority, to pass for good Coin, and current money. A Religion, which takes not
away the Key of knowledge, nor deprives its Children of the Scriptures, the only
Records of Divine Truth, and Rule that God has given mankind, of Faith and
Manners. That cries not up Ignorance for the Mother of Devotion, seeing Solomon
has told us, that without knowledge the heart cannot be good. And a greater
than Solomon, That life eternal is to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent.

And one of his Apostles has informed us, that The new man is renewed in
knowledge, and another has described the Beasts Kingdom, by its being full of
Darkness. And our Lord in the beginning of his Ministry, laid down this early
Aphorism to direct his Followers to distinguish, betwixt Truth and Falsehood,
the way of Salvation, and condemnation, John iii. 19, 20, 21. This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
than light because their deeds were evil. For every one that does evil hates
the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But
he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest
that they are wrought in God. A Religion that blots out none of Gods
Commandments, for fear the very Children, should drink in with their Catechism,
an Antidote against that gross Idolatry, which diffuses it self, through more
than half the Worship, they are called to practice all their lives. A Religion
which directs your Prayers to him, whose title is, A God hearing Prayer, and
your Worship to him, to whom alone it appertains, and whom only we must serve:
if either Moses, or Christ, are to be believed in such matters. And that
teaches you to Pray to him in his name, whom Saint Paul calls the One Mediator
betwixt God and Man: being both in his own person. A Religion that allows you
to serve this God, with reasonable service, as becomes reasonable Creatures,
Praying with your Spirits and your Understandings, not like Pyes or Parrots;
not with noise and sounds of a Language you understand not. A Religion that
delivers Christ's Institutions, as his Apostles received them from him; not
disguising a Sacrament, appointed for the living, into an expiatory Sacrifice,
for the dead; nor bidding you Worship, what Christ bid you eat. Nor giving the
lie to all your Senses, your Reason, and your Faith, together. (For Gods word
which is the object of our Faith calls it Bread most frequently after
Consecration) nor robbing you of one half, the Cup, with a non obstante, that
Christ Instituted, and the Primitive Church Administered in both Kinds. And so
avowing their presumption with an impudence as villainous and hateful, as their
theft. A Religion which has no Mint-house to Coin new Articles of Faith, or
make that needful to be believed, in order to Salvation, this year, which the
year before, and ever before that, was never thought on: A Religion which dares
neither add, nor detract from our Lords Will. Nor clap seven Seals to that
Testament, to which he annexed but two Labels. A Religion which will neither
allow you to kill your King, nor eat your God, nor purchase Heaven for your
money, nor flatter you with hopes, that you may go to Paradise in the broad way;
and have that done for you by others when you are dead, which should have been
done by your self while you were alive. In a word, a Religion not made up of
Tricks and Artifices; of Pomp and Pageantry of a Fardle of unaccountable Rites
and Ceremonies, and unintelligible mystesteries and contradictions, to comply
with all men's humors, tempers, constitutions: Severities for the Sour and
Melancholy, Carnivals and Stews for the Airy, brisk and Sanguine. Whips and
Austere Discipline (as sharp as the Lancets of Baals Priests) for the sullenly
Superstituous. And easy Indulgences, and Commutations into gentle Penances,
for the soft and delicate. A Religion, tho professed and owned by many sinful
men: yet neither invented, nor headed by the man of sin. But a Religion holy
and undefiled, like its Author, plain and simple like the Gospel, which
contains and teaches it. Spiritual and Heavenly like the place it leads them
to, who love and practice it sincerely. Such is the Religion we yet enjoy,
through Gods great goodness, but he threatens to bereave us of, for our sins
against it. Let me therefore beseech you, and adjure you, by all that is dear to
you, be zealous and repent speedily, sincerely, that you force not a jealous
God, to cut down this Tree, to remove his Kingdom, and take away his
Candlestick, because you would not bring forth the Fruits of the one, nor walk
in the Light of the other, and deprive your selves and your Posterity of the
greatest blessing, God ever did, or can bestow on this or any other Nation on
this side Heaven.

But I shall rather choose to enlarge my self in that Application of this
Parable, which is more suitable to so private an Auditory, tho I cannot deny,
neither can any man deny, the former, in our circumstances, to be very
seasonable, and therefore very necessary.

I shall therefore in what remains, consider the Fig tree as a Figure and Type
of particular persons. Under which notion every individual man and woman, is
sentenced to be cut down, and cast out of the Vineyard of the Church, by some
Temporal or Spiritual Judgment: who has been planted, and admitted into it by
Baptism, and stands and grows in it, enjoying all the advantages and
privileges which belong to a Member of it, under the Gospel, and yet continues
Fruitless, or bears no good Fruit. Gets no saving Knowledge, no true Faith, no
sound Repentance, nor sincere Amendment of Life. No real sense, or favor of
the things of God, in a prevalency of Religion, in Godliness and Holiness,
against and above Formality, Profaneness, or the love of this present world.
No Justice, Righteousness, Truth and Honesty, against Defrauding, Cousenage,
Oppression, Lying and Slandering of his Neighbors. No Temperance, Sobriety,
subduing of his sensual Lusts and Appetites against Uncleanness, Drunkenness,
Debauchery, and other defiling pleasures and sensualities, in a word, who are
not foundly Converted and turned from placing their happiness and hopes in sin
and creatures, to fix them on God and Christ, as their only blessedness and
satisfying portion. Or in St. Paul's express Language, who will not learn that
great Lesson, which the Grace of God, that is, the Gospel was revealed from
Heaven, as the clearest light, to teach the Sons of men, that is, To deny all
ungodliness and worldly Lusts: and to live Righteously, Soberly and Godly in
this present world, in hope of a blessed immortality. Nor heartily, and in good
earnest, endeavor to become such, as they are by their Baptismal Vow and
Covenant obliged to be.

To every such man, to every such woman, I denounce this day in the name of the
great, the dreadful God of Heaven and Earth, if thou turn not, and that
speedily and thoroughly; That God the Lord of Hosts, the supreme, the
Omnipotent, the Irresistible judge of all the Earth, Has prepared for thee, the
instruments of death. He has whet his Sword, he has bent and made ready his
Bow, his Arrows are upon the string: suddenly will he shoot at thee, and not
spare, or miss his mark. The Ax is laid to thy very Root, to cut thee down for
fire unquenchable. God already despises, reproacheth, and upbraideth thee for
cumbring of his Ground, has actually pronounced the Sentence against thee, to
cut thee down: the word is gone out of his mouth; only in admirable Patience,
he has reprieved thee one year more, a little longer, to try whether thou will
yet at last sue out a Pardon, return, repent, amend, that thou may live. Yet
if thou do it not quickly, he will compensate the former disappointments of his
expectation, whilst year after year he came looking for Fruit and found none,
together with the aggravated abuse of his long-sufferance, which vouchsafes
another year, with a severer vengeance, with a greater Damnation.

As for our parts who are Gods Ministers, it is no pleasure nor delight to us,
to be Messengers of so heavy tidings, to come on so harsh and terrifying an
Errand. We had rather be sent on Embassies of Peace, and speak what might be
more welcome and pleasing to you, provided it might also be profitable for you.
But we must not choose our own Message: but the Word God puts into our mouths,
that must we speak. What we have received from the Lord, that must we deliver
to you, according to our Commission and our Instructions written in his Word,
must we proceed in the discharge and execution of our Office. We must not sow
Pillows under your Armpits, nor dawb with untempered mortar, at the Price, at
the Peril, of our own Souls. Nor promise Life where God has threatened Death.
Nor speak Peace, where God says there is no Peace. And there is no peace to
the wicked, says my God, Isa. lvii. 21. This were but to betray you, and ruin
our selves. To lead you blindfold into the Ditch, and plunge our selves in,
together with you, into the Lake of fire and brimstone: and to have the guilt
of the blood of your souls, added and heapt up, upon that of our own, to sink
us deeper in the bottomless Gulf.

What we may do, and what we can do, that by the Grace of God we will do. We
will Pray to God to let you alone this year also. Spare thy people good Lord,
spare this and that other Fruitless-Tree one year more, try them O Lord, a
little longer, it may be they will consider, it may be they will bethink
themselves, it may be they will yet bear Fruit. And then, it shall be no grief
of Heart to thee O blessed Lord, that thou did not cut them off suddenly in
thy sore displeasure. Many have made some amends for an unfruitful youth, by
bringing forth more Fruit in their Age. Great Sinners have become great Saints.

What had thy Church lost, what had thy Glory lost, if thou had struck Saul
dead, when thou did strike him down, and he rose up a Paul? Lord let us
humbly claim, what thou have so graciously Proclaimed, and thou have Proclaimed
thy Name, thy own Name, to be the Lord, even the Lord gracious and merciful,
long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, Exodus xxxiv. 6. Yea so
long-suffering that thou Would not that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance 2 Pet. iii. 9. to prevent their perishing. In this
Sense we will, and to this Sense do, all good and faithful Ministers interceed
with God for their people.

But we must not only interceed for you, but we must also interceed with you,
in Gods behalf, For we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us; we beseech you therefore in Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God,
2 Cor. v. 20.

And we must not only entreat you; but we must treat with you, argue, debate,
and reason out the case with you. Why will you dye? Why will you not return,
why will you forsake your own Mercies? Why will you lay out your money for that
which is not bread, and your strength for that which satisfies not? Why will
you prefer a broken Cistern, which will hold no water, before the Fountain of
living water it self? Why will you choose the puddle, of the impoysoned
pleasures of sin, which are but for a season. Before the Healing Crystal
Streams, Those Rivers of Pleasure, and fullness of Joy, which are at Gods
Right Hand for ever more? Yea we must add our hardest Labor, to our softest
Prayers. And our dearer Cost to our cheaper Requests. We must dig about you and
manure you. You are Gods Husbandry, and Building. And we must Till and Dress
you, and Build you up to the utmost of out Skill and Industry. And tho this be
not the Work of an hour or a day, but of our whole Life and Ministry. Yet
suffer me to attempt it, so far as the time will bear.

And first I must Dig about you, that is, loosen and remove the clung, the
cold, the hard, and clutchy Loam, and hungry Earth, from about your Roots,
which chil, and stunt, and starve you, that you bear no Fruit in Gods Vineyard.
That is, your indulged Lusts, and inordinate Love of the World, which by
gnawing at your Hearts, spoil both your growth and fruitfulness.

Your Carnal security, your ignorant and bold presumptions, your trusting in
your outward privileges, and false confidences in your formal duties, and
customary performances: and self-flatteries, as to the sufficiency of your
seize, and good progress you reckon you have made.

All these, and many more, have an unhappy aptitude, to hinder your bearing
Fruit, and make you barren, in some the hardness of the Rock prevents the
taking Root. In others the Thorns draw away the good nourishment, or growing up
about it, Shade and over drop it, keep away the Sun and Weather, and stifle and
pinch it up, it has no room to spread: The cares of the world, the love of
riches, and the lusts of other things choke the seed, and the Plants, that they
bring no Fruit to perfection, Mark iv. 19. In others, the overvaluing of their
outward privileges, as those Jews, Jeremiah writes of Chap. vii. Who cried,
The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord. And
those in our Saviors time St. John viii. We are Abraham's seed, we have Abraham
to our Father. Or the Opinion of their seize. Like the Church of
Laodicea, Rev. iii. Who said she was rich, and increased in goods, and had need
of nothing. Or boasting in their formal duties, as that Pharisee, Luke xviii. I
fast twice a week, I pay tithes of all I possess. Or proud comparing your
selves with some notorious, flagitious sinners, I thank God I am not like such
an one, nor do like such an one, nor like that Publican. Some of these, or
something like these, lies at the Root of most men's Hearts, and chils, or
starves, or binds, or choaks them, that they bear no Fruit, nor answer Gods
expectation, tho they have a standing in his Church.

So many now a days, and it may be some of your selves, are prone to say we are
good Protestants, we are no Papists, no, nor we are no Phanaticks: But we are
true Sons of the Church, we have been Baptized, we keep our Church, we say our
Prayers, we receive the Sacrament.

As if the outward washing would save you, without the answer of a good
Conscience toward God; and making your Covenant with God, without the keeping
of it. Or coming to Church without learning or practicing what you are here
taught, or calling upon God without departing from iniquity, and lifting up
your hands, tho they be full of Blood, Bribes or Oppression. Or receiving the
Sacrament without discerning the Lords Body, or considering what you do. Or
standing in the Vineyard without bearing Fruit. When that is the very ground of
Gods Controversy with you, and the thing that hastens your ruin, and you might
stand longer in an Hedg-row, or on a Common, than in Gods enclosure.

Now as when the Gardener digs about a Tree, it is to loosen the clung Earth,
take away the bad, lay open the Roots, that he may lay better to them, as was
touched before, such must be the end of our Spiritual, our Ministerial digging
about your Hearts. And as I conceive this expression, is equivalent to that of
breaking up the fallow ground of the Heart, to Plow up the Weeds and Thorns,
and make it mellow and tender to receive the Seed: as that must be done by the
Plough of the Law, so must this with the Spade of the Law. Docendo, monendo,
convincendo, redarguendo, by teaching, admonishing, convincing, reproving,
threatening, as a good Expositor expresses it, which are all the proper works
of the Law.

That we may therefore apply our selves rightly to this work. In the 29th. of
Deuteronomy, verse 18. we read of a root bearing gall and wormwood, very bad,
very bitter Fruit, and the next verse describes him to be one, that blesses
himself in his heart, and says he shall have peace, tho he add drunkenness to
thirst, and the 12. verse before, and the 25. after seems to intimate the
grounds or occasion of that his confidence, because he was entered into Covenant
with God. As if that would secure him from danger, Now I beseech you observe
with what Spade Moses himself digs about this Root, verse 20. The Lord will not
spare him, but the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against
that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him:
And the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. And the Lord shall
separate him unto evil, out of all the Tribes of Israel, according to all the
curses of the Covenant that are written in the Book of this Law. Read what
follows at your leisure, as also Deuteronomy. xxviii. more largely from verse xv. to
the end, which contains 54. verses: and many more heavy curses, and dreadful
threatenings, according to what he speaks, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 23. I will heap
mischiefs upon them. And so Levit. xxvi. he threatens them with most severe
Judgments, and tells them he will punish them seven, and seven, and seven times
more for their sins, unless they repent and amend: Till he plucked them up by
the very roots, out of the good land wherein he had planted them. And in the
same method do all the Prophets proceed, as were easy to give instances in
Samuel, David's Psalms most frequently, Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezechiel,
Daniel, and the rest, and the same instruments do they all use to the same end:
but I leave a thing so very obvious to your own observation in reading of the
Scriptures of the Old Testament.

And the New Testament, in this, is like the Old. You cannot but take notice,
how John the Baptist begins his Ministry, Matthew. iii. Bring forth fruits meet
for repentance, and how does he urge them so to do? First by digging away that
bad Earth from about their Roots: their flattering themselves with a false
confidence in their outward privileges. Thinks not to say we have Abraham to
our Father: and then by threatening them with cutting down. The Ax is laid to
the root of the tree, and every tree which brings not forth good fruit,
shall, nay, is hewn down and cast into the fire. He speaks of it as done
already, to convince them of the certainty of it. And again, One is coming
after him, mightier than he, and his fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly
purge his floor, and burn up the chaff with fire unquenchable. And nothing is
more frequent in the Sermons and Parables of our Lord himself, than such useful
and faithful severity, to awaken secure sinners, by such wholesome comminations
of their danger: as every attentive reader may observe. To touch a few of very
many, Matthew. xi. 20. Then began he to upbraid the Cities in which most of his
mighty works were done, because they repented not. Woe to thee Chorazin, woe to
thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works which have been done in you had been
done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and
ashes. And I say unto you it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the
day of Judgment than for you. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven
(by the enjoyment of such means) shall be brought down to hell: (for the abuse
of them) For if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in
Sodom, it would have remained to this day. But I say unto you it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of Judgment than for thee. What
stinging words are these, how should they awaken us to speedy Repentance?

This is also the scope of many of the Parables in Matthew. xiii. of the Sower
and the Seed, of the Drag Net, of the Tares: to instance in the last. The Tares
in the Field, seem to run parallel with the barren figtree in the Vineyard,
verse 40. the Tares are burnt in the fire. The son of man shall send forth his
Angels and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and
them that do iniquity and cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth. His Kingdom, that is his Church: and you see
it is not enough to be in his Kingdom, but to be a Loyal Subject in his Kingdom,
and to yield him willing and faithful Obedience, and such is the case with him
who wanted the Wedding Garment, Matthew. xxii. and with the foolish Virgins, that
provided no Oil, and the slothful servant that traded not with his Talent,
Matthew. xxv. So Mark xvi. 16. He that believes and is Baptized shall be saved,
but he that believes not shall be damned, tho he were Baptized, yea, the more
because he was Baptized, and did not what he was thereby obliged to.

But no where more fully than in the beginning of this Chapter. Unless you
repent you shall all perish, and besides my Text, verse 24. Strive to enter in
at the strait gate, and that quickly before the Master of the house be risen,
for it will afterward be in vain, to plead, we have Eat and Drunk in thy
presence, come to thy Table, heard thee Preach. If you have been workers of
iniquity he will say, depart from me.

And the Holy Apostles, the most skilful, and most faithful Laborers in Gods
Vineyard, use the same method, warning the unfruitful by the terrors of the
Lord. By this Goad St. Peter pricked, and by this Sword St. Stephen cut, their
several hearers to the heart: with these Weapons St. Paul managed his warfare
To pull down the strong holds of sin and Satan, Romans i. 18. He tells them The
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men. Romans ii. tells them that they treasure up wrath against
the day of wrath, who are not led to repentance by Gods long-suffering and
goodness, and threatens, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anger, upon
every soul of man that does evil: and lets them know, their outward
Circumcision will avail them nothing, unless their hearts be Circumcised. And
Chap. xi. He warns them by the Example of the Jewish Branches being cut off
from their Olive Tree, and bids them take heed lest God also spare not them,
and expressly tells them that if they continue not in Gods goodness, answer not
his goodness toward them, they also shall be cut off. It Is hard to forbear
offering more, but I confess it rather needs an Apology for saying so much, in
so manifest a case, than an Excuse for saying no more, yet they that consider
for how plain a people these things were first prepared, and now written, may
pass by the error, if I have exceeded.

And now to dig the deeper about you, even to the bottom of your Roots, to the
very Root of your Hearts: let me usher in what I have to offer to you, with
these considerations.

First, You stand not on an Heath or Forest, on a Wilderness or Common, in a
Wood or Hedg-row, where you might stand long, and none look after you, neither
God nor Man expect fruit from you. The times, the places of Ignorance, when and
where men have not the light of the Gospel, to show them their Duty, or their
Danger in neglecting it, God winketh at, Acts 17.30. takes less notice of But
when and where his Gospel is vouchsafed, He calls all men to repent. Because,
by that, he lets them know He has appointed a man, by whom he will judge the
World in Righteousness, and has given full assurance of it, by raising him
from the Dead. But you are planted in a rich Soil: as God's Vineyard of old,
Isa. 5.1. in a very fruitful hill, cultivated, dressed, tilled with no small
cost and care, it was dug, and fenced, and the Stones picked out. You live
in a Church where you enjoy the Holy Scriptures to be a light to your Feet, and
lamp to your Paths; and have the truth and excellency of the Gospel, fully set
forth, and plainly preached, explained and applied to you, and the whole counsel
of God, concerning your Eternal estate, declared, and nothing kept back, which
may be necessary or profitable for you: You have the Holy Sacraments
Administered to you, according to Christ's Institution, without maiming, or
defiling them, with men's Superstitious inventions added. You have Prayers made
in a Tongue you understand, and directed to him alone, who styles himself a God
hearing Prayer, and in his Mediation, who is the true and only Mediator, in
whose name we are allowed, and commanded to ask, what we need; with assurance
given, that it shall be granted. And what ever else that is requisite to promote
your Sanctification, Consolation and Salvation, even all the means of Grace,
which he has appointed, that was faithful in all his house. A Mercy so
invaluable, that all other mercies of Life and Health, of Peace and Plenty, are
greatly inferior to it, and nothing but Heaven it self exceeds, or is above it.

Secondly, You have stood a long time in this Vineyard, lived a great while in
such a Church. Not three years only, but more than three times three, yea
threescore years many of you, and all of you many, tho not so many all. And
know that the longer you have stood, and the oftener God has come to look for
Fruit, the greater your account will be, and the nearer cuting down you are:
and if you mend not if you repent not, now speedily and thoroughly, the more
sudden, hasty, sure, sore, and dreadful will your cuting down be.

Thirdly, The more cost and pain has been bestowed upon you, the heavier, the
stricter reckoning you must be called to, and the severer vengeance will God
inflict, if you continue to receive his Grace in vain, and with obstinate
security delay to bring forth Fruit.

Fourthly, If after long ordinary means enjoyed, fresh alarms be given, and new
and more vigorous calls and applications be made to you, by extraordinary
dispensations of Gods Providence, and other circumstances he brings you under,
which are like the letting it alone another year, after Sentence given to cut
it down, for the three former years barrenness: and these be lost, and prove as
unsuccessful as those which went before them: then you perish inevitably
without remedy, without excuse, or any pity. For

First, God will do no more, It shall not be dug nor pruned any more, Isa.
v. 6. Whatever God does, he does with respect to his Mercy or his Justice, they
are Principia imperantia in Deo, as the Schools speak; they engage, and set all
his Attributes on work, as his Wisdom and Power, etc. and all he does, is for
the glory either of his Mercy or his Justice: and when neither of them can be
farther glorified: then he ceases to work, and will proceed no farther, do no
more. And such is the case here, neither of them would be glorified by his
doing more for such men: and therefore Mercy is not for it, and Justice is
against it. His Mercy has has been hitherto glorified, in engaging his Wisdom
to use such variety of means and methods, to bring them to repentance; and his
patience in allowing so much time, to see what the effect would be; but to
continue always to do so, and longer to do so, when abundantly enough has been
vouchsafed, to magnify his Mercy, both in his Wisdom and his Patience, he will
then give over. And to go on still; would but be to expose his Wisdom to
censure, and his Patience to contempt. He will not be always trying conclusions
in vain, and to no purpose, after he has done abundantly enough to manifest,
yea magnify, his Mercy in the Eyes of all impartial witnesses; and excuse his
Justice in what he shall inflict, by leaving them inexcusable, on whom he shall
inflict it. As he says to the incorrigible, Why should you be stricken any
more, you will revolt more and more. Isa. i. 5. Seeing you are like the Anvil,
which grows harder the more blows are laid upon it. So to the indocible, and
impenitent, why should ye be taught, called on, warned, reproved any more,
seeing ye refuse to learn, hearken, take warning and return? Why should the
Word of the Lord be precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line,
line upon line, to those who have made a covenant with death, and are at an
agreement with hell? Who have made Lies their refuge, and have hid themselves
under falsehood, unless that they might go, and fall backward, and be snared,
and taken, Isa. xxviii. 13, 15.

And why any more vain endeavors to charm them, who have made themselves like
the deaf Adder which refuses to hear the voice of the charmer, charming never
so wisely, whose doom is therefore to be taken away suddenly, both living and
in his wrath, Psalm. lviii. 4, 5, 9. Why any more Piping to them who will not
Dance, or mourning to them who will not weep, Luke vii. 32. Who will be won,
neither by promises nor threats, overcome neither by hopes nor fears, nor
gained, as we say, either by fair means, or by foul. How often would I have
gathered you as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not: such shall be left desolate, Luke xiii. He will not always Cluck them, nor
offer them his shelter any more, those whom he has often called and they would
not answer, he will call no more. Nay he will not answer when they call to him.
Abused Patience will turn into Fury and it is fit Justice should have its turn,
and at length take place on them, who have long despised Mercy.

Secondly, He can do no more. What could have been done more to my Vineyard,
that I have not done in it? Isa. v. 4. All has been done, that Art and
Industry, and the best Husbandry can do; and all that, in that respect, it is
capable of having done for it.

The Scope of the Parable, is to show the care and faithfulness of the Planter,
and the Dresser of the Vineyard; to whom it belongs to give good Tillage and
Culture, and to perform what is to be done below on Earth: but not to send Rain
and seasonable Weather, or the kind and needful influences of Heaven, and it
must not be stretched too far, nor applied to the internal Operations of the
Holy Ghost. Nor to limit the extraordinary power of God: as if by his Almighty
Grace, he could absolutely have done no more, to make his Vineyard Fruitful.
For in a Parallel case, we are told, He is able to raise children to Abraham,
out of stones, and he that has promised To take away the heart of stone, and
give an heart of flesh; must not be denied Ability, to do it when, and for whom
he pleases.

But it is to be restrained to, and understood of, the external means of Grace,
and Gods ordinary power exerted in, and by them, And in as much, as no part or
degree of them had been wanting, but all vouchsafed, that God ordinarily does,
or can afford: it is said, he had done all he could. And possibly it may be
thus expressed, tacitly to convince men, who are prone to think outward means
alone sufficient. And believe they can, by the help of them alone, turn to God,
and become fruitful, if they please, and when they please. And are thereby left
self-condemned, because God has done his part, (and all themselves esteem
needful) and they neglect their own; and perform not what they know they ought,
and think they can.

Thirdly, His Intercessours desire him to do no more but cease, become silent,
and plead no longer. And you know when an Advocate yields and throws up his
Clients Cause, he is in a sad case, his business is lost. It Is express and
plain in the Text if he will please to spare it another year, and bestow more
cost and pains on it, he will ask no more; if it bear not fruit then, cut it down
and spare not. Neither Christ in Heaven, nor his Ministers on Earth, have one
word more to say for a people whom neither ordinary, nor extraordinary means,
will make better. It Is usual to ask a Prisoner why Sentence should not be
given, and when neither he nor his Council, can alledg any, then Judgment is
given, and Execution follows. So here when they who had pleaded for them, can
plead, will plead no longer, because they have no Plea left: then the Case is
desperate, there is no hope. As long as Abraham interceeded for Sodom, God
granted what he requested. But as soon as he left, God procceeds to execute
vengeance. When there is no man to make up the Hedge, or stand in the Gap before
God for the Land, that he should not destroy it, then he pours out his
indignation upon it, and consumes it with the fire of his wrath. Ezech. xxii.
30, 31.

Fourthly, God himself forbids them to Pray for such men. Pray not thou for
this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession
to me, Jer. vii. 16. Now consider what people this was. Even the Trees of his
own Planting in his own Vineyard. His own People who professed the true Religion,
but abused that Profession, and made it a Cloak for their villainies. As if that
pretext had given them a License to commit their Abominations. but the better
their Religion, the worse shall they speed, who Profane it, defile it, and by
not bearing the genuine Fruits of it, but the contrary, cause it to be evil
spoken of, and that God to be Blasphemed, who was the Author of it. The whole
place, tho exceeding apposite to our purpose, is too large to be transcribed.
Jer. vii. 4. to the 17. Trust ye not in lying words saying the temple of the
Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are these; this repeating
it so often, shows the height of their confidence, but this will not do, unless
they thoroughly amend their ways and doings. -- then verse 8. Behold you trust
in lying words, that cannot profit. This will not secure you, will ye steal,
murder, commit adultery and swear falsely -- and come and stand before me in
this house, which is called by my name, and say, we are delivered to do al
those abominations. Is this house become a den of Robbers in your Eyes? But go
to Shiloh and see what I did to them for their wickedness, and He do as bad, or
worse, to you for yours, Because I spoke to you rising early, and you heard
not, and I called and you answered not. Therefore I Will cast you out of my
sight. Then follows Therefore pray not thou for them, etc. As if he should say
to us, you mightily deceive your selves, and trust in lying words, and which
will not profit you, to have you spared: If you say, we are Baptized, we are
true Protestants, we keep our Church, etc. And think this will excuse you, in
the neglect of bearing the Fruits your Baptism obliges you to, and your Holy
Religion exacts of you, and presume to do quite contrary. And tho I have long
looked for better from you, and long called you to amendment, and have been
entreated by my Servants to spare you, again and again, but I see it is all to
no purpose, therefore I am resolved to spare you no longer, nay I charge all
that love me, to speak no more for you that you should be spared. See also Jer.
xi. 14, 17. Where we have the very Metaphor of my Text, A green Olive Tree
planted, but evil pronounced against it, by him that planted it, and prayer
forbidden to be made for it.

Fifthly, If they do pray for them he will not hear: he tells them so to stop
their mouths: I will not hear thee, Ezekiel. 14.14. tho these three men, Noah, and
Daniel, and Job stood before me, as I live, says the Lord, they should deliver
neither son nor daughter. Such men, mighty in power, whom one would think
should obtain any thing, and God would deny them nothing, even they should not
prevail for a people who had sinned against God by trespassing grievously,
verse. 13. had grieved him by long resisting his Calls, by impenitency; and had
set up their idols in their hearts, and the stumbling block of their iniquity
before their faces.

Sixthly, Nay, they who have interceded for you, that you might be spared; yea,
and prevailed for you, that you have been spared: will turn their prayers
against you, if after all his sparings of you, they see you will not turn to
God, but continue obstinate, they will pray God to rid his Church of you, as
the bane, as the pests of the place you live in, who by your bad example, and
bad counsel, and other mischiefs you do, hinder other sinners from returning.
How does holy Jeremiah, who had stood before the Lord to speak good for that
people, at length not only desist and cease praying for them; but chap. 11.20.
cries against them, Let me see thy vengeance on them. And Eliah makes
intercession against Israel, Romans 11.2. for their unfruitfulness, and
corrupting their Religion: and when they who used to hold God's hands, and to
whom he says, Let me alone that I may destroy them, Deuteronomy. 9.14. not only let
loose his hands, but let loose their own prayer against them. What shall become
of such a People?

Seventhly, Nay, your own mouths will be stopped, and you will be speechless,
and as before you had no heart to use the arguments, you might have pleaded for
your selves, so now you will have no arguments to plead, nothing to say, but
will be out of countenance, wholly, and quite ashamed to hold up your heads
before God. As the man, Mat. 22. whom God had used so kindly, whom he calls
Friend, Quem tot bonis, and donis c^ronavit, whom he had crowned and compast
with so many opportunities and helps, to get what he had, so grossly neglected
to provide; when he might have had it; and knew he ought to have had it: when
he asked him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having on a wedding
garment, he was speechless. He had nothing to say for himself, not a word to
offer for arresting the severest Judgment, He that after several Admonitions,
goes on to sin, is to be rejected of God and man, being condemned of himself,
Tit. 3.11. And they who have means to know God, and will not know him, and when
they do know him, will not glorify him, nor bring forth the Fruits, by which
others might be provoked to glorify him, are without excuse. Romans 1.20.

Eighthly. But if they add impudence to their obstinacy, and will presume to
call upon him; and their extremity extort, and wring from them a prayer at
last, and they howl to him on their Beds, as God speaks reproachfully of such
men's prayers, Hos. 7.14. and their fears fright them into a pang of heartless
devotion, and the sense of approaching ruin, scare them to cry to that God,
who has so long called earnestly on them to turn, but all in vain: it shall
now be as much i^ vain on their parts: for he is resolved, he will not hear
them: Prove. 1.28. They shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, because
they hated knowledge, and despised reproof. When you spread forth your hands, I
will hide wine eyes, and when you make many prayers I will not hear. Isa. 1.15.
Read on, and see the reason, Eze. 8.18. I will deal in my fury: mine eye shall
not spare, neither will I have pity: and tho they cry in mine ears with a loud
voice, I will not bear. And Zach. 7.11, 12, 13. They refused to hearken, and
pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear: yea,
they made their hearts as an Adamant Stone, lest they should hear the Law, and
the words which the Lord of Hosts sent by his spirit in the former prophets:
therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts: therefore it is come to
pass, that as he cried and they would not hear: so they cried, and I would not
hear says the Lord of Hosts. Consider this, ye that forget God. And in the
days of your youth, and health, and strength go on securely in the ways of your
own hearts, and despise admonition and refuse to return, and think in your
selves, if you have but time to cry, Lord, have mercy upon me, at last, all
shall be well, and you shall be as safe, as they that soonest turn to God, and
sought him timely with their best endeavors, and sincerest hearts.

Ninthly. God will take away the very means from them who trust in the formal
customary fruitless use of them. We find this Sentence four times recorded.
From him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which he has: twice in
the parable of the Sower, as the doom of the barren ground. Matthew. 13.12. Luke
8.18. twice in the parable of the pounds and talents as the punishment of the
slothful, unprofitable servant. Matt. 25.19. and Luke 19.26. The kingdom of
heaven shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof; Mat. 21.43. which plainly shows the reason to be their not bringing
forth such fruits. And the Church of Ephesus is threatened. Rev. 2.5. Repent and
do thy first works, or I will come upon thee quickly, and remove thy
Candlestick out of its place except thou repent. You may sin away a good
Religion by your unfruitfulness: but the best Religion will not keep away
vengeance from those who are unfruitful, but draw it on the faster.

Tenthly, or he will take his blessing from the means, his spirit shall not
accompany them, and then they will be but a dead Letter without life and
quickening For the word preached will not profit them in whom it is not mixed with
faith: and faith is the gift of the Holy Spirit: and he will not work it in
those who resist him, quench him, grieve him, provoke him; nor strive longer
with them, who set themselves to strive against him, and harden their hearts,
as it were on purpose, to withstand, and hinder his making any impressions on
them: those who have long received God's Grace in vain, and turned it into
wantonness, may sit under the sound of it, but shall find no efficacious
influence by it, and tho to others, as Christ speaks, Cant. 1.16. Our bed is
green fruitful, and Children are begotten unto God, yet to them the Ordinances
have a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts.

Eleventhly. God will turn the means thou injoyest, to thy hurt, and to thy
ruin, to become a curse, a snare, and stumbling block, and occasion of
falling, to the aggravating of thy condemnation, Romans 11.9. David says, Let
their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block and a recompense
unto them. As meat which is not digested to yield good nourishment, breeds
crudities, and turns to be occasion of Diseases. So does Spiritual Food, when
not improved to growth and strength. As the Manna corrupted bred worms, so
spiritual Manna breeds the most stinging worm of Conscience, when abused. The
sincere milk of the word, curdled in the sour stomach of an hard heart, breeds
the most dangerous, and deadly Obstructions: and becomes the savor of death.
Unworthy Receivers eat and drink their own damnation: and turn the Seal of
God's precious promises, into a Seal of his dreadful Threatenings: yea, which is
most fearful to consider, Christ Jesus himself becomes a stumbling to some men:
even to those, who seek righteousness, not by faith, but, as it were, mark the
phrase, as it were, by the works of the Law: not downright seeking
Justifications, by the works of the Law, but turn the Gospel into a Law, to be
justified by Evangelical Works, as if they were to be justified by a Law
requiring Work, not by the Gospel, offering Righteousness, of God's mere Grace,
in Christ to be received by says.

And 1 Cor. 1.23. Christ crucified is to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness. And 1 Pet. 2.8. A stone of stumbling, and rock of offense,
to them who are disobedient to the word. And it had been better for them not to
have known the way of righteousness, than to have refused to walk in it. Not to
have had Christ offered to them, than to have rejected him, not to enjoy the
means, than to have them blasted and cursed to them, through their own default
and provocation.

Twelfthly. God will avenge your sinful hardening your selves, in your willful
neglecting and deferring to repent, and bring forth the fruits of true
Christianity, by a penal, and judiciary hardening, not by infusing any malice
and wickedness into your hearts. The holy God neither can, nor will do that;
for he is not the Author of that, of which he is the u^tour and punisher. But
by leaving you to your own corruptions, without restraint, and to those
temptations which are apt to kindle, and are fit fuel for those corruptions.
God will leave yon to your own choice. Isa. 66.3, 4. They have chosen their own
ways, and their soul delights in their abominations: therefore I also will
choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon them: because when I
called, none did answer, when I spoke they would not hear: but they did evil
before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not.

There is scarce one passage, in all the Bible, repeated so often over in
terminis, as that dreadful Sentence, first denounced from the mouth of God, by
the Ministry of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 6.10. and to which he was prepared,
with so great and awful Solemnity. By a Vision of the Divine Majesty, upon the
Throne of his Glory, and an Angel touching his Lips with a coal from the Altar,
and with a special Commission, to send him on this Errand. Go and tell this
people, hear ye indeed hat understand not: see ye indeed, but perceive not:
make the heart of this people fat, and their ears heavy, and shut their eyes:
lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with
their hearts, and convert and be healed. Which we find repeated, as the Margin
of your Bibles will show, Matthew. 13, 14, 15. Mark 4.12. Luke 8.10. John 12.40.
in all which places our Lord himself applies it, and with such variety, as
would afford us very useful remarks, but I leave them to be made by your own
Observation: then Acts 28.26. S. Paul improves it very fully, and having
rehearsed the words at large, draws a sad inference from them; verse 28. Be it
known therefore to you, that the Salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles,
and they will hear it. Than which, nothing could have been spoken, more cutting
to the Jews, who so despised and hated the Gentiles, and implies, that God's
Salvation, that is, his Word, Truth, the true Religion, should now be taken
from them, (for hitherto Salvation was of the Jews, John 4.22.) for their
obstinate unfruitfulness; and given to the Gentiles who would receive it, and
is but the interpretation, and confirmation, of our Saviors own words before
touched; The kingdom of heaven shall be taken from you, and given to a nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof. And we find it again, Romans 11.8. they were
blinded, according as it is written, God has given them a spirit of slumber;
eyes that they should not see, etc. Nothing can be more terrible, and
affrighting than this threat, to any man who will consider and weigh it, and
the enforcing it so often, may awaken even them that are asleep in the deepest
security, if this doom be not already executed against them, and it has
actually seized upon them.

And I might refer you to many more of the like dreadful import in both
Testaments; but I Will content my self with one in each. Ezekiel. 24.12, 13, 14. She
has wearied her self with lies, and her great scum went not forth out of her:
In thy filthiness is lewdness, because I have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged; thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee: I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to
pass, and I will do it, I will not go back, I will not spare, neither will I
repent; according to thy ways, and according unto thy doings, shall they judge
thee, says the Lord God. Words so exaggerated, so keen, so pungent, they will
pierce your hearts and move you, if they be not harder than the nether
Millstone; yea may penetrate the heart that is so hard, if the head, if the
mind of the man, in whom it is, will dwell a little upon the meditation, the
consideration of them.

The place in the New Testament, I would refer you to, is that pathetick word
of our Savior, recorded in the end of the Chapter, where my Text is: O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as an
hen gathers her brood under her wings, and ye would not. Behold your house is
left unto yon desolate. I have met with as improper Allusions, and Paraphrases,
tho I will not avow such an one, as it would be, should I gloss upon these
words thus; O sinners, sinners: who have killed your Ministers with their
study, pains, and travel to bring you to repentance, and yet you would not
rerepent: who have broken the hearts of them, whom I sent to you, by the
stonyness of your hearts, how often, how fain, would I have gathered you to my
self, have turned you from your sinful courses, and ye would not: therefore
I Will now trouble my self no more with you, I Will give you up to your own hearts
lusts, fill up the measure of your iniquities, that wrath may come upon you
without measure, even to the utmost.

Lastly, To add no more, God will sharpen the edge, and envenom the point of
his Sword of vengeance, by joining contempt to his wrath, and scornful derision
to the soreness of his fiery indignation, laughing at your destruction, and
mocking when your fear comes upon you. And a great mind can bear smart better
than reproach, and pain more easy than derision. Reproach will break those
hearts with vexing sorrow, which all the words of God could not break with
Godly Sorrow. He that sits in heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in
derision. Psalm. ii. 4. The Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day
is coming, Psalm. xxxvii. 13. And there is nothing more astonishingly sad than
Gods laughing, when with a just insulting he cries Ah ha, I will ease me of my
adversaries. I will avenge me of my enemies, Isa. i. 24.

These are some few of those many Righteous Comminations, of those affrighting
menaces, by which the Spade of the Law is steeled, to dig about your Roots, and
remove the cold and hungry Earth from them, which causes your barrenness in
Gods Vineyard. These are the Share and Coulter of that Plough, by which we must
breaks up the Fallow-ground of your Hearts: to kill the Thorns and Weeds, which
choke the good Seed of the Word. Any one of them might, and should suffice to
do the work, yet that they may profit you jointly, which have not done it
singly. Take them in one view, it may bean whole volly may strike down that
security, which would not fall before a single shot. I exhort you, I beseech
you, I adjure you therefore, by all these put together, and by what ever else
God's Holy Spirit may suggest to your own Consciences, of greater force and
cogency. Repent, and bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, speedily, readily,
faithfully, under those abundant helps, God affords you by the Gospel, and his
Patience, which you have almost tired out, yet continues, a little longer to
you. For, I assure you in his name.

1. God will do no more. 2. God can do no more. 3. Your kindest Intercessours
will ask no more for you. 4. God charges them they should not. 5. He has told
them, he will not grant it, tho they do. 6. They will turn their Prayers
against you, if you turn not. 7. Your own mouths will be stopped. 8. Or be opened
in vain, for God will not regard your too late requests. 9. God will take the
means away you yet enjoy. 10. Or he will take away his Spirit and Blessing from
them. 11. Or which is still worse, blast and curse them to you. 12. And avenge
your long sinful hardness with final and judicial hardening.
And Lastly, Will expose you to eternal ignominy, and himself deride your folly.

But I must not only dig about you, but Manure you, not only apply the
Corrosives of the Law, but the Cordials of the Gospel. Not only Thunder, could
I do it, like a Boanerges, but like a Barnabas, both Shine and Rain upon you,
those Consolations, which may refresh and cheer you: Not only rip up your
Breasts, and cut you to the Hearts with the Sword of Gods dreadful threatenings:
but pour in the Balm of Gilead, into those Wounds that Sword has made, to
close and heal them. Not only use the Spade and Mattock, but such Tools, call
them by what names you please, by which fresh amendment, warm and tender Mould,
and mellow Earth, of a cherishing prolifick Nature may be applied to your
Roots, to the very Roots of your Hearts and Consciences. I mean the tender
Mercies of our God; his great and preticus Promises: the warm and cherishing
blood of Jesus Christ.

Supposing therefore, and it is my Heart's desire and Prayer to God, that it
prove not a false supposition; that what has been said already, has removed
what might hinder, and has laid bare your Roots, and made them open to receive
the influence of what is yet to follow. I now in the name of that God whose name
is recorded, Exodus xxxiv. 6. As proclaimed by himself to be the Lord, the Lord
God, Merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, trangression and sin; tho he
will by no means acquit the guilty: the wilfully impenitent, the stubbornly
unfruitful. Who keeps mercy for thousands, of them that turn to him, love him
and keep his Commandments. Whose word it is: that When the wicked man turns
away from the wickedness that he has committed: and does that which is lawful
and right, he shall save his soul alive. Because he considers, and turns
away from all his transgressions, that he has committed, he shall surely live,
he shall not dye, Eze. xviii. 27, 28. In the name of that God whose mercy
endures for ever, as David tells us twenty six times in one Psalm cxxxvi. Who
not only shows Mercy, but delights in mercy. See the three last verses of
the Prophet Micah, who not only says, but swears, and that by himself,
because he can swear by no greater: and swears by that which is greatest in
himself, and dearest to himself, if any thing be greater, or dearer than other,
that is by his Life, and by his Holiness. As I live says the Lord God, I have
no pleasure in the death of the wicked But that the wicked turn from his way
and live, turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye O house of
Israel, Eze. xxxiii. 11. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my lips, Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie
unto David, Psalm. lxxxix. 35. to his people that accept his Covenant, therefore
the Covenant of Grace is called the Sure merc^es of David. I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure me^cies of David, Isa. lv. iii.
that is, with those that incline their Ears and come to him, that hear that
their souls may live.

This God I say desires not the death of the greatest sinner amongst you, nor
the cutting down of the barrennest tree in all his Vineyard. But calls you with
the most pressing importunity, and invites you with the most indubitable
assurance, to turn to him, and that if you do so, you shall not dye.

To you who have been so long Fruitless, in so rich a Soil, Planted on so very
fruitful hills, upon Mount Sion, his Holy Hill his Church, his Gospel Church.
Who have disappointed Gods expectation so often, so many years, as he has come
to look for Fruit, and have sent him away disappointed, grieved, provoked,
because he found none. To you, and such as you I say. Behold! Behold and
wonder, wonder to amazement, to astonishment, at his superabounding goodness,
and unwearied patience, that

First, He has spared you to another year, notwithstanding not only your own
forfeitures, and provocations by your past unfruitfulness, and the condemning
Sentence which they extorted from him against you. But also the subtle
Conspiracies, the bold design, the cruel and restless machinations of the
Enemies of his Gospel, and your lives. Who in their proud hopes, and wicked
purposes, had swallowed up all, and rooted up the whole Vineyard, and laid it
desolate with all that grows therein, and you amongst the rest long since.

Secondly, He yet continues to bestow more cost and pains upon you, he is yet
waiting to be gracious to you, he keeps up his Fence about his Vineyard, his
double Fence. The Wall and Hedge, a Christian Magistracy, a Gospel Ministry, he
yet causes you to enjoy the labors of the Dressers of his Vineyard. He yet
imploys laborers to Dress, to Prune, to Husband, to Cultivate those Plants, he
might in justice have stubbed up long since. O admirable patience! O adorable
Compassions, from which alone it is that we are not consumed! Let me apply to
the Lords patience, what in another respect the Apostle speaks concerning man's,
let patience have its perfect work. Let it lead us to Repentance, and while we
continue Planted by the River side, by that stream which makes glad the City of
God. Let us bring forth our Fruit in due season.

Thirdly, He declares himself willing to forget and forgive our past
unfruitfulness, if it bear fruit, well, yet, yet after so long bearing none, if
yet at last it thrive, under this last trial, and answer this new husbandry
bestowed upon it, it shall stand. He shall surely live, he shall not die. God
will blot out all your iniquities out of his remembrance. Wash you, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do
evil, learn to do well, come now let us reason together says the Lord: tho
your sins be as scarlet they shall be as white as snow: tho they be red like
crimson, they shall be as wool, Isa. i. 16, 17, 18.

Fourthly, To assure our Faith, how all this may be done, and that it shall be
done assuredly, he has provided a security for his own glory. That we may
attain all this, and yet he lose nothing, by conferring it upon us. Our Hearts
would sink, and fail within us, and our Hands, our Faith could not be strong,
if God were to lose, by what we hope to gain. if the receiving us to glory,
must be by the eclipsing of his own glory. For he will never diminish that, for
the advancement of which, all things were made by him, and for the sake of
which, he does all that he does, or ever will do, that therefore his Mercy may
be thus magnified safely, he has provided how his Justice may be satisfied
fully, and all his other Attributes retain their luster and their brightness.
He has therefore raised up for us a mighty salvation in the house of his
servant David, as he spoke by the mouth of all his Holy Prophets since the
world began. And to give us the clear knowledge of salvation by the remission
of our sins: through the tender mercies of our God the day spring from on high
has visited us. He has devised means, to bring home his banished, that they
should not for ever be expelled from himself: that we may be delivered from
going down to the pit. He has found a ransom. He has laid help upon one that
is mighty, able to save to the utmost, all those that come to God by him. He
spared not his own Son, but gave him to be a ransom for us, made him to be sin
(that is a sin offering) for us, that we might become the righteousness of God
in him, yea made him a curse for us, bear that curse of the Law, which we had
deserved, that we might be delivered from it. God has set forth his Son Jesus
Christ, to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. And he is gone into
Heaven to appear in the presence of God for us, so that if any man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, who is a propitiation
for our sin; and therefore If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from
all sin. And he has revealed him to us, and published these glad tidings to us
in his Gospel, which takes its name, its denomination hence, because in it, and
by it, is made known to us those glad tidings of great joy, that the Son of God
is become the Son of man, is now Emanuel, God with us, to be a Savior to us.

Fifthly, He makes us the most free, kind, pathetick invitations, to come to
him, to look unto him and be saved. He bids us to a Feast of fat things, which
he has slain and prepared, and of choice Wine, Wine upon the lees well
refined. You shall scarce any where amongst men, tho the dearest to one
another, and most delighted in each others conversation, meet with so
passionate, so restless an importunity, as is expressed to bring in Guests to the
Wedding Feast, Matthew. xxii. and Luke xiv. First a previous invitation before
hand, then a liberal and sumptuous preparation, which might allure any man to
partake of it. Then a sending forth servants to call them who were before
bidden, then a sending forth other servants to inform them, what an
extraordinary entertainment was provided, and again to let them know, the meat
was on the Table, and their Lord staid for them, and would not sit down till
they were come: and then other servants are posted away, some into the Streets
and Lanes of the City, to search the very Lanes and by Allies where none but
persons of the meanest rank dwell or converse; others into the Country, into
the Highways, where may be met Passengers of all degrees and qualities: and to
the Hedges where the Beggars lie basking, or the Robbers lie sculking, to hide
themselves, or look and wait to catch their prey; and not only tell them they
may come, if they please; and shall be very welcome: but invite them heartily,
press them earnestly, to come along which them immediately, and if they be
indifferent, whether they come or no, urge them and persuade them till you have
made them willing, and if they continue still unwilling, even constrain and
compel them to come in, and if when all this is done, some of them make such
excuses, that nothing will prevail with them, find out others, in their room,
and give not over, till the House be full, and the Table, be furnished as
plentifully with Guests, as it is nobly stored, and even laden with provisions.

Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money
come ye, buy and eat, come and buy wine and milk, without money, and without
price, Isa. lv. 1. Come unto me all ye that are weary and h^^vy laden, and I
will refresh you, and you shall find rest, Matthew. xi. 28. And the whole Bible
is, as it were concluded and shut up, with that large and free and earnest
invitation, which is so proclaimed, that the whole world is made to ring of it.
He that hears first, as being nearest to the first sound, having charge to tell
it unto others, and call to them that are remote, and out of hearing of the
first publishers of it. The Spirit and the bride, God from Heaven, the Church
on Earth say come. And let him that hears say come. And let him that is a
thirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely, Rev.
xxii. 17. And lest any should enlarge what God has streitned or streiten, what
God has enlarged, and take off from the encouragement, which this invitation
gives so universally, to all sinners to repent, and turn, and come in to God;
the words next following, may seem to have a peculiar aspect on what is
immediately before declared in this 17. verse, now set down (tho I would not
confine them to that only) verse 18. For I testify to every one that hears
the words of the prophecy of this book, if any man shall add unto these
things, God shall add unto him the plagues, that are written in this book, that
is, if any man shall add to the conditions of this invitation, which assures
acceptance to them who thirst, and so thirsting come to God, by Faith and
Repentance (if I may inoffensively subjoyn such a gloss) as if it were so free,
as even to exempt sinners from these terms, as necessary for their peace and
safety, God will plague that man: then verse. 19. And if any man shall take away
from the words of the Book of this Prophecy: God shall take away his part out
of the Book of life, and out of the Holy City: and from the things which are
written in this Book, that is, if any man shall deny any one to be capable of
the benefit offered in this, so large and free, and universal, an invitation:
who does thirst after these waters of life, and so thirsting, shall come to
them, repenting and believing, and willing and desirous to drink of them. He
himself shall have no part in in them.

Sixthly. He that is the Amen, the true and faithful one, the God that cannot
lie, gives you many great and precious promises, which are founded upon his
word, that is more firm than the mountains: than the foundations of the Earth:
than the Ordinances of Heaven: than the course of day and night in their
Seasons: That he will abundantly pardon, that he will heal your backslidings,
and love you freely; that he will blot out your iniquities, as a thick cloud;
that he will cast all your Tra^sgressions into the depth of the Sea, even that
Ocean of Mercy which has neither shore nor bottom: that whosoever comes to
him, he will in no wise cast him out. And hundreds more of the like endearing
and sweetest signification.

Seventhly. As if it were not enough on his part, to give us leave to be happy,
he has made it our duty to be so, and obliged us by the strictest commands, to
that, which will infallibly render us so. He commands all men every where to
repent. Act. 17.30. This is his commandment, that we believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23. and that believing we might have life by his
Name. John 20, 31. And who dare question his sincerity? as if he did not
heartily desire, what he so earnestly injoyns?

Eighthly. He steps down from the Throne of the Imperative Mood, to the humble
Footstool of the Optative. It Is a sign of weakness to fall to wishing, and an
argument of impotence, to cry O si, O si! to sigh out our Options. And yet the
Omnipotent God disdains not to appear to us thus, to show and express the
pathos of his blessed mind, the vehemence with which he desires our good and
welfare: Oh that there were such an heart in them, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that they
were wise, Deuteronomy, 32.29. Oh that my people had hearkened unto we, Psalm. 81.13.
Oh that thou had hearkened to my commandments. Isa. 48.18. Whose heart would
it not break, with shame and sorrow, to hear an holy God breathing out the
longing desires of his heart, in this wise, that we may he assured of his
hearty readiness in accepting us, when we perform, what he wishes with such
assumed passions, that we would perform?

Ninthly. He stoops yet lower, and does what is infinitely indecent, (I will
not say for him to do) but I must say, for us to occasion him to do, and more
to suffer him to continue to do; but most of all, to suffer him to do in vain,
that is to entreat us, pray us, woe us, beseech us to accept his mercy, to pity
our selves, to be reconciled to him, and to accept his pardon, which he offers
ready sealed, and to touch that Golden Scepter, which he reaches out from
Heaven to us. Abraham sent but once to take a wife for his Son Isaac, from
amongst his Kindred, and a short woing, by a servant served the turn, when they
saw the Bracelets, and the Jewels, and the Earrings, and heard the rest
reported, how soon do they yield and send away Rebeckah? Genesis 24. Yet God sends
one Ambassador, one Paranymph, and Spokes-man after another, to woe, to court
us to be Brides to the true Isaac, the Heir of all things; who is become our
Kinsman, and has all the right imaginable to claim us to himself, and offers
more Dower than we can ask, to joyncture us in the whole Land of Promise, to
settle upon us the inheritance which is incorruptible, and undefiled, which
fades not away, reserved in Heaven: to give us an eternal Kingdom: yea, the
eternal King himself to be our everlasting Portion: and is it possible to doubt
his willingness to conclude the Match after all this?

Tenthly. But to make all sure, beyond all possibility of any rational ground,
to remain, to stick and scruple at his heartiest reality, in designing our
happiness he adds to all the rest, his Oath, which puts an end to
Controversies. God being willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of
Promise, the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have
strong consolation. Heb. 6.17, 18. Two things, that is his Promise, and his
Oath upon his promise: or, two things, the two by which he swears, his life,
his holiness, as if he had said, as true as I am a living God, as true as I am
an holy God, I will pardon you, I will yet spare you, if yet at last you bring
forth good fruit; let me never be esteemed a living God, never accounted an
holy God more, if I do not; or two things, (I use this only allusively, I urge
it not as the proper meaning of the place) God swears by the two Sacraments;
for a Sacrament is an Oath. As truly as this water, which I now touch, and lay
my hand upon, will wash what is foul, and make it clean, soak what is hard, and
make it soft, quench what is kindled, and put out its burning, refresh what is
scorched, and make it fruitful, and slack his thirst who drinks it, and cheer
and revive his spirits; so shall the Blood and Spirit of my Son, which I will
pour out upon all who thirst for it, and are willing to receive it, do for them
proportionably in their Souls; cleanse, soften, quench, satisfy, and make them
fruitful; and as truly as this Bread will nourish them who eat it, and become
the staff of their lives, and as truly as this Wine will cheer the hearts of
them that drink it, so truly, so certainly, shall the Body and Blood of my Son,
which I here freely and heartily offer to you, nourish and cherish you unto
eternal life, if you will indeed by faith receive it, and feed upon it.

Eleventhly. He will make your Estate, as happy as if you had come sooner,
provided you come now in earnest, without more delay: They received every one a
penny, and there are last who shall be first.

Twelfthly. He Will not twit you, or upbraid you with your coming late. He gives
liberally, and uphraideth not. Nay, he will himself be thy Apologist, and
against them who reproach thee for laboring but one hour, he will plead thy
Cause, Friend, I do thee no wrong, is thy eye evil, because I am good? Is it
not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own: I will give to this last, as
unto thee. Matthew. 20.14.

This is a little of the much, that might be said upon this Argument, a little
of that mellow prolifick earth, to be laid to your Roots, God Almighty set it
home by the hand of his own Spirit, and in his name I do assure you, if either
this digging, or this dunging, these threatenings, or those promises, either
singly, or both jointly, prevail to make you yet fruitful: God will assuredly
spare you, and repeal his sentence given out against you. But then you must do
it quickly. Agree with thy Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with
him: Look upon this as the last year of Gods patience to this Church, and to
thy self, if thou mend not; nay, as the last day, To day if ye will hear his
voice; nay, this present now, now, now is the day of Salvation, now is the
accepted time.

Behold, 'twas a wonder he came so often, again and again, and it is a wonder, a
miracle of mercy, he has added another years patience in our circumstances,
therefore now, lay hold upon God, that he depart not, now catch hold of his
hand, which is lift up to fetch the fatal stroke, and catch, and hold it fast,
before the blow fall; by faith, by prayer, and by repentance. Happy we, it is
not too late already, the next may never be, or may be too late: When the
master of the House is once risen, when the door is locked, when the Market is
over, and the Shops are shut up; it is then too late, and in vain to endeavor
that which might have been dispatched with ease in convenient season. Who knows
but some of you would next year, nay, next week, nay, it may be too morrow give
ten thousand worlds, if you had them, to redeem the opportunities you now
enjoy, to have the offers made you again, I am now making you in the Name of a
most Gracious God, and be in a capacity to receive them. Oh therefore for God,
for Christ's sake, for the Churches sake, for Posterity sake, and for your own
souls sake, improve this year, this month, this very day, and moment: to
resolve to be presently fruitful, and to fulfill those Resolutions.

But know, that as your acceptance of this last invitation, shall blot out the
remembrance of all your former Refusals. So your adding another refusal to your
too many former ones, will aggravate them, and multiply your guilt, and God's
wrath, as a third and fourth figure, added to two before them, multiplies
Unites and Tens into Hundreds and Thousands. And your despising the Riches of
his Goodness, Long-suffering and Forbearance, and refusing to be led to
repentance by them will prove a treasuring up unto your selves whole stores of
wrath, against the day of wrath, from which God grant your speedy and sincere
Repentance, and bringing forth fruits meet for it, in amendment of life, (which
alone can do it) may effectually deliver you. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for, and sold by, Nathanael Ranew at the Kings Arms in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
In Folio.
THE Principles of Christian Religion; with a large Body of Divinity,
Methodically and Familiarly handled by way of Question and Answer, for the use
of Families: together with Immanuel, or the Mystery of the Incarnation of the
Son of God. By the most Reverend James Usher, late Archbishop of Armagh: to
which is now added in this seventh Edition twenty Sermons Preached at Oxford
before His Majesty, and elsewhere, perused and published by his Lordship, with
the Life of the Author, containing many remarkable passages, and an
Alphabetical Table never before extant.

In Quarto.
Reflections on Dr. Stilling fleet's Book, of the Unreasonableness of
Separation. By a Conformist Minister in the Country; in order to Peace.

Some Additional Remarks on the Late Book of the Reverend Dean of S. Paul's,
entitled, The Unreasonableness of Separation. By a Conformable Clergyman.

Argumentum ad Hominem; or an Argument against Protestants, who hold that
Papists, qua tales; or, living, and dying Papists may be saved. By Thomas
Whorwood.

Divine Providence, the Support of good men under all Events. A Sermon Preached
before the Lord Mayor, etc. at Guild Hall Chapel. By William Shelton, Rector
of S. James Colchester.

Durus Sermo, or Aenigma moriendi: The Mystery of Dying Daily: in a Sermon
Preached in Plymouth, at the Funeral of Mistress Joan Warren. By William Pyke,
M. A. and Rector of Stokeclimsland in the County of Cornwall.

A Plea for Moderation; or a Stricture upon the Ecclesiastics of our Times.

The Evidence of things not seen, or diverse Scriptural, and Philosophical
Discourses; concerning the state of good and holy men after death. By that
eminently Learned Divine, Moses Amyraldus; Translated out of the French Tongue,
by a Minister of the Church of England.

Octavo.
Natural Theology, or the Knowledge of God from the Works of Creation;
accommodated, and improved to the Service of Christianity. By Matthew Barker.


