A DISCOURSE OF The Resurrection: SHOWING The Import and Certainty of it. BY
WILLIAM WILSON, M. A. Rector of Morley in Derbyshire.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for William Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet, MDCXCIV.

IMPRIMATUR.

Geo. Royse, R. R. in Christo Patriac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.
April 26. 1694.
Advertisement.
LAtely Printed A Discourse of Religion: showing its Truth and Reality; or, The
Suitableness of Religion to Humane Nature: By the same Author.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, RICHARD, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.
My Lord,
IT is not above a day or two since I thought of recommending this Discourse
unto the World under the Patronage of some Great Name; not that I believed it
sufficient of it self to walk abroad without such a support, but because I was
unwilling to lay the Burden of its faults upon such a one as had not Fame and
Reputation enough to bear the weight of them; and, on the other hand, I did
believe it too great a Crime to charge any person with them, that had. And had
not Your Lordship obliged me so much, as of late you have done, I should not
have thought of doing it now, much less of doing it under Yours. Men had need
be well assured of the Goodness of those Discourses, which they publish under
the Name of some known Friend; because Dedications detract from those, whom
they design to Honor, if what is offered to the World under their Protection
be mean and trifling. But this is not the worst of my case; For though I know
Your Lordship by the report of Your Exemplary Piety and Virtue, yet I am so
altogether unknown to You, that I am ashamed to think, that That, which gives a
Luster to Your Goodness, should be an Aggravation of my Crime in defaming Your
Judgment so publicly; and that too, while I tell the World I am bound in
Gratitude to confult Your Honor.

The Subject, My Lord, I here present You with, is great and worthy the most
serious Consideration of every Christian: For it sets before us the
Glad-tidings of the Gospel, and the indispensible Necessity of a Holy Life. Two
things of that vast moment, that were they well considered, it would not be a
very easy thing for Men to do themselves so much mischief, as to forfeit their
Hopes of an Immortal Life merely for the sake of a Bodily Lust, when they judge
it a hardship upon us to be condemned to a Mortal condition for Adam's fault.
And though I know my own Defects too well, to believe I can write any thing
upon a Subject of so lofty a Nature suitable to the Dignity of it; yet if it
will but contribute any thing toward the awakening Men to a sense of that
Obligation to Holiness, that our Religion, by acquainting us with the ground of
that Hope, we are begotten to, lets us know we are under, I shall presume upon
Your Lordship's known Goodness for a Pardon for the weakness of my Performance:
And the World I hope will believe, that at least I meant well, when I ventured
this way to own my self

Your Lordship's Most Faithful and Obliged Servant, Will. Wilson.

THE Introduction.
AS in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive, says the Apostle,
1. Cor. 15.22. In which words he sets before us the Reason of that Mortality,
we are subject to, and the great advantage of the Christian Religion upon the
account of the Hopes of a glorious Immortality after Death, that we are
restored to.

If we take a view of our own Nature, nothing can be more unaccountable than
that a Creature. who carries an Immortal Principle in him, should die. And
therefore the Apostle acquaints us, that Death is not a Natural Calamity, but
the Effect and Consequence of that Condemnation, that in Adam we fell under. In
Adam all die; i.e. It is upon the account of Adam's Sin that Humane Nature is
corruptible, and that Death has any Power over us: Whereas had he maintained
his Innocence, Immortality, according to the Divine Constitution, had been the
reward of his Perseverance.

But the Calamity, which Justice doomed us to, Mercy has provided a Remedy for.
And the Design of the Gospel is to acquaint us with the wonderful Method,
whereby Life and Immortality are brought to light. That for the conquering
Death, and delivering us from the Power of it, God appointed his only begotten
Son to bear our Sins, and to became a Curse for us. Such a Person he chose to
die for us, as could rise again from under the Wrath, that would have lain for
ever upon us; and who, by rising from the Dead, has given the World an Instance
of the Mighty Power of that Life and Spirit, which he communicates to his
sincere Disciples; and in respect of which he is styled the Resurrection and
the Life. So that though in Adam all die, yet in Christ shall all be made
alive; i.e. We shall not suffer an Eternal Death; our Souls shall not for ever
be separated from our Bodies upon the account of that fault, that at first
subjected us to Death: But though we die, because Adam sinned, yet we shall
rise to another Life, because Christ, who is our Life, had appeared to take
away Sin.

This is that comfortable and joyous Message, that our Religion does publish to
the World. And it is the only Tidings, that could revive our Spirits, since
Nature within us droops and languishes upon the account of the Mortality, we
are doomed to. And therefore for the delivering poor Mortals from those fears,
that all our lifetime keep us in Bondage, as St. Paul speaks, Heb. 2. the main
subject of the Apostle's preaching was Jesus and the Resurrection.

That indeed is an Article so little accountable to our Reason, that some Men
are upon that very account apt to look upon Faith as a very unreasonable Duty;
because it consists in the taking such things for granted, which we have no
Natural knowledge of. But now that, which the Enemies of Believing do find
fault with Faith for, is the very thing, which God accepts, and is pleased with
it for. Thus it was in the case of Abraham, who upon the account of the
Excellency of his Faith is styled the Father of the Faithful. For when God
promised him a Son, that, which he took so well from him, was his believing
this Promise against Hope, If he had consulted his own Reason, what he should
have believed in the case, it would have been as much against Believing, that
he should have a Child, when Old Age had wasted his strength, and Sarah's Womb
was dead, as it can be pretended to be against a Resurrection. But when he did
not ask his Reason, what was possible, or what was fit to be believed, but did
depend upon the Divine Promise, notwithstanding all the Difficulties he might
have urged, God was so well pleased with him, that he accepted him as an
approved Servant.

And thus God by promising we shall come out of our Graves, and live again
after Death, makes a Trial of us, whether we can believe, as Abraham did,
against Hope. This is it, that makes our Believing necessary; and it is for
this Reason, that the Gospel does lay so much stress upon our believing in the
Son, who is the Person, that has received Power to give us our Lives again. For
hereby God proves us, whether we dare trust the concerns of our Life in the
hands of his Son; and are persuaded, that he, who undertook to restore Life and
Immortality to us, can raise us up at the last day.

In this Promise does mainly consist the Grace of the Gospel; for it at once
gives us a view of all that Mercy, we have by Jesus Christ. For it is an
evident proof, that he, who will raise us up again, has procured us a Pardon of
those Offenses, which have brought Death into the World; and that the God, who
has sentenced us to Death, is fully satisfied with the Atonement, that is made.
For it is not possible, we should rise, so long as that Wrath, that kills us,
does lie upon us, or the Offenses for which we die, are unremitted.

In Discoursing then of this Doctrine, which is so considerable an Article of
our Faith, and makes Christianity so acceptable to Mortal Creatures, I shall,
1. Consider what we are to understand by it. 2. What Assurance we have, that we
shall rise again.


A DISCOURSE OF THE Resurrection, etc.
PART I. The Import of the Resurrection considered.
THE Doctrine of the Resurrection is so plainly delivered in the Sacred
Writings of the New Testament, that there are no sort of Christians but in some
sense or other do assert a Resurrection; or however, would not be believed to
deny a Doctrine, that is so plainly delivered. But yet there have been, and
still are such, as do not believe such a Resurrection, as the Gospel speaks of:
St. Paul tells us of Hymenoeus and Philetus, that they erred concerning this
Truth, saying, That the Resurrection was already past, 2 Timothy 2.18. And there
are still such, as with them believe no other Resurrection, but that which
consists in the Renovation of the Soul; which St. Paul speaks of, Romans 6.4, 5.
when he styles our walking in newness of life, a being planted together in the
likeness of his Resurrection. But now they, who understand nothing more by the
Resurrection but our Baptismal Renovation, or such a Change of our Conversation
from a sinful to a Holy way of living, which the Apostle makes our imitating
Christ's Resurrection to consist in, do not believe the Resurrection of the
Body, which is the Resurrection, that we are taught to expect.

And because the Scriptures speak of the Resurrection of the Body; others by
the Resurrection of the Body understand no more but our living again in a Body
after Death, not the same Body that dies, but a heavenly Body. But neither does
this Notion of a Resurrection answer to the account, that the Scriptures give
us of it. And therefore, since there are such mistaken Notions of a
Resurrection among Men, it is necessary we should consider the true Nature and
Import os it. And, 1. It implies that we shall return from a state of Death,
and live again; or that the Soul, which is separated from the Body by Death,
shall return from its state of Separation to live in a Body again. 2. That we
shall live in these very Bodies that are mortal, and die. 3. That we shall
begin then to enter upon an Immortal life.


CHAP. I.
1. IT implies, That we shall return from a state of Death and live again: Or,
that the Soul, which is separated from the Body by Death, shall return from its
state of Separation to live in a Body again. When we die, these Earthly
Tabernacles fall down and go to the Dust; and our Souls, which dwelt in them,
take their flight and go to the place of unbodied Spirits. This separation of
Soul and Body is an effect of the Divine displeasure upon us: It is to deprive
us of that Particle of his Breath or Spirit, by which, when he made Man, he
became a living Soul, Genesis 2.7. And accordingly, when he resolved upon the
Destruction of the Old World, he threatened them, That his Spirit should not
always abide in those Men, (...), Genesis 6.3. i.e. Should not always lodge or
inhabit in the Bodies of those Men, as in a sheath, as it is in the Original:
My Spirit; i.e. The Breath or Soul that I breathed into Man when I made him:
But I will surely punish them with Death, by taking from them the Spirit, which
they abuse by making it a Servant to the Flesh. And now if this be a true
account of the Nature of Death, it is plain, that in the Notion of it, it does
not imply either a Destruction, or that sleep of the Soul, which some Men dream
of For all that this denunciation teaches us, is, That God, when we die, does
withdraw the Soul out of the Body: And this he may do, though he assign it
another place to live in, after he has taken it out of the Body. Now this we
may much rather conclude from this Threat, than that it is put into a state of
Insensibility by Death. For it being a Threat to deprive Man of the Blessing he
had given him, when he made him; the most Natural sense must be this, I will
punish these Men by taking away their Souls from them, and making them live a
Vagabond life out of the Body, which I designed at first to be their proper
habitation. (...), It shall not abide or dwell in the Body, but it shall still
abide or live, though out of the Body. And this notion of Death the Scripture
does in other places take notice of: As in that mournful Saying of Jacob, Genesis
37.35. (...) I shall go to Hades to my Son mourning; i.e. To the place where
his Soul was gone; for he believed, that his Body was devoured by wild Beasts;
And the hopes of dying the same Death could not be the thing that he comforted
himself withal. So likewise that Expression of the Psalmist is to be
understood, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy One to
see corruption, Psalm. 16.10. i.e. Thou will not leave my Soul in Hades, the
place where separate Souls live out of their Bodies, nor my Body in the Grave.
And accordingly our blessed Lord told the converted Thief, That that day he
should be with him in Paradise; which cannot be so understood, as if he should
that day go with him into Heaven; because our Lord did not ascend to his Father
till forty days after his Resurrection. And therefore the Creed does not only
teach us, that he died, and what manner of Death he died, but that he was
buried; i.e. His Body was disposed of, as the Dead Bodies of all other Men are,
and that he went down into Hell; i.e. During the time, that his Body was in the
Grave, his Soul was in the place, where separate Souls do live after Death.

But although the Soul, when it ceases to live in the Body, does still live;
yet when it leaves the Body, we, who consist of a Soul and a Body, do die: And
so long as the Soul does live without its Body, so long we are under the power
of Death; And even that Soul, that still lives, is in the state of the Dead. So
that the Resurrection, which is designed to be a Remedy of that Calamity, Death
is to us, must be the freeing the Soul from that Vagabond state, that the
Displeasure of God makes it to suffer out of its Body. It is the bringing the
Soul, that lives, when we are dead, out of that state, where it lives in a
preter-natural condition without its Body, to live as the Soul of a Man was by
God appointed to do, when he breathed it into a Body of Flesh. I call the
separate state of our Souls a vagabond and preter-natural Condition; because
when they go out of the Body, they leave their own proper Habitation, and
wander into unknown Regions. And therefore St. Paul styles our being in the
Body a being at home; and when we die, in his style, we travel out of the Body,
or go abroad, 2 Cor. 5. And according to the import of that Curse, by reason of
which we die, and go out of the Body, we should for ever, like Vagabonds, that
leave their native Soil, and roam about the World, have continued abroad; but
that God in great Goodness to us has provided us a merciful Savior, whose
business it is to take care of our Souls, when they leave their own
Habitations, and in his due time to bring them back again to their homes. And
therefore St. Paul, though he speaks of this separate state as a thing no way
desirable in it self, That no Man, how little reason soever he has to be in
love with this World, does groan, for that he would be uncloathed, v. 4. Yet
considering the safe hands our Souls are committed to, when they are abroad,
does upon that reason speak of this state as a thing much more Eligible than to
stay always here in the Body, though it is our home: We are always confident,
knowing that whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord:
We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to
be present with the Lord, v. 6, 8. i.e. Though we do leave our Habitations, we
are well pleased with our condition, because we shall be under the immediate
care of him, who at the last will brng us out of this exiled State, and restore
us to our own Habitations again. Hence the Resurrection is spoken of as our
triumph over Hades, that receptacle or prison of separate Souls. (...); O
Hades, where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15.55. The Sea gave up the Dead which were
in it: and Death, and Hell, or Hades, delivered up the Dead that were in them:
And Death and Hell, or Hades, were cast into the lake of fire, Rev. 20.13, 14.
i.e. Death will deliver up our Bodies which lie imprisoned in the Grave; and
Hades will deliver up our Souls that are there imprisoned, and then an
Everlasting Being shall succeed.

The Resurrection then does not only respect our Bodies, which see Corruption,
but that Immortal part of us, which by Death is forced out of the Body, and
driven like an Exile to live from home in a foreign Country, contrary to the
Laws of its Nature. For the Resurrection restores us that, which Death deprives
us of, and brings back our Exiled Souls to their old native Dwellings. Although
the Resurrection will bring our Dead Bodies out of their Graves, yet this is
not all that we are to understand by the Resurrection; because the raising a
Dead Body to life, will not be the raising the Man that died, unless the same
Soul and Spirit, that was separated from it by Death, be reunited with it
again. To breathe a New Soul into a Body, that is raised out of the Dust, is
rather the creating a New Man, than the raising an Old one: For the same Man,
that died, cannot be said to be raised to life again, unless the Soul be
brought out of its Prison, as well as the Body out of its Grave: For so long as
the Soul is kept a Prisoner in the place, where separate Soul live, we are as
much in the state of the Dead, as while the Body does lie in the Grave. This
re-embodying the Soul, that by Death is compelled to quit the Habitation it is
at first born with, and to live abroad in an unknown Region, is the thing, in
which our Conquest over Death does consist; and consequently is the
Resurrection, that the Gospel speaks of.

It Is true, the Resurrection has most usually a respect to the Body, and does
denote its leaving its Prison, whither it is conveyed. But besides this, the
Holy Scriptures do speak of the Resurrection with a respect to the Soul, and
that alteration of its state, when it shall of a separate Spirit become
embodied a second time; i.e. When it shall be brought out of its confinement,
and returned to its own Habitation.

This is the meaning of that place, where the Sadducees are said to have denied
the Resurrection; i.e. They were, as is plain from our Savior's Answer,
persuaded, that Death does as well reduce the Soul to nothing, as the Body to
Dust: And that since after Death there is no part of us remains alive, there is
nothing lest to ground our hopes of a Resurrection upon; because there is
nothing of us left, in respect of which the Resurrection will be a Blessing;
and consequently, that there is no state of life to be expected after this,
because Death does not only dissolve, but destroy the very Principles of our
Constitution. Our blessed Lord therefore, to prove to them, that there is a
Resurrection, makes use of an Argument, that proves, that the Soul is alive
after Death; and consequently, that there is another state, in which, as Men,
we must live an Immortal life: God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living, says our Savior; i.e. The Souls of the great Patriarchs are alive
somewhere, else God could not properly style himself The God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and therefore they must rise again.

Wherein the strength of our Savior's argument lies, I shall not now enquire:
For it is enough to my present purpose, that he proves, there will be a
Resurrection, because the Soul is still alive. For this implies, that the
Resurrection will not only bring the Body out of its Grave, but the Soul out of
its Prison, and return it to its ancient Habitation; Otherwise the Soul's being
alive, after we are dead, would no more prove a Resurrection, than if it was
extinguished. For how is it possible to conclude, there will be a Resurrection,
because the Soul lives in its separate state, if the Resurrection means no more
than that the Body shall come out of its Grave, and that a new Soul shall be
breathed into it? Our Blessed Lord undoubtedly meant, when he urged this to
prove a Resurrection, That the Soul, which after Death subsists without its
Body, shall come out of its state of Death, as well as the Body, because it is
still alive; And by being united to the Body again, have a new way of
subsisting after Death; which second state of Men is that, which (as the
Learned Hammond observes) is implied in the Resurrection.

Obj. If it be enquired how we can be said to rise again, if the Soul, as well
as the Body, be not laid to sleep?

Ans. I Answer, 1. That the Resurrection does not only import a restoring life
to that, which is dead, but the giving us another kind of subsistence than
that, which we have after Death has separated the Soul from the Body. So that
though the Soul does live after Death, yet it does not live as it will do after
the Resurrection: It lives in a separate condition from the Body, when Death
has broken the Union; but the Resurrection will restore it to its ancient way
of subsisting in a Body. And therefore,

2. The Resurrection does respect us as Men, and is for the restoring us that
Humane Life, which we are deprived of by Death: For though the Soul does live,
yet it is not the Soul alone, that is the whole Man. And as we are said to die,
when the Soul leaves the Body, though the Soul still lives in its separate
state; so we are said to rise again, when the Soul that is Immortal, and does
not cease to live, when it is gone out of the Body, is reunited to the Body
again.

And now if the Resurrection does imply our returning from a state of Death,
and recovering a new life, or the bringing the Soul out of its place of
confinement to its own proper Habitation. Before I proceed, let us consider
what Reflections this furnishes us with. And,

1. We may hence inform our selves of the true nature and meaning of Death. And
this is very necessary to be done, that we may not despise and give way to mean
and contemptible thoughts of it, as if Dying carried nothing in it that was
frightfull and amazing. It is certain, that those of the Heathens, whose Names
are transmitted down to us for the gallantry of their Minds, have generally
gained this reputation from the slight opinion they had of dying. For it was
reputed among them as a generous heroic Act, to lay violent hands upon
themselves, and by a draught of Poison, or a sturdy Abstinence, to put an end
to their own Lives, when their Designs and Interests did not prosper according
to their Minds, or they were in danger of falling by a public Executioner. Now
that which brought this way of Dying into so much credit with them, was their
not knowing what Death is: They either were persuaded, that nothing of us
remains after Death; or if they had some dark Notices, that the Soul does
survive, they spoke very doubtfully of it, and were altogether ignorant how it
lives, when it is gone out of the Body; but did believe, they did themselves a
mighty service, when they thus escaped from a Temporal misfortune. And thus it
often happens still, that Men, when their Affairs succeed ill, revenge their
ill fortune upon themselves, and die rather than feel the smart of their
Calamities. This is chosen as a Refuge from threatening Ills, and fled to as a
Remedy of present Pressures. But yet both the one and other of these are to be
pitied: The former, because they were governed by a belief, that the Soul,
while it is in the Body, is a Prisoner, and that it vanishes into nothing when
it is let out: And the other, because a clouded Mind betrays them to desperate
Thoughts.

But besides these, there are others, that think lightly of Death; for no other
reason, but because they think it a glorious thing to die like a Roman, without
discovering any signs of fear: Such, I mean, who account it a bravery of Mind
to outface Death, who are governed by no other Principle than a supposed
baseness in Fear; and therefore are resolved not to tremble, although they know
not, but that they for ever lose all that they account dear to them. This is a
Temper that is of great account in the World: But what greater baseness is it
to fear losing that, which we love and cherish, than to love and desire that
which we account good for us? For my part, I do not understand what great
Virtue there is in living fearless of Death, or in being able to meet it
without a dejected look, or undauntedly to expose a Man's self to the danger of
it, whatever horrid shape it appears in; if he, who thus despises it, has
nothing out of this World, that he can love or take pleasure in; especially
when we consider, that it is as natural to fear that, which is hurtful and
destructive to us, as to love that, which is good and beneficial. There is, I
know, a contempt of Death, which is a noble Virtue; but it is only that which
Religion does work the Mind to. For he, who knows he shall live again, has a
great deal of reason to be fearless of dying. But what account can that Man
give of his slight opinion of Death, who as little thinks of another Life, as
he seems regardless of Death; and who, while he resolves not to fear Dying,
thinks not, and perhaps does not believe, he shall rise again. These Men
undoubtedly know not, what it is to die; otherwise they, who have all the
reason in the World to fear it, would never make it a Virtue not to be daunted
or unconcerned at it. For,

1. Death has not only a respect to our Bodies: It is not only the closing our
Eyes, and stopping our Ears, and tying our Hands and Feet, and the rendering the
several Members of our Bodies incapable of performing the Functions of Life any
more. It is not the depriving this Earthly Machine which now we see to move,
and which we feed and cloth with art and care, of all sense and motion. If
Death was nothing else but this; I mean, if all the hurt, it did us, respected
the Body only; such as the letting out our Spirits, and congealing our Blood,
and the turning the Body into a Carcass, and sending it to a Grave; perhaps it
might be as easy a thing for a Man to be fearless, as a Beast is
inapprehensive of it. For why should a Man be more averse to dying than a
Brute, if he has nothing more to lose? But when we cannot cure our selves of
that Aversion we have to Death but by Religious Considerations, which is the
way that good Men take; or by hardening our Minds to a stupid contempt of it,
which is the method that bad Men grow fearless of it by; this shows, that Death
is somewhat more than what our Bodies suffer by it. Yet,

2. It is not such a state of Insensibility, as supposes the Soul as well as
the Body to be laid in a profound sleep; and that it is out of such a state of
Silence that the Resurrection will awaken us, For there is nothing more plainly
taught us in all the Holy Scriptures, than that the Soul does survive the Body,
and is in a state either of Happiness or Misery, from the very time of its
departure out of the Body. For how else could God in any sense be styled the
God of the living, and not of the dead, if there be no part of us that lives
after Death? For if the Soul as well as the Body falls asleep, when Death puts
an end to this lie, and so continues to sleep as well as the Body till the
Resurrection gives new life unto it, the Soul is as much Dead as the Body till
the Resurrection does quicken it again. And if so, God must be the God of the
dead, and not of the living, till at the Resurrection he gives us new life. And
besides, the Parable of Dives and Lazarus does prove, that the Souls both of
good and bad Men do live in another state after Death. For how else could it be
said, that the one was carried into Abraham's Bosom, and the other tormented in
Hell, if there were not two different States, in which the good and bad do live
after this life? For if the Souls of all Men do sleep from the day of Death,
till that of the Resurrection, then the Souls of Dives and Lazarus must have
been in one and the same condition, which the Parable does not suppose they
were. But,

3. It is the haling the Soul out of its own proper Dwelling to a Prison, or
the banishing it from its own home to a strange unknown Region. It is not the
setting it at liberty by breaking down the Walls of its Prison, which has been
of old, and still is a very prevailing Notion: Sumus in his inclusi compagibus
corporis. Est enim Animus coelestis ex altissimo domicilio depressus, and quasi
demersus in terram, locum divinae Naturae, aeternitatique contrarium, says
Tully. We are shut up within these fleshly Walls: For the Soul was thrown down
from its sublime Habitation, and forced into an Earthly dwelling, a place
contrary to the Divinity and Eternity of its Nature; which was the Opinion of
Plato and his Followers, who supposing a Pre-existence of the Soul, taught it
was thrust out of its Celestial Habitation into an Earthly Body for some fault;
and therefore that Death did but restore it to its ancient State by setting it
at liberty from the Body. So Hierocles discourses, That it was by leaving the
Fields of Virtue and Truth, deplumed and thrust into an Earthly Body, (...),
being banished Heaven, and made a Vagabond upon Earth. And therefore it is no
wonder that they made light of Death, which, they supposed, did set them at
liberty, and restored them to their first and most ancient way of living; Ex
vita discedo tanquam ex hospitio, non tanquam ex domo; I go out of this life as
from an Inn, not from home. Now according to this Notion of Life and Death, we
have infinitely more reason to be weary of Life than afraid of Death, and to
mourn the Birth rather than the Death of our friends.

But the case is quite otherwise, if we take a view of Death without any
respect had to those Considerations, that Religion furnishes us with. For there
is nothing more doleful, no greater Calamity can befall a Man; and therefore
there is nothing, that he has more reason to stand in awe of and tremble at. It
is so far from breaking open the doors of a Prison, and restoring our Souls to
their pristine liberty; that it pulls down its House, and drives it like an
Exile from its native Soil to live in an unknown place after an unusual manner.
The Body is not its Prison, but its House and Dewlling Place; and when Death
takes it hence, it is not as from an Inn, where it never intended to stay long;
but from the Habitation, where it would fain live its Immortal life, and where
according to the appointment of our Creator it was designed to inhabit for ever.

Now that Death does mean thus much, is plain from the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, which is designed to bring our Souls out of the Prison whither
they are carried to live in a Body again; which Doctrine God has made us
acquainted with as a wonderful Instance of his Mercy to us, and that great
Blessing, which is to bear up our Minds against the Apprehensions of, and sad
Aversions we have to Death. But now what Blessing would this be to us, and what
Comfort would it afford us, if the restoring our Souls to their Bodies was to
return them to a Prison, and for ever to deprive them of their true and native
Liberty? This would be so far from being matter of joy and comfort to us, that
we should rise again, that we had reason to look upon it as a Menace, and
bewail it as a Calamity as grievous as the Platonists suppose the first descent
of the Soul into its Body to have been. For what comfort can it be to us to
know, that our Souls, after they are restored to their liberty, (if their
separate condition be their true and most genuine way of living) they shall be
caged up again at last so as never to recover their liberty more. But if it be
an expression of abundant Mercy to us; a matter, for which we are bound to
bless the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he has begotten us
again to a lively hope of rising again by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; we
have no reason to think, that Death does us a kindness by setting our Souls at
liberty from the Body as from a Prison. It is in one respect a kindness, as we
shall rise again and live in pure and immortal Bodies; but considered in it
self, if the Resurrection will be a Blessing to us, it is a Calamity we ought
to dread; for it imports an Execution of that frightfull Sentence, by which we
stand condemned to lose our Souls; that Sentence, that suffers not the Breath,
that God has breathed into us, to abide with us. So that we have as much reason
to be afraid of Death, as a Criminal has to dread a Jail, or an Exiled person
to lament his Misfortune, when he is condemned to quit the Society of his
friends and acquaintance to go into a strange Country, perhaps to live among a
Barbarous people, the Customs and Manners of whom he is unacquainted with.

2. We may hence observe, what Death is now to us, since we have the hopes of a
Resurrection. For by this, all that is terrible in it, is taken away, and we
may look upon it without terror and amazement. For though it snatches our
Souls from us, and sends them as Exiles to a strange place, yet they go out of
our Bodies with a comfortable hope of returning back again. That which makes
the state of an Exile so extremely melancholy and afflicting is, That he is not
only deprived of the comfortable Enjoyments of his own Country among his
dearest Friends and Relations, but doomed to spend all his days in a wandering
condition among strangers without either Home or Kindred. But now our Souls,
when they are commanded out of our Bodies, do not leave them with any such sad
and sorrowful Reflections, but go to their appointed place with joyous Hopes
of being restored again after a time. And by this Consideration it was, that
the Apostle cheered the Minds of the Thessalonians, exhorting them not to
sorrow for those that were asleep, as others which have no hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
i.e. Not like the poor ignorant Heathens, who had no notice of a Resurrection.
For in this he makes the joyous condition of our Christian state to consist,
that we can rejoice in hope; i.e. In that hope of having our Souls, which the
displeasure of God does not suffer to dwell long in our Bodies here, returned
us again, which we have by the Gospel: Whereas the pitious state of the
Heathens lay in this, That they were without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. i.e. Without
this hope; but were either altogether ignorant, or in great doubts what became
of their Souls when they lest their Bodies.

But the most comfortable Consideration of all is this, That our Souls, though
they are thus haled out of our Bodies, and sent into an unknown World, yet they
are under the care of a gracious Savior. This is it, that alters the condition
of separate Spirits, from what it would have been, had not Death been
conquered; that he who has triumphed over Death and Hell, or Hades, has the
inspection and custody of all those pious Souls that enter there; that he is
their Guardian, and will not suffer them to be lost for ever.

Our Blessed Lord makes the goodness of Lazarus's Condition, when he died, to
consist in this, That he was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luke
16.22. In which Expression he undoubtedly intimates to us the great security,
that hereby was given him, that even in that condition God was still his God,
which was the Blessing that was granted to Abraham, and by which our Blessed
Lord tells us he is assured of a Resurrection. His being in Abraham's Bosom
does denote a participation of Abraham's Privileges. For as by the Excellency
of his Faith, that great Partriarch got the glorious Character of being the
Father of the Faithful, so he is an Instance to us of all the good that God
designs those that believe as he did: And not only so, but he was, as it were,
considered by the Jews as the great Patron of all, that died in his Faith: That
upon the account of the Covenant, that was deposited with him, and the Promise
that was granted to his Faith, God would certainly be a God to all that go
whither he is gone. The Jews considered Abraham, as we do Christ, to be the
Cornerstone in whom all the Building of their Church, being fitly framed, grew
to an Holy Temple, and the Head over all things to 'em; i.e. That principal
Person, by means of the acceptableness of whose Faith all the Privileges they
enjoyed, and the Blessings they hoped for, descended to them: And that
therefore they could nowhere be so safe, and rest with so much hope as with
him. For it was a common Opinion among them, that the Souls of good Men, when
they left their Bodies, went to the place where Abraham was, and that there
they lived with him as Children in the House of their Father. To this sense may
that promise be applied, Genesis 12.3. In thee shall all families of the Earth be
blessed. Which does not only signify, that it should be a Proverbial speech
among all people, that God would deal with them in this life, as he did with
Abraham; but that in him, or by being under the Guardianship of his Faith all
pious Souls should be happy after Death. So that our Lord, when he tells us,
that Lazarus was carried to Abraham's Bosom, spoke in the Language and the
common Phrase of the Jews who believed that the Souls of good Men, when they
left their Bodies, went to the place, where Abraham as the Father of a Family
has the chief place. For why is Lazarus said to be carried into Abraham's
Bosom, rather than the Bosom of Adam, Seth or Enoch, or of Isaac or Jacob,
whose Posterity they were, but because the Covenant upon which they depended,
was at first lodged with Abraham; and that by being with him, he was secured of
the utmost Blessing, that was intended in it: These all, says the Author to
the Hebrews; i.e. The good Men of old that died, having obtained a good report
through faith, received not the promise: God having provided some better thing
for us, that they without us should not be made perfect, Heb. 11.39, 40. i.e.
They did not in their times receive the promise of the Resurrection to an
Eternal life, or it was not in the times of the Old Testament, that God had
determined to conferr this Blessing upon them: But it was reserved for the
times of the Gospel, when Christ having by the Sacrifice of himself satisfied
for our offenses, should merit and receive the power of restoring us to an
Immortal life. So that they did not receive the full of their Hope; but though
they were secured of it, by being with Abraham, yet they were to wait the full
completion of it till the times of the Restitution of all things. This then of
old was the thing, that sweetened Death to the Minds of those brave Men, that
died in the Faith of Abraham; that they should go to that great Patriarch as
Children to their Father's house, who was assured of a Resurrection by having
the Lord for his God.

But the Mind of every sincere Christian has a more powerful consideration to
support it, who goes out of the World in the favor of a merciful Redeemer.
Though the Soul be ravished from the Body, and carried away under an Arrest, as
a Criminal to a Prison; yet this is no terrible thing to a Christian, who not
only goes to that Household of Faith, of which Abraham is the Father; but abides
under the shadow of the Almighty, and is under the protection and care of him,
who has the power of life, and whose second appearing he waits for. There he
rests in hope, and rejoices in the favor of his Lord, who, he knows, will not
suffer him to be lost for ever, but will remember him at the last, and grant
him the Blessing by which he shall be perfected. But again,

3. This may serve to cure us of that fondness, we have for this life; to make
us somewhat more indifferent toward it than usually we are. It is indeed so
considerable a Blessing to us, that we can enjoy nothing without it: And upon
this account it is so dear a thing, and so desirable to us, that when Age and
Infirmities have drawn of our Spirits, and made it a burden to us, we
generally feel so much sweet in it, that we can hardly be persuaded to part
with it with any content. It is for the sake of this, that we rise up early,
and sit up late, and employ the strength of the Body, and the vigor of the
Mind, to find out Provisions to sustain, and Remedies to prolong it.

There are a great many Considerations, which, if duly thought of, would go a
great way toward the abating that over-passionate Love we have of it; for it is
mortal, and that is such a disparagement to it, as ought to make us somewhat
ashamed of doting upon that, which we cannot keep; And while we have it, it is
not to be maintained but with an abundance of cost and care, a great deal of
labor and toil both of Body and Mind. So that though Life be so valuable a
thing, that we cannot but love and esteem it; yet it is not this life surely,
that is so desirable: Nor would a Wise man set a value upon Life, if he was
sure he should have no other life, but this. For who can be in love with
Corruption and Misery, or limit his Affections to Vexation and Sorrow? Who can
be fond of a life, that is always so chargeable, and very often so tiresome a
thing to us, as this is? This indeed might be a consideration to incline us to
think well of Death, though it does drive our Souls out of our Bodies; because
the Corruption and Filth of such a Habitation is enough to nauseate and make
them glad to be rid of them. For what comfort can a Soul take in a House that
is ever and anon ready to fall about its Ears, and which daily toils and
drudges it to find out some means to prop and repair it? What pleasure can it
be to a Spirit to live in so nasty a dwelling, that in every room and corner,
from the highest to the lowest, presents it with nothing but stench and
silthiness? But if the miseries and follies, with which this life is
embitter'd, be not enough to wean us from it; if the Soul be not willing to
leave the Body, though it is a dwelling, that affords it little pleasure,
because it was not created to live alone; yet when we know, that after Death
has sent it abroad to live, we well know not how nor where, we shall receive it
again at the Resurrection. Methinks this is a very satisfactory Reason why we
should the less value this present life: For the Resurrection does fully answer
our desires of life, and will for ever put an end to that Regret our Souls have
to live out of a Body; and therefore it assures us of such a life as is far
more worth our having than this is. Was this all the life, that we have reason
to look for, perhaps there might be some reason in that, why we should love
this life with all its troubles, and why our Souls should be unwilling to leave
our Bodies, as unpleasant a dwelling as they have in them, because a bad one is
better than none at all. But when Death, which puts an end to this life, will
it self have an End, and our Souls shall not be left in Hell for ever, as the
Psalmist speaks of our separate condition, we ought in reason to have some kind
thoughts for that life we shall rise to, when Death and Hell are destroyed. Did
we know no more of it but this, That we shall live again; there is this reason,
why we ought not to be only fond of this life, because this is not the only
life, we have to live. But when the life, we shall live, is Immortal and full
of Glory, and our Souls shall never more be forced out of our Bodies, when we
have once received them again; if we be found fit to live, we who hope to rise
to such a life, have little reason to dote upon a life of sorrow and vexation,
and which Death will at last deprive us of: We, I say, have little reason to be
fond of this, which must end even upon this account, because we carry a
fondness in us toward life: For this inclination ought much rather to be
toward a life that is altogether free from all, that does discontent this.

4. We may hence observe the Folly of Atheism: For it teaches Men to deride,
and make a mock at the very Blessing, which of all persons the Atheist either
is or ought to be most fond of; and for the making the most of which, he
pretends to believe as he does. He believes that it is for the good of life for
a Man to be at liberty to follow the swing of his own inclinations, and that
nothing is a greater enemy to it than Religion; which, as he discourses, does
extremely sour and embitter it by those ill-natured restraints, that it lays
upon us. And now is there any Man that ought to be so much afraid of Death, as
this Man, who is unwilling that Life should be sour'd with any thing that is
unpleasant? Is there any thing that he ought to dread more than that, which
will not only put an end to all his Enjoyments, but deprive him of that great
Blessing which he is for improving to the utmost, and labors with all his Art
and Skill to sweeten it with all that is grateful and pleasant, as he
pretends? It is indeed upon this reason, that he persuades himself, there is
nothing to be looked for after Death. He loves this World so well, that he is
not willing to believe there is another to be expected, after he is taken out
of this, unless he should live in the other, as he does in this. Let us eat and
drink, says he, for to morrow we shall die: i.e. Let us make much of Life,
while we have it, for we shall not enjoy it long: And the dead know not any
thing, neither is there any device, or knowledge, or wisdom in the Grave,
whither thou go. This is the substance of this Man's belief and reasoning:
But yet, I say, he of all Men should not believe and reason thus; because he
speaks against himself, and argues against his own Principles. For at the same
time that he speaks against Religion for being an Enemy to Life, he himself
speaks very meanly and contemptibly of it. The same reason, that makes him an
Enemy to Religion, ought to make him the greatest Enemy to Death, and to raise
in his Mind the greatest abhorrency of it: because, according to his Opinion,
it will for ever take away all that sense, in the pleasing of which, he places
all his happiness. He, who would not have Life rendered unpleasant by any
thing, ought above all things to startle and tremble at the thoughts of Death,
as the greatest Enemy to Life.

All, that are persuaded, there is another Life after this, are taught by this
belief to have a very indifferent regard to this life; because they know, that
the loss of this life is not the loss of all the life they hope for. But now
the Atheist is so much wedded to this life, that he places all his Happiness in
the delights of it, and cares not to think of any other. And therefore the
thoughts of dying must certainly be very troublesome to him, because he is
persuaded, he shall for ever lose that, which he would not have embitter'd, and
that all his joys and pleasures, all that he accounts good for him, are thereby
for ever gone.

And now what a woeful condition is this Man in, who lives under such a
persuasion as this? He shows, he is no Enemy to Life, when he tells the World,
That all, that he aims at, is the making Life as pleasant and easy as it is
possible to be. And yet that which he so much loves, he rallies upon, and
pleases himself with the thoughts of losing it for ever. Now if it be so
grateful to him to think he shall die never to live more, why is he so tender
at all of Life? why does he seek out ways to make it pleasant? why does he not
live in a continual neglect and contempt of it, if it be so ridiculous a thing
to live as he would persuade the World it is, when he derides the Religious
Man's hopes of living again, though he dies? But if Life be worth all the care
and pampering, that he bestows upon it, he of all Men ought not to make it his
scorn. He pretends to be a very great friend to Life, while he undertakes to
teach the World the best way of living. And yet at the same time, that he
professes so much kindness and friendship for Life, his Principles make him a
perfect Enemy to it. He believes, that there is no more Life after this; but
that, when once Death has closed his Eyes, he shall never wake more; and this
Thought he so much pleases himself with, that he laughs at all, that do not
believe as he does. And yet he tells the World, that he is an Atheist purely
for the good of Life. He is an Atheist, because he would not have his Life
sour'd with ill-natured Restraints, as he believes them; And yet because he is
an Atheist, he cannot endure to hear of a life that is Everlasting, or of
recovering his life again when he has lost it.

And is it now a wise thing to be an Atheist, when every one, that is so, is
taught by his Principles to thwart his own desires; and to make it a part of
his Wisdom to deride the belief of enjoying that for ever, which he pretends to
have a greater value for, and to consult the good of more than any body else.
If he be wise in being such a friend to life, as he would have the World
believe he is, when he would have nothing to interrupt or lessen the joys and
pleasantries of it; why is he such an Enemy to is, as to be unwilling the Faith
of those, that believe an Eternal life, should be true? But if he be wise in
ridiculing and opposing this Faith, why does he profess himself a friend to
Life? Either he must be a fool in being contented, that this belief should be
false, or in loving Life so much as he does; Especially, when we consider it is
for the sake of Life, that he chooses to believe as he does. Why is Life so
precious a thing to him, that he cannot endure to think of any thing, that is
troublesome to it, when with a great deal of satisfaction he can think of
loving it for ever? Atheism then is a very foolish thing, not only because it
makes a Man an Enemy to his own Life, but an Enemy to the Immortality of it,
only that he may be thought the greatest friend to it, by providing
extravagantly for it now; as a foolish Heir sells the Reversion of an Estate,
for the present Enjoyment of a small pittance of it.

The Atheist will perhaps plead for himself, that he is no Enemy to a suture
Life, but to the belief of it without Reason. And it is true, he is no Enemy to
the Life, that he now lives; nor is there any reason that he should, because it
is all he hopes for. But if he loves Life at all, why is he a friend to those
Principles, that will not suffer him to rejoice in the hopes of a Resurrection
to Life again? He says, he sees no reason to believe this. Suppose he had well
considered the matter, yet methinks he should not deride those, who are
persuaded, there is good reason to believe it; but rather lament it as his
misfortune, that he cannot discern the reason, upon which others ground their
belief. For he, that so loves his Life, as to be unwilling to lose it, should
at least be very favorable toward a Doctrine, that promises the Restoration
of Life again, and wish that he could see good reason to believe the Truth of
it. But to laugh and make a mock at it, as if it was not worth wishing it was
true, does not savor of that Wisdom, which a love of Life should prompt him to.

5. We may hence infer the Reasonableness of a Holy Life. Our Religion does
wisely command us to set our Affections on things above, and not on things on
the Earth, and to have our Conversation in Heaven, because our Life in this
World will shortly have an End; and it is in Heaven that we must live an
Everlasting life: Upon which account it is very fit that we should acquaint our
selves with the Nature of the place we are going to, and how we must live when
we come thither: And as he who is about to settle in another Country to send
those Virtues beforehand thither, which may be a maintenance to us, when we
come thither. We, to be sure, ought not so to live now, as if we were to live
no more; for what will become of us, when we do live again, if we have made no
provision at all for that life. The main solicitude that ought to fill our
thoughts, is not how we may thrive and improve our Fortunes in this World; i.e.
To put our selves into such a condition, that while we live here, we need not
fear either poverty, or the disgrace that accompanies it; but what we must do,
that when we are returned from the Dead, we may not be despised for our want of
such Virtues as are to support that Life.

This ought to be the End of our Living now, because we must live again: For a
loose inconsiderate way of living can be reasonable upon no account, but either
because we shall never be taken away from a World of such delights, as now we
live in; or because when we are once gone out of this World, there is nothing
more to be expected. In either of these two cases a Man might be allowed to
provide for this life with all the care and solicitude, that he can, without
thinking of any other: But if we must die, and after Death must rise to Life
again, the same reason, that obliges us to be careful for this, ought also to
prevail with us to provide for another life. We are very apt indeed to live
here in this World, as if we should never leave it; i.e. While there is marrow
in our bones, and vigor in our spirits, we are very apt to forget we shall
die: But yet there is no Man so ignorant or so insensible of the corruptible
state we are at present in, as to believe, he never shall. No, the Graves they
meet with in every Churchyard, and the frequent Funerals of their friends or
neighbors, are so many irresistible Notices of their own Mortality, and tell
them the sad story, that this lovely World, they so much dote on, and they must
part.

This then is not the reason, why Men live loosely; but generally they, who
live wickedly, are apt to persuade themselves, that they shall never live
again. And though it is the illness of their Lives does drive them to this
persuasion, yet they discourse the matter as if the reason, why they live no
higher than this World, was, because they were certain, there is no other. And
it is true, that if they be right in their belief, they are not much to be
blamed for their way of living; because if there be no other life but this, a
Man has nothing more to do, than to enjoy this the best he can. But then this
is a tacit confession, That if there be another life, they ought not to live as
they do, because a sensual way of living can only be suited to a World, that
affords no other than sensible delights. And then let this Man think with
himself, whether he does wisely to live so here, as to put him out of conceit
with another life, when all his unwillingness to live again will not hinder him
from returning to a new state of life. Let him think whether his way of living
be such, as he can approve of, and satisfy himself in, when it makes him
rather to choose, since he cannot avoid dying, never to see nor hear any thing
more, than to rise and live again afterward. And if a wicked Man can upon no
other score go on in his way with any tolerable ease, but by wishing he may
never see day again, when once Death has closed his Eyes, how can we choose but
think, that a Resurrection to another life does, in the opinion of this Man,
call for another course of life, than what he now lives. For if we we must rise
and live again after this, it is surely our interest and concern so to pass
through this life, as to carry along with us none of those sensual Inclinations
and Affections, as will not suffer us to live well in the next.

CHAP. II. The Resurrection, as it denotes the raising our Bodies.
II. I Come now to consider the Resurrection, as it imports our living again in
these very Bodies. A Resurrection is a restoring life to the Body, that dies.
For if it was not the same Body, that the Soul now lives in, that it shall be
united to again by the Resurrection, it could not be called a Resurrection. To
believe, that it shall inhabit a Body, but not the same Body, is to believe
that God will make it a new Tabernacle, but not erect and raise up the old one.
And how many subtilties soever Men of wanton Wits may frame to themselves to
puzzle this Article of our Faith, they ought to consider, that they are
undermining the very Doctrine of the Resurrection it self at the same time,
that they attempt to prove it impossible, that the same Body should rise again.
But I shall not examine those curious Questions, with which vain Men endeavor
to perplex this Doctrine. For since it is upon Revelation, that the Certainty
of it depends, we are to have a Recourse to that Revelation, that God has given
us concerning it, to understand the true import of it. For what he has
revealed, he will do; it is certain enough, that he has power to do. And if we
know not how it can be done, it is because we know not all, that God can do.

1. Then he has revealed, that he will raise up these very Bodies again in
which we now live, and which see Corruption. These Bodies, I say, which are the
Instruments and Companions of our Souls in all the Actions and Labors of this
life. It is, I know, insisted on as a thing very congruous to Reason, that the
Body, which is a partner with the Soul in its good or ill in this life, should
likewise share with it in the same in the life to come. But this is a way of
arguing, that was not thought of, till we had received the Notices of this
Doctrine another way. For the wise Heathens, who believed the Soul's
Immortality, and that, when it goes into the other World, it is either adjudged
to happiness or misery according to our Actions in this life, never thought of
this argument to persuade them into the belief of a Resurrection. And it is
very strange that not one of those great Men, that have discoursed of the
Rewards and Punishments of the other life, should not think of this
reasonableness, that the Body should share with the Soul in these to infer a
Resurrection. Neither is it easy to apprehend why it should be thought fit,
that a clod of Earth should have a reward or punishment for what is done, when
it can do nothing that is deserving of either. I know it is fit and absolutely
necessary the Body should be raised since the Man, that does virtuously or
wickedly, must be rewarded accordingly. But this Necessity cannot be made
appear by any Congruity in the thing, that the Body should partake with the
Soul of its future Recompense; but only from that Revelation that tells us we
must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive
the things done in his Body. We must all appear, we who now live in the Body;
and every one, not the Soul only of every Man must receive the things done in
the Body. Therefore our Savior tells us expressly, That all, that are in their
Graves, shall hear his voice, Joh. 5.28. All that are in their Graves; i.e. the
same Men, that are dead; which cannot be true, if the same Bodies be not
raised, that go to the Grave. No Bodies go to the Grave, but those we now live
in; and therefore the same Bodies must come out of their Graves, otherwise we
shall not rise the same Men we die; nor will those that are in their Graves
hear his voice. For if it was a new Body, that should then be framed, and the
putting our Souls into such new Bodies could be styled a Resurrection of the
Body, it could not be the Resurrection of the Body, that is in the Grave:
because a Body, that is not yet made, is not a Body, that is in the Grave. And
accordingly St. Paul teaches us, that it is this corruptible, that must put on
incorruption; and this mortal, that must put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53. i.e.
It is no other Body, that we shall rise with, but that which is now subject to
Corruption and Mortality, It is this Body, that dies and sees Corruption: And
it is this Body, that must rise again freed from Corruption, and the power of
that Law, that has subjected it to Mortality. And accordingly it is called the
Resurrection of the Body, and the Resurrection of the Flesh; which it could not
be, if it meant no more than the giving us a Body, which never was a Body
before; and the clothing us with such Flesh, as never had been Flesh.

The Apostle does indeed illustrate this Mystery by the springing up of Grain
from the Seed that is sown: which is only the same in kind with the Seed it
grows out of. And thence he inferrs, that God gives it a Body, as it pleases
him, and to every Seed his own Body; i.e. Grain of the same kind. But
Similitudes are not to be interpreted too strictly, nor to be understood to
give a full and proportionable proof of the thing, they are designed to
illustrate. So that we are not to conclude from hence, That it is only a Body
of the same kind with that, which was buried, and corrupted in the Grave, that
shall grow out of that, which is corrupted, as Wheat does out of Wheat, that
has seen corruption: But that, as the Seed, which is sown, does see Corruption,
before it yields its increase; so our Bodies, before they rise, must likewise
see Corruption. But still, that they shall be the same Bodies, that die and see
Corruption, that rise again; he plainly teaches us, when he tells us, That it
is this corruptible, that must put on incorruption; and this mortal, that must
put on immortality.

Neither are we to think it enough to style it the Resurrection of the same
Body, though the Body, that rises, springs out of any one small Particle of
that Body, that dies; which is an invention to satisfy the Atheist of the
possibility of the Resurrection of the same Body, though our Bodies, after they
have lain long in their Graves, may possibly undergo innumerable changes by
being mixed with other Bodies. For this is not to assert, as the Scripture
teaches us, a Resurrection of the same Body, but only of some small part of it.
Only so much of our Bodies in this case can be said to rise, as did belong to
our Bodies before they saw Corruption; but all the rest that the Resurrection
will give us, it must do so by a new Creation; for it is a contradiction to
suppose that any one little portion of the Body, that dies, may, by
Multiplication, or any other way, become all the parts and portions of which
our Bodies did consist. One part can be no more than one part; and if but one
part arises, then all the rest are lost; and all that the raised Body will
consist of besides, must be such as it never had before. And what is this but
to suppose, that it is a new Body, that is made, and not the old one, that is
raised? For it is much more reasonable, it should be denominated from all that
new quantity of Matter, of which it is framed, than from one single Particle,
that is old.

If then it be the Resurrection of the same Body, that goes to the Grave, that
the Scripture teaches us, as certainly it does, we are not to trouble our
selves with those Difficulties, that seem to thwart the belief of it; because
those things that appear impossibilities to us, are none to God. We ought
therefore to be very cautious, how for the removing the Cavils of unreasonable
Scepticks, we start new Notions of a Resurrection; lest while we endeavor to
remove the Objections, that are made against this Doctrine, we destroy the
Truth of it: For a Resurrection in its true Notion does certainly suppose a
restoring of Life to the whole of that, which falls and dies; and not only to
some part of it; for all that is added to the Old, is not raised, because it
never fell. This was the Resurrection that the first Christians believed and
maintained, and which the Heathens quarreled with, and opposed Christianity
for. Had not this been the Doctrine, that was taught and believed by the
Christians, there would have been no reason for those scoffs with which the
Heathens loaded it as an impossibility, or a childish figment. For those of
them especially, who, as well as Christians, believed, that the World had a
beginning, could no more suppose it impossible, that God should make a new Body
after this is turned to Dust, than that he should make a Man at the first. But
that, which they could not conceive to be possible, was the reviving a dead
Body: And therefore it was, that for the perplexing this Doctrine the more,
they burned the Bodies of Christians, whom they Martyred, and threw their Ashes
into the Air, or Sea, that the Winds or Waves might scatter them, thinking
thereby to shame the Christians into a Confession of the Impossibility of such
a Resurrection, as they expected. But,

2. They must be these Bodies made glorious and spiritual, fit for the Objects,
and suitable to the Condition of the World, we shall then live in. It is sown
in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is
raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. Though they
are the same Bodies, that rise; yet they will not rise with the same Qualities
and Infirmities. They will be the same Bodies, but changed and improved to such
a condition, as is proper for a state of much greater glory and perfection than
that, in which we now live, is. Here our Bodies have dishonorable and feeble
Parts, are subject to the infirmities of Age, and the decays of Sickness; and
at the best have those Necessities about them, as require daily refreshments of
Meat, and Drink, and Sleep: But when we come out of the Grave, all this
infirmity and weakness, this dishonor and feebleness, this imperfection and
corruption shall be left behind: And we, who went into the Chambers of the
Dead, the food of Worms, shall come forth the companions of Angels; We, who go
to our Beds of Dust with that stench and rottenness, as compells our dearest
friends to bury us out of their sight, shall come forth with Immortal Bodies,
that shall neither need food nor raiment, nor any thing to sustain them, as now
they do. For as we have born the Image of the Earthy, have lived in such a Body
as Adam had, so we shall bear the Image of the Heavenly; i.e. We shall have
such glorious heavenly Bodies at the Resurrection, as Christ now has: For flesh
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. Flesh and Blood, such as now we
carry about with us: Bodies, that cannot live without food, and which by reason
of the weakness and imperfection of their Senses are oftentimes pained by that,
which is their pleasure: But what is corruptible, must put on incorruption; and
these vile Bodies shall be changed and fashioned like to Christ's glorious
Body, Phil. 3.21. i.e. Such as his Body is, such shall ours be, discharged of
all that is their burden and shame, or that creates vexation or uneasiness
here; and improved to that height in all its Powers, that we, who cannot bear
the light of the Sun, when it travels in its strength, whose Eyes water and are
offended, when too much light pours in upon them, shall be enabled to live in
such glory, as is not yet revealed; and to walk in that inaccessible Light, to
which no mortal Eye can approach.

This Change is expressed in Scripture by our rising with spiritual Bodies, and
bearing the Image of the Heavenly; which does not mean, that our Earthly Bodies
shall be turned into Spirits. For then the life, we should be raised to, would
not be of the same nature with that, which we now live; i.e. It would not
consist in the vital Union of a Soul and a Body, but of two Spirits: For a Body
turned into a Spirit, is no Body. But now that which the Scriptures teach us
concerning a Resurrection, is, That our Bodies shall come out of their Graves,
and that we shall have the same Bodies, as well as the same Souls, though
improved in their capacities and qualities: That the life, the Resurrection is
designed to restore us, is the life we lose, because it is styled the
Resurrection of the Dead; which could not be, if it be a Body turned into a
Spirit, that our Souls shall be united to: For then the Resurrection would not
unite it to a Body at all; i.e. It would not give us the life of a Man, which
is the life, that Death deprives us of.

They, who contend for such a Rarefaction of our Bodies into Spirits, tell us,
That we shall have the agility and subtilty of Spirits, so as to be able to
penetrate Bodies, and to be in a place, not as we are now by filling it, but as
Angels are, who do not exclude any Body thence by being there. And this they
suppose is the Nature of Christ's glorious Body, which is the pattern, after
which the Resurrection will fashion ours. For to this purpose they insist upon
that Text of St. John, which tells us, That our Savior entered into the room,
where the Disciples were met together, when the Doors were shut: As if St.
John's meaning was, That he had passed through the Doors in the same manner, as
a Spirit does. But now the Evangelist says no such thing; nor do I see, how
any such thing can be concluded from what he does say. The Words of the
Evangelist are these; Then the same day at evening, when the doors were shut,
where the Disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews, came Jesus, and stood
in the midst, Joh. 20.19. In which he only tells us the time when, but nothing
of the manner how he appeared; whether by passing through, or opening the Door,
or any other way. That he came in the Evening, when the Doors were shut; i.e.
At that time of the night, when, according to the Custom of the Jews (who were
not wont, says Musculus, to shut their doors in the daytime) the Doors were
shut. Or if they give an account of such a Miraculous way of appearing, as
surprised the Disciples; this does not necessarily oblige us to believe, that
he came into the room as a Spirit, by piercing through the Doors: For he might
present himself among them in a surprising manner, though he did not pierce the
Door; neither is it known, that Spirits do thus appear. So that it is no proof
that the Resurrection did turn his Body into a Spirit, because he entered a
room at that time in the Evening, when the Jews shut up their Doors; unless it
be made appear, that he could no other way enter it, but by passing through the
Door, and that Spirits are wont thus to enter. But that our Savior's Body was
not turned into a Spirit, and that the Miracle of his Appearance did not lie in
his passing through the Door, he himself gave his Disciples a sensible proof at
this very time, when he showed them his Hands and his Side, and bid them Handle
him and see, that it was he himself; i.e. The Man Christ Jesus, that was
crucified, and no Spirit, as they believed him to be; because a Spirit has not
flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24.39. When therefore the Scriptures
tell us, that we shall rise with spiritual bodies; the meaning is, that our
Bodies, when the Resurrection has restored us them, shall not need those
refreshments of Meat and Drink, and Sleep, that now they stand in need of; but
shall live as Spirits do, without putting us to charge and labor to maintain
their life. And this our Blessed Lord teaches us in his Answer to the captious
Question of the Sadducees, whose Wife the Woman, whom the seven Brethren had
successively married, should be at the Resurrection; The children of this
World, where one Generation goes, and another comes, marry, and are given in
marriage; because in a World, where we are mortal, this is the only way we have
of preserving our Names, and of living, when we are dead: But they, who shall
be accounted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection from the dead,
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, neither can they die any more, but
are equal to the Angels, Luke 20.34, 35, 36. i.e. They are equal to the Angels
in this, That they shall die no more; and since they are in this equal to them,
they shall live like them. For because they themselves will be Immortal, the
reason of Marrying and giving in Marriage will be at an end.

And indeed there is a necessity, that our Bodies should be thus changed,
because the World, we shall then live in, will not be the same as this is. For
whether we shall ascend to the highest Heavens, where Christ now sits at the
right hand of God; or whether we shall have our Habitations in that new Earth,
that will be made, after this old one, which has been the Seat of so much
Wickedness, is destroyed, it is requisite our Bodies should be otherwise
fashioned than now they are; that they may be suited to the Nature of the
place, we shall dwell in. It is not a thing, that a Christian can find any
thing incredible in, that our Bodies, after they are raised, and improved by
the Resurrection, should by the power of that Spirit, that raises them, ascend
into Heaven, and be capable of dwelling there. For the possibility of this is
exemplified to us in the Ascension of a Humane Body, that was dead, and rose
again, as we likewise shall die and rise again. But now whether our Lord's
Ascension be to teach us, where we shall live, when we are risen again or no;
i.e. Whether we may conclude from thence, that we shall ascend into Heaven, as
well as we do, that we shall rise again from the Dead, because he did, is not
easy to be resolved. He told his Disciples indeed, that in his Father's house
are many mansions: And that one reason of his Ascension was to prepare a place
for them; and that at his second coming he would receive them to himself, that
where he is, they might be also, Joh. 14.2, 3. But it does not plainly appear
from hence, that we shall ascend and live with him in Heaven. The preparing the
place, where we shall live with him, is the fruit of his Ascension, and we are
plainly taught in this, and other Texts, that when he comes again, we shall
live with him in the place, that he has prepared for us; now he is in Heaven.
But it is not evident that by his Father's House, and the Mansions therein, we
are to understand the Heavens, whither he is ascended. He does intend thereby,
it is true, the place that he prepares for us; now he is in Heaven, and where we
shall live with him, when he descends again from Heaven. But why may we not
understand by this place the New Jerusalem, that St. John says, he saw come
down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21.2. And indeed why should St. Peter say, we
look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; if that
new Earth, which God will create, be not designed to be the Habitation of Men
after the Resurrection? It seems something more natural and easy to be
believed, that Man, who consists of a material, as well as a spiritual Part,
should rather have his Habitation in that place, where he was made, and which
is suited to the condition of his Nature, than to be carried to the place,
where Angels and pure Spirits have their abode. St. Paul tells us, that we,
which are alive, and the dead shall, when the Lord descends, be caught up
together in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be
with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. But his meaning is only this, That when he shall
come to judge the World, we shall go forth to meet him, or shall be conducted
or conveyed by Angels through the Air to the Judgment Seat; and after he has
given Judgment upon the World, we shall for ever be with him; which does not
imply that we shall be carried into Heaven, and there be with him, but
wherever he is, whether in Heaven or in the New Earth, that, as St. Peter
says, we look for, we shall ever be with him.

But let this matter be as it will; the place, where we shall be with him, does
require a Change in our Bodies. If we must go to Heaven with him, Flesh and
Blood, such as it is now, cannot inherit or enter into that Kingdom. And
therefore some have imagined that our Bodies must be turned into Spirits,
because the Heavens above is the proper Habitation of Spirits. Or if we shall
live with him upon Earth, it will be upon a New Earth, wherein Righteousness is
to dwell; an Earth renewed on purpose, that it may be a suitable dewlling place
for our renewed Bodies. And this proves that our Bodies must be exalted to a
more excellent state, purified from all those corrupt Appetites that make such
a World as this is needful to us. For if our Bodies should rise such as they
are now, this World, such as it is, would be a Habitation proper enough for it,
nay such a one as they can only live in. But a World discharged from all its
Vanity and Corruption does require an Immortal incorruptible Creature to live
in it.

And now if the same Body, we now live in, must rise again; and not only so,
but rise purified and exalted to a glorious Condition, according to the
Improvements we now make in Virtue, let us consider what Thoughts this ought to
furnish us with. And,

1. How satisfactory ought the Doctrine of the Resurrection to be to us. The
only reason, that Death is so formidable to us now, is, because it puts an end
to the life of these Bodies, that we extremely love and dote upon. It Is very
uncomfortable to think, that we, who feel the Benefits of life, and have a
quick and pleasing sense of the comforts and satisfaction of living in a World,
that is furnished with all things, that are delightful to the Eye, and
pleasing to the Ear, and grateful to all the Senses, that belong to our
Bodies, must ere-long languish away to a breathless Carcass: That our Eyes,
that let in so many delightful Objects, must be eaten out with Worms, our Ears
stopped, and our Bodies crumbled to Dust; and that we shall no longer enjoy
either the fruits of our labors, or the benefit of those designs, we have laid
for the raising our Fortunes: But must bid adieu to our Estates, to our
Pleasures, to our Companions and Friends, never to hear nor see, nor rejoice
with them more in this life.

And now if Death upon this account is so melancholy a Consideration; If it
damps our Spirits, and chills our Blood to think of leaving these Bodies, that
we are so well accustomed to, and acquainted with; and a World where we have so
many Interests and Engagements, and which we find so well fitted for us, to go
to live in a place, we can give very little account of, and without these
Bodies, which we know not as yet what it is to live without: How much
contentment should it be to us to have a Doctrine, that assures us, we shall
live again in these Bodies, that we leave behind us, when we go into the other
World with so much reluctance and unwillingness.

Upon this account Religion ought to be very dear to us, and Atheism looked upon
as the most uncomfortable Opinion, that can be thrust upon the World: because
among other mischiefs, it deprives us of the hopes of having our Bodies
restored to us again: which is the most comfortable thing, that a Spirit, which
by the Law of its Creation is to live in a Body can think of. It must be a very
uneasy thing for an Atheist not only to think of leaving this World, but of
losing his Body (which is the only part of him, that he loves) for ever. This
Man, above all others, must be extremely afflicted with the thoughts of dying;
because if his Opinion be true, he has nothing to love but his Body and this
World. He must look upon himself to be only made for this World; and therefore
it must be as grievous a thing to be haled out of it to a dark Prison and a
stinking Grave, where the Body he loves must be a feast to Worms and Vermin,
and at last corrupt and perish never to live more, as it is usually to persons
born to plentiful fortunes to be turned out of their Houses where they were
born and brought up, or to see them tumbled into heaps and rubbish. So that one
would think, that if it was only for the sake of his Body, which he is so very
tender of, he should be as much overjoyed to hear of a time, when he shall
receive his Body again, as a poor Prisoner is, when he has liberty given him to
return home; or he, who has seen his House demolished by an Enemy, to see it by
the Charity of a friend to rise again out of its Ruins.

And so undoubtedly it is to every wise Man, because it gratifies a very
sensible desire in us, and makes up the loss we sustain by dying. For it is the
general belief of Christians, that the Soul, after it is departed out of the
Body, though it be in a happy state, as the Souls of good Men certainly are, is
not so perfectly happy, as it will be, when at the Resurrection it is united to
its Body again. Wherein the imperfection of its Happiness does consist, or from
what Reason it is, that it is not so perfectly Happy, as it will be then, is
not for us, who know so little of the condition of separate Spirits, and how
they live, to tell. But why may we not suppose that it carries along with it
into the other World a strong inclination toward the Body, it has left behind,
which is either more or less violent as we either mortify or indulge to it in
this World? And so long as such an inclination and desire is not satisfied, it
cannot be so completely Happy, as it will be, when it carries no unsatisfied
desire in it. This is certain, that Death, which divides the Soul from the
Body, does offer Violence to it, and the separate state, in which it lives
afterward is preter-natural: And when it is rent from the Body against its own
inclination, why may it not retain an inclination to its own true and most
natural way of living again.

I know indeed, that the Souls of good Men by Faith and Resignation to the
Divine Will do save themselves from that anguish and vexation, that such a
preter-natural way of living does vex the wicked Spirits of bad Men with. For
as they leave the World with a great deal of regret, and many violent
conflicts; so it is very likely, that they carry those Resentments for being
forced out of a Body, that they love, along with them, as are their torment.
But though the Patience and Resignation of good Men does make Death more
tolerable, and a separate state not to occasion that vexation to them, as it
does to the wicked; yet it is the hopes of a Resurrection in them does overcome
those natural Reluctancies to Death, that are in us, and persuades them with a
constant Mind to bear with the loss of their Bodies for a time in Obedience to
the Divine Appointment. But had there been no such promise, I do not see, how
any Man could be content to part with so considerable a part of himself as his
Body for ever. For in this case Death would be inflicted as a Curse, and we
should go out of the World as Offenders, whom God is not reconciled to; i.e.
Such Offenders, as must bear his Displeasure for ever. So that however a good
Man may with patience resign himself to the Will of God, who has appointed,
that all Men shall die, so long as he knows, that God is his friend, and has
appointed a time too, when he shall have his Body restored him again: Yet it
would be a great difficulty to compose his Mind to such a temper, if after all
his endeavor to please God, he was for ever to lie under his displeasure. If
there was no Resurrection to be expected, he would want the only Motive, that
could dispose his Mind to such a bearing Temper, as will make his spearate
State tolerable. And although the hopes of rising again does quiet the good
Man's Spirit under the loss of its Body, yet during its separate State it must
ratain a strong Desire toward its ancient Companion; because to live in a Body
is Man's natural way of living, and because he needs a Consideration to bear up
his Mind under the thoughts of parting with it.

But it is not the living in any Body that will satisfy this desire. For the
inclination, that it carries with it into the other World, is toward the Body
it left behind: And if it be not this Body, that the Resurrection unites it to
again, how can this Inclination be laid, and its desire of living in its own
Body be satisfied by being put into a new Body. The Resurrection, by assuring
us we shall live again, does speak a great deal of comfort to us, who naturally
are afraid of, and abhor Death. But it would not be half so comfortable to us,
as it is, if it did not give us hopes of living in these very Bodies, that we
have taken a love to, and are so loath to part with. Now this is the great
satisfaction, that it gives us: For it acquaints us, that these two intimate
and ancient Friends, that are so hardly prevailed upon to bid adieu to each
other, shall meet again never to part more. The Soul is well acquainted with
the Body, it now lives in, and has contracted such an intimacy with it, that it
is loath to leave it. And that alone, which can silence this dissatisfaction, is
the hopes of being united at the Resurrection to the Body, it has already made
trial of, and has such an inclination to; whereas an unknown Body can give no
relief in the case, because it is unknown, what it shall be, and how we shall
live in it.

And how then ought we to rejoice in hopes of the Resurrection, which will
restore us the very Bodies, which we have such a fancy for. This Doctrine
should methinks be received by mortal Creatures with the greatest greediness,
even out of Love to our Bodies. We take a great deal of pains with them now to
nourish and sustain them, to repair their decays and to keep them alive; and
yet for all this they must die: And why should we not be overjoyed with the
thoughts of a Resurrection, when we shall have the Bodies again, that we have
taken such a liking to.

2. It is very requisite, we should take that care of them now, that we may
rise with comfort; and that when our Souls come to inhabit them again, they may
have a quiet and peaceable dwelling in them. For otherwise the thoughts of
rising again, and living in these Bodies after Death, will be so far from being
comfortable, that it will fill us with terrible Reflections, and occasion a
World of vexation and trouble.

Now this will be the case of wicked Men. For there are Two things that will
make it a dreadful thing to them to rise again.

1. That they must go into Bodies, that will vex and torment them with
intemperate Appetites. 2. Into Bodies that they will be ashamed of.
1. Into Bodies, that will vex and torment them with the rage of intemperate
Appetites. The Souls of such Men are in a very wretched condition: For they are
straightened with the same unhappy Dilemma, as the Leprous Men were, when Samaria
was besieged: If they stay out of their Bodies, their inclinations to them,
will be their torment; but if they go into their Bodies again, the rage and
extravagancy of such Appetites as they can meet with nothing to gratify them
with, will miserably disquiet them. So that they will neither live at ease
with, nor without their Bodies. The Resurrection will satisfy the inclination
they have to live in their Bodies again, by restoring them just such Bodies as
the sensuality of their tempers can take pleasure in. But the Resurrection upon
this account will not be grateful to them, because it will restore them to
such Bodies as will call for the same enjoyments and gratifications, as here in
this life they are pleased with, in that place where there is not one drop of
water to cool a scorched Tongue. And oh what will be the Torment of being
doomed to unquenchable thirsts? What the misery of a Spirit, that is shut up in
a Body all on fire within by reason of Appetites, that find nothing to allay
their fury?

This is the thing that makes wicked Men averse to the thoughts of another
life. It is not because there is any thing in a Resurrection, that the Reason
of Man can find any fault with. For nothing can be more desirable to a Man,
that knows he must die, and yet has a mighty fondness for life, and the Body he
now lives in, than the thoughts of living again after Death, and living too in
those Bodies, that Death deprives him of. But that, which makes bad Men so
afraid of a Resurrection, is the too great love they have for this World, and
the pleasures of a sensual life; ann that they, by their way of living, have
put themselves into such a condition, that they cannot live well nor happily
any-where else: They would live, but they would live nowhere but here, where
they find all the pleasures and delights they have any inclination to. And was
it to such a life that the Resurrection would restore them, they would without
question be overjoyed to think of living in their Bodies again, such as they
are. But since by pursuing the pleasures of a sensual life, they render
themselves unfit for a glorious Resurrection, and incapable of living in a
state, where they shall meet with none of the delights, that they take pleasure
in, they choose to wish, that they may never live more: because they are
sensible their bodily Appetites, when they have nothing to please them, will
make them miserable. They, by gratifying their Senses, and studiously providing
for the Pleasures of the Body, set such an edge upon their Appetites, that when
they come into that other World, where there is neither Meat nor Drink to
satisfy their Luxury, nor Riches nor Honors to gratify their Covetousness
and Ambition, nor fleshly Pleasures to delight a sensual disposition, will fill
them with as much anguish and pain, as the Man who for want of Bread is forced
to eat his own Flesh. For it is not to be expected that those Appetites, that
have put a Man to a World of pain and trouble to satisfy them here, that by
the violence of their cravings would suffer him to take no rest, nor spare no
cost to give them satisfaction, but have compelled him to consume his strength
and impair his health, to waste his Time and Estate to wound his Conscience and
lose his God, should be more modest and temperate, more sparing and less
vexatious, when it is not in his power to gratify them. It will be the same
Body, he must rise with, which here in this life he has indulged and cherished,
and whose Lusts he has fulfilled; And how is it possible, but the same Body
should look for the same Gratifications, and for want of them pine away and
languish with inward regrets and anguish.

Such a Body must rise again, because Christ is risen for our Justification;
i.e. As I shall show hereafter, has acquitted us from the punishment due to the
first Transgression, which is the Power and Eternal Dominion of that Death,
that we now die. But it must rise to die a second Death, to receive a second
and more fatal Sentence; because it wants that Spirit of Life, which should
preserve it from Death: And is laden with so much new Corruption of its own, as
will not suffer it to live for ever, after it is risen again.

2. Into Bodies they will be ashamed of. Such Bodies as will not rise such pure
and glorious Bodies as the Resurrection is designed to make them. For it is not
to be hoped, that a Body, that is laden with more Corruption than it brought
into the World with it, should rise pure and glorified: That a Body, that is
destroyed by its own Excesses and Debaucheries should rise so strong and
vigourous as to be able to live for ever in a glorious and happy State. Such as
Men make their Bodies here in this World, or such as they are when they part
with them, such will they be, when they receive them again. The Resurrection
will indeed restore those Bodies pure and glorious, whose Lusts have been
mortified, and which by being kept under a strict discipline, have been the
instruments of Righteousness; but those that have been made the slaves of Sin,
and debauched with a vicious Conversation, must arise bloated with
Intemperance, and deformed with all the marks of Lust and Wickedness that here
they have contracted.

And now with what shame will such Men receive their Bodies with all those
marks of Ignominy and Disgrace, that here they imprint upon them? How will they
hang their heads when they see the Righteous clothed upon with Bodies of Light
and Glory, beautified with all the Graces and lovely Features that belong to
heavenly Bodies, and their own loathsome with the stains and filth of foul
Impurities: They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament;
and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever: But
some shall awake to shame and everlasting contempt, Dan. 12.2, 3. They shall
call upon the Mountains to fall on them, and the Hills to cover them, when they
shall see the vast difference between the glorified Bodies of the Righteous,
the exalted condition of those that have waited for that solemn day, and their
own. How will it fret and vex their Souls to see their own deformity, and to
see themselves despised and detested for it by all that glorious Assembly. They
shall awake to shame: i.e. They shall wish themselves out of sight of all the
World, when they see with what vise Bodies; Bodies that upbraid them with their
own guilt, and bear the marks of those Vices they have indulged to. What
confusion will it give the unclean person to behold the filthy Scarrs and nasty
Ulcers, that his sin has given him! With what a dejected Look will the
intemperate Man appear, with all that fire in his Eyes and Face that will
betray his Lust! With what a sad damp upon their Spirits will those Men look,
who shall come forth with Tongues swollen and blister'd with all those Oaths
and dreadful Blasphemies, wherewith they have rudely assaulted the Name of God!

And if this be the case of bad Men; if it be upon this Reason, That a
Resurrection is no comfortable Doctrine to them, surely it behooves hoves us to
take great care how we use our Bodies now: That we don't make them so vile and
corrupt, that we neither can, nor can with credit live in them again: That we
don't abuse them by Rioting and Drunkenness, by Excesses and Debaucheries, by
those Sensualities and Wickednesses, which will so exasperate our Appetites, as
to make them an everlasting torment and shame to us. Alas, Men know not how
much mischief they do themselves by indulging to Sensuality and Worldliness:
For there Spirits are thereby made so fleshly, that they cannot rejoice in the
Company of pure and naked Spirits, nor live without their Bodies in any kind of
ease: And yet the Bodies, they desire to live in, are so wretchedly corrupted,
that when they are embodied in them again, they cannot live in them again
without a great deal of shame and vexation, if they can live in them at all.
It Is therefore the Apostle's Exhortation not to yield our members weapons of
unrighteousness to serve sin, but to yield our selves unto God, as those that
are alive from the dead, and our members as instruments of righteousness unto
God, Romans 6.13. i.e. Not to yield our Tongues instruments of Rancour and
Spite, Malice or Envy, by giving vent to those Evil Passions in Railings and
Cursings; nor our Eyes the instruments of Wantonness, by conveying impure
Flames into the Soul; nor our Hands the instruments of Revenge, by executing
the bloody Commands of that furious Passion, and the like; but all of them the
Instruments of Piety to God, and Charity to our Neighbors. And there is a
great deal of reason for this, because we must rise again; and when we rise,
our Bodies will be such as we now make them. If we make them Instruments of
Sin, the Corruption, wherewith such a course of life does over-charge them,
will not suffer them to live, when they are risen; but will bring upon them a
worse Death, than that, which Adam's Transgression has subjected us to. And
there is no way to receive them pure and glorious from the Grave, but by
purifying them now from all filth and corruption, by conquering those Lusts,
that will otherwise destroy us, and taming those Appetites, that will otherwise
be our Everlasting torment: If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of
the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. i.e. If we set our selves with indignation
against our fleshly Lusts, and resolve no longer to please our Bodies, we take
an assured course to live: But if we live after the flesh, we shall die. For so
long as we live to our Bodies, and make provision for our Flesh to fulfill the
Lusts thereof, we cherish and indulge that, which at first brought us into a
mortal condition. And there is no way to exchange a corruptible for an
incorruptible Body, but by ceasing to humor our bodily Inclinations, and
gratify our sensual Appetites. For by doing this, we raise our Souls from a
Bed of Corruption; and God, as the reward of our Virtue, will at the last make
our Bodies immortal too.

3. If the Resurrection will restore us our Bodies in so glorious a condition
again, let us consider how proper a Remedy the hopes of this is to those Fears
of Death, that now haunt us. Death is terrible indeed; and that which makes it
so frightfull to us, is because it robs us of our Bodies, and turns them into
Dust. It closes our Senses, and suffers us no more to see the Glories of a
World, that we have been so long acquainted with, nor to taste the sweets that
are in bodily Enjoyments: The dead know not any thing, says the Wiseman,
neither have they any more reward, for the memory of them is forgotten: Also
their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now perished: i.e. They are
neither in a capacity to do themselves or others either good or harm; neither
have they any more portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun,
Eccles. 9.5, 6. i.e. They have no profit from any of those useful Arts and
Inventions, that are owing to the ingenuity of Men here in this World: They
receive no benefit from the Riches and Pleasures, the Pomps and Splendours,
that this World is stored with: There is no desire, no knowledge nor wisdom in
the Grave, whither thou go, v. 10. No prosecuting of any useful study, nor
reaping the benefit of other Men's labors. And if it was to be thus with us
for ever, Death would be a most uncomfortable prospect.

But although Death does deprive us of all this, yet we have little reason to
stand astonished at the thoughts of dying, when we know, we shall not only
receive our Bodies again, but receive them freed from Corruption. For this will
be a sufficient compensation for all that we can lose by dying, because we
shall receive all we lose far more perfect than now we enjoy it. If we did well
consider the thing, it would upon another account appear a very foolish thing
to lament our condition, because it is mortal, and to terrify our selves with
the thoughts of leaving a World, where we have indeed a great many delightful
Entertainments for our Senses. For whether we be pleased with it or no, we must
die; And it is not very wisely done to let the thoughts of that, which we
cannot help, be troublesome and disquieting to us. Upon this account, we ought
surely so to manage our selves, as we would do, if we were in a strange
Country, where though we meet with very delightful prospects to tempt us to
love it; yet we don't upon the account thereof think it fit so to fix our
Thoughts and Affections there, as to make it a hard matter to us to leave it
again.

But though this be a Consideration, that should make a wise Man neither afraid
nor unwilling to die; yet we are not altogether so wise; but we need other
Considerations, that are capable of satisfying our desires of life, and of
removing that which is the cause that Death is so terrible to us. And of this
nature is the thoughts of a Resurrection: For this is a Doctrine, that tells
us, we shall recover all the Life and Sense, that we lose by dying; and instead
of the Glories of a corruptible World, be entertained with such glorious Sight
and charming Hallelujahs as our Eyes and Ears never saw nor heard in this life.

4. Let us consider the folly of being fond of them as now they are. One of the
greatest temptations, that we are subject to in this life, does arise from the
great Love of, and concern we have for our Bodies. For though we have Souls as
well as Bodies, and our Souls are of infinite more value and worth in
themselves, as they are the Breath of God, and that part of us, which makes us
Men; and of infinitely the nearest concern to us, as they are that part of us,
that makes us capable of Everlasting Happiness or Misery: Yet when the
Interests of these two Parts of us do thwart each other, and both cannot be
attended to at the same time, we seem to set much less by our Souls than our
Bodies. And though we profess to believe, that our Bodies deserve not half the
care, that our Souls do, yet we make the Interests of our Souls to give place
to those of our Bodies. Our Souls seem to lie at a further distance from us,
and are not so much within our ken, as our Bodies are: We don't so soon feel
what they want, nor are we so sensible what we are like to suffer by neglecting
them, as when we lose an opportunity of providing for our Flesh. Although
Knowledge and Virtue be as necessary for the Soul, as Food is for the Body; and
our better part does languish and decay for want of them, as much as our
fleshly part does for want of the Necessaries of this life, yet we don't feel
the pain of a Soul, that languishes for want of its proper nourishment, so much
as we do the weakness of a starved Body. And therefore whatever the Soul
suffers, we think our selves under so indispensible an Obligation to take care
of our Bodies, that we afford little time for the improving of the Soul. There
is no Argument more common, whereby we excuse our selves from the Exercises of
Religion, which are designed to nourish the Spiritual life of the Soul, than
the urgency and great necessity of our Secular concerns; i.e. Those Affairs, by
which the Body is to be provided for. And when this Necessity is pleaded,
Conscience must be satisfied, and the Soul must not complain of its being
almost famished. But this fondness for our Bodies is the occasion of much worse
Evils than the bare neglect of the Soul. For it is the occasion of all that
Injustice and Oppression, that want of Faith and Truth, that Theft and Rapine,
that is committed in the World. For why do Men cheat and cozen, but for the
sake of their Bodies? Why do they lie for a little advantage, or invade their
Neighbor's property, and take away by force and violence that, which is
another Man's, but only that they may be in a better condition to feed and
pamper their Bodies, to indulge and gratify their fleshly Lusts? Did not Men
love their Bodies too much, there would be none of these mischievous Vices in
the World.

And yet the Bodies we so much dote upon, and for whose sakes we do so much
mischief to our selves and others, are Bodies that must die and perish: Bodies,
that are now subject to innumerable Infirmities, and carry so much Imperfection
in them, as ought to make us ashamed of them, or at least to carry very
indifferently toward them.

But what a shameful thing is it so to love a Lump of mortal Flesh, when there
is a time coming, that unless by our Sensualities we disappoint our selves, we
shall receive them raised from their Beds of Corruption, and clothed with
Immortality and Glory? Did we only consider, that ere-long they must be laid in
the Dust, and that then all our thoughts and projects for things relating to
this life will be at an end, it would check that extravagant love we have of
them. But how much more, when we consider, that we shall receive them again so
spiritualized, that they will no more need the things, that now we endeavor to
please them with. Let us look forward to that time, when unless, we spoil them
now, they shall be improved to such a perfection, and it will surely put us out
of countenance to think of our folly in doting on them now so much, when there
is so little in them, as deserves our love. Our Bodies are, it is true, a part
of us; and we cannot but love that, which is so near to us. Neither does
Religion charge a due care of them as a sin. But it does tell us, and our own
Reason tells us, that it is an unaccountable folly to be so doatingly fond of
corruptible Dust, as to pamper and deck these Earthly Bodies, as if they were
now in their best and most glorious Condition: And to be guilty of such Sins
now for the sake of them, as will deprive us for ever of them again, when we
should receive them Immortal. When they come out of their Graves free from
those extravagant Appetites and unruly Lusts, that now prompt us to such
methods of pleasing them, as carry a great deal of danger in them, (as they
will do, if we receive the Wisdom that Religion teaches us) they will then be
highly worthy of our Value and Esteem. And then it will be a proper time to
begin to love them, when there is nothing cleaves to them, that we ought to be
ashamed of.

5. How meanly ought we to think of those pleasures, that here in this World we
are capable of. The only reason why we affect them, is, because they are
grateful to our Bodies. And it is certain, that God has had that regard to our
Bodies, as to furnish a World with all that is delightful to sense to be our
Entertainment. But yet we make too much use of this Argument, when we fly to it
as a Reason. why we may lawfully and without offense use this World as
generally we do. The pleasures of this life are for the making Life cheerful
and comfortable; and where lies the fault then, if in a World of so much
trouble and vexation, where we are doomed to labor and misery, we endeavor to
make a life of labor and sorrow as easy to us as we can.

This is the Argument, by which sensual Men reason themselves into an
unmeasurable fondness for every thing, whereby Sense is gratified, and the Body
delighted. It Is this gives reputation to the sportings and frollicks of Wit,
even when they pass the bounds of Innocence, and unmannerly break in upon the
most sacred things. For a Jest is so luscious a thing, that it goes down
glibly; and often carries with it very horrid Prophanations. It Is this does
reconcile Men to Company and Drinking, and the washing away of Cares and the
lightning the Spirits does too often issue in very great Immoralities. Upon the
same reason it is, that Men let themselves loose to all extravagant Jollities
of a sensual life, and grow enamored of this World, because it is a place so
well stored with Entertainments for our sensitive Part.

But although the Pleasures of this World do appear very considerable to us,
and are extremely taking with us, when we consider our Bodies, as they are now;
yet how meanly would they appear to us, if we considered, that all the
suitableness, that is in them, is owing to the present imperfection of them:
But that when we receive them again purified and improved, nothing of this
nature will be delightful to us. How little pleasure should we take in
feasting a wanton and luxurious Appetite, or in adorning a Carcass, that must
die and return to Dust, or in any of the most delicious Enjoyments of this
life, did we think that all this Care is laid out upon a Body, that is
corruptible and mortal: And that this same Body, when it is raised to its most
perfect state, will as much loath and abhor all these things, as a Beggar
raised to a plentiful Fortune does the Rags, he was once clad with. At the
Resurrection, though we shall live again in these very Bodies, yet there will
be no Eating nor Drinking, nor any gratifying of Sense with any of those
delights, that now we reckon the very Comforts of this life: But we shall
either despise them, or be as much despised and scorned for our inclinations
toward them, as the Beggar, who being advanced to a great Estate, does rather
delight in a Barn and a wandering Life, than a Palace, and the respects that
belong to his Fortune. And why should we for the sake of these Bodies, which
then will be above them, value and love the delights of this sensible World, as
the best and only Pleasures we are capable of. If we would judge of the
Delights of this World from the Capacities of our Bodies, the best way would be
to take an account of them from their Relation to our Bodies, when they are in
their best and most exalted Condition. And then I am sure they would appear
very mean and contemptible. We cannot, it is true, pass our Lives comfortably
here without living upon and enjoying this World. But yet it is very fit we
should be mortified to this World, and enjoy the pleasures of it very
sparingly, because we must live again in another World; and the Bodies that are
now pleased with the Enjoyments of this, will, if they be fit to live there,
find no more pleasure at all in them. And the only way to cure us of our too
great fondness for worldly things, is to consider how little pleasure we shall
take in them, when we live again; how base and contemptible all the
Temptations, that here court us to Voluptuousness and Luxury, will appear, when
we are in so good a condition, that we shall be able to live without the most
needful Enjoyments that now we have.

CHAP. III. The Resurrection considered, as it is an Entering us upon an
Immortal Life.
III. I Come now to consider the Resurrection, as it is the beginning of an
Immortal Life. We shall not only then begin to live again, and to live in these
Bodies, which Death deprives us of, but to live an Immortal life. It Is the
great reproach of that Life, we now live, that it is mortal; because by
receiving it mortal, we receive it with the mark of God's displeasure upon it:
And Mortality does detract so very much from Life, that it leaves us very
little Life to boast of. But when we rise again, we shall for ever be freed
from that, which is so much the reproach of Life: And the Life, we shall then
begin to live, will be the same, that Adam should have lived, had he not
brought a Curse upon himself and us; i.e. It will be the Life, that God in our
Creation designed us for.

Was the Resurrection only designed to restore us the Life we lose, when we
die? I mean, just in the same imperfect condition we now enjoy it, we should be
apt to rejoice in it as a Blessing; and to fetch Arguments from thence to lay
the Terrors of Death: because it is much better to be in a living than a dead
State: Better is a living Dog, than a dead Lion, says the Wiseman, Eccles.
9.4. i.e. The most contemptible Creature, that has Life, is in a much better
condition, than the most noble, that wants it: For to him that is joined to all
the living there is hope; i.e. He that is alive, does by virtue of that
principle of Life, that is in him, reap much comfort and satisfaction from a
prospect of all the good, he is capable of.

This Notion some have carried so far, as to persuade themselves, that the
Damned, who undergo Everlasting Torments, are in a much better condition, than
if they were in a state of Annihilation. Because though they live in the most
miserable condition, yet they live. And they who live do enjoy some good;
whereas they, who have no life, enjoy no good at all. Upon which reason they
conclude it is much more Eligible to be, than not to be, and to live, though in
the greatest misery, than not to live at all. But I must confess, that I don't
apprehend the fineness of this kind of arguing: Neither does it appear, that
any Man does set such a value upon Life, as to be content to live the most
deplorably wretched life, so that he can but live. For Misery, when there is
nothing to allay it, does spoil the pleasure, and take away the very desire of
living. But however, such a life, as we now live, is acceptable enough to us,
though in the course of it we do meet with many troublesome Circumstances. Our
sensibility of this we make appear by that daily care we take, and that great
expense we are at to find out Remedies to put off Death as long as we can. For
though there be vexatious passages in this life, yet we generally feel they are
tolerable; or when they swell to a bulk exceeding our strength almost, yet we
often see, that the greatest of Temporal Evils are not very long, and upon that
account we hope we may outlive them: So that although it was to no better a
life than this is, that we should rise again, yet we should be well satisfied
with the thoughts of a Resurrection: And the rather, because this is a life,
that we are well acquainted with, and know the worst of; and by having made a
trial of it, do know how to pass through it with some tolerable ease and
comfort.

But yet there is one Evil, that attends this life, which nothing, that we
enjoy in it, can make tolerable; and that is the Certainty of Death. So that
were we only to rise to a Mortal life, this thought, that we must die again,
would much abate of our esteem of a Resurrection. For the thoughts of a
Resurrection can never be sufficient to fortify our Minds against the Fears of
Death, if after we are risen again, Death will still take its turn to carry us
to our Graves: For in this case there is nothing after Death to bear up our
Minds against so great an Evil.

But this is not the Life we shall rise to, but a Life that Death shall have no
more power over: This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality; and then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory: O Death, where is thy sting? O
Grave, where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. And among all the other
advantages of that Life, we shall then enter upon, St. John reckons this, That
there is no more Death, Rev. 21.4.

But the great Question is, How we can be said to begin to live an Immortal
Life then, when the Soul that lives in these Bodies, is an Immortal Principle
now, and does not lose its Life by being separated from the Body; but does
continue to live, when the Body is returned to Dust? To this I say, that though
the Soul be Immortal, and does not cease to live, after it has left the Body,
yet the Man, that consisted of a Body and a Soul, does: And the Life that the
Soul lives, is not that Life, which a Man by Dying loses. For though the Soul
be a principal part of us, yet it is but one part, and the Body is another; and
it is in the vital Union of these two parts, that the Life of Man consists. And
as it is this Life, that Death deprives us of, so it is this Life that the
Resurrection will restore us; And this Life will then begin to be Immortal. It
is not the Soul, that will then begin to be Immortal: For Immortality is the
privilege of this part of us, even while it is now in the Body: But the
Immortal Life, we shall then begin to live, is the Life we now live only made
Immortal: i.e. When the Resurrection has united the Soul and Body together
again, this Union will never more be broken. So that an Immortal Soul shall
then live in an Immortal Body for ever.

And it is in this sense we are to understand the Scriptures, when they speak
of our putting on Immortality, and the Gospels bringing Immortality and Life to
light. For if we consider the Immortality of the Soul, that was a Principle
acknowledged and believed long before the Gospel was preached. So that it
cannot be the making our Souls Immortal, when it tells of our putting on
Immortality: Now is it the Soul's Immortality that is brought to light by the
Gospel; for that was known long before. But the Immortality and Life, that we
owe our knowledge of to the Gospel, is that indissoluble Union of Body and
Soul, which will begin at the Resurrection. And now from hence we may observe,

1. That it is then only we shall begin to live. We date our Lives from the
time we come into the World, and reckon, that we have lived through so many
Ages of our Infancy, our Childhood, our Youth, our Manhood, and Old Age, when
we arrive to three or fourscore Years. This is a Life, that we account very
long; and when so many Years have not drawn it off, we reckon it deserves a
great deal of respect and reverence. And yet all this Life, which makes such a
noise among us, and is of such mighty repute with us, is only the Dregs and
Relics of that Life, which the Curse, that is come upon us, has taken from us.
That liveliness and vivacity, that belonged to innocent Man, is sinned away,
and gone: And the Spirits, that are left us, are the very Refuse and Bottom of
what we were once stored with. And because these serve to feed Life, and are
not run off sometimes till three or fourscore Years, we persuade our selves,
that we live a great while. And yet if we arrive to the utmost length of Life,
the truest account, that can be given of it, is this; That we have been so many
Years a Dying. For the first step, we take into the World, is toward our
Graves. And though we live to see Thousands fall beside us, and Ten thousand at
our right hands, before it come nigh us; yet all that can be said of us, is
this, That we die a more lingering Death than others.

And besides; a Life of fourscore or a hundred Years is so short, in comparison
of that, which is Eternal, that it does not, in the style of Scripture, deserve
the name of Life. It is styled Vanity, and compared to a shadow to instruct us;
that it has nothing of Reality in it, And when it is once spent, what is become
of all those Years, that we are said to live? Though Man be so strong, that he
comes to fourscore Years, yet is his strength then but labor and sorrow; for
it is soon cut off, and we flee away, Psalm. 90.10.

But when the Resurrection gives us Life again, then it is, that we shall in
the most proper sense be born to live. For then we shall receive all that
spirit and vigor, that we have lost; so much Spirit, that Eternity shall never
waste it. And if we account a Life of fourscore Years venerable, how much
Reverence ought we to have for a Life, that has no Death at the end of it.

Now this is the Life, we shall be born to, and begin to live, when at the
Resurrection our Souls take possession of our Bodies again. And could we but
with steadiness enough apply our Minds to the consideration and meaning of
Immortality, this Life would appear so much like a Vapor or a sudden Flash,
that gives us no time to consider, whether it be any thing or no, as would
abate of that respect and value we have for it. For, it is sure, we can then
only be said to begin to live, when we begin to feel our selves free from
Corruption, and the Approaches of Death.

2. We shall then begin to live that Life, we are appointed to. For a mortal
and corruptible Life was not that, which God designed and made us for; But it
is the Curse, that Sin has let in upon us, the Punishment God has subjected us
to for Adam's Transgression: By one Man sin entered into the World, and Death
by sin, says the Apostle, Romans 5.12. i.e. The Mortal state, we are now in, is
owing to Adam's Disobedience. For had not he disobeyed the Command, not to eat
of the Tree of Knowledge, we had not known what Death meant. In his state of
Innocence he was a Probationer for Immortality; and the Law, that threatened him
with Death in case of his Disobedience, did implicitly at least assure him of
Immortality, if he did not disobey. For it implies, that as while he was
innocent, he was not condemned to a Mortal condition; so on the other hand, he
was not adjudg'd to Immortality; but that Life and Death were set before him to
be the Rewards of his doings.

Whether Immortality was a natural Privilege of innocent Man, and the
Mortality, that we are now subject to, was a natural Effect of his Eating the
forbidden fruit, or no? i.e. Whether his Body, which was made out of the Dust,
was naturally subject to those decays, which at last turn ours into Dust again?
Or whether it was so built, that no Time or Age could possibly have impaired
it, if he had not eaten of a fruit, that tainted his Vitals, is a question that
we need not much trouble our selves about? For whatever we believe in this
case, yet it is certain, that Mortality and Death, even according to this nice
Speculation, came upon him and us by his transgressing the Law, that upon pain
of Death forbad him to eat of such a Tree. Those who suppose he was made
Immortal; i.e. That Immortality was conferred upon him in his very Creation, do
understand no more by the Command not to eat of the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, but only a Caution to avoid a fruit, that would kill him of it self.
Now as to this matter, it may seem reasonable enough to believe, that a Body,
that was not created Corruptible, as Adam's was not, would not have dissolved
to Dust again, as ours do, if he had not corrupted it by sin. For though his
Body was made of the same matter, as ours are, yet it was in a far more perfect
state. In us the Appetites of the Body are broken loose, and grown extravagant;
and the Principles of our Constitution are not so equally poised, at to prevent
those decays and languishings, which at last issue in Death. The rage of our
Appetites often destroy us, by being the occasion of Intemperance and Excesses
in Eating and Drinking and bodily Pleasures: And the predominancy of some of
those Humors, that belong to our Bodies, is the occasion of Diseases in us,
and a natural reason why we die. But while Man was innocent, though he did
stand in need of Meat and Drink to nourish and sustain his Body, yet his Food
was wholesome, and his Appetites so temperate, that he was in no danger of dying
either through the illness of his Body, or by an extravagant Excess. And since
the several Humors of his Body were at peace, the good and sound Constitution
of Body, with which he was created, did exempt him from those decays and
infirmities, that let Death in upon us. He was, it is true, made out of the
Dust, as we are, and needed the supports of Meat and Drink as we do: And on
that account it is plain, that he was not Immortal, but that there was one way
at least, that it was possible for him to die, though not so many as do destroy
us. Hunger and a want of food would certainly have killed him, as well as it
will us, or else there needed not such a provision of food have been made for
him in Eden. But yet as he was so well provided for, that there was no danger
of his dying this way: So his Body, though formed out of the Dust, was so well
built, that Age and Infirmity would have made no Impressions upon it.

And besides, we are to consider, that the Ground being not under a Curse, as
it is now, his Body could naturally be no more subject to Vanity, than the
Earth out of which he was made. For why may we not suppose, that the Earth was
not then, what it is now, as it is suited to the Condition of our Mortal
sinful state, no more than it will be the same it is now, when we come out of
our Graves to live in that New World, that will be prepared for us, when we
have shook off our Corruption. And as the Renovation of our Bodies does
require, that there should be New Heavens and a New Earth for us to live in: So
the Earth, in which innocent Man lived, was such as was proper for him to
inhabit. It was not surely such as now it is, since a Curse has come upon it
for the sake of Man; i.e. Even out of Charity to Man, that he who is under a
Curse might have a proper Habitation to live in. And when the Earth out of
which Adam was taken, was not subject to the Bondage of Corruption, under which
it now groans, his Body, though framed out of the Dust, was not for that reason
to resolve into Dust again.

But though he was not naturally Mortal, neither was he naturally Immortal. For
a Creature, that is made Immortal, does not stand in need of Meat and Drink,
that he may live; neither could it have been in the power of the forbidden
fruit to have killed an Immortal Creature; because, whatever is naturally
Immortal, cannot die; And therefore is not in danger of being hurt by Poison,
or the Sword, or any other Instrument of Death. So that it is not good sense to
say, He was naturally Immortal, and yet that the Fruit he was forbidden to Eat
of could naturally kill him. For what can kill that, which cannot die?

And besides; Why was the Tree of Life planted in the Garden, if Adam was
created Immortal? It was not surely for show only, but for use, as all the
other Trees, even that of Knowledge undoubtedly were? For though there was good
Reason to prohibit a Tree of Knowledge to a Creature, that was by his own
industry and endeavor to improve himself in Knowledge and Virtue; yet perhaps
he was at last to have been allowed the liberty of Eating that Fruit as the
Reward of his Labor, and for the highest improvement of his knowing Faculty,
if by Care and Diligence he applied himself to that which was his great Duty
and Business. It is not to be thought surely, that God planted the Tree of
Knowledge in the Garden merely for the hurt of his Creature, or to become a
Temptation to him to ruin himself; but rather for his good, had he waited the
time, that God in his Wisdom had appointed to reward him with that fruit,
whereby all his further search after Knowledge should have been ended, by
having this Wisdom and Knowledge, he by his own Industry had acquired, secured
and perfected. But when by a hasty step he endeavored to gratify his Appetite
of Knowledge by becoming like unto God, knowing Good and Evil at once, without
any labor of his own, his Appetite became vicious; and his Attempt was such a
Breach of the Order, and a Transgression of the Method that God had appointed
him, that he denied him the benefit of the Tree of Life, and condemned him to a
Mortal condition.

And therefore the subtle Serpent, when he tempted Eve to Eat of this Fruit,
spoke a Truth, when he told her God does know, that in the day you eat thereof,
your Eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil, Genesis
3.5. He knew the virtue that was in this Tree; and therefore it is said, that
when they had eaten, their Eyes were opened, v. 7. But the mischief of the
Temptation lay in this, That they were prevailed upon to Eat of it before their
time, before they were prepared and qualified for it, or fitted for so great a
Benefit as was designed them in it. And therefore it was that God turned them
out of the Garden, lest they should Eat likewise of the Tree of Life, and live
for ever: i.e. Lest they should make themselves Immortal, when by setting their
Appetites at liberty they had made their improvements in Virtue more difficult
than they would have been; and when in the Condition they were in, Immortality
would have been no Blessing. For I don't suppose, that the Tree of Life was
planted in Eden to repair the decays of a mortal Body; but that by Eating of it
they might be made Immortal, when by a course in Virtue and Piety they were
become fit for a Translation to that place, where they should no more need Meat
or Drink to support their Lives. And therefore St. John tells us, that in the
New Jerusalem, that glorious City, we shall after the Resurrection dwell in for
ever; There is the Tree of Life, whose Leaves are for the Healing of the
Nations, Rev. 22.2. i.e. Whose Fruit shall make us Immortal, as the Tree of
Life in the midst of Paradise, should have made Adam, had he not disobeyed the
Divine Command.

The Sum of all is this; Adam was created in so sound and healthful a State,
that Age and Infirmities could not Naturally have prevailed over him: But as he
was not Naturally subject to Death, so neither was he Created in an Immortal
Condition. But Life and Death were set before him; and as he was a Probationer
for Immortality, so God having created him Innocent, left it to his own choice,
whether he would live or die: i.e. Whether by Obeying he would procure to
himself, when the time of his Trial was over, a grant to Eat of the Trees of
Knowledge and of Life, or whether by disobeying God he would be debarred of
this privilege; and instead of being translated to a state where he should live
without Food, as the Angels do, be doomed to a Life of Sorrow and Labor. So
that as Mortality was the Judgment, that came upon him for his Sin; so
Immortality was the gift God would have bestowed on him for his Obedience, had
he improved himself for it.

This then being that perfection of Life, that God, when he made Man innocent,
designed him for. The Resurrection, it is plain, is designed to restore us to
that way of living, that God in our Creation fitted us for. For although Man
was not created Immortal, yet it is plain he was created for an Immortal Life;
because God put an Immortal Principle into these Bodies of Clay, which now are
Mortal. For why should he unite two such Principles together, and make it
Natural for an Immortal Soul to live in a Body, if he did not design they
should live always together? And if this was the way of living, that Man was
intended for in his Creation; the Life, that the Resurrection is designed to
give us, is the same Immortal Life, that we were Created for: For he that
over-cometh; i.e. makes those Improvements in Virtue, as Adam should have
done, shall, after he is risen again for the confirming of Life to him, eat of
the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. i.e.
We shall be made Immortal as Adam should have been.

The Life we now live, which is subject to Diseases and Death, is not the Life,
that God gave us; but the sorry Remains of that Life, which he appointed us to.
It is only so much as has been left us: But at the Resurrection we shall begin
to live like Men. For then our Immortal Souls shall be united to Immortal
Bodies. And the Life, we should have lived, if we had never sinned, will then
Commence, when Corruption and Mortality, which are the Punishments of Sin,
shall be changed into Incorruption and Immortality, which are the glorious
Privileges of the Sons of God.

3. We shall then be freed from the Reproach of Mortality and Corruption. The
Reproach I call it; for there can be no greater Reproach to a Creature, that
was made for Immortality, than to die: And especially when we consider, that
Death is the Punishment of Sin, and that we die for our Disobedience to our
Creator and Sovereign Lord. In this case Death puts us to open shame in the
sight of all the World. We seem to have a Natural sense of the fault, that is
the occasion of it, when we lament the Funerals of our Friends and Relations:
And the natural dread and horror of Death, that is in all Men, does express a
mighty Regret, that such a thing as Mortality and Corruption should belong to
us, who have an Immortal Principle within us.

We go out of the World like Criminals; and can any thing grate more upon an
ingenuous Mind, than to think we die, because we are under an offense, and we
condemned to die? And had not our gracious Redeemer born our Shame for us, and
appeased the Wrath that is come upon us, and made it a more easy thing to
enter upon another state, with what shame and horror, with what confusion and
disorder can we imagine that our Souls would have crept out of these Bodies?
For in this case they would have been dragged like Apprehended Malefactors, to
that separate state, whither they go, when they leave the Body, as to a Gaol,
over which the Devil has the power: For, according to St. Paul's Expression, he
has the power of Death, Heb. 2.14. i.e. Death would have delivered our Souls
into his hands, as a condemned Criminal is put into the hands of an
Executioner: They would have been consigned over to him, who has the power over
that State whither Death sends us. And oh, with what Vexation and Anguish would
they have been tormented, to think that all this was come upon them by the just
Judgment of God! Think with how much shame a Man, that was born to a plentiful
Estate, appears among Men, or is haled to a Prison, when by his Folly he has
reduced himself to Beggary and Rags; and the common Reproach of all, that knew
him, is, See the Man that has undone himself by his Extravagancies. And how
much more grievous would it have been to us, had not Christ by dying and rising
again taken away our Reproach, to have been pointed at by Angels, when we had
gone into the other World without the Bodies, that by the Law of our Creation
we were appointed to live in? and when we had fallen under the Power and
Dominion of Evil Spirits, to have had it said of us, That we were the Spirits
of Men, and had brought our selves into that Condition by our own Folly, and
want of Consideration? But Christ by Death has destroyed him that had the power
of Death; and by going to the place of separate Spirits, has taken possession
of it as his own Kingdom in right of his Conquest over the Devil. And the
Resurrection he has assured us of, will free us from our shame: For then Death
will be swallowed up of Victory, and we shall appear in the World, and live
like our selves again. This will be the day of our Triumph and Joy, when that,
which is sown in dishonor and weakness, shall rise in glory and power. And
because we go out of this World with the expectation of a Resurrection, we may
appear before the Inhabitants of the invisible World without any dread or
shame, because we shall there live in hope under the protection of a merciful
Redeemer.

4. This may inform us of the Difference between this Life, and that we shall
then live. We shall live in the same Bodies indeed, but not in Bodies, that
carry such marks of dishonor and shame in them, as now they do, nor such a
Life as now we live. For the great difference between them is this, That now
our Bodies are frail and brittle, and we carry the great valuable Treasure of
Life in Earthen Vessels, that are subject to decay; and which erelong will be
broke to pieces and lose the Treasure, that is put into them. But then they
will be purified to a Heavenly frame, and no longer subject to those
innumerable Chances, that beat upon, and at last break them down. Here it is
only that little scantling of Life, which Sin and the Divine Wrath have left
us, that we enjoy; but there we shall have that full portion, that God in our
Creation set before us, and what through the Redemption of his Son, we are
restored to the Hopes of. Here we live subject to a thousand Miseries and
Infirmities, and are put to daily trouble to repair the decays of a corruptible
Nature; and at last, after all the supports and refreshments of Meat and Drink,
or the Remedies of Physic, our Spirits run off, and the Grave becomes our
Habitation. But then we shall have a Life, (unless by our own folly we treasure
up so much Wrath, as will not suffer us to live, and we our selves carry Misery
along with us;) a Life, I say, that no Sorrow shall embitter, no Wants weary
and disquiet with Labor and Solicitude, and which will be able to sustain it
self for ever without any of those Succors and Remedies, that our present
Necessities call for. There will be none of that thoughtfulness for to morrow,
which now often breaks our Rest, and embitters our Lives; no sweating for Bread
to maintain Life; nor any of those Anxieties, which here the fears of losing,
what we have, do perplex us with. For there the Reason of all this will be
taken away, because we shall then enter upon a World replenished with all, that
Humane Nature can desire; and the Life we shall live, will have none of those
Exigences, that suppose imperfection in us.

That which makes this Life so full of vexation and sorrow is the Curse that is
come upon our selves, and that which is come upon the Earth for our sakes. For
it was but fit, that the Earth should be changed, when Sin had altered the
Nature of us, that were to live upon it. And since a Mortal and Corruptible
Creature must live a Life of Sorrow and Labor, it was requisite the Earth
should be despoiled of that fertility, that gave innocent Man an easy
Maintenance, and be Cursed to bear Briars and Thorns for a Creature, that was
to fetch his Food out of it with Sweat and Sorrow. Now what wonder is it, that
the Life of Man, which is not to be sustained but by his own Labor, should
begin to be overrun with Cares and Solicitudes, when that fertility which fed
him with Ease, began to leave the Earth; and instead of the Fruits of Paradise,
he saw Briars and Thorns spring up all about him. It Is Natural when our Bread
fails, and we see a scarcity of Provision begin to appear to have our Cares
heightened, and our Heads filled with Thoughtfulness. So that our Solicitudes
and Anguish for the things to sustain Life, are but like the scramblings of
Children, when they are afraid the things they value, should all be snatched
from them. For when the Earth began to fail Man of that plentiful and easy
Provision, with which in Innocence he was fed; it is no wonder that, like Men
afraid, lest the whole World should fail us, our Desires grew impatient, and
made us restless and thoughtfull.

But now in the other World, when we live again, we shall not want the things
that are needful to us now; and all that we shall need to make that Life
perfectly Happy, will be abundantly provided for us. Then the Curse, that took
away our Blessings, will it self be taken away; And the New Heavens, and New
Earth, that God will then create, will no more be an occasion to us of those
vexatious Solicitudes, that the Poverty of this World begets in us, than any
Exigencies in our Nature will. We shall rise with Bodies renewed; i.e. Freed
from all the ill Consequences of our first Apostasy, and we shall live in a
World renewed too; i.e. Freed from the Effects of that Curse, that brought
forth Briars and Thorns in it; I mean, which is the Cause of all the Miseries
and Sorrows of this Life. For they who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that
World, and the Resurrection from the Dead, can die no more, for they are equal
unto the Angels, Matt. 26.36. What that means, we cannot tell, because it is
little, that we know as yet of the state and condition of the other World. But
this it teaches us, That we shall be Immortal, and live just such a Life as
they do: Not such a Life of Labor and Toil and Misery, as now we do, because
the Curse, that is the cause of it, will then be taken off.

5. Let us consider how much Reason we have to prepare our selves for another
Life. Life is so valuable a thing to us, that we judge it worth all the
tiresome Journeys we take, and the irksome Labor we are at to lay up something
for the sustaining of it. It Is for the sake of Life that we even choose to
Drudge our Bodies in continual Toil, and to expose Life it self to very great
Dangers. For had we none of those wants, that put us to pain, and create
Thoughtfulness in us, could we live without Labor and Industry, we should
choose to sit still and to enjoy Life with ease.

And if we are content to undergo so many Hardships for a Life, that is Mortal;
if we believe there is a Necessity upon us to follow our Callings, and to be
intent upon our worldly Interests, that we may provide those Necessaries of
Life, without which we shall certainly die; and which when we have them, will
not long preserve the Lives, we labor for: With how much greater care ought we
to lay up for the Life to come, a Life that nothing can destroy but our own
Folly and Negligence? Do we judge him an improvident Man, who takes no thought
at all for to morrow; but expects that Providence without his own industry and
forecast should supply his Necessities? And do we make no Reflections upon our
own foolish Improvidence, when while we are thoughtfull, and labor for food
and raiment to preserve a Life that we must part with, we leave all the care of
an Immortal Life to the Goodness and Mercy of our heavenly Father without any
serious Considerations, what we are to do to qualify our selves for it.

Immortality is, it is true, the Gift of God; and all that at last he bestows it
upon, must acknowledge, that it is owing to his Goodness and Mercy. But he has
nowhere told us, that he will give it to those, that are unworthy of it. St.
Paul tells us, That it is to those, who seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, that he will give Eternal life, Romans 2.7. And in this consists his
Revealed Mercy, that he will raise and give Life again to a Creature, that his
Justice takes away Life from. But then it behooves us to take care, that when we
have it, we don't lose the Benefits and Advantages of it: And by neglecting
those Improvements, whereby we are to prepare our selves for it, to put us out
of a condition of living happily, when we have it.

It Is Holiness alone can qualify us for a glorious Immortality; and this we
may be sensible of, because the Mortality and Misery we now labor under are
the fruits of Sin. And there can be no way to make our selves Immortal and
Happy, but by abandoning that which at first made us Mortal and Miserable. So
that if we still go on to corrupt our selves by the illess of our doings,
though we do rise again after Death, Misery will follow us; and a more
dreadful Condemnation than that which in Adam we fell under, will come upon us.

PART II.
II. I Come now, in the Second place, to consider what Certainty we have of the
Truth of this Doctrine. One would think, that no Doctrine should meet with a
more easy Reception than this of the Resurrection; And that the love of Life
should so strongly incline us to the belief of it, as not to suffer us to
expect so full a Proof, and plain an Evidence, as we do for Matters, that we
are not so much interested in. But yet as grateful a thing as it is to live,
and as willing as we are to have those things to be true, which are for our
good, we mightily boggle at the Difficulties, that are in a Resurrection, and
will hardly allow it possible, that God should raise the Dead. It appears very
unaccountable to us, that a Body, that has undergone so many Thousand changes,
should at the last arise the same it was. And that every Atom, that belongs to
it, should, after they have been carried to the furthest part of the World
perhaps, meet together, and make up the same Body. This is an Objection, with
which the incredulous believe this Doctrine is sufficiently puzzled, and that
no Wit of Man can make it appear so much as possible, that such a thing can be;
viz. That the same Body, that dies, should rise again, when perhaps the Dust,
of which that Body was made, has belonged to a thousand Bodies.

But though this be a Difficulty to us, does our Reason tell us, that it is so
too to an Almighty and All-wise God? Though we can give no account, where or
how the Dust of every Body shall be found, yet we may conceive, that every Dust
is some-where; and that That which is to be found some-where, is not impossible
to be found by an All-wise God, whose Eyes go through the World.

This alone is sufficient to prove it possible, without having a recourse to
any Parallel Instances in Nature. And, for my part, I must profess, that I
don't understand, how any thing of this Nature, can so much as make it appear
to be possible. We have been told that the Succession of the Summer to the
Winter, and the springing of the Day after a dark Night, and the like, do bear
some kind of Resemblance to a Resurrection. But how does it appear, that it is
possible a dead Body should rise and live again, because we see there is a
Succession of Days and Nights; and that after a cold Winter, we have a warm
Spring, that fetches Plants and Flowers out of the Earth. For these things have
those certain Causes in Nature, which don't at all belong to a Resurrection.
This will be the Work of God's Almighty Power; And that he will make use of his
Power to this purpose, is no way to be known but by Revelation. No conclusion
can be made, that because God in the first Creation of all things did make the
Vicissitudes of Day and Night, and so frame the Motions of the great Luminaries
of the World, that we should have Winter and Summer, and that Plants and
Flowers should seem to wither and die at the Approach of Winter, and to revive
again when the Spring returns; That therefore it is possible the Dead Bodies of
Men should return to Life again. For how can we possibly conclude that a Body,
that dies and sees Corruption, may rise again, because we see Flowers and
Plants that do not die in Winter, to put forth and flourish in Summer. These
things have their own Natural Causes: But to know the Possibility of a
Resurrection, we must have a Recourse to the Will of God, because this is a
matter that depends upon his pleasure. For if he will do it, it is enough to
satisfy us, that the thing is possible, because it is to be the Work of
Omnipotency. And it is no more impossible for an Almighty God to gather
together the scattered Dust of a Dead Body, and to make that a Body again which
has already been one, than to make a World out of Nothing.

Now that we have such a Revelation, none that consult the Scriptures, and
believe them to contain the Oracles of God, can make any doubt of. And for the
better satisfying us, he has exemplified the possibility of it in the
Resurrection of Christ, and furnished us with an assured Priniciple to ground
our Expectation upon, by raising him for our Justification.

CHAP. I. The Resurrection, as Revealed.
1. FIrst then I shall consider what ground of Certainty we have in the Holy
Scriptures, that there shall be a Resurrection. And as to this matter, it is to
be observed, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament do speak very sparingly
of it. And although before our Savior's coming it was, no doubt, the belief
and expectation of good Men, yet their Faith and Hope were grounded upon no
express Revelation of it. And the Reason was, because in this consisted the
Grace, that in the days of the Messiah should be procured for, and communicated
to Mankind. Upon which account the full Discovery of it was reserved to him,
who by conquering Death was to ascertain the Truth of it to us.

If it be enquired, whence then good Men of old had their Notice of it: I
answer,

1. That it was contained in the Promise made to Adam, that the Seed of the
Woman should break the Serpent's Head. For the Expression of breaking the
Serpent's Head must mean, that he, who was promised, should by dispossessing
the Devil of that power he had gained over the Souls of Men, deliver us from
the Calamity, that by the Serpent's subtilty we were fallen into. Now this
Calamity was Mortality, and that Power of leading the Captived Souls of Men to
that invisible state where the Devil exercises a Tyrannical Authority, that he
had gained over us. And because the Serpent by his Subtilty had brought this
mischief upon us, God promises that the Seed of the Woman should bruise his
Head; i.e. He would out-wit him by the Seed of that Woman, whom he had
deceived; and deprive him of the fruit of his Subtilty by restoring Immortality
to Man, whom he had brought under a Curse. Thus, no doubt, Adam understood this
Promise, which assured him of a Deliverance from the Curse he was fallen under.
For how could he be freed from the Curse, that Sin had brought upon him, but by
having the Life, which the Justice of God sentenced him to lose, assured to him
again? Or how could the Serpent's Crafty design to deprive him of an Immortal
Life be disappointed, but by a Promise that gave him hopes of rising again to
Life? And therefore St. Paul observes. That as in Adam all die, so in Christ
shall all be made alive: Implying, That as Death was the Curse, that came upon
us by the first Transgression; so it was a Resurrection from the Dead, that was
promised to Adam. Because that Promise not only teaches us in general, That God
designed us some great Blessing by the Seed of the Woman; but that the Blessing
should be a Remedy to the Mischief, that by the Serpent's Subtilty was fallen
upon us.

2. The Promise made to Abraham of giving him and his Seed the Land of Canaan
does imply it. For this Promise was not made to his Posterity alone, but to him
also: All the Land, which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed
after thee, Genesis 13.15. Now though this Promise was not made good to him, nor
his Sons, who were the Heirs of the Promise; but, as the Apostle says, they
sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country, Heb. 11.9. Yet God
made himself known to him, and to Isaac, and Jacob to be their God: By which he
would have them to believe him to be that faithful God, that keeps Promise.
And accordingly it was by Faith that they sojourned there, though as Strangers;
believing, that though they did not live to see the Promise made good, yet
there would come a time, when God would be mindful of them, and put them into
a full possession of it: These all, says the Apostle, died in faith not having
received the Promises; but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of
them, and embraced them, and confessed, that they were strangers and pilgrims
on the Earth, v. 13. And therefore when they were dead, God still styled
himself The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, to let
their Posterity know, that he was mindful of them, and of the promise he had
made them. From which Text our Blessed Savior convinced the Sadducees, that
they should rise again: i.e. Though they did not receive the Promise in this
Life; yet, because God had assured them he was their God, they should assuredly
live again, and enjoy the Benefits of it.

The design of the Argument was to teach that Sect, that denied a Resurrection,
that in this Text God had given the Jews a sufficient ground for the Belief of
a Resurrection, because God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. It
is not sufficient to style him the God of the living, though there be no
Resurrection, only because the Souls of Men do live in a separate state. For
though the Soul of Abraham be alive, yet Abraham is dead. And if Abraham was
not to live again, he could not, with a Respect to Abraham, be styled the God
of the living. The meaning of our Savior's Argument is this; That though
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob be dead by virtue of that Curse, that is come upon
all Men; yet they must rise again from under this Curse; because, though they
are dead, they are not consigned over to the Power of that Evil Spirit, who has
the Power of Death; For God still styles himself their God; which implies, that
their Souls are in a place of safety under the protection of God, where they
rest in hope of seeing the accomplishment of the Promise made to them. For the
least that we are to conclude from hence is, That God has reserved some special
favor for them. But what friendship could he be supposed to bear them, if he
was resolved they should bear the Curse for ever, that took away their Lives?
He could not surely style himself their God, if he had forsaken them for ever.
For to be a God to any one, does at least signify, that he designs some great
Good to such a person. But what great Good can he design for those, whom he has
forgotten, and leaves to bear those Marks of his Displeasure, with which they
go out of this World? If then God has not totally forsaken them, as his being
their God does imply, that he has not; though they be dead, because of the Doom
that was passed upon Adam; yet they are not by Death delivered as Captives into
the hands of him, that has the Power of Death, but shall be delivered out of
that state of the Dead, where they live under the protection of God, because he
is their God.

Or we may take the design of our Savior in order to the asserting the
Doctrine of the Resurrection to have been only to overthrow that Belief of the
Sadducees concerning the Annihilation of the Soul, upon which they grounded
their disbelief of a Resurrection. And indeed to them, who believed there was
no Resurrection, because they believed the Souls of Men are extinguished by
Death, it was sufficient for the proving there is a Resurrection, to prove,
That the Souls of Men do live in a separate state after Death. Because this was
to destroy the foundation, on which they grounded their Belief. And it is sure,
if our Souls did not remain alive after Death, there would be no part of us,
that could be sensible of the Mischief, that Death is to us; nor of the
Blessing a Resurrection will be to us: But since our Souls do continue alive,
the Hopes of a Resurrection does speak so much favor toward them, who do not
live like themselves; while they are out of the Body, as does abundantly answer
the Expression of God's being their God. For if God be their God, he will
certainly satisfy so Natural a desire as that of a separate Soul toward its
Body is; i.e. He will bring the Soul out of its separate state; and raise the
Man, that is dead.

Thus then of old, from the time that Man became Mortal, has this Doctrine been
Revealed. And although there are no such express Texts in the Old, as there are
in the New Testament for it; yet all that consider the import and design of
these Promises made to Adam and Abraham, must grant that nothing less than the
Resurrection from the Dead was intended in them. They are the Promises upon
which God founded his Church in the two first periods of it, as now the
Christian Church is upon that clear discovery, we have of a Resurrection. And
because the Church is the same it was in all Ages, the foundation likewise must
be the same. And as in the time of Adam's Innocence it was the Hopes of an
Immortal Life, that was the Encouragement he had to maintain his Innocence; so,
since we became Mortal, it is the same Hope, wherewith God encourages us to
return to and persevere in our Duty; only with this difference, That now we are
to be made Immortal by conquering Death. Thus the Seed of the Woman will break
the Serpent's Head, and God will show himself to be Abraham's God.

CHAP. II. The Resurrection, as Exemplified to us in the Resurrection of Christ.
II. I Come now to consider what Ground of Certainty we have for this Doctrine,
as it is Exemplified to us in the Resurrection of Christ. And this is such a
sensible Demonstration of the certain Truth of it, that none can reasonably
make the least doubt of it, who does not call in question the Truth of Christ's
Resurrection. For if it be certainly true, that Christ is risen from the Dead,
this is a sufficient Answer to all those Objections, wherewith wanton Wits
endeavor to puzzle this Doctrine. For no Argument can be good, against which
there lies plain matter of fact. Let them pretend never so much Impossibility
in the case; yet since we can tell them of a Man, that was dead, and is alive
again, all the Impossibilities, that they talk of, come to this, That it is
impossible a Man should know all that God can do.

There are Two things then that I shall do.

1. Consider the Certainty of Christ's Resurrection. 2. What Ground of
Certainty we have from thence, that we shall rise again.
SECT. I. Of Christ's Resurrection.
I. In speaking of Christ's Resurrection, I shall, 1. Consider the Certainty of
it, That he did rise. 2. By what Power he rose.

1. That he did rise again; i.e. That the Body in which he suffered, which was
dead, and buried, and which lay three days in the Grave, was raised again out
of the Grave, and is ascended into Heaven. That the same Jesus, who was Born of
the Virgin Mary, and lived a true and proper Life, as we do, among the Jews,
for above Thirty years, and whom they took and put to Death as truly, as they
did the two Malefactors that were Crucified with him; That Jesus, I say, who
under-went as real a dissolution of Soul and Body, as any other Man, that is
born into the World, does, did rise again the same Man both in Body and Soul,
as before he was Crucified.

This is the Doctrine, that the Apostles were appointed to publish to the
World, that by being convinced, that a Man, who died, as we do, was raised
again, we might believe, that there is forgiveness with God; i.e. That the
Punishment that is inflicted on us for Sin, will not be Eternal: Ye Men of
Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you by
miracles, and wonders, and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as
ye your selves also know: Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain, whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of Death, Act. 2.22,
23, 24. The sum of which is this; That as it was the same Jesus, who was
approved of God among them by Miracles, and Wonders, and Signs, that the Jews
crucified; so it was the same Jesus, that they had crucified and slain, that
God raised up.

This is an Article, in which, upon the account of the Curse, we are fallen
under, we are so nearly concerned, that the Apostles did mainly inculcate it,
as if the Preaching the Resurrection of Christ was to preach the whole of
Christianity. And God took care, we should have as full an Evidence of the
Truth of it, as any Matter of Fact can possibly be proved by. The Apostles, I
say, were mainly concerned in persuading the World to the belief of this
Doctrine; not that this is all, that Christianity requires us to believe, but
because the other Articles of our Faith do either terminate in this, and by
consequence must be believed, when we believe this; or else are not of that
moment to us as this is. This is an Article that sets before us the Mercy we
stood in need of; the Mercy of being delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies,
and of having Life and Immortality, the Blessings, we lost in Adam, brought to
light. And therefore the Resurrection of our Lord was accounted of that moment
in our Religion, that the Office they considered themselves Ordained to, was
this of being Witnesses of his Resurrection, Act. 1.22. And accordingly this
Doctrine St. Paul did in a peculiar manner recommend to the thoughts and care
of Timothy: Remember this, that Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, was raised
from the dead according to my Gospel, 2. Tim. 2.8.

This then being so considerable an Article of our Faith, I am to consider what
Evidence we have of the Truth of it: For, as the Apostle speaks, if Christ be
not risen, then is our Preaching vain, and our Faith is also vain, 1 Cor.
15.14. i.e. The Christian Religion is of no use to the World. The Evidence
then, that we have to prove this, though it be not such as does carry an
infallible Certainty in it, yet is such as is sufficient to satisfy any
unprejudiced person: Because it is all the proof, that a Matter of Fact, as
this is, is capable of: For we have the Testimony of several Hundreds, that
saw, and conversed with him, after he was risen; and that for forty days had
both opportunity and liberty to examine the Truth of it thoroughly, and to
satisfy all the Doubts, that rose in their Minds concerning it. And besides,
we have good reason to believe, that his greatest Enemies were convinced of the
Truth of it. And they, who will not admit of this as a sufficient proof, may as
well question the Truth of every thing we see; whether those be Men or no, that
we live among: nay, whether we our selves be not Specter and Walking-Ghosts.
But,

1. We have the Testimony of several Hundreds, that saw, and conversed with him
after he was risen, and that for forty days had both opportunity and liberty to
examine the Truth of it thoroughly. The first Reporters of his Resurrection,
were Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of James, Joanna, and the other Women
that were with them, who came in the dawn of the first day of the Week to the
Sepulcher with Spices to Embalm his Body. God hereby in his wise Providence
provided a Confutation of the Calumny of the Scribes concerning his Disciples
stealing his Body out of the Sepulcher. Now it will hardly be supposed, that
they should come with a design to take away his Body, who were sollicitous how
they should roll away the Stone: Neither is it probable, that they should feign
the story, that he was risen, who thought of nothing but Anointing and
Embalming his, Dead Body.

These Women, to whom he first appeared after his Resurrection, brought the
glad Tidings to his Disciples, to whom he afterward showed himself alive by
many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the
things pertaining to the kingdom of God, Act. 1.3. The two first that saw him
were Peter and Cleophas, as they were Traveling to Emmaus. After that he
appeared to the Eleven the same Evening, as Peter and Cleophas were giving an
account what had happened to them in the way, and how he was known of them in
breaking of Bread. And to convince them he was no Spirit, as they supposed, but
the same Jesus, that was Crucified, he showed them his Hands and his Side, and
offered them the same sensible proof, that it was he himself, as satisfies
every Man, that he, whom he sees, speaks to, and eats with, is a Man and no
Spirit. His next Appearance was to the Eleven, when Thomas was with them; to
remove whose incredulity, he offered all the satisfaction; without which he had
declared, he would not believe. After this he, by Appointment, appeared in a
Mountain of Galilee to the Twelve, where he was seen, as St. Paul says, of
above five hundred Brethren at once. After which he was seen of James, then of
all the Apostles: And last of all he was seen of me also, says the Apostle, as
of one born out of due time, 1 Cor. 15.6, 7, 8.

Now that, which I mention all this for, is to prove the certain Truth of this
Matter of Fact from these three Things: 1. That it is well attested. 2. That
they, who were the first Reporters of it, could not be deceived. 3. That it
could be no contrivance.


1. It is well attested. The Testimony of two or three Witnesses has always
been accounted sufficient to establish every Truth. This is enough not only to
determine those Controversies, that happen among Men, but to dispose of the
dearest Interests Men have in this life. For though the Testimony of a single
Witness may be doubted, because, though he speaks Truth, there is much
difficulty to know, that he does so: Yet the concurrence of many in delivering
the same thing is allowed for a certain Evidence of the Truth of it, until it
can be made to appear, that all those many speak only by report. For in that
case they bear no Testimony at all to the thing in Question, but only to the
Report. Or that it appear there is a Combination among them; for then, though
they be many, yet they are but one Witness, though the Matter be true. It Is
thus likewise that we come to the Knowledge of Persons and Actions of past
Ages. And no Man makes any question whether there were such Persons as Pompey
and Julius Caesar, or whether they did such things as are reported of them;
because they have been delivered down to us by Persons, that either knew them,
or had sufficient means inform themselves of the Truth of what was reported
concerning them.

Now thus it is, that the Truth of Christ's Resurrection is delivered down to
us: I mean, we depend upon the Testimony of such a Number of Witnesses, who saw
and conversed with him for forty days, and received instructions from him, and
afterward beheld him ascend into Heaven, as seldom any Matter of Fact is
Established by. And since we have the same Evidence for this Matter, as we have
for the Truth of all History, no Man ought to call the Truth of it into
question, until he has made it appear, that the Persons, that were the first
Reporters of it, were of no credit, or that they contrived the story. This is
expected from all, that except to the Testimony of any person: For no Man's
Testimony ought to be laid aside, till it is some way or other sufficiently
invalidated; because it ought not to be taken for granted concerning any
person, that he is a Knave, till it be proved, that he is so.

2. That they who were the first Reporters of it were not deceived. Their
Testimony is this; That they divuiged nothing, but what they were Eyewitnesses
of; i.e. They preached, That Christ was risen, because they had seen him alive
again. It is possible indeed, that our Eyes may be deceived in what they see;
and that which we judge to be a Man, may prove an Apparition. But though at
sometimes our Senses may impose upon us, yet they seldom do, but we know of it;
and especially if we have time to examine any Object, we can hardly be deceived
in our Judgment of it, or at least we seldom live long under the Cheat. And
indeed it would argue a Man extremely inclined to Skepticism to question,
whether these be real Bodies, we our selves have, or those be real Men, that we
live with, because it is possible our Eyes may be deceived; and that be
nobody, which we take to be one; and those no Men, which we believe are so.
For though we may be thus mistaken, yet nobody doubts, but there are ways,
whereby we do know, we are not mistaken, when we judge him to be a Man, whom we
see and speak withal. Now whatever it is, that satisfies us, that the Men we
converse with are not Apparitions; the same certain Proofs had the Apostles,
that That Jesus, who was crucified, was alive again. For if our Senses do not
always deceive us, what should hinder, but that they should tell, as well as
other Men, that they were not deceived in this matter.

And indeed, if we consider the whole account we have of their Evidence, it
will appear, they could not be deceived, any more than we our selves are in the
view of a plain sensible Object. For he was seen of them forty days; so that
they had time to recollect themselves, and thoroughly to examine the Truth of
what they saw. And besides, a mistake of this nature does not use to lie on
this side; I mean, Men do not use to mistake a Spirit for a Man. It may
sometimes fall out, that a Man may be mistaken for a Spirit; but the Appearance
of a Spirit is generally with that surprise, as frights us into an Apprehension
of something unusual. And thus it happened in this case. For the Disciples,
when first Jesus appeared to them, were so terrified and affrighted, supposing
they had seen a Spirit, that to convince them he was no Spirit, he showed them
his Hands and his Feet: And it was with much difficulty, that he brought them
to a belief, that it was the very Body, that hung upon the Cross, that he
appeared to them in.

And besides, it is plain from the whole story, that they were not prepared
beforehand with a belief, that he should rise again, for an easy reception of
this Doctrine; nor did their own Credulity dispose them to it. But, on the
other hand, so hard were they to believe, that they could not be persuaded,
that he was risen, till by many infallible proofs being seen of them forty
days, they were assured, it was he, that was Crucified: Nor durst they venture
upon publishing what they had seen, till by the Descent of the Holy Ghost they
were animated with new Courage. And it is worth our notice by what steps they
were led to the Belief of this Doctrine. The first account was from the Women,
that went early on the first day of the Week to Embalm his Body; That when they
came to the Sepulcher, they found it empty, and had seen a Vision of Angels,
that said he was alive. But this wrought so little upon them, that they looked
upon it as an idle report. The next was from Peter and Cleopas, to whom he
joined himself, as they were Journeying to Emmaus; and having instructed them
out of the Scriptures, that he was to rise again, he opened their Eyes, and
made himself known to them in breaking of Bread. But neither this account, nor
his appearing to them afterward, had any other Effect upon them, than to fill
them with wonder, and put them into a fright, till being called upon to handle
him and see, that he had Flesh and Bones, which a Spirit has not, they were
convinced. Now it is surely hard to conceive, that they, who were so hard to
believe, and so cautious lest they should be imposed upon, that they would not
take it upon the credit of others, and could not be convinced but by undoubted
signs, should yet at last be deceived.

3. As little Reason is there to believe, that it was a Contrivance. For how
can we believe, that they, who were so much afraid of being imposed on
themselves, should agree together to impose upon the World? or that they should
be the forgers of a story, which they could hardly be convinced was true?

I shall not here insist upon it, That they were under no Temptation to
contrive this story upon the account of Advantage. For all the Advantage lay on
the other side, because the Rulers and those in Authority among the Jews were
concerned in point of Honor and Interest to stifle it; and would without
question have paid sufficiently to have bought them, as well as they did the
Soldiers from divulging what they had seen. The bringing the Blood of the
Messiah upon them was a thing they were very jealous of. For they knew, that
they should for ever lose their credit with the People, if it should once be
believed, that they were the Murderers of their so long expected Messiah. And
when it was the Interest of those in Authority to prevent the spreading of this
Doctrine, what advantage could possibly tempt to the forging of it? What End
could a few poor illiterate persons drive at, that should be profitable to them
in contriving a story so contrary to the humor and interest of their Rulers?
Had they sought their own Advantage, they would never have framed a Lie to that
purpose, when they might have compassed this End much better by speaking the
Truth. And besides, they could not but be sensible, that a Contrivance of this
nature, would be sure to expose them to the spite and displeasure of those,
who had the Power in their hands: And is it likely that they, who were afraid
to own themselves to be his Disciples, when the Jews took him to put him to
Death, would be the Authors of so dangerous a Lie for his sake?

But there is one thing further that renders it improbable, that this should be
forged, and that is the great Credit, that it quickly gained in the World. For
the Jews, who Murdered him, were so nearly concerned to stifle this report,
though it was true, that they would never have suffered it to have passed, if
it had been false. They who gave Money to the Soldiers to tell a Lie for the
saving their Credit, would be sure to sift into this report very narrowly, and
right or wrong to object all they could against the Truth of it. So that when
after the mighty Opposition, it met with, it spread and gained Belief among
that People, who had reason to be afraid of receiving it; it is an Argument
that all the Wit of these great Men could object nothing, that could make it
appear to be a Contrivance.

But we have not only Arguments to persuade us, that it is improbable the
Disciples should contrive this report; but such as will satisfy any reasonable
Men, that they could not. For if there had been a Confederacy, the Design must
have been laid by them in a General Meeting of them all together. But so far
from this, that the Apostles were not the first, that so much as thought of his
being risen: And when they were first told it, they neither gave credit to the
Report, nor were they all present, when the first tidings of it was brought to
them. For the Two that Traveled to Emmaus, had heard nothing of his appearing
to Mary, when he appeared to them: but only that certain Women, who had been at
the Sepulcher, had declared, that they found not his Body, and that they had
seen a Vision of Angels, which said that he was alive, Luke 24.22, 23. And how
then could this be a Contrivance, when they did not all come to the Knowledge
of it at the same time, and in the same way? Those that stayed at Jerusalem had
their Notice of it from the Women, that had seen him; and those, that were upon
their Journey, were acquainted with it by his appearing to them. So that it
could not be contrived at Jerusalem, because the Two that Traveled to Emmaus
had not their first Notice of it there; nor could they contrive it upon the
way, because they at Jerusalem knew of it before they returned back. Neither
could contrive it, because it was known to both in two different places, before
either of them knew, that it was known to the other at all; and was believed by
the one, when the other made light of it. But further.

2. We have good reason to believe, that the greatest Enemies of our Lord were
convinced of the Truth of this Doctrine. For having taken away his Life as an
Impostour, they wisely took care, that they should not be imposed upon by a
false report, that he was risen from the Dead: For they came to Pilate, saying,
Sir, we remember, that that Deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three
days I will rise again: Command therefore that the Sepulcher be made sure
until the third day, lest his Disciples come by night, and steal him away, and
say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last Error shall be
worse than the first: And accordingly they made the Sepulcher sure, setting a
watch, and sealing the stone, Matt. 27.63, 64, 66. Here was as much care taken
to prevent a Cheat, as was possible. But that, which they designed as a means
to prevent any such Report, is a strong confirmation of the Truth of it. For
now we are assured, that his Disciples did not steal him away, because they
could not. They might with more probability and better success have reported
this story, had they been less cautious to prevent the believing it to be true.
So that since after all this they spread this report, That his Disciples came
by Night and stole him away, which they took so much care they should not do,
they have furnished us with a good Reason to believe, that they themselves were
persuaded, that he was Risen.

And this I shall endeavor to make appear, by considering the several
Circumstances of the story. They that were appointed to guard the Sepulcher
were sensible of the Earthquake, saw the Heavenly Messenger, that rolled away
the Stone; and being affrighted thereat, hasted to the City, and gave an
account to the Chief Priests of all that was done. Those very Persons, whom
they had employed as Ministers of their Spite and Envy to prevent such a
Report, are employed by God to be the first Messengers of his Resurrection. And
when their own Servants and Ministers did attest this to them, they could not
except against them as Interested persons. And indeed the course they took to
stop the Soldiers mouths, does prove, they were convinced in their
Consciences, that he was Risen. For why did they give Money to them to report
so improbable a story, That he was stolen away by his Disciples? Which if we
suppose true, why did they hire them to report it? Every dis-interested person
would conclude, they rather deserved to be punished for their Negligence, than
rewarded for their Service: And to have had somewhat else given them rather
than Money, if they were of that bad mind, that they would not speak the Truth,
unless they were bribed. And, if it was not true, this very Action of the
Priests in suborning the Soldiers to suppress the Truth with a Lie, does
prove, they were convinced, that what the Soldiers told them was true, else
there would have been no need of a Bribe to suppress their Testimony. But as to
the Report it self: How improbable is it, that his Disciples, who fled from
him, when he was taken by the Jews, should of a sudden take so much courage to
attempt such an Enterprise? What can we suppose should induce them to it? What
advantage would his dead Body be to them, that they should venture upon an
Armed Band to take it away? The Reason, why they followed him, when he was
alive was because they trusted, it was he, that should restore the Kingdom to
Israel; but when he was dead, they had given up all these hopes.

The only Reason that a Jew can give for this bold attempt, was a design to
draw the People after them, and the more easily to make themselves to be
followed. And therefore the better to accomplish their purpose, they took the
Dead time of the Night, while the Soldiers were asleep. This is a story, that
sufficiently discovers how weak and indiscreet Malice is. For there are a great
many things, that make it appear the Publishers of it never considered what
they said, or how it was possible to make it good. For it will hardly gain
credit, that Soldiers, Men inured to Watchfulness, should be negligent in so
important a business. Or, if this be supposed, That all of them should be taken
with Sleep just at the same time: Or, if they were, That the Disciples should
know it: Or, if all this be supposed, That a thing of this nature should be
done with so little stir; A Sepulcher broken open, and a Body carried away with
so little noise, as not to awake one of the Guard. But that, which will most
pose an indifferent person to conceive is, That the Soldiers should be asleep,
and yet know, that his Disciples stole him away: If they were asleep, how could
they know this? And if they did know so much, who can believe they were asleep,
when it was done? All this serves for nothing more than to convince us of the
Truth of our Old Proverb, Liars had need have good Memories: And that they, who
set this report on foot, had somewhat else in their Eye, than to tell Truth.

The particular improvement of this I shall wave, till I come to consider, what
that assured Principle is, which the Resurrection of Christ does furnish us
withal for the grounding our Hopes of a Resurrection upon.

SECT. II.
II. I come now to consider by what Power he rose. And this I shall do, because
the Scriptures seem to speak variously of it; sometimes that it was by the
Power of his Father; and at other times that it was by his own Power. St. Paul,
Romans 4.25. speaks in such a manner, as if it was not by his own power, but by
the power of another, that he was raised. He was raised again; which implies,
that the reuniting his separated Soul to his dead Body, and the restoring him
to life again was effected by the power of another, and not by his own. And
accordingly St. Peter speaks more plainly, that it was God that raised him up:
Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death, Act. 2.24. Which he
intimates to us in applying that of the Psalmist to his Resurrection: Thou will
not leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thine Holy One to see
corruption, v. 27. And again, This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all are
witnesses, v. 32. which is very loftily expressd by St. Paul, Ephesians. 1.19. That
we may know, what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who
believe according to the working of the might of his power, which he wrought in
Christ, whom he raised up from the dead.

But although we are taught, that he was raised, and that it was God, that did
raise him, yet we are in other places of Holy Scripture assured, that he did
raise himself, and that it was by his own Power, that he rose: Destroy this
Temple, says he of himself, and in three days I will raise it up: This he
spoke of the Temple of his Body, Joh. 2.19. Some suppose, that Christ did
nothing more in the raising of himself, but lift himself up, and come out of
the Grave, when God had given him Life again. But this comes far short of our
Savior's meaning, who in this Expression had a respect to such a Miracle and
Sign, as should sufficiently prove him to the Jews to be the Messiah. But what
great matter is it for a Man, when he is restored to Life, to come out of his
Grave? What greater Power could this prove to be in him, than in any other Man
that shall rise at the last day? Now that he spoke of quickening his dead Body,
will appear, if we consider the words. Destroy this Temple; i.e. Take away my
life; and I, by taking it up again, will give a convincing proof of a Divine
Power in me. The Words thus taken are a very proper Answer to the Jews, who
asked a sign of him. For no greater sign of his being the Son of God could be
given than this, That he is the Lord of Life; and that when he was dead and
buried, he would raise himself to Life again. This is indeed beyond the reach
of Humane Reason, and so surely, that which he designed for a sign ought to be.
For what sign would it have been to the Jews, if it had been accountable to
them? But yet it is the same Truth that he has with a great deal of care
inculcated upon us: I lay down my life, that I might take it up again: No Man
takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down,
and I have power to take it again, Joh. 10.17, 18. And upon the account of this
Power he is styled the Resurrection and the Life; i.e. That person, that has
power to give Life to the World. In these Texts then it is as plainly ascribed
to himself, that he raised himself; as in others, that he was raised by God.

But the great Dissiculty is; How he, who was raised by God, can be said to
have raised himself. For can that, which is done by another, be properly said
to he done by a Man's self? Or if it was done by himself, how could it be done
by another? Can the Scripture be true, both when it says, he was raised; i.e.
by God; and that he did rise; i.e. by his own Power. Here Reason is at a loss,
as well as to know by what Power he could raise himself, when he was dead.

Now the Design of the Holy Scriptures is to teach us these things.

1. That it was by the Divine Power, that he rose. And to this purpose it is
said, That he who was dead and buried, was raised again: because the raising a
dead Body is the Work only of an Omnipotent God. It Is no less Power can give
Life to a Man, when he is dead, than that Infinite Power, which at first made
him a living Creature. It must be the same hand, that puts the Machines of our
Bodies together again, when they are fallen in pieces, as at first framed them.
Upon which reason the raising Christ from the Dead is ascribed to God, because
it belongs only to him to give Life, who has Life in himself, and is the Author
of Life; and the raising a Dead Body can only be the Act of Omnipotence. This
is no more than Humane Reason does easily apprehend a great deal of probability
in. For why should it be thought a thing incredible, that God should raise the
Dead? But the great Difficulty is, How he, who was Dead, could raise himself?

2. Therefore this instructs us, That he had the Power of an Omnipotent God.
The Resurrection is, in St. Paul's style, the working of the exceeding
greatness of the Divine Power, Ephesians. 1.19. And since Christ did rise by his own
Power, what Power could this be less than that exceeding greatness of Power,
that is in God? When therefore he tells us, that he rose by his own Power, and
that he had Power to take up his Life again, he would have us to consider him
to be more than a Man: That however he humbled himself to the Death of the
Cross, when he was delivered for our Offenses, yet he had that Infinite Spirit
and Power, that is able to quicken a Dead Body, and which would not suffer his
Body, when laid in the Grave, to see Corruption. And therefore the Apostle
observes, that he was declared to be the Son of God with power according to the
spirit of holiness by the Resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4. i.e. Since the
raising a dead Body to life again is the Act of Omnipotency, his raising
himself from the Dead is a proof of his having that Omnipotent Power, that can
raise a dead Body. It was by the Power of God, that he rose; but this Power was
in himself, and therefore it was by his own Power, that he raised himself. So
that the Holy Scriptures in these different ways of speaking teach us what to
believe concerning him. That he was not only a Man subject to the same
Infirmities as we are, in which respect none but God could restore him to Life
again, when he was dead; but that he was equal to the Father, being the Son of
God, according to that Spirit of Holiness, which can quicken a dead Body; in
which respect he had Power-both to lay down his Life, and to take it up again.

And now since it was by this Power, that can raise a dead Body, that he rose,
and this Power was in him,

1. Let us consider how little reason we have to stand astonished at this
thing, That Christ, when Dead, should raise himself to Life again. It is indeed
but very fit, that they, who know not who, or what manner of person he was,
should stumble at this Doctrine. For nothing can be more difficult than that
they, who believe he was no other than a mere Man, though a very Holy Man,
should believe, that when he was Dead, he could raise himself to Life again.
For to believe this of any Man, though never so Holy, is to believe, that he
has Power to do that which none but God can do: And yet at the same time to
believe, that he has not that Power of God, by which alone this can be done.
And no Man can blame them for not believing things that are contradictory to
Reason. But what Contradiction is it to believe, that he, who has the Power of
God, can by virtue of that Power do all, that the Power of God can do. If it
does not exceed the Power of God to raise a dead Body, what difficulty can
there be in believing, That he who had this Power could raise himself. It Is not
expected, that we should believe, that a Man by his own Power, much less a dead
Man, that has lost even the Power of a Man, should raise himself, because this
is above the Power of a Man to do: Neither does the Scripture teach us any such
thing. But that, which it teaches us, is this; That Christ laid down his Life
and took it up again by his own Power; and yet this Power, by which he was
raised, was the Power of God. And what should hinder, but we may believe, that
he could do that by virtue of his Divine Power, which no Man can believe, that
he could do by the Power of a Man. For it is as agreeable to Reason to believe,
that he, who has the Power of God, and do all that God can do; as that he, who
has no more than the Power of a Man, can do no more than a Man can do. Let us
but allow him to be, what he was, the Son of God, according to the Spirit of
Holiness; and it will be no astonishing thing, that he, who was God as well as
Man, could do that, which none but God can do.

2. Let us consider how much Reason we have to believe, that he is able to
raise us likewise. He himself has told us, That God so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. i.e. That the design of his Life and
Death was to reverse the Sentence of Death, that we are fallen under, and to
provide a safe retreat for our Souls in the other World, where when they come
thither, they shall live under his protection in hopes of being restored by him
to their Bodies again. Upon which account he styles himself the Life of the
World, and the Resurrection and the Life, to teach us, that we are to ground
our Hopes of living again after Death upon him. And accordingly he informs us,
that the Power of raising the Dead, as well as of judging the World, is
committed to him: Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in which all that
are in their Graves shall hear his voice: And shall come forth, they that have
done good into the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil unto the
Resurrection of Damnation, Joh. 5.28, 29. And the Apostle makes the general
Resurrection of the Dead to the effect of Christ's descending to judge the
World: The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God; and then the Dead in Christ
shall rise first, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. Those Expressions of his descending with a
shout, the Voice of the Archangel, and the Trumpet of God, denote the
Magnificence of his appearing, and the mighty Power wherewith he shall raise
the Dead. For in these Expressions the Apostle alludes to the several ways of
gathering Assemblies, and especially to Tribunals, to denote, that when Christ
appears again he will give a general Summons for all Flesh to appear before him.

Now the Hopes of a Resurrection is so agreeable to us, that the Scriptures
frequently make use of it, as the best support for the bearing up our Minds
under the pressures of this life. And what better assurance can we have of
this, than that it is committed to him, whose Errand into the World was to
restore Life unto it, and who in his own Resurrection has given us a proof of
his Power to do it. Let the unreasonable Sceptick start Objections to perplex
our Faith: Let the Atheist, like those at Athens, mock at the Doctrine of a
Resurrection: Let both the one and the other pretend it never so impossible,
that our Souls, when they have left our Bodies, should be brought back again
into them; or that our Dust, when it is scattered, and has suffered so many
changes as they talk of, should be gathered together again; yet we know, and
have had a proof of the Power of him in whom we believe. We have seen his
Triumph over Death and Hell in his own Resurrection: And what Difficulty can it
be to him who has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and triumphed over them,
who has conquered Hell or Hades, and of a Prison has made it a place of Safety
and Refuge for departed Souls to give them the fruits of his Victory, and to
summon them before him when he appears the second time? What Difficulty can it
be to him, who has a Divine Power to find out that, which is not lost, as
certainly the Dust of our Dissolved Bodies is not? It Is a Divine Power that we
depend upon for our Resurrection; and he, who has promised us, that he will
raise us up at the last day, has given us a proof of his Conquest over Hell and
the Grave. That which he bids us hope for is not beyond the Power of his
Spirit; for he has that powerful Spirit, that can quicken a Dead Body, and
make it habitable again. For that Spirit by which he raised himself is able to
quicken and raise us likewise.

And therefore that portion of his Spirit, that he here communicates to us, is
styled the Earnest of our Inheritance, as a pledge given us in hand to assure
us of what he will do for us. And since it is a portion of that Spirit, by
which he rose from the Dead; we are to consider it as a security he has given
us, that we shall rise too: If Christ be in you, though the Body be dead,
because of sin; i.e. Though it is a Body, that Death has the Power of, that we
now live in, because Sin has corrupted it, yet the spirit is life, because of
Righteousness, Romans 8.10. i.e. The Spirit is our security, that we shall live
again, because its Office is to heal our Nature, and to take away that, which
is the cause of Death. And if the spirit of him, that raised Jesus from the
dead, dwell in you; i.e. If you have the same Spirit of Holiness that was in
him, he, that raised up Jesus from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by the spirit, that dwells in you, v. 11. For that Omnipotent Spirit,
by which he rose, will produce the same Effect upon all, in whom it dwells.

CHAP. III. The Assuured Principle upon which Christianity teaches us to ground
our Hopes of a Resurrection: viz. As Christ rose for our Justification.
III. THE Third thing that the Certainty of a Resurrection depends upon, is
that Assured Principle, that God has furnished us with, by raising Christ for
our Justification. And in considering the Import of this, and how assuredly it
satifies us, that we shall rise again, I shall do these Two things: 1. Consider
what Justification means. 2. In what sense Christ rose for our Justification.


SECT. I.
1. I shall consider what Justification means. But I shall not here concern my
self to give an account of the several Acceptations of this word among other
Writers, but only to state its proper signification, as it is a principal
Doctrine of the Christian Faith; and what that peculiar Privilege is, which St.
Paul, who does mainly and more fully insist upon it in his Writings, than any
other of the Sacred Writers intends by it. And for the better understanding
it, we must consider, that it is a Juridical Term, and is properly the Act of a
Judge, and has a respect to his Sentence. And accordingly in Scripture it
sometimes signifies to do Justice in general, whether by acquitting or
condemning a person, that stands charged with a Crime according to the true and
strict Merits of his Cause. In which sense the Prophet Isaiah uses it, chap.
43.9. Let all the Nations be gathered together, and let the People be
assembled; i.e. Call a Court, and let them bring forth their Witnesses, that
they may be justified; i.e. that Justice may be done them. In other places it
signifies the acquitting or discharging an accused person from the Punishment,
that the Law threatens the Crime with, that he is charged with. This
Justification or acquitting an accused person is either Legal, according to the
Rules of strict Justice, or it is of Favor and Grace. The former is the
acquitting and Innocent person, or the declaring him, who has stood his Trial,
not to be guilty of the Crime charged upon him. In which sense it is taken in
the following Texts, Deuteronomy. 25. If there he a Controversy between Men, and they
come into Judgment, that the Judges may Judge them; then they shall justify
the Righteous, and condemn the Wicked; i.e. They shall proceed according to
strict Justice, and give Sentence according to Right; the same Sentence as the
Law gives in the Case, without any partial respects to the Persons, whose Cause
is before them: He that justifies the Wicked, and condemns the Just, even
they both are an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15.

The latter is the dispensing with the Rigor of the Law, and remitting the
Punishment, that a guilty person has deserved, in favor, or in respect to the
Mediation of an acceptable person. And of this nature is that Justification,
which St. Paul speaks so frequently of; and which the Christian Religion, which
is a Law of Grace, does make known to the World. For if God's justifying us did
mean no more than his declaring those to be Just, who Legally are so, there
would be no standing before him: If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O
Lord, who shall stand? Psalm. 130.3. There would be no escaping from Death, when
once it has laid hold upon us, if there was not forgiveness with God: for he
that transgresses a Law, that threatens Death, must die by that Law, unless
Mercy interposes. The Law, that condemns him, does for ever determine of his
Condition: And it is not possible that such a person should be Justified but by
a Pardon. When therefore God justifies a Sinner, he does not Pass the same
Sentence upon him as the Law, he has transgressed, does: For then there could
be no such thing as Justification at all in our Circumstances. For whom the Law
condemns, God must do so too, if his Judgment be Legal. But when he justifies a
Sinner, he justifies him, whom the Law condemns. And when he does this, it must
be by remitting the Severity of the Law, and sparing the Life of the Offender
out of mere Grace and Mercy.

And of this nature is the Justification, that the Gospel speaks of; only with
this difference, That it does not only respect us as Sinners, such as by
Transgressing the Divine Law have deserved to die, but such as for our
Disobedience are already condemned to die. So that it is God's Act of Mercy
toward Adam's condemned Race, whereby through the Mediation of his Son he is
pleased to remit the Sentence of Death, that in Adam we are fallen under; and
to restore us to a state of Probationership for Immortality and Glory. For my
part, I know of no other Justification, that the Gospel, which is designed to
be a Remedy to the Mischief, that by the first Transgression is come upon us,
speaks of as a Blessing we are already possessed of, but this of acquitting us
so far from the Sentence that is already passed upon us; that we shall not die
Eternally, because we are already condemned to die, but shall assuredly live
again.

I know indeed, that in our Gospel-state we stand in need of Mercy for
innumerable Sins, that we are daily guilty of; and for all the Sins, that we do
commit, the Gospel does assure us of Pardon upon our sincere Repentance; i.e.
that God will justify us. But it is not upon account of this Mercy, that we
are in a justified state, but of that favor alone, that has remitted Adam's
fault to us, and assures us of a Resurrection to Life again. But after this we
must expect to undergo another Trial, whether we deserve the Forgiveness, that
is with God; i.e. Whether our Repentance for our own Sins, and our Endeavors
to do the Will of God in our Gospel; i.e. Our justifying state have been so
sincere, that he will accept of it. And this will be, when the Author of our
Religion shall come to try, whether we deserve the Life, that he will raise us
to. Then he will justify all his sincere Followers; but his Justifying at that
day means his accepting and approving of the sincerity of our Faith and
Repentance according to the very Terms of the Law of Mercy, that he has given
us to live by. But then this supposes, that we are in a justified state, as we
are discharged from the Eternity of the Punishment, that Adam's Transgression
has exposed us to, otherwise we could not rise again, nor would there be any
need of a second Judgment to be passed upon us. By being thus justified, our
Gracious Redeemer puts us into the state of Probationers for Immortality. So
that so long as we are in this World, we are in our state of Trial, whether we
will choose Life or Death; not in such a justified state, that we may assuredly
say of our selves, that we shall undoubtedly be glorified. For thus we shall
not be justified, till our Lord comes the second time to try, what use we have
made of that Mercy, that set Life and Immortality before us. But for the
clearing this matter, I shall observe,

1. That our Justification is a delivering us from a state of Condemnation. For
nothing is more plain in the Holy Scriptures, than that it does suppose a
Judgment to be already passed upon us; and that we are in a condemned
condition. For it is that Mercy whereby we are discharged from some punishment,
which we have deserved and are adjudged to. It is not God's declaring our
Innocence, or a Legal adjudging us to an Immortal state; because the Law,
whereby we should have been thus Justified is Transgressed, and we are
condemned to die for that Transgression. Thus indeed Adam would have been
Justified; for if he had not sinned, he would not have deserved to die; and if
he had not merited Death, according to the Law of entire Nature, by which he
was to live, he must have lived an Immortal life; i.e. He would have been made
Immortal, without being justified from Death, as now we must. In this case
there would have been no need of Mercy to assure Immortality to him, that had
no Crime for Mercy to pardon, nor no Punishment for Grace to save him from.

But the case is not thus with us: For the Scripture says he has concluded all
under sin, Gal. 3.22. i.e. He has already given Judgment upon us, and therefore
his Justifying us cannot be by declaring us Righteous according to the Law of
Integrity; but by acquitting us of the sin, he has concluded us under. And what
other Judgment is it, that the Apostle has a respect to in this Expression, but
that which he gave upon Adam, when for his Disobedience he condemned him to
die. God, it is true, does in a secret and invisible way govern and judge the
World in all Ages of it. He hurls contempt upon Princes; he humbles the proud,
and makes a Land barren for the wickedness of those, that dwell therein. And
when he does any thing of this nature, he concludes that sinful People under
their own Sins, whom he punishes for their Wickedness. But yet these and
suchlike Calamities, though they are the Judgments of God, and argue him to
have passed a doom upon such a People: Yet it is secret, and does not determine
of Men's state and condition any further than as to the Temporal comforts of
this life. But the sin, that the Scripture tells us, we are concluded under,
does respect all Men, and the Judgment it speaks of, had finally determined of
our state, had not Mercy interposed. And of this nature was the Sentence, that
God passed upon Adam: For his Judging him was of the same nature, as the great
Judgment at the End of the World will be. It was open, and by way of Process
and Accusation. Adam was cited, charged, admitted to plead for himself, and at
last convicted and condemned. And this Sentence did determine of the final
condition of Mankind appointing him and his Posterity irrevocably to Death. So
that he had died immediately, and this Wrath of God would have lain upon us for
ever, had not the Divine Mercy contrived a means to justify and save us. And
since it is by virtue of that Sentence, we all die, we are concluded under the
guilt of Adam's sin: i.e. We know our Doom, and what we are to expect upon the
account of that corrupt and mortal Nature, that we receive from him.

If then Justification be from some punishment, that we are already condemned
to suffer, it must be from this of Dying; because no other Sentence is as yet
passed upon us. And unless we be discharged from this, it is in vain that we
have a new Law given unto us: For we are not capable of Immortality till we are
pardoned the fault for which we are condemned; and no Man can qualify himself
for a Blessing, that he is not capable of. This is the account of
Justification, that St. Paul gives us, when he opposes it to Condemnation, and
makes it to consist in the Abolishing of Death: Forasmuch as the Children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same, that
through Death he might destroy him, that had the power of Death, that is, the
Devil; and deliver them that through fear of Death were all their lifetime
suject unto bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15. i.e. The reason of Christ's Incarnation and
Death was, that he might bear our Punishment, and set our Minds at rest, which
upon the account of that Sentence, that doomed us to die, are full of Anxiety
and Trouble at the thoughts of losing a Life, that we are so fond of. He
under-went all that we account an Evil in Death; His Body was turned to a
Carcass, and his Soul went to Hell, or the place whither Death transports our
Souls, that state where the Devil designed when he robbed us of our
Immortality, to erect a Tyranny over the Souls of Men; where having vanquished
that wicked Spirit, he returned triumphant with the spoils of our Enemy to his
Body again: And therefore, as St. Paul says, there is no condemnation to those
that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. In which words he has not a respect to the
last Judgment, in which all Flesh shall be Eternally sentenced either to an
Immortal Life, or an Eternal Death; as if no Christian need to fear being
condemned at that day. For there are, no doubt, many vicious and lewd
Chrisitians, that will be judged unworthy of the Name they bear, and of the
Hopes that belong to it. But his meaning is, that they are absolved and
acquitted from the Sentence of Death, that Adam and his Posterity long since
received; that their Souls being rescued out of his hands, who has the Power of
Death, shall at the Resurrection return in a Triumphant manner to their Bodies
again; which is the great Privilege we have by Jesus Christ. For these words
are an Inference from what he discoursed in the foregoing Chapter, where he
considered and complained of the Misery of Man's Natural state, as we are
obnoxious both to Sin and Death: Oh wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the Body of this Death? Romans 7.24. And sets before us the Goodness of
our Christian state, which assures us of pure and glorious Bodies, Bodies
perfectly delivered from Mortality, and those corrupt Affections, and
Appetites, which Adam's Sin has let loose upon us: I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, v. 25. So that they who are in this state, and take care to
approve the things that are Excellent, that they may be sincere and without
offense till the day of Christ, are in as good a condition, as if Sin and Death
had never entered into the World: For there is no Condemnation to those that
are in Christ Jesus: i.e. By Christ we are delivered from the Body of this
Death, or this Mortal sinful Body; And shall for ever enjoy the benefit of
this Deliverance, if we walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. And in
this respect Jesus Christ is styled the second Adam in opposition to the first,
from whom Sin, Mortality and Death are derived to us. That as by the Apostasy
of the first, we are condemned to die, by the Obedience of the second we are
discharged from so dreadful a Punishment, and restored to the Hopes of living
again. And this he discourses more fully in the fifth Chapter, where having
observed the Calamity of that Mortal condition, we are doomed to, by reason of
Adam's Transgression; he magnifies the Grace of God in this respect, That
through the Redemption we have by Jesus Christ, we are delivered from this
Effect of Adam's Offense: As by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men
to condemnation: i.e. As all Men were condemned to die for Adam's sin, even so
by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all Men to justification
of life, v. 18. i.e. All Men were discharged from the severity of this
Sentence, and allowed the liberty of providing for a Life, that is Eternal; as
if they had never sinned, nor ever been condemned to die. It is true, the
Apostle discourses as if it was not Adam's sin alone, but our own too are the
Reason why we die; and consequently, that our Justification is not from Adam's
Offense only, but from those many, that we are guilty of. By one Man sin
entered into the World, and Death by sin: and so Death passed upon all Men, for
that all have sinned, v. 12. i.e. All Men die as well as Adam, because all have
sinned as well as he: For until the Law sin was in the World. And again, Death
reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam's transgression, v. 13, 14. i.e. All that lived between Adam
and Moses died, though they did not Transgress a positive Law as Adam did, but
only sinned against the Law of Nature.

But if we look a little narrowly into the Apostle's discourse, the contrary
will be evident. For when he instanceth in a time, when there was no Law, that
condemned Men to die for their own Offenses, his design is to prove, that the
Sin and Judgment, that passed upon Adam, does reach to all Men: For what
account else shall we give, says he, of the Death of those, that died before
the Law of Moses was given. They sinned, it is true; but that could not be the
Reason why they died, because they were not under any Law, that threatened them
with Death, if they sinned; and therefore since they died, it could be by
virtue of no other Law, but that by which Adam was Judged and Condemned. He
does say indeed, that Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned: Yet
Sin is not imputed where there is no Law, which was the case of all, that lived
between Adam and Moses. The sum then of the Apostle's discourse is this, That
Adam's Sin, and the Judgment, that was passed upon him, is the Reason, why all
Men die; but we are not to think, that Men die only for Adam's Sin in such a
sense, as if themselves were not Sinners: For though all have sinned, yet all
die because of Adam's Sin.

Obj. But if this be the meaning of the Apostle, how comes it to pass, that he
tells us, afterward, that the free gift is of many offenses unto Justification?

Ans. To which I reply; That though by the undertaking of our gracious
Mediator, we are justified from our own particular Offenses; i.e. Are put into
such a state, that we have no reason to fear being condemned, when we come to
answer for our own Actions, if with sincerity we conform our Lives according to
the Rules of the Gospel, though we be guilty of many Errors and Mistakes: Yet
it is plain from what he discoursed before, that it is Adam's Offense alone is
the reason, why we die; because it is for Adam's Offense alone, that we are
born Mortal, and are under a Sentence of Condemnation. But by being justified
from Adam's Sin and Condemnation, we, by sincerely submitting to the Law of
Grace, are acquitted of all those particular Sins, that in our Natural state we
are guilty of. Because Adam's Sin being the Root and Original cause of our own
particular Offenses, by being discharged from the Punishment, that Adam's Sin
brought upon Mankind, we, upon our embracing the Law of Grace, are accepted by
God to a liberty of working out our own Salvation, notwithstanding our own
Sins. The many Offenses, that the Apostle here speaks of, are those that in
their Natural state Men are guilty of. For of these alone he spoke in the
foregoing Verses, when for the proving it was for Adam's Transgression that we
all die, he instanced in those, that lived between Adam and Moses, who were not
under the Government of any other Law, but that of Nature; and therefore did
not die for their own particular Offenses. And of these he tells us the free
gift is to Justification as well as of Adam's Sin; because by being discharged
from the Punishment of Adam's Transgression, we shall not be condemned for
those, that no positive Law does threaten with Death. But as for those Sins,
that in our Christian; i.e. our Justified state we are guilty of, we must be
justified or condemned for them by the Sentence of our Mediator according to
the very Voice of the Law, that he has given us to live by.

2. Then Justification puts us into a possibility of living again after Death
for ever. For since it is the taking off from us the Curse, that is come upon
our Nature for the public Transgression of our first Parents, it takes away
that, which is the Cause, why we die; and which, if it was not taken away,
would for ever hold us in a state of Death. The Reason why we die, is, because
God has doomed us to it; and that which is the Reason, why we die, would be a
Reason too, why we should never live again, if God in Mercy had not pitied our
Condition, and absolved us from the Guilt, for which we are condemned to die.
For as it is upon the account of God's Wrath, that we die; if we had for ever
lain under that Wrath, we must for ever have continued in a state of Death;
i.e. according to the Sentence God had passed upon us, we had forfeited the
Immortality of that Life, that consists in the vital Union of the Soul and
Body. So that the import of the Sentence of Death, we fell under, was nothing
less than an Eternal separation of the Soul and Body. A Doom, that adjudged the
Body to Dust for ever, and the Soul to live without its Body under the Dominion
of that Evil Spirit, that seduced us, and the dreadful Marks of the Divine
displeasure for ever.

And as this is the meaning of that Judgment to Condemnation, that is come upon
all Men; so the meaning of that free gift, that is come upon all Men to
Justification of Life, is the hopes of rising again to that Immortality we
lost. For by Justifying us, God acquits us from the Punishment, he had
condemned us to; and by withdrawing that Wrath from us, which sentenced us to
an Eternal Dissolution of the Soul and Body, he puts us into a hopeful
condition of living again for ever. As when he condemned us, his Justice laid
us under an obligation of satisfying his Wrath by a perpetual separation of our
Souls from our Bodies. So when he justifies us, his Mercy re-instates us in his
Favor; and by discharging us from the Curse, we are fallen under, gives us an
Assurance, that Death shall not be Eternal, but that there will come a time,
when our Bodies shall come out of their Graves, and our Souls and Bodies shall
happily by united again. So that,

3. Justification is an Act of mere Mercy and Goodness. It is mere Grace and
Favor, that spares the Life of a Criminal, when he is condemned to die. For in
such a case, he can have no hopes of living, unless he who has the Power of
Life and Death does by reversing the Sentence save him from the Punishment.
Whereas a Law, that allows him the liberty of atoning for his fault, by doing
something, that shall carry Merit in it, does put it into his own Power to
escape the Punishment. Now God's justifying us is not by declaring, that though
we have done that, which his Law condemns, yet we have done that which
according to the Terms of his Law must acquit us; but by declaring, that though
he has condemned us for Transgressing a Law, that threatened us with Death, yet
he will not inflict the Punishment upon us in its utmost rigor, but of his own
Goodness will give us our Lives again. And accordingly the Apostle informs us,
That after the kindness and love of God our Savior toward Man appeared, Not by
Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved
us: That being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs according to the
Hope of Eternal life, Tit. 3.4, 5, 7. In which words he informs us, that we are
not justified as Innocent persons, or such as having merited our own Lives,
cannot be condemned without Injustice. Not by Works of Righteousness, which we
have done; i.e. Not because we have done nothing worthy of Death, or having
deserved to die, have expiated our faults by some meritorious Works. For
Justice it self is no dreadful thing to those, that have not deserved to die,
or that have merited their Lives. The former way we all should have been
Justified, if we had not lost our Innocence; for then it would have been by
rewarding an innocent and sinless Creature with a legal Recompense, the
adjudging a Creature, who had not merited Death, to an Immortal state. And the
latter was the way, that the Jews depended upon; who were persuaded that their
legal Services were highly meritorious in the sight of God. The Vanity of which
persuasion St. Paul does frequently expose; and lets us know, that we are Heirs
of Life upon no other account, but because the kindness and love of God our
Savior has appeared to us; and because Mercy and Grace have interposed in our
favor, and the forfeiture of Eternal life is remitted to us. And accordingly
the Gospel is not only styled The Gospel, and Word of Grace; i.e. That
Dispensation, wherein God does make known his abundant Goodness to us, whom his
Justice had doomed to die; or that Revelation wherein he acquaints us with his
good will to us in remitting the rigor of that Punishment, we are condemned to
suffer. But Eternal life; i.e. The life we shall live after the Resurrection
has united our Souls to our Bodies again, is styled the Gift of God, to inform
us, that all the Hopes we have of living after Death does depend upon the good
pleasure of God.

The Immortality, it is true, which was to have been the Reward of Adam's
Innocence, was the Gift of God too. For no Creature can be Immortal, but whom
God makes so: But yet an innocent Man was both capable of Immortality, and
would have had a legal Right to it as the Reward of his Innocence. But God's
justifying a Criminal, Condemned Race, is his removing a legal incapacity for
Eternal life, before we can be in a condition of receiving it as a Reward for
any thing we can do.

Obj. The Scripture, it is true, ascribes our Justification to Faith: And if
Faith be the Reason or Condition of our Justification, how can that be the sole
Act of God's Mercy, which is not granted us but upon such a Condition?

Ans. To which I reply; That our Justification is of two kinds: The one is from
the Judgment, that is come upon us to Condemnation; The other is to that
Eternal life, which in this we are Probationers for. The former is by way of
mere Grace and Favor, not by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, and
is the foundation of that Hope, which is the Motive wherewith our Religion
persuades us to a Holy Life. And this our Savior styles a passing from Death
unto Life, or to a Liberty to take care of our Lives again. The other is in a
legal way, by those Works of Righteousness, that the Law of Grace, we are
obliged to live by, does require of us. The benefit of the former we enjoy in
this Life, as it puts us into such a Condition, that we may labor in hope: The
other is what we expect when our Lord shall come the second time unto the
Everlasting Salvation of his faithful Servants. And this is the meaning of the
Apostle, when he says, The free gift is come upon all Men unto Justification
of life. Where, by the free gift, we are to understand God's merciful
acquitting us from the Judgment, that in Adam came upon all Men; And this free
gift is come upon all Men, that by living according to the Gospel, we might
provide for Eternal life; and at the last be justified or declared meet to be
partakers of Eternal life according to the Terms of this New Covenant, by which
we are to work out our Salvation. The sum then of this matter is this:

1. That upon the account, and for the sake of his Son's Death, God of his mere
Goodness has remitted the Sentence of Death, that we, as Adam's Posterity, are
born under. And thus we are in a Justified state here in this Life. Thus St.
Paul tells us, We are justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption,
that is by Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness, that he might be just, and
the justifier of him, that believes in Jesus, Romans 4.25, 26. Where the Apostle
makes our Justification to be that Act of his Goodness, whereby through the
Mediation of his Son he discharges us from the Obligation to suffer Eternal
Death, that his Justice had laid us under. The only difficulty in these words
is, That the Apostle seems to make Faith the Condition of our Justification;
saying, Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
Blood. But the meaning is not, That God does only pardon those that believe;
for how then could our Savior tell us, That all, that are in their Graves,
shall hear his voice; and that those, that have done ill, shall come forth, as
well as those, that have done well. Which implies, that all Men are thus far
Pardoned: For none, that are condemned to die, can have their Lives given them
again, but by virtue of a Pardon. But the meaning is, That God set forth his
Son to render him so propitious to us, as to accept of the Righteousness, that
is by Faith, to our Everlasting Justification. So that,

2. Being thus by the Divine Mercy put into a Justified state, God has given us
a new Law, by which, he expects for the time to come, we should govern our
Lives.

3. That the Righteousness, which God accepts of, and will reward with Eternal
life, is the Conformity of our Lives to this new Law of Faith, that he has
given us.

4. That at the last we must undergo a public Trial, when the Justice of our
Mediator will declare those to be Just and Righteous, who live according to
this Rule. So that the Justification, that is by Faith, does properly relate to
the Sentence of our Mediator, whereby at the Day of Judgment he will declare
the sincere Observers of his Will to be Righteous. And therefore the Apostle
says, We are justified freely by his Grace; i.e. Have our Lives, which we had
forfeited in Adam, restored us in Christ, that he might be Just, and the
Justifier of him that believes: i.e. That his justifying the sincere Christian
at the last might be an Act of his Justice: Or, that when we come to be Judged
at the last day, Justice may declare the Righteousness of the sincere
Christian. So that the Justification that is by Faith, denotes a freedom from
the Danger of that second Death, that the Gospel threatens those, that disobey
it with. It is a second discharge from another kind of Punishment, than that we
are condemned to as the Sons of Adam, and does suppose us to be in a Justified
state from the Judgment, that by one Man's offense is come upon all Men: Or
rather it is God's owning our Righteousness to be according to the Gospel Rule;
that Righteousness, I mean, which has the promise of Eternal life.

Obj. If it be said, that according to this account, no Man is justified by
Faith at all in this life, but that all the privilege we can be said to have by
believing is, that we shall be justified at the Day of Judgment; whereas the
Scripture speaks of it as a privilege that belongs to our Faith in this life.

Ans. I answer; That it no otherwise belongs to it, than as it gives a Right
to, and assures us of it, when our Gracious Mediator shall come to Judge us.
Faith, I mean the believing the Gospel to be the Rule of our Righteousness, and
living according to it, is the fulfilling of that Law of Grace, that our
Savior has instituted; and accordingly this Law does justify those, that thus
fulfill it in this life; i.e. It denounces no Judgment against them. But who
have this Faith, that the Law of Christ approves of, and promises Eternal life
to, and who want it, will be the work of the future Judgment to discover. So
long as we live by the Rules of the Gospel, this Law of Christian Righteousness
does assure us, that the Reward it promises does belong to us; i.e. that we
have a Right to it. But whether we shall receive it, does not depend upon the
present Sentence it gives of our case, but upon that which will be passed, when
the time of our Trial is over. For the Faith, which is said to justify us, may
be renounced, and the Gospel disobeyed; and in this case we cannot be said to
be in a Justified state by virtue of the Faith, we once had, or the Obedience
we once paid to the Gospel. It justifies the goodness of our Lives for the time
past, if they have been according to this word of Faith; but whether it will
justify us to Eternal life, is not to be said till we have finished our Course
and stood our Trial. So that this is not the Justification, which we have by
virtue of Christ's Mediation; For that is a State we are already put into, and
is a Blessing that belongs to us in this life; whereas this is a State, we
shall be put into, when we are judged again.

4. Then Justification is a state of Trial, how we will use so great Mercy as
God vouchsafes us therein. For had there not been a Reversal of the Sentence,
that doomed us to die, we must have died without Mercy, and without Hopes of
ever living again. Then all our Prayers and Tears and Repentance would have
been of no advantage to us for the bettering our Condition, and preserving us
from Death: But Justice would require that we should suffer the Punishment, we
were condemned to. Judgment being given upon us, there remained nothing but a
fearful looking for of the Execution of it, which all the most earnest
Solicitations and Entreaties, we could make, would not have saved us from. For
to be in a Condemned state, is to be Dead in Law; And he that is in such a
condition, has lost his opportunity of preserving himself by obeying the Law,
that has already condemned him. Such was our case, when God had given Sentence
upon us; for then it was too late to think of preventing our dying Eternally,
and falling under God's Wrath, when we were already under it.

But by acquitting us from this Sentence, he had set Life and Immortality
before us again, and puts us to a new Trial, whether we will grow wise by so
great a danger, as we have escaped, and take warning by the Judgment, that came
upon us in Adam, to save our selves for the future from the Wrath to come. It
is a very great mistake, if we believe our being in a Justified state does
certainly assure to us an Immortal life; and is a Reason, why we may be
confident, that we shall not be condemned in the Judgment to come. There would
be no reason of another day of Judgment, if Justification did import thus much:
Neither is St. Paul to be understood in this sense, when he says, Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies, who is
he that condemns? Romans 8.33, 34. For his design was to encourage the
Christians of his time to a stedfastness in the Faith, notwithstanding the Rage
and Violence of their Persecutours. For though they were condemned and put to
Death for the sake of Christ, yet the Sentence of their Enemies signified
nothing to, and could do them no great hurt, because it took away a life, that
God would restore them with advantage. It is God that justifies; and since he
has so far remitted his own Sentence, that you shall rise again, who is he that
condemns, or presumes to take away your life? He delivers you over to a
Death, that will not hold you long, because God has justified you.
Justification then assures us, that we shall rise again, though Divine Justice
has condemned us to die: But it does not assure us, that we shall certainly
live for ever, when we are risen, because that depends upon the Improvement, we
make of the Mercy God has shown us. For unless we be so qualified, as the
Gospel requires we should, we must be condemned, and die another Death. The
state, that Adam was created in, was a state of Trial. For though he was
Innocent, and consequently free from all the vexation and perplexity, that
Guilt occasions; yet he was neither so perfect nor so happy, as God designed he
should make himself. The Innocence, in which he was created, does not imply,
that he was made as perfect, and as excellent a Creature, as if was possible
for him to be: I mean, that his Soul was so stored with all Spiritual and
Divine Perfections, that he could not possibly by Improvement make himself a
more noble and excellent Creature than he was. He had, without question, all
those Perfections, that are Natural, otherwise he could not have been
sufficiently qualified for such an Improvement of himself, as God expected from
him. He was, I mean, perfectly free from that Cloudiness of Mind, that suffers
us not to discern things, as they are, and had none of that false Biass upon
his Will, as renders a virtuous Course difficult to us. But yet these Natural
Perfections were capable of Improvement. For though as he was no way disposed
to Vice, so he wanted those dispositions to Virtue and Goodness, which are not
acquired but by repeated Acts; and which when they are laid in the Mind, do
give Reason a greater strength and vigor, and do the more readily turn the
Will to the Approbation and Choice of Virtue. Now that this Improvement of his
Mind to such a confirmed state, that Temptations should neither hurt nor reach
him, was his business, is evident from that Threat of being hurled into a
Mortal state, if he disobeyed the Law of his Maker, that the Scripture gives us
an account of.

This shows that he was a Probationer for Immortality, and that this was to be
the Reward of his Labor, when by the Practice of Divine Virtues, he had
exalted his Nature to an Impeccable state; I mean, when he had laid such strong
Inclinations to Virtue in his Mind, as to live in the Practice of it by a
Natural disposition.

And as this was the state, Adam was created in, and is the Natural state of
all Mankind, because the Powers of our Nature, if there was no Corruption in
us, are not so pure and excellent, but they may be still Exalted; The mischief,
that Sin let in upon us, was the putting an End to this state, by subjecting us
to the Wrath of God. For when God gave Judgment upon Adam, had not his Mercy
laid a design to recover us, all hopes of advancing our selves to an Immortal
state, had been at an End. And considering how low our Souls sunk into
Sensuality by yielding to the Temptation, that undid us, there was no Moral
possibility, that we should raise our Nature, so corrupted, to a state of
Impeccability again. So that the Judgment that God gave upon us, and the state
he doomed us to, was no other than the Natural consequence of our Apostasy.
Upon which account we have no Reason to complain, that he has dealt severely
with us in condemning us for one Sin, because that one Sin put us into such a
condition, that we could never have improved our Nature to such an Excellency
as Innocent Man might, and was required to do. Men are very apt to think it
hard, that God should give such a Sentence upon Adam, and in him upon us, as
took from us the liberty of trying, whether we could recover, what he had lost,
and by a greater Application of our Minds overcome all those mighty
Difficulties, that Sin had laid in our way to the Perfection, we were to aspire
after. But they, who think it hard, do not consider the waste, that Sin had
made in our Natural Powers; and that it would have been no kindness to have
tried us any longer in that way, as Adam was to have improved himself, but a
Cruelty; because we could not. For it would have been a very hard thing to have
held us to that Duty, which we are utterly disabled for.

And now since it was upon these Terms, that God placed Man in this World, and
the Duties of our entire Nature were become Morally impossible, when he
determined to put us upon another Trial, he justified us from the Sentence,
that he had passed upon us for our Miscarriage in the first. And this I take to
be the great Blessing and Advantage of our being in a Justified state; That
being discharged from Death as a Punishment of Sin, i.e. from the Eternity of
it, we are tried by the Divine Mercy, whether the Hopes of Immortality will yet
make us dutiful and obedient to him. God's justifying us is to put us into our
Original state of Probation for an Immortal Life. For as his condemning us put
an End to this state, because they, whom he condemns, have lost the opportunity
for Improvement: So his Pardoning takes off the Impediment to Improvement, and
puts Life again into our hands to take care of. But when, I say, it puts us
into our Original state, I do not mean that, which Adam was in, before he
sinned; for such an Improvement as he was capable of making, before Sin had
corrupted his Nature, is not possible to us. But the Original state, I speak
of, is that of being Probationers for Heaven, though the Trial, we are put to,
is suited to the infirmity of our Condition. It is not expected, that we should
live as Innocent Man might have done, nor improve as he ought to have done; for
God has condescended to such a Righteousness, as our maimed Powers are able to
reach to. A Righteousness, that is by Faith; and it is expected, that we should
be sincere and hearty in our Obedience to this Law of Grace, though we cannot
arrive in this Life to such a state of Impeccability, which was the Work, and
was to be the Aim of Innocent Man. And to this purpose we are Exhorted to work
out our Salvation, and by a patient continuance in well-doing to seek for Glory
and Immortality; which, and many other places of Scripture, would be
insignificant, if we were not to consider this Life as a state of Trial. For to
what purpose are the Exhortations of this Nature, if we must still die as
condemned Criminals, that have no right to Life at all? When therefore these
Exhortations are made to us, they suppose, we are discharged from the Sentence,
that will not let us live; and that if we make but a good use of this Mercy,
the former Sentence will not be rigorously executed upon us; but that we shall
live again, and when we do live again, shall be Immortal. But if we neglect so
great Salvation, and continue to prefer the Pleasures and Enjoyments of a
Sensual life, before the Joys and Glories of an Immortal state, though we do
not suffer the Death, we are doomed to, when God so solemnly Judged Adam to
die; yet, which is worse, even after we are risen to Life again, we must
undergo a second Judgment, and be condemned to die a second time.

SECT. II. How Christ rose for our Justification.
II. I Come now to consider in what sense Christ is said to have risen for our
Justification. From whence not only the Certainty, that there is a
Resurrection, but, that we shall rise again, will appear. Now his rising from
the Dead is an Exemplification of the great Blessing of our Justification. For
a Creature, that dies, can no otherwise be Justified; i.e. discharged from such
a Punishment, but by rising to Life again. So that Christ's rising for our
Justification does imply these things.

1. That God discharged him from the Punishment, that he bore for our Offenses.
2. That he has received Power to justify us.
1. His rising for our Justification, means his being discharged from the
Punishment, he suffered for our Offenses. If we consider his Resurrection with
a respect to himself, and his Sufferings as personal, none can deny, but God
did in a very glorious manner bear witness to his Innocence thereby, and acquit
him of those Crimes, wherewith his Accusers charged him, and that unjust
Sentence, that his Enemies gave upon him. When he was taken by wicked hands,
and haled before a Judge; when he was accused, condemned and executed upon a
Cross between two Thieves, he appeared as a vile Criminal in the Eye of the
World, according to what the Prophet Isaiah spoke of him long before; We
esteemed him stricken and smitten of God and afflicted; i.e. That a just
Providence had delivered him up to suffer a deserved Punishment. But when he
rose to Life again, he was justified in the sight of Angels and Men to be that
Holy and Innocent Person, that had done nothing worthy of Death. This his
Enemies were so sensible of, that when his Apostles published to the World, how
that he was risen again, they exclaimed against them, and by Threats and severe
Usages endeavored to silence them, because they brought his Blood upon them.
This was a visible Justification of his Innocence: For no other way was more
effectual to take away his Reproach, and to procure him Honor among Men, than
by giving him the Life, that was taken from him.

This indeed was his own Personal Justification. But it teaches us, That it is
not agreeable to the Nature of Justice, that Death should hold those that are
Innocent. And although we cannot plead our Innocence to excuse our selves from
Dying, yet when the Offenses, for which we die, are pardoned, Justice can no
longer consider us as under an Offense. For since Death is a Punishment for our
Offenses, the same Mercy, that pardons the Offense, does likewise remit the
Punishment; i.e. it gives us a Right to our Lives. And it is but just, that we
should have our Lives restored; i.e. that we should rise again, when Justice
can no longer treat us as Offenders by keeping us under the Power of Death.

And in this sense God by justifying his Son, has likewise justified us. For
though he was Innocent, yet for the accomplishing the Redemption of Mankind he
was content to charge himself with the Sins of the whole World. And as it was
by Sin, that Death entered into the World, he, who would bear our
Transgressions, was, according to the just Judgment of God, that doomed sinful
Man to die, appointed to bear our Punishment likewise. So that his Resurrection
is not only an Argument, that God looked upon him as a Righteous Person, that
had been unjustly condemned to die, but as a Person, that having sufficiently
satisfied for the Offenses for which he died, Justice had no right to keep
under the Power of Death. As it was an Attestation of his Innocence, and the
spightfull Accusations, that his Enemies loaded him with, it was an Act of
Justice; i.e. it was Justice that acquitted him from the unjust Sentence of
Pontius Pilate. But as it was a freeing him from the Punishment of the Offenses
for which he was delivered, it was a merciful Discharge from an Obligation to
Punishment. So that since he was delivered for our Offenses, and died because a
Sentence of Death was passed against Offenders, his Rising again is a visible
Declaration of that Mercy, that pardons Offenses. For he, who dies upon the
account of Sin, must rise from under a Sentence of Condemnation, when he
returns to Life again. And thus it was, that Christ rose: He rose from under a
Curse, and was delivered from Death, not as a Calamity, but as a Punishment.
And since his Resurrection was of this nature, let us consider, in what respect
it is for our Justification. Now as to this matter, we may observe these things.

1. That by rising from the Dead, he has given us an instance, that it is
possible, that a Creature, that is condemned to die, because of an Offense, may
rise again. 2. That that Justice, which has condemned us to die, is fully
satisfied, and therefore we shall rise again. 3. That his Resurrection was not
a Personal Privilege, but the Triumph of our Representative and Mediator, over
Death; and consequently a public Discharge of Mankind from the Sentence of
Condemnation.
1. That by rising from the Dead, he has given us an instance, that it is
possible, that a Creature, that is condemned to die, because of an Offense, may
rise again.

One of the greatest Difficulties, that lies against this Doctrine, is this;
That we are condemned to die by the just Judgment of God, and undergo it as a
Punishment of our Sin. For is it possible that a Punishment, when it is
inflicted, a Sentence after it is executed, should be reversed? A condemned
Person, before the Sentence is executed upon him, may be reprieved and
pardoned. And if we were not delivered over to Death at all; i.e. if we did not
see Men die, it might easily be believed, that we could live an Immortal life.
But when we are condemned, and die, because we are condemned, it appears too
late to hope for a Pardon after the Punishment is inflicted.

But this will be no such difficulty, if we consider, that the Divine Mercy
provided, that the Death, we are adjudged to, should not be Eternal by
promising, before Sentence was given upon us, That the seed of the Woman should
bruise the Serpent's head. So that although Justice did require, that we should
lose our Lives for ever as Malefactors do, and does, it is true, inflict such a
Death upon us, as for ever separates us from this present World, what
Difficulty can there be in a Resurrection, which restores us no more, than what
Divine Mercy reserved for us, when his Justice condemned us; and is the
fulfilling of that Original Promise made to Adam. Had we been condemned never
to live again neither in this life nor in another, Mercy could not have saved
us, when once the Sentence had been executed up us: because a Pardon would then
have come too late to save us. But when it is only a Death, that deprives us of
the Hopes of living again in this life, that we are condemned to; our being
condemned to such a Death, cannot render it impossible, that we should live
again in another. This is the difference between the Death, that we are all
condemned to already, and that, which wicked Men, will be condemned to in the
Day of Judgment. This deprives us only of the Hopes of living again in this
life, but not in another; and therefore a Resurrection from the Death, we are
now condemned to, is not impossible upon the account of the Sentence we are
fallen under. But that will deprive them of all hopes of living again after it,
because there is no other World beyond that for them to hope to rise to. So
that wicked Men, when once they are condemned to lose the next life, must die
Eternally; because it is impossible, that any Mercy should save them, who are
condemned both to lose this life and the next too, beyond which there is no
other life to be expected. But after this life there is another; and though we
are condemned to lose this life for our Offenses, yet we may hope to live again
in another, because the Divine Goodness has, by giving us a Savior, taken
care, that we shall not die Eternally in the next World, unless we abuse and
sin away his favor in this.

And this possibility of living again, which is the thing, that is intended at
the least by our being justified from Death, is exemplified to us in the
Resurrection of Christ. For he was condemned to die, and for the same Offenses
too for which we are condemned to die. And since after he was crucified and
slain according to the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, he was
raised again; it is a proof of the possibility of our rising again to another
life, though we are condemned to lose this. If we be condemned to die for our
Offenses, so was Christ delivered for them too; and if he, who suffered the
Punishment of our Sins, did rise again, why may not we hope to live again after
Death, though we do suffer the Punishment, we are condemned to? It is certain,
that it is not impossible, we should rise again, because we are condemned;
because he, who was condemned to undergo the same Punishment, as well as we,
did rise again. For if our being condemned does oblige us to a Death, that is
Eternal, then Christ could not have risen, who suffered for Sin as well as we.
There is, it is true, this difference between his Death and ours, That he died
for no Sin of his own, as we do: But yet it was upon the account of the same
Sentence, that he died, which obliges us to die likewise. And this is
sufficient to satisfy us, that it is possible for us to rise again, though we
are condemned; and that the Sentence, that obliges us to die, is not
irrevocable. But further,

2. His being dischaged from the Punishment of Sin proves, that the Justice,
that condemned us is satisfied, and that the Divine Mercy will save us. For
though he died for no Sin of his own, but ours; yet he died to another End,
than we should have done, if he had not died. He died to bear the Malignity of
our guilt, and to satisfy Divine Justice by making an atonement for us: Which
if he had not done, we must have perished for ever under our guilt, without any
hopes of satisfying the Justice, that has condemned us. Death, as inflicted
upon us, would have been for the satisfaction of Justice; but it would have
been by bearing the Vengeance of it for ever: whereas he died to satisfy it by
the Meritoriousness of his Obedience. And since he died for this End, his
Resurrection is a public Declaration of the Power of that Mercy to Sinners,
that he has procured for us. It not only proves, that it is possible for a
condemned Person to live again, though he does undergo the Punishment, that he
is doomed to suffer; but that, as the Apostle says, being justified by his
blood; i.e. being acquitted from the Obligation to suffer an Eternal Death, by
his laying down his Life for us, we shall be saved from wrath through him, Romans
5.9. i.e. From that Wrath, we should otherwise have lain Eternally under: For
if God commended his Love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, v. 8,
10. i.e. We have good reason to conclude from the Resurrection of Christ, that
we shall rise again, because it gives us a view of the success of his
undertaking, when he died for us. It shows that we are in a state of Mercy and
Grace; and that though we go out of this World under an Arrest, yet our Debt is
discharged by him, who became our Surety.

It was but fit that Divine Justice should sentence us to Death, when we
preferred a Mortal before an Immortal condition; and so far corrupted our
Nature, as rendered it impossible, we should live. For in this case, the
Justice, that condemned us, took nothing from us, but what we had forfeited and
lost. And besides, a Malefactor has no reason to complain of the severity of
that Law, that takes away his life, when by violating it, he has rendered
himself unfit to live. This was our case, till Divine Justice was satisfied;
and since that Justice, that condemned us, is satisfied, it is in the power of
Mercy to save us, by restoring us the life we had forfeited. And what Mercy can
do, the Resurrection of Christ is a sufficient Assurance, that t will do;
because it is for the satisfying us, that the Guilt, for which we die, is
remitted, and that we are under the benefit of a Pardon.

Whether the Mercy of God be of that nature, that he could without a
satisfaction have given us our Lives, that his Justice takes from us; and we
might depend on it for Salvation, though Christ had not died, is a question not
becoming a Christian to make. For we can know no more of the Nature of God's
Mercy; i.e. how far he will, or how far he can in honor extend it, than he has
revealed to us. And if he had nowhere revealed, that his Mercy is of such a
nature, why should we think it is? His Mercy indeed is infinite; and it is an
infinite Mercy, that he should send his only begotten Son upon such an Errand.
And if this be the Mercy, that he has revealed, and which he would have us
depend upon, it is a vain presumption to fancy either that there is Mercy with
him of another nature for Sinners, which we may depend upon, than that which he
has revealed; or that his Mercy is not such, as we have an account of.

And if we consider his merciful Nature, without a respect to the Revelation,
he has given us of it, it is hard to say, whether it be so merciful as to
pardon those, whom his Justice, condemns, only for his Mercies sake. For though
he be merciful, and on that account, we may hope he will, yet we have as much
reason on the other hand to fear he will not upon the account of his Justice.
And especially when we consider him as the Governor of the World, our own
Reason will tell us, that such Mercy is not to be supposed to belong to him,
which will render him despised and contemned. For in this case, we are not to
consider, what the Compassions of his merciful Nature may incline him to do,
but how he may best maintain his own Honor, and keep us the Reputation of his
Government. And although Clemency does very well become a Governor, yet it
ought to be such Mercy, as will not weaken that Awe and Reverence, as is due to
Authority. Now the Mercy of a Sovereign is not to pardon all Offenders; nor
any too easily, because the End of Government is to restrain Wickedness; which
could not be done, if none that offend, were made Examples to others. So that
Mercy is to be directed by Wisdom; i.e. it is the Office of Wisdom to consider,
when, and upon what considerations a Criminal is to be pardoned, otherwise the
not punishing a Criminal is not Mercy, but Remissness.

If then it was just, that Adam and his Posterity should be condemned to a
Mortal condition, when Humane Nature was corrupted, it was not fit, that the
wise Governor of the World should deliver us from our Mortal state, without
making known the severity of that Justice, that should awe the World for the
future. But this could not be done without inflicting the Punishment either
upon us, whom his Justice has condemned, or some other person as our
Representative. So that considering God as a Governor, who was to take care of
the Honor of his Justice, and the Reputation of his Wisdom, the only Mercy he
could show us, that would do us any good, was this of delivering our Mediator
for our Offenses. For by laying our Iniquities upon him, he has taken that wise
method, that he can be just in justifying us; i.e. in giving us our Lives, that
his Justice condemned us to lose.

If it be said, that he could have promised us our Lives again upon our future
good deportment without a satisfaction; such a deportment, I mean, as that
which he is willing to accept of from us. For unless he had condescended as low
as the Gospel does, such a promise of pardoning us what was past would not have
carried that Mercy in it, that we need, who are disabled for such an
Improvement, as was expected from innocent Man. So that they, who suppose, that
God's Mercy is of that nature, that he could without a satisfaction have
remitted what was past to the truly Penitent; and that his revealing such Mercy
to us, would have been sufficient encouragement to a Pious behavior for the
future, must suppose likewise a Remission of the Rigor of the Law of perfect
Obedience, as well as of the Sentence he passed upon us. And allowing thus
much, I answer,

1. That this would have been Mercy indeed, but not such Mercy as would have
secured an Awe and Reverence of him in the Minds of Men. For they who suppose
this, may as well go on supposing, That in case of our neglect of this second
Law, there is still further Mercy to be hoped for, till they suppose he is so
merciful as to forgive where there is no Repentance.

2. That such a Promise would not have been a sufficient Encouragement to a
Holy Life: The great Motive to live well, is the Hopes we have of returning to
Life again, after we are dead. And if this Doctrine has with so much difficulty
found belief among Men, though the Possibility of it has been Exemplified by
the Resurrection of our Lord, how much more should we have objected the
Impossibility of it. And therefore when God would deliver us from the fears of
Death, it was necessary he should make use of such a method as was sufficient
to this purpose.

It Is true, we die still, thought the Sentence of Death be remitted; but yet to
die, because we have sinned; and to be pardoned, because Christ was delivered
for our Offenses, are not unaccountable. At least such an account of our Dying
still, though we are Justified, may be given, as is sufficient to justify the
Divine Wisdom; and such an account too, as will, I doubt not, reconcile a state
of Mortality with a state of Pardon. We die still, though we are pardoned;
because we have so corrupted our Nature, that it is impossible, we should live
without a Miracle. But yet though we do die, the Resurrection of our Redeemer,
who rose to Life again, after he suffered as a Sinner, is an evident proof of
our being pardoned the extremity of that Death, we should have suffered, we are
not justified so as not to die, because the Resurrection is our Justification,
or at least the fruit of it. But since we must not die to perish for ever,
unless we fall under another Sentence, when we return to Life again, we shall
feel and rejoice under the sense of that pardon, that has delivered us from
Death. For though we are not pardoned, so as to be exempted from dying, yet it
is by virtue of a Pardon, that we shall be delivered from Death at the
Resurrection. This is the Justification that the Death of Christ has procured,
and his Resurrection does declare. For his Resurrection is a satisfaction to
us, that there is nothing will keep us for ever in the Grave, when we go
thither; and that our Souls shall not be left in Hell, because the opening of
that Prison is proclaimed by his Resurrection: Because I live, says our
Savior, ye shall live also, Joh. 14.19. i.e. My Resurrection rection will
satisfy you, that there is another Life after this; and that at the last,
though you die, because Offenders, Death will be swallowed up of Victory,
because I have conquered it.

3. Therefore his Resurrection was not a Personal privilege only, and on that
account only the Justification of his own Innocence, but the Triumph of our
Redeemer over Death, and the public Discharge of the Representative of Mankind
from a condemned state; and therefore is for the Justification of all the
sinful Posterity of Adam. Had his Death been only a misfortune upon himself,
for an Innocent person may be put to Death by violent hands, though he has not
deserved to die, Justice would require, that he who lost his life without any
fault, should have it restored for the Justification of his Innocence. So that
if we should consider Christ as a most Holy and Innocent person only, a person
that knew no Sin, there is no question, but after so much Violence as he
suffered from the wicked Hands of the Jews, Divine Justice would have
vindicated him from so unjust a Sentence, as was passed upon him, by raising
him from the Dead, and giving him that Life again that had been wrongfully
taken from him. Upon which reason, no doubt, that ancient Opinion, that the
Holy Martyrs, who bravely sought the good fight of Faith, and were slain for
the Testimony which they held, should rise first, was grounded: It being looked
upon as a thing very equal and righteous with God to Honor those with this
Prerogative, who lost their Lives for the sake of Christ and his Gospel.

But had his Resurrection been only for the justifying of himself, it would
have given no encouragement to those, that die, because in an Offense, to hope
they might live again likewise. The utmost then, that could have been
concluded, would have been this; That if at any time after there should be any
Man, that lived as Holily, add deserved Death as little as he did, Divine
Justice would do them the same right as it did him, if their Lives should be
violently torn from them, as his was. But since he undertook to deliver a
sinful Race from Death by becoming a Curse for us, he rose as our Triumphant
Redeemer, not for his own Justification only, but ours. And his Resurrection
does not only proclaim to the World, that Divine Justice will not suffer an
Innocent person, who is unjustly condemned, and with Violence put to Death to
lie for ever under the Power of so unjust a Sentence: But that Divine Mercy has
pardoned the Offenses, for which we, who are under a Sentence of Codemnation,
do die; and will not suffer us, who die for our own faults as Criminals, to lie
for ever under the Sentence, that is passed upon us. For,

1. His Resurrection was a Justification from guilt. For since he bore our
Sins, when he died, we are not to consider his Resurrection as the
Justification of an Innocent person only, but of a person laden with Iniquity.
And if we may infer, That it is agreeable to Divine Justice to restore a
person that lives as much without Sin as he did, his Life again, if it should
be wrongfully taken from him, because he thus justified the Innocence of his
beloved Son; the least that we can conclude from his rising from under a Curse,
and the burden of our Sins, is, That our Sins, and the Curse, that is come
upon us, are not of that weight, but that we may likewise hope to rise from
under them. But further,

2. It informs us, that our whole Nature is Redeemed and Hallowed. And
therefore the Holy Scriptures represent him as another Adam to inform us, that
he bore the same Relation to us in all he has done to restore Life to the
World, as Adam did, when by his Fall and Punishment Sin and Death came upon us:
As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22. i.e. As
Humane Nature was corrupted and made Mortal by Adam's Transgression, and the
Sentence of Death, that he fell under, came upon us, who are his Posterity; so
Humane Nature is quickened and revived in Christ; and his Resurrection is the
great Instance of that Grace that remits to us the Punishment, we are condemned
to. He is as well the Root from whom Immortality and Life are derived to us, as
Adam was the Root, from whom came Mortality and Death. And upon this Reason he
is styled the first fruits of the Dead. Now is Christ risen from the dead, and
become the first fruits of them that sleep: For since by Man came Death, by Man
came also the Resurrection of the Dead, v. 20, 21. i.e. A Resurrection to
another Life is come by Man in the same manner, as Death came by Man. For as we
are all condemned in Adam, so we are all acquitted from Death and made alive in
Christ. So that he is the first fruits of them that sleep, not only as he was
the first Man, that after Death rose to an Immortal Life, but as his
Resurrection is the consecrating Humane Nature afresh, or the taking of the
Curse, that in Adam came upon us. In this Expression the Apostle alludes to the
Jewish Custom of offering the first fruits of all their Increase unto God;
which Oblation did not only sanctify the Fruits that were offered, but
consecrated the whole Harvest. And that, which he informs us, is this; That
God, by raising up Jesus from the Dead, has Hallowed us to an Immortal Life.

Obj. If it be objected, that this is to put wicked Men into a Justified state.

Ans. I reply; That without doubt they have this advantage be the Death of
Christ that with the rest of Mankind, they are acquitted from the Condemnation,
that is come upon us in Adam, else no reason can be given, why they rise from
the Dead, and why they must be judged and condemned again for their own faults;
which supposes, that here in this Life they are in a state of Probation. That
they shall rise again, is as plainly revealed to us, as that every good
Christian shall. Marvel not at this, says our Savior, for all that are in
their Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: they that have done
good unto the Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the
Resurrection of Damnation, Joh. 5.28, 29. All that die; the bad as well as good
must rise again, because the bad as well good do die. And if the bad as well as
good must arise, it must be because they are freed from the Condemnation, that
came upon all Men in Adam. For if they still lie under that Curse, the Wrath
that kills them, would for ever give Death a power over them: Neither would
there be any reason, why they should rise again to receive another Sentence, if
they be not freed from the former, and restored to a possibility of saving
their Souls. So that since they must rise to receive another Sentence for their
own faults, it implies, that they were in the same condition in this Life with
those that made a better use of the Mercy, that is granted us; i.e. That they
were pardoned as to the Sentence that was given upon Adam, but that they must
be condemned, because their own Sins will not suffer them to live, when they
are risen; which will be so much the more dreadful, as it will be the Sentence
of a Redeemer that came to save them. And now let us consider, what improvement
we may make of this. And.

1. Let us consider how comfortable a state we are restored to. It is, as I
have observed, a state of Pardon and Forgiveness; A state that frees us from
the Terrors of Divine Justice, and puts us under the favorable influences of
Grace and Mercy, and gives us the liberty of a second Trial, whether we will
choose Life or Death. And therefore the Apostle takes notice of it as the
peculiar Privilege and Blessing of our present Condition, that we are not under
the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14. We are not under the Dominion of Justice,
that condemns, but under the Rule of Mercy, that justifies us. The Law has
condemned us, and it is certain justly enough, because it gives no other
Sentence upon us, than what by corrupting our Nature sin does naturally oblige
us to suffer. For it is naturally impossible, that a Creature, that is
corruptible, should not see Corruption. But being justified by the Divine
Grace, we are put into a Condition of gaining that Immortal life, that we are
condemned to lose. So that though Corruption and Mortality be the Natural
fruits of Sin, yet the Mercy, that is procured us by the Mediation of Jesus
Christ, does give us a comfortable prospect of rising to an Incorruptible and
Immortal state. He, who is risen for our Justification, is made Head over all
things to his Church; i.e. Has a Sovereign Authority given him to dispense the
Grace and Mercy, that he has purchased with his Blood. He has Erected a Kingdom
distinct from that, which, as the Creatures of God, we are Members of; and in
that place too, where the wicked Spirit designed to Erect an Everlasting Empire
over the Souls of Men. For, as he tells us, Rev. 1.18. He has the Keys of Death
and Hell. A Kingdom of Grace, which permits us to work out our own Salvation in
this life, and assure us of an Everlasting deliverance from the hands of our
Enemies in the other World, and thereby eases our Minds of those Apprehensions,
which our being under the Dominion of his Father's Justice fills our Minds
with. For his Rule and Authority is that of a Gracious Lord, who has power to
forgive Sins, and to bestow Life upon those, who have deserved to die; and who
must infallibly have perished for ever, if we had continued under the strict
Government of Justice. So that our Condition is of the same nature, with that
of a condemned person, who has his Life restored him by Favor and Grace, and
has the liberty of making his Fortune under the protection of that Authority,
that he had offended. The Kingdom we belong to, is not that of Justice, that
condemns the least Transgression, but the Mercy of a Redeemer, who calls us to
Repentance. and assures us, he will protect us from the severity of Wrath, if
we submit to his Authority. And then,

2. How much reason have we to rejoice in the Religion, that Christ has
instituted: For it is not only his Institution, who rose for our Justification,
but brings us the Glad-tidings of that Mercy and Grace, which alone can compose
the Minds of persons, that are condemned to die. It is enough to satisfy us,
that it must be very favorable to us, that it is the Institution of a Savior.
For we may be sure, that nothing severe can come from him, who came into the
World to work deliverance for us. Who can believe, that he, who had no other
Aim, but the propitiating Divine Justice, and the interceding for Mercy toward
a sinful condemned Race, would lay us under any hard Circumstances, or publish
to the World any other thing than the Mercy he came to procure for us. Since
his design was Gracious, his Religion must be so too; for as the design of
Natural Religion is to set before us the Nature, and to give us the Character
of God the Author of it, so the design of Christianity is to give us the
Character of our Redeemer. And therefore it can contain nothing less than the
mighty Arguments of Love, wherewith he courts our Obedience, and the highest
Instances of that Mercy, that was the End of his assuming our Nature, and dying
for us.

It is a Religion indeed, that has highly improved our Duty, and rescued
Holiness from that Corruption, wherewith the depraved Minds of sinful Men had
soiled it. But that which does in a peculiar manner recommend it to us, is the
Tidings it gives us of Gods being reconciled unto us, and the Hopes of an
Immortal life, it presents us with, by being delivered from that Judgment to
Condemnation, that Divine Justice has passed upon us. Had its design been only
to rectify our mistakes concerning our Duty, and to give us a fair view of the
true Luster of Holiness, it would not have contained Mercy enough to save us;
because the only Mercy that can save a condemned Malefactor, is that which
pardons his fault. It is indeed a great Instance of the Excellency of this
Religion, that it gives us the best, and most noble Character of the Divine
Nature, and furnishes us with the best Rules of Life: But the great Grace of it
consists in the Hopes it gives us of a Resurrection, by acquainting us, how our
Redeemer was delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our
Justification. And if then we believe, that we are under an Obligation to any
Religion, methinks the Christian Religion should meet with an easy
Entertainment among Men. For it is the only Religion in the World, that can
speak satisfaction to the Minds of condemned Wretches, as we are: Because it
does not only ground our Hopes of Mercy upon the Gracious Nature of God, but
the compassionate Undertaking of a merciful Mediator. It does not only
acquaint us in the general, that God is Merciful; but sets before us the
Nature of that Mercy, that we are to trust in. The only Aim of Natural Religion
is to acquaint us with our Duty, and the Desert of our Actions. But what can
this signify to a Creature, that is already condemned, because he is in an
Offense, to know the Duty he has transgressed, when withal he knows he must
die, because he has done so: And to have the Excellency of that Law revealed
unto him, by which he might have improved himself to an Immortal condition,
when he knows he has disabled himself, and lost his opportunity for such an
improvement. Such a Knowledge can only serve to heighten his Affliction; and
the more lively the Representation of his Duty is, the more stinging must his
Torment be. Before we can be benefited by the plainest Representation of our
Duty, and the best Rules of Life, the Wrath of God, that we are fallen under,
must be averted; and no other Religion, but that, which assures us it is so,
can be of any Advantage to us. For a Religion, that assures us we are in a
Justified state, as the Christian Religion does, gives us encouragement to
perfect Holiness, by assuring us our Labor shall not be in vain, because we
are in a state of Improvement. It is too late to call upon us to work out our
Salvation, if we lie under a Sentence of Condemnation for not doing it. We must
first be saved from this Wrath, before we can be in a possibility of securing
to our selves an Immortal life. And that is the only Religion, that suits our
present state, that importunes us to a Holy life, by acquainting us with such
Mercy, as we stand in need of. And there is no Man surely can quarrel with, or
be an Enemy to such a Religion, but who is an Enemy to his own Soul, and
carries a Mind in him, that is disposed for no Religion at all.

3. This may persuade us of the Reasonableness of the great Duty of believing,
which the Gospel so frequently and so earnestly inculcates upon us. The
believing I mean, not only those Principles of Natural Religion; the Being of a
God, and Providence; the Immortality of the Soul, and a future state of
Retributions; but those Doctrines of Revealed Religion, which acquaint us with
the Methods of Divine Wisdom and Goodness for the delivering us from Death.

As to the Principles of Natural Religion, there is none, that owns any thing
of Religion, but does own likewise, that the believing them is a reasonable and
necessary Duty, because there can be no Religion at all without it. And the
believing the Principles of Revealed Religion is as reasonable and necessary,
because there can be no Christanity without it. By Revelation we have a plainer
account, and a more distinct and certain Knowledge, it is true, of all the
Principles of Natural Religion, than we could have it; and in this respect it
is of great use for the furthering that Piety and Holiness, without which we
cannot see God, nor live an Immorral life. But it was not for the making these
things known only, that God sent his Son into the World: For though it was
necessary that, when he would once more make a trial of our Faith and Obedience
to him, he should rectify those mistakes, that we were run into, concerning
the first Principles o Religion; yet it was first of all necessary, that he
should put us into such a condition, that the hopes of succeeding in our
Endeavors after Holiness might be an encouragement to us. Now this is the
thing, that he has Revealed to us in the Gospel, and it is the being persuaded
of this astonishing Mercy, that is the Faith, which Christianity presses upon
us.

And besides, considering our present Circumstances, the belief of the
Principles of Natural Religion is not enough for us, who have corrupted our
Nature. This Faith was suited to the state of Innocent Man before he was doomed
to a Mortal Condition. But since we feel our selves Mortal, and know we must
die, what encouragement can our knowing there is an Immortal state for such, as
improve themselves for it, be to us to aspire after it, when we know we are
Mortal, and cannot avoid dying? Surely something more is needful to encourage
us to do our utmost to prepare our selves for it than the Faith, that was the
foundation of that Religion, whereby Innocent Adam was to have made himself
Immortal, because we cannot become Immortal as he might have done. For unless
we believe that we shall live again, though we die, we are so little concerned
in that Life, that is Eternal, that we shall never upon the bare believing,
there is such a Life, and that Man was made for it, be persuaded to the
Practice of Holiness, because such a Belief does not persuade us, that there is
such a Life for us.

The Soul, it is true, is Immortal, and will live for ever after Death has
separated it from the Body. But for ought that any Man knows, it is so much the
worse for us, that it is, if it must always live in such a state, as is not
Natural to it. For it is very plain that it leaves the Body with a great deal
of Reluctance: And I don't believe that they who are no friends to the
believing the Doctrines of Redemption and Justification, as they mean our being
restored to the Hopes of a Resurrection by the Death and Passion of Jesus
Christ, are such friends to Death, that they part with their Bodies very
easily. And this I think proves, that they could be very well content, that
their Bodies were as Immortal as their Souls, and that they might live an
immortal life in their Bodies. It is not the Soul's Immortality, that contents
them, however they may seem to put a good face on it, and make a Virtue of
Necessity. For they look upon Death as a great Calamity at least; which no Man
could do, was he persuaded, that Death would put him into his best State and
Condition. Now what does all this mean, but that a Resurrection is very
acceptable to us, and that without it we in our Circumstances cannot have that
Immortality, which Adam by the Principles of Nature was encouraged to hope for.
I dare say, that they can be very well contented, that God would raise their
dead Bodies again so improved, as we believe he will. And upon what account
then can they except against the Reasonableness of that Faith, which they can
be contented should be true, and own to be necessary to make the belief of
another State a complete and sufficient Motive to a Holy Life. The Apostle
observes, that without Holiness, it is impossible to please God; and therefore
that he, that comes to God, must believe, that he is, and that he is a Rewarder
of them, that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. And accordingly he gives us a
large Catalogue of brave Men, that by Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought
Righteousness, and obtained the Promises. Which implies, that we shall never be
persuaded to deny our selves the present Enjoyments of this life, and keep our
selves within the measures and bounds of Religion, unless we believe, there is
another Life, and a God, that will reward us there. And therefore so much Faith
as this is, was a Duty, that Adam, while he was Innocent, was obliged to;
because though he was Innocent, he was a Probationer for Immortality. And it
was requisite, that he, who was a Probationer for Immortality, should believe
there was such a State, and that there was a God, that would reward him with
it, if he did improve himself to the perfection it belonged to, for the
encouraging him to do his Duty. But so much Faith as was sufficient to
encourage an Innocent Man, is not enough for us, who are guilty, and condemned
to die, because we are so. For Innocent Man might by improving his Nature; i.e.
by doing his Duty make himself Immortal: But we who are guilty and condemned
can do no such thing, because we are not in a state of Trial, if we be not
freed from the Curse, that is upon us. And that which is needful to put us
into such a state must be a part of our Faith, if we do believe, that we have a
prospect of Immortality; i.e. We must believe, that God has justified us, that
we may apply our Minds like Probationers for Immortality to that Improvement of
our selves, that is to qualify us for it.

4. This is a further Consideration that ought to reconcile us to the Thoughts
of leaving this World. I have observed with how much satisfaction we ought to
go out of this World, because the Resurrection will restore us both our Souls
and Bodies again; i.e. Will bring our Bodies out of their Graves, and our Souls
out of that place where they live in a Praeter-natural state out of their
Bodies: But the thoughts of our being in a Justified state ought to raise our
Minds much higher, and to fortify them with more Resolution and Courage when
we come do die, because it sets before us the Reason and Ground of our Hope,
and eases our Minds of that which is the most stinging Consideration in Death.
Death is, as I have said, very terrible to us upon many accounts; It hales us
out of a World that clothes us with solt Raiment, and gorgeous Apparel, and
feeds us with rich and sumptuous Delicacies, and furnishes us with delights for
the Eye and Ear, and every Sense: All which must be very troublesome to a
sensible Creature. But that which is most grievous in it is, That it comes upon
us as a Punishment, and that we die by the just Judgment of God upon us. And
how much comfort must it give us to think that we are discharged from that
Condemnation, which is the severest Consideration in Death? How may it revive
our Spirits, and raise our Heads, to think, That though in Adam all die, yet in
Christ shall all be made alive? To know that we are justified in the
Resurrection of him, who died for our Offenses, is such a healing Consideration
to our Minds, as leaves nothing in Death, that is troublesome, but those little
Aversions, that Nature has to a Dissolution.

It is, it is true, and always will be difficult matter to meet Death without
concern, and something of consternation, because there is something
praeter-natural in it. But yet how unwilling soever Nature is to submit to so
hard a fate, yet we know, we must; and since the Law, that has appointed us to
die, is irreversible, the only wise thing, we have to do in such Circumstances,
is to reconcile our selves to the thoughts of dying, as well as we can, that we
may go out of the World with as little disquiet and aversion to a thing, that
we cannot help, as is possible. And the only Consideration, that is sufficient
in this case, is this of our being in a Justified state, and that we know the
Reason of that Hope, which alone is sufficient to bear up our Minds. For with
what peace and satisfaction may we go to our Graves, when we know, that the
place our Souls go to, will not be an Eternal Prison to them, and that Death is
not inflicted as an Eternal Punishment.

5. Let us consider with how much care we ought to live, while we are in this
World. For since we are acquitted from Condemnation, we are not in so hopeless
a Condition, as those that must die without Mercy. For the Grace and Favor of
God, that has remitted to us that Sentence, has favored us with an opprtunity
of escaping from the Wrath, that is Eternal. This is the favor, that he
publishes to the World in the Gospel; and that which he calls upon us to do, is
to lay hold on this opportunity, and to make a good use of it: The grace of
God; i.e. the Gospel, which brings, or acquaints us with this Salvation,
teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12. For it sets Life
and Death before us; i.e. it lets us know, that God is willing to try us once
more, and therefore favors every Man, as he did Adam with the Liberty of
choosing for himself, which of these two he pleases. And surely it is but a
just and reasonable Expectation, that we should lay hold of the opportunity
that is put into our Hands, of escaping for our Lives: That if Death be so
terrible a thing to us, as we make it, and we cannot very easily brook being
condemned for a fault, that is none of ours, we should be very careful for the
future not to do any thing, that may provoke God to condemn us for our own
faults, and be extremely fearful of offering Violence to our selves, and
having our own Hands in the blood of our Souls. It might be judged a hard Law
by us, that the fault of others should be charged upon us; and that we should
be under a Condemnation to Death, because our first Parents sinned; Therefore
he calls upon us to look to our selves, and tells us there is no more occasion
for complaint as if the Children's teeth were set on edge by the sour Grapes,
that our Fathers have eaten. For he has remitted to us that Sentence, that
assigned us over to the power of Death, and has privileged us with the liberty
of taking care of the Life, we are so unwilling to lose. And if Life be so
precious a thing to us, as by our Apprehensiveness of Death we would be thought
to account it, what a wretched Madness is it, while we are complaining of the
hardship of our Circumstances, as we are condemned in Adam, to take so little
care of it, now it is put into our own hands to secure it, as if it was all one
to us, whether we lived or died? If Death be an indifferent thing to us, why do
we tremble at it? Why does the near approach of it put us into terrible
Agonies? Why do we seem to account it a hard fate to be doomed to die for a
fault, that was not in our power to help? But if it be as really frightfull, as
it appears, why should we neglect so favorable an opportunity of providing for
our future safety, as it put into our hands? This will be a very great
Aggravation of the Folly and Misery of wicked Men, when they come to be
condemned to a second Death, that there will be no altering of that Sentence,
no more Mercy to be expected for the delivering them from the Wrath that their
own faults will then bring upon them. Oh how many sad Reflections will it
occasion to think, that they have twice forseited Life, and that it is in
spite of Mercy and Grace, that they have destroyed themselves by their own
saults; That they have been tried a second time, whether they would choose Life
and Immortality, but have made no better a choice for themselves than their
first Fathers did: So that the Mercy, that delivered them from the Death, they
were condemned to in Adam, was thrown away upon them; and which will not a
little add to the Misery of the second Doom, as much as they feared dying, they
have yet made it their choice. And since this will be the Fate of all Men, that
neglect so great Salvation, ought we not to be careful how we use it? Surely
after such an escape as this is, there is great reason, that God should expect,
that we should look well to our Ways, and be very watchful over our selves for
the future. That whenever any sensual Appetite begins to be over-craving, or
the Riches, Pleasures, or Honors of this World do tempt us to Covetousness or
Oppression, to Sensuality or Intemperance, to Pride or Ambition, we should call
to mind the Danger we have escaped, and that we shall perish with scorn and
contempt, if we let our Love of our Bodies undo us twice. This use we ought to
make of our being in a Justified state; for since the Sentence of Death is
remitted, we have a fair opportunity put into our Hands of securing a Life,
that is Immortal. But if we lose this opportunity, we shall sorfeit our Lives
again, and all the Mercy, that would save us.

2. His being raised for our Justification, does imply his receiving Power and
Authority to justify us. And here we are to consider Two things: 1. That he is
invested with Power and Authority to deliver us from Death. 2. That this Power
he received when he rose from the Dead.


1. That he is invested with Power and Authority to deliver us from Death, 1.
By raising us again out of our Graves. And in this respect he is styled the
second Adam, in whom all shall be made alive in opposition to the first, in
whom all died, to denote him to be the Author of Life to a condemned World, as
the first Adam was the Author of Death to a race, that was designed for
Immortality. But yet he is not the Author of Life and Immortality only as he
was merited it, as Adam's Offense has entailed Death upon us; but as he is that
Person, whom the Father has constituted to be the Dispenser of that Grace and
Mercy, that pardons the Offenses, for which we die, and to communicate that
Spirit of Life, by which we shall rise again at the last day. In which respect
it is, that he so often styles himself the Life of the World, and the
Resurrection and the Life, by which he informs us of the great Authority, the
Father has put into his hand; and that the Nature of that Office, which as the
Mediator between God and Man be executes, is for the discharging us from that
Obligation to die Eternally, which was the fruit of Sin. As the Father has
life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself, Joh. 5.26.
i.e. He has made him the Lord of Life, and given him Power to bestow it: For as
the Father raises up the dead, so the Son quickneth whom he will: i.e. He, as
well as the Father, has the Power of Life in his Hand. We are not to understand
this Expression as if there were some, whom he would not restore Life unto, but
that the Power of giving Life, which he has received is unlimited, so that he
can give and take away Life to and from whom he pleases. Verily, verily I say
unto you, the Hour is coming and now is, when the Dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God; and they that hear shall live.

Thus the Scripture does constantly represent the Power of abolishing
Corruption and Death to be in the Hands of the Son of God. And that Renovation
of all things when the Creature that now groans under Corruption shall be
redeemed from Vanity and Corruption, and restored to an indissoluble state,
will be the work of him, that came to redeem us from Death. For as the Father
is the first Fountain of Life, from whom all Creatures received Life and Being
in the first Creation of all things; so the Son is appointed to be the Fountain
of Life to all things again, when the World shall be created anew, and put
into such a state as shall endure for ever. For we are to consider, that when
God first made the World, it was a much more excellent thing than now it is,
being designed to be the Habitation of Innocent Man. But when Man fell, and
lost his Innocence, all this visible Creation suffered with him, and was
accursed for Man's sake; i.e. It was put into a state proper for a Creature,
that was doomed to Labor and Sorrow to dwell in: Cursed is the ground for thy
sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life: Thorns also and
Thistles shall it bring forth to thee, Genesis 3.17, 18. Of what nature this Curse
was, is not easy to tell. But however, thus much it plainly imports, that the
Nature of this World was much altered for the worse, and that it does not
nourish us now, as it would have done, had we not been doomed to a laborious
and mortal Life. But this is not all: For the Scriptures represent it as such a
Change, as that which we our selves have undergone; when instead of
Immortality, Mortality and Corruption seized us. And that at the last this
World must undergo a purgation by Fire, by means of which it will be restored
to its ancient incorruptible State: The Heavens being on fire, shall be
dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat: Nevertheless we,
according to his promise, look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.12, 13. Which is the thing that St. Paul
means, when he tells us, That the earnest expectation of the Creature waits
for the Manifestation of the Sons of God, Romans 8.19. i.e. The visible Creation
waits for that time, when we shall become the Sons of God, being the Children
of the Resurrection; at which time it will be freed from its Curse, as well as
we shall be delivered from the Wrath, that is come upon us: For the Creature
was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him, that has
subjected the same in hope: Because the Creature it self also shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
Children of God, v. 20, 21. i.e. As it does partake of our Curse, so it shall
of our Blessing, when we rise to an Immortal life, being new made.

And as the first Creation was the work of the Father, who has Life in himself;
i.e. from whom all that Life, that is in the World, is Originally derived. So
the second Creation, when all things shall be put into a lasting incorruptible
State, will be the work of the Redeemer of all things: For he came to give Life
to the World, and to be the restorer of all things; i.e. to take away the
Curse, under which we and all this visible World, do suffer. The Authority,
that is conferred upon him, is for the repairing those breaches, that Sin has
made in our Nature, and for the putting a disordered World into its right
indissoluble Frame. And therefore the account, he gives us of himself and his
Errand is the giving Life to the World: I am come, that they might have life,
and that they might have it more abundantly, Joh. 10.10. or in a more perfect
and excellent degree than here they have. He does, it is true, give us a
Specimen of his Power in the Renovation of our Souls in this Life, which is the
first beginning of that Life, that he came to bestow upon the World. But the
great Exercise of his Authority will be at the Resurrection, when all that are
in their Graves shall hear his voice and come forth, which will be his great
Act of justifying us personally from the Sentence, that has appointed us to
die. The Spirit, that he communicates for the raising us to a new and holy Life
is styled the Earnest of our Inheritance. For nothing can be a more lively
Emblem of our future Resurrection, when we shall be delivered from Death, than
that New life, we are raised to here by the Power of his Spirit. For it is
every whit as great an Instance of his Power to quicken and revive a dead Soul
to its own Spiritual life, as to raise a dead Body to life again. And this is a
great Evidence, that God has given him Power to justify a condemned World,
because that Spirit by which we begin to live again to God, is derived from
him: For if the Spirit of him, that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in
you; he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
Bodies by the Spirit, that dwells in you, Romans 8.11. i.e. The Spirit, whereby
Christ does now raise us to a New life, will likewise quicken our mortal
Bodies, and give New lise to us after Death. But this is not all that is meant
by his Power to justify us. For,

2. He has Power and Authority given him as the Supreme Judge of the World to
acquit us Eternally from Death, or when we are risen to give us Eternal life.
And this is a distinct thing from God's justifying us from the Sentence passed
upon Adam. His raising us to life again after we are dead, is owing to our
Justification from that Sentence. For had not he by dying satisfied the
Justice, that takes away our Lives, we should not rise again to Life. But
whether we shall live for ever, after we are risen, or die again, does depend
upon that Sentence, that as our Judge he will pass upon us: God has appointed a
day, in which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man, whom he
has ordained, says St. Paul, Act. 17.31. i.e. God has given him Power to take
an account, how Mankind has used the Mercy, that he has favored us with, and
to declare, who according to the Gospel are worthy of Eternal life, and who are
not; and accordingly to determine of our Eternal condition, either by
justifying us to Eternal life, or condemning us to a second Death. And this he
intimates to us in the forementioned Text; I am come, that they might have
life, and that they might have it more abundantly. That they might have life;
i.e. That I might by raising them from the Dead restore them the Life, that
Death deprives them of. And that they might have it more abundantly; i.e. That
I might justify them to a Life, that is Eternal, when at the Resurrection they
are Judged a second time. His Resurrection, it is true, does assure us, that we
are now in a Justified state; i.e. That we are acquitted from the Sentence,
that has passed upon Adam; and that in respect of this Justification, we shall
certainly rise to Life again. But though we be absolved from that Sentence, we
must expect another to be passed upon us, which will finally and eternally save
us from Death, if when we appear before that great Tribunal, he that is to
Judge us does find, we have not neglected so great Salvation, and sinned away
the favor, that has been granted us. And this Power to absolve us for ever
from Everlasting Death, is given to him, who came into the World to suffer for
our Offenses, and rose again for our Justification. And therefore the Apostle
to the Hebrews tells us, That as it is appointed unto Men once to die, and
after Death the Judgment: So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many;
and unto them, that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin
unto salvation, Heb. 9.27, 28. i.e. Though we die by virtue of that Sentence,
that God gave upon us in Adam; yet Christ having undergone the Punishment for
us, we shall not die Eternally by virtue of that Sentence: For Christ, who bore
our Sins, will come again to Judge us; and then shall all his faithful
Servants be Eternally acquitted from that more dreadful Curse, that he will
denounce against all, that have lost their opportunity to save their Souls.

2. This Power to justify us; i.e. to deliver us from Death by raising us to
Lise again, and acquitting us as our Judge at the last day, he received, when
he rose from the Dead. For then it was, that he entered upon the public
Administration of the Affairs of his Kingdom, and was made of God both Lord and
Christ. Then it was, he received a Name, that is above every Name, and was
dignified with the Honor of being Head over all things. Thus he himself told
his Disciples after his Resurrection, That all Power was given unto him both in
Heaven and Earth, Matt. 28.18. By which he means the Power of that Kingdom,
that by vanquishing him, that has the Power of Death he has obtained; The Power
of pardoning Sin, and raising the Dead, and giving Eternal life to all, that
faithfully and sincerely serve him. The God of our Fathers, says St. Peter,
raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a Tree, Him has God exalted with
his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance unto
Israel, and remission of sins, Act. 5.30, 31. In which words the Apostle
informs us, that the Power God has given him, is the Power of dispensing that
Grace and Mercy, that he has obtained for us: The Power of delivering us from
Death, and of justifying us as our Judge to Eternal life: And that this Power
God advanced him to, when he raised him from the Dead. It Is true, while he was
in this World, he styles himself the Resurrection and the Life, and tells us,
That God had given him Authority to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of
Man. But yet in these Expressions he means no more than that he was the Person,
who was designed by his Father to this Eminent Dignity and Power of abolishing
Death, and Judging the World, and giving Life and Immortality to mortal Men.
And of this he gave a convincing proof by raising Lazarus from the Dead. But
yet the Life he restored Lazarus to was not that Immortal life, which he will
give his sincere Followers, when he utterly destroys Death; but the same Mortal
life, that he was possessed of before. But the Power of raising us to an
Immortal life, which he gave a proof, that he was designed to be instated in by
raising Lazarus from the Dead, was not conferred upon him, till he was risen
from the Dead. Then it was that he entered upon his Regal Office, and was
invested with that Power and Authority by which he has put all Enemies under
his feet. He is sat down on the right hand of God, says the Apostle, expecting
till his Enemies be made his footstool, Heb. 10.12, 13. Designing at the End
of all things to subdue Death, which is the last Enemy he is to destory, and in
a most solemn and glorious manner to deliver his faithful Servants from their
Captivity and all Power of Death for the suture, and to put them into an actual
possession of that immortal life, that they live in an expectation of srom him.

And now if Christ be thus risen for our Justification, or that he might
receive Power to justify us, Let us consider,

1. What Reason we have to depend upon him for Everlasting life. This is that
Faith, that he expects from us, and which in the Gospel we are so frequently
exhorted to. A believing that Death is vanquished by the Power of our
Mediator, when he rose from the Dead; and that we shall assuredly rise again
to Life, because our Redeemer, who has overcome Death, has the Power of
raising us to Life again, and of justifying us to Eternal life in his Hands.

It is not a believing that there is a God: For though such a Faith does much
contribute to the comfort of our Lives, when we know, that he is reconciled to
us, yet it serves only to fill us with terror and astonishment, if his Wrath
does still lie upon us. Nor is it a believing only, that he employed a great
Prophet to make our Duty more plain, and to give us the best Rules, and the
most excellent Example of a Holy Life. For such a Revelation can be of no
advantage to us, if our former Offenses, for which we are condemned, are not
pardoned. Neither is it a believing, that though Sin be strong and prevalent in
us, yet we are not one jot the less Just, because we commit Sin, as some speak;
but by being united to Christ, who has fulfilled all Righteousness, we have all
Righteousness, that is needful to possess us of Everlasting life: i.e. That
God has put all into the Hands of his Son; and that we have nothing more to do
for the gaining Eternal life, but to believe, that Christ has done all for us.
For all that we can do, will not make us one jot the more Just and Righteous in
the sight of God; i.e. Nothing more qualified for Eternal life, than we are
without it. Now that this is not the Faith, that the Gospel requires of us, is
evident from hence, That the Gospel does all along suppose us to be in a state
of Probation for Eternal life, which this Faith does not. For it supposes we
are as safe, as we can be by believing the things, that Christ has done and
suffered for us; and that by means of this Faith his Righteousness is ours; and
that this Righteousness, which is ours by believing, is the only Righteousness,
we have to trust to for Eternal life. Now if this be so, we must deprive Christ
of two of his Offices; viz. his Prophetic and Regal Offices. For having
fulfilled all Righteousness for us, there was no need of his discharging the
Office of a Prophet by interpreting the Mind of God, and prescribing Rules of
Life to us; nor of executing the Office of a Prince in governing us by Rules of
Righteousness, who have all Righteousness in him. And besides, To what purpose
are all the Motives and Exhortations to do Righteousness, which we meet with in
the Gospel? Why is a Day of Judgment appointed to take an account of our
Doings, if believing, that he has done all for us, be all the Duty that our
Eternal Happiness depends upon? St. Paul tells us, That we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his Body according to what he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor.
5.10. And if we must be Judged for all that we our selves do in this Life, it
is certain that we have somewhat more to do than to believe, that Christ has
done all for us.

The true account then of this Matter is this, That Christ, by suffering Death,
having born the Punishment, that in Adam we were doomed to, has procured us a
full discharge from that Punishment; i.e. God has justified us, so that there
is no need of our doing Righteousness, that we may rise again from the Dead;
because that which Christ has done and suffered, has procured us this Mercy,
and we may depend upon him for it. Of this Mercy God has given us an Assurance
by raising him from the Dead. For his Resurrection is for our Justification, or
a certain Evidence, that God has justified us, as his Death was for our
Offenses, or the Punishment, that the Justice of God has doomed us to. But
then, though this Justification be only owing to the Merits of Christ, yet we
must do Righteousness, that we may for ever enjoy the Benefits of it; and if we
do not this, our Mediator himself will condemn us again. So that being
discharged from the Obligation to die as Malefactors, we are to take care of
our Lives lest we die again by the Sentence of our Redeemer; i.e. We must add
to our Faith all Christian Virtues, which are necessary to qualify us for
Everlasting life, lest the Gospel condemn us again.

This is that Mercy, that the Gospel declares to us. And accordingly the Faith,
that it requires of us, is the believing, that God sent his Son into the World
upon this Errand; and that being justified by his Death, we shall not only
assuredly rise again, but by obeying the Gospel, we shall assure to our selves
Everlasting life. So that the Faith, that the Gospel requires of us, does
suppose we are in a Justified state; i.e. discharged from the Sentence of
Death, that passed upon us in Adam; and is required of us not as the only
Righteousness, whereby we are to make our selves Immortal, but as an
Encouragement to perfect Holiness, that we may be justified to Everlasting
life, when we are Judged by our Gracious Redeemer.

And it is by this Faith, that God makes a Trial of the Sincerity of our
Hearts, whether we dare depend upon the Power he has given his Son to raise us
again, and to give us Eternal life. For he expects, that we should leave this
World as Abraham did his native Country and his Father's House, though we know
not the World we go to, when we leave this, with a firm belief in his Promise
of being raised to a better life. And for the better confirming our Faith, the
performing it is committed to the care of him that is risen, and has received
Power to destroy Death. For his Resurrection is an Instance, that Death is not
an Enemy too powerful for him to vanquish. And since he is invested with that
Power, by which his own Body was raised, what greater assurance can we have,
that Death shall be abolished, than this; That he who has undertaken to abolish
it, has that Power, which can destroy Death. But especially our great Certainty
in this case does arise from hence, That the doing of this is committed to his
care, the business of whose Life and Death was to deliver us from Death. And is
there any Reason to fear, lest he, who has loved us, and laid down his Life for
us, should at last fail us of the Blessings, that he came to mediate for us,
and which he has dearly purchased. If he will suffer his Blood to be vilely
cast away, and the Price of our Redemption to be lost, we may question whether
he will finish the Salvation, that he came to procure us. But if he has any
value for his own Blood, any sense of his own Sufferings, any regard to his own
Merits, we cannot but believe that he, who has gone through the Tragical part
of his Undertaking, will undoubtedly Triumph at the last in the total
destruction of Death. For what better and safer hands can this Power to deliver
and save us be lodged in than the hands of our Savior? For he, to be sure,
will suffer nothing to be lost, that he came to save, and which he has Power to
save.

This I have insisted on, because some who believe that Christ rose again,
cannot see any Reason from thence to believe that we shall rise again too.

Now there are but Two things, that I can think of, that can be an occasion of
distrust in the case.

1. That this Power was not given him to this purpose. 2. If it was, we are not
certain, that he will make use of it. Now we are sufficiently secured against
any fears of this nature. For,
1. If he has any Power at all given him, it must be to this purpose. For none
can be said to have a Power to do a thing given him, which he is not to do by
the use of that Power. A Power which is not to be made use of, is no Power at
all; and it could not be said, that Christ has Power given him to raise us, if
this Power, that is given him, be sufficient to do this, and yet he is not
permitted to use this Power to this purpose. Now that he has such a Power, his
own Resurrection is a sufficient proof. For upon the same Reason that we
believe he rose from the Dead, we must believe that he has Power to raise the
Dead; because the Scriptures that teach us the one, do teach us the other also.
So that if he has the Power of raising us committed to him, it must be to this
purpose, that he may raise us. And,

2. We have great Reason to believe, that he will make use of this Power to
this purpose. For will not he accomplish his own undertaking? Will he not
finish the thing, that he has been sollicitous for? Has a Malefactor any
reason to doubt, whether his Life shall be saved, when his friend, that has
with Cost and Charge been long suing for his Pardon, has it at last in his own
hands? No, we are secured by the Love of our Redeemer, that the Power, he has
received, will be made use of for our deliverance. For where can such a Power
be better lodged than with him, whose great concern it is to have us saved.
Thus the Apostle does argue upon this matter: If when we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the Death of his Son; much more, being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his Life, Romans 5.10. i.e. If he loved us so much, when we
were Enemies, as by dying to reconcile us to God, can we believe that he loves
us the less now for having loved us so much before? Or, that after he has
procured such a Power of delivering us from Death, he will not do what he was
so desirous should be done. He who died, that we might live, will undoubtedly
give us Life, now that he has the Power of giving Life conserr'd upon him. This
is the Faith, that the Gospel requires of us; and it is so well grounded, that
nothing can be more reasonable. But,

2. Since Christ has received Power to justify us, by raising us from the
Dead, and giving us Eternal life; This may insorm us, wherein the Mercy of the
Gospel does consist. This is a Matter worthy our Consideration, because there
are so many, that mistake it. There are few or none so little acquainted with
the Circumstances of our Nature, but are sensible, that we stand in need of a
great deal of Mercy to save us. And this Universal acknowledgment, that it must
be Mercy, that saves us, is an acknowledgment likewise, that no other Religion,
but such a one, as is sounded upon Mercy, is suited to the Natural condition of
Mankind. A Religion, that only teaches us our Duty, and what improvement is
necessary to qualify us for Immortality, is not now so adapted to our Nature,
as when Man was Innocent. For, because there are strong Aversions in us to that
which is good, Sensual inclinations, that render man. Sins very grateful to
Flesh and Blood, and by that means give Sin such a power over us, that the
Conquest of one Sin is many times the labor of a Man's life; we are not in a
Condition to improve our selves for Immortality, as Innocent Man might.

But though this is the Acknowledgment of all Men, and the Gospel upon that
account does contain the best Religion, we can be under the Government of; yet
the Mercy of the Gospel, which is the Mercy we want, is not so well considered,
but that many, who believe it is Mercy must save them, do rest upon such Mercy,
as will not save them. For that which many found their Hopes upon is the simple
Consideration of the merciful Nature of God, without any regard to any
particular Instance, wherein he has Exemplified to us, the Mercy, he would have
us depend upon. For because Mercy is an Attribute, that belongs to the Divine
Nature, they persuade themselves, that nothing severe can be dreaded from a God
of Mercy. Thus bad Men bear up their Spirits under the pressure of their guilt,
and put by those Terrors, wherewith the Consideration of God's Justice would
affright them into an amendment of Life, and at last make a shift to go out of
the World without any great sense of their Danger. For if they must appear
before a Just and Holy God, yet the God, that will Judge them, has the Bowels
and Compassions of a Father. And this Thought lays all frightfull Apprehensions
of his Justice. They consider not that Death is the Wages, or the just desert
of Sin, and that by carrying their Sins along with them into the other World,
they carry that along with them, that the Justice of God has already condemned,
and does punish them for, when they die. They think not that while they do
wickedly, they despise the Mercy that God has shown us, and even throw away
their own Lives, which the Divine Mercy by justifying them from a Sentence of
Condemnation has put into their own power to save.

It is evident indeed, that their own Consciences being witnesses they do that,
which deserves Death, I mean the Eternal loss of their Souls, when they have a
recourse to Mercy for their hopes of recovering them again, when they are lost;
i.e. When they are separated from their Bodies, and sent into the other World
to live among Cursed Spirits. For why else should they expect to receive their
Souls again from the Hands of Mercy rather than of Justice, if they were not
conscious to themselves, that they justly lose them? And since they are
conscious of this in their own Minds, what reason have they to think that God
will not do that, which their own Consciences tell them they have deserved? And
there is this further to prove the Folly of such a Hope, that they see the
Mercy, they trust to, does not save them from the Punishment of Sin. But Death
deprives them of their Souls, and Justice sends them into the other World; and
no Mercy, but such as is Revealed, can assure them, that they who die by the
Hand of Justice, shall have their Souls restored to them again, when once they
have lost them. For those who were not informed of this matter by any Divine
Revelation, never thought of such a thing as a Resurrection; though they did
believe, that Mercy was an Attribute, that belonged to the Divine Nature.

Neither does the Mercy of the Gospel consist only in revealing to us, that God
is Merciful. For there needs no Revelation to such a purpose. And a Revelation
of this nature would be of no great use to us, if the Extent of his Mercy was
not made known to us in some particular Instance, that might encourage us to
depend upon it, and assure to us the Certainty of the Blessing, that we hope
for from his Mercy: i.e. If he had not Revealed to us, what we are to Hope for,
and upon what grounds we are to build our Hopes. For to hope in his Mercy only,
because he is Merciful, is to hope for nothing that is certain; and that can
afford but cold comfort to Creatures that know they must be miserable for ever,
unless he shows 'em such a special Favor and Mercy, as they stand in need of.
And it is observable, that they who build their hopes of Mercy at large, do
talk very much at random, as if they knew not what to hope for, and were
altogether unskilled in the state and condition of another life.

Further, it does not consist in prescribing to us the most perfect Virtue in
the Rules and Example of our great Lord. For though this be an Eminent part of
the Gospel-Mercy and Goodness, yet it would be no Mercy, if we were not put
into a condition of obeying the Gospel with Hope. For what Mercy is it to have
the most exalted Virtue set before us, if we cannot attain unto it, and yet
must perish, if we do not? Or if though we could attain unto it, we must die by
reason of a former Sentence. For it is too late for a Malefactor to apply
himself to that Obedience, that the Law requires, when he is already condemned
for transgressing it: Neither can he receive any Benefit from the best
Informations concerning his Duty, till he is acquitted from the Sentence, he is
fallen under. And therefore Zacharias in his pious Hymn, celebrated the Mercy
of the Gospel upon this account, That being delivered out of the hands of our
Enemies, we may serve God without fear, Luke 1.74.

Once more, It does not consist only in God's Revealing to us, that he will
forgive us our Sins upon our Repentance, and not charge the many Errors of our
Lives upon us, if we do our best to perfect Holiness. None must deny, but this
is a very great degree of Mercy, and that the Gospel does acquaint us, that
there is such Mercy with God. For it encourages us to turn from Satan to the
living God by the Promise of Forgiveness, and assures us of Everlasting life
upon the Sincerity of our Obedience. So that he, who applies his Mind with the
greatest care and industry to improve himself according to the Rules of the
Gospel, will be acquitted even by the very Justice of his Redeemer, when he
comes to be Judged, though he has not a Righteousness every way complete to
plead at that day.

But though this be a very merciful Condescension, yet it does not set before
us the utmost height of that Mercy that the Gospel sets before us. For it
further lets us know, That God's just Sentence of Death upon us is remitted,
without which all his other Mercy would have been to no purpose. And that as
upon this account St. Paul exhorted the Corinthians, 1 Epist. 15.58. We may be
steadfast, unmovable, and always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch
as we know that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord; i.e. Because we
are assured we shall rise again from under our former Sentence, and be rewarded
with Everlasting life. And therefore this is styled the Hope of the Gospel,
Col. 1.23. to denote it to be the peculiar Mercy, wherewith it encourages us to
live according to the Laws of Christ. The grace of God which brings Salvation,
or makes known our being discharged from Death as a Punishment, and that
therefore we shall rise to Life again, teaches us, that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godlily in this present
World, looking for that blessed hope, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. i.e. That Immortal
life that this Mercy encourages us to labor for: For he that has this hope
(which no Man could have, unless he was freed from Condemnation; i.e.
Justified) purifies himself as God is pure, 1 John 3.3. And still for our
greater encouragement, the Gospel lets us know, that this Mercy is merited, and
that the Hopes of rising to Life again, which we are begotten to, is founded
upon the Redemption, we have by Jesus Christ, and the price of our Mediatour's
Blood. That there is forgiveness with God, because Divine Justice is satisfied,
and the Power of Justifying us to Eternal life is committed to him, who has
suffered the Punishment of our Sins. This is that height of Mercy, that the
Gospel reveals to us. It Is Mercy, that is procured for us by the Death of our
Redeemer, and Exemplified to us in his Resurrection: And therefore we know,
what it is, that we are to expect from him. It Is Mercy, that we have a right to
upon the account of the Price, that has been paid for it; and therefore we
know, that it is just with God to restore us the Lives we lose. In a word; it
is Mercy, that is in the Hand of our Mediator, that has conquered and
triumphed over Death; and on that account we have a full Assurance, that he
will remember his own Mercy, and compel Death and the Grave, to give up the
Dead that are in them. The Mercy of the Gospel then is a sufficient
encouragement to us to do our Duty, because it does not leave us at
Uncertainties, as those Hopes do, which are grounded only upon the Merciful
Nature of God. It is owing to the Merciful Nature of God, that we have the
Hopes of Immortality. But that Resurrection to Life, which is the great Grace
of the Gospel, is not a thing, that we are still to depend upon the Will and
good Pleasure of God for: For it is already granted us. And though it is the
Gift of God, it is a Gift in the Hands of our Surety, who is entrusted with the
Power of giving Life.

3. Since he has received Power to Justify; i.e. to Raise us, and to give
Eternal lise to his sincere Disciples; This may inform us, what Honor and
Reverence is due to him. And this is a Matter well worth our Consideration,
because there are a sort of Men, that discourse as if Christ had no Power in
Heaven, but that of a Favorite; and therefore that the Honor we are to give
him, is not that Religious Worship, wherewith we Honor the God of all Power.
And it must be granted, that if he has not the Power of a God, that Power which
can raise the Dead, and give Eternal life, he is not to be Honored as we
Honor God; i.e. We must not give him that Worship and Reverence, as belongs
only to him, who has Infinite Power and Majesty. But then on the other hand it
is plain too, that if he has Power to do those things for us, which none but
God can do, and to bestow those Blessings, which none but God can bestow, it
must be acknowledged, that the Honor that belongs to God, does likewise belong
to him. For then we must Honor him as a Person, that is endued with Infinite
Power, the most Glorious Majesty, and the most Excellent Sovereignty; i.e. As
that Person, whom God has constituted in his place and stead to manage the
Affairs of his Everlasting Kingdom, and to dispense the Blessings that none but
God can give. And if we must Honor him as a Person, that has the Glory, and
Majesty, and Power of God, we must Honor him with the same Honor, as we
Honor the Father.

And of this nature is the Honor, which the Scriptures require us to give him.
For they speak much more Magnificently of that Power, he is Exalted to, than
they do, who allow him only a Power of Intercession for us. For they speak of
him as a Person, that is invested with Power to give all, that he has
interceded for. And that this Power was conferred on him, when he first
presented himself before his Father as our Intercessour after his Resurrection;
i.e. When he entered into the Holy of Holies with the Blood of Atonement. Then
he interceded for us, when he first appeared in the Presence of God for us; and
having by his powerful Intercession procured that we should reap the fruits of
Labor and Conquest, he was honored with the Power of bestowing what he
interceded for. So that it is a trifling Question to ask, what need there is,
that he should intercede for that, which he has a Power to give. For his
Intercession is to be considered as antecedent to his Investiture into his
Eminent Dignity and Authority. For having prevailed with his Father through the
Merits of his Blood, when he entered the Holy of Holies as our High Priest to
grant us Life and Immortality upon the Terms of that Law, that he had given us,
for our greater security the Power of giving Life and Immortality is committed
to him by his Father. So that now we are to look upon him as the Lord of Life;
i.e. that Person, who has Power to reward our Services with Eternal life. And
therefore St. Paul styles him the blessed and only Potentate, the King of
Kings, and the Lord of Lords, who only has Immortality, to whom belongs Honor
and Power everlasting, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. Intimating him both to have the great
Power of God, the Power of giving Everlasting life, which only the Power of God
can do; and a right to the Honor, which belongs to the Power and Majesty of
God. And in this respect he is styled the Brightness of his Father's Glory, the
express Image of his Person; and is said to uphold all things by the word of
his Power; To be made so much better than the Angels, as he has by Inheritance
obtained a more excellent name than they, Heb. 1.3, 4. All which does relate to
the great Place and eminent Authority, that he holds in Heaven. And because of
the Greatness of his Majesty, all the Angels of God are required to worship
him, v. 6. God has highly exalted him, and given him a name that is above every
name; That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven and
things in Earth, and things under the Earth, Phil. 2.9, 10. That he should be
Honored by every Creature, with Religious Worship, as the great Sovereign of
the World. The same Honor that Natural Religion teaches us to give to God,
Christianity obliges us to give to Christ: For wherever the same Power and
Authority is, there the same Honor and Reverence is due.

He is, it is true, advanced to this great Dignity, and, as he teaches us, has
received this Power of the Father. But we are not to imagine upon that account,
that a lower Degree of Honor is due to him, than that which we give to the
Father. For it is the Divine Power and Sovereignty, that is in his Hand; and if
our highest Veneration and Reverence be due to the Divine Power and
Sovereignty, they must be due to him that has them. And besides, if he has the
Divine Power in his Hands, it argues him to be that God, that is capable of it.
For to suppose him to be a Creature, and yet to have a Divine Power, is to
suppose a Creature, that has an Infinite Capacity: And what does that mean
less, than that a Creature is capable of being made a God. If then he has a
Divine Power, as the Power to forgive Sins, to raise the Dead, and to give
Eternal life certainly is, he must have Infinite Abilities to render him
capable of such a Power. For Infinite Power and Authority is too big for any
Being of a Finite Capacity to manage. And if he has that Infinite Ability, that
is requisite to make him capable of managing Infinite Power, he must have those
superlative Excellencies as render him a proper Object of Religious Worship.
For as his own Personal Capacity qualifies him above any Created Being for the
Exercise of a Divine Power, so it is that, upon which his Right to Divine
Honor is grounded.

This is that Honor, that he himself lays a claim to, when he tells us, That
the Father judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son: That all
Men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, Joh. 5.22, 23. And
that we may not believe, that it is barely upon the account of the Power, that
is given to him, that he makes this claim, he tells us, how well qualified he
is to discharge the Trust, that is reposed in him, by having Life in himself:
As the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them; so the Son quickneth
whom he will, v. 21. i.e. He is qualified in himself for the Exercise of such a
Power: For the Father has not only entrusted him with the Exercise of this
Power, but has given him to have life in himself, v. 26. And therefore he that
does not Honor the Son; i.e. does not give him that Honor, that is due to the
Divine Power and Essential Life of the Father, does not Honor the Father; i.e.
He does not Honor that Power and Life, upon the account of which the Father is
to be Honored by the Creatures he has made and governs.

4. Since he has received this Power, we may observe upon what Reason it will
go worse with wicked Christians at the last, than with ignorant Heathens. That
it will do so, our Savior has assured us in those dreadful Denunciations
against Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, the Cities where he frequently
taught and wrought his Miracles: Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida;
for if the mighty Works, that have been done in you, had been done in Tire and
Sidon, they would have repented long ago in Sackcloth and Ashes: But I say unto
you, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the Day of Judgment, than
for you. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to Heaven, shall be brought down
unto Hell: For if the mighty Works which have been done in thee, had been done
in Sodom, it would have remained until this day: But I say unto you, It shall
be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom in the Day of Judgment, than for thee,
Matt. 11.21, 22, 23, 24. And that there is a great deal of Reason it should be
so, is evident from hence, That wicked Christians sin against that Mercy, and
despise that Salvation, that the Heathen part of the World know nothing of: For
all the Mercy that Heathens have by the Death and Resurrection of Christ, is,
that they shall assuredly rise again from Death; because Christ, who died for
our Offenses, has discharged all Mankind from Death, as it is a Punishment of
Sin. But how the great Judge will deal with them, when they are risen, we know
not; because the Mercy, that shall be shown them, is not revealed. Christ by
the Power he has received, will raise them to Life again, though they know not
of it. But when they are risen, they will not be Judged, for not improving this
Mercy; because they know nothing of it neither. Neither have they that
Revelation, that ascertains to Christians both their Duty and Reward; and
therefore shall not be condemned for not improving themselves to that height of
Virtue, that the Christian Religion teaches.

But now the case of wicked Christians is quite otherwise: For they must rise
to answer for all the abuse of that Mercy, that the Gospel acquaints them with.
And they must die again, because they have despised that Life, that they must
then lose, when it was in their Power to have secured it. Though they have the
means of knowing, that they shall not for ever lose their Souls upon the
account of the Judgment, that came upon all Men to Condemnation in Adam; and
that they are favored with a new Trial, whether they will choose Life or Death,
they lose the time of their Trial, and must die, because they choose Death. And
this will aggravate their Condemnation, that when they were favored with the
care of their own Souls, they foolishly lost the time in which God put them to
their choice whether they would live or die. So that when they are condemned
again, it will be a startling Consideration to them, that they must die for
their own neglect of themselves; and that they have taken no warning by their
former Condemnation, but have to no purpose been pardoned the fault, for which
they lose this present life.

And besides, it will beget terrible Reflections in them, when they come to
consider, that the Judge, before whom they stand, is he that came into this
World to deliver them from Death by vanquishing that subtle Enemy, that
betrayed us into Mortality: That it is he, that will condemn them, that when he
appears the second time, comes with Power to save; i.e. to conferr upon us the
fruits of his bloody Victory: And that he will condemn them, because they have
taken their Souls out of his hand, when he had delivered them, and have
delivered them up again to the slavery of those Evil Spirits, out of whose
power he had rescued them. So that their Condemnation will be with the greatest
Indignation for disappointing the Hopes, and thwarting the Design of him, that
has procured a Power from his Father to save. It will be with bitter Wrath and
Vengeance for deserting the protection of a Savior after all the Sweat and
Blood, that he was at the expense of, to deliver them. Those mine Enemies, that
would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me,
Luke 19.27. And oh with what Consternation and Agonies in their Souls will they
then be tortured, when they see the direful Executioners of that terrible
Sentence coming upon them to seize them, and that they must lose their Lives
again, which they have but just received, and, which is worse, to lose them
within the sight of Immortality. He will condemn all that do Unrighteousness,
but a wicked Heathen will not fall under so much Wrath as a wicked Christian,
because he sins only against the Light of his own Mind, and loses the Benefit
of that Salvation, that he never heard of: But that which will heighten the
wicked Christian's Condemnation, is this, That he has received the Grace of God
in vain, and must be condemned by him, whose Kindness they have been frequently
told of, and whose Mercy they have been courted to accept of and to improve.
Oh! with what weight will the Wrath of a Redeemer fall upon the Heads of wicked
Christians? How scorching will that Justice be, which the Love and Mercy of a
Savior will be forced to give way unto? Because you would none of my Counsel,
but have despised all my Reproof, and trampled on my Blood, and turned my Grace
into Wantonness; Therefore shall ye eat the fruit of your own Ways, and be
filled with your own Devices: Go ye cursed into everlasting burnings. Such a
Sentence out of the Mouth of a Savior will come with such Astonishment and
Horror, as no Heathen has any reason to dread.

Neither is this the worst of their case. For every one, that calls himself a
Christian, does profess to have put himself under the protection of their
Redeemer's Mercy. And therefore every Christian, that does wickedly, must
expect to die without pity, because he renounces his Trust in that Mercy,
without which, when he embraced the Christian Religion, he declared he could
not be saved; and repenting of his subjection to his Savior, revolts from him,
who alone has the Power to justify. The case of the Heathens is pitiable,
because of their Ignorance. And therefore the Apostle tells us, God winked at
the time of the Heathen Ignorance; He seemed to overlook their Follies, and
out of mere pity to take no notice of their Mistakes. But what Mercy can they
expect, who make light of that Mercy, that calls them to Repentance, and puts
it into their Power to provide better for themselves than their first Parents
did.

5. We may hence likewise observe how little reason we have to dread a future
Judgment. There are a great many Considerations, that are sufficient to remove
those Fears, that the thoughts of that Great Day are apt to terrify us with.
For he who is appointed to Judge us, is the Man Christ Jesus. He is a Man, that
is sensible of all the Infirmities, that we labor under, and does carry in his
Bowels the Affections, and tender Compassions of a Man toward us: In that he
has suffered, being tempted, he is able, or very inclinable, to succor them
that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. For what severe or terrible thing can we fear from
a Man like our selves? What unkind or hard Sentence have we reason to dread
from him, who is our Brother? Will not he, who took part of Flesh and Blood, be
very tender to the Infirmities of his own Nature? Though it be a terrible thing
to appear before a Just and Righteous God; because the Justice of a God is very
frightfull, yet it can be no very frightfull thing to appear before a God made
Man, because we are well acquainted with the Tendernesses, that are in the
Nature of a Man.

Or if this Consideration be not enough to reconcile our Thoughts to a Judgment
to come, because we too often see, that the Passions of Men make them violent
and injurious, cruel and oppressive toward each other: Yet he is a Man not
subject to the like Passions, as we are, nor tainted with those Vices, as
corrupt our Nature, and render it a difficult thing oftentimes to converse with
those of our own kind. But he is a Man famed for Meekness and Humility, for
Love and Charity, for Mercy and Compassion. So that he is qualified with all
those soft and tender Virtues, that we our selves would desire should be in
him, that is to Judge us. And since we must be Judged, we would wish for such a
Judge, as he is.

But this is not all; for the most comfortable Consideration of all is this,
That the Power to Judge us, that is committed to him, is a Power to justify
and acquit us from Death. He has merited a Power to give Life to the World; and
therefore when he appears the second time, it will be to the Salvation of all,
that wait for him by raising them from the Dead, and giving them Eternal life.
So that his Judging the World will be an executing of that Power of giving
Life, that he has received. It will be with the Pardon, that he has mediated,
in his hand; and for the delivering us, who now are appointed to die from any
more fear of Death for the future.

He will, it is true, when he appears, be clothed with that Majesty, that will
be terrible to his Enemies, and, as a Righteous Judge, give a very dreadful
Sentence upon all the workers of Iniquity. But yet though he will condemn to a
second Death those, that he finds not worthy of Life, and as well concern
himself for the Interests and Reputation of his Father's Justice, as our
Everlasting Welfare: Yet it is plain, that the giving so severe a Sentence is
besides his purpose, and as well contrary to the Office as the Inclinations of
a Redeemer; because he will raise even those to Life again, whom he thus
condemns. His raising them to Life again will demonstrate even to those, that
must die again, that it is for the dispensing of Mercy, and the acting like a
Savior, that he does then appear: That the primary End of his appearing is for
the restoring Lise to Mortal Creatures: For why else will he raise them to
Life, whom he will afterward condemn to another Death, but to let the World
see, that he designs Life for all, if Mercy it self can but save them. The true
and proper find then of his sitting in Judgment will be the displaying the
Mercy of a Redeemer, the distributing the price of his Blood, and the
communicating the Everlasting Grace of the Gospel. He came to save that, which
was lost; and to be sure he will not cast away any, that he came to save: nor
easily condemn, when his business was to destroy Death. He will Judge us, who
will raise us to Life again; And to be sure he, who then gives us our Lives,
will not easily, and without very great Reason, take them away again.

And now how terrible soever it is to us to think of undergoing a Trial of our
Actions before a just Judge: Yet is it not enough to ease our Thoughts, to
think, that this Judgment will be terrible to none, but such as have no Reason
to hope in his Mercy; but that all whom Mercy can save, the Bowels of a
Mediator will deliver from Condemnation? What more favorable Judge can we
expect than such a one as has purchased us, and has purchased Eternal life for
us: Such a one as comes with Power to justify and save all whom Mercy can
deliver, and who lets us see his Inclination to give us Life, by freeing us
from a Sentence of Condemnation, when he raises us out of our Graves.

The Conclusion.
HAving considered the Nature and Certainty of the Resurrection, all that I
shall observe from the whole, is the Necessity, that is upon us, to live like
those, that do believe we shall rise again: I mean, that we do nothing now that
will lose us our Lives again, when they are restored to us at the Resurrection.
To live in this World, as if we should never live more, after Death has taken
us out of it, is very excusable in those, who know not, that they shall rise
again, because they take care of all the Life they know of. But for a
Christian, who believes he must live again, to do this is an extremity of Folly
and Madness, for it is to be thoughtfull only for an inconsiderable part of our
Lives: And surely it is not to act wisely for our selves not to take care of
all the Life we are to live. It is in the Opinion of all Men a very great
imprudence not to take care of our Lives. And therefore that Labor and Toil,
those vexatious Cares and Solicitudes, wherewith Men wear out their Bodies, and
vex their Minds, are justified upon this account, that they are for the
maintaining of Life: And they are looked upon as Men of little understanding,
who live without any kind of forecast or thoughtfulness for Life. Now what Men
do, and make a great Mark of their Prudence in doing for the support and
preservation of this life, is much more needful to be done for the preserving
the Life we shall rise to: because that is the Life, that it principally
concerns us to look after. When Men neglect the Duties of Religion, the general
Answer, wherewith they satisfy themselves, and wherewith they expect that all
Men should be satisfied, is, that they have not leisure: The business of this
World takes up their time; and if they have hardly time sometimes to Eat and
Sleep, they cannot think but the Cumber and the Urgency of their Affairs will
as well excuse them from their Religious Services, as it obliges them to a
neglect of their Bodies. But when Men talk at this rate, one would think they
were not at leisure to live. For a Man should have no more regard to Lise it
self, than he has to the Means whereby he must live. If he despise the one, he
ought not to value the other: And it is surely a hard matter for any Man to
give an account why he wishes for or expects a Life that is Immortal, when he
takes care of no other Life but that which is Mortal.

Since then it was by Sin that this Life, which we are so hugely solicitous
for, became Mortal, and which after all our care to maintain it, we must lose;
it surely behooves us to take care, that we do not give our selves those deadly
Wounds by living in Sin, as will let our that Spirit of Life, whereby we should
live an Immortal life, when we are risen. It behooves us to learn by our former
misfortune, what we are to do, that we may live, when the Mercy of our Redeemer
gives us Life again: That we are to take of our Lives now, lest by disobeying
the Will of God, and letting our sensual Appetites loose upon our Souls, we
both provoke him, that is to Judge us, to pass a severe Sentence upon us, and
render our selves incapable of that Immortal life, that the Resurrection is
designed to enter us upon.

There are some, that have so discoursed this matter, as if this was the only
work of Divine Grace, as well as it has been of his Goodness to set Immortality
before us; as if nothing less than such an irresistible Power of Grace, as will
not suffer us to destroy our selves, was sufficient to preserve our selves from
Destruction. Now although it is a very great Instance of Divine Goodness, that
he furnishes us with such Helps, as the infirmity of our present Condition does
make needful; yet it is to expect too much from him to look for such an
Over-powering Measure of Grace, as we cannot resist, for the qualifying us for
Life. For though Providence is needful for us here for the Blessing us with
the Necessaries of this Life: Yet every one looks upon it as a great
improvidence in us, if we be mindless of our own concerns, only because there
is a Providence over us, and without the Blessings and Succors of Providence
all our own Labor is insufficient. Thus in the case of our Everlasting
Salvation the Divine Grace is needful for the working in us to will and to do;
but yet we are not very provident for our own Lives, if upon that account we
use no Endeavors, that we may live; and shall certainly die like fools, for
want of a due care of our Lives, as he does, who so depends upon Providence for
the food he must live by, as to use no Providence of his own. The Holy
Scriptures, I am sure, call upon us to give all diligence to make our Calling
and Election sure, and to add to our Faith all Christian Virtues, that so an
Entrance may be administered abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. And if we do thus apply our selves
to the perfecting Holiness, we shall live, when we are risen. For our Virtues
will go before us into that other Life; so that when we come thither, we shall
have something to live on: Whereas if we neglect to improve our selves
according to the Rules of Holiness, we shall have nothing to sustain our Lives
with when we are risen.

Let us then be careful to walk worthy of the Grace and Mercy of the Gospel,
and to learn to be so wise by the Favor, that is granted us, as not to
treasure up more Wrath for our selves against that day. Let us not render an
Immortal life impossible to us by continuing to vitiate our Nature, for then we
may be sure, that he who has received Power to justify and acquit us for ever,
will not make use of his Power to condemn us.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and
One God, be ascribed all Honor and Glory now and for ever-more. Amen.

FINIS.

