Totum Hominis: OR THE WHOLE DUTY OF A CHRISTIAN Consisting in Faith and good
Life. Abridged in certain Sermons expounding PAVL'S Prayer for the
Thessalonians, Epist. 2. Chap. 1. Verse. 11, 12. By the late Reverend and Worthy
Mr. SAMVEL WALES Minister of the Gospel at Morley in Yorkshire. 1627. The
Second Edition. With the occasion of Re-printing it: AS ALSO A Prefatory
Epistle from the Lord WHARTON and Sir THOMAS WHARTON his Brother to their
Children.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the
Poultry over against the Counter, 1681.

THe Reader is to take notice of the Providence, by which the ensuing Treatise,
and the Epistle before it came to be reprinted so many years after the first
Impression, and the Reason thereof, which was as follows. The Lord Wharton in
Sept. 1674, being at Leedes, and looking on the Pictures in the room, where he
dined, among the rest there was one of Mr. Wales the Author of both: A
Gentleman there present spoke highly in his commendation, he having been a
neighboring Minister in those parts of great worth and esteem, and said he, he
dedicated a Book to your Lordship, which I think I have in my Closet; my Lord
not remembering any thing of the said Book or Epistle, was desirous to see it,
and finding in the ^^^^^le so honorable a character of his Lordships Father,
he begged the said book. Afterward finding also the Treatise it self so
useful, he communicated the same to his only Brother Sir Thomas Wharton, who
both of them thought fit to cause the said Treatise and Epistle to be
reprinted, both in respect of the memory of their ever honored Father, and for
the usefulness of the Treatise it self: and they also thought fit to add a few
lines of their own to their Children, collecting from that word in the Epistle
of the worthy and reverend Author, That the Domestical Precedent of such a
Father was for Admonition and Instruction of the said Lord Wharton, that surely
it was, and they hope and pray it may be no less admonishing and instructive to
all those who come but of the loins of the same holy and worthy Progenitor.

PHILIP Lord WHARTON, and Sir THOMAS WHARTON, his only Brother, wish Grace and
Peace unto their Children, and their Childrens Children from God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ, through the Sanctification of the Holy Ghost.
Dear Children,
YOU have been acquainted with the Original of the ensuing Discourse, and the
occasion of its Revival at this time: Your especial concernment in it is from
the Character and Account given of the Life and Death of your Grandfather (our
Father) in the Epistle Dedicatory prefixed unto it: and although we had not the
advantage of knowing him our selves, so as then to have had a sense of the
things spoken of him (he being taken away in our tender Age) yet we have a full
assurance of the Truth of the Testimony given in the Epistle following unto his
Zeal, Wisdom, and Piety.

The known Reputation and Integrity of the Reverend Author of that Epistle,
with the time of his Writing of it, being after the Death of our Father, and
its Direction to one of us, then a Child, from whom he could expect no
Countenance, nor Reward, do exempt his Testimony from the common Condition of
such Epistles and Dedications, even when Written by other good men.

On this Account we do in the first place commend the Treatise it self unto
your diligent perusal, and do leave it as a pledge of our concernment for you
in the things contained therein. For being not designed, nor contrived by us,
nor the Author for any such end, the Tender of it being made unto you from that
hand of Providence, whereof ye have heard, it ought to be had of you in
especial regard.

It is a Treasure in, and unto a Family, to have such a Person as your
Grandfather is here truly represented to have been on the Roll of its
Progenitors: And we have been taught, that where Sovereign Grace has made an
entrance into any Family, especially in a principal Root of it, it does not
utterly forsake that Family, at least in some of its branches, unless the
Covenant, whereby it is administered, be generally neglected or refused.

On this Occasion it is not improper for us to add, what we each of us know,
and can with much comfort Witness of the holy and exemplary Lives and
Conversations of our dear Mother, and of each of our Wives from whom ye have
respectively issued, on which Account, as the Apostle said of Timothy, that he
called to remembrance the unfeigned Faith that dwelt in his Grandmother Lois,
and his Mother Eunice, we can truly say the like of your Grandmother, and
respective Mothers; and we should rejoice in nothing more, than with the like
Confidence to add with the same Apostle concerning you all, that we are
persuaded the same Faith dwells in you also, as we hope we can say of some of
you.

It becomes not us to speak any thing unto you of our selves, nor of our
endeavors to transmit this Privilege unforfeited unto you? It is sufficient
for us, which we must abide by, that, we have not been wanting in any means of
Instruction, which we thought might conduce unto your good and advantage.

You that are our own Children immediately are most of you in that State, for
Age and understanding, as wherein you must answer for your selves: We therefore
leave it in charge with you, that there be not an Intercision of the
Administration of the privilege and grace of Gods Covenant in, and toward our
Family by your Default.

Your Lot is fallen into Times of great Advantage on the account of the Light
of the Knowledge of the Gospel, and of great Disadvantage from the abounding of
various Temptations in them; it requires more then ordinary Diligence so to
deport your selves; that you neither suffer for abused mercies, nor fall into a
Course of sin upon urgent opportunities.

Remember also in point of Honor and Interest that no Families are more
contemptible in the World, than those, who degenerate from pious Ancestors; for
in that case it is, which God himself has given that express Rule, They that
honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

It is but a little while, that we shall be present with you, neither have we
much more to do for your advantage, than we have done: Our principal Design now
is, to leave an abiding sense with you of this our present Advice. We are not
altogether ignorant of what has been said by others, and of what yet may be
said in the way of Advice to Children by Parents, who have a Care of their
Temporal and Eternal good. The substance of all that can be spoken in this Case
is comprised in the last words of David to Solomon his Son; And thou, Solomon,
my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart,
and a willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all
the Imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him he will be found of thee,
but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. While Solomon followed
this advice, it was his Wisdom and Honor, and when he forsook it, it was his
Ruin: Nor will they have any better Success, who under the like Admonition in
their Circumstances do follow his example in his miscarriages.

We could use many words with you unto the same purpose, not without Hope,
that, although in themselves they should not be more forcible than the words of
others, yet with you they would be more effectual, and prevalent, because they
are ours. But our present design is only to recommend unto your perusal the
ensuing small Treatise, which in its Original and Revival was directed by
Divine Providence to the one of us, and thereby to be an Admonition, and means
of Instruction unto the whole Family.

You will not find in it those Allurements of Style and Language, which some in
this Age do strive to adorn their Writings with about things Divine. It is the
Subject matter of this Book, and upon the account of your special concernment
in it, we propose to your Consideration, and that as declared without
Rhetorical Ornaments; yet with that Gravity of Speech, and Evidence of Truth,
so as to recommend it unto the minds of those, who are sober and modest, and to
vindicate it from the contempt of any.

It does not belong unto us to pass our Judgment upon, or give a
Recommendation unto the particular matters insisted on, it is sufficient unto
us, that we are satisfied, that in the whole it may be exceeding useful unto
your Souls, as to their Direction in the ordering of your ways with respect
unto the Will of God. We could not therefore content our selves without the
Discharge of our Duty, and shall pray for a blessing upon it unto your
Advantage, when we shall be here no more.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, PHILIP LORD WHARTON, Grace and Glory.
Right Honorable:
REmarkable is that passage in the History of Nehemiah: when the poorer sort of
the Tekoites labored stoutly in repairing the Walls of Jerusalem, their Nobles
put not their Necks to the work of their Lord. Nehem 3.5.
By which we are plainly taught, that when God commands, Nobles are no less
straightly bound to obedience, than inferior persons. Indeed as godliness is
profitable unto all things, so the power and practice of Godliness is necessary
for all persons of all degrees. The great men of the earth, yea those that are
mounted on the highest stair of earthly Majesty, must not think it any
disparagement to labor for understanding of the Mysteries of Religion, and to
exercise the duties of piety: their places cannot privilege them, their
affairs may not excuse them from works of this nature, Dut. 17. ^. Psalm. ^ 1.2,
and ^8.11. and ^1. and 72. ^.11.
For first, as there is but one God, and one Kingdom of Heaven, so there is but
one way leading to that Heaven, which is the way of holiness and righteousness.
Whence it follows that the sons of Nobles are no more exempted from the
necessity of hearing, reading, confessing, praying, fasting, holy conference,
watching over their own ways, and the ways of their houses, and such pious
exercises which are main duties, means and helps of holiness, than the poorest
man in the world, that if they leave the care of these things to the poorer
sort, they shall leave Heaven to them also, and be turned into Topheth, while
the poor take the Kingdom by violence. Secondly, the mightiest are but Gods
tenants, farmers, stewards, vassals, vassels as well as the meanest, they hold
of him whatsoever they have, to their very breath, by homage they so depend
upon him, that they cannot subsist one moment without him, their greatness as
well as their being is from him, a gift of his providence (for promotion comes
neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South, but from God the
Judge, who puts down one, and sets up another) therefore they owe as much
love, Psalm. 75. ^, 7. and ^ 13.8. Dan. 4.17.
reverence, thankfulness, obedience to their Creator as others, that is in a
word, they ought to be as religious as others. Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11.
For in the spiritual Kingdom of Christ there is not (nor shall there be in the
day of wrath, and before the glorious Tribunal of Christ's) any difference
betwixt the Prince and the Pesant. Thirdly, Religion and Piety, bringing to
Communion with God, and participation of the spiritual sonship, and the divine
Nature, ennobles Nobility, sets a Crown upon Earthly Dignity, makes greatness
truly honorable: whereas the most glorious greatness without true godliness
and goodness, is not only vanity, but baseness in the sight of God, despised
therefore by holy Moses (for can any thing be more base, than to command many,
and yet willingly to serve the Devil, the worst Master, the vilest Tyrant in
the World? besides that in Scripture, not the great but the good, not the high
but the holy, are styled the precious, excellent, glorious ones, Gods Jewels,
worthy persons, Temples of the living God in whom he walks and dwells, Kings
born of God, brethren of Christ, the King of Kings, dwelling in Heaven, etc.)
and will end in shame and misery, as many testimonies and examples in Gods word
prove abundantly? Fourthly, where much is given, much is required; where God
sowes liberally, he looks to reap accordingly. Now great men are most indebted
to Gods liberality, their heads are anointed with Oil, their cup runs over,
they are fed with the finest of the wheat, and satisfied with honey out of the
Rock, they enjoy the most precious and delicate portions of the world, and suck
the sweetest marrow of Gods temporal bounty, they have, or may have if they be
not wanting to themselves, better means and more time of building up themselves
in godliness, than others. Therefore they have no cloak for their sin yea
double guilt lies upon their souls, if receiving most wages, they give the Lord
least glory, least faithful service. They that having most allurements and
helps to be good, will not be good, shall be deepest in Hell. Fifthly, fewest
great ones are called to grace, as few first born, named in Scripture were
vouchsafed the adoption of sons (God delighting to stain the pride of Man's
glory, and to spoil him of all matter of boasting, all occasion of putting
confidence in carnal privileges) and its harder for great men to be saved,
than others; because there are most and strongest bars to keep them from
conversion, they are most hardly brought to empty themselves by self-denial,
poverty of spirit, mortification, contempt of the world, that they may be fit
to enter in at the strait gate, they are exposed to most and greatest
temptations and spiritual dangers, as the tal Cedars to strongest blasts, Satan
has many more advantages against them, than meaner persons, they are most
subject to be poisoned with pleasures, puffed up with pride, surfeit of
prosperity, let loose the reigns to all injustice, violence, cruelty; in a
word, to break the bonds of all discipline, promise to themselves impunity, and
become incorrigible (while they power out themselves to all licentiousness)
because few dare freely reprove them: (hence, no doubt, sprung that Dutch
Proverb, which must be taken with a corn of salt, Princes in Heaven are as
scarce as Venison in poor men's Kitchins) therefore they have need to be
extraordinary careful of their salvation, and guarded with double diligence,
watchfulness, zeal in all religious duties. Lastly, their lives are very
exemplary, obvious to public inspection and imitation, many eyes are fixed
upon them, their actions are powerful to command, effectual to corrupt
inferiors, who are too ready to follow and conform to their courses, and
think, if great men live wickedly, they may do the same by authority,
Satanknoweth, that by their exorbitances they not only lose their own souls,
but draw much company with them to perdition, Examples even of greatest
Princes, Kings, Emperors further confirming this point are not wanting. David,
though entangled in many wars, besides other encumbrances and employments not a
few, spent no small time in communing with God and his own heart, as appears by
this, that 140 of the Psalms in probability are of his penning and composing.
King Josiah in the eigth year (not of his life, as some mistake, but) of his
reign, that is in the sixteenth of his life, began to seek after the God of
David his father, that is to give himself to the private study of piety; to
reading, prayer, and such like exercises. Who more devout than Daniel and
Nehemiah, two great Courtiers and Governors? Constantine the Great, besides
reading and praying with his family, did every day at set times shut himself in
his closet, and there converse with God by solitary Prayer. Alfred King of
England spent eight hours (the third part) of every natural day in prayer,
study, and writing. These things I have thus discoursed, that your Lordship may
see and others acknowledge, I do not without cause offer to your hands and eyes
a Treatise, wherein the two main parts of religion, faith and good life, are
explained and urged. It pleased your Noble Father, while yet he dwelt in the
land of the living, to vouchsafe me, the meanest of Gods messengers, that
gracious respect, which I could never have expected from so honorable a
personage; and your Honor also, in those times to take notice of me. The
remembrance of those things has emboldened me to this Dedication, which
otherwise I should never have presumed to attempt. Wherein the Searcher of
hearts knows I seek and aim at nothing else, but the honoring of his memory
who now sleeps in the Lord, and stirring up your tender mind to the imitation
of his virtues. What honest heart ever knew him and did not lament his
departure as a public loss, or say, this world which now wants him, was
unworthy of him? He was a professed enemy of Popery and Profaneness, a true
friend and favourer of all godly and painful teachers, without exception or
partiality, receiving their persons and doctrine with such gladness and
singular reverence, as I must needs say to me was wonderful, and in persons of
his rank is rarely seen, ready at all times by his authority, speech, letter
to help and encourage them in their holy function? What shall I say of his
supported life in the slippery time of youth, his religious care of constant
frequenting Gods house, not only twice on the Lords day, but ordinarily on
Lecture days, and preparing himself for the use of the Lords Supper, his
sincere affection to the holy ways of the Lord, and all that walk in the same,
which to any observant eye appeared by many not obscure signs and testimonies?
I shall comprehend all if I do but say, by profane great ones, who openly
reverenced him, he was secretly twitted for Preciseness and Puritanism. And
could the Epilogue of such a life, be any other but a blessed death? Though his
sickness was violent, yet how sweetly he comforted himself in the Lord, and
having foretold the day of his death rejoiced in spirit from assurance of being
with Christ after his dissolution, how graciously, feelingly, powerfully, he
powered out his heart in supplication before the Lord, those that were present
can witness, and will never forget, and amongst the rest I remember one (an
ancient and reverend Minister) who professed to me, that himself was
exceedingly affected and refreshed by his prayer, and that he has seldom heard
any Preacher pray more excellently, more divinely. Now (my Lord) why has the
Divine Providence (which does nothing in vain) sent and set before you such a
domestical precedent? Surely, for your admonition and instruction, that you
might be warned there by to tread in the same steps, and learn the path of life
by example as well as precept. Suffer therefore (I beseech your Honor) the word
of exhortation. As God has made you heir of your fathers greatness, so labor
to show forth an express image of his graces and godly conversation, and think
often you hear his voice thus sounding in your ears (for by his life, being
dead, he yet speaks to you) My son know the God of your father, and serve him
with a perfect heart and willing mind,

Macte nova virtute puer, sic itur ad astra, By the grace of God I have led you
the way, walk as I have walked, that we may meet and enjoy one another in
Heaven. Repel with infinite loathing the whisperings of those witches, who go
about to persuade that (though its not amiss for Nobles to have a form of
godliness, yet) forwardness in Religion is a stain and blemish to Noble blood.
Such things are suggested by the father of lies, to rob you of true comfort in
this life, and a Crown of glory after death. For I assure your Lordship in the
word of truth, as true piety is able to accommodate Noblemen with the best
Music (peace of Conscience) the best Counselor (the wisdom which is from
above) the fairest and strongest house (Gods protection) the best weapons,
defensive, offensive faith and the spirit of prayer) the best attendants (Gods
holy Angels) so it will wonderfully adorn and beautify all other excellencies,
purchase them more true honor than an external accomplishment, even the honor
that comes from God only, a place and a Name better than of Dukes, Earls,
Lords, an everlasting name, that shall never be cut off, and at last put them
into the possession of immortality, and eternal life. The father of mercies
enrich with all blessings of heaven and earth, the noble and virtuous Lady
Philadelphia your mother, keep your Honor from every evil now and ever, season
and govern your young years by his holy spirit, that as you increase in days
and stature, so you may increase in all sanctifying gifts, and in favor with
God and men, flourishing in the Courts of our God, as those that are planted in
the house of the Lord, and brings forth more fruit in old age, to the glory
of his blessed name. Amen and Amen, from his heart says

To your Honor most addicted SAMUEL WALES.
Apr: 30. 1627.
2 Thessalonians. 1. v. 11, 12. 11. Wherefore we also pray always for you, that our God
would make you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and the work of faith with power.

12. That the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in
him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.


THE scope of the Apostle in this Chapter is, to refresh with the cool water of
consolation, the faithful Thessalonians, now in the fiery Trial of Tribulation,
and with Cordials of lively Comforts to confirm their spirits macerated and
steeped in afflictions. His chief Argument is taken from that righteous
recompense of reward, which the just Judge of all the world will give in the
day of his appearing, endless trouble and torment to them that have here
troubled and tormented the godly, eternal ease and refreshment to them who are
now hated and vexed for Christ's sake. And to the end this comfort might sink
more deeply and stick more firmly, he digresseth a little into a description of
Christ's coming to Judgment, opening (as it were) the very Heavens and
representing him to their eyes with all his glory. These two Verses now contain
the conclusion of this consolation, the sum whereof is, a commemoration of the
Apostles Christian care and religious practice of carrying the names of these
Thessalonians continually before the Lord in holy petition, and making suit for
them, that they might hold out in this noble but painful race and warfare,
which was indeed the scope of his consolation.

In them we may consider, 1. The act or duty simply propounded. 2. The
amplification of it,


1. From the adjunct circumstance of time, when or how often he did exercise it.

2. From the moving cause, included in the first word [Wherefore.]

3. From the subject or persons for whom, the afflicted Thessalonians.

4. From the object or person to whom, [our God.]

5. From the matter of the prayer, [ that he would make you worthy, etc.]

Let us begin with the first. The act or duty performed by Paul and two other
holy men of God, Sylvanus and Timotheus, is prayer: [we also pray] that is, we
do not only give thanks to God for you, comfort and teach you the way of
salvation, both by preaching and writing; but moreover, we make earnest
requests to God in yoor behalf. Our lesson hence is,

Ministers must pray for their People.

Teachers of the Church must add prayers for the Church, to all their other
labors, prayers, I mean both private and public. The sons of Aaron are
commanded to bless the Children of Israel, Number. 6.23. Deuteronomy. 33.10. 1 Samuel
12.23. Jer. 18.20.
to put incense before the Lord (a type of holy prayers.) Samuel calls the
neglect of this duty a sin against God. The Prophet Jeremy professes, he had
stood before the Lord to speak good for his hearers, and to turn away his wrath
from them. Nothing is more plain or frequent in all the Epistles almost of all
the Apostles. And good reason: For,

First, They are spiritual Fathers of their Congregations, and therefore should
have paternal affections in them, which cannot but send forth Prayers for their
Children. Will not natural Parents earnestly wish and desire the good of their
sons and daughters?

Secondly, Their Prayers may greatly help and advantage the People, 1. By
diverting threatened and imminent, or removing already inflicted and incumbent
Plagues. Moses standing in the breach, turned away the Lords wrath from
rebellious Israel, and saved them from deserved destruction. Psalm. 106.23.
The withered hand of that wicked Jeroboam, at the Prayer of the Prophet is
restored. Two heavy Judgments showed in Vision to the Prophet Amos, prepared
for Israel, at his intercession were stayed at least for a season. Read Amos
7.1.2, 3, etc. 2. By procuring or pulling down from Heaven many blessings upon
them, spiritual and corporal. Elias prayed (says the Apostle James) and the
Heaven gave rain, and the Earth brought forth her fruit. If the prayers of
private Christians may prevail with God for healing those that are sick in soul
or body, shall we think the requests of his faithful Messengers; who come
nearer unto him, will do nothing? But especially their Prayers may obtain of
God that blessed success and fruit of their Ministerial travels in the
conversion and sanctification of their hearers, than which nothing can be more
profitable for the People, and which is the Crown of the Ministers rejoicing.

First then, many are worthy to be reproved. Some are so full of Satan, that if
any of their hearers do but cross or displease them, they break out into black
and bitter cursing instead of blessing; wishing Gods Plagues and vengeance may
fall upon them. Some are so ignorant, they cannot pray; some so profane, they
care not for praying either for themselves or others: they have more skill of
swearing and swaggering, than pouring out spiritual prayers. Many utter words
of prayer in public, who are dumb at home all the week long, and trouble not
the Lord with one fervent and savoury request for the spiritual welfare of the
souls of their people. I fear, when the great Shepherd, the Prince of Pastors
shall appear, these will appear and be found unfaithful Shepherds. For as that
Christian who never prays for himself but in the Church, is convinced to pray
only for fashion; so that Preacher who never prays for his sheep but in the
Pulpit, may justly be thought to pray of custom rather than from conscience and
zealous desire of their salvation; and he that prays of custom only will (I
warrant him) by cold and careless teaching (except the wind of praise drive his
Mill) testify to the world, that he cares not much who carry away their souls,
so he have their fleeces.

Secondly therefore, let all that are set over Congregations in the Lord,
provoke themselves to this duty, I mean, to be as well instant suitors for them
to the Lord, as constant instructers of them from the mouth of the Lord. Let
every faithful Steward of Christ say with Samuel, God forbid I should cease
praying for the people of God committed to my charge. For; 1. If we bear them
in our hearts, 2 Cor. 7.3.
as Paul did his Corinthians and Philippians, if we earnestly long after and
love them in the bowels of Christ Jesus, as the same Paul did the same
Philippians, Phil. 1.7, 8.
(and what are we but hirelings, if we do not?) we cannot but remember and
mention them to God in our daily prayers, as Paul did all the Churches. 2. Can
we see our Auditors rotting and stinking in the Graves of their ungracious
courses, stumbling (or poasting rather) in the path of perdition, stabbing and
wounding themselves continually, and like mad men treasuring up wrath which
shall burn themselves in the bottom of hell? Can we see these things and not
pity them, and pitying shall we not by prayer seek to help them? 3. Seeing all
our speech without the inspiration of the Almighty, can neither call nor keep
men in the state of grace, have we not need with the Apostle night and day
exceedingly to pray for them? The converting of a sinner (a work no less
difficult than the quickening of one dead) is far above the activity of any
means or labor we can use; yea, the power of the Angels of Heaven. A moral
dispute of an heathen Philosopher, much more a divine discourse of a Christian
Preacher, may stir up strange pangs and passions, but cannot imprint grace in
the soul, no more than turn a stone into flesh. Should we waste our lungs, and
weary, yea, wear our tongues with speaking, if God bow not the heart, we spend
our strength in vain and for nothing. Now how can we expect or promise to our
selves this great blessing, I mean the winning and saving of souls by our
doctrine (which a good Pastor thristeth after more than any earthly commodity,
and wherein he rejoices more than if ten thousand royal diadems, all
garnished with precious stones, were set upon his head) if we crave it not
of God by fervent prayer?

Thirdly, Hearers must hence learn to crave the help and comfort of their godly
Ministers prayers. I doubt not but they fare better for them in their persons,
children, estate, travels, sickness, seed-time, harvest. Its a good and
commendable custom to commend the afflicted in Congregations to the prayers of
the Pastor. Hezekiah seeing himself and his People in a great and dangerous
strait, by messengers entreats the Prophet Esaias to lift up his prayer for the
remnant that were left in the Kingdom of Judah. The Apostle wills the faithful,
when any are sick among them, to call for the Elders of the Church, that they
may pray over them. If any be so godless, as to despise or make light account
of the prayers of Gods Messengers, not only the godly, but the wicked shall
condemn them: For reprobate Pharaoh, when the hand of God presses him, can say
to Moses, entreat the Lord for me; and Simon Magus to Peter, Pray to the Lord
for me, that none of these things come upon me. But here let Jothams Counsel be
remembered, Hearken to me you men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you. If
thou would have thy Teacher to be a speeding spokesman to God for thee, if
either thou desire or think thou shall ever need the relief of his
prevailing prayers in the day of thy calamity, see that now thou obey from the
heart the doctrine he delivers, submit as a good Child to his holy counsels and
admonitions. If thou continuest to rebel against the word which he brings from
God, it may be as the Lord charged Jeremy not to lift up a cry for the Jews,
nor to make any intercession for them, because he was determined not to hear;
so he will lock the heart and close the lips of thy Minister that though he
would fain speak for thee, he shall find neither words nor affections of
prayer, God shutting the door of prayer against him, because he means to shut
up his mercy from thee, and not to be entreated to do thee good. And this is
just, that he who would not hearken when God besought him in his Minister to
repent, should not be heard, when by the Minister he sueth to God for favor.

Thus much of the duty. The first thing whereby it is amplified, is the adjunct
circumstance of time, when or how often they prayed [always] which is not so to
be understood, as if they were continually upon their knees, or did nothing
else but pray, without intermission but the meaning is, that they continued and
renewed every day the practice of this duty at fit times and seasons. So
Solomon's servants are said to stand continually before him: King 10.
and Jehoiachim, to eat bread continually before the King of Babylon; that is,
he had a daily allowance or portion at mealtimes. And the daily Sacrifice in
the Law is called the continual burntoffering, because it was constantly
repeated twice a day, that is, offered continually morning and evening, as
elsewhere the Holy Ghost expounds himself. Now because Paul and his fellows
may and must be considered both as Ministers, and as Christians, hence we
observe that, Christians must daily exercise themselves in Prayer.

The servants of God must keep a constant course of calling on God day by day.
This lesson is taught by the most holy mouth of our Savior, both in that
Parable of the Widow importuning the wicked Judge, the scope whereof is to
teach that men ought always to pray, and in his pattern of prayer, wherein he
directs us to beg every day bread for the day: likewise by the example and
practice of the Saints, David, Daniel, Anna, Paul. The reasons are many and
evident.

First, What more equal than that part of every day be given and consecrated to
him, who is the Lord of the day and of all our time? Is it not reason we should
daily do homage and service to him, by whom we are maintained and sustained
daily; in whose hand are all our days, all our ways? Is it not fit he have a
sheaf of his own Field, a Cake of his own Lump? They had a morning and evening
sacrifice in the time of the Law shall we, who have greater light than they
had, come behind them in honoring the Lord? shall we want that truth, whereof
they had the shadow?

Secondly, Prayer is a singular means of near and Heavenly communion with God:
therein the godly not only seek, but enjoy the face of God, talk familiarly
with him. And have we not need every day to maintain this communion, which is
the root and fountain of all our comfort, to hold and continue acquaintance and
fellowship with him, who is our life, strength, best friend? Is it not a shame
for Children, living in house with their Father to pass a day without speaking
to him, or looking him in the face?

Thirdly, Prayer sanctifies to us (that is, obtains of God for us a lawful
and comfortable use of) all the things and affairs of the day. Without prayer
therefore our callings and our labor in them are unclean: whatsoever we
enterprise or do, is unclean to us; we cannot expect Gods blessing on any thing
for our good, we cannot be assured that it shall beprofitable or wholesome to
us, we may justly fear we shall be brought to Judgment and condemned for every
thing we do, take, or use, because we defile it.

Fourthly, every day we stand in need of many things, belonging both to
temporal and spiritual life. We want much knowledge, wisdom, faith, love,
fear, etc. our graces have no less need to be renewed, our souls repaired, than
our decaying bodies and bodily strength, by daily food. Now Prayer is that
which gets these wants supplied, fetches from Heaven that blessing by which
spiritual strength and stature is augmented, yea by exercising and stirring up
Gods graces in the heart, increases them.

Fifthly, We are commanded every day to lead holy lives, to walk as becomes
Saints, to have our conversation in Heaven, to pass the time of our dwelling
here in fear, to spend that which remains of our life, not according to the
lusts of the flesh, but according to the will of God. Now Prayer is a
necessary help and prop of a godly life, a good means of quickening, seasoning,
well-ordering the heart, of vvinding it up from Earth to Heaven, and of passing
thorough all the parts and businesses of the day, christianly and purely.

Lastly, we are every day, yea, every hour subject to many dangers, outward in
our bodies, families, estates, inward in our Souls, Satan incessantly watches
all opportunities to do us a displeasure, to strike us to the heart with some
fiery dart, to overthrow our goings, lays snares for us in the most lawful
things: provocations to sin abound every where: how soon are we distempered,
dissetled? how hardly brought into good frame again? Now Prayer is our Hedge
fencing us, an excellent Weapon by which we drive back Satan, and overcome
the evils within or without which encounter us. Have we not need to be
daily armed with such a notable help, that so we may stand fast against
temptations, walk safely, and hold fast peace with God?

This Doctrine, if we descend to application, will first reprove Three sorts:
1. Those that Pray not at all, except in the public Assembly, that rise up and
lie down daily without request-making to God: urge upon them praying at home,
their reply is ready, that is too much purity, they have other things to mind,
and will leave that burden to the Minister. The Scripture has long since
branded these for Atheists. Not Papists only, but even Gentiles shall condemn
them, one of which counsels his Brother, every Morning and Evening to offer
to God pure incense and oblation, that Gods favor may be toward him, and he
may have success in his affairs. If amongst us after so long teaching any
continue in this sin, let them know, that as Gods fear is not in their hearts,
so God is not in their houses (for he dwells where he is worshipped by prayers
and praises) the Devil rules all, and unless they repent, the curse of God, as
a canker, shall consume them and theirs. 2. Those that pray by fits only, as
when Conscience gnawes, fickness binds them to their beds, death threatens,
business calls not, or suffer any worldly, any trivial occasion to break off or
justle out this duty. Shall I fear to say, this seeking Gods help only in
extraordinary straits, argues, that men think they can do well enough
ordinarily without his help, and by their own wit, strength, industry, compass
their own ends and desires: which a Papist will tell them is Gentilism? Had
some of these Men a Neighbor, who would never visit them, but when some urgent
necessity did press him, would they not suspect his affections toward them to
be cold, and that he cared little for their company? I dare assure them, the
Lord judges of them, as they of this Neighbor. It may justly be doubted
whether ever they knew the necessity, or selt the sweetness of true Prayer Let
us fear, least if we send for, and entertain Prayer but now and then as a
stranger, God be strange to us when we would most gladly be acquainted with
him. 3. Those that are fallen from their former Conscience and care of
practicing private prayer, whoseharts can tell them they are particularly
touched, if I do but say there are some amongst us, who in former times were
as forward and servent this way as the best, and are now become as careless of
praying as the profane. Its easy to show the reason why they are weary of
Prayer; They have banished the holy Ghost, and entertained the unclean Spirit
again, which carries them to swearing, drinking, delighting in bad company, and
those abominations from which they were washed; whence it is that they have
lost both skill and will to call upon God: they are condemned by their own
Mouths, by their own Consciences when they do pray, and therefore dare not call
upon God, but fly from his presence. The Lord be merciful unto you, that you
sleep not the sleep of death, but may remember whence you are fallen, and come
out of the snare of the Devil. I say unto you in the name of the Lord, take
heed you become not very Cains, spiritual vagabonds, straying and running
further and further from God, till you arrive in the land of eternal horror.

Secondly, let all the Servants of God continue their holy care of daily
offering the Sacrifice of invocation. Observe the seasons and occasions of
prayer, as thou do thy Meal-times. Persevere in Prayer, and faint not.
Resolve with thy self, rather to strive to perform this duty in a better manner
and more abundantly, than to break it off and take liberty to neglect it.
Brethren, why are we so backward to come unto him, to whom the oftener we come,
the more we are vvelcome, the more importunate, the more acceptable? Whence is
it that every Year we see or hear of strange punishments, heavy accidents
befalling men, whereby they are brought to misery or untimely death? Is it not
hence, that true Prayer is out of request with the most? Whence is it, that
many ahve no better success in their Earthly Callings and Affairs? They pray
not. Whence that we hear Men complain their Houses are insested with Spirits?
(all such things are not fables and illusions, though many be) There is no
Prayer in their Houses. Whence is it that we find not help, or more comfort and
strength in our troubles? We pray not. Whence, that many of us are ensnared and
overturned by every temptation? We Pray not. Pray, and thou can not want any
good thing which God can give, unless the want be better for thee than the
possession. In few words, think seriously of thine own need, and the great gain
of Prayer, the danger and hurt of careless and willing neglect of it, how
highly it honors God, and I shall not need to use many reasons for persuading
thee to assiduity and constancy in the performance of it. Far be it from any
truly fearing God, to think, a Christian may be as strong and well armed
against temptations, as heavenly minded, as able to walk holily and faithfully
in his calling, to preserve peace and purity of heart, without Prayer as with
it. They that are thus minded, shall I hope acknowledge before they die (if
they belong to God) that this is not the persuasion of him that called them.

Thus much of the circumstance of time. The second point is the motive or cause
which induced and stirred up the Apostle thus to pray, and that was his thirst
after the salvation of the Thessalonians, or his earnest desire that they might
be glorified among other Believers in the day of Judgment. This is implied in
the word [Wherefore] as if he should say, And now to the end you may obtain
without fail this rich prize of Heavenly happiness, which I have set before
you, and toward which you are already marching, that you may be sharers with
the rest of the Saints in that admirable glory (mentioned in the former verse)
I pray, etc. Here let it be observed, that though the Apostle knew these
Thessalonians were entered into that good way which would certainly lead to life
eternal, and assured of their full and future glorification, yet he thinks it
behoveful and needful to help them forward by Prayers. Out of the which we may
collect two instructions.

First, that the best need helps toward Heaven. And no marvel. For;

First, as Man's final happiness, so the means leading to it are included in
Gods predestination. He that has ordained certain Men to salvation, has
ordained that by certain means they shall be brought to the knowledge of it,
strengthened in the says and hope of it, upholden in the way to it. For
whomsoever God has prepared glory (I speak of those that are of ripe age in
the Church) to them he has left and commended his sacred. Word, Pastors and
Doctors, Sacraments, Prayer, Watchfulness, Fasting, and the like, with express
charge to exercise and attend upon these means, while they abide in this
Tabernacle. Now if we did not need these things, God would never have appointed
them: he that is most wise, does nothing in vain, nor cloggeth his Children
with unnecessary burdens.

Secondly, not every one that begins well, but he that continues to the
end, shall be saved. No Crown without perseverance, back sliding is the way to
perdition. Now the best are prone to turn back from following the Lord, or to
faint in the way: For the best 1. have weakness in them; 2. meet with many lets
incumbring them. 3. The trade of godliness is difficult, irksome, and grievous
to the flesh. True it is, Isa. 45.24.
the strength by which they stand, is in and from Christ, but conveyed and
ministered unto them by the pipes of holy means and ordinances, which himself
has sanctified to that end. In vain do they look to be kept and strengthened
by Christ, who wittingly cast away the means by which his strength should be
applied to them. These things being so, who sees not how necessary it is that
they who run well, be helped and undershored by spiritual means?

Thirdly, Satan has great wrath against those that are taken out of his hands
and translated toward the Kingdom of Christ; he labors busily to entangle them
in the old servitude, and bring them back into the former bondage. In regard of
this wicked one, therefore they have need to be supported, lest the Dragon cast
them down from their good beginnings, and so their latter end be worse than
their beginning, of which the Devil would be most glad.

First then, we see the folly of them discovered and checked; who cry down all
means, as being of little or no use to them that are in Christ. I know the Man's
Name, who compared one commed to Christ, unto a Man that having finished his
House, lays aside his Tools. How I pray you (judge in your selves) can those
Men, who deny that Scriptures are either guide or rule to a true Christian, who
maintains that Ministers ought not to urge and call for repentance,
mortification, holy walking; who dislike repetition of Sermons, judge
Family Prayer a thing indifferent, dare travel on the Lords day without
scruple, rest contented with a reading Minister, cast away all Books but the
Bible, and say plainly. Commentaries do but mislead Men, that Treatises
directing to lead a godly life will mar Christians: How, I say, can these
think, that means and duties are needful? And does any Man now expect, that by
Arguments drawn out of the Word, I should oppose this new Divinity? shall I
spend time in showing how this Opinion fights with the experience and practice
of David and Daniel, both of them (though Prophets) most precise observers of
holy duties and exercises, and one of them bitterly lamenting the want of
public means? How it voideth and breaks many Scriptures, as, Quench not the
Spirit, Despise not Prophesying, Stir up the gift of God in thee, Attend at the
posts of wisdom, Keep thy Heart above all keeping, Ponder the path of thy feet,
Build your selves on your most holy faith, Search the Scriptures, Whet these
things ou thy Children, Hold fast what you have heard, Watch and Pray, Examine
your ways, and almost six hundaed such like places? (unless they will give us
new senses of these plain Texts, never before heard of) or lastly, that it
carries a too too rank favor of Anabaptism and Familism? No, no, the bitter
fruits of such loose conceits in the lives of these new Evangelists, cry aloud
that the good Spirit is not the Father of them. Behold here a mavelous policy
and stratagem of that many-headed Serpent. The greatest part of the world he
holds in a secure and dead condition, wherein they came neither for Christ nor
means. When he cannot keep Men from means, he persuades and cunningly prevails
with many to rest contented in the naked and powerless use of them, abstracted
from Christ, and his quickening Spirit, the Life of means. When this plot
succeeds not, he will push Men into the contrary extreme, persuading so to hang
upon Christ, as they neglect all means; wherein it seems some of the
Corinthians faulted. Oh that these Men would consider that which the Devil
knows full well, that they who dare abandon and relinquish the means of
maintaining Godliness and a good Conscience, will in time cast off all care of
godliness and keeping a good Conscience; and he who dare bid farewell to the
means of executing Gods predestination, is in danger to fulfill his own
reprobation.

Secondly therefore, let us take heed of setting at naught the gracious helps
which God offers and affords for bringing us on in our spiritual Journey. Let
us lay hold upon them, and apply them with diligence, public, private
ordinary, extraordinary. God could save us without them, but will not. We shall
never be so strong as not to need these staves, till we appear perfect before
him in his holy Mountain. Its as vile presumption and madness to think our
Souls can be in good plight, and our spiritual life continued without them, as
to hope for a crop where we never sowed, or strength and life without meat
and drink. Do we not see that such Christians as use them most, have most
grace? Take heed, say not in thy heart, I am sure I shall never fall, I cannot
be taken out of the hands of Christ, therefore these outvvard duties are not
needful for me, the Spirit of grace will make no such conclusions. Its the
Devils Logic, not Gods, which teaches to reason from the certainty of Gods
grace to the neglect of our own duty. Thus of the former instruction.

Our second Lesson from the same ground is, that

Godly Men's Prayers promote the salvation of others. The hearty supplications
of the faithful put up unto God, for their brethren, are good means furthering
and helping forvvard the salvation of their brethren. if this were not so, our
Savior would not have taught us to pray, that Gods Kingdom of grace and glory,
may come to others, as well as our selves that others as well as our selves may
know and obey the will of God sincerely, cheerfully, constantly: The Apostle
would not have said, I know this shall turn to my salvation through your
prayers; my prayer to God for Israel is, that they may be saved, the Lord grant
that he may find mercy in that day; If a man see his brother sin a sin which is
not unto death, he shall ask and he shall give him life for them that sin not
unto death. For sometimes the prayers of the godly obtain for others the
beginning of actual salvation, that is, conversion (as our Saviors prayer for
the Jews who crucified him, took effect when so many of them were brought to
repentance by Peter's first Sermon, and Stevens, when Paul was converted;
therefore the Apostle wills Christians to pray, that Heathenish Magistrates
may be turned to the Lord, and come to the knowledge of the truth) sometimes
the progress of it, that is, the continuance and increase of all consequent
blessings and gifts which are preparatives, forerunners, certain prognostics
of perfect salvation, as fuller assurance, comfort in afflictions, spiritual
establishment, and the like. Yet here we must know (that we may rightly and
soundly understand the point) that Prayer is not a cause moving God to save
those whom before he did not intend to save, or making him more willing to save
such, whose salvation he formerly willed, for Divinity teaches, that the will
of God admits not intension or remission) but a condition commanded and
required in us, which being fulfilled by us, the Lord has promised to show and
shed abroad upon others that grace, which he had purposed before all time, to
bestow upon them.

The which doctrine serves first to teach us, what is the best office and
greatest good turn we can do to any whom we love, or whose kindness we desire
to recompense, as faithful friends, bountiful benefactors, kind parents,
dutiful children, loving yokefellows. Lend them many hearty prayers, entreat
the Lord ser them, that they may be delivered from this present evil world,
their eyes enlightened, their sins pardoned, their hearts parged, their feet
guided in the way of peace: beg these things for them. If thou prevailest in
thy suit, thou have done more for them, than if thou had made them Lords of
all that the Iberian Nimrod does either possess or desire, all the Kingdoms of
the earth. Oh the dignity, utility, riches of prayer! a good man by prayer may
do that for his friend, which all the wealth and power of the world cannot do.
The poorest Christian, on whom God has powered the spirit of supplications, may
be very profitable to the rich, helping him to that which all his store cannot
purchase. For by the Heaven-piercing prayers, which ascend daily from the Altar
of a pure heart in the Temple of his soul, he may be a means of receiving him
into everlasting habitations, that is, of saving his soul.

Secondly, hence we must be stirred up, 1. In our daily petitions, not only to
speak for our selves, but to remember also the whole community of them that
belong to God wheresoever scattered. Its a great fault in Christians, not only
to omit this duty altogether, but to make it (as too many do) a mere matter of
form. Indeed our wicked hearts out of sloth or unbelief, will be too ready to
say, Alas wherein can our prayers be profitable to them, whose faces and cases
are unknown to us. But answer them from this Doctrine, our prayers may advance
the business of their salvation, and like a prosperous wind facilitate their
course (or set them forward with happy speed) toward the Celestial Paradise.
How are we friends of Gods people, if we deny our helping hand to procure (...)
in special sort we should be mindful of them that travel under tribulation, and
suffer with Christ or for Christ. This duty is included in that general
precept, remember them that are in bonds. The practice of it occurs often in
Scripture. The sweet Psalmist sings, redeem Israel O God out of all his
troubles, that thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right hand and hear
me. How often do the Faithful in the Psalms complain to God of the Churches
distress and petition for redress? Psalm. 74.79, 80.
Daniel and Nehemiah, Courtiers both in great favor with the greatest Monarchs
in the world at that time, how mournfully and earnestly do they entreat for the
church then in misery?

For, First, crave supply, or remedy? sure, else they were unworthy to have any
place in the body, or receive life or motion from the head and heart.

Secondly,

Thirdly, against proud and cruel Tyrants with no other weapons, but prayers
and tears have given them blows, after which they could never rise or recover)
we may move the Lord to give them compassion, before those that afflicted them,
or to raise them up friends and fautors; we may obtain for them deliverance (as
the Church did for Peter) or strength to stand invincible under the cross.

Lastly, our own hearts will tell us, whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them, and that which is now their lot may be ours e're
long: we are subject to the same things they suffer. Suppose we were out of all
reach of gunshot, yet we are commanded to put our selves in their room, and to
be affected toward them, as if their case were ours, as if their afflictions
were our own proper burden.

First then, We have heard with our ears, our neighbors have told us, how some
are spoiled of their goods, houses, children, synagogues, liberty of
worshipping God purely, their temple-songs turned into howlings, some kept in
sore bondage, by hard and cruel Lords, mourning continually, and drinking their
own tears in abundance, by reason of the oppression of the enemy and the
avenger: some given to be meat to the sword of the furious, and sulphurous sons
of Babylon; who now is grieved for these breaches of Joseph? who lays them to
heart? the telling or hearing of these things may prove a pang of pity in us,
for the present, but who cries earnestly to God for them? who can say, his soul
bleeds in secret for Zions wounds, and thirsts after the peace of her children,
as if they were his own natural parents and brethren? that their miseries lie
heavy upon his spirit, that he bears them in his heart, when he comes to God in
prayer? give me the man, give me the man (that I may pronounce him the blessed
of the Lord, yea one of 10000) who cannot take, and find that contentment,
which otherwise he might, and could in his own good fare, quiet habitation,
commodious lodging, sweet children, to whom the best outward comforts are less
pleasant, and often sawced with sorrowful sighs, because it goes not well with
the people, and Saints of the Most high. Well, we may here learn to judge of
our selves, if our houses, our hearts afford no prayers for poor afflicted
Christians, Zeph. 3.18.
if we be not sorrowful for the solemn assembly, if the reproach of it be not a
burden to us, we are as far from a truly Christian disposition, as they that
are furthest, dead lumps in the womb of the Church, void of the spirit of
Christ unworthy to be reckoned in the mystical body of Christ.

Secondly, Jews in captivity must pray for the peace of heathenish Babylon; how
much more should the Israel of God for Jerusalem the City of God? Is not the
Christian Church the Spouse of Christ? If we can see Christ's own Spouse
despightfully used, trampled upon, wounded and not be troubled, not speak a
good word for her, how dare we say the love of Christ dwells in us? The Lord
(no dobut) has just reasons within himself, why as yet he sends not
enlargement and deliverance to his Church; but this freeth not them from blame,
who seeming, and calling themselves the Churches chidren, pray not at all, or
very coldly for the prosperity of their mother. Nay, I will say boldly, this
denying to help the Church against the enemy, though they never conspired with
the enemy, makes them guilty in Gods sight of the Churches desolation, as sure
as he that looks on, while a true man is robbed and murdered, and calls not for
aid, is accessory to the murder. Wherefore let us now begin (if hitherto we
have been supine and careless) and continue to be importunate petitioners for
the faithful in misery; oh let us double our importunity (if it be possible)
giving the Lord no rest till he arise, have mercy on Zion, and stablish
Jerusalem, till he tread down her enemies as straw is trodden for the dunghill,
and raise up Carpenters, which may fray, and cast down the horns that have
scattered Judah, Zech. 1.21
that there may be no more a pricking briar to the house of Israel, nor any
grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that they may be no more a
prey to the heathen, but dwell safely, and none may make them afraid. Let us
often set before our eyes their rueful condition, think how many good things
they want, which we enjoy; and how little worthy we are to enjoy what they
want; labor to be affected with a tender sense of their miseries, that our
hearts melting in compassion, may send forth many zealous prayers, the fruit
and benefit whereof, they, whom we never knew, never saw, shall undoubtedly
feel and reap in one kind or other.

The fourth point in order, Interpretation.
is the ob^ect of Paul's invocation, the Author of the blessings which are
afterward begged, thus discribed, [our God] that is, the true God, who
generally is the God of the whole world, The Lord of all the earth, Zeck. 6.5.
the God of the Spirits of all flesh, peculiarly of his own people. Whence let
us observe (omitting all others) only this Instruction.

The Lord is in special sort the God of the faithful, The godly and true
believers, have God to be theirs in a special manner. He is my God, my Fathers
God, Exodus 15.2.
says Moses, this God is our God for ever and ever, says the Psalmist. O
Lord, thou art my God, says the Prophet in the name of the Church. The Lord my
God shall come says Zachary, My God shall supply all your needs, says the
Apostle. And many such places there are through out the Scriptures. For,

First, and separated them from other people to be his peculiar people, and
embraces them with such a love, as he extends not to all.

Secondly, he has confirmed them to himself, by making with them a covenant of
life and peace, wherein he promised to be a Father and Husband to them,
removing evils, conferring all good things, in this and the future life. So
much is comprised in these few words. I will be their God.

Thirdly, avouch him to be their God, to whom they give themselves, and yield
all hearty and willing service, duty and obedience, as becomes good children
and subjects.

First, of naughtiness the companion of Satan, which is most vile impiety, yea
blasphemy, should a known strumpet still in all places be calling the King her
Husband; would it not be counted impudency worthy to be severely punished by
the judges? Let such hear the Lord himself (if yet they will believe him)
forbidding him to be so bold with his Name; What have thou to do to take my
Covenant in thy mouth? Yea, plainly telling tthem to their faces, they are not
his people, not under mercy, that he is not their God. It Is true, even the
vilest men in the world have relation to him, and dependence on him, as a
Creator and Conserver: but no man can truly call God his by Covenant, till he
find in himself, 1. A sweet mourning in secret, for that he has done him so
much wrong, and still can serve him no better. 2. A sensibleness of his
dishonor. 3. An earnest striving to give God his heart in all worship.

Secondly, dismayed thou faithful Christian: if he be thy God, who is the God
of salvation and justifier of repentant sinners, thou can not be condemned;
if he be thine, who is greater than all, sin shall not hurt thee, nor Satan
pluck thee out of his hands. If God be thine, he will keep and care for thee,
thou art sure of consolation in calamity, Esa. 43.2, 3.
preservation in perils, supply of all wants, his wisdom shall be thy watch,
his providence thy portion, his power thy pillar sustaining thee in heaviest
afflictions: If God be thine his promises are thine, all those Texts which
declare what God is, or will be to his, are as surely thine as if thy name were
expressed in them, his Christ is thine, his kingdom is thine, all are thine.
If friends fail as the brooks in summer, kinsfolks grow unkind, and old
acquaintance stand afar off like strangers, if parents or dear yokefellows take
their leave and drop down into the dust of death, if earthly stays and
comforts, like riches in Solomon, take themselves to their wings and fly away,
grieve not thou as others that have no hope, but sing and exult in spirit;
seeing God, who is instead of all things, remains thy God for ever and ever.
Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, and be thankful for your happiness; for
blessed are the people whose God is Jehovah. This is indeed true felicity to
him that has God for his God, no good shall be wanting, no evil mortal,
nothing can make him miserable.

Thirdly, The Lord is my God; from this hold (which indeed is the foundation of
all our comfort) the Devil and the Pope would drive us; but we must maintain
our title, and never suffer our selves to be beaten from it, especialy in the
evil day in distresses and agonies of conscience, imitating our Lord and
Master, who when his Fathers hand so pressed him; that to his own feeling he
had forsaken him, yet cried, My God my God, why have thou sorsaken me? 2. To go
boldly to him in prayer, seeking and asking of him all things needful: speak to
him with confidence of acceptance and audience: if he be our God, he will deny
us nothing. Should we fear being welcome to our own? I am the Lord their God,
and will hear them, says God in the Prophet Zachary. 3. With erect and
undismayed spirits to profess and confess his name before the sons of men. If
we call him ours, and here the Apostle tells us, he is not ashamed to be so
called, Heb. 11 2^.
shall we be ashamed of him, deny him in the world? if we do, are we not well
worthy to have our liveries taken from us, and to be turned out of his service,
or discarded in the day of his glorious appearing? 4. To be careful of
honoring, pleasing, obeying him, Ye shall do my judgments (says the Lord to
the people in Leviticus) and keep mine ordinances to walk therein. Why? I am
the Lord your God. Levit. 18.4.
We will serve the Lord, for he is our God, Josh. 24.18.
say the people in Joshua. For shame never profess thy self to be Gods, never
call God thine, while thou make no conscience of obeying him. Art thou a
willing servant of sin, more ready to do what thy lusts lead unto, than what
God commands? Sin is thy God. Do thou bestow upon the world, the profits and
pleasures of it, that love, fear, joy, delight, strength, time, which God
challenges, and the godly consecrate to him? The world is thy God. Are thy
ways such as agree far better with the will of the Devil, than with the holy
will of God? Do thou not take far more care and pains for fulfilling the mind
of the flesh, and Satan, than doing what God requires and accepts? The Devil
is thy God. See now thou have chosen and made strange gods to thy self, other
Lords have dominion over thee, the God that forms thee, have thou rejected;
for no man can serve two masters.

Lastly, one that is higher than the highest, the mighty maker of all things is
their master, and has undertaken to be their Protector; he that touches them
touches the Lord, who has linked himself to them in an eternal league of
amity. If God be theirs, he will certainly take their parts, declare himself an
enemy of their enemies, smite the proudest that afflict them. Make God thy Foe,
draw him into the Field against thee, and see how thou speedest.

The last and largest branch of our general division now follows, Resolution.
which is the matter of the Apostles prayer. Wherein two things are to be
considered; 1. The things craved in the rest of the 11 ver. 2. The end for
which he desired and would have God to bestow them, ver. 12. The things craved
for the Thessalonians, the blessings for which Paul prays unto God in their
behalf, are two: for he entreats the Lord, 1. That he would make them worthy
of their calling. 2 That he would fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness,
etc. whereof the first is principal the other subordinate, a means conducing
and subservient to the former. Let us begin with the former; and first seek out
the sense of the words, Interpretaiton.
By calling, many understand the glory of Gods kingdom, to which the faithful
are called. I see no need of flying to so far-fetcht a Metorymya, we may well
enough take it in the usual sense; either for that gracious and saving benefit
of God bestowed on the Elect, which commonly we call effectual calling, or for
the state and profession of Christianity, to which they are brought by Gods
calling them out of their natural condition; and then the meaning of the other
words will be this. We pray, that the Lord will enable you to walk, as becomes
those that are the called of God, to direct, and strengthen you, that in
nothing you may discredit, but in all things to the very end, honor your
Christian-calling. Hence we may deduce three conclusions.

The first, True Christians of themselves would shame their calling.

The faithful, if God do not guide and uphold them, are in danger to blemish
their profession. For prayer to God for any thing, imports and presupposes
our indigency, and want of the thing prayed for, or else impotency to retain
what we have obtained, to perform what is required. The Apostles petition
implies as much, as if he had said, though you have received a good portion of
Gods grace, unless he continue to be your strength, and stay, you will fall to
such courses, as are unworthy your holy calling. Sam. 12.14.
David a Prophet, endued with a large measure of the spirit of sanctification,
how did he discredit his religion, by his adultery, murder, counterfeit
madness? Peter an Apostle, by lying, swearing, and forswearing, before the
enemies of Christ, and by dissembling at Antioch? The like may be said of Noah,
Jonah, Sampson, Solomon; for that Solomon was an elect vessel; and is a
glorious Saint in heaven, I no more doubt, than that he was the Author of
Ecclesiastes; for this Book could not be written in the time of his primitive
integrity (because he speaks precisely of that as a thing past) nor of his
Apostacy, Eccles. 2.8.
because a soul turned from God would never have taken pains to draw men from
all earthly vanities, which is the scope of that Book) nor breathed out such
heavenly precepts, as are here found; and therefore was written by a true
penitent, who found God gracious, and was received into Abraham's bosom.

Reasons of this Doctrine, that flesh in which dwells no goodness dwells in
those that have most goodness. The holiest souls do necessarily, though
unwillingly carry about in their bosoms an hereditary disease, which inclines
them to drowsiness, Romans 7.11.
and neglect of their holy watch. a dangerous deceiver, an enemy like to Satan,
lusting against the spirit, rebelling against the Law of their mind, sometimes
craftily enticing, sometimes violently haling to those things that are contrary
to their calling

Secondly,

Thirdly, from the weakness of the new man. True holiness indeed is renewed in
them; but imperfect: their strength is like the strength of a child, now
beginning to go, or a man recovering of a great sickness; they neither know,
believe, nor love perfectly, and therefore can neither avoid evil, nor do good
perfectly. Look then, as he whose sight is dim, or joints and knees feeble, may
easily slip and fall into the mire; so the best Christians being attended with
infirmity, whilst they are strangers on earth, are in danger by falling to
shame their calling, further than they are supported by God.

The point thus confirmed, serves further to admonish the godly of three
things.

First, unstable as water, reeds shaken with the wind, if the rock of Israel be
not our arm every morning; Esa. 33.2.
unable to stand against the left blast of Satan's mouth, the smallest puff of
wordly troubles, ready enough, if left to our selves, to fall as foully, as
fearfully, as ever did any, and so cause the Church of God, the religion of
God, the calling of Chrstianity to be reproached; the best of us, the strongest
amongst us, had we no better keepers than our selves, would sin like Peter,
David, Solomon, Manasses, yea become Judasses, Demasses, Alexanders, terrestial
Devils; he that believes not this of himself, is blind and knows not himself.
See what small cause we have to be conceited, and confident of our own strength.

Secondly, Blessed is he that in this sort fears allwaies; had Peter feared
his own infirmity, he had not strayed so grievously. No man is nearer downfall,
than he that is furthest from doubting himself. Had we a child, or servant whom
we knew desperately bent to hurt himself, or some other, or else in danger,
either by reason of some disease to fall into fire and water, or of a bad
disposition, to play some lewd, shameful pranck, whereby our house might be
discredited, would we not still have an eye to him, and command our folks to
watch him at every end? the case is our own; our own traitorous hearts conspire
against us night and day to work us woe, to lay us naked before the world, like
Noah uncovered in his tent, to seduce us into the dirty-paths of sin, that when
we have stained our garments, we may be the laughing stock of Devils and wicked
men. Oh look we to our selves that we be not deceived by such a cozening
companion: no vigilancie can be too great, in observing and taking heed of this
thief, this murderer.

Thirdly, not to insult over, that calls on the name of Christ, do this or that
unbeseeming his profession? do not presently condemn him for an hypocrite, nor
cease to acknowledge him for a brother, but rather support him in love, and the
spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted; remembering
that thy self, though as famous for faith and sanctity, as any of these
Thessalonians, art in danger to do as much, yea more, if the Lord do not lead
thee in his truth and righteousness. But let no man mistake me, or deceive
himself; I speak of one, who failing in some particular act, is for the main,
undefiled in his way; not of a man that follows sin as a trade, and after
illumination and admonition, purposes to go on still in his trespasses. We may
as lawfully and certainly judge such an one to be de presenti, a slave of the
Devil, one far off the kingdom of God, as call that a crab-tree, which bears
crabs or a thorn; which brings the fruits of a thorn.

The second instruction is, The godly must by all means grace their calling.

Christians must so demean themselves both in peace and trouble, as they may
honor and credit the Christian-name and profession. For Paul's prayer includes
the Thessalonians duty, as if he should say, we knowing and considering, that
this is a main thing chiefly to be looked unto, by you that are believers,
worthy the labor of your lives, do constantly beg for you at the hands of God
this grace, that he would make you worthy of this calling. The Ephesians are
exhorted, to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith they are called. Timothy
must teach women to carry themselves, as becomes those that profess
godliness. And good reason. For,

First, they had profaned his holiness, and again, for that they had made his
name to be profaned among the Gentiles by their wicked lives. Indeed the
doctrine is holy and good, and no way to be charged with the faults of the
persons, yet the men of the world judge of the doctrine, the worth and
sweetness whereof they know not, by the works and fruits which they see and
know; and conclude there is no such holiness, goodness, power in Gods School,
because no more appears in their lives. Therefore the Apostle would have young
women obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed,
and servants faithful to their masters, that they may adorn the doctrine of God
our Savior. See Tit. 2.5, 10. 1 Timothy 6.1.

Secondly, them, that in those whom they have often reviled and condemned,
nothing is found worthy to be blamed, they may be brought to feel shame and
selfcondemning accusation in their own consciences: when they behold such
worthy fruits of religion in the lives of others, as even they that will not be
good, cannot but commend and admire; they be drawn to some liking of religion,
allured to look into it, to enquire and hearken after it, to be acquainted with
those that teach and profess it, till at length they be taken in Gods net.
Whereas by blemishing their profession, they hinder the salvation of others,
hearten and harden the wicked in rebellious courses, in hatred or dislike of
Gods truth (who think they have good cause to hate it, seeing it produces no
better effects in those that follow it) and so drives them further from grace
and Gods kingdom.

Thirdly, the Church, members of the Son of God, sets before us a kingdom,
a crown of erernal glory as the prize for which, the goal to which we must
run. Is not this a great dignity? Is not this so worthy a calling, worthy
honoring? are we not guilty of horrible unthankfulness, unrighteousness, if we
do not honor it all we are able?

Before we come to application,

Sundry ways;

1. They honor it by growing up to an holy dexterity and skilfulness in the
trade of Christianity: when they so receine the word, as they increase in
knowledge and holiness, labor still more and more to abound and excel in
spiritual understanding, maturity of judgment, power and ability to subdue
evil and do good. Contrariwise, they disgrace Christianity by non-proficiency,
when after much teaching they continue silly punies, babish, ignorant, sticking
and stumbling in the very grounds and easiest points of religion, ever
learning, and never attaining to any solid, distinct, orderly knowledge of
Divinity.

2. They honor it by steadfast persisting in the holy doctrine they have
received against all contrary blasts of vain mouths, when they are so rooted
and grounded in the truth, that they are able to stand firm and unmovable
against the enticing words of corrupt Teachers, yea to try their spirits,
discover and avoid them. On the contrary, they dishonor it by being reeds and
weathercocks in religion, when they hearken unto, and suffer themselves to be
seduced by the subtilties of impostors, and glorious shows of counterfeit
Angels of light, vomit up again the wholesome doctrine they have taken down, and
drink in the lying words of deceitful workmen.

3. They honor it by an unspotted conversation; when like Zachary and
Elizabeth, They walk in all the commandments of the Lord, blameless, and are
(as the Philippians are exhorted to be) unblameable, sincere, harmless, without
rebuke, shining as lights in the world, that is, so frame their lives, as they
cannot justly be accused of any open and gross sin after their calling. They
dishonor it, by falling into reproachful and scandalous evils.

4. They honor it by abounding in fruits of righteousnefs, when they labor to
be full of good works, holy, just, profitable actions, ever to be speaking and
doing that which is agreeable to the word of grace, and may honor God, edefie
the inward, or help the outward man in themselves or others, ever to be
exercised in one good work or other; in a word, when they endeavor seriously,
that their practice may answer their teaching and profession. They dishonor it
by barrenness, fruitlesness, careless neglect of good works, when they place
religion only or principally in knowing or talking, profess piety, but express
it not in their practice, or do not constantly show forth mercy and equity in
all their actions, so that the very wicked can tax them for the want of these
things.

5. They honor it by bridling and moderating affections, manifesting Christian
meekness (when occasions of being provoked are offered) equanimity, confidence
and joy in God, when he takes away good things; or brings evil upon them. They
dishonor it, by suffering passions, now stirred by some adverse and ungrateful
occurrences, to overflow the banks and break out into unseemly excess, when
they can keep no mean or measure in their anger, are fearful above measure,
altogether heartless at the approaching of danger, grieve immoderately for
losses and crosses. For worldlings, seeing the children of God so impotent,
impatient, timorous, dejected, think within themselves, surely there is no such
joy in these men's religion, no such power in faith as Preachers would persuade
us.

6. They honor it by union and harmony of hearts and tongues, when they
sweetly conspire and are knit together in judgment and affection, as the
boards and curtains of the Sanctuary by rings and tenons, minding speaking the
same thing, walking by the same rule. They blemish it by mutual jars, wars,
dissentions, especially in matters of Religion.

7. Lastly, they honor it by constancy in religion, when they are called to
suffer great things for it: holding on in the way of life, when showers of
persecution falling, threaten to drown them: willing and cheerful forgoing the
dearest things for the Gospel. They dishonor it by spiritual cowardife and
apostasy, starting back from the truth because of the Cross, shrinking away
from the love, profession, practice of godliness, lest they should be troubled
and persecuted. This makes men think Religion is worth nothing, for which they
that know and have professed it, will lose nothing: this makes men say, these
love the world and the things of the world, as well as others, for they will
yield to any thing, rather than part with living, liberty, life.

This instruction thus confirmed and opened, ferveth first to reprove many that
desire to be counted and called Christians, but answer not their style. Some,
notwithstanding all our preaching, are unexpert in the word of righteousness,
in the art of godliness, grow not in knowledge, but stand at a stay like
dwarfes, and dwell perpetualiy upon that a. b. c. of Religion; which they
learned long ago. Some of good age and long standing, have begun to totter and
turn after seducing spirits, which promise to open unto them a new way, that
they may find rest and peace to their souls, wherein they may walk without a
Conscience. Some, for fear of worldly troubles, let good causes fall to the
ground. But above all others this point thunders against those, who by their
disordered lives, bring shame not only upon themselves, but upon Christianity
in general. Its to be lamented, that some by idleness in their callings, pride,
unthriftiness, undutifulness to Governors, unfaithfulness in dealings,
slipperiness in promises, rigor in standing upon and prosecuting their own
right to the utmost, discords and such like gross faults, appearing in their
lives, give the wicked occasion of condemning our whole brotherhood, 1 Pet.
2.17.
and make Religion ashamed that ever she knew them, yea blush and hide her
face, if they do but look at her, or challenge any acquaintance with her. And
do we serve our Religion thus, (Beloved) in which we hope to be saved? Do we
look she should comfort us, plead for us, lead us to heavenly glory, and yet we
deal with her, as Judas did with Jesus, that is, daily deliver her up to be
mocked, scourged, crucified, pierced by the spears and arrows of ungodly men's
venomous tongues? Do we not fear, lest if we continue to be a shame to our
fathers house, exposing it to infamy and obloquie in the world, we be cast out
at length as bastards and bond slaves, lest if we be a shame to the Gospel, the
Author of the Gospel be ashamed of us in that great day.

Secondly, think on them and do them, embrace and follow after them: whatsoever
things we know, or justly suspect will disparage and bring an aspersion upon
our calling, avoid, abhor them. Away with the works of darkness, let them not
be seen among us, they are most unseemly, unseasonable in Christians. What a
shame is it that those who are called to so great and glorious things, should
live like the base scullions of the Devil? ought we not to walk in the fear of
our God, because of the reproach of our enemies? that we may give no occasion
to the adversary to speak reproachfully? Let us, oh let us strive to be such
manner of persons for holy conversation and godliness, that our very lives may
proclaim to all men, tha^ our hearts, hopes, country, portion is above, not in
this world, that in our words and works wicked Men may smell the fragransie,
and behold the majesty and glory of Religion to their astonishment, and be
compelled to say, these are kindly Christians indeed, worthy the Name they
bear, the seed which the Lord has blessed. Esa. 61.9.
Consider I pray you (for I would gladly strike this nail a little further) 1.
That profession separated from suitable practice, is a great Enemy of Christ's
Kingdom Unreformed Protestants must be content to be ranked among adversaries,
as well as Turks and Pagans, and its hard to tell which is most dangerous. For
1. these fight only from without the City of God, and who can look for any
better from them, who profess hatred and enmity against the Church? Those
living within the bounds and bowels of the Church, put weapons into the hand
both of foreign and domestic loes, secretly encourage, strengthen, arm them
against Religion, while they seem to be Friends. 2. Neither should external
enemies have any power to hurt the Church, if the sins of those that are in the
Church, did not provoke the Lord to become her Enemy, to pull down her wall,
and give her into the hands of the uncircumcised. 3. The bad lives of
Christians are a great hindrance of the Churches increase. For when the Men of
the world see them as earthly midded, as covetous, as contentious, and (in a
word) in many things as blame worthy as themselves, they applaud and settle
themselves with more confidence on the dregs or dunghill of their own cursed
condition, as giving sufficient hope of salvation, they think our doctrine,
touching the necessity of holiness and universal obedience in them that shall
be saved, to be vanity and falsehood, they resolve they need no more repentance
than they have (which indeed is none at all) and so come not to Christ that
they might have life: whereas a good lise is a good orator, persuading and
calling others to goodness, wooing and winning the minds even of rude aliens to
an approbation of it, and so preparing them to be further wrought upon by the
word of grace. Whence the Apostle Peter exhorts Wives to subjection from this
reason, that such Husbands as obey not the word, may be won by the conversation
of the Wives. Were we such Christians as we ought to be (says an Ancient) such
as blessed Paul, there would be no Gentiles (no profane men) left among us. We
might draw many worlds to the faith.

2. A bad life in Christians makes way for corruption in judgment, renouncing
of Christ, and the height of wickedness. For 1. God being provoked by men's
impounding or imprisoning his truth in unrighteousness, and partial walking in
his Commandments, in judgment gives them over to delusions, leaves them to
fall into errors and damnable opinions. 2. When men are not what they profess
and know they ought to be, it cannot be but they feel themselves often stung,
lashed, judged by the word of God and their own Consciences. Wherefore to be
rid of this trouble and torment, and get liberty from Gods yoke (the strictness
whereof they cannot endure) First, they begin to desire (and then labor to
persuade themselves) that some things which they have learned may be false, or
at least doubtful, not very certain, they invent (or fetch from the Devils
forge) colors, excused defenses of that they mean not to amend, wicked and
Atheistical conclusions encouraging to continue in their course, till at length
the spirit being wearied and departing, they fall to open profaneness, grow
extremely impudent and obdurate in sin, and so their latter end be worse than
their beginning. Would thou have me speak more plainly? Art thou a Christian
in name, but live not like a Christian? Take heed, thou art in danger to be
given over to heresy, to believe Doctrines of Devils, or wholly to forsake the
way of righteousness, to return to thy vomit and wallowing in the mire, to
become a stinking snuff or vapor in the nostrils of all men, yea sevenfold
more the child of hell than when thou did first begin to profess Christ.

3. As God expects more duty from his own than others, so their unholy lives
disagreeing from their holy calling, kindle his anger, more than the sins of
others. He will be sanctified in them that draw near him. You only have I known
of all the families of the earth, therefore I will visit you for all your
iniquities. He takes it most unkindly to be dishonored by his own people. He
will wink at the wickedness of strangers, when those of his family shall be
sure to smart for their disobedience, and worthily. For (as one says) if
Gentiles live filthily, its not a thing to be wondered at, nor worthy of so deep
censure: but for Christians, who enjoy so many glorious favors of God, to live
wickedly, is a thing intolerable.

4. Christians, not Ministers only, should be lights or candles shining and
showing to others the way to salvation. If then by the dark and foggy cloud of
carnal conversation, we lead them into the pit, how shall we answer our Judge?
Dread we not that sentence, Cursed is he that causes the blind to err in the
way? Indeed the wicked who take occasion from our unworthy walking to speak
evil of the way of God, or to wander in the way of death, shall perish in their
iniquity; but we who give the occasion shall not escape. Truly, when I hear a
man thus taxed, Oh such an one is one of these forward fellows, who love
Scripture, Prayer, Exercises, and yet he will swagger in some company as well
as others, or, he has so deceived me, that I will take heed how henceforth I
trust or entertain under my roof any of that feather, I cannot but say within
my self, It were better a millstone were hanged about his neck and be cast into
the depth of the Sea, than he should by such un-Gospel-like carriage, and
discolored manners, lay such a stumbling block in the world.

5. Think with your selves, what comfort can any man have in that life which
fights with his profession, in that profession which is controlled by his
life, to which his life daily gives the lie, which will certainly be an
indictment and witness against him in the great day? If it be a shame for one
pretending himself a Grammarian, to speak incongruously, a Musician to play or
sing unskilfully, howgreat a shame is it in the sight of God and his holy
Angels, for one to profess and make show of Christianity, and yet so grossly to
fail in observing and obeying the rules of it, that his own works condemn him
in the gate? What a shame is it lastly, that those who by their lives ought to
condemn the unclean world (as Noah did by his obedience, and all ought, who
hope to be assessors or benchers with Christ in judging the world) should give
the world just cause to condemn their lives? I would gladly take off mine hand
and make an end, but the point holds me, as if it were loath to leave you,
till you were persuaded. I beseech you set your hearts to all these words which
I testify unto you this day, and let them sink down into your ears, yea into
your souls. Let your conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
walk worthy of God who has called you to his Kingdom and glory, that you may
by a real demonstration of the power of Religion, stop the mouths of foolish
and ignorant men, who would be barking against Religion, by practice and
expressions of holiness, muzzle or make ashamed the slanderous brood of
Antichrist, who charge us to deny or contemn inherent holiness. Solomon said
once, Go to the Pismire; so say I, Go the little Bees, consider their ways and
be ashamed of irregular lives, of ill composed manners, when you see their
little cells or hony-combs so artificially and accuratly framed. Consider and
remember often, that your Christian calling calls for and requires great
circumspection and watchfulness, great purity and uprightness. See you not how
careful some Men are when they walk or ride in a fair new fuit, to keep it from
spotting? So must you your heavenly vocation. Speak, do nothing but that which
beseems your calling, and you shall not easily offend in word or work. What
shall I say? no more but this, let us either be such indeed as our names import
and report to others, or else cast away the names and call our selves from the
masters we serve; and the Lord grant that whosoever hears or reads may be
persuaded (or this doctriue may put a sting into his conscience, never giving
him rest, till he resolve) to lead the life of a Christian. And so I pass on to

The third instruction, A Christians walking worthy of his calling, is from God.

All ability in believers to grace and adorn their profession, is Gods gift.
Therefore does the Apostle beg this grace at the hands of God for the
Thessalonians. And there is good reason for it.

First, no man is of himself sufficient to think, much Iess to accomplish that
which is good. This, that great Apostle, who was taken up into the third
heaven, confesses and confirms in himself; therefore all the sufficiency of
the faithful must needs be from that Father of lights, from whom descends
every good and perfect gift.

Secondly, God gives the first grace, whereby they begin both to deny
ungodliness, to renounce all that spiritual uncleanness of sin, which is
contrary to their calling, and to do those good works, to which they are
called, to bring forth new fruits of holiness and righteousness, a greeable to
their new calling.

Thirdly, he continues and confirms this grace or gracious work by a
subsequent. upholds them in their integrity, stablisheth their hearts in
holiness, gives wisdom to epsy and shun the snares of the tempter, Delivers
from every evil work (and consequently preserves from shameful falls disgracing
their calling) waters them as a garden, that they may be fruitful in good
works, which are a comely ornament to their profession.

Lastly, he limiteth or restrains their adversaries, spiritual, corporal,
whether soliciting to defection from the faith, or tempting to sin in
conversation (suffers them not to affault his children, when, where, with what
weapons, with what force and fury they would) or else ministers strength to
withstand and overcome them. Now he that curbs or puts to flight the enemies
which would draw us to dishonorable acts, must needs be the cause of our
honorable standing in the day of battle, and consequently of our winning
credit to our calling.

First then, have thou escaped many dangerous pit-falls, and quicksands in
which others have been overthrown, many foul sins of youth, of age, which have
foiled others, and defiled both them and their profession, Have thou as a brave
Soldier of Jesus Christ, warded or repelled those blows of temptation, which
have brought others on their on knees, or driven them from their station? Have
thou purchased the name and repute of a worthy Christian, by a godly, harmless,
meek, sober, peaceable conversation, gained honor not only to thy self, but to
the general calling of Christianity, and so sent abroad the smell of the
ointment of thy graces, that others have been thereby induced to speak
honorably of Religion for thy sake? Be not proud of it, its Gods work in thee,
ascribe the glory of it wholly to him who keeps back his children from evil,
and confirms them in good, without whom we have no stedfastness, no power to
live well, or hold out in good courses, but should certainly after we have
begun in the spirit, end in the flesh. Its truly said of an Enemy, the least
temptation, if God forsake us, and suffer the Devil to work as powerfully as he
can, will be intolerable; invincible.

Secondly, Paul did for his Thessalonians; send every day post to the Court of
heaven, none other but thine own heart, on the winged horse of Prayer. Spread
thy petition, as Hezek. his letter, before the Lord; say unto him Lord, as thou
have made me partaker, make me also worthy of the heavenly calling, give grace
that whiles I live, I may show such behavior, as is fitting the honorable
condition to which thou have brought me. Let me die, rather than I should admit
or commit any thing which might impair the reputation of Religion and cause
Christianity to find worse entertainment in the world: Guide me therefore by
thy counsel, till thou receive me to glory; hold me by thy right hand,
strengthen me with thine own might, turn from me shame and contempt, order my
steps in thy word, and let no iniquity have dominion over thy servant, keep my
spirit ever waking and watchful against sin, stablish my heart in thy fear, my
feet in the way of thy precepts, enable me to continue holy and faithful unto
death, and lead me in the way everlasting to the land of righteousness. This is
the way to obtain this excellent grace, and he that perseveres earnestly
begging it, adding thereunto holy endeavors, making the matter of his prayer;
the matter of his practice, shall be preserved from opprobrious evils.

The second petition of Paul follows, wherein such things are begged as
mainly and necessarily conduce to the honoring of a Christians calling,
especially by undaunted constancy and perseverance in the time of tribulation.
The means are two, 1. General. 2 Special.

The general is, fulfilling all the good pleasure of his goodness. By good
pleasure, I understand Gods decree and promise of bestowing on his children all
spiritual blessings needful for the attainment of eternal glory, or his love
and favor now begun to be executed and manifested to the Thessalonians, by
effects and real gifts accompanying salvation; this is amplified by the cause.
What is the root, fountain, and foundation of this good pleasure? the goodness
of God, that is, the kind and gracious nature of God, whereby he is ready to
deal bountifully with his creature. The meaning then is, we pray, that the Lord
would accomplish and finish all those good things, he has intended to work in
you and for you, that he would give the fullness and perfection of all those
graces, wherewith of his mere grace and goodness he has purposed, promised and
already begun to enrich you. The words may admit two other readings and
interpretations, for they may be turned [all the well-pleasing of goodness]
that is, all that goodness and holiness which is acceptable and well-pleasing
to God. And again [All the desire of goodness] that is, all the good and godly
desires of your hearts. But this latter sense is barren and not so suitable to
the Apostles words and scope, and the former is included in that which we gave
in the first place, which I judge to be fullest, most proper, and therefore
most worthy to be preferred and followed.

The instructions to be drawn out of this clause are three.

First, That all good in man is from the mere goodness of God.

Whatsoever grace God wills to and works in his children, it flows only
from his free grace. God (says the Apostle) God works in us both to will and
to do, of his good pleasure. You shall find the Scripture exemplifying this
point in particulars, ascribing all the saving benefits of God bestowed on his
people, to his grace and good will, election or predestination to life,
redemption, remission of sins, justification, acceptance, vocation, revelation
of the mystery of the Gospel, and giving of knowledge and wisdom, spiritual
vivification, and consequently sanctification, regeneration, comfort and hope
after their calling, ability for the faithful discharge of the duties of their
callings, deliverance from evil, confirmation and persevetance, glorification.
Reason proves the same.

First, its a sure principle in Divinity, sequently is not God. Nothing
therefore does induce and more him to do good to his creature, but his own
goodness. If something without him should move his will, that thing must needs
be in nature before him, and more worthy than he, he must depend upon it, and
suffer from it, but these things cannot agree to the nature of the first cause.
Wherefore either we must confess there is no grace and holiness in man which
springs not from the sole goodness of God, or else deny a most certain Canon
of Religion, and spoil God of his nature, and prerogative royal.

Secondly, we will speak properly) be an impulsive provoking cause of Gods
augmenting these gifts. Because 1. God purposed in his eternal Council before
the world, to bestow or work that increase, and therefore it being an effect of
Gods will, cannot be a cause of the same. 2. Nothing temporary in man, can be a
cause of that which is eternal in God: therefore God was not moved by any thing
fore seen in time, to decree this increase. If nothing besides his own
goodness, moved him to decree to work it, nothing else moves him actually to
work it, else the decree and the execution of it do not agree.

Thirdly, God is not bound to man,

First then here are confuted, Babylon goes about to salve this point by a
favorable interpretation; but if there were no snake in this grass, I marvel
why some of great name and note among them (who doubtless understood well
enough the tenets of their own times) wished the abolishing and abandoning of
it. 2. That Man is able by a power naturally inherent in his will, if it be but
helped and vvakened by grace, to believe and convert. Indeed they disavovv this
Opinion (as whoremasters are sometimes ashamed of their bastards, but they must
be content, will they nill they, to father it. For the vvritings of the Jesuits
(who in this point are hotly opposed by their own pue-fellows the Dominicans)
witness that besides the outward means, they acknowledge nothing necessary to
conversion, but inspiration, illumination, excitation, they require not any
supernatural habit or principle infused into the will by which it may be
disposed and elevated to produce the act of faith: they make effectual grace to
be nothing else, but Gods persuading and calling Men in such a time, place,
manner, as he foresees most agreeable to their disposition, inspiring such
motions, as he sees by their free will they will embrace: yea, some of them
ingenuously confess, that the first radical cause of the efficacy of grace is
the cooperation of man's will. 3. That men may merit (yea others for them)
increase of grace, perseverance and restoration by repentance, when they have
fallen. How these Romish Opinions are repugnant to the doctrine in hand,
grounded upon the plain words of the Apostle, he is blind that sees not.
Secondly, the doctrine of the Arminians. who maintain that the ground and cause
of Gods election; is foresight of says, and perseverance in persons to be
elected, that God sends the means of salvation, and offers his grace to this or
that people, because he did see and know they would with humble readiness
embrace and rightly use that grace and come when he called. 1. These are right
builders of Babel: Is not this most horrible and most wicked coufusion, to
thrust the first cause out of his rank, and seat the second in his room? to
subject the Creator (or make him inferior) to his creature? to fetch the first
rise or spring of man's salvation from man? It is no less absurd and blasphemous
(for ought I can see) to say, Gods will had or needed an external moving cause
in ordaining things, than to say his power had or needed an outward help in
creating things. The Papists shall rise up in judgment and condemn them, some
of whom do affirm roundly (and confirm as soundly) that there is no cause in us
of Gods predestination, that election is altogether free, without prevision of
good works. 2. What faith could God foresee in man not half, but wholly dead
in trespasses and sins? what power of willing their own conversion in Men of
stony hearts, altogether impotent to spiritual good, mancipated to Satan? 3.
Lastly, where they say, God bestows means of salvation upon some rather than
others, because he sees they will profit better by them, a pur-blind Papist
will tell them its manifestly false. For if that were the reason, then the Lord
should always send his Gospel and Ministers to those that are most towardly and
capable, deny them to those who are most hard-hearted and rebellious: but we
see in Scripture and experience, he often sends them to those that are worse
than others, as to Israel a gainsaying people, a people of stiff and steely
necks, adamantine hearts, brazen foreheads, Ezekiel. 3.6.7. Matt. 11.21.
more stubborn and inflexible than the Gentiles, than the Tirians and Sidonians.

Secondly, This must teach us humility. in pride for any good thing we have or
can do. For its neither from our selves, nor procured and purchased from God by
any worthiness or work of ours. Nothing is our own but evil, let us take
nothing to our selves but shame and confusion. Have thou honor, riches,
children, bodily strength and activity, friends, gifts of nature, graces of the
spirit? say with Jacob, these are the riches, the children, the gifts which God
has graciously given me. If thou feel at any time such thoughts as these
arising in thy heart; Because of my sincerity, obedience, hearty and constant
praying, I have better children, better success in the world than others, I am
preserved and delivered out of dangers wherein others perish, judge them to be
the issue of Satan, that father of pride, who persuaded our first parents, and
still would all his posterity, to affectate the Divinity, and therefore serve
these cockatrice eggs, as they deserve, trample upon them, crush them, east
them in the Devils face, and know that our obedience is not a cause of Gods
kindness and benignity, but a way or path leading to the taste and feeling of
it (God who is faithful having promised that whosoever walk in that way shall
find him gracious and bountiful) or a condition pre-required in those that
shall taste the fruits of his goodness, which condition (not man by his own
power performs, but) the grace of God works and produces.

Thirdly, nor satisfy our selves in thanking him. Oh (say we) such a man is a
mirror of good nature. When I was a mere stranger to him, had none to mediate
for me, could give him nothing, nor any way pleasure him, of his own accord,
out of his own free disposition, he thus and thus befriended me: Oh how am I
bound to him, I shall never forget it while I live. How much more (brethren)
should the praises of the goodness of our God be ever in our hearts, in our
mouths, who loved us when we were enemies, sought us when we strayed like lost
sheep, sound us when we sought him not, called us when we resisted him,
remembers us when we forget him, keeps promise with us most faithfully, when
we are unfaithful to him, follows and ladeth us with his benefits, when we
have forfeited all by unthankfulness, undutifulness? how should we awaken our
dead hearts to admire and glorify this so free mercy of the Lord, 2 Samuel 7.21.
and say, for thine own sake, and according to thine own heart (O God) have
thou showed me unworthy wretch, Neh. 9.5
less than the least of all thy mercies, all this grace and truth: blessed be
thou for ever and ever, and blessed be thy glorious name which is exalted above
all blessing and praise.

Let this suffice to have been spoken of the first lesson: Now secondly,
whenas the Apostle prays in this manner for a people excelling many in grace
and goodness, in the next place we set down this conclusion.

God is able enough to replenish his children with all holiness, and lift them
from the hell of misery, wherein he finds them, to a state of perfect happiness
in a moment: yet he pleaeth to proceed step by step in opening and displaying
to them the treasures of his goodness, and not in an instant to power out upon
them all his spiritual riches. Therefore Solomon compares a just man's path to
the shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Pro. 4.18.
Hence are these Exhortations, as ye have received of us, 1 These. 4.1
how ye ought to walk and please God, so abound more and more, grow in grace,
put on the new man, cleanse your selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and these promises, the righteous shall grow like a Caedar in Lebanon,
ye shall grow up as the calves of the stall, and the like. For,

First,

Secondly, specious world, not in a moment, (which to him had been as easy)
but successively in six days space, partly that man might learn by his example,
to take more time, leisurely and distinctly to meditate of his works, partly to
help man the better to conceive of his workmanship, and in what order the parts
of the building were joined together; (whence many profitable considerations
arise, whereof this is not the least, the admirable power of the builder
appears, in causing light and day, before there was any Sun, grass before rain
and the like, which we should not have seen, if all had been dispatched in an
instant:) so in the reparation of the world he perfects sanctification in his
children gradually, by little and little, that he may lead them to a more
distinct and punctual notice-taking of all his graces in themselves, and the
footsteps of the worker, that is, the sundry wonderful ways and passages of
his providence and administration in the perfecting of them. (Whence they
gather much sweet experimental knowledge) that he may give occasion more fully
to observe, deeply ponder, and highly praise his wisdom and power, which shine
forth more conspicuous and illustrious, in his making a small grain of grace to
prevail against a world of corruption, and bringing them through so many
weaknesses, battles, seas of troubles and temptations, falls and foiles, (every
of them threatening death) to complete holiness and happiness, than if he had
made them perfect at their conversion.

Thirdly, his portion at once, (an exceeding great stock of grace:) but he
quickly forgetting both God and himself, spent it and proved a bankrupt.
Wherefore our heavenly Father thinks fit to give us ours by little and little,
that we may know, and all the days of our life acknowledge our selves to be
beggars, depend upon him for a continual subministration of new grace, learn
better to husband and improve that little which he has put into our hands.

First, who (if their confident affirmations may be believed) have so much joy,
that they need or desire no more in heaven, brag that they are past the
doctrine of the hearts deceitfulness, never crave pardon of sin, and deridingly
tell them that do, they have their pardon on their back, acknowledge no use of
the Law after justification, feel no need of preaching, prayer, Sabbaths, use
these things rather least they should give offense, than for any necessity,
professing to the same purpose this to be their opinion, that the new man may
be so strong as it shall not need any means: and to this height they are
mounted in a few months, I might truly say, days, even by hearing one or two
Sermons. Well, we need no other argument (if we be wise) to persuade us to stop
our ears against such erroneous spirits, but this, that they boast of and
arrogate to themselves the possession of such things, as Paul the greatest of
the Apostles had not attained many years after his conversion, not many before
his death, as appears by his complaint to the Romans, his confession to the
Philippians.

Secondly, this must comfort and stay those righteous souls, who are much
dejected because they find much corruption, and great want of grace in
themselves. I forbid them not to deplore and grieve for their spiritual
defects, not to seek to the fountain for supply and perfecting his work in
them, only I exhort them not to be dismayed, nor to conclude they have no
grace, because they have not the measure they desire. Thy case is the common
case of all the godly, not one of them but has his wants to complain of, not
one of them but feels in himself much emptiness, great weakness of holiness,
much ignorance, vanity, unbelief, hardness, deadness, inordinacy of
affections, nay evil motions and inclinations: yea, the better any man is, the
more he discerns and groaneth under these things, and confesses himself far
short of perfect fullness. Look not the Lord should deal otherwise with thee,
than with all the sons he brings to glory. Be content therefore first to be a
babe in Christ, for so thou must, before thou can be a tall man: be content
that the seeds of grace do first poorly peep up and sprout in the mould of thy
heart, which in time will grow to be great herbs, and fill the whole garden. If
thou were recovering of a great sickness, though health should return very
slowly, would thou not be glad and praise the Author of life? Do here in like
manner, rejoice and bless God, that thou art begotten again and come into the
new World of new Creatures, though thou want much of that strength which
some have attained.

The third instruction is, Christians should desire a full measure of all
graces or spiritual gifts. That which Paul beggeth for his Thessalonians, every
believer ought to desire for himself; but Paul desires that God would
accomplish in them, all good things needful for their salvation. This is
further confirmed in those places, in which the Apostle prays (or testifies
that he prayed) for them to whom he writes, Ephesians. 3.19. etc.
That they might be filled with all knowledge of Gods will, abound more and
more in knowledge and in all judgment, be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, yea with all the fullness of God, made perfect in every good
work, to do his will: those places also which exhort to such things, as, Be ye
perfect even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect, be ye filled with
the Spirit, and such like.

And good reason. For first, to replenish and satiate the hungry soul, to pour
his Spirit abundantly on his people, to fill the earth with the knowledge of
himself, as the waters cover the sea, to make the parched ground a pool, the
thirsty land springs of water, the feeble in the Charch like David in strength,
so that they shall mount up with wings like Eagles, run and not be weary, walk
and not faint. Now he that promises, wants neither will nor power to perform
his word, being the All-sufficient, a most bountiful Father and Master, Rich to
all that call upon him, 2. The Scripture affords examples of such as have
attained it. I speak not of extraordinary persons, (such as the Apostles, of
whom jointly it is said, They were filled with the holy Ghost, as the same is
affirmed particularly of Peter and Paul, such also as were sundry ministers and
believers in that first Church; for example, Steph'n and others with him in
Jerusalem, Barnabas, etc.) but of ordinary Christians. Does not the Apostle
give this honorable testimony of the ancient Romans, Romans 15.14.
that he was persuaded they were full of goodness, filled with all knowledge?
Of the Corinthians and Ephesians, that they were enriched with all knowledge,
utterance, wisdom, prudemce? Now that which God has promised, and the Saints
have received from him, why should not the godly still desire and hope to
obtain? If in any thing this point contradicts other Scriptures, and the
places mentioned in the former Doctrine; I answer, fullness is either absolute,
such a perfection as admits no defect, this is reserved for the life to come;
or comparative, such a measure or degree of grace, as sits and falls into
a grown Christian, is answerable to the age of a Father in Christ, which in
respect of the weak beginning of young Christians, may be termed fullness: this
is that we affirm may be found and enjoyed here on earth: which thing the Apostle
also plainly teaches; for in the very same place where he denies himself to be
perfect, he calls himself and those believers in Philippi, that were of good
standing and growth in Christianity, perfect, which sentences seemingly contrary,
are to be reconciled by the forenamed distinction.

Secondly, Christ, and so ascertained of Christ's dwelling in him, the nearer he
draws to heaven, and the life of Angels, has more certain testimonies and
pledges of his salvation, and lastly, the less power shall any evil, which can
befall him, have, to disquiet his course, damp his joy, disturb his inward
peace, or remove him from his stedfastness.

Thirdly, Paul's doxologies. Psalm. 63.5. Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
When the soul is satisfied as with marrow and fatness, the mouth will praise
God with joyful lips: if the heart be filled with the Spirit, the mouth will be
filled with Psalms and spiritual songs of hearty thankfulness. Secondly, in
works of obedience: 1. Active; As abundance of spirits in the body, makes one
more light and lively: so abundance of grace in the heart makes a Christian go
about Gods business more nimbly, strongly, with more cheerfulness and largeness
of heart, more ready to do the good will of God, more fruitful and abundant in
all good actions. 2. Passive: As he that is well lined with meat and drink,
will best endure winter blasts, and as the body, or any part of it, the fatter
it is, the less it is pierced with pinching cold, (whence it is, that in
greatest frosts, our eyes never feel cold, because the fatness of the white
keeps them warm:) so the richer any one is in grace, he will bear afflictions
the more equally, rejoice in tribulations more sweetly, and like the Elephant,
walk most steadily under the greatest load.

Lastly, times further than these excel the mire in the streets. Is not a large
portion of such riches worthy to be desired?

This reproves three sorts; their corn and wine increased, and God abundantly
bringing into their hands, even more than heart can wish, to have their bellies
filled with his hid treasure, their garners full, affording all manner of
store, their bags full of gold and silver, their hearts of food and gladness,
that they may be able to say to their souls, with the rich man in the Gospel,
Soul, thou have much good laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink,
and be merry; these are the things which the men of this generation admire,
this is the only happiness their Souls long to find. As for the gifts of the
Spirit, the riches and ornaments of the Soul, which make man an Angel among
men, abide with him in death, and go with him into heaven, they are so far
from desiring to be filled with them, that they care not for tasting or being
acquainted with them; yea, scarcely once think of them, except when they are
forced in hearing a Sermon. Alas silly-wood-cocks, whose whole life is in
sucking the ground! when you see a company of little children, busy as Bees in
making houses, and banquets, and yet, if a shower fall, or hunger pinch, take
themselves to their heels, and seek refuge, or relief elsewhere, do you not
laugh at their folly? Should you send your servant to buy in a market town,
spices, drugs, wines, and such things of special price and use, and he come
again laden with clay, or peble-stones; or should you see a Merchant undertake
a long, painful, perilous, ^^stly voyage into the remotest parts of the world,
and return at length fraught with sand, vile earth, or such baggage, as either
he could not carry out of the ship with him, or if he did, would not profit
him; would ye not stand amazed at the man's madness? I tell you before hand the
terrors of death shall open your eyes to see, and confess the case to be your
own: that is, that all the study, thought, care of your whole life, has been
consumed in heaping up goods, which can do you no good in the day of wrath: or
else, if your hearts in death be turned into a stone, like Nabals, (which is
much to be feared) you shall curse your selves in the dark dungeon of hell, and
say, Fie upon us idiots, more brutish than the beasts of the field, we never
lived the life of men, or reasonable creatures before God, because in so many
years we never began to mind, or do, what we were born to mind and do above all
things. In the mean time, I wish you to consider, that he cannot be Gods child,
who contents himself with Gods basest blessings. Did you see one in a
Gentleman's kitchen, seeding upon scraps, or the coursest food in the house, you
would not doubt to conclude, this is none of the children, but some scullion,
or one that belongs not to the family: apply this to your selves, and you shall
find just cause to fear, that you are but vessels of dishonor, slaves, that
must not abide in the house for ever.

2. Profane Protestants are here to be taxed, Ezekiel. 9.9.
who are (or strive to be) full of wickedness, and perverseness, like
Jerusalem; of mischief, and subtilty, Act. 13.10. Matthew. 23.28. Romans 1.29. Act.
13.45, etc.
like Elimas; of hypocrisy, and iniquity, as the Pharisees, af all
unrighteousness, as the Gentiles; of envy and wrath, as the unbelieving Jews;
have mouths full of cursing and deceit, eyes of adultery, tongues of deadly
poison, who (in a word) take the high way to be filled with the spirit of
Satan. As Abner said to Joab, so I to these, Know you not, that it will be
bitterness in the latter end? When for every sugared morsel of sin, which now
goes down so pleasantly, you shall receive a double portion of the sour sauce
of vengeance? The more you fill your selves with the liquor of hell, the more
will the Lord fill you with the dregs of the wine of his indignation, and dash
you like bottles one against another: the more pains you take to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh, the more you fill up the measure of your sins; and take
heed, lest God accomplish his fury, and fulfill the good pleasure of his justice
in your condemnation.

3. Many of better proficiency are to be censured, who finding in themselves
some seeds and elementary rudiments of godliness, let fall the fails of their
desires, and sit down well contented. I wish this Corinthian and Laodicean-like
fullness, be not a sickness too common among Christians; but I fear too many,
not of the worst sort of our hearers, if once they have but thus far profited,
in Christianity, that they can thank God they are much reformed in mind and
life, or persuaded of the truth of their conversion, think themselves rich
enough, they have gotten grace sufficient to save their souls, and now they are
well-satisfied, they will not trouble themselves to labor for any more. This
is to manifest our own consciences being witnesses; we have no questions, we
feel no poverty of spirit, we complain of no wants, our secret sighs, and
fervent longings for grace, are dried up and withered, the temper of our
spirits is cold and dead, as the winter season, our affections are grown flat,
and frozen, we please our selves in a conceit or self-sufficiency, and that
more holiness, than we have already attained, is superfluous. But brethren, if
we be so easily, so quickly satisfied, and glutted with Gods dainties (which
make true believers more hungry) I testify unto you, we may justly fear, that
we never rightly tasted, at least never kindly digested them, but have all this
while dreamed, and been deluded by Satan, and consequently, doubt of our
conversion. Assure your selves, when God shall call us to an account (such a
time will come, and how soon we know not) we shall have small comfort in
looking back, and recounting, what a long rich spiritual seed-time, and
harvest, we have enjoyed, wherein manifold means, and opportunities of getting
a fair stock of grace, have been plentifully afforded, and we in the mean time,
like loitering sons of shame, dallying with Gods bounty, and neglecting to
redeem the season, have gathered little.

Secondly, with suitable endeauours, we aim not at a great measure. Alas, that
we should be so poor, and have a father so able, so willing to enrich us. I
beseech you therefore, if there he any consolation in Christ; if ever you have
tasted how good the Lord is, stick not in beginnings, call upon your selves to
strive and endeavor after the highest degree of mortification, and power to
resist, and conquer remnants of corruptions, the highest degree of all positive
graces, knowledge, faith, love, joy, fear, etc. the highest degree of cheerful
and constant obedience, of lively and fruitful walking before the Lord, the
highest degree of peace and comfort, of strength, stedfastness, boldness. The
means in which we must strive, are 1. A constant attending upon public
ordinances (especially the Word preached, and the Lords Supper) which God has
sanctified for perfecting the Saints, and by which he is wont more and more to
convey his graces into the souls of those, who use them with pure and prepared
hearts. 2. Feeding much upon Christ by application of: he promises, drawing and
keeping near him in our spirits, taking all occasions of looking up, and
speaking to him, often bringing, and baring your hearts before him, as
husbandmen do the roots of their trees before the Sun: the reason is, because
he is not only the fountain of goodness, who makes the spirits of those that
delight in approaching to him, and walking with him, watered gardens: but also,
that Sun of righteousness, whose sweet and quickening heat, does enliven,
regenerate, renew, impregnate with spiritual graces and fruits, the invisible
world of believing souls, and advance the same to persection spiritually, as
this visible Sun does creatures in this visible world naturally: the more
communion any one has with this fountain, this Sun, the more grace he shall be
sure to have. 3. Plying God with fervent prayers, springing from spiritual
hunger, and deep sense of our own beggary, entreating him by the wind of his
Spirit, To blow upon the garden of our hearts, that the spices thereof may flow
forth. 4. Improving, Song 4.16.
and blowing up grace by spiritual exercises of reading, finging, meditation,
conference, private communication of gifts. 5. Evacuation, purging out by
renewed repentance, such matter as might cause an oppilation of those passages,
in which grace should flow unto us; for Christ, to whom we are joined as
members (if we be believers) is an head full of the holy Ghost, full of grace
and truth; if we defire to receive abundantly of his fullness, we must take
heed, the nerve of faith, and pipes of Gods ordinances be not stopped, or made
ineffectual in us by our worldliness, deadness of spirit, lusts, or some known
corruption too indulgently handled. 6. Laying our hearts low before the Lord,
in humiliation and humility. For the low valleys, because they receive most dew
and rain into their bosoms, are most fruitful: so the humble heart, the broken
spirit, is of all others a subject most capable of the spirit, and shall be
most plentifully watered with the showers of grace, because the God of all
grace and goodness has promised to dwell in such a spirit.

Do you now see the way? Walk in it, that you may find rest to your souls. Do
you know these things? Blessed are you if you do them. And therefore, still
suffer the word of exhortation, in the use of these means, propound this mark
to your selves, To be filled with the holy Ghost, with wisdom and
understanding, with all riches of full assurance, with all might, patience, and
long sufferance, with joy, and peace in believing, to be full of good works, of
mercy, and good fruits, of thankfulness, and Gods praises all the day. Oh spare
no pains for storing up abundance of grace, as David said of his children the
fruit of the womb, happy is the man that has his quiver full of them: so may I
much more truly say of the fruits of the spirit, happy is the man that has his
heart full of this treasure: here only covetousness, yea violence is lawful,
and holy. Say not within your selves, this is an hard, doctrine, and
impossiose. What? we cannot be perfect here; such thoughts are prompted by
Satan, to make you lazy, and rob you of your crown. The Apostle Paul was not
ignorant of this, yet He forgot the things that were behind, and stretched
himself unto the things before, yea labored, if it were possible, to attain to
the resurrection of the dead. So that, though we cannot reach an entire and
complete perfection, yet we may, and must grow still more and more perfect; and
though our seize shall never in this life overtake, and equal our
desires; yet as he that shoots at the noon-Sun, though he be sure he shall
never hit the mark, is sure to shoot higher than he that aims at a bush: so if
we desire, and aim at the highest pitch of grace, we shall be sure to outstrip
our fellows, and attain such a measure, as shall make our profession, both
comfortable to our own souls, exemplary to our brethren, and glorious in the
eyes of strangers.

And thus much touching this branch of Paul's prayer: for though I perceive
there is one point more couched in it, which have not been handled; yet for
brevity, I will refer, and reserve it, to be wrapped up (as well it may) in the
conclusion of the next member, which now remains to be opened; wherein a
second thing is craved by the Apostle, as a necessary, and more special means
of making them worthy their calling.

The words are [and the work of faith with power] where confider 1. The
blessing asked, which is, fulfilling the work of faith. By work of faith, may
either be meant the exercise, operations, fruits of faith; faith, stirring,
acting, laboring, producing such works as are proper to her: or faith, as it
is Gods work in man, the grace, or habit of faith, wrought by God in our
hearts. I take this latter sense; the difference is not great, and this
includes the other.

2. The efficient cause of it, Gods power: For so I understand those last words
[with power] that is, by his own Almighty power, joining them to the word
[fulfil] rather than to [faith] which works powerfully in believers. The
meaning then is, as if the Apostle had said; But above all other graces, we
make suit unto God for the perfecting of that blessed and singular work of
faith, which his grace has begun in you, and that by the strength of his own
right hand, who is omnipotent, and all-sufficient.

The instructions to be gathered from these words follow, whereof the first is
this:

The best faith has wants. received the word with much assurance, that their
faith to Godward was spread abroad in other places. In this very Chapter, he
has given thanks to God; that their faith grew exceedingly: yet here he tells
us, they have need to be prayed for, that God would perfect their faith. A
cloud of witnesses does further confirm it. Abraham's faith did limp, and halt a
little, when he hearkened to the counsel of Sarah, in going in to Hagar, for he
consented to the use of unlawful means, for bringing about Gods purpose:
likewise when through fear, he sained Sarah to be his fister: weakness appeared
in Sarahs says, when she laughed at the promise of a son: in Jacobs, when
tidings of Esaus coming did so affright, and distress him, though he had a
promise of Gods presence and protection in that journey: in David's, when in his
haste and fear he said, I am cast out of thy sight, all men are liars, when he
fained himself mad: in Peter's, when being afraid of his skin, in the high
Priests hall, he denied his Master.

And no marvel, for first, if knowledge be imperfect in all Christians,
confidence cannot be perfect in any: How can the heart desire, or cleave unto
this, or that, further than the mind apprehends it as true and good? I can. not
rest upon a man, believing he will do this or that for me, further than I know
him. The measure of faith in the will, depends upon, and sollows the measure of
light in the understanding, (I mean in respect of latitude, not intension, or
in intrinsecal vigor; for otherwise I know, there may be great faith, where
there is but small knowledge, as in many Martyrs,) A man may know more than he
believes (so do many wicked men in the Church) but he cannot believe more than
he knows. Now its certain, that we know but in part; for neither do we
apprehend the whole object of knowledge, that is, the whole body of divine
truth, (my meaning is, we know not all things to be known, we are still
ignorant of many things) neither do we see those things which now we know, so
fully, clearly, distinctly, as we should, and shall in the life to come. If
therefore we know but imperfectly, we must needs trust imperfectly. Experience
in our selves, and other Christians, may partly teach us the necessity of this
consequence. Do we not perceive this to be (or have been) one special cause of
the failing of our faith, that either we know not this, or that promise, or
were not sufficiently acquainted with the saithfulness, and goodness of the
promiser, or did not so evidently behold the good things, God had begun in us,
as from them we could conclude our selves to be heirs of the promise?

Secondly, there are many enemies, which oppugn a Christians faith: from
without, Satan by his temptations, sometimes more subtle, sometimes more
violent: in his own bosom, carnal wisdom, and reason, natural slowness, or
untowardness of heart, to that which is good, inordinate affections and
passions (for grace does not wholly expel, and root out these Canaanites,
though it brings, and keeps them under the yoke of the spirit.) Now these
sometimes dim the light, of faith, by raising mists, and fogs of objections,
and doubts, sometimes cast her into a slumber, sometimes, as it were, by a
sudden vehement blow astonish her, and in a word, by many means hinder the
efficacy, and working of faith. No marvel therefore, if sometimes the best
faith stagger and waver.

This doctrine confuteth, 1. The Papists, who to the end they may with more
probability maintain, and persuade the possibility of fulfilling the Law in
this life, teach, that faith and charity are perfect in this life. 2. Some in
our Church at home, who hold, that a man never doubts, after he is a true
believer. It seems these men think faith to be like certain little bones in
man's head, of which the Doctors of nature write, that they are of the same
bigness in an old man, and in a child. 3. Our common people, and silly
ignorants, who brag their belief is so strong, as nothing can shake it, no
company can hurt, no Devil prevail against them, they never sound in themselves
any want or weakness of faith, they never distrusted God in all their lives,
they can believe as sted fastly as they lift. From their own words, their
faith is evinced, to be nothing but an idle sancy; for the child of God seels
such craziness in his faith, as vvrings from him many deep sighs, bitter cries,
dolorous complaints, before his heavenly father who sees in secret. He, who
never groaned under sense and conscience of great infidelity, is yet in the
state of infidelity, and death, and has no more true faith than the Devil.

But is it possible (may some say) that any man should be so deceived and
mistaken,

I answer, selves, nor what is in them, as one bodily blind, or going into a
dark night without a candle into a room, cannot discern what filth and baggage
is in it. 3. All unconverted are in a deep and deadly sleep, (for repentance is
called awaking;) therefore we need not think it strange or impossible, they
should dream of great riches, when they have nothing; of eating and drinking,
while their souls are empty. 4. The Devil will do his best to keep such from
doubting, for fear of losing them: for well he knows, that, to doubt one has
gone wrong, is a step to returning, and to fear ones heart is faithless and
graceless, a step to believing.

Secondly, Let the child of God take heed of numbering himself among
unbelievers, and concluding that he is void of faith, because sometimes he
finds his heart trembling, and shaken with doubtings and fears. Indeed Satan
will encounter a Christian with this sophistry; Thou have experience o^ much
wavering, thou art not steadfast and rooted in faith therefore thou art not
found in the faith: but we must answer the tempter boldly, If this reason be
good, all the generation of the just must be condemned, none of which were
exempted, and privileged from knovving weaknesses, and failings of faith.

If it be objected, Peter, that his faith should not fail:

I answer; Peter's did (for his denial proceeded from such a cause, as strength
or lively powerful vvorking of faith expels, viz. predominancy of carnal
fear) neither did our Lord Jesus pray that his elect might be preserved from it.

If it be objected again, Abraham believed without staggering,

I answer; 1. True, Isaac, but it does not hence follow, that he never at any
time staggered. 2. This example teaches what a strong faith ordinarily can do,
and what every Christian should labor to do, but not, that every one, who
reaches not Abraham's measure, is an hypocrite. I speak this for the comfort of
true believers, not to nuzzle up any in their doubts; if any man shall hence
take occasion to please himself in a floating uncertainty, hanging between hope
and fear, and neglecting to try (or labor for more strength of) faith, because
he hears the best faith has weaknesses, he perverts and wrests the word of God
to his own destruction.

But (may some man say) seeing a good Christian may be troubled,

Take heed of this deceit. that never was believer. The difference between them
is this:

First, himself, his own enemy. But the doubts of a sound Christian come
principally from Satan, (yet not without the help of natural ignorance and
infidelity, by means whereof he has great advantage to work) whose policy is,
when he cannot keep the child of God from grace, then by aggravating his sin
and unworthiness, by extenuating, or hiding from his eyes the good things God
has given him, to hold, and deter him from beleiving, to make him (if it were
possible) wholly to cast away his hope, or else to languish in an heavy
uncomfortableness, greatly displeasing, and dishonorable to God. But how may
one know that his doubts are from Satan? 1. If after a diligent, privy search
in the closet of his soul, he finds such signs of faith, as certainly declare
its there present, though the comfort of it be not presently felt and
discerned; as namely, a turning of the stream, and bent of the thoughts and
affections after heavenly things, an ingenuous and lovely melting of the heart
into sorrow, for offending to the Lord, strong desires of honoring and
pleasing God, with resolutions of cleaving to (and following) him, though he
should never receive comfort from him, an hearty hatred of (joined with a
serious strife against) secret hypocrisy, and carnal ends in welldoing, and
the like. 2. If he feel, that the spirit in the ministry of the Word fights
against his doubts, sweetly persuades and draws him to believe, comfort and
rejoices his heart, not beatting and battering down his confidence, (as
ordinarily it does the hypocrites) but bettering and strengthening it: for
hereby it appears, that his doubts are the enemies of Gods Word and Spirit, and
therefore not the echo of the word, nor the just verdict of conscience
speaking from the word, but the voice of Satan.

Secondly, sins, they are very burdensome to him, chiefly because they rob God
of his glory, and make him less cheerful in rendering unto the Lord praises, and
other obedience. But the hypocrites doubts trouble him, and he wishes to be
rid of them, only because they are attended with inward disquietness, terrors,
fears of the Lords judgments, not because they are sins against God: whereof
this is a sufficient proof, that if he enjoy a kind of peace, and persuasion
that he is the Child of God, though his evil heart, full of infidelity,
secretly deny or call into question an hundred things in divinity, one after
another, he relents not, he is not troubled; tush, these are but flitting
motions, nor worthy check or controlement.

Thirdly, and constantly to go forward, in resisting and subduing them, in
seeking and lamenting after Christ, and never to sit down, till God have
brought his heart into the harbor of a stablished assurance, till he see,
feel, and (as it were) handle eternal life in himself, till he know Christ and
all the treasures of grace and glory in Christ, as undoubtedly to be his own as
his apparel, money, house, lands, till the Holy Ghost have signed, sealed and
delivered the heavenly inheritance in the Court of conscience: in a word, till
he have gotten such a faith, as can glory in God, insult over Hell, Death,
Devil, Sin, the Curse of the Law, and outwrestle all difficulties: but the
unsound Christian, either builds himself a Castle of imaginary assurance upon
the sand of false grounds, or lies under his doubts irrecoverably, giving over
seeking before he receive a sound, certain and satisfactory answer from the
Lord, either out of sloth or despair of obtaining, or because he has learned
the strongest faith is subject to some faintings, and therefore judges it
needless to strive any longer, or labor for more faith, seeing that which he
has will serve his turn, and its no otherwise with him than it is with a true
Christian.

Thirdly, We must hence be admonished, not to disdain or condemn such
Christians as sometimes bewray some feebleness of faith, in word or work. Thou
see or hear thy brother is impatient in affliction, fears poverty, shrinks
at the approach of persecution or death, is discouraged by reproaches and
slanders, not so zealous and valiant in maintaining Gods glory and cause, as it
were to be wished, for fear of the wrath of Man, omits some necessary good,
defiles himself with the doing of some evil: do not now think or say, such a
one is a faithless temporizer; take heed of such judgment, lest thou be judged:
seeing the truly faithful have done as much, thou shall do well to be sparing
in thy censures, till thou can show a perfect faith.

Fourthly, etc. Absurd, unreasonable men, do you expect they should be
perfectly holy, when they are but imperfectly faithful? If one of your children
have a slow, or unseemly pace, by reason of lameness, or debility in some
member, you think he is rather to be pitied than upbraided. If you will not
learn to judge mercifully of the godly when they fall, and to impute their
slips, rather to the imperfection of their condition, than the hypocrisy of
their hearts, and naughtiness of their disposition, you shall but prove your
selves to be haters of your brethren, and he that hates his brother is a
murderer, 1 John 3.15.
and no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.

Fifthly, hence we are taught,

Lastly, it follows hence, the gift of Faith dwelling in the Heart, nor the act
of believing, (as the Novellers teach) but the thing holden and possessed by
believing, which is our Righteousness. For that thing, by which we are in
proper sense, absolutely, and (as I may say) formally justified, and presented
spotless before God, must be perfect, yea expiate infinite guiltiness, answer
the Justice of God: but this faith cannot do, because it is imperfect, as we
see.

The second Instruction or Conclusion to be drawn out of these words, is,

Christians must desire the accomplishment and perfection of Faith above all
other Graces.

First, goodness, all privileges, all works of man, seeks righteousness and
life only from Gods grace in Christ: when a poor sinner sees himself a
condemned rebel and traitor, feels nothing in himself but darkness;
unworthiness, wrath, and death, has nothing to bring to God but shame and
misery; Faith leads him to the Throne of Grace, and makes him bold to beg, and
expect pardon in Christ's blood, for no other cause, but because God is
gracious; yea, when his many, mighty, ugly sins discourage and terrify him, to
cleave still to the free and everlasting goodness of God, acknowledging the
Bords mercies infinitely to surpass his iniquities. Thus Faith gives the whole
praise of man's salvation to the grace of God. 2. Faith believes God upon his
bare word; if God have revealed or promised this or that, though all the world
say it cannot be, though reason cannot comprehend how, or why it should be,
though many reasons appear why it should not be believed, none at all why it
should, but this, that God has spoken, faith will still all contrary surmises,
and subscribe to Gods testimony, as more stable, and steadfast, than the
foundation of the earth. Thus faith highly honors Gods truth. 3. Faith
proclaims God to be able to effect whatsoever he has promised, and believes,
that though a thousand difficulties stand in the way, the overcoming of which,
flesh and blood judges, not only a thing improbable, but impossible, it is as
sure as if it were done already. Romans 4.20, 21.
Thus it gives glory to the power of God. 4. Faith causes a man denying and
renouncing his own judgment, wisdom, will, as foolishness, to bless God, as
well when he denies, or takes away, as when he gives; as well for the worst as
the best; and to rest persuaded, that the worst estate is the best for him;
when God is the Author of it, that poverty is better than abundance; when God
will have him poor, restraint than liberty; when God will have him restrained,
etc. that it is greatest gain; to lose all things for Christ, that God loves in
smiting, heals by wounding, exalts by humbling, through the gates of death
brings unto life. Thus faith extols the wisdom of God. 5. Faith makes man
justify God in all his decrees, judgments, dealings, subscribe to the equity
of them all, even when he conceives not of them, adore the unsearchableness of
them, reverently submit unto them, yea, when they thwart his desires,
pronouncing, approving all his ways to be pure, and righteous, when he neither
sees, nor asks any reason thereof, but Gods will. Is not this a great
honor, which faith gives to Gods righteousness? 6. It beholds him that is
invisible, every where present, persuaded that he sees and knows all things,
and so glorifieth him in respect of his omnipresence. In a word, (that I be not
too long in multiplying particulars) Faith (if I may so speak) gives unto God
his whole Divinity, and of all graces most sanctifies his Name, by
acknowledging and confirming, as it were, by seal, all those excellent
properties, and perfections, which the Scripture ascribes to him. Indeed other
graces also, as love, fear, joy, and the rest, do honor God, (nor do I mean to
rob them of their due praises) but neither primarily, (for the cause and
foundation of all that honor is in faith) nor yet in such ample and full
manner as faith. Seeing then, nothing is so glorious to God as Faith, and
consequently, the more faith any man has, the more he glorifies God; does it
not stand every Christian in hand, above all graces to labor for perfection of
Faith?

Secondly, and sanctifies; because 1. Being a gift of an holy and heavenly
nature, descending from above, it will oppose and fight against corruption, as
light expels darkness, heat cold, and antidote poison. 2. Laying hold on
Christ, it draws, and deriveth from him the Fountain, Virtue, and Power,
whereby corruption is mastered, and mortified, as a leaden pipe brings water
from the spring, wherein vessels are washed and cleansed. 3. Faith is the
mother and root of all other holy graces in a Christian, and therefore as faith
increases, the rest will increase; the more perfect that Faith grows, the
nearer the perfection is the whole cluster of heavenly gifts in the children of
God; the more a man knows and believes the love of God to him, the more
fervently he will love God, the more reverently he will fear him, burn with
zeal of his glory, patiently hope, earnestly desire to be with him in heaven,
and so of the rest. 3. Faith strengthens, 1. To obey God in leading an holy
life, in performing all duties, and doing all the good works he requires of
his people, so as they may please him in all things. 2. To fight against, and
foil all spiritual enmity: faith makes a poor soul able to resist the Devil, a
spirit of exceeding great power, to stand fast, when he is buffeted by Satan's
suggestions, which Adam in innocence could not do, and to overcome whatsoever
is evil in the world: faith either wards off the blows, or so heals the wounds
received in this battle, that the soul becomes more sound and healthful than
before; the Apostle therefore to the Ephesians, arming, and training the
spiritual soldier, bids him, Above all, take the shield of faith: Hence it is,
that this grace is of all others most assaulted by the Prince of darkness. 3.
To persevere and continue in the way of salvation to the end, because it does
seat, and keep believers in the impregnable fort of Gods faithfulness, and
tower of his Almighty power, wherein the gates of hell cannot prevail against
them. In a word, what is said of Sampsons locks, may be said of faith, a
Christians strength lies in it, yet not simply, and for it self, but because it
lays hold upon Christ, the rock of Israel, who strengthens his Members to do
all things.

Secondly, for natural life. 1. Faith procures temporal good things. For God,
who is faithful, has promised to them that fear him, and will subject
themselves to his government, following him wholly, like Caleb, even outward
and temporal benefits, so far as they may be good for them, and not prejudicial
to their spiritual prosperity, or soul-thriving: now a Christian by believing
and suing to God in prayer of faith, obtains them, and so finds relief and
supply of temporal wants. 2. Faith makes evils tolerable, sweeteneth crosses,
enables to endure afflictions, by assuring the believer, that in them God
offers himself as a Father, will moderate the stroke, minister sufficient
strength, give an happy issue, turn them to his good, by setting before his
eyes such a Crown, such a weight of Glory, with which the light and momentany
sufferings of this life, are not worthy to be compared. Now (to knit up this
reason) if there be such necessity and use of Faith for Justification,
Sanctification, corroboration in holy obedience, and in the spiritual warfare;
sustentation and consolation in afflictions, and consequently, the greater
faith, the more peace, holiness, strength, comfort in afflictions; who sees
not, how needful it is, that every Christian do chiefly, and above all things,
desire the accomplishment of says.

This discovers, Parts, as the Heart and Liver, or look well to the branches of
a Plant, and neglect the root. Assure your selves. the hand of Satan is in this
matter, who like a most subtle enemy, when he cannot keep you, now quickened
with the life of God, from seeking grace, and working that which is good,
labors that you may seek and work preposterously (and so without success or
comfort) doing any thing rather than that which chiefly, and above all things
should be done.

Wherefore Secondly, or dead in afflictions, so oppressed, sometimes with
fears, or fruitless pensiveness, so burthned, or distracted with want of this
or that earthly blessing, so weak in love to God, in resisting our lusts, in
holy duties? Why is there not (as indeed there should) such a light of heavenly
joy and sanctity in our lives, as might make the men of the world stand
wondering at the glory of Christianity? is it not want of this great faith, this
strong faith the Scripture commends? Let us trace our own hearts, and search
the matter impartially, and we shall find it to be so. We all desire strong
bodies, strong houses, firm evidences, and Writings for money or land, and
shall we content our selves with a weak and wavering faith, which will be dashed
out of countenance with every doubt; not labor for that steadfast and grounded
assurance, which will minister strong consolation? Its a shame for us to be
babes in faith, who have so long enjoyed the means of faith. We are now nearer
our salvation, than when we first believed, and therefore should lay faster
hold upon eternal life. Little do we know what need we shall have of the
strongest says before we die. Suppose we should be freed from outward trials,
the Devil will sift and winnow us, and when that time comes, the best of us
shall find all the faith we have gotten, little enough. Besides, oh the benefit
of a manly and grown faith! Its the crown and glory of a Christianity before
Men and Angels, it brings a man to know and enjoy a Heaven upon earth, works
for him wonderful things, and incredible to reason; fills the heart with such
triumphant and glorious joy in tribulations, as profane men in all their
wealth and prosperity never feel, nor can possibly attain, makes him conquer by
suffering. Would thou gladly be brokenhearted, humble, patient, heavenly
minded? Let faith have her perfect work, and thou shall be all these and more.
Gods yoke shall be sweet and easy to thee, thy corruptions, like David's
enemies, shall fall under thy feet, thou shall chase and put to flight armies
of temptations, and lead about the roaring Lion in Triumph, thou shall behold
God more near, and see him more clearly than many others; when thou art weak
thou shall be strong; when thou art poor, thou shall abound; in darkness thou
shall see light; and in the shadow of death, find life eternal. What could we
want, if we wanted not Faith? how happy might we be, if we were rich in Faith?
My exhortation therefore, and earnest suit unto all Gods people is, and shall
be, that they would not only strive to ferret insidelity out of their hearts,
and confirm Faith, but seek and reach after the most excellent and eminent
degree of Faith, a powerful and victorious Faith, carrying them far above the
World in all conditions, and labor by often chewing particular promises, and
meditation of their glorious hopes, by praying earnestly with the Apostles,
Lord increase our faith, by constant hanging upon the breasts of the Ministry,
coming to the word of faith with an eager appetite, receiving it with
application, by keeping in memory, and revolving the experience they have had
of Gods Faithfulness and Mercy, by fellowship with strong and experienced
Christians, exercising Faith in all occurrents, and such like holy means;
labor I sy, that the small grain of Faith, which God has sown in the soil of
their Souls, may grow up to a tall Tree, whose height reaches unto Heaven,
full of fair leaves nnd savoury Fruits, yielding shade and shelter to many.
Blessed is he that hears and keeps; for he provideth well for his Soul, he
shall sing, when others sorrow; stand, when others stagger or fall; the Lord
shall reveal to him the abundance of peace and truth. The Lord give us
understanding in all things, and persuade our hearts to the things which belong
to our peace.

Thirdly, I gather hence, Apostatical doctrine, the spirit of Paul, and the
spirit of Papists: for they depress the dignity of says, and extol charity and
the works of charity far above it. They teach, that the Scripture, when it has
to deal with men faithful and regenerate, calls not for faith any longer, but
urges good works: they teach, that true righteousness consists principally
in charity; that charity only is the form and Queen of virtues, (even of
faith, as if one should say, the form of justice is temperance, an habit
distinct from it; or motion the form of the spirits in our bodies; prosound
learning indeed, by some of their own men disliked:) they teach, that faith
does out only dispose us unto justification, make us meet to receive grace, and
obtain Christ's merits, but charity alone suffices it to justification, charity
will purge away sin, and deliver from the guilt of death eternal. Who can
endure to see the Daughter lift up above the Mother, to hear the hand honored
above the heart? But that such Divinity should come from Papists, we shall
think it less strange, if we do but remember two things.

1. That the Roman Synagogue is just such a Church, as a Carcass is a Man, and
therefore it was meet she should neglect that grace which is the spring, and
soul of all piety, justice, charity; What Is fitter for a dead Church,
maintaining a dead Christ, a dead Cross a dead Word, dead Sacraments, dead
Prayer, a dead Ministry, than a dead justice?

2. That the Popish Faith is nothing else, but an assent to all such things, as
the Church propounds out of the word, written or unwritten; which (themselves
being witnesses) many Catholics have, who are notorious Sinners, Murderers,
Fornicators, Thieves, Drunkards,; such a faith I am sure may be in the Devil:
and therefore good reason they should commend any thing before it.

If it be objected, that our Apostle expressly affirms love to be greater than
faith or hope.

I answer, his glorious Presence, and the society of the blessed Angels.

We come now to the last instruction, which is this:

The perfecting of faith and all other Gifts in the Elect,

The Power of God accomplisheth the Belief, as every other grace of the Godly.
I join together the general and special from both the clauses which might be
handled distinctly. Hence is that of the Apostle, To. 15.13.
The God of hope fill you with all peace in believing, that ye may abound in
hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1.3.
So elsewhere His divine power gives us all things pertaining to godliness.
The truth is, God himself must either do it by his own strong hand and mighty
arm, or it will never be done.

For First, from Gods efficacy; Man himself, though endued with faith, cannot
believe when and so much as he pleases, its not in his own power to rest so
firmly and steadfastly upon Gods promises as he desires; and therefore cannot
perfect his own faith. Alas, how should he? when he cannot make one hair white
or black, command one ounce of bodily health at his pleasure, or add one cubit
to his stature.

Secondly, him that is strongest, able to tread down Satan under our feet.

First, that much more the beginning, and first working of Faith, is from Gods
powerful efficacy or effectual power. For its a greater work to give, than to
conserve life; to kindle or produce fire where none was, than to keep it
burning when it is kindled. If that which is less, viz. the consummating of
faith, much more that which is greater, the begetting or infusing of faith must
be attributed to the power of God; which meets with the Arminians, teaching,
that God does not by his Almighty Power bring men to believe, but only allure,
persuade, excite, leaving it still in their power, whether they will believe or
no. But the Prophet Esaias makes the revelation of Gods Arm, to be the efficient
cause of the belief of the Gospel, and our Apostle ascribes the believing of
the Ephesians, to the same mighty power of God, by which he raised Christ Jesus
from the dead. It were well therefore, they would change their minds, or
correct their Bibles.

Secondly, who is strong in power, who created all these things, brings out
their host by number, and calls all by their names, by the greatness of his
might, who can do what he will, and hinder what he pleases, who never faints
nor is weary, has undertaken to finish their faith by that effectual working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. As soon shall God fail, as
the Faith of the Elect utterly fail: till the Almighty be overcome, they can
never perish.

Thirdly, David to cry out, My flesh and my heart fails me? let us cry unto
Jesus, the Author and Finisher of Faith, Heb. 12.2.
that he would strengthen us, and perfect that which he has wrought in us; Let
us look up unto him, Joel. 3.16. Ps. 68.35.
who is the strength of the children of Israel, who gives strength to his
people, power to them that are faint, and to them that have no might increases
strength, let us lay hold upon his strength, who is the God of all Power, the
rock of our hearts, and of our faith, the worker of all our works in us, and
for us, who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think,
according to the power that works in us, to him be glory for ever and ever,
Amen.

Fourthly, It seems to me,

1. Were it not harsh and absurd to say the glorified Saints have no confidence
in God?

2. No man can doubt that the spirits of just and perfect Men now in Heaven, do
believe and wait for the redemption of their bodies; therefore faith and sight
are not so opposed, as they cannot stand together

3. If there shall be a word in Heaven, then faith; but there shall be a word,
not this written or printed Bible, but the substance of that Doctrine which is
contained in the Bible, and consequently, all those Promises which speak of the
Eternity of that glorious Estate reserved for Believers in He aven, shall be
written in their hearts, So that if any ask, what use shall there be o^ Faith,
when now they enjoy the Lords promised Salvation. I Answer, they shall believe,
that God will perpetuat and continue those joys and pleasures, that blessed
condition to them for ever and ever.

4. I suppose this is sound Doctrine, (which has hitherto gone for current
among our Divines, unless in that late Controversy, whether faith or
repentance has precedence, it have received some affront.) Faith is the root,
foundation, original of holiness. Does the root wither when the tree and
branches flourish more than ever? 5. In the day of Judgment the Lord shall
pronounce all the sins of the righteous eternally forgiven, and the sentence of
absolution and remission shall be openly and fully declared and confirmed, as
Divines teach. Shall they nor believe what Christ speaks? 6. Why may we not
say, that as the godly in this world believe things past, as the creation, the
incarnation, death, resurection of Christ, so shall they in the life to come.
These arguments sway me to this opinion, as most probable, that Faith in God is
an eternal gift, abiding in the Heavens, the some Operations of it shall cease
in Heaven, whereof there shall be no number. The matter is not of such weight,
that I would contend with any man about it. Let the Prophet judge, and instruct
him better (if he orr) who in points of this nature suspecteth his own
judgment; as much as any other, and is more desirous to learn than to teach.
Lastly, from this instruction its easy to gather, that we must seek unto, and
rest upon God, as well for the finishing as beginning of our salvation. Should
the beginning be Gods work, the accomplishment ours, so wise an Apostle would
not have spent, nor by his own example taught us to spend so many prayers for
it. This is to be marked as meeting with the Papists: they will have God lay
the foundation of man's salvation by Predestination, redemption, free remission
of sins: but afterward they will not be much beholden to him: they can now
perfect the building themselves, for they can merit increase of justice and
eternal life, so that in effect they say to God, as a man sometimes to his
neighbor, when he would have this or that work done, do but set me in, and I
shall do well enough. But that doctrine which suffers us not with the Apostle
to pray while we live, Lord accomplish in us, weak and worthless Vessels, by
thine own power, the work of faith, and all the good pleasure of thy goodness,
is not from heaven but from men and the Devil. Hitherto we have unsolded the
special requests which the Apostle made unto God for the Thessalonians: There
now remains only the end why or for which he thus intercedeth with God, and
moves him for the forenamed blessings, and its double; 1. Principal,
respecting Christ. 2. Subordinate, respecting the Thessalonians themselves.

The former is set down in these words, [that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
may be glorified in you] that is, that Christ himself by this means may be
honored in you; and by you in this present world. As if he should say, I do
the rather beg these things for you, because they mainly tend to the promoting
of the glory of Christ among the sons of men, which thing I am sure your souls
earnestly wish and desire.

Observe from these words to instructions.

First, that the scope of Christians must be the glorifying of Christ. The
Apostle testifies of himself in another place, that he desired nothing more
than that Christ might be magnified in his frail body, Phil. 1.20.
whether by life or death; and professes, that he made this the only end of
his life, the mark at which he aimed in his whole Ministry, all his actions and
passions, to bring glory to Christ. For so I expound those words, for to me to
live is Christ, and generally, of all true believers he says elsewhere,
Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the
Lord. And good reason, For

First, by him all things were created: Col. 1.16.
do subsist, and are upholden by the word of his power, he gives unto every Mun
that comes into the World a reasonable soul, he quickens sanctifies the elect,
Feeds them with his own flesh and blood, 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Co. 5.17.
presents, stablisheth, enableth to every good word and work, holds them in
his hand, supports them by his grace, as the High Priest the ruins of Israel
on his shoulders: without him we have nothing, can do nothing, would return to
nothing. Therefore nothing is more meet than that Christians should wholly
addict themselves to his glory.

Secondly, Must not all Wives give honor to their Husbands? Is he not their
King, yea the King of glory? are not subjects bound to honor their King? Is he
not their Lord and Master? ought nor servants to count their masters worthy all
honor? Lastly, he is their dear Redeemer, who willingly disrobed and emptied
himself of his regal glory, and put on the homely mantle of humane flesh, that
he might ransom them with the price of his own blood? Therefore they owe
themselves wholly to him, and stand obliged to glorify him in soul and body,
whose they are both in soul and body. For to this end (says the Apostle)
Christ died for them, 1 Co. 6.20.
that they should not henceforth live to themselves- but to him that died for
them: Hence the living Creatures are brought in, saying with a loud voice,
worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive honor, glory and blessing.

Thirdly,

But alas, (their consciences being witnesses) is no more thought on or
remembered, than if Christ had never bin, of all other things this has never
troubled their heads. Well, if Christ had ever visited these men with the light
of life, and by his spirit sent joyful tidings of salvation to their spirits,
it would be otherwise with them. Never did man truly know Christ, and what
Christ has done for his soul, but was much taken up and transported in musing,
devising, defiring to glorify him. Be not deceived, if the Lords honor be a
stranger in your minds, memories, intentions, endeavors, you are in darkness
till this present, and cannot be assured to your comfort, that you have part in
the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. Secondly, do not many live as if they
had been made or born to the dishonor of Christ? As 1. our idolaters, who more
stupid than the old Egyptians, give the glory of Christ to creatures, to their
own works, to the works of the Painter, Carver, Baker. I fear these grand
thieves are long since past shame and grace too. Therefore the Lord Jesus
requires at their hands the restitution of that honor which most
sacrilegiously, contrary to his crown and dignity, they have robbed him of. 2.
Our profane swearers, who tear the glorious name of Christ, or toss his Titles
unreverently in their Mouths; these honor him, as the Jews did when they
spitted on him. 3. All contemners of Christ's ordinances and servants, who shall
one day find that whatsoever is done to things or persons bearing his Name,
Jesus Christ will take it and revenge it as done to himself. 4. All wicked
livers, whose ungodly works cause that worthy Name by which we are called, Jam.
2.7.
to be blasphemed in the world. We shall sometimes hear them detest and curse
both Turk and Pope, for persecuting it with the sword, when themselves (like
arrant hypocrites, in whom the love of Christ dwells not) tread it under foot
by their cursed and most abominable licentiousness.

Secondly, study in all things and by all means to glorify Christ Jesus. Let
his honor be dearer to us than all things. For this cause were we redeemed Is.
43.21.
, called, quickened, that we should show forth his praise, live to his glory.
Do not masters look their servants should be a credit to them? The Angels of
Heaven have no more noble employment than to serve and honor the Son of God.
The Father has committed to the Son the government of all things, That all men
might honor the Son, Joh. 5.23.
as they honor the Father. If any desire direction for the practice of this
most necessary lesson, know that we must glorify the Name of Christ, both
inwardly and outwarly. Inwardly in spirit and affection. 1. By stirring up and
cherishing in our minds honorable thoughts of Christ, an high esteem of him
and his excellency, of that incomparable goodness and power which he shows in
leading us to salvation. 2. By believing against hope and reason, trusting on
his grace, and casting our selves wholly upon him, in want of feeling, and when
all things seem to be against us. 3. By intending his honor in every thing,
making it the mark at which we shoot, and if we cannot be so happy, as at all
times to find, that this is the end which before every action first comes to
our minds, and sensibly moves our wills, yet must we strive to find in our
selves after the action, an high prizing, and earnest thirsting after his
glory, far above all our own good, temporal and eternal. 4, By grieving
heartily to see, or hear him dishonored by false worshippers, false teachers,
carnal Christians. 5. By often calling upon our hearts to admire and rejoice in
him, more than all other things. Outwardly, both in word and work. In word; 1.
By ascribing the whole glory of our salvation to him only. 2. Speaking of him,
and using all his Names and Titles with such reverence, as beseems so great a
Lord. 3. Continual praising him for his mercy and truth toward us, for the
things be has wrought, daily works, and will hereafter work for us, speaking
much good of him before others, telling them what a wise, powerful, bountiful
Lord we serve. 4. Confessing him boldly before the sons of Men, vindicating and
maintaining by our Apologies his cause and truth when they are opposed and
spoken against. In work and conversation; 1. By submitting our selves to the
direction of his word in all things, enterprizing nothing without leave or
warrant from him. 2. By a godly life and fruitfulness in a Christian course. 3.
By upholding and setting forward his Gospel to the utmost of his power. For the
Gospel is Christ's chariot, wherein he rides through the world, to conquer his
enemies, and gather his Church; if the Gospel run and prevail, his glory is
enlarged: if the Gospel be stopped, his glory is hindered. 4. By willing
undergoing any thing for his sake. These are the things which we must remember
and do, that Christ may be glorified in us; in the doing of which we shall not
be a little helped, by accustoming our selves every day, yea often in the day
to call our own hearts to account, and enquire, what glory has redounded to
Christ this day, this hour, from my thoughts, my speeches, my actions, that so
far as we find our selves barren and defective this way, we may take shame to
our selves, and turning our feet into the way of Gods testimonies, with renewed
care, and redoubled resolution, set upon this greatest and most honorable Work
of honoring the Lord.

Secondly, a good Christian desires the Lord may be glorified by others. A good
man is not content to honor God in his own person, but he heartily wishes,
and prays that others may do it as well as himself. So did David, Psa. 67.3,
4. and Paul, Ephesians, 3.21. For,

First, creatures; in regeneration he puts on the image of God, by which he is
inclined and enabled to will what God wills, to love what the Lord loves,
and in the same manner, (according to his measure) therefore he cannot but
desire the enlargement of his glory in the world, and the communication of that
grace to many, by which they may be effectually taught and moved to glorify
him.

Secondly, He loves the souls of men,

First, then this reproves two sorts; 1. Those that hinder and deter men from
glorifying God, such I mean, who discerning in others holy forwardness in
religion, love of godliness and godly persons, tenderness of conscience, care
to depart from evil, and shun the society of sinners, snub ad discourage them
by threatenings, reproaches, commandments, punishments. This is a fearful thing,
though men see it not; its manifest fighting against God, and playing the part
of Elymas, who is therefore called the child of the Devil, and an enemy to all
righteousness. Judge in your selves, can he be the child of God, who neither
gives him his due honor, nor suffers them that would? As we stand affected to
the glouy of God, and the means of it, so are we affected toward God himself.
He that cannot endure the light of piety in the life of his child, servant,
kinsman, neighbor, by which God is glorified, would banish God out of the
world, if it were in his power. He that destroys the Temple of God, 1 Co. 3.17.
him shall God destroy: he that quenches the fire of Gods grace in others,
shall burn in the fire nevar to be quenched. 2. Those that draw or thrust
others forward to such courses, as dishonor God, provoke and persuade them to
swearing, riot, drunkenness, wantonness, revenge, etc. for shame let not such
men any longer call themselves sons and servants of the living God. Should I
hear a man in secret conference with another, command or council him to set a
fire on his neighbors Corn Barn or Dwelling house, might I not safely
conclude, this is no friend, but a very dangerous and bitter enemy of his
neighbor? Is it not enough that by thy personal sins thou frettest, yea
breakest the very heart of God every hour, except also thou hire and procure
helpers, as if thou could not easily satisfy thy self in heaping injuries
upon him, and loading him with contumelies? Tell me vile hell-hound, do men
thus to their friends? Go now, and if thou have lost all forehead, deny thy
self to be the Lords enemy. I tell thee thou art a flat hater of the holy One
of Israel, or the Devil is none.

Secondly, may be made more zealous of his glory, show forth the virtues of
him, who has brought them out of darkness into his mavelous light? Answer
me, is it thus with thee? no doubt a portion of Paul's spirit rests upon thee.
But if the spiritual condition of others affect thee not, if thy spirit be not
stirred, when the Lord Jesus is crucified afresh by Oaths and blasphemies, his
Sabbaths polluted, his word despised, if thy heart tells thee thou carest but
little what become of Gods glory, how often or by whom he be wronged, so thy
self be not touched, what become of other men's souls, whether they sink or
swim, if these things wring no sighs, no prayers from thee in secret, though
thou have a name to live, thou art dead.

Thirdly, out of his sin, fall a fuming and exclaiming, what has he to do with
use, let him look to himself, he is more busy than needs, he shall not answer
for me, etc. But stay a little, as David said to Eliab, Is there not a cause?
Thy brother has received mercy from the Lord, and therefore cannot but show
mercy to thy soul: grace has kindled in his bosom a desire of thy good, forbid
him not to speak, when the Lord has bidden him. He knows that as God is by thy
sin dishonored, so by thy repentance he would be greatly honored, and that if
Christ have not glory now by thy conversion and obedience, he will get himself
glory in thy confusion. Hence it is that he calls upon thee to renounce the
works of the flesh. Can thou blame him? Is it not a brutish part to be angry
with him that would gladly have thy company to heaven? if thou stormest against
those, who wish thee in as happy a case as their own souls; what will thou do
to thine enemies?

This serves lastly for exhortation, multitude of subjects is a Kings glory)
at least restraining them from open profanation of his name. How do the
followers of noble Personages bestir themselves that their Lords may have
honorable respect in every place where they come? What child desires not to
see his father very wealthy? The Lord give us such minds and hearts toward our
heavenly father

The second end, respecting the Thessalonians follows, which is 1 propounded,
2 amplified from the cause of it, propounded thus [and ye in him] that is, and
ye thus living to his glory, may be glorified in and through the Lord Jesus.

Observe hence only one instruction, that,

They which glory in Christ, 8, 17, 2 Timothy 2.12. For first, God is a bountiful
rewarder of all diligent and faithful servants of his most beloved Son.
Secondly, the members must follow and be conformed to the head. Now Christ the
head of believers first glorified his father upon earth, and was afterward
glorified with that glory which he had with the father before the world.
Therefore the faithful shall go the same way, that is, after they have finished
their course of obedience, in doing and suffering to the glory of Christ, they
shall be received into the glory of Christ and the Father, Thirdly, in
glorifying the godly, Christ glorifieth himself. Relatives mutually give and
receive honor. The nobility, beauty, bravery, discretion of a wife is an
honor to the husband, and the glory of the spouse of Christ, shall fet forth
and illustrate the glory of Christ.

If any ask, what is this glory which the Lord bestows upon his Saints that
honor him.

I answer: Joseph had great glory in the Egyptian Court, Ge. 45.13.
Moses was very great in the sight of Pharoahs servants, and the people of
Egypt, David honorable in Saul's house, 1 Sa. 22.14
Mordecai in the Court of Ahasuerus. Est. 8.15.
More secret is when the wicked who openly despise, vilify, condemn the godly,
are forced inwardly to justify them, and to feel their own consciences telling
them, that they, or no people in the world are in an happy estate, and in the
way of life. Whence it is that sometimes we have known Mockers and professed
Enemies of Gods Servants ( Puritans Men call them now adays) in cold blood, or
in the evil day desire their prayer, wish to die their death, and commit to
their trust most important businesses. For the spirit of glory rests upon them,
which causes the face to shine, and imprints that Majesty in the countenance
or conversation, which makes their persons no less venerable and terrible to
those that hate them, than amiable to those that love them. Future is that
wherewith they shall be crowned in the life to come when every faithful person
shall be clothed in soul and body from top to toe, with such glory as shall
cause admiration in men and Angels, and dwell for ever with most glorious
company, in a most glorious Mansion, of which particulars I think it not fit to
treat largely in this place, it shall suffice briefly to have named them,
because I hasten to an end.

First, Then it follows hence, rule of contraries, that the end of all such as
either oppugn the glory of Christ, or wholly neglecting it, hunt and hawk
after the glory of the World, shall be shame and confusion. Think on this, ye
proud vainglorious men, who leave no stone unmoved, that you may magnify your
selves, whose only study and strife is to climb to the height of earthly
greatness, but if the name of Christ lie inglorious in the dust, will not wag a
tongue, stir a hand or foot to lift it up. Think on this ye persecutors of
Christ's truth, ways, sincere servants, ponder it betimes, and believe before
you feel. Though your excellency mount up to Heaven, and your fame reach unto
the ends of the Earth, though all mouths should bless you, all tongues extol
you to the skies, and all knees bow unto you, yet shall you perish like your
own dung, leave your names as a curse, which religious posterity shall abhor
and detest as the smoke of a dunghill, or stink of a carcass, and in the day of
the Lord, if not in this life, be brought to a shameful ruin, and clothed with
ignominy never to be removed.

Secondly, our credit with men for submitting to Christ's Laws? We shall recover
it with advantage, when Christ shall admit us to society in his own happiness,
to eat, to drink, and reign with him in his kingdom.

Lastly, Exalt him in your hearts, houses, dominions, and he shall promote you
to greatest dignity. Advance him by your Councils swords, Authority, and he
shall advance you, yea, make you an eternal excellency. Honor him in his
ordinances, ministers, members, and he shall make you high in name, in grace
and in honor. 1 Samuel 7.9.
The zeal of Gods house consumed David, and God made him a great name, like
unto the name of the greatest men of the earth. Do not think that pomp and
Bravery, Wit and Policy, Worldly wealth, preferment, and power of commanding
many, sumptuous buildings, stately tombs and monuments, much less cruelty and
tyranny, shall immortalize your names: no, no, its blessed conformity to Christ
in true spiritual purity, hearty subjection to his government, and downright
resolution for his cause, which shall embalm and emblemish your memorials, that
children unborn may admire the fragrancy and splendour of them, and at last set
upon your head an immarescible crown of glory. Be strong therefore and do it,
for if you despise and pollute the Name of the Lord Jesus, know for a certain,
that he will expose your names to contempt, and make your memory not. De^ 9.20.
If you transgress against the Lord, it shall not be for your honor: the seed
of evil doers shall never be renowned, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

The cause of this glory remains in the last words, [according to the grace
of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.] the meaning is, the which glory
comes and shall be bestowed upon you (O Thessalonians) and all other
believers, from the free favor and kindness of God, and that unspeakable love
of Christ the Mediator, which he showed in giving himself for us, that he might
bring us to the glory of the Father, and through whom all the effects of that
eternal grace of God are derived and conveyed unto us. Observe hence only this
instruction:

Heavenly glory is from Gods mere grace. Ye are saved by grace. Where good
pleasure signifies the mere loving kindness of God, as a Jesuit confesses
against himself, I suppose. Other places we shall see afterward. For,

First, Predestination to glory is merely from grace, (this a Papist will not
deny) therefore induction into glory is merely from grace. The consequence is
good. For first, no man can properly be said to be freely chosen to a place of
dignity, for which he pays sweetly (as we say) which he procures by his own
money. Election to life is not wholly of grace, if collation of life be not
wholly from grace. 2. The root is the cause of the several branches that grow
out of the stock, as well as of the stock it self. Grace is the root,
Predestination the stock, wherefore grace has no less a stroke in all
subsequent benefits, whereof glorification is one, than in predestination.

Secondly, Life eternal is an inheritance, following adoption, a child's
portion, yea such an inheritance, as is assigned by lot, like the several seats
of the Tribes of Israel in the land of Canaan, and therefore (as antiquity did
hence truly gather) comes not by humane acquisition, but Gods gracious
disposition and donation.

Thirdly, Whatsoever is procured for us by Christ, and given us for Christ, is
from grace. For that which is the cause of giving Christ, must needs be the
cause of giving all the riches of Christ, which cannot be separated from
himself, and Christ cannot make an imperfect purchase. But we attain life
eternal by and for Christ, he has procured it for his Members, he is given to
them to be their redemption as well as righteousness and sanctification, he is
our life, our hope, our hope of glory, through his righteousness we continue to
reign in life, by his blood we have liberty to enter into the holiest. Hence we
are said here and elsewhere to be saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
If the purchase be already made by one so sufficient, there remains nothing
for us to do, but thankfully to receive what the grace of God is ready to
bestow.

Fourthly, Holiness is the beginning of glory, they differ not in kind, but in
degree, holiness is glory inchoate, glory is holiness perfected. Now holiness
begun in regeneration, is from grace; if Gods grace give the entrance into
glory, why not the upshot and consummation?

It may be objected life eternal is from justice, because purchased by Christ,
therefore not grace.

The most common and received answer is, its from both in diverse respects: From
justice, if we look at Christ, because he paid dear for it: from grace in
respect of us, who bring nothing to our own salvation. But others say thus:
Christ's satisfaction, or the price of redemption which he paid, does not buy
life at the hand of justice, but remove the bar which justice had put into the
door of Gods storehouse, the which being taken away, grace has full power to
bestow salvation, which before she had not. They explain themselves thus: God
out of mere grace appointed some to life. These have defiled themselves with
sin; whereupon justice flepping sorth, puts a caution into the Court of Mercy,
I will and must be satisfied, before Man shall see life and happiness. Christ
comes and gives full contentment to justice, whereupon grace may now freely go
forward with her dole, and finish the work she had intended and begun. The
sum is; Christ's satisfactory obedience does not put falvation into the hands
of Justice to bestow, but enables grace to bestow it, justice not gain saying.
Let him that reads, choose whether of these answers he likes better, or
judge, if he be able, whether is the foundder.

This fights against that devilish doctrine of Papists, which says, heavenly
happiness is not to be expected as an inheritance, but won and procured by our
merits, and consequently comes not from grace, but from justice. So that if
Paul were alive again, the Italian Idol (I mean the great Bridge-maker of Rome,
the Porter of the bottomless pit) would compel him to change his style, or else
anathematize him, and make a bon-fire of his bones. Were there no other
difference betwixt us and the Romanists, this alone is a sufficient cause why
we should abhor them, and damn their Doctrine to the bottom of Hell, unless we
will be Traitors to the Grace of God.

But a Papist will object, it may be both from grace and justice: from grace,
because its the grace of Christ which gives power to merit: from justice,
because the Apostle says, The just Judge will in the last day give a crown of
Righteousness to all that love him.

I answer, 1. Their Goliath seems here to stagger; for tho sometimes he
maintain, that good works do merit eternal life by reason of an inherent
dignity, which he endeavors to prove by seven most silly sophismes, yet
elsewhere he says, We attribute not to works such merit, as has an answerable
wages due unto it from Justice: and again, setting aside the promise of God, he
is not bound so to accept our works, as to reward them. 2. That place of the
Apostle is not to be understood of Justice commutative, or distributive,
respecting man's merit, but of Gods verity of fidelity, who has promised this
Crown to all that strive lawfully, the faithful fulfilling of which promise is
a part of his Justice. For else the Apostle should manifestly contradict
himself, as who in other places has taught most plainly, that grace and debt,
grace and man's works (in respect of causation of salvation) can never stand
together, that eternal life is a free gift, not wages (they shall never be able
to make other construction of Paul's words) yea, such a gift of grace, as is not
any way from our selves (all the wit in the world shall never elude so
perspicuous a passage) 3. This will better appear, if we do briefly show, that
the Scriptures do not know, but overthrow the doctrine of man's merit, (for
themselves cannot deny, but its a good rule in expounding Scripture, to compare
one place with another.) First therefore, the faithful Israelites did not merit
the possession of the land of Canaan. Deuteronomy 9.4, 5, 6. Psalm. 44.3.
2. Its impossible man should merit by paying his debt: but whatsoever we do or
can do for God in this present world, its debt. 3. They that are but
instruments doing all things by a power received from, and continued by
another, cannot merit at his hands: but such are we. 4. Could we merit, we
might by our works make God a debtor to us: but this may not be granted. My
goodness extends not to thee, says David, which phrase is not to be
expounded by that, Thy vows are upon me, O God, that is, have made me obliged
and indebted to thee. 5. If the best man's best works, cannot endure the strict
judgment of the Lord, if the best men shall need mercy in the last day, there
is no place for merit. But the first is true. 6. We cannot deserve the least
morsel of bread, but must seek it at Gods hands like beggars. Lastly, if we
must not look to have our Prayers heard and granted, much less Heaven bestowed
upon us for our merits. But the first the Scripture teaches, Dan. 9.18.
and Papists confess, and therefore in one of their Missal-prayers, they
entreat God not to weigh their merits, but to pardon their offenses.

Secondly, Let us look and trust only to this grace of God in Christ, that we
may find salvation, renouncing and disclaiming all meriting causes of
salvation, in our selves and all creatures. Let us never think of challenging
any thing at Gods hand by desert, much less the Kingdom that cannot be shaken.
They that put confidence in their works, are like little children beginning to
go by themselves, who, that they may stand more firmly, take fast hold on their
own clothes, but alas they are never a whit further from falling: Nay well were
it, if it were no worse, but further they forsake their own mercy, and are
abolished from Christ. Indeed we must labor, strive, run, fight before we be
crowned: but when we have done all, still we are to acknowledge our selves
unprofitable servants, and confess that Heaven is Gods free gift, called a
reward, not because by our working it is deserved, but because by God
graciously promised. Hold this fast, that if Satan object thus unto thee on thy
deathbed, How can thou hope for any part in the Kingdom of God, who art
conscious to thy self of so great sins, so many haltings and imperfections,
thou may have what to answer: indeed (Satan) it were something thou say,
and might shake me terribly, if I did challenge or expect salvation for my own
works, my own preaching, praying, holiness, zeal, serving of God, etc. But I
abhor my self, my worthiness is none, my righteousness is spotted, my merit is
hell, I depend aad rely only on the Lords mercy, and Christ's purchase, this is
my rock and portion for ever. Notwithstanding, this hinders not, but if Satan
assault us another way, we may lawfully look at Gods image, graces and works in
us, as testimonies of our faith, seals of the truth of our calling, evidences
that Gods grace has not been ineffectual in us, and that we are of the number
of those to whom salvation is promised.

FINIS.

