GOD, THE KING, AND THE COUNTRY, United in the Justification of this Present
Revolution: Containing also Animadversions on Dr. William Sherlock's Book;
Entitled, The Case of Allegiance Due to Sovereign Powers, stated and resolved,
according to Scripture and Reason; and the Principles of the Church of England.
By TIM. WILSON, M. A. and Rector of Great Mongeham in Kent.

Licensed, Jan. 29. 1691.



LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

To the Sacred Majesty's of King William and Queen Mary, by the Grace of God
King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defenders of the
Faith, etc.
May it please Your Majesty's,
THE Divine Providence, that disposes all things to the emolument and
advantage of those that love God, has sent Your Majesty's to be our Saviors
and Deliverers from Popery and Slavery, to the Joy of all sound Protestants,
not wholly sunk and buried in prejudice. And we see the Prophecy of Isaiah
fulfilled, Kings shall be your Nursing Fathers, and Queens your Nursing
Mothers. But the Government of Moses, whom God sent into Egypt to deliver his
people, was not without some Murmurers, and men of a revolting spirit, who
looked back toward Egypt. Victorious David had that crafty Politician,
Achitophel, his Adversary; and Absalom, who stole away the hearts of this
people; and Sheba, a Mover of Sedition. The Reign of Solomon had some, who
complained of Grievances and Oppressions, though he honored God by building a
Magnificent Temple. The most excellent Deborah, though she had some that
jeoparded their lives unto death with her, yet she had others, who for their
Divisions caused great thoughts of heart. It is my affection to the Protestant
Cause, and Your Majesty's Government, that moves me thus resolutely to rush
into your Sacred Presence. I am very sensible that false Principles will create
Practices correspondent to them: And therefore I have examined some new and
strange Notions of Gods Providence, and Humane Governments of late asserted by
some Doctors. To say, That a Prince has Gods Authority, though he has no Humane
and Legal Right, and that there is another Person, who has Legal Right, is
dismal to consider in the consequences thereof. If this Poison creeps into the
Church, I tremble to reflect upon the Effects of it. It is good for nothing but
to produce Insincerity, and to make men swear to live peaceably, when they have
War in their hearts. I am confident of Your Majesty's Protection; for I have
acted in this Affair with a full satisfaction of Conscience, and the greatest
Evidence of Reason. And no History can exceed, if parallel, so great valor and
courage, mixed with so much grace and clemency, as has shined in King William.
This is to be like God, who is Almighty, and yet slow to wrath; whose Power is
irresistible, and yet he delights in Mercy. Go on, and prosper, most victorious
Prince; and may the God of Heaven bless you with success by Sea and Land
against that proud and persecuting Monarch, who has been the Ruin of so many
Innocent Protestants in his own Dominions. May God give Your Majesty's the
Necks of your Enemies, and may they all taste of Your Forgiveness and Bounty,
but never forsake Your first Friends, who ran all hazards with Your Majesty. I
pray with Tertullian, who says, We Christians pray for our Emperors; 1. That
they may have a long Life; which contains Health, Joy and Prosperity. 2. A
constant, safe and secure Government. 3. Faithful and Trusty Domestic
Servants, free from Treachery, and secret Conspiracy. 4. A strong and valiant
Army. 5. A faithful Senate, Council, or Parliament. 6. Obedient, Submissive and
Loyal People. 7. A quiet and peaceable Reign. In a word, whatsoever can be the
desire of Caesar.

God inspire Your Majesty's with heavenly Grace and Wisdom, and sound
Knowledge, and good Understanding to go in and out before this great People;
and moreover give you Victory, and Peace, and Length of Days; and at last may
Angels convey Your Souls into Abraham's bosom. This is the constant prayer of

Your Majesty's Most Humble, most Loyal, and most Devoted Subject and Servant,
Tim. Wilson.

The Apostle asserts in the 13th Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans, That all
Emperors, Kings, Princes and Governors, receive their Power from God. And that
the Right of the Sword is delivered to the Magistrate by God. And therefore all
are obliged to be subject to the Higher Powers, and not to resist. And
whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and shall
receive damnation.
FOR the right understanding whereof, I shall premise these Principles.

1. All Dominion is Gods.

2. God gives Dominion and Power to some persons over others.

3. The Law of Nature (which is the Divine Law unwritten) is a Rule, by which
all Nations should walk.

4. This Law of Nature teaches all Inferiors to honor their Superiors; and
Subjects to pay Tribute, honorary Gifts, etc. to their Kings.

5. The same Law of Nature secures every man's Propriety; so that there can be
no Alienation, without consent, explicit, or implicit. There is (says
Aristotle, Rhet. b. 1. c. 13.) as all divine, by Nature a common just and
unjust, though there be no mutual communication, nor compact.

6. The holy Scriptures do not contradict the Law of Nature; but inform mankind
more plainly what is duty.

Lastly; The sacred Historian Moses, and other holy Writers leave Positive and
Political Laws to be practiced according to the Usage of several Countries.

I suppose (as the known truth is) that God Created Adam and Eve: And Adam
begat Cain and Abel. Now what Land, or what substance and goods Adam gave Abel,
he had Right to by the Law of Nature, as well as what he got by his own
industry and labor. Neither could Adam or Cain take any of Abels Flock without
sinning against God, though there had been no Agreement between them. For this
Law was written in Adams heart, Thou shall not covet any thing that is thy
Neighbors. There is a Natural Right, and there is a Civil Right: Natural Right
is by the Law of Nature. Meum and Tuum were before there was any written Law.
Civil Right is that which the Municipal Laws of every Country gives. And (if
good, and consonant to Reason) they are but confirmations, or explications of
the Law of Nature, or conclusions drawn from it, or securities of men's Lives,
Goods and Possessions, from wicked men, who would use no conscience. We know
(says St. Paul; 1 Timothy 1.8, 9, 10.) that the Law is good, if a man use it
lawfully; knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for
the lawless and disobedient, etc.

Government as Government agrees to Heathens, Jews, Turks and Christians, all
alike. It is man as man who is the object thereof. The Nature, and Definition,
and Properties are the same. The holy Scriptures intend not to teach us to be
Politicians, no more than to be Philosophers; but to be Christians, and make us
wise to salvation. The Law of Nature, or Right Reason, is the Rule of Political
Government. And all Civil, or Municipal Laws, are to be squared by it, and so
directed to the public good, as their end.

But more particularly, for the illustration hereof, 1. I shall consider what
Government is. 2. The several kinds thereof. 3. I shall show the Latitude of
Subjection.


1. I shall consider what Government is. Government is Power or Authority,
which some men have over others, derived from God, and exercised according to
Agreement, for the good of the whole Society.

In this Description,

1. We have the general Nature, Power or Authority. 2. The Author of
Government; it is derived from God. 3. The formal Reason; it is exercised
according to Agreement. 4. The End; for the good of the whole Society.
1. We have the general Nature, Power or Authority. Government generally
considered, denotes superiority of Office and Authority. Where there is no
Authority, there can be no Government, nor no Obedience or Subjection due.
Power or Authority (says Camero) is that whereby a person may claim any thing
to himself without the injury of any other. Thus a Father exercises his Power,
when he commands his Children: A Master over his Servants: And a King over his
Subjects.

2. We have the Author of Government. It is derived from God. There is no Power
but of God. All Dominion is Gods. The Kingdom is the Lords, (says David) and
he is the Governor among the Nations. And the Lord has prepared his Throne in
the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 22.28. and 103.19. By me
Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even
all the Judges of the Earth, Prove. 8.15, 16. God is the Absolute Monarch over
all.

3. The Formal Reason, It is exercised according to Agreement. My Opinion is
this; Government in general is of the Law of Nature; but in special, whether
Monarchical Absolute, or Limited and Conditional; whether by Hereditary
Succession, or by Election, is according to Positive, Humane Law and Compact.
So that the People, or Fathers of Families were at liberty to choose, what Form
of Government they thought most convenient, and Fundamentally to fix the
Constitution. Which may not be altered but by the same means or power. Thus
Power in general is of God, as Solomon, and St. Paul say. But the
Specification, Limitation, and first Designation of the Person, or Form is by
Humane Right, or Positive Law, according to the Discretion of the Assembly of
the People. And this seems to me evident by Scripture and Reason. Thus the
Higher Powers are the Ordinance of God, says St. Paul. And the Emperor is the
Ordinance of Man, says St. Peter. Mankind is naturally subject to none but
God, or whom God shall appoint. But otherwise the Sons of Adam are left at
Liberty to choose what Person or Form of Government any free Multitude can agree
upon. This Opinion seems consonant to the Doctrine and History of the Holy
Scriptures; the constant Practice of the Kings of Israel, or rather the People
of any Commonwealth, is consonant to the Principles of the Law of Nature; and
is neither Erroneous in Divinity, nor dangerous in Policy. And experience
shows that the best and most conscientious Subjects pay Obedience, according
to the several Laws and Customs of their Countries. The Epistle to the Romans
was written either in the Reign of Claudius Caesar, or of Nero. As for
Claudius, Historians tell us that he hid himself, and the Soldiers proclaimed
him Emperor, and both the Multitude, and the Senate agreed to his Election. And
as for Nero, his Quinquennium, or first five years were admired by all, and had
the approbation of the best Men, while he followed the Advice of Seneca, and
other grave Counselors. And though afterward he proved a cruel Tyrant and
Persecutor, yet the Laws and Customs of the Roman Empire in Civil things were
good and just. And in those things of which St. Paul speaks, even Nero's
commands were to be obeyed Actively: As is plain, For there is no Power but of
God, and Rulers are not a terror to good Works, but to the evil, and he is the
Minister of God to thee for good. And therefore pay Caesar his due, Tribute,
Custom, Fear, Honor, or whatever the Laws of your Country and Conscience, and
the Laws of God require of you, without Resistance: For they that resist, shall
receive to themselves Damnation. And this is the Judgment of all the Famous
Schoolmen, either Ancient or Modern, whom I have either read, or looked into.
Insomuch that I stand amazed that this Doctrine should have no more Followers
in England, when in all other Disputes our English Divines are the most
rational Men in the World. But to use St. Paul's words in another case, I bear
them record that they have a Zeal for Monarchy, but not according to Knowledge.
Yet let them know, that as far as I can find by search, it is the united
Determination of all Politicians, Schoolmen, and Divines, who purposely handle
the Controversies, that though Prince and Subject are Relatives, yet ( prioritate
rationis, or Ordine naturae intendentis, as Logicians speak) in nature and time
Subjects were first instituted, and Princes were constituted for the Subjects
sake on certain conditions, unless you follow the example of such as designed
Tyranny. From whence it follows, that Subjects were no Born for Kings, but
Kings or Princes, and Governors ought to promote the profit of Subjects. I
have as much reason as any of your Majesty's Subjects to value your Service,
Crown, Dignity, Honor, and Prosperity, and the Succession to your Heirs, yet I
follow the old Maxim, Malim veris offendere quam placere adulando. I think
nothing becomes a Priest so much as Integrity. I am sure that no Man can deny,
that the Apostle speaks of the Higher Powers commanding things lawful, or of
the Civil Legal commands of the Higher Powers; and these must not be resisted.
But they mistake, who think that this command of the Apostles was given to
Christians to be obedient to Nero in his unlawful commands. Whereas the
Apostles command in this place (says a Learned Divine) reaches to all times,
and is made to all that are Christians: Though they did live under Nero, yet it
does not follow, that the Apostle commands them to be subject to him in
Unlawfuls. If indeed Nero's commands were only unlawful, and this Direction of
the Apostle was made only to Christians in those times, and that subjection
commanded were only suffering subjection, then this Scripture might make much
more for Non-resistance. But though Nero was an Enemy to the Christians, yet some
of his commands were lawful; and this Direction of the Apostle was not made
only to Christians in those times, but as a general rule for all good Men. And
the Obedience and Subjection here commanded, was not only to be Passive, but
Active. This Scripture commands Active Obedience to the Higher Powers in all
things which concern the Duty of Subjects, and the Public Good.

And as for the Instances in Scripture out of the Books of the Kings and
Chronicles, it is plain that there was a Covenant between the King and People.
And after the Deposing of Athaliah, all the Congregation made a Covenant with
the King in the House of God, 2 Chronicles 23.3. And what does a Covenant signify,
if it may not be defended and justified? If such a dead Dog as I am, were
worthy to admonish an English Monarch, I would advise him to make Law the Rule
of his Reign, and show his Prerogative in Acts of Bounty, Mercy, and Mitigation
of the Rigor of some severe Laws: And I would not tell him, that it is
Rebellion for an Innocent Subject to defend himself. And yet I imagine that I
am as great a Friend to Monarchy, and to the Church of England, as the greatest
Passive-Obedience-Doctor is.

4. We have the End of Government, For the good of the whole Sodiety. Power and
Authority is ordained of God for the Happiness of Mankind. By this we are
legally secured against wicked Men in our Houses, Possessions, Lands, and
Estates; in our Liberties, and Properties, and in whatsoever belongs to us as
Members of a Civil Society. Political Order is a just Disposition between King
and Subject, as well as between Subject and Subject. God is the Author and
Lover of Order; and an Enemy of Disorder and Confusion. And Government was
constituted by the singular Wisdom and Providence of God for the good of his
Creatures.

From hence I may deduce these Inferences.

1. Hence the Power and Authority of Kings and Governors is clearly Divine.
They are constituted Rulers by God, and are his Ministers. And therefore Honor
and Obedience is due to them for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.

2. Hence it follows evidently, That Princes and Governors ought to Rule in
Gods fear, and so perform their Office as Gods Vicegerents, administering
Justice impartially, knowing whose Authority they have. Hence Princes are
called Pastors of the People, and Fathers of the Country. And should bear the
Name of Gods, and Children of the most High, not only in Power, but in Goodness.

3. Hence it necessarily follows that all Subjects ought to reverence and
honor their King and Governors with most humble Service, Homage, and
Obedience in all things. But of this more anon.

2. I shall consider the several kinds. The most common Distribution is into
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy.

The first kind or Form of Government is Monarchy. I approve of this as best,
according to the saying of the most Famous Poet, The Rule of many is not good.
Let there be one Ruler, one King, to whom God gives the Scepter. He is King,
who has Supreme Power, subject to none.

And a Monarch is either Absolute, or Conditional. And again, either Elective,
or Successive. Elective, when in a Kingdom a Person of a new Family, or of the
same Family is chosen. Successive, when the next Heir, Male, and in some
Kingdoms the Female, is owned and proclaimed. Thus the Kingdom of England is by
Inheritance and Succession: And our King never dies, as we say. But the King of
England is not Absolute, but Limited: And has Lords, and Commons, without whom
he cannot make, nor repeal Laws. And we have Magna Charta unviolable: And the
Subjects great Felicity, and no less the Kings Honor, who Rules not over
Slaves, but Freemen.

3. I shall show the Latitude of Subjection. It is a Civil Filial Fear of the
King: And excludes all things that tend to his Dishonor, and includes all
things that tend to his Honor. It contains all Duties and Services required of
Subjects to their Prince. There is an universal Obedience (next under, and
after God) in all things Legal due to the King, who Reigns by the Ordinance and
Appointment of God. Native Religion and true Christianity is the greatest
Interest of Princes. A good Conscience and pious Heart abhors Obmurmurations,
Factions, Seditions, Rebellions, or whatsoever can be conceived to disturb the
Souls subjection to the Higher Powers. It is gross Hypocrisy to pretend to
follow the Holy Jesus, and not render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's.
I am sure that Christ and his Apostles taught Subjection to the Roman Emperor,
as the Ornament and Honor of their Religion.

This Subjection, first, forbids light and vain thoughts of the Kings Authority
and Person.

2. Uttering Wicked and Traiterous words; speaking evil of him. Thou shall not
revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People, Exodus 22.28. And curse not
the King, no not in thy Thought, Eccles. 10.20. And the Holy Ghost brands them
with the odious name of filthy Dreamers, who despise Dominion, and speak evil
of Dignities, St. Jude, ver. 8. In brief, It excludes all retaining of his
Dues, Tribute, Custom, etc. all Cheating him of his Revenue; all Disobedience
to his wholesome Laws; all Contempt or Violation offered to his Sacred Person.

2. Subjection includes or comprehends all Duties of a Christian Subject to his
King. For that which is in one place, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
Powers, is in another, Fear the King, and Honor the King. And in the Fifth
Commandment, Honor thy Father and Mother. Here as by Father and Mother all
Superiors are meant; (not only our Natural Parents, but also our Political
Father, our Governors, especially the Supreme Magistrate, the King: As it is
well explained in our Church-Catechism, To Honor and Obey the King, and all
that are put in Authority under him: Which also is the Interpretation of all
sober Divines.) So by this word Honor, all kinds of Duty and Services from all
Inseriors to their Superiors respectively, are comprised. So to Honor, as to
Fear, Love and Obey them, etc. This is expressed also by St. Peter, Submit your
selves unto every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the
King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, This is yet
more fully and largely set down by St. Paul, Romans 13. Where this Doctrine is
not only declared, but pressed and confirmed by many strong and solid Reasons.
We must needs be subject not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, v.
5. If you make Conscience of your ways, give the King his Due. There is nothing
more plain than this Chapter for Subjection to the King, and Submission and
respect to his Officers without murmuring and repining, when according to Law
they demand their Dues. The humble Christian, and obedient Subject, who
willingly submits to the Kings Laws, may be assured that in that particular he
pleases God, and he always has the Testimony and Satisfaction of a good
Conscience. But the stubborn and disobedient, who will not render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, assuredly displeases God, and can never quiet his
Conscience; but runs the hazard of a most ignominious esteem in the World, and
of Eternal Damnation in the World to come.

And verily Resisting Governors is not less unbecoming the Reason of a man,
than the Patience and Humility of a Christian: For the Officer is armed with
Authority, but the contumacious Opposer has nothing to defend or plead for
him, but Arbitrary Power, wilful Perverseness, and stubborn Humor, which in
cold blood or sober consideration must be acknowledged far more dangerous than
the evil the Resistant pretended to remedy.

And here if ye demand the manner of this Subjection: I answer, True Christian
Subjects bear to the King, such a Submission as Children to their Parents: Not
a terrifying and amazing, but a respectful and reverential Subjection. The King
is the Father of his Country, and all his Loving and Loyal Subjects are as so
many Children to him.

This Subjection also does imply, 1. A real and eminent Love of the King. Gods
own People Israel said of King David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2 Samuel
18.3. Hence the King is called The breath of our nostrils, Lam. 4.20.

2. This Subjection does imply Fidelity and adhering to the King at all times,
and in all conditions. The King, and his Subjects, are united in their
Political capacity, as the Head and the Body: Their welfare is conjoined, and
cannot be separated. And this Fidelity is most excellent, when it comes from a
touch of Gods finger; from the Grace of his holy Spirit. As we read there went
with Saul a band of men, whose hearts God had touched, 1 Samuel 10.26. But such
as clave not to him are stigmatized for Children of Belial, who despised their
King, v. 27. For Fidelity also we have the example of David's Servants; Behold
thy Servants are ready to do whatsoever my Lord the King shall appoint, 2 Samuel
15. v. 15. And Ittai (that Loyal heart; that noble and constant spirit) said to
the King (when David went to persuade him to go back, and to take care of his
own safety) As the Lord lives, and as my Lord the King lives, surely in what
place my Lord the King shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will
thy Servant be; v. 21. Here was a faithful Servant and Loyal Subject indeed;
and herein he evidenced himself no less obedient to the Law of God, by which we
are bound in Conscience to help the King against his Enemies. And thus to
adhere to the King (by being faithful in the Trust reposed in us; in being just
in our places, and ready to help in all difficulties) is a right and sure way
to make a Kingdom invincible and terrible to Enemies. Divisions, Conspiracies,
and Combinations in a State, expose it to foreign Enemies. A Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand, says the wise Counselor, the Son of God. But
Unity of heart and affections between Subjects and their Sovereign, renders a
Kingdom prosperous at home, and formidable abroad.

3. Prayer to God for him. Our Religion, the Law of our God, our Christianity
as well as our Fidelity, Loyalty and Affection, call for this at our hands. The
blessed Apostle St. Paul exhorts Timothy to this duty, 1 Timothy 2.1, etc. And I
think that the Collects of our Church for the King and Queen, are both wise and
Christian.

4. Thanksgiving to God for any mercy to the King. I exhort that Thanksgivings
be made, says the Apostle. The Infinite Majesty of Heaven is the Ocean, from
which flow all blessings that we mortals receive. It is he that gives great
Deliverance to his King, and shows mercy to his Anointed, to David, and to
his seed for evermore, Psalm. 18.49, 50. Therefore should we give thanks unto
the Lord, and sing praises to his holy Name. Especially let us praise God for
the wonderful and happy Deliverance of this Church and Nation by our Joshua,
who has by the Divine favor and blessing saved us, and put a stop to the
Malice and Cruelty of all the Churches Enemies. This is the Lords doing, and it
is marvelous in our eyes. And as great a mercy as ever this Nation and Church
enjoyed: Though through an unnatural Principle the Prejudices of many wise and
pious men have made them ungrateful to your Majesty's, who are in truth, (...),
Benefactors, not only to all English Protestants, but to all the Reformed
Churches.

And that these Prejudices may be removed, and that all your Subjects may give
God, and your Majesty's thanks, has been my constant desire and labor. And
though I know that the multitude are prone to Innovations and Changes, and too
apt to be seduced, yet in this Revolution they are to be justified, so far as
they defended their Religion, Laws and Liberties. And I challenge any learned
and conscientious Divine to dispute the Case in Print before God and the World.

And therefore I humbly beg your Sacred Majesty's pardon, while I make
Animadversions on the Reverend Dr. William Sherlocks Book, entitled, The Case
of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, stated and resolved, according to
Scripture and Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England.

I cannot believe that false Principles in Government conduce to your Majesty's
service. And for this reason among others I think it my duty to oppose them.

I do believe that the Reverend Dr. acts according to the present persuasion of
his Conscience, (as he speaks in the beginning of his Preface) and I do not
take him either for a dishonest man, or a fool. But, as he says, he may be
mistaken, and so may any body else, though never so wise and honest. And he says
ingenuously, that if any man can show him, that the Principles he acts on are
false, uncertain, or precarious, and such as cannot reasonably satisfy an
honest and unbiassed mind, he will confess that his desire of satisfaction
secretly and insensibly distorted his Judgment, tho he took all possible care
that it should not. I do, as I would be done by, and I believe that many have
refused the Oaths upon Principles of Conscience, though I believe their
Consciences erroneous. And I hope to make it evident, if, as the Dr's phrase
is, they will deliver themselves from the Tyranny of Prepossession and
Prejudice, 2. p. 10.

Animadversion on Section 1.
The Dr. says, That which has perplexed this Controversy, is the intermixing
the Dispute of Right with the Duty of Obedience, or making the Legal Right of
Princes to their Thrones the only Reason and Foundation of the Allegiance of
Subjects.

A. I cannot imagine that any Obedience is due, but to him only who has Right.
If he has no Right, why should I pay him Obedience? The Scripture says, Fear
to whom fear, honor to whom honor. I must know therefore to whom it is due.
The Scripture supposes all Subjects to know some other way, to whom Obedience,
Fear and Honor is due. For I take it for granted, and as that which all
Learned men will own, that the Scripture is not a Rule of Policy, or Political
Government, any more than it is of Logic, Astronomy, or any part of
Philosophy; which are Arts and Sciences of themselves. And so Policy has Rules
and Methods of its own, and depends upon the Sense and Reason of all Mankind,
being not proper to Christians, but common to Jews, Turks or Heathens. And
besides, the English Policy is not the same with other Christian Nations.

Now as to our present Government and Revolution, Englishmen may be divided
into these three Ranks.

First; Such as joined with the Prince of Orange before or at his Landing,
according to his Declaration, Expectation, Desire, and Invitation of them.

Secondly; Such as did not join with the Prince of Orange, but did oppose him,
either with their Prayers, or with their Strength, or with both; but since have
taken the Oaths of Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary.

Thirdly; Such as did neither join with the Prince of Orange, nor since have
taken the Oaths.

The Reverend Dr. is among the Moderate men of the second Rank: (And est
quiddam prodire tenus: It is something to come thus far; we have the shorter
way to our Journeys end, as one says.) For he writes thus, Many things are
said (for the justifying the Legality of the late Revolution) which may make
men much more moderate in the point than some are, 1. p. 2. And his endeavor
is to persuade those of the third Rank to take the Oaths; (a very honest,
charitable and pious endeavor) for he says well in his Preface, There are
others who are still dissatisfied about the Oaths, and are desirous to try,
whether they can find that satisfaction, which he has done. This, I confess,
is a good Reason, which may in charity oblige me.

To proceed; All Learned men know what it is to suppose or put a Case, and I
will not be a quarrelsom Antagonist; but will be as civil to the Dr. as he can
be to me; and therefore for his supposition, I will not charge him with
reflecting upon this present Government; which he says, and I believe he
speaks his conscience and heart, he is very sure, he is far from intending to
do, in the latter end of his Preface.

The Dr. seems to make a contradistinction between Right, and Government, in
these words, 1. p. 1. Allegiance is due only to Right, not to Government, though
it can be paid only to Government. Now I think there can be no Government,
where there is no Right: For who should command, and who should obey, where
there is no Right to command? Otherwise how could there be such a thing as
Anarchy, or Confusion, when every man does what is good in his own Eyes, as
when there was no King or Governor in Israel? Judge. 19.1.

And again p. 2. If then Allegiance be due, not for the sake of Legal Right,
but Government. But I say there is no Allegiance due, where there is no Legal
Right: (either Natural or Positive;) for I suppose all Obligatory Laws founded
upon Natural Principles. Again, the Dr. asserts, That God places and sets
some Princes on the Throne, though they have no Legal or Humane Right, p. 3. Now
this seems to me a Riddle. I am of Opinion, that every Prince, who has Gods
Authority, has a Legal and Humane Right; unless God immediately from Heaven by
an Angel, or the like extraordinary way, gives him Authority. But no Prince
ordinarily has Gods Authority but by Legal and Humane Right; as will appear
hereafter.

As for what the Dr. says about the Disposal of Providence, it seems to me
pure Enthusiasm, and the very Dregs of Quakerism; which I shall consider in due
place.

Animadversions on 2.
As for what the Dr. says in this Section, and quotes out of Bishop Overals
Convocation-Book, I admit and approve sano sensu, and I reverence their
Authority: And I suppose that at that time there were some Divines, perhaps
Bishops, in that Convocation, who did think Defensive Arms lawful in some
cases, and founded Government in Agreement; as the ever-renowned Mr. Hooker and
Dr. Bilson certainly did. And when the Dr. proves the contrary, I will believe
him, and before, I suppose, he does not desire that I should.

But let us see the Dr's. Inferences from the Doctrine of the Convocation. Men
may dispute any thing, but I know not how it was possible for the Convocation
to express their sense plainer; That all Usurped Powers, when thoroughly settled,
have Gods Authority, and must be obeyed. So that here are two great Points
determined, whereupon this whole Controversy turns.

1. That those Princes, who have no Legal Right to their Thrones, may yet have
Gods Authority. But surely the Convocation meant, that they had a Legal Right,
and were no longer Usurpers, when they had Gods Authority; as the King of Egypt
and Babylon, and King Alexander, and the Emperors of Rome. Let him prove the
contrary if he can. And I am fully of this Opinion, which, I think, is the Dr's
That there is Momentum quod sic, as the Schools call it, a Time, when all
Usurpers, or Invading Powers have Gods Authority, and must be obeyed; and that
is when they are thoroughly settled.

But the Question is, When they are thoroughly settled?

A. It is hard to determine and fix a time; but there is a time when Invaders
and Conquerors have a Right and Title to the Crown. And I am of Opinion this
is, When such a Prince and People have made a Covenant, Compact or Agreement,
explicit or implicit: When having with a good Conscience defended their King,
Laws, and Country, as long as they could, they yield, being taken Prisoners,
or subdued. And let this consent be supposed to be overawed, yet consent it
is; especially when they have made a Solemn Promise or Oath to such a Prince.
And he that breaks such a Promise or Oath is wicked. David describes a Citizen
of Zion thus, He that swears to his own hurt, and changes not, Psalm. 15.4.
This is grounded upon this Natural Principle, That what Promise I make, if
lawful, however inconvenient to me, I must perform.

By the way, I call an Explicit Covenant, when there is the Public Consent
and Profession of such an Engagement made by a National Assembly.

I call an Implicit Covenant, when the Members of a Society in their Practice
do all such Acts, as are required by the Rules agreed among them, and submit
themselves thereunto: Though they make no verbal Promise or Profession thereof. I
need not illustrate this in our Case; for all Men have seen with their Eyes,
and heard with their Ears what has been done among us.

Or, in the Drs words, 2. p. 9. The Government is thoroughly settled, when the
whole Administration of the Government, and the whole Power of the Nation is in
the Hands of the Prince, when every thing is done in his Name, and by his
Authority, when the Estates of the Realm, and the great Body of the Nation have
submitted to him, and those who will not submit, can be crushed by him,
whenever he pleases: If this be not a settled Government, I despair of ever
knowing what it is.

Now I say, in plain English, This is a mutual Covenant between Governors, and
Governed, and gives the Formality of Relation between King and Subject. But
then in this Case the King has an Humane and Legal Right, as well as Gods
Authority; which the Dr. seems every where to deny. For he infers, page 5.
Therefore those Princes, who have no Legal Right, may have Gods Authority. But
I say, That though such Princes, as the Convocation speaks of, had no Legal Right
before, yet when they are thoroughly settled, they have Legal Right. And this is
the difference between the Dr. and me. And, page 9. The Submission of a Prince
indeed may be thought necessary to transfer a Legal Right; but the Submission
of the People, it self, is sufficient to settle the Government, and when it is
settled, then it is the Authority of God, whatever the Humane Right be. See
page 25, etc. He seems to assert, That no Right can be Legal and Humane, but
Successive or Hereditary Right, 4. p. 26.

I know Great, Learned, and Pious Authors, who are of this Opinion, as I have
proposed it; and the Dr. cannot appear singular in it, and to advance
Paradoxes, as he speaks, 1. p. 3. to any Man who has thoroughly studied these
Controversies. But then all, or most of those Divines, and Politicians assert
Defensive Arms in some Case: And that the several Forms of Regiment are
according to Agreement, or an Ordinance of Man: And they usually say, that the
Call of the People is Essential to Magistracy in such extraordinary Case: And
so the Powers that are, are ordained of God, and must not be resisted.

Again, if the Dr. means, first, By Actual Possession of the Throne, the Power
of the Sword, or Strength, or the Princes being in Whitehall, and having the
Royal Forts, etc. at his Command, then this alone cannot give Right, though it is
the Disposal of Providence. And this I take to be Hobbism, Skepticism, or
Atheism. And such things I have read in some Oliverian Pamphlets to justify
that Damnable Rebellion, as the Disposal of Providence. And thus to say that
Conquest, Election, and Usurpation were all one to the Primitive Christians, as
some of late have said, is most abominable, and to be exploded. And the
Reverend Dr. verges so near this, that I wish he would explain himself better,
if it be not his meaning. See 4. p. 18. The Scripture has given us no
Direction in this Case, but to Submit and pay all Obedience of Subjects to the
present Powers. It makes no Distinction, that ever I could find between a
Rightful King and an Usurper, etc.

A. The Scriptures, not being an absolute Rule of Policy, as I said before,
suppose that we know, who is our King or Governor, or who are the Higher
Powers, by Reason, and the several Laws and Constitutions, or Immemorial Usages
of several Countries. And then instruct Subjects in their Duty. But of this
Section I shall speak in its Order.

2. If the Dr. means by Actual Possession of the Throne, such a Covenant or
Settlement, as is before mentioned, then I say, whoever has such a Settlement,
has not only Gods Authority, but Humane and Legal Right; though he is not the
next Heir, or immediate Lineal Successor. And of such a Prince I grant, the
Subjects need not inquire, Quo jure, quave injuria, as the Schools speak, he
came to the Throne: or whether he had Reason to Invade, or Conquer, or not. He
is King, and has Gods Authority, and must be obeyed. And in this case the old
Maxim proves true, Vox Populi est Vox Dei, The voice of the People is the voice
of God. God chooses whom the People in this manner choose. But I do not think
that any rational Politician, or judicious Divine grounds this Position upon
the Disposal of Providence firstly: I am sure, most do not.

But upon such Principles as these;

1. No one Form of Government is Natural or Moral, but purely of Positive
Agreement. And though it is good Manners in the Subjects of a Monarch, especially
of an English Monarch, to believe Regal Government best; and to believe that
Hereditary Government, or Monarchy, is most prudential and excellent: And that
Lineal Succession is not to be altered but upon very sufficient grounds. And
though no Man ought to meddle with them that are given to change; (which may
possibly befall a King, as well as his Subjects) yet no Man can with a good
Conscience condemn any other lawful Form of Government. As the Government of
the Consuls, and Senate of Rome of old: Or the Government of the Duke of
Venice, or Senate at present: Or the States General of the United Provinces.
All whose Subjects are to obey, and not resist their several Sovereigns, by St.
Paul's command, Romans 13. For they have their Power of God, and Gods Authority.

2. The Public Good is the Sovereign Law of all. And so though Subjects have
Sworn to maintain their Sovereign, yet if he, and they are Conquered, and the
Conqueror gives them their Lives, Liberties, or Estates, whereupon they Promise
or Swear Allegiance to him, they must for the future own him as their Sovereign
Lord. Or, if they are grievously oppressed, so that the Public Good of their
Country or the Preservation of their Laws, Liberties, and Religion requires
them to forsake their King, who (as I suppose) would have brought them into
Slavery; or Non-assistance, as the Dr. confesses, when a loving, valiant, and
good Friend comes to save their Religion, Laws, and Properties. In this case
the Subjects ought to obey him that has Actual Possession of the Throne. For
he is their Elected King, and has Humane, Legal, and Divine Right.

And this secures Princes from Factious, Seditious, and Rebellious Subjects.
And secures Subjects from Wicked, Cruel, and Ill-designing, or Ill-advised
Princes, who follow evil Counselors, to the Subversion of the Laws, and Ruin
of the Kingdom.

And this I think may be proved from the Drs. own Assertions, scattered in this
Book.

1. He asserts, p. 14. Sometimes God not only places a single Person in the
Throne, but intails it on his Family by Humane Laws, and makes the Throne a
Legal Inheritance. And p. 24. Hereditary Right is either a continued
Usurpation, which can give no Right, or a Right by Law, that is by the Consent
of the People to intail the Crown on such a Family. Now all Laws are made by
the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons. From
whence it follows that the Dr. must own, that Hereditary Monarchy is so made by
the People; and that such a Monarch receives all his Power (for he has no
Power, but Legal) from them as well as from God. And as for what follows,
which, says the Dr. I observed before, If Right be resolved into the Choice
and Consent of the People, cannot be done; for what Right had my Ancestors
three or four hundred years ago, to choose a King for me?

A. I am afraid the Dr. next time will say, That the Laws of former
Parliaments, made some years ago, do not bind us, though not repealed. And none
but present Parliaments can make Laws for us. We have nothing to do with our
Forefathers; we must personally consent to all Laws. Phy! for shame Dr. let us
hear no more of this. For I am confident you do not believe, that our Ancestors
had no Right to make Laws for us, or to choose a King for us. A King is a King
to Children Born of Parents, who have chosen him, or his Family, and such
Children are his Subjects without a personal and verbal Engagement: And former
Laws bind us without a new Act of Parliament to confirm them.

2. The Dr. asserts, p. 36. If they (that is, Sovereign Princes) receive their
Authority from Men, (which they do, as well as from God, say we) and Humane
Laws, (which the Dr. confessed before) I cannot imagine that their Power is any
more than a Trust, of which they must give an account to those who have
entrusted them with it, according to those Laws, by which they were entrusted
to exercise that Power. For whether there be any express Provision made in the
Law to call them to an Account or no, the Nature of the thing proves, that if
they receive their Power from Men, they are accountable to them. For those who
give Power may take an Account of the use and abuse of it. This, with the Drs.
Concessions hereafter mentioned, proves the Lawfulness, Reasonableness, and
Conscience of this present Revolution. And, p. 25. he says, A Legal Intail is
nothing more than the Authority of the People. So that the Authority of the
People (I mean, either the Convention of Estates, which is an extraordinary
Assembly, or the Parliament, which is the ordinary Assembly) gives Humane and
Legal Right. And such a Prince is set upon the Throne by God, and is by the
Disposal of Providence, and is Gods Minister for the good of the People. So
that what the Dr. says in the beginning of p. 25. is very weak, To say that
God sets up no Prince, who ascends the Throne without Humane Right and Legal,
is to say, that some Kings are removed, and others set up, but not by God;
which is directly contradictory to Scripture; It is to say, That the Four
Monarchies were not set up by God, because they all began by Violence and
Usurpation; It is say, That God, as well as Men, is confined by Humane Laws, in
making Kings; It is to say, That the Right of Government is not derived from
God, without the Consent of the People. For if God cannot make Kings without
the People, or against their Consent declared by their Laws, the Authority must
be derived from the People, not from God; or at least, if it be Gods Authority,
yet God cannot give it himself without the People, nor otherwise than as they
have directed him by their Laws.

A. If we speak of Gods Absolute Power, he can send a Legion of Angels, and set
the Crown upon a Kings Head, or by any like extraordinary Nomination and Means.
But we say (and I hope the Dr. upon consideration will not deny it) that Right
Reason, Natural Conscience, Law, and Scripture are the Rule of our Duty; and by
these means God cooperates, and his Divine Providence concurs with men. And
when the Dr. is in his senses, and argues like himself, that is, a Divine of
his Reputation and Station in the Church, he will tell you, p. 65. That the
King has no Right but by Law, and then the Law may determine how far his Right
shall extend, etc. But this Revolution has confounded the wisdom of the wise,
and brought to nothing the understanding of the prudent; insomuch that a man
may propound St. Paul's Question to these great Doctors of our Church; Where is
the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World? Has not
God made foolish the wisdom of this World? It is much easier to justify the
whole Revolution. I will here add the Judgment of Tol. collected by the Author
of the Synopsis on Romans 13. Power (that is, Principality or Magistracy, yea,
even of Infidels and Idolaters) is not but of God, that is, from the Divine
Ordination and Disposition, that the wicked may be restrained, the just
honored, etc. from God as the first Beginning, and Cause, and Author, not
indeed by himself, but mediately, by men, in whom God has put this instinct to
set over them those that should Rule them. And whoever reads the Lord Chan.
Fortescue, will find this true in England.

Animadversions on Sect. 3.
In this Section I shall animadvert on some of his Propositions; and then
propose his Concessions, scattered all over his Book.

As for the two first Propositions, I admit them: But I think that I may justly
find fault with the third, which is, There are but three ways whereby God gives
this Power and Authority to any person: Either by Nature, or by express
Nomination, or by the Disposals of Providence.

Here I say that this Division is Illogical and naughty. Logicians say, that
the parts of a Division must be opposite; but these are not. For the Power and
Authority, that is given by Nature, is the disposal of Providence; and the
Power and Authority, that is given by express Nomination, is the disposal of
Providence also. And I must confess, that in my small Reading, I never met with
any that made such a sort of division. I should have added, 3. By Covenant, or
by the Election of the People. I fear that the Dr's. Enthusiastical notion of
Providence here imposed upon his Learning.

Let no man say, that I do not speak of Divine Providence with that awful
regard and reverence that I ought; for surely I justify Gods Providence much
more clearly, than this abstruse and unaccountable notion.

The Dr. goes on: By Nature, Parents have a Natural Superiority over their
Children, and are their Lords and Governors too. This was the first Government
in the World, and is the only Natural Authority: For in propriety of speaking,
there is no Natural Prince but a Father, etc.

Here observe that this destroys the Principles of Sir R. F's. Book; with which
so many young Divines in the University of late have been possessed, and about
which they have been so very passionate, that they would endure no modest
opposition; but invidiously declaimed against any man who did but call in
question this Principle, as if he could not be a Lover of Monarchy. If there is
no Natural Prince but a Father, thens in propriety of speaking, there can be no
Natural Prince now in the World; but every Prince must be by Institution, or
Agreement, or the like. For the Relation of King and Subject are not Natural,
as the Relation of Father and Child are. But yet I say, Monarchy approaches
nearest to the Government of Gods Throne. And I approve of the words of the
Reverend Dr. Fern, Monarchy (however we cannot say it is Jure Divino, by Divine
Precept, commanding all Nations, to be so governed, or Jure Naturae, by
Nature's Law enforcing it) is plainly ductu Naturae, by Nature leading men from
Paternal to Legal Government, and exemplo Divino, as I may say, by Divine
example and insinuation. We suppose (as the Sacred Historian tells us) that
Adam, and so Noah after the Flood, by Gods blessing begat Sons and Daughters.
These spread over the face of the Earth; some in Asia; some in Africa; some in
Europe, etc. And these God endued with Reason, and they lived (or should have
lived) by the Light of Nature, Gods own Law written in their hearts. (And as
face answers to face in a glass; so the heart of man to man.) And when they
increased greatly, for orders sake, or because some were lawless, and, living
without the fear of God, oppressed the weak, Natural Prudence, which is the
Light of God in Man, taught them to Covenant with one Ruler, and to have common
society and mutual help, and some Rules, Laws and Customs to determine
Controversies between Family and Family; Man or Man for the public good. To
this first Constitution all were bound, both Rulers, and Ruled; and this could
not be changed (ordinarily) but by the Heads of such Societies, or Families. If
any man can disprove this by Reason, or Scripture, we would gladly see it.

As for our own Country, it is manifest in the most ancient Histories and
Chronicles that ever I read, that we have been governed by Kings all along. But
we have had an Heptarchy, and not always Lineal Succession. And when England
was one Monarchy under Egbert, in the year of Christ 818. or thereabouts, we
shall find the Succession altered for the public good; as the late Author of
the Unreasonableness of Separation upon the account of the Oaths has largely
showed out of Mat. Westminster, and Mat. Paris, and others. But still all this
supposes an Agreement between the King and People originally. And no doubt
Monarchy, and all Government will stand best upon its own Foundation. And what
men agree to, all conscientious men will observe, according to the mutual Oath
of King and People. And it is so far from being an inconvenience, that it is
the only true and just Title of all Royal Families. And it is a prejudice to
the King, to say otherwise: For the best and wisest men submit only upon
Condition and Covenant. We know that Nature teaches all men to prevent Ruin;
and this is the Law of God.

But let us come to the Dr's. great Principle, the disposal of Providence, p.
12. God governs the rest of the World, removes Kings, and sets up Kings, only
by his Providence, that is, then God sets up a King, when by his Providence he
advances him to the Throne (that is, I think, God sets up a King, when he sets
up a King; a self-evident Principle) and puts the Sovereign Authority into his
hands: Then he removes a King, when by his Providence he thrusts him from his
Throne, and takes the Government out of his hands, etc.

I can make no other sense of this, but that God does it, when he does it. But
how shall it appear to us, that it is Gods Providence, either to remove, or set
up a King?

The Dr. answers, There are but three ways whereby God gives this Power and
Authority to any person; either by Nature, or by express Nomination, or by the
Disposal of Providence, p. 11. If this be not Trifling, I know not what is. If
any man should ask the Dr. Who made him Master of the Temple? and he should
answer, God made him so, or it was the disposal of Providence; would he not
smile, though this is true? But the Question asked is about the Humane Principal
Efficient, subordinate to God, and his Providence. But the former never comes
into question among Christians. It is confessed, it was Gods Providence that
exalted Joseph and all Kings. I can hardly forbear, but I have always
reverenced the Dr. and therefore will say no more, but Lord have mercy upon us
the sinful Sons of Adam: O the power of Prejudice!

As for Gods Providence in this Revolution, I have published my thoughts in a
Discourse entitled, Conscience satisfied, in a Cordial and Loyal Submission to
the present Government of King William and Queen Mary; and I must refer the
inquisitive Reader to that Treatise, p. 11, etc.

But here farther, that we may consider what the Doctor says, we must
distinguish of Gods Providence: It is either, 1. Immediate and extraordinary;
Or 2. Mediate and ordinary.

1. The immediate and extraordinary Providence of God is, when God works what
he will besides or against the means and order appointed by himself in Nature.
And this is done in all Miracles, which are effected to this end, that we may
know that the Omnipotent Creator and Governor of all things, acts most freely
by means, or without means.

And this is manifest either, 1. In punishing his Enemies: Or, 2. In preserving
his Servants. Thus God immediately by a Deluge from Heaven drowned the Old
World; confounded the Language of the Rebels at Babel; rained Fire and
Brimstone out of Heaven upon Sodom; drowned Pharaoh and his Host in the Red
Sea, after all those former Plagues and Judgments upon him. Thus God commanded
the Earth to open and swallow up those proud and hypocritical Rebels, Corah and
his company. By this the Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed, till the people
had avenged themselves on their Enemies, Josh. 10.13. By this, to deliver good
Hezekiah and his people Israel, the Angel of the Lord smote in the Camp of the
Assyrians one hundred fourscore and five thousand, 2 King. 19.35. On the other
side, God by his extraordinary Providence gave Abraham a Son in his old age;
commanded the Ravens to feed his zealous Servant Elijah; multiplied the Widows
Oil; and preserved the three Children in the Fiery Furnace, and the like. Hence
the Psalmist concludes; The Lord alone does great wonders, Psalm. 136.4.

But I suppose the Dr. does not mean, that God makes any King or Queen thus by
Miracle. He did not send an Angel to set the Crown on their Majesty's Heads on
the days of their Arrival in London, or on the day of their Election by the
Convention of Estates, or on the day of their Coronation.

2. Therefore there is a mediate and ordinary Providence of God: And that is,
when God by Creatures or second Causes produces those Effects, to which those
Creatures or Causes by the constant, accustomed Order of Nature are appointed
and made by God. Thus by food and nourishment he sustains us; by Physic and
Medicines he removes diseases, and heals the sick; by his Word Read and
Preached he declares his will to sinners, and persuades them to believe and
obey. Thus we read, Man does not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 8.3. And Hezekiah was recovered
by applying a lump of Figs, and laying it for a Plaster upon a Boil, Isa.
38.21. Finally, thus our Savior says, Abraham in the Parable told the rich
Glutton, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, Luke 16.29. Thus
I acknowledge it is the disposal of Providence, that by the Convention of
Estates, as Means or Instruments, the Prince and Princess of Orange should be
King and Queen of England, etc.

Now the Dr. says well, 3. p. 12. Providence is Gods Government of the World
by an Invisible Influence and Power, etc. But he might have told us, that the
Acts, Manner, and Effects of Providence become visible to us.

And the disposals of Providence are seen, either, 1. In Divine Judgments or
Punishments.

Or, 2. In Divine Probations, and Fatherly Corrections and Chastisements.

Or, 3. In Divine Blessings, Mercies, and Deliverances: And all these are
Personal, Domestical, or National.

Now Gods Providence is holy and just in all these. But sometimes the
Instruments are very wicked. Thus proud and cruel men, who break in pieces Gods
people, and afflict his Heritage, as the Psalmist speaks; though they are Gods
Rod, or Instruments by whom the Lord chastises his Servants (which in God is
most lawful and just) I say, ungodly men are guilty of the evil of sin: Because
they propound to themselves the satisfaction of their own malicious and
spiteful affections. But whoever are the Instruments of Gods Providence in
Blessings, Mercies, Deliverances, in such Acts do well, and deserve praise of
all that are not ungrateful. Thus the late Revolution is Gods just Judgment and
Punishment on the Papists, and all Oppressors that joined with them. But it is
an exceeding great mercy, blessing, and deliverance to the Protestant Church,
and all Gods faithful Servants. But I spare the Dr's prejudice. He knows the
old saying, Dolus latet in generalibus. God permits evil Instruments, but he
approves good Instruments in such acts.

It is true also as the Dr. says, That God not only permits, but he does these
things. He permits men to do wickedly, but God is the Author of all the Good
and Evil, which happens to private persons, or public Societies. Surely no
Christian doubts of this.

But then we distinguish, which the Dr. does not, and say, 1. Evil is from God,
who punishes, corrects, or chastises his Church.

2. Good is from God, who defends, delivers, blesses, or saves his Church. And
this is done ordinarily by the free Ministries of men.

And the Question between us is, of these Instruments, whether they be Evil, or
Good, or whether they have done Evil or Good, deserve well or ill of the Church
and Commonwealth?

Thus to illustrate my meaning: I say, that O. C. and his Confederates were
Usurpers, Traitors and Murderers; and though they had power or strength, yet they
had not Power or Authority from God. But King William and his Confederates had
not only Strength or Power, but also had Power or Authority from God to save
this Church and Kingdom, when we were so near sinking under Popery and Slavery.
And this I think is deducible from what the Dr. sometimes grants. As when he
says, p. 28. The Law of God and Nature must take place of all Humane Positive
Laws and Oaths. And when he says, p. 33. Though I have as great a Reverence for
Princes as any man, I do not think the Right and Interest of Princes so
considerable as the Safety and Preservation of a Nation, and the Lives and
Fortunes of all his Subjects. From whence I infer, that no Positive Laws,
Oaths, or Prince, in case of such Oppressions as we groaned under, ought to
stand in competition with the Preservation of our Country, Liberty, Property
and Religion. And consequently King William and his Confederates deserve
Immortal Honor from all Englishmen and good Protestants. And if this be not
sound Divinity, I desire that the Dr. would be pleased to bestow some of his
Charity upon me, and write another Book to convince those of my Persuasion. I
wish he had free leave given him to try his skill. For though I do not pretend to
his Learning and Abilities, (and I know that he can teach me many things) nor
have I the Opportunity of such Libraries, and Conversation of most Judicious
Men, yet I have studied this Controversy, and I never acted in any Affair with
a more full and clear Approbation of my own Conscience than in this Revolution:
Or, to use the Dr's words in the beginning of his Preface, This I am sure of,
that I never acted with more sincerity in any Affair of my whole Life, than I
have done in this matter, from the beginning to the end; and whether I have
sufficient Reason for what I do, I refer to the Trial of this, and other my
Discourses.

But in short, All Power is of God, and all Power is of the People. All
preservation is of God, and all Preservation is of our selves. All Riches and
Honor are of God, and all Riches and Honor are of our selves, by our own
Industry, and good Merit. For though we can Merit nothing at Gods Hands, yet we
may Merit from Man. Thus, the Hand of the diligent makes rich, says Solomon,
and the blessing of the Lord makes rich. And see thou a Man that is diligent
in his business? he shall stand before Kings; he shall not stand before mean
Men. This is Gods Cooperation and Concourse: And God ( quasi ex pacto coobligat
se creaturis, as a Learned Protestant Schoolman and Metaphysician speaks) by
Covenant obliges himself with the Creatures, and as it were promises that he
will help their Acts. And I suppose the Dr. himself does not embrace the
previous efficacious motion mentioned by the strict Followers of St. Thomas,
and of Calvin.

Thus God removes Kings, and sets up Kings. And this the Dr. will acknowledge,
when he recovers himself. For he says, p. 13. Sometimes [a Prince is placed on
the Throne by God, and receives his Authority] by the Election of the People;
sometimes by Conquest; (which has been the visible Original of most
Governments) (True say I; but Conquest makes a Man a Prisoner, not a Subject,
till after Consent and Agreement) and when any Family is thus advanced to the
Throne, it is continued by Succession and Legal Entails. But all these ways, or
any other that can be thought of, are governed and determined by Divine
Providence, and the Prince thus advanced is as truly placed in the Throne by
God, as if he had been expressly nominated, etc.

But the Secret or Reason of the Drs. obscurity and confusion, I believe, is
this, He could not condemn the Instruments of Gods Providence in this
Revolution, out of fear: And he could not justify them, because of his
Erroneous Conscience and Prejudice. And so he runs on with a General and
Confused Discourse of the Disposals of Providence. Just as a Quaker, when he
knows not what to say, will tell you, It is the Light within him that tells him
it is so as he says. So these Men will tell you, that it is Gods Providence:
which is very true of all Acts, Means, and Events, good, or evil. But we desire
that Men's Consciences should be satisfied, whether the Instruments have done
well, or ill. But the Dr. will not meddle with this.

Let us go on. Propos. 4. All Kings (says the Dr.) are equally rightful with
respect to God: for those are all rightful Kings, who are placed in the Throne
by God, and it is impossible there should be a wrong King, unless a Man could
make himself King, whether God will or no, etc.

A. I take this to be obscure, and Enthusiastical. Those are all rightful Kings
who are placed in the Throne by God, says the Dr. True; but how shall I know
that they are placed in the Throne by God? I suppose the Dr. will answer, When
they are thoroughly Settled in the Throne, as 2. p. 9. But then say I, This is
the Election of the People, and supposes a Covenant, Explicit, or Implicit,
as before. And this gives Humane and Legal Right. If the Dr. thinks otherwise,
I desire to know of him; for he is so cautious, that I cannot positively say:
Sometimes he has words to this sense; sometimes not.

And, I think, it is an odd sentence to say, It is impossible there should be a
wrong King, unless a Man could make himself King, whether God will or no, etc.
For God may permit a Man to call himself King, who is not King, and his deluded
Followers may flatter themselves, and him also: As the late D. of M. was called
King at Lyme. But God never approved of him as King; which I suppose the Dr.
will acknowledge; and yet this was the Disposal of Providence. Let the Dr.
distinguish here, and then he will have an answer. And I am of Opinion, that if
the P. of O. had called Himself King, when he entered Exeter, or when he
marched on without much, if any opposition toward London, or when he had
Possession of St. James's, or Whitehall, all Englishmen had been bound in
Conscience to oppose Him, as an Invader of the Liberty of their Country. But
when by their Representatives they Elected Him King, then all the Duties of
Subjects were to be paid to Him. And if I had ten Thousand Millions of Lives to
lose, I would venture them for this Proposition, That Law is, or ought to be a
Rule to all Men: And that if the King himself will go about to destroy all
Laws, that the Subjects may defend themselves. And when the Dr. answers the
Arguments that I have brought in this, and some other Discourses by me
published, I shall think my self bound to recant. But of this when I come to
Romans 13. in the next Sect.

At present, I will propose a few short Questions, and Answers.

Q. How does it appear that a Prince has Gods Authority, or that he is set
upon the Throne by the Disposal of Providence?

A. When he has Actual Possession of the Throne.

Q. When has a Prince Actual Possession of the Throne?

A. When he is thoroughly Settled in his Throne, p. 9.

Q. When is his Government thoroughly Settled?

A. When the whole Administration of the Government, and the whole Power of the
Nation is in the Hands of the Prince, etc. ibid.

Now this last Answer is intelligible and plain. And thus whosoever has Gods
Authority or Power, has it mediately by the Election of the People, or by
Covenant, Compact, and Consent, or Submission, which is an Implicit Covenant;
and this is the Disposal of Providence.

But to begin at the Disposal of Providence, is to speak in the Clouds, and
never to give a Rational account, either of the Original, Changes, or
Revolutions of Government. In all my Discourse I suppose not only that God is,
but that he has made us with true Faculties; and so we are Reasonable
Creatures, and can give a Rational Account.

I proceed to Propos. 5. The Distinction then between a King de jure, and a
King de facto, relates only to Humane Laws, which bind the Subject, but are not
necessary Rules and Measures of Divine Providence. In an Hereditary Kingdom, he
is a rightful King, who has by Succession a Legal Right to the Crown: And he
who has Possession of the Crown, without a Legal Right, is a King de facto,
that is, is King, but not by Law, etc.

A. I imagine that this Distinction of a King de jure, and a King de facto, was
invented for another purpose; and has nothing to do in our Controversy. When
the Houses of York and Lancaster laid Claim to the Crown, both by Inheritance
and Lineal Succession, the Subjects being in great Perplexity, and many in very
great Doubts, Scruples, and Uncertainties, who was the Lineal Successor, it was
thought fit to make this Law. He that pretended to Lineal Succession, and had
it not, was called a King de facto. He that had Lineal Succession was called a
King de jure, though out of Possession. But if I were to distinguish in Reason
and Conscience, as to our Case, I would distinguish thus.

A King de jure is Twofold; either, First, A King by Inheritance: Or, Secondly,
A King by Election, though he is not the next immediate Heir, nor pretends to be.
But in this I humbly submit to the Learned and Judicious Lawyers.

As for the rest of this Proposition, it is of the same piece with other
Prejudices of the Dr's, and must have its Answer accordingly. See my other
Discourses. And most of this Section is of the same Nature. The Dr. talks many
times of a King having Gods Authority, without Legal Authority. Let him
explain, and prove what he says. For I know no Prince that has Gods
Authority, who has not Legal Authority. When he would clear himself of
Hobbism, (of which I believe he is not guilty) he says well, Power, and
nothing else, does not give Right to Dominion, p. 15. But presently after, he
seems to write Enthusiastically, and not like a Man guided by Reason, and
Principles of Nature.

I come now to his Concessions. First, It is evident, (says the Dr. 4. p. 23.)
there is no Natural Authority but Paternal, and Patriarchal Authority. This
destroys Sir R. F's Principle; and it concerns his hotheaded Followers to
consider it, as I observed before. But what the Dr. says immediately after, is
more than I can approve of, That Monarchies were erected upon the Ruins or
great Diminution of it, etc. For I do not think Monarchy the Ruin or Diminution
of Fatherly Authority, but rather the way to preserve it, and add Perfection to
it in the Increase of the World. The Dr. might have expressed himself more
warily. For this seems to reflect more upon Monarchy, than the Subjects of a
King ought.

2. Hear what he grants, 4. p. 25. speaking of those who refuse the Oaths, If
they would examine themselves for what Reason they believe that a King who has
no Right to the Throne, is not set up by God, and invested with his Authority,
they will find, That it must ultimately resolve it self into the Authority of
the People to make Kings, which it is unjust for God himself to overruled and
alter: ( pace tanti viri, by the Dr's leave, I should say, it is not Gods usual
Method and ordinary Providence to overruled and alter) for a Legal Entail is
nothing more than the Authority of the People: And if the People have such an
uncontrollable Authority in making Kings, (hold a little, the People cannot do
this, when they have Covenanted, ordinarily, but in extreme necessity) I doubt
they will challenge as much Authority to unmake them to. But perhaps the Dr.
will say, This is Argumentum ad homines; and I would not willingly misrepresent
him. As for his Answer to the Objection, which I find, p. 26. I know not what
to make of it, it is pure Enthusiasm, I think: I cannot measure it by any Rules
of Reason.

3. He grants very honestly, p. 27. That when ever a People have a good King,
(as surely, say I, King William and Queen Mary are a good King and Queen) it is
both their Duty and Interest to defend Him: And if they be not misled by the
Cunning and Artifice of ill Men, they will certainly do so. But if they have a
very bad one, that notoriously violates their Rights, and breaks the
Constitution upon which Himself stands, and strikes at the dearest things they
have, their Religion Established by Law, and their Properties, I doubt the Case
may be altered. And though every Body will not speak it out, yet most may say in
their Hearts, Let him go, if he cannot defend Himself. It is enough in
Conscience patiently to bear so bad a Prince, but a little too much to venture
their Lives and Fortunes to keep him in the Throne to oppress them. This is
against Reason and Nature, and I know no Law of God which requires it, etc. I
wish with all my heart that this Consideration, and other Arguments of the
Dr's. may prevail with the most Reverend Father in God, the late Archbishop,
and the Right Reverend the Bishops, who have not taken the Oaths to their
present Majesty's, I believe, out of pure Conscience, though erroneous, and full
of prejudice. And I have often wondered, that so many of the Clergy, who but a
little before did so violently oppose the Prince of Orange's proceedings (out
of the like conscientious prejudice, as I believe) did on a sudden take the
Oaths. This seems to me, to show that our Case wanted but a little
consideration, and men might easily lay aside their prejudices, in so blessed
and desirable a Change.

4. The Dr. grants, p. 28. That the Laws of God and Nature must take place of
all Humane Positive Laws and Oaths. Hence I infer, that the Dr. cannot deny
Self-preservation.

5. He grants, p. 29. That it is unreasonable to expound the Oath to such a
sense, as no man would have taken it in had it been expressed: No, no man in
his wits would take it for the best Prince that ever swayed the Scepter. Then
such an Oath, or Promise, or Declaration, could not intend to dedestroy
Self-preservation, Liberty, and Property.

6. The Dr. grants, p. 30. We are not bound to defend the King against Law, or
when he subverts the Laws, und Liberties, and the Legal Established Religion of
the Kingdom, by Illegal Methods: Or, as he says presently after, by the
exercise of an Illegal and Arbitrary Power.

7. He says, p. 32. Certainly this was not the Intention of the Oath, to fight
for their King against their Country. For an Oath to fight for the King, does
not oblige us to fight against our Country, which is as unnatural, as to fight
against our King.

8. He owns the preservation of the whole Kingdom is before the Prince, p. 33.
in these words; Though I have as great a Reverence for Princes as any man, I do
not think the Right and Interest of any Prince so considerable, as the Safety
and Preservation of the Nation, and the Lives and Fortunes of all his Subjects.
I am sure, we, who are for Defensive Arms, cannot say more than this.

9. I leave the Teachers of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance to answer his
Arguments, p. 36. or else I hope they will take the Oaths. I have spoken my
thoughts of this matter. As for Bishop Overals Convocation-Book, I do not love
many words, I have spoken my mind.

10. This seems very hard, that when God has actually delivered us, we must
refuse our deliverance, p. 38. And I add, it seems very hard that the Clergy,
who receive most benefit by this deliverance, (if in heart they love the
Protestant Religion) should not honor the Deliverers.

11. The Dr. agrees to what Bishop Sanderson tells us, That the End of Civil
Government, and of that Obedience which is due to it, is the Safety and
Tranquillity of Humane Societies; and therefore whatever is necessary and
useful to this End, becomes our Duty: for the End prescribes the Means. Hence I
infer the lawfulness of Defensive Arms in some case; because Humane Societies
under a Tyrannical Prince, who Rules Arbitrarily, cannot be safe. I beseech the
Dr. seriously to consider this, and examine thoroughly whether it does not
necessarily follow.

And before I end this Section, I must desire the Dr. to reconcile some of his
Assertions.

He says, p. 4. The Church of England has been very careful to instruct her
Children in their duty to Princes; to obey their Laws, and submit to their
Power, and not to resist, though very injuriously oppressed; and those who
renounce these Principles, renounce the Doctrine of the Church of England. But
she has withal taught, That all Sovereign Princes receive their Power and
Authority from God; and therefore every Prince, who is settled in the Throne, is
to be obeyed and reverenced as Gods Minister, and not to be resisted, etc.

And here I observe that the Dr. charge the Non-swearing Bishops, as well as
those who joined with the Prince of Orange, as rejecting the Doctrine of the
Church of England. Well; let the Dr. and his Party be the only true Church of
England-men, if he can disprove what I have now and elsewhere said. He grants,
That whosoever is settled in the Throne, has Gods Authority, and must not be
resisted. But p. 25, 26. in answering an Objection, That this makes the Prince
lose his Right by being notoriously injured, etc. he tells us, The Providence
of God removes Kings, and sets up Kings, but alters no Legal Rights, nor
forbids those who are dispossessed of them, to recover their Right when they
can, etc. and does not divest the dispossessed Prince of his Legal Right and
Claim, nor forbid him to endeavor to recover his Throne, nor forbid those who
are under no Obligation to the Prince in Possession, to assist the dispossessed
Prince to recover his Legal Right, etc. nor hinder him from Claiming it, when
he finds his opportunity.

I would here know of the Dr. who they are that are under no Obligation to the
Prince in Possession, and so may assist the dispossessed Prince? Are they
Domestic Subjects, or Foreign Enemies? What? may the late King with a good
Conscience invade England with an Army of Frenchmen to recover that which the
Dr. calls his Legal Right? I believe the Dr. to be an honest man, and that he
has no Plot or Design; but let him see the tendency of his Argument.

I should answer the Objection thus; The dispossessed Prince is either good, or
evil. If he is a good Prince, and has not oppressed his Subjects, his case is
hard, and very calamitous, and much to be pitied; but he must submit to Divine
Providence, and Gods Fatherly Correction or Probation. And this is a difficulty
in Providence, as the Dr's. phrase is; according to the account of all
Philosphers, Cur bonis male? But if his Subjects have stood by him with their
Lives and Fortunes, and are conquered, and have settled the Government of the
Conqueror, either by a General Assembly, or by Universal Submission, Promise,
Oath, etc. they are excusable, and the King so forced into Banishment, in
Conscience cannot require their Allegiance. If the Prince be evil, and has
oppressed his Subjects in a high measure, then he forfeiteth his Legal Right,
and it is transferred on another King for the public good. But I pray God this
may never befall the Royal Family again, while the Sun and Moon endures. But
furely the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy and Commons had Reason and Conscience to
defend themselves against the Tyranny of Jesuits, and other evil Counselors,
who tempted the King to be ungrateful, and seek the Ruin of their Religion and
Properties.

Again, p. 14. The Dr. says, He who has Possession of the Crown without a
Legal Right, (that is, as he means, a Successive Right) is a King de facto,
that is, is King, but not by Law. And yet p. 63. he says, The Law requires us
to own him for our Sovereign. Let the Dr. reconcile this.

Animadversions on Section 4.
I have before answered the Dr's Observation, That the Scripture has given us
no Direction in this case, but to submit, and pay all Obedience of Subjects
unto the present Powers. It makes no distinction, that ever I could find,
between a Rightful King, and an Usurper, between a King whom we must; and whom
we must not obey. See Animadversions on Sect. 2.

And now I come to that famous Text of Romans 13. And here the Reverend Dr. still
owns Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance. And he tells us in his Preface, That
he has renounced no Principle that ever he taught, except one in the case of
Resistance, p. 128, etc. which is the only material passage he knows any reason
to retract in that Book, to wit, that when St. Paul says, All Power is of God,
he means only Legal Powers.

Now I think the Dr. has had the ill Fortune to adhere to one of the worst
Principles, and renounce one of the best Principles, that ever he taught in
Government.

And that I may prove this, it must come to my Turn to suppose. And here I
shall premise the Dr's Words in the end of his Preface, They who understand
what belongs to Disputes of this nature, know very well that the shortest way
to bring the matter to an Issue, is to put the Case at the worst that can be
supposed; because this gives so much greater force and advantage to the
Argument, when it is suited to those, who are most strongly prejudiced [against
the Lawfulness of Defensive Arms in any Case.]

In managing this Argument, (as the Dr. goes on) it is necessary to reason upon
supposition of the most Illegal and greatest Oppressions: And it may be I may
meet with some Readers, as may charge me for so doing, with unchristian
Behavior, and clownish Irreverence toward a calamitous Prince, which I am
very sure, I am far from intending to do. I say, as I said at first, Sacred
Majesty laid in the dust requires our Tears: Our Religion, and our Laws revived
require our Joy. This premised, I offer a Supposition.

Suppose the Late King was resolved to Rule by a Standing Army: Suppose he had
Suspended all the Bishops, as well as the Bishop of London: Suppose he had
turned all the Nobility out of their Freeholds, as well as the President, and
Fellows of Magdalen College: Suppose he had set up an Illegal High Commission
Court: Suppose he had Tried all the Ministers in England for their Lives, as
well as the Seven Innocent Bishops: Suppose he had Closeted all the Nobility,
as well as he did many, to overawe their Votes in Parliament: Suppose he had
given Power to all the Dissenters, and Sectaries to preach in our Pulpits, as
well as in private Meetings: Suppose all the Members of his Privy Council had
been Jesuits, and Bigoted Papists, as well as Father Petre, Tyrconnel, etc.
Suppose he had Suspended all the Clergy in England for not Reading the Illegal
Declaration in Churches: Suppose he had commanded the Officers of his Standing
Army to Plunder our Houses, and cut our Throats. And now I think that I have
almost supposed the worst that I can suppose: And verily I tremble to suppose
this. I will make but one Supposition more. Suppose that by teaching this
Doctrine of Non-resistance the Late King might be tempted to bring in his
Religion by these Illegal and Horrid means: And thereby not only lose his Crown
and Dignity, but hazard the Damnation of his Soul, without Repentance, yet the
Authors Doctrine is, Subjects must not resist. And he says, Christ, and his
Apostles, especially St. Paul in Romans 13. taught this Doctrine, when he says,
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and
they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. No doubt but this is
very edifying Doctrine. This was most irresistible Rhetoric to the Senate, and
People of Rome (the freest People of the World) to turn Christians. For then,
though their Philosophers taught them, that they might defend themselves against
Tyrants by the Law of Nature, yet, they must not defend the Liberties of their
Country: If they do, they must never be happy hereafter. This is an invincible
Argument to any Jealous Roman, or Wise Grecian, to embrace Christianity. Is not
this Doctrine against all Gods Attributes, his Goodness, his Justice, his
Mercy, as well as the Predestinarian Doctrine is said to be? What! has God
left his poor innocent Creatures, I mean Legally innocent, to be a prey to
Lions? Credat Judaeus Apella, non ego. And here I may use the Dr's words, (for
I confess my style is not so Elegant) p. 40. According to these Principles
Humane Societies in such Revolutions (I must say Male-Administrations) cannot
be preserved without sin: For if all Men did their Duty, they must all be
destroyed. Now, I believe it will be hard to persuade any considering Men, that
that which in such a Case is necessary to preserve a Nation, is a sin: And that
which will infallibly destroy it, is a Duty and Virtue: If we allow the Safety
and Preservation of Humane Societies, to be the great Law of all. And I will
add the Dr's words, 1. p. 3. mutatis mutandis, The Doctrine of Resistance in
some Case may startle some Men at first, before they have well considered it.
But every one at first sight must acknowledge, that it is so much for the Ease
and Safety of Subjects in all Male-Administrations and Universal Oppression,
(which sometimes happen) what the Generality of Mankind, from an inward
Principle of Self-preservation, have always done, and will always do, that they
have reason to wish it to be true, and to be glad to see it well proved. And p.
18. These Principles are so very useful, especially in all Innovations in
Church, or State, that Subjects have great Reason to wish them true, and to
examine over again those strict Principles of Loyalty, which if pursued to
their just Consequence, must unavoidably in some Junctures, Sacrifice whole
Kingdoms, at least all Subjects, who pretend to this degree and kind of Loyalty
and Conscience, to the Tyranny of Evil Counselors, or Maladministration of
their Prince. And once more I will borrow the Dr's words, p. 44. (for I cannot
use so good) Since then such Male-Administrations will happen, such Principles
as must dissolve Humane Society, when such Maladministration happens, or
expose the most innocent and conscientious Men to the greatest Sufferings,
without serving any good end by them, cannot be true: For the End of Government
is the Preservation of Humane Societies, and therefore that can be no good
Principle of Government, which in the greatest Maladministration, if pursued,
must Ruin the most excellent, true, and harmless Subjects, who desire nothing
but to live according to Law, and save their Liberties, conveyed to them by
their Ancestors. Passive Obedience in such Case is to make all Mankind the
Slaves and Properties of Princes: As if all Men were made for Princes, not
Princes for the Government of Men, p. 45.

I know not but that a Barbarous and Savage Prince, as Tyberius, of whom it is
said, That there passed no day, no not so much as any Festival and Religious
Holy Day, without the Execution and Punishment of some. Or as Caligula, who
being highly displeased upon a time with the multitude, Would to God (quoth he)
that the People of Rome had but one Neck, meaning to chop them off at one blow:
And said, Let them hate me, so they fear me. Or as Nero, who is reported to
say, Let the whole Earth be on Fire, while I live. I say such cruel Tyrants may
possibly be well pleased with the Doctrine of Non-resistance. But surely no
good and wise Prince, who would have the Affections of his Subjects, does
desire that such Doctrine should be taught. The Great and Noble Spirit of
Augustus Caesar, or the Courage and Valor, together with the Clemency and
Mercy of a Vespasian, or the Impartial Administration of Justice in a Trajan,
would detest and loath such a sottish, brutish, and unnatural Principle. And
nothing can make a Prince encourage it, but a Design upon his People, or to
reduce them to Popery and Slavery, or to Rule Tyrannically, that is, both
Wickedly, and Uneasily. St. Paul himself stood upon his Privilege against the
Magistrate, Acts 16.37. Paul said unto them, They have beaten us openly
uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast us into Prison, and now do they thrust
us out privily? Nay verily, but let them come themselves, and fetch us out. It
is a most excellent and prevailing Motive for the Savior of Mankind, and his
chosen Apostles, to use, to tell them, that if they will be his Disciples, in
some Case they must become Slaves. If they save their Country, and defend
themselves against Violence and Oppression, (which they cannot but do, as
Sensible and Reasonable Creatures) they are certainly Damned. This verily is to
become Fools that they may be wise to Salvation, in another Sense than St. Paul
meant it.

And now let us hear what the Dr. says to us about Romans 13. To say the Apostle
here speaks of Lawful Powers, is gratis dictum, for there is no Evidence of
it.

A. There is Evidence of it; and the Evidence or Reason of it, is this; Neither
God, nor Man gives Authority to any man to oppress the Innocent. Therefore the
Innocent in resisting Illegal proceedings, resist no Authority; Nor do no evil,
forbidden by God, or Man. See my Answer to the History of Passive Obedience, in
the beginning.

But, says the Dr. The Criticism between (...) and (...) will not do; for they
both signify the same thing in Scripture, either Force and Power, or Authority.

A. Some Passive-Obedience men think this unanswerable: But surely the Dr.
cannot think the Divines of our Persuasion so weak, as to lay the strength of
the Argument upon a Word or Criticism. But first they give a Reason, as before,
and then to illustrate their Argument, use the words, as Modern Critics say,
they are most commonly used in our days. The Apostle does not say, All Power,
(...), that is, Strength is of God; but All Power, (...), that is, Authority,
or Lawful Power, is of God; implying, that it is not he that is the strongest
man, has Gods Authority, as Mr. Hobbs says; neither has any Oppressor in the
Act of Oppression; neither are we required not to resist such Acts of
Oppression. But I observe however, that he says not a word to those Critics,
who say, that (...), The Powers that be, that is, the True (or Lawful) Powers.
But I would not have the Dr. think, that our Divines lay the stiess of so great
a cause upon Criticisms; but they may be plain Illustrations.

The Dr. goes on, p. 19. Why should we think the Apostle here intends a
distinction unknown to Scripture? Had there been any such Rule before given, To
submit to Lawful Powers, but not to submit to Usurpers, there had been some
pretense for understanding St. Paul's All Powers, of all Legal Power; but there
being nothing like this any where else in Scripture, if he had intended any
such distinction, he ought to have said it in express words, or else no body
could reasonably have understood him to intend this Precept of subjection to
the Higher Powers, only of the Powers that had Legal Right.

A. St. Paul was not bound, neither was he sent to teach the Romans Political
Government, but he supposes them to know this by the Customs of their
Country, and he tells them, They must submit, and not resist; for all Power is
of God. Christians, as well as Heathens, or Jews, must obey Authority. But he
does not say, that Usurped Power or Strength is of God, and to be submitted to.
And though the Dr. says, There is nothing like this any where else in
Scripture, which is gratis dictum, yet other Learned Divines say, that the
Apostle means this, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. When he says, Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether to the King as Supreme. Hence they
collect, and I think truly, That the Donation of the Power is of God, and the
Designation of the Person, or Limitation and Qualification of the Power is of
Man, though it is also the disposal of Providence. I have said in another
Discourse, God and Man in these Acts are not opposite, but subordinate. God is
the first Cause; Man is the second Cause. The Prince that receives Authority
from Man, receives it from God also, though mediately by Man; and is Gods
Minister and a Ruler, v. 3, 4.

The Dr. proceeds; Then in order to the fulfilling of this precept, it would be
necessary for Subjects to exarmine the Titles of Princes, and to that end to be
well skilled in History, and the Laws of a Nation, and to be able to judge
between a pretended and real Right, etc.

A. And surely it is not so difficult a thing to know who is our Prince, as the
Dr. would make it. It is so easy, that every Subject in England, as far as
ever I heard, never doubted that the late King James was the lawful King of
England, etc. And there needs no great skill in History and Law to know this.
And as for the Revolution, when we are bound in Conscience to obey another
King, there needs no History to tell us, what we have seen and heard. And the
Reverend Dr. will tell us, when the Government is settled, p. 9. Suppose the
greatest uncertainty that you can suppose, the Consciences of men would not be
more perplexed, than you have perplexed them at this day: And therefore you
need not have said, Let any man judge in what perplexities this sense of the
Apostles Precept would involve the Consciences of men.

The Dr. has a great deal more to the same purpose, and descants at large. To
which I answer in general, That if St. Paul had taught us Politics in Romans 13.
I should have thought it very strange. Men must learn Politics from the Laws
of Reason, and the common Prudence and Experience of Mankind.

Suppose the Great Turk in a Passion, or upon a small Provocation, should draw
his Scymeter or Sword, to kill some Eminent Nobleman of his Court, and the
Nobleman should defend his Life by force of Arms, and by Skill or Strength
should disarm his great Lord and Master, and escape for his Life. In this case
I say, Natural Religion and Conscience will justify the Innocent Nobleman, and
will tell the Great Turk, that he ought to give God thanks in such like words
as David did, when Abigail by her wisdom pacified his wrath, 1 Samuel 25.32.
Blessed be the Lord God, who sent thee this day to meet me; And blessed be thy
advice, and blessed be thou, who have kept me this day from shedding blood. I
should never read the Scriptures, nor any History or Law-book, to tell me, who
is my King, no more than I would to tell me, who is my Father and Mother. I
like a Fool have all my days presumed without Book, with my Fellow Subjects,
and with my Brethren and Sisters, who is my King, and who is my Father and
Mother; and have honored and obeyed them according to the fifth Commandment.
Such reasoning is unworthy of the profound Judgment of Dr. Sherlock. If the Dr.
pleases, I would desire him to write a Book to teach Children what are their
Names, and who are their Godfathers and Godmothers, before we Catechize them
any more. For, is it not a very hard thing to know all these things? See how
prejudice blinds the Eyes of pious and wise men.

I confess, that when there is a competition for the Crown, or when Imposture
may be reasonably suspected, or in the like extraordinary case, then the
Subjects may become Skeptics. But then we have a Privy Council, and a
Parliament, to examine, judge, and determine. But otherwise, I am persaded that
there was not one of ten thousand, that ever doubted, whether King Charles the
Second was the true Heir, and rightful King, or King James the Second.

But let us hear the Dr's. Objection, p. 24. If the choice and consent of the
People makes a Prince, then no man is a Subject, but he who consents to be so;
For the major Vote cannot include my consent, unless I please: That is the
Effect of Law and Compact, or Force, not of Nature. If Subjects give their
Prince Authority, they may take it away again, if they please. There can be no
Irresistible Authority derived from the People: For if Authority be wholly
derived from them, who shall hinder them from taking it away when they see fit?
Upon these Principles, there can be no Hereditary Monarchy: One Generation can
only choose for themselves; their Posterity have as much right to choose as they
had.

A. The Dr. owns, That if the Lineal Succession should fail, then the People
must choose a Prince; and this hinders not Hereditary Monarchy. No more does it
in such an extraordinary case as our present case is. And the Dr. himself
says, p. 25. A Legal Entail is nothing more than the Authority of the People;
though here he says, Upon these Principles there can be no Hereditary Monarchy.
Let him reconcile these. The Parliament has settled the Succession.

But, says the Dr. Every Subject must consent.

This is thought a mighty Goliath, but I think it a poor, weak Argument. I have
elsewhere showed, that the meek, wise, and ever-renowned Hooker, foundeth all
Government in Covenant, so that I am not singular in the Church of England. And
surely it is not required in our Constitution, that every individual person
consent explicitly to Acts of Parliament, but the major Vote includes all. And
there is nothing more common in the World, either in Political, or Sacred
Affairs, than for a Father, or Guardian, or Godfather, or Friend, or Relation,
to engage for a Child. See Deuteronomy. 29, 10, 11. If it were any other person, I
should be afraid, would turn Anabaptist, or at least a Puritan, and write a
Book against Godfathers. In these Cases an Implicit Covenant is fully
sufficient. If the whole Kingdom consists of such who were Children to their
Parents, that Elected the Prince, and agreed that the Kingdom should be
Hereditary, this in Conscience binds them: Though they make no Personal and Vocal
Expression of their Consent and Agreement, as the Fathers did. I imagine that
upon second Thoughts the Dr. will have no mind to oppose this, and therefore I
say no more.

But the Dr. says, That if Subjects give their Prince Authority, then they may
take it away again, if they please.

A. All Subjects are bound in Conscience to stand to their Covenant, Agreement,
Promise, and Oath. And here whosoever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.
This is Rebellion, supposing a Kingdom not universally oppressed. And this
secures the Prince, as well as the Providence of God, in the Dr's
unintelligible Notion.

But this is to say, God, as well as Man, is confined to Humane Laws in making
Kings, p. 25.

A. I suppose the Dr. living among such an Honorable Society of Lawyers, has
heard of being tried by God and the Country: And so the King and Queen may be
made by God and the Country. God feeds us, but we must put Meat in our Mouths.
God Clothes us, but we must put on our Clothes. God does what we do, when we
use the Means appointed by God. And when the Dr. is in a reasoning Humor, he
will tell us, that there is no doubt but several Governments have been begun
by, and Originally derived from the Choice and Consent of the People, p. 23.
but still it is God, who by his Providence advances Men to the Throne. But of
this before.

As for those who advance Conquest, I have spoken my Mind formerly. And I add,
that when the whole Community, be it by the Sword, is subdued, (as the Jews
were by Caesar) and have promised Subjection, and own the Authority of the
Conqueror, and he promises them Protection, I grant this gives the Conqueror
Humane Right and Title, as well as Gods Authority. For he holds his Crown (as
some speak) jure Gentium and concessu Gentium. But if the P. of O. did Conquer
England, against which he declared, and acted nothing like a Conqueror in any
part of the Nation, where his Army Marched, but every where like a Savior and
Deliverer. I say, if the P. of O. did Conquer the Nation, the Princess of
Orange did not. And Queen Mary's Title can be no other way (God save Her
Majesty, for I am Her most Loyal Subject and Servant) but by the Election of
the People in Convention, and now confirmed by Act of Parliament: Which I
desire all Conscientious Men to consider.

Finally, As for Submission, that is an Implicit Covenant, as I have showed,
and must be kept. So that (though the Dr. cannot, yet with all, or the most
Judicious Philosophers, Schoolmen, and Reformed Divines) I can see where to fix
the Foundation of Government, and that is in the Agreement of the People: And
this is the ordinary Disposal of Providence. But let it be by the Election and
Consent of the People: Or by Conquest, and so by After-Covenant: Or by
Submission, which is an Implicit After-Covenant: Or by continued Usurpation,
as the Dr. speaks, which still is founded upon After-Covenant and Promise, all
these are the Disposals of Providence. So that the Dr. very weakly (for I do
not believe he does it craftily) gives only the General Cause, which no Man
denies. But we desire to know, what is (causa secunda, proxima, and
particularis) the second, next, and particular Cause (as the Schools speak) of
this Revolution and Government.

And the Reason is, either we have done very well, or very ill in joining with
the P. of O. And we would gladly convince the Dr. or any Man else, that we have
hazarded all that is dear to Man, Virtuously and Honorably, to preserve Gods
true Religion and Worship as by Law Established, to save the English Monarchy
from the Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome; and to continue the Liberties of
our Native Country.

The Providence of God is no Rule, or Reason, or Measure of our Duty: But the
Law of God and Nature, and the Laws of the Land, when they contradict not
these. And the Dr. will tell us so, when he thinks of it, p. 32. The Divine
Providence has Ways and Methods of removing Kings and Setting up Kings, which
we are not aware of, nor concerned to know, because it is no part of our Duty.

To sum up all this, In this Revolution some talk of Desertion and Abdication:
Some of Conquest: Some of Gods Providence, as the Dr. and some of the Election
of the People.

1. As to Desertion and Abdication, whether the Late King did in a proper and
strict sense Abdicate the Kingdom is a matter that I need not dispute, but
surely the Convention did well to take this into Consideration, that the
Kingdom was left without any Order or Government, in a very troublesome time.
But supposing that it was a proper and strict Abdication, this does not make
the Prince and Princess of Orange, King and Queen of England. This must be some
other way.

2. As to Conquest. And, 3. As to Gods Providence, I have said enough to
satisfy any Conscientious, and wise Man, who will lay aside Prejudice and
Prepossession.

And therefore, 4. I am fully satisfied in my own Conscience, and will dispute
the Case with any Learned and Conscientious Divine, that it can be justified no
other way, but by the Election of the People in Convention.

As for the Examples of Jehoiada, and Joash, and Athaliah, and of Jeroboam, and
Jehu, I think there may be a better Account given, than the Dr. gives: But this
is nothing to the main Controversy between him, and us. That concerns the
Non-Swearers.

I shall only give you a familiar Simile or Example out of Scripture of the
Election of a King, though it does not quadrare in omnibus; it is not (nor needs
be) fitted in all Circumstances to the Kingdom of England.

In the first Book of Sam. chap. 8. The People of Israel desire a King. (Then
it follows, they had none before.) Whereupon Samuel told them his Message from
God, and at last yielded to the importunity of the People. And he called all
the People, Chap. 10. that is, All the Heads, Elders, and Princes of the
People; a great Convention, Parliament, or Assembly of the Nation. And they
chose Saul. And all the People shouted, and said, God save the King. And those
whose Hearts God had touched went with him. And they that despised him, were
called Children of Belial. And I shall only add Samuel's Admonition and
Counsel, Chap. 12. ver. 24, 25. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with
all your heart: for consider how great things he has done for you. But if ye
shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King.

I know that there are two Prejudices (as the Dr. speaks in like case) rather
than Objections against this Truth.

1. This will not please the King, and Royal Family. 2. This occasions Subjects
to Rebel, when they think fit.
1. This will not please the King, and Royal Family.

A. We are confident that this is an Insinuation of weak Spirits, and directly
contrary to the Great and Heroic Designs of their Sacred Majesty's, and their
Impartial Administrations of Justice; and God forbid we should do any thing
justly meriting the loss of Their Majesty's Favor, and their Hearts confiding
in us. I am sure that the pleading for our Liberties, is no Prejudice to the
Kings Crown, or Prerogatives. Why should not our Sovereign look upon us with
Respect, when we pay him all Legal Obedience out of Conscience, and venture our
Lives and Fortunes in defense of his Crown and Dignity, as well as of our Laws,
and Properties? Why may not we hope for Preferment, Honor, and Commendation,
as well as those who never practice what they teach? When I have lived to see
their Senses too much for their singular Divinity. But however we fare in this
World, I am of Opinion, that a King should do Justice, a Priest should teach
Truth, and a Soldier should Fight for a good Cause, and leave the Success to
God. The Happiness of a Kingdom is in a Princes Ruling as a Father, and
Subjects obeying out of Love, rather than mere necessity.

Obj. 2. This occasions Subjects to Rebel, when they think fit.

To this I say, besides what I have formerly written, that the Doctrine of
Non-Assistance, which is now become common, is as bad, if not worse than our
Doctrine of Resistance in some Case. Now the Dr. owns the former, p. 50.
saying, Thus far I think the Subjects may be very guiltless, who do not drive
the King away, but only suffer him quietly (to be driven away, or) to escape
out of his Kingdom: for this is no Rebellion, no Resistance, but only
Non-assistance, which may be very innocent: For there are some Cases, wherein
Subjects are not bound to assist their Prince, and if ever there were such a
Case this is it.

I grant Non-Assistance and Resistance are not the same in all cases: I grant
we are not bound to assist our King in Illegal Commands: But I should think,
that if we may not resist him in his Illegal and Arbitrary Commands, we ought
in Conscience to assist him in his Legal Commands, especially in the
preservation of his Person, Crown and Dignity. And I am sure that the late King
would have called this a Seditious and Rebellious Doctrine, as well as ours.
But thus the poor King was cheated. And the Dr. may say, as well as think in
his heart, p. 27. Let him go, if he cannot defend himself. Well; I commend the
Dr. in this case, for Teaching Subjects to sleep in a whole skin. But in troth
I think, it is more plain dealing, and the King had better be told, that in the
same case they will not assist him, they will resist, that is, in case of
Universal Oppression.

I will suppose for once, that David was against Defensive Arms and Resistance
in any case; and upon this supposition, let us hear his Judgment and
Resolution, 1 Samuel 26.15, 16. David said unto Abner, Art not thou a valiant
man? and who is like unto thee in Israel? Wherefore then have thou not kept thy
Lord the King? for there came one of the people in to destroy the King thy
Lord. This thing is not good that thou have done: As the Lord lives, ye are
worthy to die, because ye have not kept your Master the Lords Anointed.

Abner might have replied to David, (if he had been taught by the Dr.) Sir, the
King is in pursuit of you, when you are innocent; and that illegally, cruelly,
causlesly, maliciously; and therefore though I must not resist, I may not assist,
nor see your innocent blood shed. Take my Master, Lord, and King, and do what
you will with him. Here I must desire the Dr. to reflect upon his Conscience in
the fear of God. And I dare appeal to the Judgment of any moderate,
conscientious, and learned Papist, or to the Judgment of any indifferent man in
the World, if our Doctrine be not as honest as this. In this case
Non-Assistance is as bad as Resistance; for the Prince must certainly,
infallibly, and inevitably fall into the hands of his Adversaries, with this
aggravation, That those he trusted deceived him.

To this purpose we may consider that distinction of the Efficient Cause
mentioned by the Schoolmen. It is either, 1. Physical Or, 2. Moral. The
Physical Cause is that which has a real influx toward the Effect, or that
which truly, and of it self contributes to the Being of the Effect. The Moral
Cause is that, which though it does not really operate in producing the Effect,
yet it is such (in ordine Moris) in order to Manners, as they say, as if it
really conferred Being to the Effect; and that because the Effect that follows
is no less imputable to it, than if it had produced the Effect by a real
influx; such are causes consulting, commanding, and not hindering, when they
ought to hinder. But I have sufficiently lashed this Doctrine elsewhere.

As for the rest of the Book, it is either what we grant, or what has been
already answered, or contains the Dr's. Arguments to persuade the Clergy, that
have not taken the Oaths. And I see no reason why the Arguments should not
prevail with them, if they will lay aside prejudice. But I believe the Dr. may
Preach Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance upon Romans 13. long enough, before
he will gain one rational and considering man. For the Maladministration of
the late unhappy King, and the Tyranny, Pride, and Insolence of the Jesuits,
instead of frighting them out of their senses, have frighted the Commons of
England into their senses, that they will rather believe they merit Salvation
(if the Protestant Faith allowed it) than that they are guilty of that
Resistance, which, the Apostle says, shall receive Damnation, for joining with
the Prince of Orange, and his Confederates, in this Revolution.

Wherefore I shall conclude with these three Propositions.

1. In our Case Defensive Arms were lawful.

2. King William and Queen Mary, with their true Friends, can be justified no
other way.

3. This Doctrine, as I have explained it, is neither contrary to the Church of
England, nor more prejudicial or dangerous to Monarchy, than any other
Principle; as will appear, I hope, to any, who will impartially consider what I
have written in a Treatise called Conscience Satisfied in a Cordial and Loyal
Submitting to the present Government of King William and Queen Mary; and in
another small Discourse, in Answer to the History of Passive Obedience; and in
a Fast Sermon on Josh. 5.13. Art thou for us, or for our Adversaries? And I
think that the Thanksgiving-days, and the Fasting-days, and the Collects, and
Prayers read, and the saying Amen by all the Members of every Congregation, is
a Justification of what has been done in this Revolution, unless men are gross
Hypocrites, and honor God with their mouths, without their hearts.

And whatever some late Bishops, and Governors of the Church have done, I am
sure the first Blessed Reformers honored all Protestant Churches as Sisters,
and their Divines and Ministers as Brethren. I know not why Luther, and Calvin,
and Arminius (though they differ in some Opinions) should not all still be
honored as faithful Servants of Christ. And here I shall produce a few of our
Divines, most famous, who speak honorably of them; as all men, that hate
Faction in the Church ought to do.

The Reverend Bishop Jewel (Reply to Hard. A. Art. 2. Divis. 6.) justifies
Luther as a godly man, and accuses Harding of Slander. And ( Divis. 7) he
calls Melancthon and Bucer, godly learned men. And he calls Peter Martyr, a
most worthy and learned Father. ( A. to Hardings Preface.) And Harding commends
his Modesty. And surely if Passive Obedience had been the Doctrine of those
days, and esteemed (as it has been of late) Rebellion to oppose it, the ever
Renowned Hooker (Preface to Eccl. Pol.) would not have honored Calvin with
this Elogium; For my own part, I think him (that is, Calvin) incomparably the
wisest man that ever the French Church did enjoy, since the hour it enjoyed
him. The Divines of the Church of England are not wont thus to commend Authors
guilty of Heresy, or Schism, or Sedition, or Rebellion. And Dr. Bilson (True
difference between Christian Subjection, and unchristian Rebellion, p. 3. page
264.) says, Calvin is so well known to those that be Learned or Wise, for his
great pains and labors in the Church of God, that a few snarling Friars cannot
impeach his Name. And Dr. Whitgift against the Puritan T. C. every where
honors Bullinger, Castius, and more especially Zuinglius: And yet all these
justified Defensive Arms in some case. Now who are the Innovators? they that
follow the first Doctors of our Church, or they that have embraced other new
and unheard of Principles in Government? I leave the works of our Forefathers
to be Judges.

But here it is objected by some weak and factious spirits, that our Convention
(or Parliament) have done as bad to the late King, as the Rump Parliament, so
called, O. C. and the Army of Sectaries did to King Charles the First: And
therefore if we are justifiable, they are justifiable, and consequently Jan.
30. ought not to be kept as a day of Humiliation and Fasting.

For this, let the Reader consider what the Dr. says, p. 46, 47, etc. Or let
him take this Answer. Our Cause and theirs differ as far as Heaven and Hell, or
Good and Bad, Murder and Self-defence. I will not say that there were no
Corruptions in Government, nor no Innovations brought into the Church: Neither
will I dispute the Reasonableness of the War between the King, and Parliament
in the beginning. But supposing that the Parliament had sufficient Cause to
defend themselves: Yet,

1. King Charles the First had given full satisfaction to the Two Houses of
Parliament, and the Bishops, and the Common Prayer were Established by Law: And
all know that it was the National Worship, as it is now, and cannot be
abrogated, or altered, but by King, Lords, and Commons: But O. C. destroyed the
House of Lords, and the Book of Common Prayer by force, and by the Sword.

2. King Charles the First was a professed Protestant, and all his Officers and
Ministers in Church and State were such as the Law allowed: But the Late King
was a professed Papist, and put Papists in Places of Trust against Law, and
turned out all the best Protestants for no reason, but only because they
opposed the Jesuits and Arbitrary Power.

3. King Charles the First, and the Parliament had concluded upon a Settlement
to the satisfaction of all sober and wise Men in the Kingdom; but O. C. and his
Army of Sectaries with force turned about a hundred Members out of Parliament,
and kept them Prisoners against Law and Justice.

4. O. C. and the Sectaries Ruled the Nation by the Sword in time of Peace,
contrary to all Law, and Executed many of the most Zealous Protestants: But
King William defends all Protestants according to Law.

5. They, like Cruel Tyrants and Usurpers, destroyed the whole Frame of
Government, Murdered the King, and Banished all the Royal Family. As there are
some at this day, who are so vain and sottish as to desire a Commonwealth, and
to Root out the Bishops, and Common Prayer, and so bring confusion into Church
and State. As if there were no difference between the Reformation of Abuses,
and destroying that which is good and excellent. We say that this Faction in a
Nation is to be opposed as well as the Tyranny and Illegal Proceedings of the
Papists: For both are destructive of our Laws, and Established Religion. It is
true our present Business is against the Abominations of the Church of Rome,
and the Usurpations of Popish Priests and Jesuits: But we also abhor all those
who would Murder a Protestant King, and destroy our Liberties, and the Religion
by Law Established, and force us contrary to our Consciences: But King William
opposes none but Papists, who would have destroyed us, and he continues our
Parliament and our Laws, Liberties, and Religion, with all the Encouragements
thereof.

6. King William was invited over by diverse of the Nobility, and Gentry, to
save us from Popery and Slavery, and was received with the universal Joy of
Protestants: But O.C. and his Sectaries, who Barbarously and Impudently
Murdered King Charles the First, were cried out against by all sound
Protestants, who adhered to the Laws of the Nation. So that that Rebellion and
King William's Actions, and those that joined with him, differ as much, as
Destroying a Nation, and Saving a Nation; as the greatest Sin, and the greatest
Good.

Lastly, Our Royal Martyr, King Charles the First died in the Defense of the
Laws, and Established Religion: But the Late King Abdicated, or Deserted, or at
least went out of the Kingdom, rather than he would Rule according to Law: And
when he was gone to France the Chief of the Nobility and Gentry desired the P.
of O. to take the Government upon him, and to Summon a Convention; which
Convention Elected him King, and the Princess Queen. The Late King fled, and
Banished himself, rather than he would do the Nation Justice, and when he was
gone, the Convention (or Parliament) resolved to keep him out. The P. of O.
though a Sovereign Prince, and no way Subject to the Late King, did not Murder
him, when he had him in his Power: But O.C. and the Sectaries of the Army
Beheaded King Charles the First, though he was Innocent, and a Prince of most
Excellent Virtues, and of Ever Blessed Memory.

Ob. Solomon says, Prove. 24.21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King,
and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their calamity shall
rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

A. This Text does not forbid the Change of Government in Absolute necessity,
when the Safety of the whole Kingdom requires it, and it is done Regularly, and
for the Public Good. But commands Obedience and Fear to the present Lawful
King, and never to join with Changelings, who are restless under Government,
and Lightly, Wantonly, Factiously, or Seditiously oppose what is present. It is
not to be understood Morally, as if it were Absolutely evil, and a Sin to
change, when the whole Frame of Government is corrupt: But you must take it
prudentially, that a wise Man, who fears God, ought not to Change that Form of
Government under which he lives, unless in urgent necessity. But what if the
King be given to Change? Then meddle not with Him. Keep the Fundamental Laws
and Customs of your Country, and the true Religion by Law Established. We say
(says a Learned Author) that if Power be given to the King by Law, yea, or to
other Magistrates, though it be against Religion, we have no help but suffering,
or flying, till we can be helped by Legal ways. But if when we have Laws for
our Religion and Liberties, the King out of his own will, or seduced by others,
shall in an Illegal way seek to deprive us of them, now we may defend our
selves, and in this we resist no Kingly Authority, but the Will of such a Man.

Obj. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy
People.

A. This Text commands Obedience to the King, with all reverence in Heart,
Tongue, and Action. But what is this to innocent and lawful Defense: Which St.
Thomas, and other Schoolmen call cum moderamine inculpatae tutela.

Obj. Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight.

A. The Confession of David (says a great Divine) is to be taken
comparatively. He sinned against God alone by way of Excellence; because he
could be punished, condemned, and absolved by God alone. But David sinned also
against those, who were mere Subjects, as Bathsheba, Vriah, Joab, and Nathan,
but not as a Tyrant, violating the whole State of the Commonwealth; but as a
Sinner, left to his Lust. Furthermore, no Man could judge of the Personal Fact
of David, except God alone, which pertained not to the Subversion of the
Commonwealth. I say, the sin of David was particular, which was not
destructive to the whole Commonwealth. Besides, David speedily recanted, and
repented of the evil. The sense is, (says Calvin, cited by the Author of the
Synopsis) as if he should say, I do not regard what Men think or speak; if
either they spare me, or extenuate the wickedness by flattery, or mitigate my
grief with gentle Speeches; yet it is more than enough to me, that I perceive
thee my Judge, that Conscience draws me to thy Tribunal, etc. Other Expositors
say, I have sinned against thee only as a Judge and Avenger, because I can fear
punishment from thee only. For Kings are free from the bonds of their offenses,
says St. Ambrose. R. R. says, No Creature judges the King, but the blessed
God; otherwise he would be King in Name, not in Deed. (G) The Kings sin is not
punishable. Which is all true of the Personal Crimes of Princes, or of such
Oppressions as are speedily repented of.

Obj. Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are Gods.

A. This is true (says one) of Inferior Magistrates as well as Superiors, and
yet none will say, but the Inferior may be resisted. Kings should imitate God
in Wisdom, in Justice, in Mercy, etc, and defend, not oppress the Innocent. To
tell a King thus becomes a Priest, much better than to delude him with an
unaccountable and irresistible Power.

Obj. Prove. 8.15, 16. By me Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Justice. By me
Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth.

A. By, here, denotes the Principal cause, it does not exclude the less
Principal, or Instrumental, the Election of the People. As, Psalm. 18.29. By
thee (that is, God) I have run through a Troop; or by thy help (says Synop. out
of G.) By me as King of Kings Kingdoms are constituted; and Persons set over
Kingdoms, either are given, or are deposed according to Dan. 2.21. and 4.25,
31, 32. and by me they are preserved, etc. Neither does this forbid the People
to defend themselves against a Tyrant, or to Depose a Tyrant, but rather
acknowledges them Instruments. This hinders not what St. Thomas says, (2.2.
q. 10, art. 10.) Dominion and Prelacy were introduced by Humane Right. Because
God and Man both concur to Government: God is the first Cause, Man the second.
Whatsoever the second Cause does (says Fortescue out of an ancient Author, c.
3.) the same does the first Cause by an higher and more excellent way or mean.

Obj. Prove. 30.31. A King against whom there is no rising up. And, Eccles. 8.4.
Where the word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say unto him, What
do thou?

A. These Texts speak of a King Ruling according to the Customs and Laws of his
Country, or not of Tyrants and Oppressors: Or, at least, they forbid not
self-defence in case of Extremity. I may honor the King, and yet not suffer
him to kill me, when I am innocent, and have served Him faithfully and when he
ought by the Laws of God and Man to protect me. Solomon, Prove. 30.31. speaks of
the glory and happiness of a potent and invincible Prince: not of any Moral
evil or unlawfulness in defending our selves against Illegal Courses,
Oppression, and Tyranny of wicked Princes. Again, these Texts give a General
Rule, being wholly silent in casual exceptions; as in case of extreme
Maladministration. The sacred Writers exclude not certain Pacts, (says a
grave Divine) or Laws of Humane Creation (or Constitution) by which the King is
put into that Super-eminency. And the saying of Optatus Milevitanus, is either
to be taken of Emperors or Absolute Monarchs: or verily of Him, who restrains
his Super-eminence within the Laws of Divine as well as Humane Constitution;
for then in truth, There is none above the Emperor, but God alone, who made the
Emperor. Solomon says what may be done, not what may always be rightly done by
a Prince. For afterward, v. 9. he teaches us that many abuse their Power to
Tyranny. There is a time wherein one Man rules over another to his own hurt.
Therefore he does not give the Magistrate leave to do what he will. For the
Power of Man is limited by the Word of God, and honest Laws. Because it is
written, We must obey God rather than Man: and give to Caesar the things that
are Caesar 's, and to God the things that are Gods. The second verse is not to
be understood otherwise, I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and that
in regard of the Oath of God. As if he should say, So obey the King, as rather
to obey God, to whom we are all bound with greater Religion.

Obj. Eccl. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; and curse not the
rich in thy bedchamber; for a Bird of the Air shall carry the voice, and that
which has wings shall tell the matter.

A. Solomon prohibits reviling, or slighting the Kings person, or speaking evil
of the King, either for natural, or moral, personal defects, and vices. And he
cautions us against wrath for a little Oppression; because a King may easily be
revenged on us, and ruin us: But he forbids not self-defence in case of
Universal Oppression. If thou art wise and skilful, despise not a young or a
foolish King, by mocking his Majesty; by proud slandering his Government; by
contemning and reproaching his Statutes and Deeds; but (as much as the matter
and truth will bear) speak thou honorably of him, and think the best, and
interpret well actions that are doubtful (says some Author.) For it is wisdom
as well as duty to reverence the Kings Person and Office, and conceal small
miscarriages.

Obj. St. Matthew. 22.21. Read the Context, v. 15. Then went the Pharisees, and
took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk. And they sent out unto
him their Disciples, with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art
true, and teach the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man,
for thou regardest not the person of men: Tell us therefore, what think
thou? Is it lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus perceived
their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye Hypocrites? Show me the Tribute
money; and they brought unto him a penny. And he said unto them, Whose is this
Image and Superscription? They say unto him, Caesar's. Then says he unto them,
Bender therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the
things that are Gods. When they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left
him, and went their way.

A. It is most certain that Tribute is to be paid to our Governors. The
Herodians were sent to entangle him in his talk: And they propounded this
Question concerning Caesar, the Roman Emperor's Tribute. To which our Savior
answers, that they ought to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. So
that by Christ's command all Subjects must willingly and cheerfully, and for
Conscience sake render honor, tribute, custom, subjection, and obedience to
the Higher Powers, which are ordained of God. But what is this to the Desensive
Arms against Tyranny and Oppression? The Jews had promised Obedience to the
Romans, and to Caesar. Now what we promise, (Synop. out of G.) though forced by
necessity of War, binds us fast; for unless it were so, the whole sanction of a
Covenant would perish. Besides Possession of a long time, which to endeavor to
move (or change) is always unjust in public Affairs. Christ, and his Apostles,
and the Primitive Christians hearkened to no Innovations under what specious
pretenses soever, but performed Faith, Allegiance, and Obedience to the
Emperor. But let any man prove that these Emperors did not rule the Jews
according to their Promise and Covenant, and known Laws and Customs; or that
our Savior forbids defending our Lives, Liberties, or Properties, if invaded
contrary to Law, Custom, or Covenant. Again, it follows not, that if Christ
does not here dispute Caesar's Title, that he never did, nor that his Disciples
never satisfied themselves. I am sure the Scribes and Pharisees, and the
multitude cried out, when our Savior was accused, We have no King but Caesar;
a plain acknowledgment of Caesar's Title, Power and Authority.

Obj. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. I exhort therefore that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for Kings,
and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of
God our Savior.

A. This is also spoken of Governors indefinitely, and of such who would rule
according to the Customs and Laws of their Countries: Not of Tyrants who would
Subvert National Laws and Customs without cause. And though there was great
Confusions in the Roman Empire about the Throne, sometimes yet still the
Emperor promised to Rule according to Laws and Customs received. And surely no
Man can prove that Passive Obedience was owned in those days, if the Emperor
commanded Illegally: Nor was their Hereditary Succession in the Empire. The
wickedness of Man, cannot destroy the Institution of God. But Magistrates
Kings, Emperors are constituted of God. And Christian Religion does not
overthrow the Political Government of Infidels and Heathens. Therefore we must
pray for all, Persecutors, and Idolaters.

Obj. Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Poweers,
to obey Magistrates.

A. All these Texts command what no rational Man, much less Christian denies,
ought to be given to our Governors: But they prohibit not Defensive Arms in
case of Universal Oppression.

Obj. 1 St. Pet. 13, 14, 17. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for
the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as
unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. Fear God. Honor the King.

A. The Apostle speaks indefinitely of Governors, and of Obedience to them; but
he states no particular Case. When this Epistle was written, ( Synop out of G.)
I think that Claudius, or Nero, was Emperor. Therefore we must obey Infidels,
and evil Princes. But this prohibits not Self-defence, when Laws are violated.
Though the Ordinance or Government in the manner of its Constitution be from Man,
(says a Learned Author) yet because of the necessity of its Institution, it is
from God. Submit to it, though of Man, for the Lords sake. For God is the primary
Author. Observe Kings and Presidents are an Humane Constitution or Ordinance,
made by Men with common Consent, by certain Laws, yet by the Command and
Authority of God. So that I conclude with a great Statesman, As it was the
Oppression and Slavery under which we had been brought, that rendered His
Majestys undertaking in coming into these Kingdoms with armed Force, in order
to redeem them, both Honorable and Just: So it was the Hope of being delivered
by Him from Misery and Bondage, that encouraged us first to invite, and then to
cooperate with Him in the Prosecution and Accomplishment of His Glorious
Design. It was the Invasion upon our Laws that we complained of, and from which
we desired and endeavored to be relieved, etc.

Thus I have omitted no appearance of an Objection, and have given satisfaction
to all, that will examine things impartially and conscienciously, in order to
their ready and hearty Obedience to Their Majesty's, and the Preservation of
the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom.

I shall conclude all with a plain Exhortation both in respect of the King, and
Subjects.

First, For the King. Seeing His Majesty has received Power and Authority from
God, it concerns him to Administer Justice and Judgment. For Gods Eye is
All-seeing, and he is Omnipresent. God stands in the Congregation of the
Mighty: he judges among the Gods, Psalm. 82.1. It is a poor, weak, inferior
thing, beneath the Spirit and Dignity of a Prince, to wrong the Innocent: But
it is indeed Great and Godlike, to seek Judgment, and relieve the Oppressed.
God has Honored Kings with his own Name and Titles, and they should imitate
Him in Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, and Mercy. And as this tends to the Honor of
God, and Happiness of his Church, and the Prosperity of the Kingdom, so it
gains the Love and Affection of Subjects, which is the only Ambition of
Valiant, Wise, and Just Monarchs.

Secondly, For the Subject. Seeing Kings are by Gods Designation, Ordination,
or Constitution, let every Subject humbly submit. They derive their Right from
the Highest Majesty of Heaven and Earth. They are set over us by Gods
approbation. And the God of Israel, who led his People by the hands of Moses
and Aaron, in all Ages has subjected Mankind to some of his Viceroys on Earth.
And they who are Enemies to them, are Enemies to God, and cast off that sweet
and easy Yoke of Obedience, to which God would have all his submit. This
condemns all wilful Offenders, who disobey Governors. They are in Gods stead,
and to despise them, is to despise God himself. And as Subjects ought to yield
Obedience to their Sovereigns (which I have Illustrated elsewhere) so they
ought to be grateful for their Favor, Mercy, Clemency, and good Government.
And in particular, they ought to be thankful to God, and the King, for the
Mercies of this present time, even the Reviving of our Religion, Laws and
Liberties.

FINIS.

