SAY ON: OR, A Seasonable Plea FOR A FULL HEARING BETWIXT Man and Man.

And, a Serious Plea for the like Hearing, betwixt God and Man.

Delivered in a SERMON AT Chelmsford in Essex, at the General Assrze holden for
the said County, before the Honorable Sir Timothy Littleton, one of his
Majesty's Barons of his Exchecquer: July 8. 1678.

By Anthony Walker, D. D. Rector of Fyfield in the same County.

Luke 7.40. Master, Say on. LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the King's
Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. WILLIAM DYER Baronet, of Tottenham-high-cross,
High Sheriff of the County of Essex.
WORTHY SIR,
YOu cannot be more surprised to see those Notes made public, than I was
(being then so wholly a stranger to you) by your desiring me to perform that
service which occasioned their composure. And though you used a civil Apology,
for giving me so short a warning for so solemn an appearance, I shall trouble
you and the world with none, for yielding to their importunity who drew them
from me.

I confess an obvious objection occurred, which would have resisted all their
entreaties, had I esteemed so low a consideration, as my own reputation, fit to
be put into the balance against the good, I was made believe, they may do, viz.
lest the acceptance they obtained, when transiently delivered to the ear, they
should lose, when exposed to the severer censure of the Eye. It being no
unusual thing for Discourses to sink, when divested of the advantage of being
spoken with some quickness, warmth, and pathos. But if they meet with common
candor in the Reader, which I request, and modestly expect, I hope they may be
useful. However, his expense will be so little, either of money or time, that a
small charity may excuse his disappointment, if any happen.

I have, Sir, inscribed your name upon them, as a testimony of my respects, the
omission of which would have been so indecent, that I hope it will neither by
your self, nor others, be imputed as a fault, to

Worthy Sir, Your Loving Friend and Servant Anthony Walker.
July 17, 1678.
Imprimatur,

Geo. Thorp Rever. Patri Guliel. Archiep. Cant. a sac. Domest.

AN Assize Sermon: DELIVERED AT Chelmsford, July 8. 1678.
2 SAMUEL 14.12. Say on.
THough a Short Text, and as Short a Warning be no good Prefaces to a long
Sermon, they may be no bad or unwelcome Earnests of a short one, as I design
this shall be, not to comply with the humor of those un-devout Souls, to whom
every thing is tedious which is serious, and to whom holy David himself, though
the sweet Singer of Israel, prolixe canit, is too long: as St. Gregory
Nazianzen observes in his sixteenth Oration, and the sacred Melody of whose
Psalms cannot expiate, or atone for the length of them.

But to comport decently with the present occasion, that the Pulpit may not
entrench upon the Tribunal, nor the first Table over-lay the second; or crowd
it up into too narrow a room.

The words are a very small, yet a most considerable part, of the largest and
best managed Parable in all the old Testament; contrived by subtle Joab, and
carried on, and acted by the wise Woman of Tekoah, whom the Jewish Rabbis will
needs have to be the Grandmother of the Prophet Amos, a Native and Inhabitant
of the same place, which,.S. Jerome tells us, was a small Town nine Miles
distant from Jerusalem.

The use of Parables, though it was not unknown to other Nations, witness that
famous one of Menius Agrippa among the Romans, by which he successfully
appeased a dangerous, popular Sedition; and those many witty ones of honest
Esop, amongst the Grecians; yet was it more signally frequent amongst the
Hebrews and Syrians, as the Learned Grotius observes; and as by that remarkable
one of Jotham, Judge. 9. and many other in the Old Testament; and by our
Saviors frequent use of them, evidently appears.

And though the first Design of them seems to have been to instruct the rude
and ignorant multitude, whose minds are less susceptive of the impressions of
solid Reason, they being a kind of mental Pictures, (and you know who call
Pictures Laymens Books) by which the matter is represented more lively to the
Fancy and Imagination.

Yet the second end of them is to insinuate conviction and reproof insensibly
into their minds, who would be less patient of it, in express words, or plainer
Reprehensions. And thus Nathan had proceeded with David in the case of Uriah
and Bathsheba, chap. 12. and succeeded happily to ensnare him into Repentance,
by the Parable of the poor Man's Ewe-Lamb.

And thus Joab by the Woman of Tekoah attacks him here, by a fiction of her two
Sons striving together in the Field, and the one slaying the other, and the
rest of the Family rising up to put him to death.

The scope of the whole was to prevail with David to recall Absalom from
Geshur, whither he had fled, and where he had remained in Banishment three
years after the slaying of his Brother Amnon.

Although there is a great deal of excellent matter in the Parable; and some
would find even much of the Gospel in it; to instance but in one Verse, viz.
14. which runs thus: For we must needs die, and are as water spilt upon the
ground, which cannot be gathered up again: neither does God respect any person,
yet does he devise means that his banished be not expelled from him. As if it
imported these three Particulars.

1. The forlorn Estate of man by the first Apostasy, and his desperate ease
that can no more recover himself, than water spilt upon the Ground, and drunk
up by it, can be gathered up again.

2. That no wan, in David's Phrase, can redeem his Brother, or give to God a
ransom for him. For God respects nothing that any Man can do.

3. Yet he himself helps, when no creature could, by his unsearchable wisdom
devising means (Job 33.24. Deliver him from the pit, for I have found a
ransom) by Christ, to satisfy Justice, and magnify Mercy; to punish the Sin,
and spare the Sinner, that his banished from Paradise may not be expelled from
Heaven.

But I must dismiss and wave whatever is contained in the Body of the Parable,
and single out this seasonable Passage, Say on.

Which words are so plain, they need no Explication; and so few, they admit no
Division: the only Method that remains to handle them, seems to be this, to
consider, A quo, cui, quo fine dicta sunt.

1. By whom they were spoken By David, a King, and a Judge.

2. To whom they were spoken: To the Widow woman of Tekoah, a Petitioner, a
Plaintiff, who stood before him for Help and Judgment.

3. To what end and intent they were spoken: To give her leave and
encouragement to make her Plea as fully as she could, and to grant her a fair
Hearing before he pronounced entence in her case.

Of these in order.

First, Of the person who spoke them, David, the King, the Judge (...) whom
this Woman addressed her ^^lf, verse. 4. Help, O King. So v. ^. My Lord, O King.
So in this ^welfth Verse. Let thy handmaid, I ^^y thee, speak one word unto my
Lord ^^e King: and he said, Say on.

This Book is styled by a Learned Expositor, the Throne of David, whom the Holy
Ghost represents as the Exemplar and Icon of an excellent Magistrate, who
himself had learned and practiced that Lesson he taught his Son; He that rules
over men must be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord. And this is not the
least instance and proof of it, (that according to the old Verse, -- Patiens
sit Judicis auris) he was willing to hear out the Plea of her who stood before
him for help, and by the forgetting which Rule, and deflecting from which
Method, he contracted one of the foulest blots we read him to have stained his
Justice with, in all his Government: I mean in the case of Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel
19.29. He said, Why speak thou any more of thy matters, I have said thou and
Ziba divide the land. Which precipitate Sentence had been prevented, and an
innocent Master delivered from the slanders of a treacherous servant, if
instead of why speak thou any more! he had said as he does here, Say on.

So that the words are a commendable instance (which may have the force of a
standing rule) of a good Magistrate, giving leave, and encouragement to those
who stand before them for Judgment, to say all they can to make good their
Plea, and to grant them a full Hearing.

And to show the excellency of this Rule, we shall look upon the Words under
several Aspects.

1. As they are vox humanae naturae, the voice of humane nature, breaking forth
from that first principle of it; Do as thou would be done by. No Judge or
Magistrate, if instead of sitting on the Bench (excuse the supposition, which I
will not make, but with a modest Apology) he should stand at the Bar as a
reputed Criminal, or as a Plaintiff or Defendant, would be willing to have
Judgment pass, till his Plea were made, and he had obtained a full and fair
Hearing. Therefore as we use to phrase it, Turn the Tables. Let the Reverend
Judge suppose himself in his Circumstances who comes before him in Judgment,
and then do as Nature it self dictates, as he would be done by. Hear him out,
say as he would desire it should be said to himself. Say on.

That Is the first, they are the voice of humane nature.

2. They are verba sapientiae, words of wisdom. Wisdom is highly requisite in a
Judge. Therefore Solomon (wise already) made it his Prayer, which God so highly
approved, 1 Kings 3.9. Give thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people. Or as it is, 1 Chronicles. 1.10. Give me wisdom and understanding, for who
can judge this thy people that is so great. And Hiram blessed God for giving to
his Friend David a wise Son to judge his people Israel. Now wisdom consists in
the adapting suitable means for the attainment of desirable ends. The end of
judicial proceedings, is to give to every Man what is right, and due to him.
Now what means can be so sit, and conduce so evidently to this, as to sift out
truth by a full and fair hearing of all the Allegations, Pleas, and Defenses of
the Parties concerned. 'Twas this that gave Solomon that Renown in judging
betwixt the two Harlots, 1 King. 3. ult. That all who heard it said, The wisdom
of God was in him to do judgment. For 'twas from their own mouths he discovered
which was the true Mother of the Child, which he had never done had he not let
them Say on.

3. Verba justitiae and aequitatis, They are words of Equity and Righteousness.
It Is most just to hear Men out what they have to say, before they be condemned,
or acquitted: therefore it is a customary question after Indictment read, and
Evidence produced, What can thou say for thy self? and no Proclamation more
common in Courts than Let them come forth, and they shall be heard.

It Is a Rule in every Man's Mouth.

Qui aliquid statuerit, part inaudita altera,

Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus tamen fuerit.

He that determines any thing without hearing both sides, although he chances
to determine what is just, yet is not just himself in so determining.

Therefore 'twas praiseworthy Justice in Agrippa, Act. 26, that he said to the
Prisoner, Paul, thou art permitted to speak for thy self. And it was a standing
Rule amongst the Romans (a People so renowned for their Justice, that S.
Augustine ascribes all their Successes to God's rewarding of their Justice) not
to deliver any Man to die, till the Accused had his Accusers face to face, and
liberty to answer for himself, Act. 25.16.

4. They are verba misericordiae, words of mercy, and commendable compassion
and condescension.

The awful Solemnities which attend Courts of Judicature, do often strike a
consternation into those who appear before them; and few Men, of low and common
Education, have that presence of spirit and audacity, whether Principals or
Witness, to recollect themselves suddenly.

It Is therefore very commendable compassion to relieve them against their fears
and amazements, and not to discourage or put them out of countenance, nor
suffer others to do it, but rather to raise them to a just confidence, by
bearing with, and helping them against their weaknesses, with these, or words
of the same import, Say on, be not dismayed, or afraid, but speak freely, let
us hear all you have to say.

5. Lastly, They are verba patientiae, words of patience; than which, nothing
is a greater ornament to the Tribunals of Justice, no word worse becoming their
mouths who sit on them, than non vacat, which made the poor Woman reply so
smartly to Philip of Macedon, who when she demanded Audience and Justice of
him, said, He could not tend it, or was not at leisure: Why then will you be
King? I pray, Sir, let some body else be that can and will.

De vita hominis nulla cunctatio longa. No deliberation, no delay should be
esteemed long, in which so precious a thing as the life of a Man is concerned.

And because you Gentlemen of the Long Robe have a just veneration for the sage
and grave Sayings of your Predecessors, I Will cite a memorable and very
commendable Passage I heard near forty years ago at Cambridge Castle, from the
Lord Chief Justice Banks, when an inferior Officer of the Court prayed him to
make haste, for they should be too late. He openly replied, I had rather travel
all night, or put my self to any inconvenience, than the King's Justice should
be denied to any of his Liege People, or huddle over business for want of time
to hear it fairly.

And this for the Speaker, as they are the words of a King or Judge, ecchoing
the sentiments of humane nature, speaking as a wise, a just, a merciful, a
patient Judge, Say on. All Virtues so ornamental to Tribunals, that nothing can
be more.

I proceed to the second Consideration: that is, of the Person to whom they
were spoken: that is, to a Petitioner, a Plantiff, who came to plead her cause
before him as her Judge.

And First, they were dicta mulieri, spoken to a woman; whose Sex exposed her
to some prejudice, as not needing over much encouragement to speak: yet he
says not, She Will talk enough without bidding; and if I encourage her, she will
never have done. No idle or frivolous pretenses should debar those whose Lives,
Estates, or other near Concernments lie at stake, from a full and fair Hearing.
He says to the Woman, Say on.

2. Dicta Viduae, they were spoken to a Widow. Widow-hood is a forlorn estate,
and Widow is a desolate name. Had the Plaintiff been a great man, no wonder
that such an one should obtain a Full Hearing. But to give leave and
encouragement to a poor, to a desolate Widow, to Say on, this was much to be
wondered at, but more to be commended. 'Twas such a piece of Justice in
righteous Job that rendered him so eminent: the words are so remarkable, I
cannot omit the rehearsal of them at large: Job 29.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw me, it gave
witness to me. Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless and
him that had none to help him. The Blessing of him that was ready to perish,
came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to sing for joy. I put on
righteousness, and it clothed me, my judgment was a Robe and Diadem. I was
eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame. I was a father to the poor, and
the cause which I knew not I searched out: and I brake the jaws of the wicked,
and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. Than which words there can be no better
Commentary upon David's saying to a desolate and poor widow, Say on.

3. Dicta Reo, spoken to a guilty person. For if it be true, that in the eye of
the Law, Actor and Reus eandem sustinent personam: What is said to him or her
that pleads the cause of the guilty, is said as to the guilty. To suspend
prejudice, and to hear out a presumed guilty party, argues much candor and
moderation. The Law supposes every man honest and innocent: and every man's
cause just and good, till it is found, and appears otherwise; and that cannot
be without discussing it; therefore no presumptive prejudices should stop their
mouths, or debar them their Plea. Let even such therefore Say on.

4. Dicta reo parricidii, they were spoken to one guilty of Murder, the worst
of Crimes, and Fratricide the worst of Murders. The foulest offenses cut not
off the offender from liberty to plead his cause, to defend, and if he can, to
clear himself: which minds me of God's own proceeding with Cain in the very
same Circumstances, when he had slain his Brother Abel; Genesis 4. Where is thy
Brother? What have thou done? Which Questions imply a liberty to answer, left
him.

5. Dicta consitenti, to one who had confessed the Fact, and in effect accused
him whom she came to defend and plead for; Circumstances often alter the case
very much, and great alleviations may be urged, which may extenuate the fault,
though they neither do, or can deny the Fact; therefore even confitenti reo,
say, Say on.

6. But lastly, dicta humili and supplicanti, they were spoke to one who was
humble and modest, and made request for audience: ver. 4. She fell on her face
and made obeisance. She said, Let thy handmaid I pray thee, speak a word to my
Lord the King. She made supplication to her Judge: she behaved not her self
unseemly, she did not extort an Hearing with noise and clamor: nor like the
other Widow, Luke 18. weary him out with importunity, and so teez the Judge,
that he did her Justice to be quiet, and relieved her in his own defense: no,
she sought it humbly, and obtained it heartily.

It Is infinitely indecent, and a great desecrating and profaning so sacred a
place as a Court of Judicature, and so holy a thing as Justice it self is, to
bawl, and jeer, and make a noise, and is so far from being manly, that this
Woman may shame them to use their Tongues better. And such procedure gives just
suspicion, that the merits of that cause are not very good, which needs the
raising so much dust, to cloud them from the eyes of sober Reason.

When S. Paul pleaded before King Agrippa and Festus, his Plea was words of
truth and soberness: Act. 26.25.

The King's presumed present in his Courts, and a greater than He, the King of
Kings, He judges amongst the Gods, the judgment is the Lord's.

Therefore all things should be carried as becomes such a presence, gravely,
modestly, soberly, seriously, for though every good Judge will say to such,
with David here, Say on. I suppose no wise Judge will say in earnest what Job
once said in Irony, Job 21.3. Mock on.

3. Quo fine, for what end, intent, or purpose did he give her this leave and
encouragement to Say on. Certainly for many wise, and great and good ones, to
suggest some of which, may be useful and exemplary.

First, To find out the truth and right. The Tongue is the Hearts Interpreter,
and other men's Informer; and truth is often bolted out, by the moving of the
Lips.

A plain Story innocently told, that comes freely without pains, disguise, or
artifice, that is coherent and self consistent, is a good argument of honest
simplicity. When on the other side, fair liberty of Speech being granted, if
they shuffle, hesitate, and stick, contradict themselves, and have little or
nothing to say, it is a shrewd presumption all is not right; and so (though it
be uncomely in this place, to name the Proverb, it is like occurs to all your
thoughts) offenders are often ensnared by their own lips: and their tongues fall
upon themselves, and they are judged out of their own mouths.

For nothing is easier than to tell a true Story plainly, as the matter is,
truth being always consistent with it self, and to defend a just and honest
cause, which carries with it it is own evidence. So nothing is harder than to
make a false matter appear true, and a foul cause to appear just and clear to a
discerning mind. Let them therefore Say on, it is the way to clear the innocent,
to convict the guilty, and bring truth to light.

2. To preserve the honor of Judicial Proceedings, which is of great
Concernment.

While the Judge judges the Criminals, or between the parties litigant, all the
Assembly will be sure to judge him: and therefore it is not enough to decree
what is just; but to make it manifest that he proceeds justly; even God
himself, whose nature secures him from all unrighteousness, and makes it
impossible for him to do injustice, yet takes care to make it apparent, that he
proceeds justly, that he may be justified when he speaks, and clear when he
judges. As we have it, Psalm. 51.4. or as the Apostle turns the words, Romans
3.4. That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when
thou art judged. God himself cannot escape the censure of the world; and
therefore for the honor of his Righteousness he will manifest his proceedings
to be just, that no place may be left for cavil or reproach.

3. To put an end to strife and contention. What is the reason of bringing the
same cause so often over, but pretense of not having had a fair Hearing at the
first. Wh^^'s well done, is twice done. And trying Causes well once, would
prevent the trying of them, it may be, twice or thrice: it is not only for your
honor therefore, but for your case, to let them, Say on.

4. To prevent clamor. We have a Proverb, Losers will have leave to talk, and
they often talk so much when they have lost, because they had not leave to
talk, to prevent their losing. Let them therefore Say on before the Sentence,
and they will have nothing to say after. Yea, the condemned Criminals will
yield their lives more silently, and calmly, and submisly to the Law, when
Condemnation was not awarded, till they had liberty to make their best defense.

5. To restrain the violence of proud oppressing Men. Nothing so much emboldens
great Men to oppress, and wrong, and grind the poor, as a confidence that their
complaints will not be heard or regarded.

Now if the Magistrate will consider the cause of the needy and afflicted, the
Fatherless, and Widow, the poor and helpless when they cry to him, this will be
a mighty restraint, that the man of the earth shall no more oppress.

The one would not dare to lay on so unmercifully, as often they do, if they knew
the other should obtain so merciful a Say on, when they make complaint.

6. Lastly, that true sentence may pass, according to the merits of the Cause,
and as shall appear just upon a Full Hearing. This is the Life and Crown of
all; for of the two it were better, and more tolerable to huddle up a business,
and precipitate a Sentence, though this be a very great fault, than to pass
Sentence against, and give Judgment contrary to the merits of a Cause, and what
has been made appear upon a Full Hearing to be just and righteous.

Therefore that a sacred Court may not be branded with the profane name of a
fortuitous Lottery, let the Pleader Say on; and let his so doing be crowned
with the Reverend Judges, saying in his Sentence what is Just and Right,
according to the apparent merits of the Cause. And thus far briefly of the
Words, as they have an aspect on the Assize.

But I may well suppose you are not all concerned in the peculiar business of
the day, and the special occasion of this Solemn Appearance: and so my
Discourse has hitherto not reached many of you: and I would be loath that any
man should wholly lose his labor of Attendance here, especially by my fault.

I shall therefore borrow a short liberty for a double improvement of these
Words, Say on, in a more spiritual manner; and so, as may be of an universal
influence and use.

First, Give God a fair Hearing, interrupt him not, let him Say on, when he
pleads his own cause to provoke you to your Duty, or to convince you of your
neglect of it.

Secondly, Bethink your selves what you have to say, make your Plea ready,
against God's calling you to account. When he shall say to you, why do you, or
why did you so, or so, and what can thou say for thy self, why thou should
not be condemned? Say on, thou shall have a fair Hearing, say what thou can
for thy self: take heed your ways be not so unaccountable, that you must then
stand mute, and have nothing to say for your selves, when God bids you Say on.

First, As to what God has to say to you, grant him a fair Hearing, cut him
not short, interrupt him not, but say unto him, Say on.

And that this may appear less forced, yea, proper and pertinent: I may argue
thus, If it be incumbent on the Judge to bid the Prisoner, the Pleader, the
Plaintiff or Defendant, Say on, it is much more necessary, equal, and becoming,
that they should hear the Judge; and most of all, that we should hear him that
is the Judge of all men, the Judge of all the earth.

But nearer yet, if the Judge must hear the Pleader, Man must hear God: for he
vouchsafes, (oh astonishing condescension!) to make man judge, and to plead his
own Cause before the Tribunal of Man's Reason. Isa. 1.18. Come let us reason
together. And 5.3. O men of Judah, judge ye I pray you betwixt me and my
vineyard.

Where God's Plea is managed with such strength of Reason, such convictive
evidence, such unanswerable clearness, that Interest it self cannot bribe man
to forbear giving sentence on God's side.

So the Prophet Samuel on God's behalf, 1 Samuel 12.7. appeals to themselves
while he pleads God's cause, Stand still that I may reason with you before the
Lord of all the righteous acts of the Lord, which he did to you and your
Fathers. So Jer. 2.9. I will yet plead with you, says the Lord, and with your
childrens children will I plead. See also Ezekiel. 20.35, 36. See also that full
place to this purpose, Mich. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Hear ye now what the Lord says
-- for the Lord has a controversy with his people, and he will plead with
Israel -- O my people, what have I done unto thee, -- testify against me. --
That you may know the righteousness of the Lord. Now is it not all the reason
in the world, that when God appeals to Man, and makes him Judge, and pleads
before him, that he should allow him a fair Hearing; and let him Say on.

But to make all sure, that we proceed pertinently, we have an instance in
terminis, S. Luke 7.40. where Simon the Pharisee uses this very word to our
Lord Christ himself, Master, Say on.

Now I most earnestly exhort and adjure you to do likewise. See that ye refuse
not him that speaks. Turn not away from him who speaks from Heaven, Heb.
12.25. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Say with
Samuel, Speak Lord, thy servant hears. Resolve with David, I will hearken
what God the Lord will speak, Psalm. 85.8. and with Simon, Lord, Master, Say on.

Now God speaks once, yea, twice, Job 33.14. yea, thrice.

1. God speaks to thee by the voice of thy Conscience.

2. God speaks to thee by the voice of his Word.

3. God speaks to thee by the secret voice of his Spirit.

1. He speaks to Man by the voice of his Conscience. The spirit of a man is the
candle of the Lord, Prove. 20.27. So it is also the Tongue and Voice of the Lord.
Conscience is God's Deputy, what that speaks, he speaks, that accuses or
excuses according to the Law his own Finger has written on thy heart.
Therefore stop not its mouth, stifle not its checks, put it not to silence, but
hear it out; and say unto it, Say on.

2. He speaks to thee by his Word. This is beyond controversy with all, but
downright Atheists, that what the Scriptures speak, God speaks. This teaches
thee to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously,
soberly, godly in this present world. There Is not a sin against the Law of
Nature or Grace, which this forbids not under pain of eternal death; nor a duty
of either, to which it encourages not, with the promise of eternal life. This
shows the equity, the reasonableness, the excellency, the necessity of every
Duty, Virtue, Grace: and the iniquity, unreasonableness, baseness, danger of
every Corruption, Vice and Sin. Hear, consider, weigh well what it says.

And dare not to go on where God's Word bids thee stop; nor dare to stand still
where God's Word bids thee go forward.

Time will not give me leave, nor will the Text well bear it, to plead God's
Cause. I may only admonish you to hearken how he pleads it in his Word himself;
where you shall meet with all the cogent Arguments Right Reason can be moved
by, in the behalf of Virtue, Temperance, Justice, Charity and universal
Holiness: and against Vice, Profaneness, Debauchery, Dishonesty and
Irreligion, drawn from his authority over thee, and Benefits to thee, from all
the Attributes of his Nature, from all the Methods and Instruments of his
governing the Rational World. His Promises and Threatenings, his Rewards and
Punishments, etc. So from Christ, the example of his Holy Life, the love and
design of his Bloody Death, etc.

Now when thou art moved to any Duty, or tempted to any Sin, before thou refuse
the one, or yield to the other, hear fully what God in his Word says for it,
or against it. Let God make his full Plea before thou yieldest, and give
sentence for the World, the Flesh, the Devil; do not precipitate, and because
one reason prevails not, resolve to hear no more, but hear him out, Master, Say
on.

If his bare authority prevail not, try what the obliging sense of his Benefits
may do. If Thus says the Lord, be not enough, hear him, saying, O foolish
people, will ye thus requite the Lord? If his love constrain thee not, try
whether his fear, and the terrors of the Lord may not restrain thee, if the
promises and hopes of going to Heaven be too light, put in the wrath revealed
from Heaven, and the consideration of eternal Burnings.

If Gods Glory move thee not, hear what he says of thine own interest: if the
declaration of the promises and threatenings suffice not, hear what he says of
the fullfilling and exemplifying of them upon others, to give thee warning.

I suggest these few Instances transiently, which may teach you to make many
more; and I beseech you do it, hear all God says for Duty, and against Sin,
before you reject the one, or yield to the other; and remember that the
sinfulness of the world, and their final condemnation is chiefly ascribed to
their not hearing what God says to them in the Word. Peruse with greatest
seriousness that awakening place, Prove. 1.24. to the end: which if you mind, as
you should do, I hope you will give God a Fuller Hearing for the future; and when
he speaks to you in his Word, will let him plead his Cause at large, and Say on.

3. He speaks to you by his Spirit, whispering secretly and silently to your
Hearts. There is an intimate converse betwixt God's Spirit and Man's, of which
the standers by can take no notice.

Thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it, Isa.
30.21.

Hear him therefore as a spirit of conviction, pleading with thee to convince
thee of, and bring thee to repentance for thy past Sins.

As a spirit of excitation stirring and quickening thee to present Duty, as a
spirit of restraint to withdraw thee from thy sinful practices or purposes. Oh
do not this abominable thing which I hate.

As a spirit of Application, setting home general truths to a man's particular
case: this concerns thee, Thou art the Man: Generalia non pungunt: therefore
the spirit in the reading or hearing the Word, uses to infer from Generals, and
apply in this or the like manner; If the wrath of God be revealed from Heaven
against all unrighteousness, then against mine. If every one be accursed that
continues not in all things that are written in the Law, then so am I. If every
one that repents not must perish, then must I, if I repent not, the spirit and
the bride say come, and whoever will, let him take of the water of life freely;
then I may take it, it is as free to me as to any other, God has not excluded
me, if I exclude not my self, and sic in caeteris, in the general threats,
promises, precepts. Oh therefore when the spirit stands at the door and knocks,
open to him; when he calls, answer him. Resist him not, provoke him not, quench
him not, grieve him not, put him not to silence, treat him not rudely, turn not
a deaf ear, but say unto him, What will thou have me do? Speak, Lord, thy
servant hears: Blessed Lord, Say on.

The last improvement I shall make of the words, is to mind you to get ready a
good Plea against the time God shall call for it, and give you the liberty to
use t.

There is a day approaching, nay, in some degree now is, in which we must
appear at God's Tribunal, and though we must expect a strict, yet we may assure
our selves of a Fair Trial. God will hear us out: he will give us leave to Say
on all that we can say with reason, for our just defense: Isay 41.21. Produce
your cause, will the Lord say, bring forth your strong reasons, says the king
of Jacob.

Resolve therefore with the Prophet, Habbak. 2.1. To watch to see what he will
say to you, and what you shall answer, when you are reproved or argued with.

Now God has two Tribunals: one in this world, the other in the world to come.
The first erected in every man's Breast, his Conscience enlightened by the
word, which is magni judicii prae judicium: as a private Sessions preparatory
to the general and grand Assise, which is the second, the judgment seat of
Christ, at which we must all appear to give an account of all we have done in
the flesh, whether good or evil.

I beseech you therefore bethink your selves before hand, provide your Plea,
for God will certainly call for it.

First, What have thou to say when God shall summon thee to appear before his
Deputy, thy own Conscience? and shall demand a reason of thy ways? O man, why
do thou do so or so? I am ready to hear thee; Say on.

A wise man should do nothing, for which he cannot give a good reason. And I
know no reason good, but this, or what is reduceable to this. God commands me,
or at least allows me so to do. I appeal therefore to the Consciences of all
that hear me this day, whether you can give this reason for all the actions of
your lives, God commands me, or allows me to do what I do. If you can, it is
well: happy Congregation, blessed Assembly are you!

But this is a thing rather to be wished it were, than hoped it is. If
therefore there be any who comes to bear false witness against his Neighbor,
who comes, though he gilds over his malice and violence with pretext of Law, to
vex, to wrong, or to oppress his Brother: or to defend what he knows to be an
unrighteous Cause, to the ruin of the poor and innocent, can he say so? Can he
that swears falsely by the God of Truth, or customarily by the name of him who
is a God of Holiness, say, so? Can the Drunkard, the Liar, the Adulterer, the
Thief, the Despiser of Holiness, say God commands him, or allows him to be such?

I beseech you deal uprightly, and venture not to do any thing, of which you
cannot give a good account and reason to God and your own Consciences; for if
your heart condemn you, God is greater than your heart, and will condemn you
much more.

Lastly, I pray consider well what Plea thou will make at the day of Judgment;
it is an awful and awakening thing to name it, or to think on it. But it will be
a most dreadful thing then to stand mute, not as some do at the Bar, through
sullenness or stomach; but as the man who thrust in to the Wedding Feast
without a Wedding Garment to be speechless, and have nothing to say, when God
bids them, Say on.

And I most earnestly entreat you, and adjure you not to satisfy your selves
in any Pleas which will not be allowed, or hold good at that day.

'Twill not serve your turn then to say, I neither believed, nor thought of
such a day; if I had, I would have prepared better for it: nor to say I knew
indeed, and sometimes thought of that day, and resolved to be prepared before I
died, but that I was prevented by dying sooner than I made account I should.

No, nor to say, I was baptized, and kept my Church, and sometimes said my
Prayers, and only did what I saw others do before me, who were my Betters, and
wiser men than I, and though I often did what I fear I should not, I was
resolved to say I am very sorry, and cry God mercy when I came to die. He that
has no better stuff than this, no wiser Plea to make, will have little list to
Say on, when God shall bid him do so.

But you will ask me what Plea will then hold? I answer, I find none in
terminis in all the Bible, and it is not wisdom to be wise above and beyond
what is written. I find one indeed made for them by the Judge, Matthew. 25. I was
hungry, and ye fed me, etc. But none made formally by any man as for himself, I
will not therefore assume the boldness to prescribe a form to any man, to plead
his cause then, nor in express words can formally conclude what I would my self
then say: yet for the matter and substance I would be glad to be able with
confidence to say, when God shall bid me plead my Cause, and answer for my self.

O Lord, who know all things, thou know I loved thee sincerely, though
not perfectly. And that I earnestly desired to know thy whole will, and
seriously endeavored to fulfill it, and unfeignedly repented of my
transgressions of it. Thou know, Lord, I thankfully accepted the Grace
offered in the Gospel Covenant; and then did, and still do most earnestly
desire to be found in Christ, not having my own righteousness, but that
righteousness which is of God through faith in Jesus Christ, whom God has sent
forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood.

Such a Plea made up of the conditions of the New Covenant, Faith and
Repentance, love and universal new obedience in some measure performed by the
assistance of Divine Grace, would I be glad to be provided of against that day.

And I doubt not but whoever can make such a Plea in truth, will have great
boldness to Say on, when God shall bid him, and shall hear God say to him, Well
done, good and faithful servant, inherit the kingdom prepared for thee before
the foundation of the World.

For which Blessed Sentence, he of his infinite Mercy prepare us, who has by
his Blood purchased that Kingdom for all that love him, and wait for his
Appearance. Amen.

FINIS.

