THE Prisoners Plea: HUMBLY OFFERED IN A REMONSTRANCE; With a Petition Annexed,
To the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled;

By GEORGE WITHER: Falsely charged to have composed a Lybel against the said
Commons, and therefore now Prisoner in Newgate.

It contains also, many Interjections not to be despised; As also a Colateral
Corolary, of public Concernment; and in particular touching The BLOODSHED,
Whereinto God is now making Inquisition.

2 Cor. 12. 9, 10. My strength is made perfect in weakness; for when I am weak,
I am strong. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in Persecutions, and in distresses for the sake of Christ, and a
good Conscience.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

A Copy of the Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons, wherewith the
following Remonstrance was sent to the said Commons.
SIR,
I Was committed to Newgate, as a Lybeller against the House of Commons;
Therefore, to Vindicate my self from that Aspersion, and to intimate some other
things pertinent to their Consideration, I humbly desire, you, to present
thereto, the Remonstrance and Petition herewith sent; which I neither hope nor
desire should be totally read in the House to the interruption of Public
Affairs, but perused rather, by the Members thereof at their best leisure. I
ought not to have been longer here detained, by the Warrant for my Commitment
hither, then until your next meeting after the Date thereof, but should have
been transferred: into the Custody of your Sergeant at Arms, who it seems is
not willing to be troubled with me; And, indeed I cannot blame him, in regard I
am so poor, that I am likely to be a burden unto him without profit, as I may
be perhaps, henceforth to him also, who is now my Jailer. I was once your
Clyent, and you my Patron; but, you are now engaged to speak rather against me,
then for me: yet, you may be P^^^^^^micus, which is much better then a false
Friend: and will think per adventure, when you have perused my Remonstrance,
that I am fitter for an Hospital, then for a Prison. I hear many say, you can
speak well; And I shall say so to, if you can find in your heart, a Motive, to
speak a good word for me in season; and it may perchance do you some honor;
for, Age, Poverty and decay of health have rendered me an object of Compassion,
being at this time so utterly dispoiled of all (yea and of more then all) that
I am likely here to perish, unless God (as he has hitherto done) shall
extraordinarily provide for me. If by reason of Public Affairs, your House be
not at leisure to take me into consideration, it would be one Act of Charity,
to commit me to the custody of some Person (such a thing having been heretofore
done) who is able to lodge and feed me at his own charge. If my parol might be
taken for my appearance when it should be required, I would inviolably keep my
word; but, indeed I know not where you will certainly find me when I shall be
delivered from hence; for, so God help me, as I yet know not where I may then
rest my head, within Walls and under a Roof, unless it be in a Church Porch, or
some such place. Do, as God shall incline your heart; for, this is really the
present Condition of,

Sir, your Friend and servant, Geo. Wither.

The Prisoners PLEA FOR HIS VINDICATION: Humbly offered, To the Honorable
Commons of England in Parliament Assembled, in a Remonstrance, with a Petition
annexed; by George Wither, Prisoner in Newgate, under pretense of Lybelling
against the said Commons.
Proverbs 18. 13. He that judges a matter before he hears it, it is shame and
folly unto him.
HONORABLE,
THough I am numbered among Malefactors, and some think me (as Ahab did Elias)
to be one of those who troubles Israel; I have honestly endeavored to serve
God and my Country, even in those actings, which are supposed Criminal; and
perhaps may have, yet, something to do, wherein I may be further serviceable in
my Generation. Therefore, feeling my health impaired by being above six Months
without hearing, shut up in a close Prison, deprived of those conveniences and
necessaries which my Age and condition require; I think it my duty whilst I
have some strength left, to use the best means I can, to preserve my Life for
his sake who gave it (though I have little cause to value the same for its own
sake) being confident whatever hardship shall attend it, that he will permit no
more to be imposed on me, then he shall render conduceable to his Honor, and
make me able to bear. Our late Epidemical distempers, have reduced me from a
considerable Estate, to be much less worth then nothing, and if those
blusterings had hitherto continued which ruffled about me, before, and when
those Papers were seized, for which I am confined; doubtless, the Floods had
ere this time overflowed my soul, or the stream ran so strong against me, that
it had been impossible, I should have landed a Remonstrance within your
threshold, with hope of acceptance; and what may be now done I am uncertain;
nevertheless, you being again assembled, whom I am supposed to have
Scandalized, (and long time elapsed without Prosecution, since the limit of my
confinement hither by Warrant) I conceive your displeasure (if you be
displeased with me) to be so moderate, that I am emboldened to offer my self to
your remembrance, and to make my defense by this Address; whereto, if you
please to vouchsafe Audience, a few minutes with patience, it may peradventure,
save you the expense of many days hereafter, with some other advantages to
boot; and though the length of it threatens tediousness, it may prove as well
worth your hearing as most Causes, ten times longer in pleading, when Friends
are made, and great Lawyers Feed. I shall be hopeful also that this will come
the more seasonably to move your compassion, because it comes so soon after
your late Commemoration of the greatest favor vouchsafed by God to the Humane
Nature; and in regard the deliverance of an Innocent out of Prison, may be as
allowable at a Christian Feastival, as Liberty was to a Murderer at the Jewish
Passover.

I am, and have always been (however misrepresented) so true a lover of the
Public Peace, that I was never designedly active in pulling down, or setting
up any Supreme Power, or delighted in defaming those who are in Authority; nor
purposely false to any, though I have been accidentally disservicable to some
(when the appearances of Supremacy were shared among them who were a medly of
true Friends, and Traitors to God, King and People; and when many of the late
Dissenting Parties were in Profession and Action so fallacious in their words
and deeds to each other, and to themselves; as also so repugnant, that few knew
in whom to confide; and when wiser men then I, were guilty of many failings.
For, knowing that all Power, exists by Gods Grace or Permission, I still
submitted conscientiously to that which was most visible in being, not
questioning how it was obtained, how justly or unjustly executed, or whether it
favored or disfavoured me in my own Particular; but continued in Active or
Passive Obedience thereto, whilst it could protect it self; endeavoring such
things only, as according to my understanding, ought in my place to be done,
and which might best conduce to preserve the Government, in Righteousness to
Gods Glory and their welfare, for whose sakes Powers and Governments were first
given and Ordained: for, (how mean soever their Places and Faculties are) all
men are obliged to serve in their Generations, with such Talents as are
bestowed upon them, though they shall be Maligned and Persecuted for their
labor. In prosecuting this duty (though performed with much negligence and
vanity) God has now preserved me about 50. years in being a Remembrancer to my
self and others, of such things (after a Poetical mode) as I conceived
pertinent to our Public or Private Welfares: And Poesy (though brought into
contempt, by being made a Bawd to Pride or Lust; and for the most part rendered
serviceable to the World, the Flesh and the Devil) was generally privileged to
dare any thing tending to depresse Vice and advance Virtue, by plain or
Enigmatical Expressions, according to this Sentence.

-- Poetis,
Quid libet audendi semper fuit, esquire Potestas.
Which in effect may bear this Paraphrase.

Vice, to reprove in whom soere,
The Poets Privileged were.
Yea, Divines, Poets, and Philosophers, have been that great Counsel Table of
the World, by whom Piety, Morality, and the Privileges of the humane Nature
have been preserved from Barbarism, in all Ages, though many of them, in the
Times, and among the Nations with whom they lived, had not much respect, nor so
much Civil Authority as a Petty Constable. I presumed on their Privileges, and
in order to the discharging of my Duty, lately designed a Poem, called Vox
Vulgi, personating (more Poetico) the Counties, Cities and Buroughs of this
Nation, reprehensorily expostolating a few particulars, relating to what was
then rumored, touching the Deportment of some of their Trustees; And I was
thereto moved by the many murmurings, secretly whispered, or openly devulged by
Common fame, to the begetting or fomenting of dangerous. Animosities, though
perhaps false; and to the infringing of our Common Peace, if true; Those Rumors
I endeavored to express in such manner as they were spoken, and with such
Inferences as were made upon them by others, or naturally resulted from them in
my apprehension; that, having fixed and made visible by words, those Notions
which fluttered to and fro within me, I might the better see what they amounted
unto; and make use of them to such good purposes, as I found cause of. And, I
confess, I made those whom I personated acting a Reprehensory part, to speak
as plainly, as boldly, and as Magisterially, as I thought it became them;
because, fearful reprovers make fearless offenders. Therefore, I conceive that
which I did, was neither a transgression against any Positive Law, intrenchment
upon good manners, nor abuse of my Christian or natural Freedom.

Having almost finished what I intended, I thought fit to offer it to the
consideration of other men; and before I would make it public (which whether I
should have done or not, neither I my self, nor any other man certainly knows)
I resolved (that misconstruction might be prevented) to offer those rumors
which I had Collected, together with such probable results as might arise from
them, to the private view and Censure of some discreet and Honorable Persons,
who were favored by the King, that, if to them they appeared considerable,
their prudence might dispose of that composure as they thought fit: And the
Earl of Clarenden, Lord Chancellor of England, (though to me a stranger) being
reputed of so much Honor and Integrity, that the King judges him worthy to be
entrusted with dispensing his Conscience in the chief Court of Equity, I
(resolving to present it to him in writing as soon as finished) had prepared an
Epigram to his Lordship, which was inserted in the first draught of the said
Poem, and seized by a Doctor (whom I think they call Master of the Faculties)
of what Faculty I know not, except it be a Faculty of Plundring. For, without
any Legal Warrant to me shown, he in a hostile, rather then in a Legal civil
manner, ransacked my Chamber, Closset and Chests; took away goods belonging to
other men, as well as mine; carried away by a Porter, a large Bagg-full of
Books, written by several Authors, as also Papers, Letters, Bills, Evidences,
Acquittances, with whatsoever else he pleased, which are all still detained,
save a very few, to my damage and other men's; some of them being of such
consequence, for ought I know, that they might have undone me, if I had not
been undone before: and though it cannot yet appear, others may thereby suffer
great detriment hereafter.

The last draught of the said Poem, having many Alterations and Additions,
which made it differ from the former, I purposed to make both agree in
expressing my whole mind, had it not been prevented by that seizure. I added
likewise, a Postscript to the said Epigram, of about four or six lines (as I
remember) whereby I signified to the said Earl, that forasmuch, as in
confidence on his Nobleness, and Humanity, these Papers were to him privately
communicated, I presumed and expected (however they were by him relished) that
no use should he made of them to my disadvantage (or words to that effect)
which evidently implies that I had no Lybellous intention. The said Doctor has
perhaps so much candor, that he will attest his seizure of the said Epigram,
with the said Books, as also of his then taking special notice thereof; but if
not, I can make forth what I affirm as well by a probable Demonstration, as by
other Testimony if need be; though I was then in some things wanting to my
self, by that sudden surprizal: For, I was so much distempered to see my honest
intention, likely to be quite made void, by taking away every line of what I
had composed, that I regarded not what might befall my Person thereby; and
should not have been so calmed as I now am, and then was within a few Minutes;
but that something assured my heart, the loss of those Papers in that manner,
would produce more advantages both to me, and to what God has determined, then
if it had succeeded otherwise; and I have in part already so found it.

But for that mercy I owe nothing to the world; for, notwithstanding my
cautiousness to avoid giving just cause of offense, the said Poem being quite
taken out of my hand, (so that I could not produce it for my Vindication) it
has been so misrepresented by Fragments, to his Majesty's Privy Council (they
not having leisure to peruse it all in so ragged a hand as mine) that I was
about six Months past committed to this Prison, as a Lybeller against this
House of Commons: Before which Commitment, I heard a line or two, of the said
Poem repeated in that injurious manner, to the Attorney General (who seemed to
me so prudent, not to regard the officiousness of the informer) as made me
perceive what was intended. For his objecting my words in that mode, without
the qualifications preceding, or subsequent, made them appear like the Devils
quoting of holy Scripture, or like his abusing the Sacred Text, who says,
cursed is he who does the work of the Lord, and leaves out this Principal word,
negligently. Thus do I seem to be dealt withal, contrary to my apparent
meaning; For, in the Title of that Poem, called a Lybel, wherein the Counties,
Cities, and Buroughs, are personated, reprehending their Prevaricating
Trustees only, according to what was commonly famed; there is a premised
Salvo, preserving the honor of the Parliament, and of every faithful
individual Member thereof, from those reproofs, and the said Salvo was not
there verbally expressed only, but likewise really intended; and I effectually
endeavored throughout the whole Poem to excuse them from what was
mistransacted by Surprise or otherwise, as also by so reproving those that were
faulty, that no man might be personally defamed though guilty; yea, so rather,
that every individual offender privately applying those reproofs to himself, as
he finds cause, might reform secretly what was amiss.

The Parliament, or this House cannot be Scandalized by discovering of mere
causual failings in that manner, or of such contingences as were not in their
Power to prevent: nor is any man justly to be blamed, for modestly taking
notice of them, with an intention, to seek redress for what may mishappen
thereby. If there be no such Prevaricators among you, as it was defamed, no man
among you, is then reproved or concerned in that Poem. If there be such, they
keeping there own Counsel, and reforming there manners, may be as free from
Scandal as they were before that Poem was written, though it should be
devulged; and I think it would add to your Honor, if published with your
allowance; for the best way for men to prevent disparagement by general
reproofs, is to take no notice that they more concern them, then every other
man; and to approve of it as tending to the depressing of Vice, and the advance
of Virtue.

Scandals past by, are soon for got,
And hid from them, who knew them not.
They have exceeding crazie Credits, whose Reputation will be cracked with such
touches; and I am rationally persuaded, that they who are prudent, and sober,
will be ashamed to take offense at so innocent a Prosopopeia, seeing, though
there may be folly in it, wise men hear fools gladly, because they themselves
are wise; and none will be implacably displeased, but they whose imprudence
will manifest, that their own Consciences do accnse them, for having been
somewhat justly liable to those reproofs.

If we may not in genaral terms reprehend indiscreet and vicious actings, in
such a mode, and with such Epithites as to them belong, I may well affirm Vices
are more privileged then Virtues, and that Morality is in hazard to be
brought to utter contempt. If we may not without loss of Liberty, be permitted
within our own Private Closets, to set in order our fleeting thoughts,
occasioned by what we see and hear, and put them into words, that we may
thereby the better consider what they amount unto, doubtless, we have little
Freedom left us; and I for my part (though I shall not whilst I live, desist
from claiming the Privileges due to the humane nature) will bear the
infringment of them with patience, and rest contented with an internal
enlargement; yea, though I know it is as injurious to a free English man, to
suffer uncondemned, as it was to Paul being a free Roman; and I had rather be
one of their number who suffer in that kind, then one of those, who lives in
fear of their words and thoughts, who intend them all good, and no harm, in
Words, Deeds or Imagination. It was reputed a dangerous time, and a Symptom of
sad consequences, both by the Jews and Romans (as their Histories testify)
when men were made Capital offenders for words. How sad then are those times
likely to be, wherein words well intended, yea, tending to the General Peace
and welfare (if rightly understood) shall be judged Criminal? and, when some
who misjudged them, do know in their own Consciencies, that they express
nothing but what is true, and fit to be offered to consideration? I know it to
be a Privilege claimed by this House to judge of the Crimes charged upon any
Member thereof: If therefore, I had intended a charge in particular, against
any one, or more of them, I would have brought it hither, though I have
learned, by dear bought experience, what hazard I might have run.

But, I having only gathered together, what the wind had scattered, with a
purpose rather to make a Lenitive then a Corosive, designed to present it to
such hands, as I thought fittest to make application: For, perhaps (considering
of what Ingredients it consists) if I should have presented it to your Speaker,
or to any other of your Members, he or they, might as justly have been
suspected my confederate, and an accessory Lybeller, as I now am to be a
Principal one.

It may be objected against what I have raised from Fame, that she is a Liar; I
confess it true, as well in her good as evil reports; and that in these times,
Fame has been very injurious both ways: I am therefore so Jealous of all she
blabs, especially of what concerns men's Reputations, that I give not credit to
any rumor without well considering the Circumstances and Relators, before I
receive it for truth (unless a fit of that Levity surprises me, whereto most
men are over prone) And as I am wary how far to believe it, so likewise I am
careful to make use of the Truth, Falsehood or Probability thereof, so far forth
as I can, both to prevent my doing that injury to another, which I would not
another should do to me, and to render it as publicly advantageous also as I
may without Scandal to Individual Persons. Therefore, though Vox Populi, is
said to be Vox Dei, and Common Fame in some cases, reputed equivolent to a
Proof, my reprehensions are always in General Terms, or at least of so large an
extent, that particular offenders, are not thereby made discoverable; because,
I have neither warrant or purpose, to bring men to public shame or personal
punishment; but to prevent it rather by giving Delinquents occasion so to take
notice of their own Prevarications in private, that they may escape both
punishment and shame. If this were not my Principle, I might have mentioned
many things in particular, not meanly reprovable, as well knowingly, as by
Fame, whereof even Members of your House are guilty; and which I might safely,
and with a good Conscience, have charged upon them, if I had as plain proofs to
evidence it to other men, as I have to ascertain it unto myself; And, to affirm
this, is neither blameable in me, nor Scandal to this House: For, it is no
dishonor to any Society to have it affirmed, that some of them are corrupt or
faulty. The soundest Flock may have some rotten Sheep; There is no natural body
without a blemish, nor any Politic Body, or Civil Constitution without
defects. There was one Traitor among those 12. Apostles which were chosen by
Christ himself; and if there be one faithful one among 12. of those Prelates,
who in these later Ages, (as they are now Elected) do claim to be their
Successors, many good People are deceived. It were a Miracle if the People had
not chosen some to sit here, who are not such as they ought to be. Though you
have an Eloquent Tongue, an undistempered Brain, an intelligible common Sense,
if you have therewith some Organs of the External Senses maimed, and other
members defective, without your default (which is not impossible) how can you
help it? or why should the whole Body be therefore blamed? I am not ignorant
how tender I ought to be of your Honor; and to let you know, how far I am from
being a malicious prosecutor of any man's Personal Crimes: One to me allied (who
in that respect craved my advice and assistannce) brought me a Paper containing
the effect of Articles, by him intended to be exhibited against a Member of
this House, with confidence and probabilities, of making unquestionable proof
of the whole Charge; which comprehended such unmanly, unchristian, impudent,
and Barbarous misdemeanors in words and deeds, that the Crimes being proved
(as I think they might evidently have been) you could not have waved his
expulsion with preservation of your Honor: yet for some good reasons, I made a
stop of that intended Prosecution, and in hope to reclaim him, immediately
declared the whole matter to an Honorable Earl, who to my knowledge had power
over him, desiring his endeavor to reform him by his Authority and advice; for
which Civility I had thanks returned, and heartily wish the Gentleman may be so
truly reclaimed, that no further notice be taken of what is past, to his
dishonor; For, by my wilful default no man shall be Personally defamed, if
reformation may be otherwise effected.

There is, without question, in some degree, a just occasion of every Fame
wholly, or in part, whether good or evil, true or false; and a discreet taking
notice thereof, might be a means of rectifying somewhat which is or may be
misdone to private, or public detriment; If there were such misactings as Fame
reports, no great offense can be justly taken by the repetition thereof in my
Poem: For, a verbal mention of Prevarications, whether in general or particular
terms, is the least punishment due to Transgressors. If reproofs be misapplyed
to them who are not faulty, or Scandalously to them that are guilty, the
misapplyer, not the Writer is the Lybeller. To prove that which is written to
be a Lybel, all these following particulars must be concomitant: First, it must
be written and devulged with a malicious intent, and the malice evidenced by
some Circumstances. Secondly, it must be so published, that neither the Authors
name is expressed, nor ought else, whereby it may be discovered if reputed
Scandalous. Thirdly, it must either Scandalize the Persons by Name, or by such
marks, as can make it applyable to no other man; or if it Scandalize Societies,
it must Scandalize them wholly; for to say some of them, did such foolish or
wicked actions, is no Scandal to them who never did them. I mention no
offenses, but such as are known to have been committed by some; for, to write
against that whereof I knew not any one to have been guilty, were to teach men
new Sins by naming them, which perhaps never came into their thoughts. There
are few things misdone by any one, but such as many know others to have
committed, and if they make a Scandalous application, be it at their own peril;
for it concerns not me. To be debarred from a general reproving of such
Enormities as are daily found in Persons and Societies, would be a paliating of
Transgressors, and an infringment of the Privileges due to Justice, and the
Moral Virtues; and therefore when all the Circumstances before mentioned concur
in a reproof, to denominate it a Lybel, it must be entirely and openly produced
also, to be judged of by those whom it may concern, and not by fragments: and
then such only are to pass Judgment thereupon, who are Competent Judges
thereof, by being no parties; and who have taken every part of it into
consideration: For, it is a Prerogative due to God only, who is Justice it
self, to be judge in his own Cause; and is I think, a Privilege Usurped by
none else, except Tyrants; because I have observed, that, Just Kings and lawful
Judicatories, presume to judge none in matters relating to themselves, but by
standing Laws, justly constituted; and their infringments, by the Common Law of
this Nation, ought to be evidenced to the Consciences of twelve good and Lawful
men, as well as to the Judges, before the party accused is Condemned to suffer.
In this Mode, if I shall be found an offender, I will patiently submit unto the
Verdict, be it right or wrong; be sorry for my offense, if I have committed
any; and make what other satisfaction I can, as I will also do, by whomsoever I
shall be convicted of a Crime, though I intended none. For, having been many
ways a transgressor to Godward, I will not repine though he shall deliver me
into the hands of Men, even of those men who having been forgiven many Talents,
shall take me by the throat, and cast me into Prison, who trespassed against
them to the value of a few pence only.

Nevertheless, I think it will not misbecome me to say, that I have been
somewhat over severely dealt withal, in being upon a slight view of my
imperfect Papers unpublished, accused and committed, without hearing, to a
destructive Imprisonment, for but mentioning the Drunkenness, Debaucheries,
Follies, and other Exorbitancies of those, who have not been ashamed to act
them, as well openly by day in the sight of the whole Country, as by night, to
the occasioning of many disgraceful rumors, whereof I thought to have made some
good use. And, but that I presumed on the candor of this House, and hoped that
some Novices might have been improved for the better, since their Election by
sitting a while there, as well as many have been heretofore made worse by
sitting there over long, I had not brought this Remonstrance hither; but rather
appealed to the King or House of Lords, as my proper Judges in this Cause, in
regard none of them are Parties.

This Nation boasts of their great Charter, and of other petty ones: But, how
enjoy we the Privileges by them confirmed, when we are deprived of our
Liberties unheard, upon misapprehensions, or the false accusation of beggarly
and maliticious informers, to the enriching of Goalers and Messengers, by
impoverishing honest and innocent men, as if Sheep and Lambs, were bred and
kept for nothing else, but to be worried for Dogs meat? how can humane Society
be preserved, or of what value are Grants of Princes for themselves, their
Heirs and Successors confirmed by Solemn Engagements, Oaths, Hands and Seals?
and what trust is in them, if upon every slght Jealousy or Suggestion, they
may be made void at the will and pleasure of those who are in Power, as often
as they find the vacating of them will be their advantage? The Privileges
which God and Nature gave me, I will exercise as long, and as far forth as I
can, without asking any man's leave, and suffer patiently when I cannot shun it,
without making any account of that which has no certainty therein: For, how
can I believe that they who will hinder me from enjoying what is given by Gods
Charter, will let me long possess what I have by their Grants? When the World
permits me to possess Liberty, or any other natural benefit or accommodations,
which are in her Power to give or take away, she permits it, but because, it is
most for her present advantage, not out of love to Justice, or good will to me.
And long experience has taught me, that where Power is exercised without Law
or Conscience, there fair Promises mingled with some Acts of Grace, are but
baits to bring Wild Fowls to their decays; and slight performances in hand,
greatned by hopes raised from Complemental favors, and deeds confirmed with
hand and Seal, are for the most part, but devices to keep Tame Fowls always in
readiness, as it were about the house, to supply such wants as may accedentally
happen. It may be said of many now, as it was of Severus, of whom it is
recorded, that he deceived every man who trusted him; yet still found enough
who were enduced to trust him: so, most men in these days, though they have
been often deceived, and profess they believe they shall still be deceived, by
those in whom they seem to confide, do nevertheless act, as if they believed
otherwise; the many reason whereof is, because, they cozen themselves: And
whereas Oppressions proceeded heretofore from the Pride, Avarice and Ambition
of Princes, now they proceed from the Luxury, Malice, greediness, and baseness
of the People turned Courtiers; who under color of a feigned Loyalty, rob
Kings of their honor, with a show of increasing their Power and Wealth; of
which they likewise cheat them, and by degrees corrupt their manners, and root
out of them the Royal Virtues to which they were naturally inclined. By such
bosom Traitors, if his Majestres constancy and clemency had not been
impregnable, his last Act of Grace and Indemnity, had ere this time (if I am
not deceived) been made void; as his Engagements on the behalf of Purchasers
have been, by a device, which picks our bones after our flesh is torn away,
instead of what he graciously intended. Of this I am experimentally sensible;
for, I am not only deprived of my whole Purchases with their improvements at
my cost, without the allowance of one Foot of Land, or a penny in money; But the
Prelate who now possesses it, his Tennants, Officers, or their Agents, making
riotous and forcible entries into my possessions in a Barbarous manner, took my
rents due to me, with my Corn sown before he was Bishop there; yea that Corn
that was housed also, a year before his Admission; as if it had been purposely
done in contempt of the Kings Declaration and Engagements to the contrary; who,
by what is observed in His Majesty's struglings to moderate the violence of
them who are inclined to Rigor (and by what I have been informed of his
generous respect to the Preservation of His Royal word) it seems to add much
thereby to his Personal Honor; and evidences, that he has more true humanity,
and Christian Clemency, then two thirds of those, who have sought to honor and
advantage him by their severity; And if he ende^^our to strengthen those
virtues by Gods assistance, (who will never be wanting thereunto) until they
shall become habitual, they will cure all his Infirmities, and cover all his
sins, though they were multitudes. I am as sensible as a man can be of what I
do suffer; I am as intelligible of what I may yet suffer, and know as well as
most men, when any thing is illegally imposed on me: but am so prepared for
what may befall, that I fear it not, nor will currishly bite the stones that
are flung at me, because I know the flingers; nor will trouble my self to rate
every Dog that barks at me, nor complain frowardly of those that sets them on;
but, plead my innocence with a sober boldness; declare truly my oppressions,
and sustain them patiently, in hope they will be shorted, amended or ended:
For, things grow ripe as well in dark nights, as in clear days, though few
perceive it; and, that which men despise proves other while, more pertinent to
their welfare, then that which they best esteemed. Micab though, feared, hated
and persecuted by Ahab, and the rest of the Princes of Israel, told them that
which was true, when all their Court Prophets prophesied Lies; and he was more
safe in Prison with bread and water of affliction, then they were by enjoying
their Liberties, with plenty, and fortified with Armies to defend them from
what he presaged: For, he is the Protector of all those, who stoutly and
conscientiously discharge their duties; who, has said by way of threatening,
Touch not mine Anointed ones, neither do harm to my Prophets. Every true
Christian is one of his Prophets, and in that sense I may say without
Arrogance, I believe my self to be one, though I am often so called in
derision; Or, I am in stead of one, at least, at this time to these Nations:
and may say also, that I have been scurvily enough used, to be one of those to
whom God vouchsafed an Anointing with that Spirit in a measure, somewhat more
then ordinary: For, what may I expect to suffer when I shall be convicted of
the Crime laid to my charge, who am uncondemned cast into this disgraceful
Jayle, and left so neglected of the world, as if I were neither worthy to he
acquitted or Condemned? Here, I consume the last of my days in a poor lodging,
without servant or other attendant, during the long Winter nights, forced in my
present sickness, to arise in cold and darkness, without convenient
accommodation, nigh half an score times within a few hours, to disburthen
Nature; I am put to more expense in one day, then all that amounts unto which I
have in certain for subsistence during my life; For my Friends being unwilling
to hazard my health in a Lodging among common Prisoners, are compelled to pay
weekly, as much for a poor Chamber (as would discharge a years rent for a house
with a good Farm in the Country, yet cannot have it at that dear rate, unless
they pay likewise weekly for one meal a day, besides extraordinary expenses in
other necessaries, so much as provided me competent meat and drink five weeks,
one week with another, before I came hither; which pittance did preserve me in
good health without having any other addition, to the value of a penny; and I
would to God there were not many at this time more oppressed then I am in this
kind. That expense was defrayed, also by Charity, which made me then so
frugall, lest there might be a failing thereof, as there has been lately of
what was formerly sent in hither: perhaps, by reason my offense being agravated
so much, that I being numbered and made a Companion of Thieves and Murderers
without any difference, it has rendered some of my Friends afraid to visit me;
and for that, some other of them are so impoverished that they are disabled.

I would have added no more, but considering, with what Malignancy some giddy
Censurers have objected against me, the harshest passages in my Poem, without
their Qualifications as aforesaid, I cannot but be sensible of that influence
it may have upon those hearers, who shall never see the said Poem in its proper
dress, and perfected as I intended. I will therefore make bold to put your
Honors in mind, that I shall conceive my self much injured, if any Member of
this House shall in his Public Capacity, pass a Vote against me concerning
that Book which is supposed a Lybel, until he shall first peruse, or hear it
wholly read; or, if he shall charge upon me as my Act, either of those
imperfect draughts thereof, which were seized in my Chamber, until I deliver it
forth completed according to my purpose; in regard, till then they are neither
mine, nor ought so be reputed. I will once again also, put you in remembrance,
that it is but the Common Fame, with some Inferences thereupon, which I would
have expressed; and which therefore, if offencive, ought to be charged upon the
People, not upon me, who did but Echo to what they spoke. This being
considered, and that I only wrote in Private to a good end, what I had heard
and partly knew (yea, and what some of you likewise and many Thousands know to
be true) I cannot justly be termed a Lybeller, or that Poem a Lybel. Though he
who seized my Papers (and is or was, as I am informed the Master News
Carpenter, that chips out unto us the Weekly Intelligences) has already deemed
me (as I hear also) to the Gallows, and intends to endeavor what he can to
prefer me thither, by publishing my late Poem in fragments, with his
Animadversions thereupon; I shall have no cause to be displeased thereat, if I
may have Liberty to answer him in Public, and be allowed also a true Copy of
the said Poem.

Habitual vitiousness, has so corrupted most men, and made them so slavish
that they dare not speak of, or to, their own Idolized Creatures, but with
Epethites and Attributes due to their Creator; or with some abusive application
of the holy Text; nor hear things expressed as they truly are, or called by
their proper names: and that makes my Poem so distastful to some Readers. This
slavishness has also partly occasioned, and justifies those whom you call
Quakers (who do it by a Spiritual impulse, and not out of a carnal affectation
to singularity) to neglect and condemn the Complements, Language, Dialect and
manners of these times. Some of my Predantical Censures without your doors (who
know not what free Language is allowable to the Muses in reprehending Vice)
being more offended with honest words and wholesome Truths, though soberly (if
plainly and boldly) spoken, then with wicked deeds; seem to think it little
less then Blasphemy, to affirm, their are or may be Fools, imprudent, rash,
inconsiderate, or debauched Persons admitted into the House of Commons;
Nevertheless, you may perceive by what I have already expressed, that I know it
to be possible, and why should I not believe it so to be? when, was it
otherwise? what wise men among you have not so found it to their vexation and
trouble? or how, could you be a true Representative of the People, if there
were not such among you? considering, what for the most part, they are, how
factious, how froward, how malicious, and how troublesome they have often been
to themselves, and to your sober proceedings? when I find Dawes and Doves
together in one Dove-house, flying daily in and out together, I may possibly
forbear to speak of it; but, if my Life should lie upon it, I cannot choose but
think and believe the Dawes are Dawes, whosoever says to the contrary, when
they are such in Shape, Color, Feathers, Voice, and Action; nor do I think the
Pigeons are not true Pigeons, because their are Dawes among them: I have been
so used to a true Pace, that I cannot easily tread a shufling Amble, or fall
into a false Gallop. But, I will harp no more on this string, for it is harsh
in mine own ears (God save them) and you are wise enough to apprehend what is
considerable without more words. Fools are afraid of their own shadows, and
had rather be flattered into destruction by false representations, then to be
delivered by plain dealing. Truth will nevertheless prevail at last in despite
of impostures, and falsehood; God, has sent his Harbengers, and will come ere
long to put an end to the Delusions and Confusions which our incredulity,
profaneness and Apostacies have occasioned to abound; yea, even that great
Mystery of Iniquity, which begins to sprout afresh, and which has lately
appeared in many Shapes, ripens every day so fast, that it will shortly be
rotten; and I believe (as old as I am) I should live to see the fall of it, if
I might survive but till the Age whereto some in this Generation have artained:
Gods will be done, for though I die before that time, I shall stand up in my
Lot, to behold the effects of it. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

I have now done with what I primarily intended by this Remonstrance, purposing
at first to conclude with Petitioning somewhat for my self, relating to my
present outward Condition; But, as my case, and the times are, I neither know
what will be most advantageous, nor what is likely to be granted: for
considering how I stand misrepresented, many will be ready to speak against me,
and not one plead for me, except those whom God shall extraordinarily incline
thereunto; and what respect they shall vouchsafe, lies yet hidden between God
and them. I think I may truly profess, that I desire neither Prosperity, nor
Adversity, no not the best things absolutely, at this present, as relating
merely to my self; for as bad as it seems to fare with me, I dare not ask for
any thing absolutely, but what I am warranted absolutely to pray for; because I
know not what God has preordained as best for me, and most tending to his
Glory; and lest I may Petition my self out of the Frying Pan into the Fire:

Incidet in Scillam, qui vult vitare Charibdim.
Charibdis when I shun
I am on Scilla run.
That, which threatens the worst things, may produce the best; that, which
promises what seems most desirable, may be most harmful; and, assuredly it
will so prove, if I should absolutely desire it, especially, in these times of
Probation, wherein all Persons and things, are coming to the Test. I am for my
sins justly deprived of my whole Estate, and well nigh of all outward comforts
and conveniences (except such as God sends in upon a new score) yet perhaps, I
am not deprived of them for my sins only, but partly that being thereby freed
from those worldly intanglements, which made me too regardful of my Life, and
Personal Intrests, I might by the loss of them, the more fearlesly discharge my
duty to God and Men; as most commonly they do with more courage, who have but
their Lives to lose, then when they have also great livelihoods to hazard; and
it may be, that they who rejoice in their plentiful enjoyments of such things
as I have lost, do possess them but to help ripen them into a sinful
impenitency. It may be likewise, I having expressed such Principles, and
Resolutions as the World thinks no man truly owns, it is necessary for the
sake of many men, that I and some other should in this Hypocritical and
Apostatizing Generation be proved by Sufferings, whether we are true Professors
or Impostors; And if I shall be Ambitious of any honor in this World, it will
be to be Honored with such a Probation; all other Temporary Honors appearing
to me in comparison thereof, less Honorable then that of the late Frince Le
Grange; which is not altogether so empty a vanity as it is reputed by some
sober men; because, possibly, that Scoene of Boygames (commonly called
Christmas Gambolls) was permitted (though not so intended by the Actors) to be
a sign to this Generation, and to all who saw them, that the most substantial
Titular Honors, Glories and Pleasures, of this World, will be very short, and
when past away, leave them who affectionately embraced those Clouds, poorer and
less honorable then they were before; if not more miserable. All Subcoelestial
things are vanity, and I am so far from doting on Temporary Honors, that I
should little value that precious Jewel, a Good Name among men, if it conduced
not more to the Honor of God, and the Consolation and Edifying of others in
Virtue and Piety, than to my Personal advantage; yea I had rather be a George
on Foot, styled simply George Wither, without any Attribute, having my share in
the Honor of those, concerning whom it was said, To you it is given to believe
and suffer; then to be a George on horsback, honored among those Grandees,
usually Pictured riding as it were Tryumphantly on prancing Steeds, with Guilt
Trapsticks in their hands, and the Title of Excellency, or such like written
under them.

I have now little or no Portion in the World, but my Life, and if I should ask
to be delivered out of this Jayle, my Engagements may bring me next day into
another: For, I have no subsistence but their Charity, whose faces, or names
for the most part, I know not; and should God cause them totally to withdraw it
(which I am confident he will not, until he provides for me another way) I
shall soon be out of every man's Power: God has been pleased here to prove me,
as well by Sickness, as by Poverty and Imprisonment; in so much, that one
Twelve hours more of such Corporal tortures as I have sustained for some few
days, would totally end all my sufferings; and I am persuaded God (whose mind
I desire in all things to search out so far forth as lawfully I may) has
lately given that sharp touch in my Flesh, to make me consider how much more
dreadful it would be to fall into his hands, then into the hands of Men, who
cannot possibly inflict a greater Torment; and, that, if bodily pains may be so
extreme, how insufferable it would be if I should fall into the distempers of a
wounded and despairing Conscience, by a wilful neglect of my Duty. But to
prevent it, and furnish men with inducements to constancy in his service, he
has in that, as in all other straits, given me earnest both of his making
issues out of all my Trials and Temptations, and of preserving me safe and
patient whilst they continue. When I had nor Goods, nor Lands, nor House left
me wherein to rest my head, nor any certain place wherein my distressed
Relations might have harbor; yea, when the addition of Restraint to Poverty in
this disgraceful Prison, had made my Children an object of scorn and contempt;
even then, Gods merciful Providence provided for them, to the wonderment and
rejoicing of my Friends, by giving them in marriage, without Portions, to
Persons of considerable Estates and good Reputation; and made it the more
considerable, in regard they whose natural affections and morral Compassion, he
inclined thereunto, were never in their Judgments, or Interests united to that
party with whom I was formerly engaged: But he who makes men of one mind in a
house, has made nevertheless such a loving and conscientious harmony, in their
manners and affections, relating to a Christian wel-being, that I hope it may
be a sign of a more general composure of differences throughout the whole
Nation; and I heartily pray it may be so; howsoever, by these and such Pledges
and Evidences of Gods Love, my Faith in the mean time, may be preserved from
failing, if I must pass through greater Trials.

Those are possible enough to happen in diverse respects; For, I hear that
Stigmatizing, and the loss of my Ears is the least I seem to deserve in the
opinions of some; which though I repute it equal with the loss of my Life, I
will neither make Petition nor Friends to avoid it, by any other means but this
Apology; For, I deserve no such punishments by Law, and if I undergo them
without desert, it has been the Lot of better men, and Gods Will be done, who
will enable me to bear what he permits to befall me. Some, owning worse
Principles then I do, have suffered no less hardship with much courage: I have
known a man in my time, to lose his Ears, to be Stigmatized, Banished, brought
home again by Thousands as it were in Triumph; Chosen to be a Member of the
Highest Council then being, and yet to have less honor in his Exaltation, then
he had in his Sufferings; Sic transit gloria mundi: Thus the Honors,
Disgraces, Bubbles, and Troubles of this Life, pass and repass into that which
is contrary to themselves; and with me, all such things will so quickly come to
an end, that I think them not worthy my care. It is possible, that I may
shortly be cast into the Dungeon, ten times worse accommodated then at present,
There, I may be visited also with bodily distempers, no less unsufferable then
those I lately felt, and be left quite destitute of those supplies and means of
easement, which were then vouchsafed; for there is already a failing of that
Contribution which I formerly had, and it may be much less, in regard it came
not (that I know of) from the hands or Charity of the Lord Mayors, Sheriffs or
Aldermen, within whose Common Prison I am confined; nor from any Noble or very
rich Persons; But from them only (or for the most part) whose Charity exceeded
their Abilities, and from such (if I am not misinformed) whose certain
livelihoods are scarce sufficient to relieve their own wants and their
necessities, of whom they seem to be more obliged to take care then of mine;
and as their Number and Estates decrease by Death or Oppressions; so in
probability must my relief diminish: But it may partly be obstructed by a worse
means, in regard (if I am not much deceived) there be yet some counterfeit
Professors of Piety, who having gained repute and profitable employments
heretofore, by their formal complying with such as are sincerely Religious, do
for self ends privately asperse and disparage their Brethren who are in
affliction, to the abating of that Charity, whereby they were comforted: this
way, I probably suspect I may suffer by some, who insinuate that I have not
dealt so candedly as I ought to have done with them; whereas they abounding in
their own sense, have not only been unreasonable in their demands and
expectations, but palpably injurious also unto me and mine: But my Essential
reputation depends on what is really in my self, not on other men's Tongues; and
these devourers of Widows houses, under the color of long Prayers, have
always been as much my Enemies and Traducers, as they who are openly profane;
of which two sorts there are so many who make it their work to asperse me, upon
the account of envy, malice, or self intrest, that I cannot long escape their
Evil Tongues; and perhaps I may now suffer in the opinion of this House, by the
misrepresentations of such Persons, as I have done heretofore.

But I being Experimentally acquainted with Gods dispensations as to giving,
and taking away; do find their may be as just cause at this time, of taking
away as of giving (least my corrupt Nature being prone enough thereto) I might
more depend upon my own strength, or upon Gods gifts, or upon those by whom he
sends them, then upon him from whom they came. God Alsufficient by adding and
withdrawing, keeps me both from despair, and presumption. I find moreover, that
not only the seizure of my Papers, has advanced my Primary intention, but
that every hardship also which has happened thereupon to my Person, has
advantaged me; For, I who was heretofore served with nigh twenty servants in
household at once, can now serve many hard Masters, and my self too, with more
contentment then in those days. I have by loosing, gained somewhat toward my
support; found somewhat which lay hid within me, to make a mends for what is
defective without me, and can do many things for my self, which I never did
heretofore; mend my Clothes, make my Bed, my Sea-coal Fires, and sweep my
Chamber, as well as any servant in the Jayle, and make the doing of these
things a pleasing recreation. I may possibly be detained in Prison until I must
lie in a lousy Bed, or upon the bare ground, but whilst I am here I shall
still have the Walls and roofs of a Prison to defend me from the cold Air;
whereas, if I should Petition to be delivered hence, and obtain my request,
without being some way provided for, I know not at this present any place
wherein I can be certain to find so much shelter as I have here; in regard, my
son in whose Chamber at the Temple I had harbor, till I was from thence
committed, was lately constrained to sell it to discharge a debt of mine, for
which he stood engaged; and this being considered with many other things
considerable, I know not what to ask of you for my self. Excuse this Verbosity;
For, old men (especially when oppressed) are full of words; Losers also (as our
Proverb says) may be allowed to speak; and though much of what I express may
seem impertinent both to my Vindication, and to you, yet for many respects it
will he pertinent to me, and to many more, when you have laid them aside (or
shall neglect them) even to many of the Common People who are both your
Servants and Masters. For, I have not scribled all this, and enlarged it with
many Collateral Expressions, so much to Vindicate my self, as in hope my
Experiments in this suffering, may be of comfortable use now or hereafter, to
some of those whom you represent. And, in truth, my Apollogizing for my
tediousness now I seriously heed it, is but a needless and impertinent
mannerliness, according to the Common mode; for, it cannot be justly expected,
that to the interrupting of Public affairs, a discourse of this length should
be read in your House; nor had I any such hope, though I directed it to the
whole House, to intrest every individual Member thereof in my Cause, when his
will and leisure shall thereto incline him; well knowing, that were it longer,
or shorter, it will be totally perused by some of you, out of a Conscientious
regard of my sufferings; by some others, out of curiosity; by others, for their
information touching those matters which may be thereby discovered relating to
themselves, or the Public; and, perhaps, by more then a few with a desire to
find out somewhat therein, which may give them occasion to add to my affliction.

But, I may trespass against your patience more through my tediousness, in
somewhat that I have yet to say, by occasion of that Public Humiliation which
is enjoined by his Majesty's Proclamation; the sincere Solemnization whereof,
will be another incitement to Justice and Mercy, in regard that which is most
Essential to such Duties, is Relieving the Oppressed, the Widow, the
Fatherless, and letting the Prisoners go free, next unto those Offices which
are to be performed immediately to God. It has suddenly Surprised me, and
though it seem not to belong to my matter in hand, it will be of such
concernment, that I cannot forbear in this place to insert it; knowing, it
pertinent to this Generation, and my work therein; which being almost at an
end, I will upon the said occasion, leave with you who are the Representative
of this Nation, some hints and Cautions, fit to be taken into consideration by
you and them, at this time, in respect of that said Public Humiliation;
Therefore that my words may appear to be worthy of so much regard, at least, as
those which were spoken to Baalam by his beast, I pray be pleased, though I
seem a Phannatick, to take notice that above a hundred of my Presages and
Preconjectures heretofore published, and tending to the Common welfare (during
the several changes of Governors and Governments, since I came to years of
discretion) have been evidently verified; and some in particulars touching the
profanation and abuse of Public Humiliations and Thansgivings; and for which
Impieties, and Hypocrisy, those Plagues were increased, from which we desired
to be delivered, or other Judgments brought upon us. It was too evident that
for the most part, there was more Policy then Piety, in the Celebration of
Public Fasts and Thanksgivings heretofore; the first, being perhaps to delude
People by a show of Holiness, to make them the more willing to contribute
supplies and assistance to their Designs; and the latter to encourage their
Friends, dishearten their Enemies, or to Magnify their own Victories and
Prevailings, rather then to glorify God; And the lean Calves of their Lips,
which they then offered, were far inferior to the Hecatombs and magnificent
Sacrifices of the Gentiles in preceding Ages. Oliver Crumwell, about, or little
before the beginning of his last year, commanded a day of Humiliation to be
Solemnized, with a pretense to seek God for the removal of a great Mortality
then raging, as he pretended; within a Month after that, he enjoined a Public
Thanksgiving, with a pretense to glorify God for his two most Signal
Victories; at which times, I prepared and made bold to present to his own
hands, Hints, to remember him of such Cautions and Duties as I feared he might
neglect, peradventure not without cause; For, no effects followed answerable to
those Pious pretendings; and on the very day Twelve Month next following his
day of Humiliation to take away Sickness; he himself sickned to death; and
within a few weeks after that, even upon the same day Twelve Month also, which
he set a part for a Public Thanksgiving, he died of the aforesaid Sickness;
which I take the more notice of, because, I find at the conclusion of the last
Address, which I prepared for the said two Solemn days, these few lines;

Sir, I have now performed my true endeavor,
If, nothing it prevails; Farewell for ever:
For, you, or I, or both, shall be ere long,
Where, you can do no right, nor I take wrong.
God give a better success to our Devotions, then in days past; but I do yet
see very small appearances thereof, for, the best Sign at present that God will
at last deliver us from the Judgment now lying upon us, and avert those which
we fear, is this; that he removes them not before we truly repent: I hear we
have the same Animossities, and the same Avengeful spirits amongst us: I hear,
the cries of the Widow, Fatherless and oppressed, are as loud and lamentable as
ever; That Prisons are still as full, not only of miserable decayed Debtors,
but, also crammed up as it were, to the destruction of many men's lives, or
healths, with Persons who suffer merely upon the groundless Jealousies, and
pretended Suspicions of malicious informers; and few take their Oppressions and
starving condition into consideration. Poverty by Oppressions, and new
Oppressions by Poverty, are become so Epedimical and Universal, that no History
can show us that there ever were in the same Land (where no War did then rage)
so many thousands of the same Nation, made beggarly and miserable by each
other; even by their acquaintance, their former Familiars, their Neighbors,
Brethren and Kinsmen; or, where there was at so necessitous a time, so much
Luxury, Pride and excessive bravery in apparel. And the confederates of the
man of Sin, do so endeavor also to root out their opposers, by whom the Peace
of God should be preserved among us; and have so increased Profaneness, Impiety,
and Superstition, that, though many now think this Nation in a happy Estate,
and near to a Glorious Establishment in their Mode; the World seems unto me,
rather nigh to such a Judgment as Noah's Flood; or, these Nations, by their
paralelling them in their sins, not to be far from somewhat resembling that
which befell to Sodom and Gomorrah, unless God shall prevent it, for the sake
of his Elect.

Give me leave therefore (who shall probably never hereafter be troublesome
again in this kind) to declare freely and fully what I believe God declares
unto my heart, by bringing an Examplary Judgment of his to my remembrance,
recorded in the 21. Chapter of the second Book of Samuel, which I am hopeful
may opperate somewhat, being well considered, toward the asswaging of that
blood-thirstiness, and toward purging away that blood-guiltiness, which lies
yet upon us; For, notwithstanding the blood already shed, I do perceive that
not only many men, who are no ways in their particular Persons or Intrest,
damnified by those who are questioned for shedding blood, have an unquenchable
thirst after more blood; but, that Women also, who are naturally tender
hearted, are so inflamed with that thirst (if we may know their distempers by
their words) as if the Death of others were half the Life of their Souls; and
as if they had never heard, who has given it forth to be the Mark of Whorish
Women, to hunt after the precious lives of men. I heard since this Text came
into my thought, that you had a Sermon Preached before you, upon the same
parsel of Scripture, on the late day of Humiliation; but I have not yet seen
it, nor heard what Application or Use he has made thereof; when you have heard
me, try the Spirits by which we are guided; for, I will declare my self
impartially without respect of Persons, according to that Light within me,
which beameth from the Light Eternal.

In the days of David, there was a Famine three years throughout the Land;
whereupon, he enquiring of God the cause of that Plague, received answer, that
it was for Saul and his bloody house, who had slain the Gibeonites, a remnant
of the Amorites, unto whom the Children of Israel had sworn; yet, (as it is
added in the Text) Saul thought to slay them, out of a Zeal to the children of
Israel and Judah. From this Record, and the Circumstances, I do undoubtedly
collect, that Famine is a Judgment, proper to the avenging of unlawful
Bloodshed; and in reason it so appears to be; For as Blood is the Life of men,
so the Fruits of the Earth are the Life and preservation of humane Blood; and
therefore justly taken away from those, who are guilty of that Sin. A Famine is
now begun among us, likely to increase and continue, unless we make our
Atonement and Peace with God; which the King taking into consideration,
according to the Duty of his Place, strictly commanded all his People to seek
unto Almighty God for pardon of our sins, by a General and unfeigned
Humiliation; wherein he Christianly Professed, that he and his whole Family
should so join, that we might altogether as one man humble our selves in his
presence, in hope our Devotions might be accepted; and, I shall be glad if it
has been so performed, lest else, it so provoke God, that instead of removing
and preventing a destructive Dearth, it bring upon us, all his three great
Plagues at once, doubled; even Wars, Pestilence, and Famines, both Spiritual
and Temporal. Let us take heed of it; And since Bloodshed is the principal
crime, for which the Judgment already begun is feared will increase, and for
the expiation whereof some satisfaction must be made, to witness the truth of
our Repentance, (though it be not in our Power to make satisfaction for the
least Transgression) let us all be so cautious to search into the whole matter,
and to find out every Circumstance of our Duties; that we add not Sin to Sin,
Blood to Blood, and suppose we do well, when we have done more wickedly, by an
hypocritical misapplication, or an ignorant search. Or, least in place of true
Christian Oblations, we offer up the abominations of the Heathen, who
sacrificed the Innocent Children of their Enemies, to appease the Ghosts of
their slaughtered Princes; or, do like them, who offered the Fruits of their
Body to Molech, for the sins of their Souls; Or, lest we think, as many have
done, we do God or our Country good service, when we have oppressed, or slain,
or banished, those who worship him not as we do; even those, for whose sakes we
are hitherto preserved, by him, in whose sight the Blood of the meanest of his
Saints, is more precious then the Blood of the greatest King, who has not
as well a Saintship as Kingship.

For the Expiation therefore of our Blood-guiltiness, so far forth as it will
be requirable to testify the sincerity of our Contrition and Repentance,
(plenary satisfaction as I said before, not being in our Power) we must
effectually and speedily prosecute the means, which are but two in chief. The
one is, the washing away of wilful Bloodshed, with the blood of malicious
Murderers, by Executing Justice. The other is by Mercy, in pardoning those who
have shed Blood causually, ignorautly, and without any apparent malice; And,
this Justice and Mercy must be dispensed without partiality, rashness, malice,
or by-respect to our selves, or to any other. That, we be not deceived in the
Persons who are to be the Objects of this Justice and Mercy, we must be very
wary least we incur the curse pronounced against them, who Justify the wicked
and condemn the Innocent; so, in stead of being rendered acceptable, become
abominable unto the Lord; For, the World is so full of deceitful Juglings,
that, she can make that which is Righteous and Holy, appear to be unrighteous
and profane: wrap up Suparlative Impiety in such a Mystery, that, it shall
seem the Perfection of Holiness, make Traitors and Murderers appear to be
Saints and Martyrs, true Saints and Martyrs to be reputed Murderers, and
Traitors; and bring them to the greatest outward shame and suffering. Therefore
to prevent these Falacies, we must by the example of David, seek of God, to be
rightly informed, not only as touching the true Cause of the Plagues that are
feared, or lie upon us, but also for the Principal Offenders; for, if we seek
but to men, to humane Laws, and reason, and to what our own hearts will
Dictate, there is so much falsehood in all these, being usually swayed by
Self-Intrests, that we may easily be deceived.

If inquiry had been made in David's time, touching the Famine before mentioned,
of that part of the People, then of Saul's Faction, who were the Murderers, for
whose Bloodshed that Plague was inflicted; they, probably would have answered,
that it was for the bloodiness of David's house, and of his confederates, who
had Traitorously disinherited the true apparent Heir of the Kingdom, Anointed
and made King by Gods own appointment, with consent of all the People; and that
his Blood-guiltiness was manifest by a long Rebellious warfare against the
house of Saul his Lawful Sovereign. If the same question should have been then
asked of David's Party, it is likely they would have said, that Saul and his
partakers were the Murderers by shedding blood in opposing him, to whom God
had translated the Kingdom from Saul, for his disobedience, and conferred it on
David by the same Anointing, by the same Prophet, who inaugurated Saul; and in
regard the Kingdom was also confirmed upon David, by consent of the same
People. If the Priests in these days, had been consulted with all, they
perhaps would have thought and said, that it had been, for the Blood of those
Priests of the Lord, which were barbarously Butchered by Saul, rather then for
the blood of the Gibeonites; and, it may be they and many other (who usually
Judge according to common appearances) would have thought that Famine had been
inflicted for the blood of Abner, Ishbosheth, Amasa, Ammon, Uriah, and many
other, as well as for the blood of the said Priests. But, the Judgment came
not forth at that time for any of these; It was not absolutely for shedding of
mere Innocent blood; nor for Blood Royal, or esteemed Sacred; no not for the
blood of a King, but for Blood shed by a King; and for no such precious blood
as the blood of Israelites, or Friends, or Free Subjects, but for the Blood of
slaves, of whom little account was made; and for breach of an Oath, and a
Covenant to and with despised Persons, though contracted Illegally, yea,
contrary to Gods express command, with a People whom they were to have
destroyed; and though, it had been fraudulently and surreptiously procured:
which Exemplary Judgment, was executed and left upon record, to make it known
to all Nations, and Generations, how abominable it is to God, when men violate
the Laws of Humane Society, though out of a pretended Zeal to the welfare of
his own People; and, that he will sooner dispense with an Oath and Covenant
made ignorantly, contrary to his own express command, then with violation
thereof, in such a case, when it is once made; and, that, neither length of
time, or Pious, or Politic pretenses, can incline him to leave it unpunished.

This hints unto us, that which will be very considerable at this present by
you, and by all this Nation, as touching that Bloodshed into which God is
making inquisition; and concerning which we are to make inquity of God himself,
by the Urim and Thummim of his Word; as also, by impartially examining our own
Consciences, lest the false Witnesses, which the World and self intrest may
suborn, corrupt our Judgments: For, if we ask of our mere Courtiers, or
Fawning Parasites (who think there is more Divinity in the blood of Kings then
of other men) whose Bloodshed is at this time punishable by Famine, they (as I
conceive) will tell us, that it is only for the Blood of the late King, which
I believe not, though there lies a blood-guiltiness for that, on very many. If
we ask of the Prelates, they peradventure will add thereto the blood of the
late Archbishop of Canterbury, and the violence done to their Hyerachie. If we
ask the rest of the Clergy, they will cast in the blood of those Ministers of
the Gospel, who have been slain by the Sword, are destroyed by Oppression: The
Peers will say it is likewise for the Blood of some of the Nobility: If we put
the Question to the Generality of the People, they will affirm, that it was for
the blood of their Parents, Children, Brethren and fellow Subjects. If we
demand the opinion of the Papists, they will answer, that it is for the blood
of their Priests and Jesuits. If we Interrogate the Protestants, they
unanimously cry out and say, that it is for the blood of those three hundred
sixty and odd Thousands, who were in a most Treacherous and Barbarous manner
Massacred in Ireland, by the Papists: If we think by our Laws and Parliaments,
to be rightly informed, they (not being infallible) will leave us as doubtful
as the rest; For, Laws contradict each other; one Parliament Enacts that for
Law, which another makes Illegal; and that to be Heresy and Treason, which we
are enjoined by another Parliament to embrace for Orthodox Truth and Loyalty;
Hocus Pocus! so, that if we had no better Oracle to enquire at, then these
aforementioned, we may add blood to blood, by punishing Innocents as Offenders,
and Justifying Malifactors.

In truth a Blood-guiltiness, more or less, in all these respects, lies upon
some of all dissenting Parties throughout the whole Nation; yea upon all
without excepting one person, though they perceive it not; and a greater
blood-guiltiness then the bloodshed of all those put together will amount
unto; even a guiltiness of the precious Blood of Christ Jesus and his Saints,
by oppressing them, not only in depriving them of their Liberties and Estates
(whereby Life is to be preserved) until they lose their lives more miserably
then by a quick murder; but, by Tyranizing over their Consciences also, to the
destroying of their souls, if God prevent not. Unless therefore we will heed,
and weigh this guilt, and sanctify out formal Humiliations with more works of
Justice and Mercy then heretofore, they will prove empty vanities, and
Sacrifices without Salt or Oil. And, when we have according to David's Example,
duly searched out the Sin for which God has begun to punish us (which
probably is Bloodshed in chief) the same blood-guiltiness will continue upon
this Nation, until as far as in us lies, we shall proportionably apply what is
justly deserved by the Principal, accessory and causual Transgressors; putting
difference between them according to the quality and degree of their offenses;
seeing some of those who have been accused and condemned, may possibly be as
far from being guilty of Bloodshed, or Treason, knowingly or intentionally, as
they who went with Absalom in the simplicity of their hearts to a sacrifice,
when he rebelled against his father; and as guiltless of wilful Treason, as the
Priest was, who gave the Shewbread to David and his Soldiers when pursued by
Saul. Two men may be Active in the same work, grinding at the same Mill, fight
in the same Cause, at one and the same Battle, and yet one of them be justly
excused and received to mercy, the other as justly rejected. And when the
matter is doubtful, we must labor to our utmost, to find out the certainty,
inclining rather to compassion then to extreme Rigor in such ambiguities; else
we do neither according to the mind of God, nor make our selves to be so
capable of his mercy as we may. Solomon advised us not to be over just, that
is, not to execute any Justice without mercy. The very mercies of the wicked
are cruel, much more cruel then is their Justice. They who think they express
much love and Loyalty to the King, or to do him the more honor, by how much
the more blood they shed to avenge his Fathers Death, do more disadvantage and
dishonor him thereby, then they who took away his Life, as it will be manifest
at the last. The Indulgence of David to the People, who rebelled with his son
Absalom, does imply that a difference should be put between offenders according
to the degree and nature of their offense, as did also the Cities of Refuge for
manslaughter; The Jews, who were guilty of the blood of Jesus Christ, the King
of Kings, (as Paul was also by Persecuting the Saints) were capable of Divine
Mercy in regard they did it merely through ignorance, and by being involved in
the Epidemical Sin of the Nation at that time; So, may many be at this present:
And our King (if I am not misinformed) is so naturally inclined to extend
compassion to such offenders, that probably the issue of Blood, had been here
stopped long since, if he had not been urged to more severity then he is inclined
unto. And, doubless, they who submitted unto His late Proclamation, (which
threatened that no mercy should be vouchsafed unto them, who thereupon
surrendered not their Persons) were not so mad, as to come in with a purpose to
be hanged, seeing they might as possibly have secured their lives by flight as
others have yet done; But, knowing their Consciences clear (as I suppose) from
having had any malicious intention in those transactions wherein they were
judged offenders; they surrendered themselves into the Kings hands, with a
belief that their Indemnity was sincerely intended by the said Proclamation,
upon their submission; seeing else, it had either signified nothing as to them,
or, somewhat worse then nothing, to delude them with a false hope; which to
believe, were such a Derogation from the Kings honor, as I am not guilty of;
and I am persuaded he is so sensible how much it may concern him, that he will
not destroy the hope which was begotten by his own voluntary Act of Clemency. I
my self, (as, it may be, some other were) though engaged heretofore with such
as opposed the Royal Interest, was even then, as far from intending any thing
maliciously against the Kings Person or Dignity, that I truly pitied his
estate; And so God prosper me, as I would gladly have contributed what was in
my power toward his Restoration, or the settling of him in a safe and
comfortable being, if I had then known how to have done it, without resisting
God, or infringing that fidelity to which I conceived, I was then obliged; For
which respect, I do verily believe, I may now claim an interest in all his
Majesty's Public Acts of Grace, notwithstanding my former Misprisions: And
that according to his Royal Promises and Engagements voluntarily made, I may
justly expect, at least a competent subsistence for me and my Family, out of
that estate, which I purchased and possessed, before his Restoration: For, he
is not more safe in any man's professed Allegiance or Principles, then in mine;
who am probably persuaded in my heart to believe, that after he has tried the
temper of his People, God will put into his heart a desire and resolution, to
declare and prosecute somewhat, extraordinarily tending to his Glory, and to
the frustrating of the fears, hopes and expectations of many thousands, who are
now opposites in their Judgments and Affections: Nothing, but a malicious
wickedness can supersede this Mercy. It is a more manly Principle to ruin men
speedily and outright in fury, then by dissembling an intention of Mercy to
linger out their Torments, and destroy them at the last; of which cruelty, I
conceive the Prelates to be less guilty at this time, then many other by whom
we suffer; For, they are, for the most part, so true to their Pride and
Avarice, that they devour us as quickly as they can, without masking or hiding
their Intentions.

Let there be sincerity therefore, in executing Justice and extending Mercy;
and let us know and heed this to a maxim, which ought undoubtingly to be
received; to wit, that if any King, Supreme Power, Prince, Commander in chief,
or any other by them Authoritatively deputed to dispense their Mercy, or other
Privileges or Concessions of Grace, or of right due, shall, by his or their
Declaration, Proclamation, Letter, Promise or Engagement, make tender of them
voluntarily to any real or suspected Delinquents, (without any capitulation or
conditions) actually insisted on by the said Delinquents (especially the said
Granters receiving benefit afterward thereby) If these Delinquents accept
thereof, submit, and put themselves into their Protection, without questoning
the terms of expression, or the sincerity of the said Granters intentions;
Then, the said Concessions are to be construed to the utmost advantage of them,
who so confided and submitted. And, if in such cases there shall be any secret
Reserve or Intention in the said Granters, whereby they who so absolutely
confided, shall be deprived of their hope; or if there be any explicit or
equivocal term therein, whereby the Grace hoped for, may be vacated, by the
future Judgment of the said Granters, or of other men, who are apparent
Enemies, or doubtful Friends to the Granters; it will be so evident an
Injustice, so ignoble, and so Hypocritical a Prevarication, that, what Reason
of State soever is pretended, it will be abominable to God and Men: The said
Granters, will justly lose their honor both abroad and at home; none will
confide in their Grants, Promises or Engagements for the future, and Divine
Vengeance will also pursue them. This may perhaps be distastful to them who
relish not such assertions; But, he who truly fears God, and declares
necessary Truths in season with a good Conscience, needs not fear men, how
furious or powerful soever they be; For, they will be afraid of him, if his
Assertions be of God.

Moreover, let us take notice, that we shall neither be freed from the
Judgment threatened, nor clear from the guilt of bloodshed past, unless we
prosecute every medium in our Power to prevent bloodshed to come, by taking
away the occasions of malicious Animosities which foment discord, the Usher to
Murders and Rebellions: And this will never be effected in mere Morral or
Carnal Men, but by executing of Justice between Man and Man without
partiallity, and by permitting them to enjoy their Liberties and Livelihoods,
according to Law, without Oppressions; For, it being their Lifeblood, they
will struggle for it, upon all advantages (though it be by bloodshed) let
Divines, Preach what they will, and Statesmen threaten and impose, whatsoever
Oaths and other manacles they can devise; yea, though they lose Liberty,
Estate, Life, Body and Soul to recover it; Because they cannot be made so
sensible of any thing, as of their Self-Interest and present wants; So, that,
if their distempers be not assuaged, by the means aforesaid, occasion of
blood-guiltiness will still continue; And as for them who being by regeneration
made so conscientious of yielding Active or Passive Obedience, to the Commands
of Authority, that, they will suffer any thing rather then resist to blood,
though they lose all that whereby the mainteance of their lifeblood consists
(and are exposed to greater sufferings, then by a speedy Murder) they will
make the Land liable to greater blood-guiltiness, and more dreadful Judgments,
then the former: Because, at last, it will provoke God for the sakes of those
Patient Innocents, to arise from his Throne in Heaven and descend to be their
avenger. This, I am warranted to declare; therefore consider it; Reason is
reason, and Truth Truth, though spoken by Fools and Children; The greatest
Persons if they despise it, shall be despised; and the wisest, if they slight
it, are Fools.

It is impossible to enjoy the Peace of GOD, or long to preserve the Civil
Peace, without otherwhile giving an occasion of Bloodshed, when the Consciences
of men are entrenched upon, by imposing that which is destructive to their
Natural and Christian Freedom in things indifferent; especially, when they
perceive them to be imposed for superstitious ends only, and to advance the
covetuous designs and Interest of corrupt Persons in Societies: For, though
they who are sincerely conscientious, will (as I said before) suffer any thing
rather then give a just occasion of offense, or act ought whereby the Civil
Peace may be violated; yet, it is so abominable to mere Natural and Moral men,
to see an unlawful Interest upheld and indulged, under pretenses of promo^ing
Piety, or the Common Welfare, that they cannot well bear it, without such
murmurings as may produce mischief at the last. Among other things considerable
in that kind, the Prohibition of meats on certain days and times, makes many
very sensible, how impudently they have been fooled out of their Freedoms by
Religious Impostors. For, though it be reasonable that the forbearing of Flesh,
and the eating of Fish at sometimes should be enjoined, for preserving the
breed of Cattle, or such like respects; and that neither the Fishing Trade may
be neglected, nor that blessing of abundance of Fish, seem to be despised,
wherewith God has plentifully furnished these Islands: yet, who can understand
what prudence or Piety it is, that, according to an Antichristian Principle
(which was introduced as it were in despite of what God has declared in his
Word) those meats should be judged unlawful, on some days in a Religious
respect, which being Sanctified by Prayer and Thanksgiving, may be eaten at all
times without offense to God? If there be no thing of Religion in such a
Restraint, why should it be imposed as pertinent to Religion, and managed by
Officers thereto pretending? If the observation of a Lent, be not as truly a
Turkish as a Christian Discipline, or Ceremony, Let us know by what Holy Text,
it is commanded, equivolent to that Authority, whereby that, and such like
Impositions, and interdicted, or at least reproved. And, if, indeed it be of
Divine Institution, let it then be considered, what an abominable hypocrisy
and abuse it is of that Discipline, that the Prelates, their Vicars or other
Officers, or Doctor Dodipol, with such like Persons should make a sordid gain
thereof to satisfy their Covetousness? dispense with this Liberty to
whomsoever they please for money; even to those who desire it, merely to
satisfy their Luxurius Appetite? taking that Freedom also to themselves, by
licensing each other to eat Flesh, when prohibited? If a poor-man be so sick,
that he cannot eat Fish without hazard of his life, or has such an Antipathie
thereunto that it always indangers his health to eat it; why should his life
or health be put into the hands of such Persons who regard nothing so much as
their Self-Interest? what Religion or Charity is it to make this man pay money
for it? Is it not affliction enough that he has such infirmities, unless he
shall be enforced also to add unto his Poverty, by paying for that Liberty to
some Shabby Fellow, which God bestowed freely upon him? yea, to pay for it to
one perhaps, who whilst he is Fasting, will consume in Feasting, that which he
exacted? were it not more Christian like (if such a Restraint be civilly
necessary) that sober honest and faithful men, should take the money given for
such Licenses to help relieve the sick and needy in necesitous times? yea, if
it be expedient for a public benefit, that there should be a restraint from
eating Flesh at some set times (as I believe it may be, if ordered according to
the true intention of our Laws) It seems neverthelels, unreasonable, that a
corrupt Magistrate should raise a large profit, to himself and his Officers, by
Licensing Butchers, Cooks and Powlterers, to the making that dearer to the
People, which was over dear before. It were therefore more agreeable to common
Justice, that the profit by Fees and Fines for such Licenses, if they be
necessary, should be rather employed to ease public Burdens; or else to
relieve the needy and oppressed: For, that Justice and Charity, might somewhat
allay their distempers, who may perhaps be provoked beyond the Limit of their
patience. This last Paragraph was by forgetfulness omitted in the Papers which
I sent to the House of Commons.

This I have cast in by the way, for a Supplement to my Remonstrance, and now
you have in effect, the sum of what I have heretofore expressed publicly or in
private, as pertinent to my Vindication; and I will hereupon request nothing
simply relating to myself: For, to say truth, I can ask nothing to any purpose,
nor can you give or take away any thing which will not be as advantageous or
disadvantagious to your selves, as to me, according as it shall be justly or
unjustly given or taken away; and, if my Flesh had as little sense, of those
torments the world can inflict upon me, as my Soul has at present, of those
pleasures of hers, which I formerly enjoyed, she had nothing in her power,
which would much delight or offend me. If you restore unto me the Freedom of my
Person, and possession of my Estate, they may be lost again to morrow; and,
unless I might therewith enjoy the Liberty of my Mind according to the Law of
Nature; and of my Conscience, according to the Law of Grace, (whereof I see no
great likelihood at present) I shall not greatly value either of those
accommodations, or my Life; but, as it relates to him who gave it. I have lived
almost three quarters of a hundred years upon Earth, wherein I have observed
the Works of God and men; seen the Almighties Judgments disregarded, and his
Grace turned into Wantonness; many Changes, every one worse then the other; and
am now in Purgatory, next Wall to Hell, where I perceive those Fiery Trials
which melt and soften a few, do harden most men, into a froward impenitency;
the Gold and Silver is thereby purified; the Wood, Hay, and Stubble consume;
and I shall shortly ascend from hence, thither, where (though all things are
already known) I must give up that Testimony which I shall leave behind me, of
this Generation; wherein Apostacies, Hypocrisy, Profaneness, with all manner of
Wickedness, and impieties ripen so fast: (yea, wherein the Doctrine of Christ
is so disparaged by the Professors thereof, who live contrary to the Life of
Christ) that if the Angels, thereto appointed, do not speedily thrust in their
Sickles and gather the Wheat into Gods Garner, and hack up the Tares for the
fire; there will be few handfuls of good Corn left upon Earth, and little Faith
found amongst men when Christ comes. This Testimony is true, though expressed
in much infirmity, after the manner of men; therefore, I will conclude all with
a Petition for those things only, wherein Gods Glory, your Honor, and the
Interests of many Thousands are comprehended, as well as mine: The said
Petition is that which follows.

The PETITION.
I Humbly beseech your Honors, as you respect the many great and extraordinary
Mercies of God lately vouchsafed to the King, to your selves, and to those whom
you Represent: As you stand in awe of those Judgments, that are in part
removed; as you desire the total removal of those which yet lie upon us; and
the prevention of those that are feared; as also, to behold the Face of God
with Joy at the last Judgment: that, in all your future Consultations, Debates
and Actings, you seek the preservation of a good Conscience, in preferring the
Cause and Honor of God, before all Royal, Popular, or Personal Interests:
That, in particular you would be careful his Divine Worship, may not be
adulterated, or clogged with the Superstitious Traditions of Men, by your
assent; and that no Power, Person or Persons, by your neglect or means, be
permitted to Usurp a seat in the Conscience, which is Gods Peculiar Throne upon
Earth. That, you will so endeavor to Establish the Kings Throne in
Righteousness, that Justice and Mercy, being the Supporters thereof, neither
the Just Royal Perogative, nor the Lawful Liberties of the People (by whom you
are Entrusted) may be infringed, or clash; But, that, Right may be equally
dispensed. That, you would be merciful as our Heavenly Father is merciful,
extending Compassion (which is the best Sacrifice) to other men, according to
that Mercy which you would willingly receive, if you were in their stead;
rather mitigating, then agravating their punishment, who have offended through
Ignorance, Weakness, or Inconsiderateness, and not by Design or Malice. And,
forasmuch, as the Privileges you Claim, were not at first conferred for your
own sakes, but for the sakes of the People whom you represent, and by whom you
were chosen and entrusted; That, you make no farther use of those Privileges
for your Personal advantages, then may consist with your Trust; which is to be
kept inviolable without respect of Persons, Fear, Favor, or Reward. These
Petitions being by you approved and granted, so far forth as it may be in your
Power, I shall have so large a share in them, that it will be needless for me,
to Petition ought a part by my Self; and I shall be fully contented with what
God pleases to allow; Praise him, and Pray for you unfeignedly, as in Duty I
am bound; who, by vouchsafing these requests, shall have a Joyful welcome home,
by all your Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, when you are adjourned, prorogued,
or dissolved; And your Honor, shall be so transcendant, that no Tongue, Pen,
Lybeller or Lybel, shall have Power to cast a blemish the reupon.

Jamque Opus Exegi.
My Life, and work (for ought, that yet I know)
Is either quite, or almost ended now;
And my Quietus est, within a Grave
Is, that, which best would please me, now to have:
For, by their struggling, many years together,
My Flesh and Spirit, have nigh tired each other.
Lord, let the short-snuff, of my Life unspent
Burn out, with clear flames, and a pleasing scent.
Newgate, January the 27th. 1661. Geo. Wither.

THE END.

