OBSERVATIONS UPON THE OATH Enacted 1. Eliz. Commonly called, The OATH of
SVPREMACY.

For the better satisfaction of those that may find themselves concerned
therein.

Observations upon the Oath Enacted 1. Eliz. commonly called, The Oath of
SVPREMACY.
BY the Oath of Supremacy Enacted by Henry the Eighth, the said King was sworn
to be Supreme Head of the Church of England. Which title was of so great
offense and scandal, even to some of those that then professed the Reformed
Religion, that they writ Invectives against the same, as Roman Catholics also
did, and sundry persons lost their lives in those days for denial thereof, as
is written of Sir Thomas More, and others.

But that Oath was afterward abolisht by Parliament, with some other statutes
relating thereunto: and in the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth the ensuing Oath
was enjoined by an Act then entitled (All ancient Jurisdiction restored to the
Crown, and all foreign power abolished) the words of which Oath are as
follows,

I A, B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Queens
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, of all other her
Highnesses Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or Causes, as temporal, etc. That no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this
Realm, and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, and do promise that from
henceforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Queens Highness, her
Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies and Authorities granted or belonging
to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

Although the words of this Oath are not the same as in the former, and Supreme
Head of the Church of England not particularly mentioned therein, yet according
to the common acceptance of the words in the said Oath, it seemed to attribute
to her said Majesty in effect and substance no less spiritual Jurisdiction and
power; (nay more) then what the said former Oath did or might import. Wherefore
this Oath was also excepted at by diverse. In which consideration, and for the
clearing of doubts that might be conceived thereupon, her Majesty by an
Admonition in her Injunctions published afterward in the said first year of
her Reign, did explain and interpret the sense and meaning of the words of the
said Oath, in which the same should from thenceforth be accepted and taken. The
Admonition and Title is as follows.

An Admonition to Simple men deceived by malicious.
The Queens Majesty being informed, that in certain places of the Realm sundry
of her native Subjects being called to Ecclesiastical Ministry in the Church,
be by sinister persuasion, and perverse construction, induced to find some
scruple in the form of an Oath, which by an Act of the last Parliament is
prescribed to be required of diverse persons for the Recognition of their
Allegiance to her Majesty, which certainly never was ne ever meant, nor by any
equity of words or good sense can be thereof gathered; would that all her
loving Subjects should understand, that nothing was, is, or shall be meant or
intended by the same Oath, to have any other duty, allegiance, or bond required
by the same Oath, then was acknowledged to be due to the most noble Kings of
famous memory, K. Henry the 8. her Majesty's Father, or K. Edward the 6. her
Majesty's Brother.

And further, her Majesty forbids all manner her Subjects, to give ear or
credit to such perverse and malicious persons, which most sinisterly and
maliciously labor to notify to her loving Subjects, how by words of the said
Oath it may be collected, that the Kings or Queeus of this Realm, possssors of
the Crown, may challenge authority and power of Ministry, of Divine Service in
the Church: wherein her said Subjects be much abused by such evil disposed
persons; for certainly her Majesty neither does, nor ever will challenge any
other authority then that was challenged and lately used by the said noble
Kings of famous memory, K. Henry the Eighth, and K. Edward the sixth, which is
and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, THAT IS,
under God to have the Sovereignty and Rule over all manner persons born within
these Realms, Dominions and Countries, of what estate either Ecclesiastical or
temporal soever they be, SO AS no other foreign power shall or ought to have
any superiority over them. And if any person that has conceived any other
sense of the form of the said Oath, shall accept the same Oath with this
Interpretation, sense or meaning, her Majesty is well pleased to accept every
such in that behalf, as her good and obedient Subjects, and shall acquit them
of all manner penalties contained in the said Act, against such as shall
peremptorily or obstinately refuse to take the same Oath.

It is observable, that the Queen did thus explain and interpret the words of
this Oath by her own authority. But whereas some might then object, as others
have done since, upon the same occasion, that the words of an Oath could not be
warrantably interpreted from their ordinary sense, and usual acceptance, by
any authority less then that of the Lawmakers: Therefore the said Admonition
was confirmed by her said Majesty in Parliament, by the Satute 5 Eliz. cap. 1.
wherein is this Proviso as follows.

Provided also, that the Oath expressed in the said Act made in the said first
Year, shall be taken and expounded in such form as is set forth in an
Admonition annexed to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions published in the first
Year of her Majesty's Reign; That is to say, to confess and acknowledge in her
Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, none other authority then that was
challenged and lately used by the Noble K. Henry the 8. and K. Edward the 6. as
in the said admonition more plainly may appear.

It is observable, that in virtue of this Provisoe in the said Statute, the
aforesaid admonition acquired the force of a Law as much as the Provisoe it
self had, which referres to the said admonition, and consequently makes void in
law whatsoever was formerly Enacted contrary to the same. So that from and
after the said Act 5. Eliz. the said Oath (though pronounced in the form of
words verbatim, as is expressed in the Act 1. Eliz.) yet the effect and tenor
of the said words must be construed and understood in the form, and according
to the Interpretation, sense and meaning, as appears in the aforesaid
admonition. And whosoever upon tender of the said Oath unto him, if (when he
shall have read or pronounced the words thereof) he do profess that he intends
in swearing the same to mean those said words in no other sense, but according
as the admonition aforesaid does set forth, No Officer whatsoever can press
him to swear it any other ways. Which being matter of Law the Learned in the
Law can best resolve, if any doubt be made thereof.

The next Enquiry shall be, if any thing be contained in the said admonition,
either in words or meaning, which a Conscientious person, Protestant, or Roman
Catholic can justly except against.

The Exceptions generally pretended against the same are, First, That the said
Oath was purposely framed for profession of Religion then newly established.
Secondly, That the Sovereignty and rule claimed by her Majesty in the said
admonition is, over Ecclesiastical persons, and in things and Causes spiritual
and Ecclesiastical, both which (say most of those that except against the same)
are exempted (Jure divino) from the power of the temporal Magistrate, and
consequently the King is in effect declared thereby to be Head of the Church.
Thirdly, That the spiritual power and Jurisdiction left by Christ to his
Church, and the respective Pastors of the same, is likewise absolutely denied
therein. These things being part of their Faith and Religion, they cannot swear
without renouncing the same, and giving scandal to others of their profession,
which therefore shall be the subject of our next Observations.

1. The very words of this admonition do express that the said Oath was
prescribed and required for recognition of Allegiance.

2. The Latitude of meaning which might be contained in the words of the Oath,
viz. (Under God Supreme Governor, as well in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
things and Causes as temporal) is restrained in this admonition, by these
words, viz. Her Majesty neither does nor ever will challenge any other
authority then what was challenged and lately used by Henry the Eighth, and
Edward the sixth, which is and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm. And then it is particularly specified what that authority was by
the words of the said admonition immediately following, viz. THAT IS under God
to have the Sovereignty and Rule over all manner persons born within those her
Realms, Dominions, and Countries, of what estate either Ecclesiastical or
Temporal soever they be.

3. Least by the said Oath her Majesty might seem to deny to the Church the
Power and Jurisdiction left by Christ to his Apostles and their Successors,
being merely spiritual, her Majesty therefore professes not to challenge
authority or power of Ministry of divine Service in the Church. And moreover
restrains the denial of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Power, etc.
mentioned in the said Oath (being in general) to such Jurisdiction (only) as
was repugnant to the said Sovereignty and Rule over all her Subjects. Which is
apparent by these words, So as no other foreign power shall or ought to have
any Superiority over them.] which words (SO AS) denote the rest to be relative
to her Majesty's Superiority and Rule, that immediately before was declared.

And in further proof thereof, Whereas the aforesaid Act in the said first Year
of her Reign was entitled [All ancient Jurisdictions restored to the Crown,
and all foreign power abolisht,] the Statute made in the fifth Year of her
Reign, Cap. 1. seemed to qualify or explain the said former Act, for it
entitled the said former Act to be an Act restoring to the Crown the ancient
Jurisdiction ever the state Ecclesiastical and spiritual, and abolishing all
foreign power REPUGNANT to the same. The alteration of the Title is very
observable in this latter Act, for it seemed thereby to denote and explain that
which in the heat of the then sudden change of Religion had not been so
maturely disgested and established in the former.

The Articles of the Church of England, and of the Clergy, express the Kings
said power and Authority by calling it the civil (not spiritual) sword.

Doctor Carleton afterward Bishop of Chichester in his notable Treatise of In
his Admonition to the Reader. The Fathers write for the spiritual Jurisdiction
of the Church above Princes, which thing we never denied.
Jurisdictions Episcopal, Regal and Papal, writes most learnedly and clearly
upon this Subject. He says page 9. As for spiritual Jurisdiction of the
Church, standing in Examination of Controversies of Faith, judging of Heresies,
deposing of Heretics, Excommunication of notorious and stubborn offenders,
Ordination of Priests and Deacons, Institution and collation of Benifices and
Spiritual Cures, etc. which Princes cannot give nor take from the Church, this
power has been practiced by the Church without coactive Jurisdiction other
then of Excommunication. But when matters handled in the Ecclesiastical
Consistory are not matters of Faith and Religion, but of a Civil nature which
yet are called Ecclesiastical, as being given by Princes, and appointed to be
within the Cognizance of that Consistory, and when the Censures are not
spiritual, but carnal, compulsive, coactive, here appears the power of the
Civil Magistrate.

Page 42, 43. It cannot be denied, but that there is a Power in the Church, not
only Internal but also of External Jurisdiction. Of Internal Power there is no
question made, External Jurisdiction being understood all that is practiced in
External Courts or Consntories, is either Definitive or Mulctative. Authority
Definitive in matters of Faith and Religion, belongs to the Church;
Mulctative Power may be understood either as it is referred to spiritual
Censures, or as it is with Coaction. As it stands in spiritual Censures, it
is the right of the Church, as was practiced by the Church, when the Church was
without a Christian Magistrate and since. But Coactive Jurisdiction was never
practiced by the Church, when the Church was without Christian Magistrate, but
was always understood to belong to the Civil Magistrate, whether he were
Christian or Heathen. ande.

The Apostles did sometimes take vengeance upon the disobedient, but that was
not by the Material Sword, (in the Power whereof we place Coaction) but by the
Spiritual Sword.

The Learned Bishop of Derry, lately made Bishop of Armagh, and honored with
the Title of Lord Primat of all Ireland, speaks most clearly to this Point, in
his Book Schism Guarded, p. 160. But I expect it should be Objected, that
besides these Statutes which concern the Patronage of the English Church, the
Legislative, the Judiciary, the Dispensative Power of Popes, There are two
other Statutes made by Henry the Eighth. The one, An Act for extinguishing the
Authority of the Bishop of Rome: The other, An Act for establishing the Kings
Succession in the Crown; wherein there is an Oath, That the Bishop of Rome
ought not to have any Jurisdiction or Authority in this Realm. And that it is
declared in the 37th Article of our Church, That the Bishop of Rome has no
Jurisdiction in this Kingdom of England. And in the Oath ordained by Queen
Elizabeth, That no foreign Prelate has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction or
Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

I Answer this Objection three ways, First, As to the two Laws of Henry the
eigth, They are both repealed long since by Queen Mary, and never were restored
by any succeeding Prince. If there were any thing blameworthy in them, let it
dye with them. I confess I approve not the Construing of one Oath for another,
nor the swearing beforehand to Statutes made or to be made, But de mortuis nil
nisi bonum.

Secondly, I Answer according to the equity of my second ground, that although
it were supposed, that our Ancestors had overreached themselves and the truth
in some expression; yet that concerns not us at all, so long as we keep our
selves exactly to the line and level of Apostolical Tradition.

Thirdly and principally I answer, That our. Ancestors meant the very same
thing that we do, our only difference is in the use of words, Spiritual
Authority or Jurisdiction, which we understand properly of authority and
Jurisdiction, purely Spiritual, which extends no further then the Court of
Conscience. But by Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction, they did understand
Ecclesiastical authority and Jurisdiction in the Exterior Court, which in
truth is partly Spiri-tual, partly Political. So our Ancestors cast out
External Ecclesiastical Coactive Jurisdiction. The same do we, They did not
take away from the Pope the Power of the Keys or Jurisdiction purely spiritual;
No more do we. And p. 119. We acknowledge, that Bishops were always esteemed
the proper Judges of the Cannons, both for composing of them, and executing of
them; but with this Caution, that to make them Laws the confirmation of the
Prince was required, and to give the Bishop a Coactive Power to execute them,
the Princes Grant or Concession was needful. And p. 170. Whatsoever Power our
Laws did divest the Pope of, they invested the King with it. But they never
invested the King with any Spiritual Power or Jurisdiction, witness the
Injunction of Queen Elizabeth, the Articles of the Church, King James, our
Statutes, etc.

K James Triplict nodo, tripl^^^ cuncus. p. 47.
In that Oath ONLY is contained the Kings absolute Power, to be Judge over all
Persons as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, excluding all foreign Powers and
Potentates to be Judges within his Dominions: And generally all
English-Protestant Writers who maintain the 39. Articles, with the Discipline
and Canons of the Church of England, do constantly affirm.

That the Kings said Supreme Government and Rule is intended no other ways but
to exercise under God the Supreme coactive Jurisdiction and Power over all his
Subjects within his Realms and Dominions, of what estate soever they be,
whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal, to take cognizance in his external
Tribunals of offenders for the punishing of them with civil and corporal
punishments, according to the nature and quality of their respective offenses:
And that Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things and Causes (the transgressors
wherein are liable to his cognizance and punishment as aforesaid) are not meant
of things and causes that are merely spiritual, as of Faith and Religion, but
of such as in their own nature are either civil or mixed with something that is
temporal, which according to vulgar acceptance, are called nevertheless
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, for the reasons noted by Doctor Carleton as
aforesaid.

This Supreme external Coactive power and Jurisdiction as aforesaid, cannot be
acknowledged to be due to the King, but by necessary consequence all Power,
Prerogative, Jurisdiction, Superiority or Authority repugnant to the same, must
be denied and disclaimed in any Prelate, Person, State, or Potentate, foreign
or domestic whatsoever, other then by or under his Majesty's permission or
Authority.

But it is also observable, that what Power or Jurisdiction soever that is but
merely Spiritual (and consequently not belonging to the King) is not meant or
intended to be denied or renounced to the Church, or to any Person Prelate etc.
whatsoever, as the aforesaid Bishop of Derry most expressly declares, in very
many places, of his Book aforesaid, which for brevities sake, are omitted,
excepting these few hereunder mentioned, which may abundantly satisfy. Page
62. And therefore when we meet with these words, or the like, That No foreign
Prelate shall exercise any manner of power, Jurisdiction, Superiority,
Pre-eminence or privilege Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm; It is
not to be understood of Internal or purely Spiritual power in the Court of
Conscience, or the power of the Keys (We see the contrary practiced every day)
but of external coactive power in Ecclesiastical causes, in foro contentioso,
etc. And in his Epistle to the Reader, (having set down all or the most
considerable Points of difference and question upon this Subject, concludes his
said Epistle with these words, viz. The true controversy is, Whether the
Bishop of Rome ought by Divine Right to have the external regiment of the
English Church, and Coactive Jurisdiction in English Courts, against the will
of the King, and Laws of the Kingdom. And p. 218. No difference between Roman
Catholics and our selves about the Papacy, but only about the extent of Papal
power, etc.

To these may be added, that the Bishop of Spalato that came into England,
after his being consecrated Bishop by the Pope, or by authority from the Sea of
Rome, did not renew his Character after he came over, yet (as is well known)
ordained diverse Priests here, which was never disputed, but allowed by the
Church of England to have been validly done. All which confirms what is said
before, That Jurisdiction purely spiritual is not denied by the now
intendiment of the said Oath, and that it is not an Oath of Religion, but of
Allegiance, as is expressly said in Queen Elizabeth's Admonition aforesaid, and
obliges the takers to no more, but to assist and defend all the ancient
Jurisdictions of the Crown, and to renounce and impugn all foreign
Jurisdictions and Powers repugnant to the same. What those ancient
Jurisdictions of the Crown were esteemed to be, may be observed by the Statutes
of Clarendon, the Statute of Carlisle, the Articles of the Clergy, the Statute
of Provisors, and other the Laws of our Norman Kings, and in the times of Henry
the Third, Edward the First, Edward the Third, Richard the Second, Henry the
Fourth, which Statutes and Laws had not so publicly passed, without a greater
clamor of other Nations professing the same Religion, if the Popes pretended
power in those respective mixed cases had been thought to have been Jure
divino, or so undeniably his right, as some Divines do challenge in his behalf.

But forasmuch as many Learned and Large Treatises have been written upon this
Subject, of mixed Causes, as aforesaid, both by Roman Catholics, and by
Professors of the Reformed Religion of several Nations, and of each side some
holding that they belong to the Kings Supreme Authority and civil sword, others
that they belong only to the Church without any Concession from the temporal
Magistrate.

For allay to the Scruples that may hereupon arise in the minds of any his
Majesty's Loyal Subjects, it may be observed, that since the Learned Doctors of
both sides do respectively declare upon mature consideration of several Texts
of holy Writ; Acts of Councils, and other reasons alleged, to have different
Sentiments therein, some of each side, holding the contrary to what others of
the same profession do strongly maintain, but never determined by the Church:

The probability of their said opinions may respectively warrant (if not
oblige) all his Majesty's Subjects (especially being so enjoined by Law) to
acknowledge submission to that external coactive Power and Authority of his
Majesty for the punishment of Offenders with civil and corporal punishments in
such mixed cases, as aforesaid, which their respective Teachers do affirm to
be justly derived from natural Reason, and clear places of Scripture, and
assert them as part of his Royal Jurisdiction.

Our ancient Histories, Statutes, and most authentic Records of former times,
long before Henry 8th do testify as aforesaid, That our Kings did challenge a
sovereign, external, coactive Jurisdiction over all their Subjects, as
aforesaid in those cases, sometimes indulging them to the Ecclesiastical
Courts, and See of Rome, sometimes restraining them again (of their own
Authority, without recourse to the Pope or See of Rome) more or less according
to their zeal or devotion toward the Church and Churchmen, and the respective
occasions in those times, according as was then thought fit by our Kings and
Parliaments. Read the Statutes of Provisors, 25. of Ed. 3.

The practice in France sufficiently declares what that Kings Power is in the
cases aforesaid: For although spiritual offenses (that are merely such) are
punishable in the Ecclesiastical Courts only by spiritual Censures as
Excommunication, Suspension, etc. Yet if the cause be mixed in any sort with
what is civil or temporal, as aforesaid; or if never so little pecuniary Mulct
be imposed upon the offenders for damages by the Ecclesiastical Judges, the
whole matter may be brought to the cognizance of the civil Court upon appeal,
and the former sentence reversed, if it be thought fit: Nor does any
Ecclesiastical Promotion or Dignity, how great soever, privilege any person
from civil and corporal punishments there; if he offend against the the now
Archbishop of Paris, under the most Christian Kings, who is known to be most
zealously devoted to the Church and See of Rome. And many other Presidents of
the same nature have been in Hungary, Germany, and other Countries that hold
communion with that Church.

The King of Spain exercises the like Authority in several places of his
Dominions, and so amply in his Kingdom of Sicily, that it is there called,
Supreme Spiritual Authority, and spiritual Monarchy, as is acknowledged by the
Catholic Divine in in his Answer to the fifth part of Sr Edward Cooks
Reports, page 102. which words Supreme, spiritual Authority, and Spiritual
Monarchy sound as harsh, and require a favorable explanation, no less than
any the words in Queen Elizabeth's Oath aforesaid. He says indeed, That Pope
Urbane granted the same long time since to that Kings Predecessors, as Pope
Nicolas somewhat of the like nature to St. Edward King of England.

But mere spiritual Jurisdiction (as is conceived) could not be granted to a
Lay person. And our Question being of the original right of our Princes to
supreme, external, coactive Jurisdiction over their Subjects to take cognizance
of offenders in such mixed cases, as aforesaid, for punishing them with civil
and corporal punishments according to the respective quality of their offenses,
which (indeed) is no other but a civil and temporal power, though the said
cases be vulgarly called Spiritual for the reasons declared as abovesaid, he
ought to have told us how the Pope came to be invested with such coactive power
by force of Law and corporal punishments, which he so granted away unto others.

Christ said, His Kingdom was not of this world. The Apostles claimed no such
coactive power, by force of Law, and corporal punishments, as aforesaid, nor
any the aforesaid exemption of their persons or goods from the temporal
Magistrate and his Tribunals. The Church (as the said Catholic Divine
confesses) had no such power for several Ages, the Emperor Constantine was the
first that granted it, who did it (to use his words) voluntarily. And other
Kings and Princes, upon their singular devotion, and in imitation of that good
Emperor.

And does not all this plainly signify, that the External Coactive power (such
as aforesaid) was originally in the Supreme temporal Magistrate? whose said
Supreme power (as most Learned men do affirm) cannot bind and conclude it self
in a Law, so as not to be able to revoke or alter the same when there is just
cause, for preservation of its being, and general good of the Commonwealth
(otherways) in imminent danger. And consequently howsoever Cannon Laws and
Decretals have been sometimes received by permission or concession of our Kings
alone, or Parliaments of our Nation, and in virtue of such reception (and not
otherwise) matriculated among our Laws, yet according to the President of many
of our Kings and Parliaments long before King Henry the Eighth, the same might
be validly restrained or made void to this Nation, so far as to the nature of
a Law, if our said Kings and Parliaments conceived it necessary for those
reasons as above said. Whether the same was well or ill done by them, or
whether the causes were sufficient or not, in the respective occasions, the
doers were answerable in conscience, not their Subjects who were bound to yield
obedience to their Sovereign power, in what things soever were not purely
Spiritual, or repugnant unto the Law of God.

Since therefore it is most apparent, that Spiritual Authority (it self) is not
denied by the intendment of this Oath explained by the Admonition and declared
as aforesaid (which is otherwise then the abovesaid Catholic Divine did
understand it to be; but only the enlargement of Spiritual Authority to
temporal coaction (such as aforesaid,) which (in reality) alters its nature,
and is repugnant to the prerogative Royal of this Crown, and which indeed the
Court of Rome (not the Church of Rome) and some Divines most especially
depending upon the same would extend the said spiritual power unto, b^^ Jure
Divino, but was not so ab initio, as manifestly appears by what is abovesaid.

Why should any his Majesty's Loyal Subjects (Roman Catholics especially)
deny to acknowledge their dutiful submission to his Majesty's said Sovereignty
and Rule over all his Subjects, and their like obedience to maintain Laws
established, so far as they relate to his said Authority in such manner as
above declared; Whereas not only the Opinions of many of the most Learned
Writers of their own Religion do maintain, That External Coaction by force of
Law, and civil and corporal punishment upon offenders of what quality soever,
and for what matter or cause soever so deserving, as abovesaid, is of natural
right belonging to the Supreme Temporal Magistrate, But also, the practice of
our Kings and Parliaments in former Ages (time out of mind) as also the
present practice of other Kings and Countries, that (nevertheless) hold
Communion with the Pope and Church of Rome, do authorize and approve the
exercise of the same, according to emergent occasions, by the said Supreme
temporal Magistrate, in manner as abovesaid.

Let them not therefore give just advantage to their adversaries in Religion,
to press against them the continuance of the penal Statutes, by objecting that
what they suffer is upon suspicion of a dangerous dependency upon a foreign
State, but not for any Doctrine or Point of Religion, which their Church has
declared to be of Faith.

The unlimitted power, and immoderate attributes given to Popes by Cannonists,
and some other Writers of eminent Authority of that side, together with the
violent proceedings of some Popes thereupon, have been principally the
occasion, that the said Oath has been so strictly urged (...) Catholics, and
has chiefly caused (...) with that See, and by the over-bold assertions of
such Writers, that some of their said Opinions were De Fide, it has been
instilled (though not with truth) into the minds of most of the people of this
Nation, That whosoever holds Communion with the Church of Rome, must
necessarily be principled according to their said Tenets. Which caused his
Majesty King James (and others so conceiving) to think that the above said Oath
was purposly framed to make distinction between Protestants and Roman
Catholics, who chiefly upon this score were all promiscuously called Papists,
and so severe Laws Enacted against them in Queen Elizabeth's time and since. Bp
of Derry's Schism Guarded. Page 176. It is true there are other differences
between us, but this is the main difference that gives denomination to the
parties.

But the truth hereof ought (if but in charity) to be further enquired into by
all conscientious men, especially by those in Authority.

For many of the Roman Catholics of these Nations (nay most of the
most-knowing among them) do profess, against such over-bold assertions, such
immoderate attributes, such unlimited powers and practices, as much as any
Protestants whatsoever. And although they hold Communion with the Church of
Rome in spiritualibus, and acknowledge (as their Ancient Forefathers did) that
the Pope is the Supreme Spiritual Pastor (which the Bishop of Derry says is
not meddled with one way or other in the intendment of this Oath, so it be but
in spirituals. And his Royal Majesty King Apol. for the Oath of Allegiance, p.
46.
James could be content that the Bishop of Rome were Patriarck of the West, and
were the first Bishop among all Bishops, and Princeps Episcoporum, so as he be
no otherwise then as Peter was Princeps Apostolorum.) Yet the said Roman
Catholics do not hold it as a part of their faith, that the Pope is infallibly
free from Error, or that he can absolve Subjects from their obedience to their
natural Prince, or from the Obligation of faithful upright dealing with their
Neighbors, though such their Prince or Neighbor be not of their Religion, or
were Excommunicated, or what more the Pope could do by himself, or with any
other, against them for that cause. And all this (say they) they will
cheerfully testify upon their Oaths, without equivocation or mental
reservation, if an Oath in clear terms expressing as aforesaid be tendered unto
them.

It is not the true meaning of the Oath explained in manner as abovesaid, which
makes many of them refuse to take the same; but there being an Oath made since,
and called the Oath of Allegiance, makes them apprehend, that something more
than mere Allegiance is contained in the former. And besides the latitude of
the words in this Oath (at which many Protestants also stick) which words are
not explained but by the admonition as aforesaid, and that admonition again not
cleared, but by the Writings of Learned Doctors, and then authorized by the
Proviso 5o Eliz. and the force of that Proviso to be resolved by the Learned
Men in the Law. These particulars (not known to many, and so intricate in
themselves) and above all, the constant tendering of the said Oath for so many
years past, without the aforesaid explanation. These things I say have made it
to be firmly believed by them, and those of their profession over all
Christendom, that in taking the said Oath, with what explanation soever (if
such explanation be not as publicly made known and declared) they give just
scandal (which is Malum in se) that they renounce their Religion: as indeed the
common acceptance of the words of the said Oath do import no less.

And since the said Roman Catholics have been so Loyal to his Majesty, not
one having drawn Sword against him in the late Rebellion, so many of them
having lost their lives and estates, and endured strict Imprisonment and great
hardship for his cause, and rendered eminent services in the late Wars even to
the preservation of his most Sacred Person.

It seems but very reasonable what is generally desire oy them, viz. that the
Oaths required of them under so great penalties, may be cleared of those
doubtful expressions in them, which cause their scruples as aforesaid, or a new
Oath to be compiled in clear terms, whereby not only they, but also many
Protestants who likewise scruple at the words of the same, may (to the entire
satisfaction of his Majesty and the Nation) fully testify the Allegiance and
Fidelity of faithful Subjects, and true Patriotts, and no longer remain (as
generally they now do) distrusted, and subject to much obloquy, and in an
incapacity to serve their King and Country, (notwithstanding the indulgence
generally afforded to tender Consciences, though of different persuasion from
the Tenets of the Church of England,) and all this upon no other score, but of
being thought otherwise principled then what their said late actions have
approved them to be, and what they now offer to profess upon their Oaths,
which is the greatest security that can be given in testimony of a man's
intention, and as much as satisfies in the like case of suspicion, from those
that have fought, etc. against his Majesty and been his most bitter enemies.

FINIS.

