AN APPENDIX TO The History of Independency, BEING A brief description of some
few of ARGYLE'S proceedings, before and since he joined in Confederacy with the
Independent Junto in ENGLAND: With a Parallel betwixt him and Cromwell, AND A
Caveat to all his seduced Adherents.

CICERO. Totius injustitiae nulla capitalior est quam eorum, qui cum maxim
fallunt, id tamen agunt, ut viri boni esse videantur. LONDON, Printed for R.
Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1661.

AN APPENDIX TO The History of Independency.
BEING A brief description of some few of Argyle's proceedings, before and
since he joined in confederacy with the Independent Junto in ENGLAND: With a
Parallel betwixt him and Cromwell; AND A Caveat to all his seduced Adherents.
THe Covenant being at the first taking, held to be the true Touchstone whereby
the Religious Royal Subjects were discerned from all those who were unwilling
to submit to the yoke of Christ in matters of Religion, or to the just and
lawful Government of our dread Sovereign his Vicegerent; now a subtle
generation of men (or rather Vipers) in both Kingdoms, who did take the
Covenant, and did magnify it so long as it could serve them for a Ladder to
mount to their intended Greatness, being now at the top, have kicked away the
Ladder, and standing (as it were) on the pinnacle, look with disdain on all
their old friends, who out of the integrity of their hearts, did for the good
of Religion, and His Majesty's honor, join in that solemn engagement, it being
far from their thoughts that their modest and humble desires for the
Reformation of some abuses both in Church and State (all which, His Majesty in
the respective Kingdoms did (or was willing to) cure) should have struck so
deep as to endeavor the overthrow of all lawful Governments, Civil and
Ecclesiastical; bringing, instead of a promised Reformation in Religion, a
cursed Toleration of the most damnable Sects, Errors, and Heresies that ever
Hell did send forth; and for the Civil State, instead of a well-setled
Monarchy, a most confused tyrannical Anarchy, quite contrary to the words and
meaning of the Covenant, and the honest intentions of all true-hearted,
Religious and loyal Subjects in the three Kingdoms, who did take that solemn
Covenant with a purpose to keep it, and of very many thousands who did never
take the Covenant, (yet very good Protestants and loyal Subjects) being more
affrighted with the compulsory way of enforcing it on all, then unsatisfied in
the matter, being introduced in a legal way, none of these deserving the name
of Malignants, or to be so cruelly dealt with either for their persons or
Estates, as has been too too common in both Kingdoms; but the Covenant it
self, does best decypher who are Incendiaries, Malignants, and evil
Instruments, viz. those who hinder the reformation of Religion, who divide the
King from His People, or one Kingdom from another, or make any Faction or
Parties amongst the people, contrary to the League and Covenant: Yet by our new
tenets, none must be called Malignants but those that have loyal hearts toward
their Sovereign, though otherwise never so Religious, and all of them (with
Master Martin) would gladly make the Covenant an old Almanac, that they might
be rid of that tie of preserving His Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with their consciences of their loyalties, and
that they have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just Power
and Greatness.

As the History of Independency has discovered the practices of the
Independent Junto, so this Appendix will discover their chief Confederate in
Scotland, namely the Marquess of Argyle; whose dealing with his Kindred,
Friends, and Confederates mentioned in the following discourse, will be a
warning to all religious Protestants, how they trust such an Apostate
Covenanter, whose ambition and avarice has ruined the KING, Church and State,
or three flourishing Kingdoms. Although it may seem a paradox to many, I dare
boldly aver, that Argile and his Faction in Scotlaud, have been, and are the
chief Malignants, Incendiaries, and evil Instruments, who have been the Ruiners
of these three flourishing Kingdoms, and the Authors of the blood shed in all
of them as I hope by this following Discourse will be made appear to every
impartial and unprejudicate Reader, who has, or may have the certain knowledge
of every particular when time shall serve. This Argile's Father, after the
marriage of his English Lady, having turned Roman Catholic, and this his only
Son by his first Lady being carefully educated by the Earl of Morton, by whose
means he obtained the possession of his Fathers whole Estate for a small
Pension, and by his Majesty's special favor (for outquitting his pretended
Title of Justice General of the Kingdom of Scotland) did obtain an Heritable
Justiciary of Argile, Lorn, Kintyre, and many of the Western Isles; which power
he did execute with that cruelty; that he disgusted all the Islanders, and
Highlands of Scotland, who were never so tyrannized over by any of their Kings,
till his Fathers death (still fearing his return) he kept himself somewhat
moderate for the engaging for the Covenant, or keeping company sometimes with
those that were against it; but his Father being dead, finding himself idolized
by those who had taken the managing of all affairs into their hands, and that
by his power and policy he could prevail with them in any thing, to indear
himself the more to that party, he did seem exceeding zealous for the Covenant,
and pretending great fears from Ireland, (which the then Lord Deputy Strafford
his Greatness, and known averseness from the Covenant, did make the more
easily to be believed) whereas the true cause of his fears was for the loss of
Kintyre, whereof he cosened his Brother long before his death) Isla, and diverse
considerable Isles which were and ought to be the possessions of the
Macdonalds, and his indiscreet provoking of Strafford, who in revenge of him
did use very hardly all the Scots in Ireland who would not renounce the
National Covenant of Scotland: he dis-arming them, did Arm and Train many
Irish, who (after his Head was off) shed so much blood in Ireland, and upon
pretense of diverse of the Macdonalds (Argile's own Tenants for the time) were
accessory to the Plot, fearing his Judiciary power where he was both Judge and
Party, they were enforced to fly to Ireland till their peace should be made;
to prevent which, he sent their Wives and Children after them, took possession
of all their movables, and placed other Tenants in their Room; but being
grieved that Culkettough and his Sons, who had goodly Possessions, were not
gone with the rest, he caused cite them before the Council, as accessory to an
Invasion to be made by Antrim and some of their friends; which citation (as
legal men and not guilty in the least) they did obey, and after some days stay
in Edinburgh (taking their walk daily before Argile's door) they did humbly
entreat his Secretary to plead for them, that they might have a speedy hearing,
since they were weary of their attendance; which the Secretary acquainting the
Lord Argile, returned them this answer, That since they had testified their
obedience by their appearance, they might go home and behave themselves
civilly, not meddling with their Rebellious friends, (as he was pleased to term
them) and be ready upon any new citation, they should be excused for that time:
they did humbly thank his Lordship, and his Secretary, for this courtesy, and
did presently depart from Edinburgh toward their home; whereof my Lord (by his
Spies upon them) having notice, did immediately convene the Council, and
whereas in many days before (during their stay in Town) they could not be
heard, that day they were first Called, and upon their not Answering, my Lord
aggravating their Accusation by their departure, occasioned by his own and his
Secretaries contriving, procures a Warrant to make them prisoners till they
should be Tried, and to seize upon their Estates; which out of his zeal to the
Covenant (God knows) he did carefully perform, and made Culkettough and his two
Sons Prisoners before they were half way at home; which Alexander Macdonald
(afterward Sir Alexander Macdonald) being fled to Ireland (having no valuable
possession to look to at home) did associate himself with the Irish in the
beginning of their Rebellion; but so soon as the Scots Army came over, he did
apply himself to them, assuring them that he would do them faithful service
against the Irish Rebels, if they would release his old Father and his two
Brethren, unjustly detained prisoners, or bring them to legal Trial, whereof
having assurance given him, he brought with him two hundred gallant men of his
friends, and did more execution upon the Irish, than half of the Scots Army,
their horse being not able to follow through Bogs, and their Foot not so swift
as the Irish, and did in one morning bring in six or seven thousand Cowes to
the Scots Camp (the like booty they did never take at any one time before or
since) for which good service, the General did of new engage for his Father and
Brethrens releasment; but when the Committee of Estates had consented, Argile
did reverse all, and frustrate the Generals promise: which Alexander Macdonald
perceiving, said no more (but well) I will yet cause my faithful service
procure my fathers enlargement, and did continue without pay, or hope of pay,
saving a very spare allowance of quarters, until Argile sent over and caused
him to be discharged of all quarters, to the grief of all the Scots Officers,
who did well know what faithful service he had done, and was able to do them:
so that mere necessity did enforce him to make his peace with the Irish, by
whose help he did come over into Scotland, merely to be revenged on Argile, and
to relieve his Father, hoping the Estates of Scotland, would not blame him for
suing the performance of what their General had promised unto him, intending no
more til Montrosse out of his desire to be revenged on Argile did enforce
Alexander Macdonald to join his Majesty's Interest, as Montrosse pretended,
with the said Macdonald, hoping he would find (as indeed he did) a great many
discontented persons to join with them, all which, or the most considerable,
were parties and persons wronged, oppressed, and ruined by Argile, as chiefly
(besides the forementioned Islanders and these Highlands that were under his
lash) the Athol men twice or thrice plundered by him; Montrosse himself
provoked by many well-known injuries, which no noble heart could endure, as the
death of Mr. James Stewart who was no Traitor either to King or Country save
only to Argile. The Earl of Airly having his estate plundered and his House
thrown down in revenge of an ancient quarrel amongst their Predecessors, for
the Earl of Airly having some Lands in the Bray of Augus, out of which Argile's
men did many times drive Herds of Cattle, Sheep, and other Beasts, for which
the Ogilbee could have no remedy, these Thieves being protected by the Earl of
Argile, by advice of his Lawyers he did Charge the Earl of Argile, that he
should find surety not to maintain or protect such Out-lawes; but before he
could obtain the same, he was obliged (according to the custom of Scotland) to
give his Oath, he did fear bodily harm from Argile, which he was unwilling to
do; alleging, it were only a Beastly harm that he did fear, for if he would not
protect those that did steal his poor men's Beasts, he was nothing afraid of his
body. This tart Answer, after an age must (under color of service to the
State) be so revenged.

The Gourdons, diverse of whom he betrayed under trust, and under pretense of
securing his Nieces Portions that he was engaged for, possessing himself of
Badinoch and Lochabar, and plundering friends and foes indifferently in his
marches too and fro, and the inexhaustible treasure of the Scots Exchequer must
allow him eleven or twelve thousand pound sterlin for every Voyage: whereas his
Breechlesse Soldiery were well content with their Beef and Bannocks, and such
convenient plunder as the Country could afford: these (as I conceive) were the
most considerable Forces Montrosse ever had, unless some that were through
fear, compelled to yield for the time, so that the bloodshed in Scotland by
Montrosse and Macdonald do properly fall upon Argiles score, no other under
Heaven having occasioned both their outbreakings; and all their partakers, who
did see no other way to be revenged on him (that had made himself Master of all
the Estate, having made Argile's quarrel their own) than by heaving at all
under the specious pretext of the Kings interest: which if God in mercy had not
prevented, they had almost effectuate through Argiles misgovernment, wherein it
is to be remarked, that when he was overthrown by Montrosse in Lochaber the
second of February, 1645. many of his friends being killed, and others taken,
he who would not release Culkettough for his Sons good service, nor the
Generals engagement, or the Committee of Estates desire (you must not speak of
Command) for Master James Hamileon, a faithful Minister of the Gospel, who
found more kindness from Culkettough than from this Canibal Covenanter, is now
content to release all to get a poor Company of his Countrymen, leaving the
godly Minister in cruel bondage, whom Culkettough did release upon his Paroll
and promise to send him a Boy that was forgot behind.

This religious Covenanter, out of his pious care for the education of his
Sister, in the true Religion as he pretended, did by His Majesty's special
favor overthrow the last will and Testament of his mother-in-law, by getting
himself made Administrator in the room of him who was nominated therein,
whereby he got the Gentlewoman his Sisters whole patrimony into his hands; but
before he could prevail in this, His Majesty did take special care that
sufficient Surety should be given that the Will of the Dead should be truly
performed by payment of their respective portions when they were Married, and
sufficient maintenance until they were Married: the Elder whose Portion was
Five thousand pound sterlin, is presently sent for, and one thousand pound or
thereby given to a Gentleman for his second Wife, the rest (there being a
clause that if any of them should enter into Nunneries they should only have
300 l. sterlin for all) being kept so scarce of their due maintenance (the
Gentleman who was surety, having advanced of his own above 1000 l. whereof he
is not as yet repaid) were seduced to go to Monasteries all save one, who is
now ready to enter through his neglect; so this 12000 l. of his Sisters
Portions (with the ruin of their Souls to boot) is a part of Argile's wel-made
purchase.

The great care taken by the Earl of Morton for Argile's education and
preservation both of his life from the crafty designs of a Stepmother, and
recovery of his almost ruined Estate, was so well requited, that
(notwithstanding he has the Earl of Morton's Daughter in his bed) in open
Parliament he spoke what became him not both of that noble Lords Person and
Estate (only as he pretended, out of his zeal to the welfare of the Kingdom)
whereas the truth is, it was merely out of his ambition to have that Honorable
place conferred upon himself, which was intended by his Majesty upon that noble
Lord; but finding His Majesty not inclinable that way, the next assault was,
for one of his own name, a man truly well deserving (for to say, better
deserving than himself, is no great praise) and if, his two much favoring of
him do not stain his reputation, worthy to be beloved.

Thus having shortly viewed Argile's religious carriage toward his Vassals and
Tenants, Parents, Friends, and Allies, Brother and Sisters, Neighbors, and
fellow-Patriots, let us take a short view of his Loyal carriage toward his
Sovereign, and his due observation of the Solemn League and Covenant with his
covenanted Brethren of England, and then let the impartial reader judge whether
he be not such as is affirmed in the proposition, the greatest incendiary in
the three Kingdoms.

It cannot be denied, but His Majesty (as is mentioned before) did confer many
great and Princely favors upon him at the Earl of Morton's desire when he was
Lord of Lorn, such whereof as required confirmation were approved and ratified
in Parliament, His Majesty being present, anno 1641. with the addition of the
honor and title of Marquess, and a full Pension well paid ever since whoever
want, together with (not only an Act of oblivion, but) approbation of all his
tyrannical proceedings against the Athol men, the Earl of Aireley, and others,
though not particularly mentioned, yet as done in obedience of Orders from the
Committee of estates (obtained by his own procurement) therefore to be no
further questioned.

The first endeavor in requital of these and many other Royal favors was the
entering in conspiracy with certain his Confederates (whom I forbear to name) to
transform the Kingdom of Scotland into a free State like the Estates of
Holland, and because some truly noble Lords did abhor such a disloyal motion
(after so many Acts of favor, witnessing to all Posterity his Royal bounty
both to Church and State, whereof these chief Conspirators tasted not a little)
he did at that time forbear not so much to prosecute his design, as to conceal
their Counsel from all these that had thoughts of Loyalty, though most
faithful to the true Religion and their Country, according to the Covenant.
The Irish Rebellion breaking out, fearing his own stake if Antrim should grow
strong, he procured one Regiment for himself, another for his Cozen Lawers, a
third with the place of L. General for that most ungrate Gentleman the Earl of
Lothian (who was married to his niece and one of his Confidents, who was once
heard say, That the 3 Kingdoms would never have peace so long as King CHARLES
his head was on his shoulders: And yet it is only King CHARLES his favor that
has made him and Father exceed the estate of Gentlemen) with many other places
to diverse of their friends, intending a full Conquest of Ireland (at least) to
banish Antrim and the Mackdonalds from thence, as he and his Predecessors had
done many of them out of Scotland, taking a gift from the Parliament of England
of some of the Earl of Anerims Lands in Ireland, especially the Island of
Rachera; to the which, one of the forementioned Regiments was sent, and kept
there a long time, so that all the three Kingdoms must be at the charge to
maintain Armies and Garrisons for enlarging the Dominions of Argile. His next
project, having begun his Confederacy in England, by showing them the ways to
get money by Taxes, and Excise, 10. and 20. part, bringing in of Plate,
voluntary Contributious, borrowing on the Public Faith, tyrannizing over the
Persons and Estates of all that durst be so bold as speak against the illegal
Orders, and all this Money in both Kingdoms to be employed against His
Majesty, whom their renewed Covenant did oblige them to defend, having good
opportunity to traffic betwixt under the pretense of Commissioners for the
Kingdom of Scotland, the rest for the most part either his Creatures or
Confidents; so that he ruled all the Council at home and abroad, sending
Lothian to France to have them brought in a Confederacy, abusing his Majesty by
procuring His Commission for Treating concerning the keeping and preservation
of that ancient League betwixt France and Scotland (begun in Charles the
great's time, with Achaius King of Scotland) but the effect of the Treaty was
to bring money to Argile, who, at that time when the Kingdom stood in much need
of men, sold five thousand to the French to be under his Brother, (from whom he
had, as formerly the Estate, so now the title of Kintire, and he must be Earl
of Irwin, all the Interest be had there being by his quondum Tutor (now Slave)
Barcley, his being sometime Provost thereof) and the Chancellors Brother Lundie
sur France and Irwin had bad penny worths, although Argile made a good market
for the men, like money trusted in a Juglers hand, were gone with a puff: thus
you see how much both KING and Kingdom were obliged to him in this particular.
But to come to the main point of the Conspiracy, finding Scotland (although he
had all the power of the Persons and Estates in his hand) not pliable as yet to
cast off Monarchy, and embrace Aristocracy, of whom (as affairs stood) none
could be the chief Ruler but himself, he did employ the Zealots of the Clergy
to asperse those who did oppose him (especially some most faithful and
religious Noble men) as if they were fallen from their first love, turn enemies
to the cause of Christ, had with Demas embraced ^is present world, and that
Argile was the only man that stood in the gap; threatening out of their Pulpits
all such as would think or speak evil of him; but when the State-juglers with
their Clergy-Impostors, could neither shake the Loyalty of the one, who were
really for the Covenant and Monarchical Government, nor plaster over the many
fraudulent cheats of the Argathelian party, now become a most odious and heavy
burden to the Kingdom, harased and ruined from the one end to the other by him
and his Armies on the one part, and Montrosse and his Confederates on the other
part, ( Argyle, of the two, being the Kingdoms most cruel Enemy) was simulat
humiliation, having the Churchmen still his friends, did reconcile himself to
the other noble and loyal Patriots, by suffering them to take some share of the
Government, that the (by him) dis-joynted State might by them be set in a right
frame again, with a resolution, when all things were right, to usurp his wonted
Authority, and follow his old trade of Dethroning his Majesty, and cantonizing
the Kingdom; but things falling out so, that one day at Nazeby, quelling the
KINGS party in England; and one day at Phillipshaugh, almost quieting Scotland;
finding the Presbyterians in England inclinable to peace, and desirous of his
Majesty's re-establishment according to the Covenant, he leaves them, and joins
Counsel with Say, Perpoint, Cromwell, and others of the Independent Junto,
doing them that-Master piece of good service. First under color of Loyalty and
friendship to prevail with His Majesty to return to the Scots Army then at
Newark, Cromwell contributing a Pass to Hudson, and Ashburnham with a slack
Guard, that His Majesty might the more freely escape. Secondly, after many
learned and loyal Speeches for Monarchy, the Kingdom of Scotlands interest in
the person of the KING, and many Vows and Protestations both in private and
public, not to abandon His Majesty without his own consent, contrary to all
which, he and his Party did overthrow the Loyalty of that once famous
Gentleman, Lieuten. General David Leslie (who had deeply sworn, and engaged
himself to His Majesty, to convoy him safely into Scotland, or then to see His
Majesty peaceably settled in his throne in England) forcing him, and he
persuading and prevailing with the Soldiers to march away, leaving his Majesty
behind little better than (but now an assured) Prisoner, and the whole power of
the Sword in the hands of the Independents and Sectaries, to the ruin and
overthrow of their Presbyterian friends in the City and Parliament, as the
History of Independency does Witness, encouraging the Independent Party (by
their Letters) to proceed in their dethroning Votes, and accusation of his
Majesty, assuring them that no party from Scotland shall be able to hinder them
in their proceedings; but finding the body of the Parliament, and the Kingdom
of Scotland to be sensible of the ruin of Religion and Monarchical Government
if the Sectaries prevail, and their resolution to adhere to their Covenant, and
re-establishing his Majesty, being in fear their party shall not be able any
longer to delude the Kingdom, or hinder the Army designed to come in for the
vindication of the many breaches of the Solemn League and Covenant, and the
several Treaties betwixt the Kingdoms, they have solicited the Armies of
Sectaries to come to their assistance, some of their Ministers professing in
their Letters, They have no hope of safety, unless it be by means of this
(rebellious) Army now in England, thereby endeavoring to make Scotland the
seat of War.

And if these troubles in Wales, and cutting Petitions from Essex, Kent, Surry,
and Sussex, had not hindered them, their resolution was to have sent Cromwell
thither, it being debated before he went to Wales, which of the two he should
take in hand; but the constant assurance they had from Argile, and those
accursed Clergymen that were bribed by Stephen Marshal, That there was no fear
of danger from Scotland in have, made them hasten to finish the enslaving of
England and Wales, and then they resolve to conquer Scotland; which they
conceive may be quickly done, having Argile and his Faction so firm to them,
that although he would, neither he nor his Partners dare revolt from them,
having received so much of their money, lest they should reveal more then he
desires should be known; and as the Independents sent their Emissaries through
all Counties and Corporations, to get hands to Petitions for thanks to the
House for their dethroning Votes, so Argile and Marshal's Hirelings have been
very active to get hands to Petitions in many Shires, Corporations, and
Provincial Assemblies, for hindering the engagement against the rebellious Army
of Sectaries, and the Independent Junto their Confederates: whereas there is no
intention against the Parliament, or Body of England; but to comply with all
religious honest-hearted and loyal Subjects, who desire that His Majesty may be
enlarged and brought to a Personal Treaty, whereby Peace and truth may be
settled in the three Kingdoms; their chief pretenses being, that Religion is not
secured: the Religion now established in Scotland was by Act of Parliament (His
Majesty present) so well secured, as the most religious Churchmen, and most
skillful Lawyers could devise; if you have got New lights, and desire any other
Religion to be established, vindicate His Majesty's Honor, and put up your
Petitions to Him in an orderly way, and He may possibly vindicate you from the
Yoke of Slavery which some of your tyrannizing Clergy desire to put upon you;
The next is a wonderful increase of your fears by the great Trusts put upon
such persons, of whom you have just cause of jealousy to this Kingdom, and the
Cause of God; though you do not speak plain, your Pamphletters do, and your
Pulpit-Incendiaries to some purpose; you mean Duke Hamilton now General of the
Forces, designed by the Kingdom and Parliament of Scotland for vindicating the
Honor of the Nation, and revenging His Majesty's Captivity-upon that
perfidious rebellious Army of Sectaries, and their adherents: what he did
before the subscribing of the Covenant ought not to be objected, (his
moderation even then deserving the honor and love of his Country) and since
his subscribing, malice it self cannot tax him that he has done any thing
contrary to his Covenant or his Country; what Montrosse does asperse him with,
that he hindered his intended invasion of Scotland, and so consequently His
Majesty's Service; none of those who stand for the Covenant who did think
Montrosse an enemy to the Covenant, and to his Country, ought to object this to
my Lord Duke; whose tender care of the safety and welfare of his Country may
evidently appear even in the relation of one of his most deadly enemies; and
whereas his good advice for moderation was misconstrued by Argile and his
prevailing Faction on the one side, as if he had done things contrary to the
Covenant; and by Montrosse and his Confederates at Court on the other side, as
if he had connived or been accessory to those violent courses against his
Majesty, which (God knows) he was not able at that time to hinder; his
intentions being still for Peace, and such a Peace as might consist with the
safety of Religion, and His Majesty's honor; whereof he was very hopeful,
being confident of His Majesty's propensnesse to Peace, and the interest he had
in His Majesty's favor: but the watchful malice of his enemies, and the
enemies of Peace, did cunningly prevent his going about so good a work, making
him Prisoner without His Majesty's knowledge, hindering by all means a meeting
betwixt them, knowing that his Majesty's justice, and the Dukes innocence,
would quickly make their calumnies to vanish: what a sad imprisonment did he
endure, much heightened by the then impossibility of clearing his innocence to
his Sovereign (the loss of whose favor would be more bitter then a thousand
deaths) and his real intentions for the good of his Country, for whose cause he
hazarded and suffered so much misery and imprisonment? Yet this noble Dukes
implacable and malicious enemies do further asperse him as a man of no
Religion, a mere Politician, and one that seeks the ruin of his Sovereign,
by the aspiring to the Crown of Scotland: It would trouble the best Politician,
and the most Religious upon earth, in these distracting and distracted times,
to distinguish rightly betwixt the duty we owe to Religion, and the duty we owe
to our Prince, supposing them enemies; but the falsity of this supposition,
(which has misled many thousands, and been the ground of all our miseries)
being evident to the Duke, who had the honor to be educated and intimate with
his Majesty from his youth, knowing his Majesty to be a lover and honourer of
the true Protestant Religion, a lover of justice and mercy, and a practiser of
all Christian and moral virtues, and with a most munificent hand a royal
Benefactor to himself and his Family. It may be asked, if it had been either
piety or policy in the Duke to have kicked off so loving and so liberal a Lord
and Master, (although he had not been his Sovereign) or to have engaged against
his Country with any Party that for their own ends more then the good of their
Sovereigns, were disturbers of all moderate Counsels, so long as he had any
hopes of Peace; especially seeing so many sad presidents in both Kingdoms,
where many powerful Subjects, lovers of the true Protestant Religion, not
joining prudence with their loyalty and innocence, have crushed them under the
Load, and nothing eases his Majesty's burden, but rather increases the same;
all their wealth and power being now made instrumental to enslave both KING and
Kingdoms: the Duke's prudence having vindicated him from the ruin intended
against him by his enemies, and reserved him (through Gods blessing) to
vindicate his Loyalty by re-enthroning his Majesty so soon as God has enabled
him with any power to do it. As for his Religion, it is known he is neither
Popishly affected, nor a Sectary; but who has ever been a professor of the
true Protestant Religion, a loler and Patron of all Godly men and honest
Ministers, even in the time of Episcopacy, when few or none but himself durst
appear for them; if his judgment had not been overswayed in some Star Chamber
sentences, before he had that wisdom and experience which he now has, and long
before he did take the Covenant; if he had been ambitious of popular applause,
he had been more renowned for his Religion, then for his Princes royal bounty;
but wishing rather to be religious, then seem so, his favors were given in
secret to many godly Ministers, and his Majesty's honor and good chiefly aimed
at in the bestowing of them: and that you may take a short view of his
proceedings, as you have done of Argile's, by comparing them, you will find who
does deserve the Title of the most Religious.

Duke Hamilton suffered his worthy Mother to enjoy, besides her own Jointure,
all his Estate, (whereby, indeed he lost nothing, she improving it much to his
advantage) has helped his Brother to a great estate, with Titles and Places of
Honor and profit, suitable to his birth and worth; his Sisters, and now some
of his Neices matched in the Noblest and best Families of the Kingdom.

The Duke had no quarrel with any save Montrosse; the ground you heard, for
crossing his first intention for the Invasion of Scotland, to prevent the
misery and bloodshed that he did foresee was like to follow.

The Duke had no spoils nor gifts given him since ever he signed the Covenant
(save the Title of DUKE) but has been spoiled both himself and friends by
those that followed Montrosse.

The Duke stands firm to his Covenant for the established religion, loyal to
his Prince for Monarchical Government, faithful to his Country against all
foreign Invasion.

The Duke acts nothing but according to the Laws established, according to the
Covenant, and the the duty of every good Subject.

Duke Hamilton has been of that temper to mediate for a welgrounded Peace, his
Majesty's deliverance, and the Personal Treaty, being the only probable ways
for settling the three Kingdoms, and settling the power where it ought to be for
the Honor and safety both of King and Subjects.

The Duke has used, and is using all endeavors to Vindicate the oppressed
Subjects in both Kingdoms, never changing Interests, being always faithful to
all those to whom he did profess love and friendship.

1. Whereas Argile did in his Fathers life time b^ing him to a Pension, outed
his Brother of his Estate, Kintyre, and ruined his Sisters by cheating them of
their portions, and so enforcing them to go to Cloisters.

2. Argile, for private quarrels betwixt him and Montrosse, Culkettough, and
the Athol men, the Earl of Airely, and other, has drawn much misery and
bloodshed upon the Kingdom, whom he enforced to espouse his quarrels.

3. Argile had enriched his Country with the spoils of the Kingdom, and himself
with the great treasure bestowed on him both by Scotland and England, which is
well secured without the reach of an Impeachment.

4. Argile has contrary to his Covenant, Duty and Allegiance, conspired to
extirpate Monarchical Government, to introduce foreinforces of Sectaries, to
the utter overthrow of the established Religion.

5. Argile has overthrown all Laws, tyrannizing over the Lives, Liberties, and
Estates of the Subjects.

6. Argile opposes all ways of the Peace, and setlement of the three Kingdoms,
His Majesty's deliverance, and being brought to a Personal Treaty, lest the
power should be taken out of his and his Confederates hands, whereby they
oppress and ruin both King and Subject.

7. Lastly, Argile has betrayed his old friends the Presbyterian party in both
Kingdoms, especially the Presbyterians in the Parliament of England and City of
London, not only suffering them to be made a prey to their enemies, but
ostructing their relief.

Let the impartial Reader now judge which of the two is most religious. As this
opposition betwixt Duke Hamilton and Argile makes them both to appear what they
are; so this following Parallel betwixt the Argathelian Faction and the
Independent Junto will serve for an eye salve to cure the eyesight of both
Kingdoms, and let them see clearly how near they are to the brink of an
intolerable and perpetual slavery.

Argile and his Faction styled by the Independents, the Godly party in
Scotland, the rest all Malignants.

The like in England by the Army of Sectaries and Independent Junto, above
twenty millions shared amongst them; whereof the Kingdom can never get account;
all places of Honor and Trust of England still in the hands of those that are
engaged for, and with the Army of Sectaries.

Cromwell and the army for the King in their first engagements; but having
inslaved the City, enforced the Parliament to the dethroning Votes, and as not
formerly acquainted therewith, gave thanks for them, and sent their Emissaries
to some seduced Counties and Corporations to do the like.

Cromwell contributes a Pass to His Guides, slacking the guards, as he did the
second time, when he frighted him with a Plot from Hampton Court to the Isle of
Wight, where he remains close Prisoner.

The blood shed in England under color of justice in cold blood, calls aloud
for vengeance; and the perfidious breaches of the Army of their promises to
King, Parliament and Country, is too too evident.

What the insolent Army did, coming with Bays in their hats when they
inslaved the Parliament, and riding in triumph through the City, by whose
bounty they were made and maintained an Army, will to their perpetual infamy be
registered to all posterity.

The Army, and some others by their instigation, petition that the Kingdom may
be settled without the King, and that Army continued to enslave the Kingdom,
especially the Presbyterian party, their Army being for Toleration.

Cromwell was ready to comply, but got some other work for the time; and if God
prevent it not, will now speedily be able to obey Argile's desires; but if that
fail, Argile shall have money, and send David Lesley to levy Forces abroad to
work Argile's ends.

1. The Army of Sectaries in England (however formerly Preached and wrote
against) now called by Argile's faction the hope of their safety.

2. The heavy Taxes imposed and continued upon Scotland by Argile and his
Faction, and all the benefit thereof, and most part of the moneys got from
England, shared amongst them, and no satisfactory account given to the Kingdom
thereof.

3. All places of Honor and trust usurped by Argathelians (till of late) and
the Army modelled to maintain their Interest.

4. Argile formerly (yet but seemingly) for Monarchy, now really against it,
and all that desire to assert it.

5. That Faction first betrays the King to come to the Scots Army, promising
protection, and then most perfidiously delivered Him up to the mercy of His
most cruel Enemies.

6. Argile and his Faction have been most cruel to those they call their
Enemies, especially in cold blood; and perfidious to their friends, deserting
and betraying them.

7. Argile when he had done mischief, must have both thanks and reward; and
like a Conqueror, march through the Kingdom in triumph: a thing never granted
amongst the noble Romans to triumph for a Victory in a Civil War.

8. Argile's Faction petitions, That the Army intended for His Majesty's
enlargement, and the relief of our Presbyterian Brethren shall not come in.

9. Argile and his Faction desires but five thousand Horse to assist them to
subdue Scotland, which must be turned a Province to the Kingdom of the Saints.

Let this serve for a Caveat to the misled and deluded Protestants of the
three Kingdoms not to trust the fair promises or pretenses of these seeming
Saints, who have made the solemn League and Covenaat, (intended for
preservation of Religion, His Majesty's Honor, and the just Liberties of the
Subject) to be the ruin of Religion, the dishonor (so far as in them lies)
of His Majesty and the most absolute enslaving of all free Subjects, not to
Kings or Princes, to Great men or Good men, but to the very scum and
offscouring of both Kingdoms; it being no small grief to all that truly feared
God, that so many of the reputed honest Presbyterian party should (out of base
fear, or other by-respects) comply so long with these State-Juglers, the Clergy
being most active, hastening thereby their own and the Kingdoms misery; for they
may be well assured, if these Saints prevail, they must (as some of them have
done already) turn their Coats once more, and become the Hirelings, and
tongue-tied Tenants at will to their Brethren of the Independency, or be kicked
out of their fat Benefices, and possibly out of the Kingdom to prevent new
Insurrections against them, which they are cunning to procure, having the power
in their hand to repress all that dare appear against them may be ruined,
others by their example terrified, and their Saints may enjoy the fatness of
England; but I would ask these violent Clergymen of the Presbyterian Party that
are unwilling His Majesty should be brought speedily to a Personal Treaty, what
their Assemblies of Divines have been doing? for if that Confession of Faith
set out in England, approved of in Scotland, be agreeable to the truth of Gods
word (as I know nothing to the contrary) why should the chief Magistrate our
dread Sovereign be any longer debarred of his just dues? is He worse then
Infidel, that you will assist those that deny His sacred Majesty that which
they allow to Infidel Magistrates? blush for shame, and repent in time, lest as
they change their Votes every day, according as the tide of their power ebbs
and flows; so they may soon force you to repeal that Article concerning the
chief Magistrate, or (like the gloss of Orleans) put an exposition upon it
which destroys the text. God send us peace and truth, and preserve His sacred
Majesty, and his Posterity, and confound the wicked counsels of all such as are
enemies to Peace, Truth, and Monarchy.

-- Si quid novistirectius istis,
Candidus imperti; Si non, his utere mecum.

THE END.

