By Salvator VVinter, An Italian of the City of Naples.
Directions for the Use of my Elixir, my Philosophical Petza or Plaster, my
Balsom, and also my Purging Drink.
Readers,
I Present you with my Elixir, my Purging Spirit, my Petza or Plaster, and my
Balsom; which through long Study, great Travel, and daily Experience, I have
found to be Universal Medicines for all Diseases, Distempers, Maladies and
Casualties, Age or Sex of Man. But should I attempt particularly to declare
their Virtues, and the several Cures that (by Gods Blessing) I have therewith
(even beyond Imagination) performed, This Sheet would swell into a Volume. I
have therefore only mentioned some Few (of those Many) Cures; and instanced
some particular Diseases, for your better direction in all. I have done my part
to proffer it unto you, and that at a Small Price, considering its Worth. But
if you prefer Money before Health, and neglect to furnish your selves with
this Treasure now offered unto you, the Fault will be yours, not mine, if
hereafter you have occasion for it, and want it.

First, My Elixir is of such Admirable Virtue, that it alone is sufficient not
only to Cure any Disease incident unto Man, and to prolong even Old Age it
self, But to prevent any disease from fixing upon you. And did you really
regard your Health, you would constantly have it about you. How much better
Prevention is, then After-Remedy, they will tell you, who have paid dear for
their Experience. I my self at this time am Fourscore and three years Old and
upwards; have scarce a Bone in my Body but what has been Broken or Bruised;
besides several dangerous Wounds I have had, some whereof the Surgeons would
not undertake; yet by the Virtue of this my Elixir I did Cure them, to the
great Astonishment of all that knew of it. So that what I assert, is not only
Experience gained by Practice upon others, but such of which I my self am
sensible, and at this time feel the Benefit; Who not only by Studying, but by
Taking daily, and that several times in a day of this my Elixir, am (by Gods
Blessing) preserved in health. It may be taken at any time, and in all
Conditions, with good success, and to your great Benefit, as hereafter shall be
shown unto you: Viz. Robert Hunt, Apprentice to Mr. S^. (...) Stories and an
half through the Joyces, at Mr. Buroughs a Lawyers (...) Strand-Bridg, Bruised
and Broke his Head, and almost all his Bones, and was speechless; yet was
recovered and Cured in a short time with my Elixir.

2. For any Diseases in the Head, take a little of my Elixir, and pour it in
the palm of your hand, snuffing thereof strongly up your Nostrils, drawing up
the very Liquor, if need be; and in so doing you shall find present ease: And
if the Humor be rebellious, bathe the Head very well with the Elixir; then clap
on a piece of a Hogs or Calves Bladder, the softer the better, to keep the
Linen from the Elixir, which would otherwise dry it up. To remove the Cause,
it will be requisite you take some of my Purging Spirit, till you find your
self perfectly well, as otherwise you shall be directed; which will cleanse
you throughout. My Elixir cures also the Lethargy and Apoplexy: One was
trapan'd (but not by my Order) who should not have doubted the Cure of the
most vehement Pain or Headache with my Elixir and Plaster; provided I had the
applying of it my self. I have Cured some that would otherwise have been
trapan'd. Mr. William Westwood of Reading in the County of Berks, was upon the
Road in a Fit surpised with sudden death; But having 4. or 5. persons about
him, whereof one finding accidentally some of my Elixir in his Pocket, and
forcing some down his Throat, and some into his Nostrils, he immediately
recovered, and lived several years after, to my knowledge.

3. For Sore Eyes, or Dimness of Sight, lying on your Back, bathe the Eyelids
well with my Elixir, your Eyes being almost shut, lest the smarting trouble
you: yet if it get in, it hurts not the Eyes, but cleers and strengthens them;
Do this twice a day, if need be. Elizabeth Would have living near the
Waterside at New Castle upon Tine, aged about 19. years, could at best not see
without Spectacles, and by the Virtue of my Elixir was cured.

4. For Deafness of Hearing, or Noise in the Ear, lying down on the contrary
side, anoint round about the Ear with the Balsom, and chafing it in well, fill
the Ear as full as it can hold with my Elixir; this must be done at-night going
to Bed; and if need be, use it the next night, and to the other Ear. I cured
with it (besides many others.) James Mills at Mr. Lydalls near the Armitage in
Wapping.

5. For the Toothache, sore Throat, or the like, hold some of my Elixir in your
mouth as long as you can upon the Tooth; but for Soreness and hoarseness in the
Throat, gargarize your Throat very well with my Elixir, and let it down by
degrees. It helps a stinking breath also, and the Scurvy.

6. For any pain in the Stomach, and bad Digestion, or Reluctance, bath the pit
of the stomach very well with my Elixir, (the more the better) the Elixir being
well chafed in: then clap on my Petza or Plaster, reaching down from the pit
of the stomach, to the edge of the Navil, which must be kept on for 4 or 5
days, or more; then take it off by degrees, dry the place again, then bathe it
well with my Elixir, and put on the same Plaster again. Drink also of the
Elixir every morning, Noon, and Night, and as often as you please, the oftener
the better; but especially when ever you find any indisposition. Men and Women
may drink from half a spoonful to a spoonful; Children, a quarter or less,
according to their Age, and as you find its operation.

7. For the taking away any old Cause, whether inward or outward proceeding
from any cause whatsoever, as Ulcers, Bruises, French Pox, Running of the
Reins, Cankers, putrified Sores, Corruption of the blood, and the like, take of
my Ounce Bottle of Purging Spirit, the Dose is a Thimble full for a Man or
Woman, to give 4. or 5. stools a day; but if you think you are easy to be
purged, you may begin with half a thimble full: but if you have less then 4 or
5 stools a day, take the greater quantity; if more, take the less quantity:
continue and follow it till the Cure be perfected. If it be taken Overnight,
it will purge the next morning. It carries away all putrified and Contagious
humors, but especially that Viscous and slimy humor, which is Jellyed in the
Joints, and is the Original cause of most diseases. You may give it to Children
a quarter of a thimble full at a time, more or less as they are in Age. And for
a Child 3. or 4. days old, but 3. drops. When you take this, you may take it
either in 3 or 4 spoonfuls or more of Wine, Beer or Broth: But if you give it
to a Child, and it be peevish and froward, put the quantity you intend to give
it, into a pint or more of Beer, and let it drink that day and night, and no
other drink till you find it purges proportionable to your desire; which being
continued, it will remove from the Body any disease whatsoever. For an Ulcer,
Canker or other Sore whatsoever, let them take of my Purging Spirit daily till
they are well; bathe the Sore with my Elixir, then apply my Petza or Plaster.
But Note, That you take not of my Purging Spirit above once a day, and that you
take some of my Elixir half an hour before, and presently after, and at least 3
times a day besides, the oftener the better. When you take of my Purging Spirit,
you need not purposely keep your Chambe; for it will not make you sick, or very
little; if it cause Vomiting, it will be with great ease, it vvorking according
to the nature of the distemper, either by Spitting, Vomiting, a breathing
Sweat, Purgation, Urine, or all of them. It may be given to little Children
weak or strong, without keeping them from School or Play; and the like to
sucking Children. It purifies the Bones, Sinews and Veins, purging the Body in
every part. Mr. Abemiah Crome near New Kingstreet in St. Giles in the Fields,
was so excessive Ill, and so full of Pain, that he could not sit, but lie along
upon his Back, all his Joints being knotted with the distemper and humor, no
part being free, and reduced to that condition, that he begged the happiness
once more to sit; after having tried several Physicians without any success,
(being given over by them) was to the great Admiration of all, restored by the
Virtue of my Elixir and Purging Spirit. I would not have mentioned him, but
that himself has often spoke of it, and unto this day owneth it. In Children
it cures the Rickets, or any other Scurvy disease, and takes away Worms. I
have been more prolix then I at first intended, as well for your better
direction in the use of it, as in respect of the extraordinary Virtues of my
Elixir, and this my Purging Spirit.

8. For any sorts of Wounds, bathe them well with my Elixir 2 or 3. times
together or more, then put on my Balson (being warmed) with a feather, the more
the better; then clap on a Linen Cloth to keep it from running down, binding
it up renderly; and so continue it for 3 or 4 days; in which time it cures,
never failing. For small Wounds, Cuts or the like, dip the Finger or part in
the Elixir, and hold it there a while; then apply some of the Balsom warm, and
bind it up, it cures at the first dressing. For great and Mortal Wounds, if
the party be run through with a Rapier or the like, let him be sering'd with my
Elixit, then apply gently a Tent; small at one end, bigger at the other, being
dipped in my Elixir and Balsom, let him also drink some of my Elixir, and bathe
with it, the oftener the better; it will neither fester, nor gangrene; there
will no Fistula nor Fever come there, nor will there (by Gods Blessing) be any
fear of death. With this Remedy, to the Glory of God, I have Cured many
Gangrenes, which by the Advice of others were concluded to be cut off. Only it
is requisite, that afterward he take twice or thrice of my Purging Spirit to
remove all Film, purge and cleanse the Blood. Mr. Richard Cook, Farrier of
Charlberry in Oxford shire, having been a long time a Patient to some of the
Ablest Physicians and Surgeons in Oxford, who had Concluded at last to cut
off his Arm: But I my self with the use of my Elixir and Purging Spirit saved
his Arm, and he was perfectly Cured; which to this day he owns and
acknowledges, by sending me 3 or 4 Presents a year, he having been well these 3
years; whose Son in Law Mr. Newbury a Farrier, now living in Dukes-Yard in St.
Martins Lane, can testify more then in Modesty I am willing to speak. When I
was at Colchester under Sir Charles Lucas, I Cured abundance of desperate
Wounds, who were not brought unto me till they were very far gone. I also Cured
one Thomas a Tailor, Servant to Mr. Neev's at the White Horse in Bromley, who
was run through with a Rapier unto the very Backbone, that the Wind passed
through his Body from one side to the other.

9. For Convulsions, Falling or Fainting fits, or Fits of the Mother, Gravel or
Stone, difficulty of making water, Burning Fevers, Tertian or Quartan Agues,
pains in the Liver or Spleen, chafe my Elixir well in with your hand, then
anoint with the Balsom, and drink of my Elixir, as in the 6th Article. And as
for the Ague, drink first a spoonful when your Fits are ready to come, and then
drink more according as you find your self. Mrs. Jean Horton of Cool near
Nantwich in Cheshire, Daughter to Mr. Ralph Horton, had Convulsion Fits 4, 5,
and 6. times a day; and by means of my Elixir was Cured. Jean Nail, Servant
unto Mr. George Ward between Old Gravel-Lane and Ratcliff Highway, had the
fits of the Falling Sickness so violent, that 6. men could not hold her, and
was Cured with my Elixir.

10. For the Small Pox, Measles, or the like, first bathe with my Elixir then
warming the Balsom well take a feather, anoint the Face, the Eyelids, and the
Throat, very well with the Balsom, drinking my Elixir, as in the 6th Article.
And if the Small Pox be struck in, my Elixir will put them out again. A Child
of Capt. Acton's, being very full of the Small Pox, (which did not come out)
and to every ones thoughts dead, the Mother closing the Eyes of it, was by means
of my Elixir perf^ctly recovered and cured.

11. For Burning or Scalding, though never so bad and burnt to the Bone, bathe
it well with the Elixir, and then put the Balsom upon it well melted, and put
it on with a feather; then take a piece of clean white paper, rub it between
your hands, and lay it on the grieved place, binding it up very tenderly, and
in short time it cures perfectly: There are many breed Gangrenes, and other
inconveniences, for want of well Curing; but if presently applied, as
before-said, it gives perfect Cure. C^pt. Punch being extraordinarily burnt of
his right Arm, that every one concluded the Arm irrecoverable, was perfectly
cured with my Elixir; which he certifying unto George Mancklins Esquire; then Lord
Mayor of York, he admired the Cure, and Ordered me a Certificate under the City
Seal.

12. For Pains or Aches in any part of the Body, as Gout, Sciatica, Cramp,
Palsy, and the like, chafe the place with a warm Napkin, then chase in some
Elixir with your hand, and anoint it presently with the warm Balsom; clap on a
warm napkin, and bind it up: this must be done at night going to bed; but if it
be for the tender Gout, or a Bruise, broken Bellies, or broken Bones, first
bathe it well with my Elixir, then put on my Petza or Plaster, which cover all
over with a Lamb-skin; then some Linen upon that, and bind it up with a
swathing band, or swadling-cloth: do this in the morning before you rise; and
at Night after you are in bed take off the Plaster and wipe it, then bathe it
with my Elixir, and cover it presently again. But for to remove the Original
Cause, take of my Ounce Bottle of Purging-Spirit, as in the 7th Article. Mr.
Butterfield of Woolurn in Buckinghamshire, being so vehemently troubled with
the Gout, that he went upon Crutches; by the means of my Elixir, and this my
purging Spirit, went without his Crutches, being perfectly cured.

13. For the running of the Reins, or Weakness of the Back, Ulcer in the Reins,
or any other part, bathe all along the backbone with my Elixir, and drink it
3. times a day as aforesaid, or oftener; then take of my Ounce Bottle of Purging
Spirit, every morning as before directed in the 7th Article. And for a Plaster
for the Back (in regard all other Plasters are too hot) take 3. ounces of Bees
Wax, and when it is melted put a spoonful of Oil of Roses into it, (but take
heed it boil not) incorporate and mix them well together, dip a Linen cloth
in; then take it out and hold it up, and the Plaster is made: Which Plaster
you must take off morning and night, that you may bathe it with the Elixir, and
after bathing, put it on again; This will Cure it whatever the Distemper be.
The plaster is made only to keep the Elixir on.

14. For the Dropsy or Tympany take of my Purging Spirit daily, as you are
directed in the 7th Article; only not the full quantity, but rather less, in
respect of the abundance of humors in all Hydropick persons, especially if
gross and Corpulent; My Advice therefore is to take but half a Thimble sull the
first time; and if that give above 4 or 5 purges, or 6 at most, to lessen the
quantity the next time; if not so many to add unto it. For I am not of their
Opinion, who either desire or think to carry away all the humors at once; which
in any case I do not hold fit; and in this it is dangerous. It weakneth Nature,
and together with the Noxious humors, does carry away what otherwise would be
strengthening and Nutrimental. I would not therefore have it purge above 4, 5,
or 6. times a day at the most, that it might gradually work upon the Noxious
Humors. For I am certain, that this my purging Spirit and my Elixir, by the
Blessing of God, will perform it. Nor do I approve of Tapping, though I my self
have formerly used it; yet had I not used my Elixir and purging Spirit, a
Gentlewoman at Norwich whom a Servant of mine tapp'd, and took too much at once
from, had undoubtedly died; but by the use of them was perfectly recovered. And
since I have cured several without Tapping, and never failed any I undertook.
Nic. Harris, Butler to the Lady Jenkins of Charlberry in Oxfordshire, being
swollen very much all over his Body with the Dropsy that he could not stir one
Joint, was cured with my Elixir and Purging Spirit

15. For the Cough of the Lungs, Consumption, Ptisick, Ulcers in the Throat or
Mouth, first take my Elixir and gargarize it very well in the Throat, and then
swallow it down by degrees. Anoint the Stomach with my Balsom well warmed, and
then apply the Plaster to reach from the pit of the Stomach unto the Navil;
And every time you Cough; take a Sup (though rever so little) of my Elixir. Mr.
Brock at the Flower-de-luce in New-street Covent Garden, being very much
troubled with the Ptisick, and very far spent, was Cured with it.

16. For hard Labor in Women, let the Midwife anoint, and chafe gently the
Belly both the Thighs and the Groin with my Balsom, and with her hand: then let
the Woman in Labor drink a spoonful of my Elixir, and if the Labor continues
hard, another spoonful, which will occasion (by Gods assistance) a sudden and
easy delivery. Mris. Fewister, a Shoomakers Wife near Framwell-gate in
Durham-Yard, had 2. Midwives with her, (being in hard Labor 3. days, insomuch
that the Midwives and all the Women that were with her, confidently believing
that the Child was Dead, would have had it drawn with an Instrument from her)
But within half an hour after she took some of my Elixir, she was delivered of
a living Child, which lived a years after to my knowledge. It is not only good
for the mother whilst in Labor, but both for mother and Child after her
delivery; and if the mother of the Child after her delivery immediately take
some of my Elixir, it will ease her of After-pain, and prevent the Vapors of
the Mother; it is likewise good to bathe he parts withal. And about 15 days
after, to Comfort and strengthen her, and to carry away all Viscous and Corrupt
humors, which would otherwise breed many diseases, let her take some of my
Purging Spirit.

17. For the Plague, Pestilence, or Spotted Fever, take of my Elixir at the
least 3 times a day; oftener if you please; it will not only prevent, but if
Infected, by Gods assistance it Cures. To carry away all congealed and fixed
humors, take some of my Parging Spirit, as before directed.

18. For all sorts of Poisons, stinging or biting of Scorpions, Adders, or Mad
Dogs, or other venomous Beasts, Gangrenes, and the like, drink of my Elixir 3
or 4 times a day or more; bathe also the grieved place morning and night
therewith, and after anoint it with my Balsom. Mr. John Fenwick in Durham-Yard,
dropping accidentally a Paper of Mercury out of his Pocket, which his Son (a
Child) taking up, and mistaking for Sugar, was therewith poisoned to that
degree, that none would administer any thing to him, being very much swollen: I
was sent for, when no Body would undertake him, and (by Gods Blessing)
recovered and cured him.

Thus I have given you some particular Instances of the Virtues of my Elixir
and Purging Spirit, which have prolonged and increased these Lines. If any
desire to be further Satisfied, if they come to my House, I can produce
Certificates under the Hands and Seals of most Cities and Corporations in
England and Wales. Though you have no occasion for the present, yet for their
Worth they Recommend themselves unto you; and will promise you to keep their
Virtues for your sake, if you will but keep them close and safe, as you would
things of Value. They fear not any Climate, for their Virtues are a sufficient
Safeguard and Protection. Were they but arrived in the West Indies, you would
quickly hear, that the Country Disease (or Griping of the Guts) had quit those
Regims. N^ Mariner or Traveller therefore, but should desire their Company,
Especially since you may have them so near at hand from me, who live at the
Sign of St. Paul in New King Street, between Long-Acre and St. Giles in the
Fields.

VIVAT REX.

