A DECLARATION OF FORMER PASSAGES AND PROCEEDINGS BETWIXT THE ENGLISH and the
Narrowgansets, with their confederates, Wherein the grounds and justice of the
ensuing war are opened and cleared. Published, by order of the Commissioners
for the united Colonies: At Boston the 11 of the sixth mon^h 1645.
THE most considerable part of the English Colonies profess they came into
these parts of the world with desire to advance the kingdom of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to inioye his precious Ordinances with peace, and (to his praise
they confess) he has not failed their expectation hitherto, they have found
safety, warmth and refreshing under his wing to the satisfaction of their
souls. But they know, and have considered that their Lord and master is King
of righteousness and peace, that he gives answerable laws, and casts his
subjects into such a mould and frame; that (in their weak measure) they may
hold forth his virtues in their course and carriage, not only with the nations
of Europe, but with the barbarous natives of this wilderness. And accordingly
both in their treaties and converse they have had an awful respect to divine
rules, endeavoring to walk uprightly and inoffensively, and in the midst of
many injuries and insolences to exercise much patience and long suffering
toward them.

The Pequots grew to an excess of violence and outrage, and proudly turned
aside from all ways of justice and peace, before the sword was drawn or any
hostile attempts made against them. During those wars, and afte^ the Pequots
were subdued, the English Colonies were careful to continue and establish
peace with the rest of the Indians, both for the present and for posterity, as
by several treaties with the Narrowganser and Mohiggin Sagamores may appear:
which treaties for a while were in some good measure duly observed by all the
Indians, but of late the Narrowgansets and especia^^ the Nianticks their
confederates have many ways injuriously broken and violated the same by
entertaining and keeping amongst them, not only many of the Pequot nation, but
such of them a h^ve had their ^ands in the blood and murder of the English,
seizing and possessing at least a part of the Pequots Country, which by right
of conquest justly appertains to the English: by alluring, or harboring and
withholding several Pequot captives fled from the English, and making proud and
insolent returns, when they were redemanded, and more lately the English had
many strong and concurrent India^ testimonies, from Long Island, Uncoway,
Hartford, Kinnibeck and other parts, of Miantonimo's ambitious designs,
travailing through all the plantations of the neighboring Indians, and by
promises and gift, laboring to make himself their universal Sagamore or
Governor, persuading and engaging them, at once to cut off the whole body of
the English in these parts. Which treacherous plots were confirmed by the
Indians general preparations, messages, insolences and outrage^ against the
English and such Indians as were subjects or friends to them: so that the
English Colonies, to their great charge and damage, were forced to Arm, to keep
strong watch day and night, and some of them to travail with convoyes from one
plantation to another: and when Miantonimo in his circular travel was
questioned at New Haven concerning these things, in stead of other and better
satisfaction he threatened to cut off any Indians head that should lay such a
charge upon him to his face.

The Commissioners by the premises observed Miantonimo's proud and treacherous
disposition, yet thought not fit to proceed against him in that respect, till
they had collected more legal and convincing proof.

But while these things were under deliberation, Miantonimo was brought
prisoner by Uncas to Hartford, and the case being opened and cleared as
follows, he craved the commissioners advice how to proceed with him.

It appeared that in a treaty made with the English at Massachusetts Anno 1637.
Miantonimo engaged himself not to fight with any of the Ind^ans, and
particularly not to invade Uncas without the English consent; and after in a
tripartit agreement made and concluded at Hartford betwixt Miantonimo and Uncas
with reference to the English An^o 1638. in which one of the Articles runs,
That though e^ther of (...) said Indian Sagamores should receive injury from
the other; yet neither of them shall make or begin wa^r, until they had
appealed to the English, and till their grievances were first heard and
dete^mined, and if either of them should refuse, the English might assist
against, and compel the refusing and obstin^^^ part^e.

Notwithstanding which, Miantonimo and his confoederates have both secretly and
openly plotted and pract^sed against the life of Uncas not at all acquainting
the English or advising with them, but more especially of late since the
forementioned plots and designs were in hand.

First, a Pequot Indian one of Uncas his subjects in the spring 1643 aiming at
Uncas life, shot him with an arrow through the arm, and presently fled to the
Narrowgansets or their confoederates, boasting in the Indian plantations that
he had killed Uncas; but when it was known Uncas (though wounded) was alive,
the Pequot (taught as was supposed) changed his note, affirming that Uncas had
cut through his own arm with a flint, and had hired him to say he had shot and
killed him.

Miantonimo being sent for by the Governor of the Massachusetts upon another
occasion, brought this Pequot with him, and would have covered him with the
former disguise, but when the English out of his own mouth found him guilty,
and would have sent him to Uncas his Sagamore Miantonimo earnestly desired he
might not be taken out of his hands, promising he would send him safe to Uncas
to be examined and punished.

But fearing (as it seems) his own treachery would be discovered, within a day
or two, he stopped the Pequots mouth by cuting off his head, but at parting he
told the Governor in discontent, that he would com no more to Boston.

After this, some attempts were made (as is reported) to take away Uncas life
by poison and by sorcery; these failing, some of Sequassons company (an Indian
Sagamore allied unto, and an intimate confoederate with Miantonimo) shot at
Uncas with an arrow or two, as he was going down Conecticot river: Uncas
according to the forementioned treaty 1638 complained, and the English by
mediation sought to make peace, but Sequasson expressing his dependence on
Miantonimo refused, and chose war. They fought, and Uncas had the victory.

Lastly, Miantonimo without any provocotion from Uncas [^^les the
dissappointment of former plots provoaked] and suddenly without denouncing
war, came upon the Mohiggins with 900 or 1000 men; when Uncas had not half so
many to defend himself. Uncas (before the battle) told Miantonimo, that he
had many ways sought his life, and for the sparing of blood, offered by a
single combat betwixt themselves to end the quarrel, but Miantonimo presuming
upon his number of men, would have nothing but a battle.

The iss^e fell contrary to expectation, his men were routed, diverse of
considerable note slain, and himself taken prisoner.

These things being duly weighed, the Commissioners judged that Uncas could not
be safe, while Miantonimo lived; wherefore they thought he might justly put
such a treacherous, and bloodthirsty enemy to death, but advised him to do
it in his own Jurisdiction, without torture or cruelty. And Uncas having
hitherto showed himself a friend to the English, and in this and former
outrages (according to the treaty) craving their advise, if the Narrowgansets
or their confoederats should for his just execu^ion unjustly assault him, the
Commissioners for the Colonies promised to assist and protect him.

Uncas heerupon slew an enemy, but not the enmity against him. The
Narrowganset^ soon fell to new contrivments. They pretended they had paid a
ransom for their Sachems life, and gave in particulars to the value of abo^t
40 li. This for a while cast an imputation of foul and unjust dealing upon
Uncas; but in September 1644 the English Commissioners meeting at Hartford,
sent for the Narrowganset Sachems or their Deputies desiring they might be
instructed to make good their charge.

Uncas came himself, they sent their Deputies; but after due examination it
appeared, though some loose discourses had passed that for such quantit^es of
wampom and such parcels of other good, to a great value, there might have been
some probability of sparing his life, yet no such parcels were brought, and the
Narrowganset Deputies did not allege; much less prove, that any ransom was
ag^^ed, nor so much as any serious treaty begun, to redeem their impr^soned
Sachem. And for the wampom and goods sent, as they were but small parcels and
scarce considerable for such a purpose, so they were disposed by Miantonimo
himself to sundry persons for courtesies received during his imprisonment, and
upon hope of further favor.

The Narrowganset Deputies saw their proofs fell far short of former pretenses,
and were silent. The Commissioners promised that upon better evidence
hereafter, they should have due satisfaction.

Whereupon a truce was made, and both parties were engaged that all hostility
should cease till planting time 1645: and after that, they would give thirty
days warning either at the Massachusetts or Hartford before the truce should
cease. Yet in February last, the Narrowgansets by ^^^^engers sent to Boston,
declared, that unles Uncas would render 160 fathom of wampom or come to a new
hearing within six weeks they would begin the war.

This crossed the former agreement, and the season was such, as neither the
Commissioners could be advised with, nor could Uncas travel if notice had been
given. After which, about or before planting time, Tantaqueyson a Mohiggin
Captain who took Miantonimo prisoner, was dangerously and treacherously wounded
in the night as he slept in his wigwam: and other hostile acts were on both
parts attempted, in a private and underhand way as they could take advantage
each against other.

But since the Narrowgansets have at several times openly invaded Uncas, so
that Connecticot and New Haven were forced according to engagement, to send men
from those Colonies for his present defense: but with express direction not to
begin any offensive war against the Narrowgansets or their confoederates till
further order.

Jn the mean time messengers were sent to the Narrowgansets from the General
Court in the Massachusetts, signifiing the Commissioners meeting, promising
their agrievances should be fully and justly heard, and requiring a cessation
of war in the mean time; but they refused: and hearing probably that the
English from the western Colonies were returned, they made a new assault upon
Uncas, and have done him much hurt.

The Commissioners being met, sent messengers the second time both to the
Narrowganset and Mohiggin Indians, minding them of the former treatise and
truce, desiring them to send their Deputies instructed and furnished with
authority to declare and open the grounds of the war, to give and receive due
satisfaction, and to restore and setle peace.

At first the Narrowganset Sache^ gave a reasonable and fair answer, that he
would send Guides with them to the Mohiggins, and if Uncas consented, he would
send his Deputies to the Commissioners, and during eight days hosti^^ty should
cease: but he soon repented of this moderation, told the English messengers his
mind was changed, sent private instructions to the Niantik Sachem, after the
del^very of which, there was nothing but proud and insole^t passages: the
India^ guides which the English messengers brought with them from Pumh^m and
Socononoco were by frowns and threatening speeches discouraged and returned; no
other Guides could be obtained though much pressed, they knew (as they
expressed themselves) by the course held at Hartford last year, that the
Commissio^ers would mediate and press for peace, but they were resolved to
have no peace without Uncas his head; it mattered not who began the war, they
were resolved to continue it; the English should withdraw their Garrison from
Uncas, or they would take it as a breach of former covenants, and would procure
as many Mo^^anks as the English should affront them with: that they would lay
the English cattle o^ heaps as high as their houses: that no English man should
step out of doors to piss, but he should be killed. They reviled Uncas,
charged him with cutting through his own arm, and saying the Narrowgansets had
shot him; affirmed, that he would now murder the English messengers as they
went or returned [if he had oppertunity] and lay it upon the Narrowgansets.

The English messengers upon this rude and uncivil usage, wanting Guides to
proceed, and fearing danger, returned to the Narrowgansets, acquainted Pesicus
with the former p^ssages, desired Guides from him, he [in scorn as they
apprehended it] offered them an old Pequot Squaw, but would afford no other
Guides. There also they conceived themselves in danger, three Indians with
hatchets standing behind the Interpreter in a suspi^ious manner, while he was
speaking with Pesicus, and the rest frowning and expressing much distemper in
their countenance and carriage. The English messengers not hoping for better
success at that time, departed; telling Pessicus that if he would return any
other answer, he should send it to the English trading-house, where they
intended to lodge that night In the morning he invited them to return, and
promised them a Guide to Uncas, but would grant no cessation of Arms. When
they came to Providence they understood that in their absence a Narrowganset
Indian had bin there, and faining himself to be of Conecticot, spoke in that
dialect, but could not put off the Narrowganset tone. He told Benedict
Aarnold's wife (who well understands the Indian language) that the English
messengers should not pass to the Mohiggins, he knew they should have no
Guides, but should be destroyed in the woods as they traveled toward Uncas.

Thus the English messengers returned, and the Interpreter under his hand and
upon his oath related the former passages, with others less material more
laregly.

Mr. Williams by the messengers wrote to the Commissioners assuring (...) That
the Country would sudainly be all on fire, meaning by wa^r; that by strong
r^asons and argu^^^^s he could convince any ^^n thereof, th^^ was of another
mind; That the Narrowgansets had been with the plantations combined with
Providence and had solemnly treated and settled a neutrality with them, which
fully shows their councels and settled resolutions for war.

Thus while the Commissioners in care of the public peace, sought so quench
the fire kindled amongst the Indians, these children of strife breath out
threatenings, provocations and war against the English themselves, so that
unles they should dishonor and provoak God, by violating a just engagement,
and expose the Colonies to contempt and danger from the Barbarians, they cannot
but exercise force, when no other means will prevail, to reduce the
Narrowgansets and their confoederates to a more just and sober temper.

The eyes of other Indians under the protection of the Massachusetts, and not at
all engaged in this quarrel, are [as they have expressed themselves to the
English messengers] fastened upon the English with strict observatio^, in what
manner and measure they provide for Uncas s^fety. If he perish they will charge
it upon them who might have preserved him: and no Indians will trust the English
(if they now break engagement) either in the present or succeeding
generations. If Uncas be ruined in such a cause, they foresee their head, upon
the next pretense shall be delivered to the will of the Narrowgansets, with whom
rherfore they shall be forced to complye [as they may] for their future safety;
and the English may not trust an Indian in the whole Country. The premises
being duly weighed it clearly appears that God calls the Colonies to a war.

The Narrowgansets and their confoederates rest on their numbers, weapons, and
opportunityes to do misch^ef; and probably (as of old, A^^^^, Amalek and the
Ph^listi^s with others did confoederate against Israel) so Satan may stir up
and combine many of his instruments against the Churches of Christ: but their
Redeemer is the Lord of Host, the M^gh^y One in battle, all the shield of the
earth are in his hand, he can save by few and by weak means, as well as by many
and great. In him they trust.

IO: WINTHROP President, In the name of all the Commissioners.


