FIDES-ANGLICANA. OR, A PLEA FOR THE PUBLICK-FAITH Of these NATIONS, Lately
pawned, forfeited and violated by some of their former TRUSTEES, to the
rendering it as infamous, as FIDES-PUNICA was heretofore.

It is humbly offered to consideration, in a Petitionary Remonstrance to all in
Authority, on the behalf of many thousands, to whom Securities were given upon
the said Publick-Faith; and was prepared to have been put forth during the
sitting of the last Parliament.

By the Author GEORGE WITHER.

It comprehends likewise, an Expedient, whereby the Honor of the King and
Nations may be preserved in redeeming the same, without oppressing private
persons, or overburthening the Public: And thereto are added two or three
Examplary Narratives out of Antiquity, evidencing that Neglect of Justice is
dangerous; and that the freedom of expression assumed by the Author, is neither
needless in such cases, nor unjustifiable by warrantable precedents.

Veritas non quaerit Angulos.

LONDON, Printed in the year MDCLX.

FIDES-ANGLICANA. OR, A PLEA by way of Remonstrance, for the Publick-Faith of
these British Nations, humbly offered to all in Power and Authority, jointly
and individually, by whatsoever Title or Name they are lawfully active; and to
whom a care of preserving the Peace and Honor of these Kingdoms does appertain.
Psalm 82. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. GOD stands in the Congregation of the mighty,
he judges among the Gods: How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the
persons of the wicked? Defend the poor and fatherless, do justice to the
afflicted, preserve the poor and needy out of the hands of the ungodly, etc.
WHereas in the Hopes entertained rationally by this Remonstrant and others,
upon his Majesty's late voluntary and gracious condescentions (without any care
taken for our Indemnity, at his Restoration, by the Trustees of these
Nations) they rested thankfully therewith contented; being much comforted in
the Kings prudent and tender respect vouchsafed to their sad condition; and
have ever since, (though it be now about eight or nine Months) waited in a
patient expectation of some timely settlement, according to his Royal
Declaration, Speeches, References and Commission; notwithstanding many of them
have in the mean time been almost quite destroyed in their estates and credits,
and some utterly ruined by the impatience of their Creditors; by the violence
of untimely Intruders upon their possessions; by vexatious suits commenced
against them; and by paying great taxes and other duties, for those Lands by
them purchased, which are intruded upon contrary to an Order of Parliament, and
other Prohibitions; as also, because some of the said Purchasers have been so
impoverished by former Oppressions, that (to the Public damage, as well as to
their own) much of the said Lands lies waste, in regard they have neither
wherewith to stock those which came lately into possession, nor means to demise
them to Tenants, whilst their Titles are disparaged. Which with other
destructive grievances daily multiplying, have constrained this Remonstrant
(who in his own person, is made sensible of other men's afflictions, well near
in every kind) both for preventing the utter undoing of himself with his
Relations, and of many thousands more, together with their Creditors and
Relations, humbly to Remonstrate as follows.

That the long delayed, and justly expected Relief of the said Purchasers and
Lenders (of which this Remonstrant is one) seems to him prolonged by the
sinister endeavors or neglects of some from whom they hoped better things,
occasioning no less dishonor and hazard to the King and Nation, then injury to
their patience, whose damages are multiplied thereby: For instead of what was
rationally hoped for, this Remonstrant and many more, are among other frequent
upbraidings and provocations, jeered with this untimely and unsavory caution,
Caveat emptor; which has obliquely, a worse reflection upon Venders then
Buyers in their condition; implying rather Caveant Venditores, in regard it is
a Caveat to be given beforehand; and to those only, who contract with persons
justly suspected to be either Cheaters or Beggars, and ought not to be applied
to them who were Purchasers from States or Parliaments, who have engaged the
Public Faith of a whole Nation to confirm their Sales and Securities: For they
should with reverence be confided in, by all under their Authority, lest such
become guilty of exposing it to contempt; and therefore, the said Purchasers
and Lenders, were not (till really damnified) to suspect or question, Whether
the Grants and Securities to them offered, would be valid or invalid; or
Whether the Estates exposed to sale by the Parliament, were justly or unjustly
bargained and sold; because it was to be presumed that States and Parliaments,
are not only at all times able to make good their Bargains and Securities, or
to give full recompense to those who shall be thereby damnified, if it prove
otherwise; but that (being thereto obliged both in honor and justice) they
will also punctually perform the one or the other, without receding from their
Bargains, or hagling like broken debtors: And therefore by one of these ways,
the said Purchasers and Lenders presume they shall accordingly be saved
harmless.

And, it is their humble desire, it may be timely and effectually done, in
respect of those destructive necessities aforementioned, whereinto many of
them are plunged; and that they may not be listened unto, who seek to persuade
those who should relieve them, that (as affairs now stand) there is no
obligation upon the Supreme Power, or upon the Representatives of this Nation,
to take cognizance of those engagements; For, whatsoever they think, the
Public Peace, and the honor of the whole Nation, together with their Kings
and Parliaments, will therein be much concerned, whether their Power who
granted those Estates and Securities, were justly or unjustly constituted, or
exercised; considering it was then the sole visible Power in being, assented
and submitted unto as an authentic Authority, by the greatest number of the
people of every degree and qualification, in these three Nations, without any
open contradiction (which implies an universal assent, or what is so
equivalent thereto, that a factious or rebellious combination could not be
justly thereto imputed.) It was acknowledged to be then the Supreme Power, not
only by popular voices in the air, but by voluntary subscriptions also, under
the hands of well near all the Magistrates, Knights, Citizens and Burgers of
all Counties, Cities and Corporations in these Dominions, without any open
protest made against it; and, de non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem
est ratio: Those things, which when they should appear, appear not, reputed
are, among the things that are not. Moreover, it was actually owned and obeyed
by the Nobility, as the Supreme Authority, and by the reverend Judges of our
Land in every Court of Record; by the Pastors of Parochial Churches, and
Congregations of each several judgment, to be by divine Precepts, and the
examplary practice of Christ and his Apostles, that Power (being then the Power
which had sole visible being) whereto obedience was due: Such also it was
generally reputed and acknowledged by the Public Ministers of all neighboring
Nations, Kings, Princes, and Republics; wiser then whom, it could not be
expected, that this Remonstrant, or any of the said Purchasers and Lenders
should have been. Therefore, if they were deceived, the examples of such
considerable persons, and so much Reason deceived them, that no man living can
be certain, wherein he is not deceived; or that he may not be as much deceived
now, or hereafter, as he, and others were heretofore.

But, without question, the Powers in being, whether by Gods Grace or
permission, all Power being given by him, (even that which Pontius Pilate had
to crucify his Son) are to be the object of our obedience while they continue,
whatsoever they seem; and no man can be justly blamed for submitting actively
thereunto in mere civil things, or with a passive obedience, in matters
relating to GOD and Conscience; nor can this Principle be disadvantagious to
the Power for the time being, but will be a great strengthening and security
thereunto, if well understood: Even as a man, whether he were lawfully or
unlawfully begotten, is truly and essentially a man, and so reputed, as long as
the Soul and Body continue together, (howsoever he shall be dismembered by
others, or by his own default.) So, that Power and Parliament, by which the
said Securities and Sales were given and made, were a valid Power, and a true
Parliament, to all intents and purposes, so long as they retained that which
was essential to supreme Powers and Parliaments, how surreptiously soever that
Power was acquired, or whatsoever was but accidentally defective: Or else
perhaps, the lawfulness of most Powers and Parliaments, (yea, and of most
humane Authorities and Constitutions) would be otherwise found defective enough
to be questioned, and to have all their transactions rendered invalid: And so
likewise, they may de facto (how just soever they be de jure) when a Power
shall be permitted to reign, which is strong enough to make WILL and PLEASURE
the Supreme Law: For (to speak truth in plain English, which this Remonstrant
heartily loves to do, when just occasion is offered) a prevailing Power, in the
hands of Tyrants, (howsoever acquired) is while it has being, paramount to all
Laws and rational Arguments; and will be obeyed in every thing as it pleases,
right or wrong; or else break or destroy all that opposes it, till GOD
extraordinarily restrains it, or breaks it into pieces.

Blessed be his name for it, we are not yet subjected to such a Tyranny as our
sins have deserved; but, to a King from whom we have received an Earnest,
making us hopeful that Justice and Mercy will equally flow from the Throne,
either when he shall be fully and rightly informed of such particulars as are
pertinent to his cognizance and care; or when GOD's time is come: And
therefore, this Remonstrant, does in order thereunto, hereby signify on behalf
of himself and such other Purchasers and Lenders as aforesaid; that, when they
engaged with and for the the said Parliament (lent their moneys, and purchased
the forementioned estates) they did it not upon any factious Principle; nor
merely to get satisfaction for what they had disbursed, or to have recompense
for services formerly done; but, for supply also of Public necessities, and to
dis-engage the said Parliament and Nation from those debts, which were
originally contracted for the service of the late King; by which debts, other
engagements were (in part at least) occasioned; and for discharge whereof, that
Parliament was empowered to continue undissolved, till the said debts and
engagements were paid and discharged: And this Remonstrant then believed, and
still believes, that the said Parliament was fully authorized, both to raise
money by what lawful means they could, to supply public wants, and to make
such Sales and Securities as they proposed, to repay and satisfy for what was
lent, bought, or acted by their commands, for the Public honor or safety: And
he so believes, because Parliaments were that Supreme Council of the Kingdom,
to whose Orders, Acts, and Ordinances, the people had ever heretofore been
obedient, without scruple or blame; yea, whereto no less obedience was
required, then to the Kings personal commands; nay, much more, as it was then
thought, when Empson and Dudley, two eminent persons, (and as this Remonstrant
remembers) of the Kings privy Council, were condemned by Judgment in
Parliament, and executed for their officious obedience, in executing the Kings
illegal Commission under the great Seal of England; which was more obliging,
then his personal mandates. A Popular Supreme Power, whilst it is actually in
being, cannot be properly impeached of Treason, nor any who acts by the
commands or authority thereof: Because, it was then our duty to be obedient
thereto. And though a single person, or few, or many, yea though Cities,
Counties, Provinces, and whole Armies may be Traitors, it is not reasonably
supposed the Representatives of whole Nations can so be, and if possibly they
might, there is no competent Judge thereof but GOD himself, who usually
determines such differences (as he is LORD of Hosts) by the sword, as he did
lately upon a joint appeal, and afterward, by reversing again that Judgment
for the sins of these Nations, has righteously executed his dooms on both
parties, for their mutual failings in their reciprocal Relations; and which
dooms were reciprocally inflicted on both the said parties for their treasons
against his divine Majesty, for their gross hypocrisies, apostasies,
profaneness, unmercifulness and injustice, in which many imitate each other to
this day. For even many of those actions which ought not to have been done, lay
obligations upon their actors and their succssors, when they are done. Children
should not be unlawfully begotten; yet when mis-begotten, the parents are
obliged in all duties by them to be performed to their children. The Israelites
were not to have made a league with the Gibeonites; but when it was made, they
were bound to observe it; and for the breach thereof, the whole Nation was
punished many years after, and seven of their Kings sons hanged also for that
transgression.

Moreover, it is further considerable, that the Parliament which made the said
Sales, and granted the said Securities, were both the Kings and Peoples
Trustees, summoned by the late Kings Writ, to consult about the most weighty
affairs of the Kingdom, and delegated by a popular Election, to dispose of the
Peoples Interest, as they should find cause, for the Common good. And
thereupon, this Remonstrant conceived, he might reasonably have confided as
much in that Parliament, as in this now sitting; and does suppose, that they
who make question of the former, may as rationally be doubtful, both of this,
and of all future Parliaments; especially, if the successors of that Power and
Parliament shall not, (or ought not in equity) to confirm their Sales and
Securities, nor give recompense to those who are damnified, out of the estates
of those who trusted them with the Public Faith, whose estates, as long as
they shall be a people, will in conscience, be liable thereunto. And, it seems
to this Remonstrant, by matter of Fact, since the sitting of this present
Parliament, that even in their judgment, the Sales and Securities, granted and
given by the long Parliament, should be made good according to their intention.
For, they caused or ordered payment to be made of very great sums to the now
Lord Mayor of London, and to Major General Massey; persons who heretofore were
of the same judgment with other men, now called Phanatiques; and who then
opposed the Kings armed power, both in Field and Garrison, as vigorously as
any, in the beginning of the late war; and were instrumental in that, which
enabled others to prosecute him to death: These had no other, but the very same
Security, which the Remonstrant, and the rest aforementioned, had for money
lent, lands bought, and services done by the commands of that Representative of
this Nation, and which to make good the said Securities, was by a peculiar
positive Law, to have been continued as aforesaid, to that purpose, till they
were dissolved by an Act of Parliament, with their own consent. The loss of
which Power, whether occasioned by their own default, or other men's, or by
GOD's immediate justice upon them, is no bar in equity, to the Purchases
claimed, Securities or Debts aforesaid; in regard the Nation in whose name they
were made and contracted, to whose use the said money was raised, by the said
Sales, Loans, and Condescentions; (and upon whose credit also they were granted
by their own Acts, personated by their Trustees) is the same Nation by whom all
this was transacted, and to whom the injustice and dishonor of violating those
Securities will be imputed: And if the Representative thereof now in being, or
some other hereafter empowered, provide not an expedient whereby to disoblige
it from the said Securities, it will be a blot upon it (yea worse) whilst it
is a Nation. For, it will be liable to the Judgments which are due to such a
failing, in what ought to be performed. Also, if those Securities be rendered
void, (for whose confirmation such extraordinary provision was made) nothing
will hereafter be reputed a good Security, which can be thereby given: For, in
probability, States and Parliaments will so lose their credit, that they will
not only be reputed the greatest cheaters in the world; and the most cruel and
most foolish destroyers of their own honor and relations; but also, in
whatsoever necessity they shall be, will never more be confided in,
notwithstanding all their specious pretenses, plausible Speeches, Declarations,
Protestations, and Engagements; and then their Magisterial slighting,
contemning, and condemning, just and reasonable Proposals, Cautions, and humble
requests of oppressed Supplicants, will have evil Consequents, though they may
serve their ends for a while. The Remonstrant fears this Result, and that there
are some endeavoring to make invalid the said Securities, together with the
Kings gracious condescentions, if it be possible, both to the Remonstrant and
others, who can hardly walk the streets without abusive affronts and
provocations; in which considerations it is presumed he is allowed by the Law
of Nature, (and shall be permitted by your humanity) to plead and insinuate in
a peaceable manner, such Motives as reasonably tend to their timely relief;
especially, when they are made almost careless of their lives by being totally
deprived of that, whereupon life depends, through their neglect of Justice to
whom they conscientiously adhered.

But much more weight may be laid upon the Argument drawn from that tender
respect, that ought to be had to the honor of the King and his Parliament,
which this Remonstrant cannot choose but frequently touch upon, as being of very
high concernment. A Gentleman of the lowest rank, who has any sense of his
true honor, is no less careful to keep his word and promise, then to perform
what he is obliged unto by an Instrument confirmed with hand and seal; yea
more, because he to whom he stands engaged by the latter, confided less in him,
and has a legal security, whereby he may probably be saved harmless, howsoever
he be inclined to make performance, who gave him credit. And it ought to be
remembered, that by his Majesty's Declaration from Breda, concerning Sales; by a
Declaration made in this Parliament the 8. of May last; by his Majesty's
Proclamation the 6. of June last; by an Order in Parliament last August,
restraining Ecclesiastics from granting Leases of any of the said lands by
them claimed; by his Majesty's Speech at the end of the first Session of this
Parliament; and by the L. Chancellours Speech seconding the same; (which gave
hope that some good proceed should be made toward the relief promised, before
the Members of this Parliament were arrived at their Countrey-Houses.) It
seemed to be the intent both of the King, and of this Parliament, that the said
Purchases should, and ought, to have been confirmed to the late Purchasers; and
that in the mean time, their possessions should be quieted, and their Rents and
Arrears paid unto them by their Tenants: Nevertheless, to the dishonor both of
the King and Parliament, the Prelates not only slight the Orders and Acts of
the Commons alone, and the Ordinances of the Lords and Commons jointly, with
that which was declared by the King, as aforesaid; but, do many other ways,
act so violently and arbitrarily repugnant to these condescentions, as if they
would make the People believe, that they knew the King and this Parliament
intended not what they declared, except only in things relating to the benefit
of them the said Prelates: For, the first Votes of this House of Commons, for
restoring them to their Mansion-Houses, and the Votes of the Grand Committee,
excluding persons, under several Qualifications, (not excepted in the Act of
Oblivion) from the benefit of the intended Act for confirmation of Sales, they
observe, and impose as Laws upon the People; but, on the contrary, the Votes of
the same House, for prohibiting them the said Ecclesiastics to grant any
Leases, until the intended Act of Sales was passed; as also, for the
Augmentation of Vicaredges, and the Votes of the said Grand Committee, for
satisfying the Purchasers their money and Interest, before they did part with
their possessions, they reject as of no force, the Parliament being dissolved;
and regard the said Ordinances of the Lords and Commons, and the said Acts and
Orders of the Commons alone, much less. Moreover, if in any thing his Majesty's
Commissioners incline to give the least satisfaction to any Purchaser, the said
Ecclesiastics cry out against it as an Arbitrary Prerogative Commission;
though in cases relating to their advantage, they cry up the Prerogative
against the Laws. Also upon Petitions of some of the Purchasers (as the
Remonstrant is informed) Orders are made, seeming to enable them to receive all
Arrears due before the 24. of June last; when it is well known (perhaps to
themselves) that by the Act of Oblivion, Arrears to that day are generally
pardoned, and that the Tenants who ought to have paid them, lay hold on that
Act, and disobey those Orders; by which means, Officers are only benefited, and
the suitors more damnified by expenses, instead of getting relief; So that,
whereas Purchasers are invited to bring in their deeds to be cancelled, upon
promising that they should receive all Rents due at and before Michaelmas last,
it would be plainer dealing to tell them, they should have a Quarters Rent, to
relinquish their purchases; for in truth it amounts to no more, from June 24 to
Michaelmas next following. Furthermore, there being nothing promised by King or
Parliament, as aforesaid, in their Declarations, in relation to the Old Tenants
of Prelates Lands, (the said Tenants having had pre-emption before all other,
when the said Lands were sold; enjoying also their full term without
interruption, during their respective Leases; and being no otherwise displaced,
then they usually were formerly when the said Prelates pleased by Concurrent
Leases or otherwise, to take these Farms into their own hands, or for the
benefit of their children and relations, at the expiration of their Terms) it
had been more candid usage, to have absolutely signified to the Purchasers,
that the said Old Tenants should be preferred before them, rather then to
permit the said Purchasers (deluded by a vain hope) to consume money and time
in seeking for a Composition, and to suffer the said Prelates in the mean time,
to receive their whole Rents, to eject the Purchasers by force, when they had
paid all Taxes, with other duties, not without great expense bestowed in
fencing, soyling, plowing and sowing the said Lands; and also to grant Leases,
as they have done, to the vacating of all the cost and labor of the said
Purchasers, in pursuing what seemed graciously intended both by King and
Parliament on their behalf. These and many other passages, which this
Remonstrant has observed, makes it appear unto him, that there is not that
care yet taken to preserve the honor of the King and of this Parliament, in
giving satisfaction to Purchasers, as might be wished; and that there is not
that respect had to Justice and good Conscience, in satisfying them, as has
been heretofore vouchsafed by Princes, States, and Parliaments in the like
Cases.

In true Reason, (which distinguishes Men from Beasts, as Justice and Mercy
differences them from Devils) this Remonstrant conceives, that the whole matter
in Fact and Judgment, concerning the said Sales and Securities, must
unavoidably be brought to this Dilemma; (to wit) either the Long Parliament had
Power to make such Sales, and grant such Securities as aforesaid, or else they
had not: If they had such a Power, then their Sales and Securities must be
allowed and confirmed; or, at least, (if in Law or Equity, restitution of what
was by them sold, ought to be made to the former possessors) then recompense
must be given another way; else injustice is committed, GOD, and the Nation are
dishonored, and many thousand Families and innocent persons will be
unmercifully exposed to ruin; and that severity and want of compassion, for
which they were visited in wrath, who last abused their Power, will be more
then doubled. GOD is the same he was; and if private men, for not performing
their Covenants made to and with each other, (though to their own hindrance)
shall be excluded from his Tabernacle; doubtless an equivalent Judgment will
be extended to States and Parliaments, or those whom they represent. Then, on
the other part it (...) should be granted that the foresaid Parliament (...),
and exercised wilfully a Power, not thereto belonging, to the damnifying of
those who confided in them; that Parliaments successors ought then in Justice,
to award satisfaction out of their estates, who arrogated such an unwarrantable
Power, as far as they will extend, if they can be distinguished from those
among them, who were guiltless: And if that distinction cannot be made, or, the
damages exceed their abilities; then, condign satisfaction should be made out
of their Common purse, who entrusted those with the Publick-Faith: For, the
greatest part of the People have often been too careless upon whom they impose
that confidence, and perhaps, will be more wary, when they have well paid for
it, what persons they choose; and be so wise, as to consider, that they who have
not wit enough to govern their private estates, or they who consume many
thousands of pounds, in Ale houses, Inns and Taverns, (whose reckonings, as
this Remonstrant hears, are not yet paid) to procure themselves to be Elected
by Feastings and Drunkenness, had probably some worse ends in being so
prodigal, then a sincere intention, to serve GOD, the King, and their Country.

Yet, neither this Remonstrant, nor as he believes, many of the said
Purchasers and Lenders, do expect satisfaction should be made them at full for
all their damages, (though in justice it ought so to be) but considering the
Public wants, and other private men's necessities, as well as their own; with
how much it may tend at this time to the settlement of Peace and Amity, that
every man should enjoy a comfortable subsistence, they would rest contented
with so much only toward a repair, as might discharge them from their
engagements occasioned by the said Loans and Purchases, to the redeeming the
loss of their liberties, and to preserve a competency proportionable to their
several degrees, and the condition of their nearest relations; which might be
raised without overburthening any, if such Expedients might be speedily taken
into consideration, and vigorously prosecuted, as may be hereafter proposed;
whereas the course which is yet pursued, will neither be a means of relieving
many, nor of so reconciling disagreeing Parties, but that the Breaches will
daily grow wider, and increase Animosities till they become irreconcilable;
and kindle such an universal flame by private fewds and vexatious suits, that
it will never perhaps be quenched, whilst ought is left unconsumed, or whilst
any considerable number of them, or of their Posterities, are living, who were
unhappily engaged against each other in the late war: And for prevention
whereof, there will be no possibility in nature, but by a general Forgiveness
on all sides, mediated by a moderate course, to preserve in some indifferent
measure, that Interest by which each man may be comfortably maintained: For,
until that be sincerely endeavored, prosecuting the rigor of the Laws, by
imprisoning, suing, hanging, beheading and quartering will terrisie few of
those who have neither estates to lose, nor an outward condition of life worth
preserveing: Nor in such cases will preaching the principles of morality, or
Evangelical Precepts prevail much, but with men, naturally meek, (or perhaps
cowardly) or such as are of so true a Christian and sanctified a temper, that,
according to the doctrine and example of Christ, they can freely forgive their
enemies, and submit to any thing, wherewith it shall please GOD to permit the
Supreme Power to exercise their Faith and Patience; which number is so small in
respect of the rest of those who are at this time exasperated, in relation to
their Estates, Credits and Consciences, (as they will pretend at least) that
the Public charge, which the present Government may be constrained yearly to
continue, will amount to more, then that which would suffice to calm their
spirits, by a repair of their destructive damages: And yet their suppression by
violence, may paradventure also, be prolonged, until some advantage be gotten
by the changeableness of humane affairs, to let their fury break forth in such
a time as may destroy or endanger that peace, which they desire to preserve:
For, an Army is a security which has in it, neither certainty nor safety. It
being therefore this Remonstrants principle, not only to seek the preservation
of that visible Power whereto God subjects him, out of prudence and moral
gratitude, because it protects him; but even for conscience sake also, (though
it should oppress him, as the last did) he thinks it his duty to give a Caveat,
whereby they whom it shall concern, may take it into consideration, whether
both Parties which have opposed each other, are not in some respect so equally
guilty of the sins occasioning the Judgments under which they have lain
together, or by turns; and whether it will not be their next and safest way to
a general peace, to divide the burden which now lies destructively upon many,
to be born by the whole Nation, and to make it as easy, as Justice and
Prudence will permit, by an impartial respect to the interest of all Parties
concerned: To which end, somewhat shall be proposed before the conclusion of
this Remonstrance; not Magisterially, to be strictly so or so prosecuted; but
rather, to be a hint of something to that purpose, to be deliberately
determined by wiser men.

It will be pertinent to common peace, to take notice how many hundred
thousands are at this time exasperated, by being nigh totally destroyed or much
impoverished by the loss of their livelihoods and liberties, with little hope
of remedy: Some, by imprisonment upon malicious suggestions only, without any
cause of offense given; some by being deprived of their moneys exacted, lent or
contributed upon the Public Faith, to that Power whereto they heretofore
submitted conscientiously, or by compulsion; some by being ejected forcibly out
of Lands, Offices, or other Estates by them Purchased, and formerly belonging
to the King, Queen, Prince, Prelates, and such as were then reputed
Delinquents; some by taking up, on valuable considerations, those Lands or
Offices from the first or second Purchasers and Possessors, in satisfaction, or
in relation to debts, jointures, childrens portions, or other collateral
Contracts, Securities, or Engagements; and some by great sums expended in
buildings or other improvements, borrowed from many who are quite undone by
their disability to repay it; occasioning suits and quarrels no less
destructive to them, then to the original Purchasers and Lenders. And not a few
thousands are as much discontented upon other civil and conscientious accounts,
whom to provoke altogether, may be of dangerous consequence, though the Kings
Indulgence has much qualified and settled the minds and estates of some: For
little advantaged will they be by a pardon for life, who needed it, or for
ought else criminal, who are put into a worse condition by living, then to be
executed ten times by the hangman. The natural temper of this Nation, is for
these respects much to be regarded, and they are accordingly to be dealt
withal; as it was prudently counseled by King Henry the fourth, upon his
deathbed to his Son, whose words I will here insert as not impertinent. I
charge thee (said he) before God, to minister the Law indifferently to all, to
ease the oppressed, to beware of flatterers, not to deferr Justice, nor yet to
be sparing of mercy; punish the oppressors of thy people, so shall thou obtain
favor of God, and love and fear of thy Subjects, who whilst they have wealth,
so long shall thou have their obedience; but, made poor by oppressions, will be
ready to make Insurrections; Rejoice not so much in the glory of thy Crown, as
meditate on the burthenous care which accompanies it. Mingle Love with Fear; so
thou, as the heart, shall be defended in the midst of the body; but know, that
neither the heart without the members, nor King without the Subjects help, is
of any force. Speed, page 763.

This Remonstrant conceives, he might have procured many thousand hands
subscribed to attest the reasonableness of this Caution, and of what else is in
this Remonstrance expressed or desired; but he endeavored it not, because, he
thinks it will be needless to wise men, who very well know, that common cheat
signifies little or nothing, as hands are usually procured. When Reason
prevails not more then Voices, there is small hope of Justice. And, as it was
said to Dives, They who will not believe Moses and the Prophets, will not
believe one sent from the dead. So, may this Remonstrant say, They, who will
not be moved to do conscionable and righteous things, for the sake of Justice
and Mercy, will little regard Remonstrances or Petitions, subscribed with many
thousand hands, till they feel them about their ears; or, until the vengeance
of GOD seizes on them, as it lately did on those who neglected good Cautions,
until they had not power to put them in execution. Misconster not this, as a
secret threat to any in Authority; for it is humbly and soberly intended, to be
only a Memorandum, useful at this time, wherein all have not the patience of
Saints, who are grieved or oppressed. That, which has been, may be again
hereafter; and there be among those who are now depressed, some of those
Anointed-ones of the LORD, whom he will not permit to be harmfully touched
without Vengeance: For, he has other Anointed-ones beside Kings, whom he often
reproves for their sakes; and verily he will not forget the poor for ever,
though to humble them for their transgressions, he hides his face from them
for a season; at least, his Everlasting Mercies, he will not take from them.
God preserve us from seditious and mutinous repinings; and give us all grace,
from the lowest to the highest, jointly and severally, to endeavor that which
prevents desperate Activities, and take away every occasion of temptations
thereunto: For, though meek and conscientious men, will, as they ought to do,
wait patiently upon GOD in all their sufferings; yet mere natural men, (of
which sort, the greatest number of those many thousands consist, who are made
almost desperately careless of their lives) will not easily conform to
Evangelical principles, (as is before employed) but, perhaps, when their
personal wants are aggravated with the importunings and upbraidings of
Creditors, the neglects of friends, and the scorn of enemies, the jears of
neighbors, and the cries of perishing wives and children, it may so provoke
them, that in such extremities, they will have as a little regard to Reason,
Religion and Civil duties, as they had to their sad Petitions from whom they
expected Justice or Compassion; and then like provoked English Mastives, (the
true Hieroglyphics of English men's temper) fly upon Bulls, Bears or Lions,
without fear of their inequality in strength and number, or into any dangerous
attempts. Take it not therefore offensively, that you are in this extraordinary
manner forewarned thereof. Many things have been this year permitted by way of
premonition, more then at other times. The Waters, which are the Peoples
Hieroglyphick, have had several prodigeous motions; the Air, not a few
portentuous impressions; yea, the Fire and Earth also; and many other of GOD's
creatures have contributed symptoms pertinent to our instruction, which ought
to be well heeded; and are no such Non significants, as they would seem to
think them, who do what they can to becloud them.

It may be, the late Insurrection of those few, called Fifth-Monarchy-men, has
somewhat in it which tends to premonition: For, GOD and Nature never act or
permit any thing in vain (no not the falling of a sparrow to the ground, or the
numbering of hairs) and, this Remonstrant, therefore, conceiving himself obliged
to declare his sense thereupon, will make bold here to insert it, that it may
not be altogether fruitless. He truly professes he knew not one of those
persons, so much as by name, and is as far from justifying that, or any such
attempt, as they who either martially or legally prosecuted them to their
destruction in the flesh. For, though Moses slew the Egyptian which oppressed
an Israelite, being then but a private person, Rahab confederated with foreign
spies, to the destruction of her native City; Jael infringed both a League and
the Law of Hospitality, in killing Sisera; and Ehud, under color of presenting
a Gift, and of being a Messenger from GOD, slew King Eglon, to whom he was a
tributary Subject; and these had no doubt, secret warrants from GOD for those
irregular Actings, by a divine impulse upon their spirits, making them content
to hazard the destruction of their bodies to a temporal condemnation in those
services; but no such secret ever entered into the soul of this Remonstrant, nor
does he find his heart enclinable to act any thing not warrantable by the
revealed will of GOD; because, he finds, as well by what has within his own
experience befaln to some, as by the example of Simeon and Levi, that, men may
be so deluded, by their own fancies and corruptions, as to think the most
barbarous cruelties are acts of Justice. Therefore he leaves the judgment of
those persons, and of such attempts, to those unto whom they appertain, and to
God, who only knows their hearts, their purposes and warrants, if they had any;
and whose Mercies being infinite, and his Judgments past searching out, does
sometime permit external Judgments to seize upon a few, to make way for many
to escape them; and otherwhile exposes men to temporal cruelties, without
mercy here, that an everlasting mercy may be enjoyed hereafter. But, whatever
those persons were in themselves; or whatsoever that attempt was in its own
nature; this Remonstrant is very certain that it was a Providential permission,
for their sins and ours, hinting unto this Generation, things very pertinent
thereto; and foreshewing somewhat to come, (if not prevented by Repentance and
Amendment) which it will concern us to search after, with as much diligence as
we can. What it particularly points at, he has a dark view by a contemplative
Vision, like an imperfect Apparition in the Air, which is not visible enough to
be ascertained in words to other men; yet sufficient he thereby discovers to
make it evident to himself, that such previous considerations as these that
follow, will be very needful.

First, forasmuch (as aforesaid) GOD and Nature act or permit nothing in vain;
It is to be considered, that the sudden rising and desperate attempt
beforementioned, tends to more then such a vanity seems to be in it self; and
that the Circumstances of the Fact, and the Qualifications of the persons, may
have much in them tending to the disquisition of what Providence intended.

Secondly, It is to be considered, That if Moral and Religious men, being left
to themselves, may be transported into such dangerous extravagancies, what they
may possibly be hurried into, who have neither honesty nor Religion to restrain
them, if GOD should be then provoaked, to give way to their corruptions, when
they are tempted by their Lusts, or exasperated by Sufferings, which they
conceive injuriously inflicted.

Thirdly, If upon a mistaken Principle, a few persons, seduced to take up
carnal weapons to prosecute a spiritual warfare, might be so encouraged, and
elevated in their spirits, as to out-dare the whole Power of one of the
greatest and most populous Cities in the world; even when her Citizens were in
Arms, in readiness upon their guards, and the Militia of the whole Kingdom
without her walls, in a defensive and an offensive posture, to assist if need
were: It is very considerable, what the effect thereof might be, if the whole
Body of GOD's Elect in these Nations, spirited by an unquestionable belief,
grounded upon his promises, should engage all together as one man in his Cause,
armed with all the spiritual weapons offensive and defensive.

Fourthly, It is observable, that those Impulses which are termed Phanaticall,
and those persons who are agitated by them, are neither to be slighted, nor
inconsiderately treated withal: Because, if they be moved by divine Instinct,
(which may be discernable) as Jonathan and his Armor-bearer were, two of them
will be able to rout a whole Garrison, ten to chase an hundred, and an hundred
to put a thousand to flight. If they be stirred up, but by a mere Phanatique
delusion, they may accidentally, be sufficiently spirited, thereby to vanquish
a Power, much superior to themselves in strength and number, as it has often
happened, when unequal Armies have joined battle, and the superstitious vulgar
were prepossessed by some ominous conceit or presage divulged among them: As
for instance, at the battle of Agencourt, (if the Remonstrants remembrance
fails him not) when the English, overpowered by their numerous Adversaries,
ten (nay twenty to one) as some writers affirm, (when their strength was spent,
by sickness and weariness, and they quite surrounded, and seeming without hope
of escaping an utter defeat) a prediction being divulged among them, which had
long before presaged, that the stones of the field should rise up for them
against the French: GOD, who is the giver of Victories, permitted that
despicable means, to be instrumental thereto; for, weapons failing, and the
English thereby encouraged, took up stones, and obtained the most signal
Victory, that ever was gotten in these parts of the world. And the most famous
Captains among the Ancients, made use of Auguries, Predictions, and such like
mediums, to stir in their soldiery such impulses, as we call Phanatique, and
very frequently thereby prevailed.

Fifthly, If a handful of men (as it were) upon a conscientious account only,
built upon a false ground, without being moved with respect to their personal
damages or interests, could be so desperately and obstinately resolved: It is
considerable, what the desperation of so many hundred thousands may amount
unto; who are or may be exasperated through unsufferable insolences and
oppressions, making them careless of their lives, by defect of all things
pertinent to a comfortable life; they having therewith no sense of Morality,
Piety, or Conscience to restrain them, proposed nothing but vengeance; and GOD
should then also, therewith let loose the fury of others, whose malevolence and
discontents are not yet much heeded, to make them instrumental for the
deliverance of those from Oppression, have meekly submitted their Cause to him
only. For know, that they who are eminent for nothing so much, as for their
prodigality, whoreing, roaring, drinking or swearing; and valiant only in
Baudy-houses and Taverns, will run away like sheep before resolute assaylants,
made desperate as aforesaid.

Know also, that the LORD of Hosts, who is the GOD of Nature, as well as of
Grace, is General of a twofold Militia, furnished with distinct weapons
according to the several services whereby they are to glorify him; the one
Natural, and the other Spiritual; and that he makes use of both to correct his
Children, and destroy the Enemies of his Kingdom, as occasion is given. The
first he employeth in shedding the blood of his malicious opposers, or of
incorrigible servants, sometime, with hazard or loss of their own; and the
other, (if need be) he engages in sufferings, and by contributing their own
blood also in his Cause; managing to that end, those offensive and defensive
weapons only, which are proper to a spiritual warfare. These last, are those
followers of the Lamb whither soever he goes, who are Saints and Soldiers, in
the most super-eminent degree; to whom the other usually make way by the
violence of natural Faculties and Passions, to those Conquests over
Profaneness and Injustice, which must be completed by Patience, Meekness,
Love, constancy in Faith and Prayer. And many of the former may be Saints also,
who when their natural corruptions have been soaked in their own blood, or
sufferings, and the stains washed out, by being rinsed in the blood of the
Lamb, shall have a share both in his Victories and Triumphs.

Permit, I pray you, this Remonstrant, with patience and candor, to pursue this
plain-dealing a little further, and to add somewhat for vindication of himself,
from those mis-interpretations which may be made of his honest and peaceable
intentions, in these free expressions: For, when he calls to mind, that Christ
and his Apostles were charged with sedition, for innocently Preaching the
peaceable glad-tidings of the Gospel, for their safety to whom they preached
them; and that some of the Prophets were imprisoned and persecuted as seditious
persons, when they declared GOD's Judgments, and what ought to have been
performed for preservation of their Common safety; he thinks it not unlikely,
in this froward Generation, that some Objections of that kind may be made
against him, by their Pride, Malice, or Ignorance, who prosecute their
selfends; And he being neither insensible, nor totally careless of those
disadvantages which may befall thereby, nor ignorant how easy it is to find
wherewith to beat a dog; will now (lest he may be restrained from that liberty
hereafter) preoccupate as much as he can, whilst he may, to prevent
prejudicacy (if it be possible) by giving reasons for his Remonstrating to the
purposes aforementioned, and in this unusual mode.

He knows how far the just bounds of a free expression extends by the Laws of
GOD and Nature; and though his body may be enslaved, and kept from the exercise
thereof by the cruelty of others, his mind cannot be inthralled, but by his own
baseness or pusillanity; and if he must perish, he is resolved to perish like a
man, not like a beast, or like one who cuts his own throat for fear of death.
He will not whine like a curdog, or snarl at him, when he is beaten or kicked by
his Master; nor cry like a Swine, when he is to be slain by the Butcher, or
ringed for his rooting; nor does he think himself obliged at this time, to be
as dumb before his shearers, as CHRIST was; nor until a time comes (as it did
to him) wherein words will either be wholly in vain, or may tend to prevent
that suffering, whereunto he shall believe he was pre-ordained by Providence,
for his Masters glory, or for the welfare of other men; and then he will leave
scribbling, and bear his Cross in silence. But it is yet, seasonable for him to
write and speak, and if he now do it not, he may for ever hereafter hold his
Peace; for it will be to no purpose. He writes and speaks, with the more
boldness, because it is not for his own Interest; but as it lies wrapped up with
the Public Honor, Peace, and Welfare, and is preservable, without injury to
other private persons. He acknowledges himself subject to the natural desires,
fears, frailties and infirmities of the weakest men; yet, GOD, by his Grace,
has (as he hops) so habituated him to the Principles, which will preserve
him in a warrantable sobriety, that he shall dread nothing, but GOD and
himself; or lest by ignorance he may offend against his own Conscience; in
which case he is one of the veriest Cowards in the world. He neither does nor
can willingly intend hereby the just offense of any: For he hates nothing, that
GOD has made, loves him above all things; his neighbor as himself; and his
Country (if his heart deceive him not) much better. He honors the King, and
is, and will be, as faithful unto him, as he was to those who lately exercised
Supreme Authority; to whom, he was conscientiously faithful to the last hour,
wherein GOD permitted them to retain it; never dissembling, juggling, or halting
between two Parties; yea, though he was neglected and oppressed by those to
whom he was obedient. He that has no self-love, is as blameable, as he which
has too much, because he wants that rule whereby he ought to regulate a Love
to his neighbor; and he who to his power, provides not for his Family, is
worse then an Infidel. Therefore, no malevolent repining or discontent, but a
Christian regard to his duty, and to those many who are oppressed (which is
enough to make a dumb man speak) has extracted this Remonstrance, quickened
with a little more Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, then usual, that (if he should
live so long) he might not solicit in vain for Justice twenty years longer, but
have a speedy dispatch one way or other. For, Qui rogat timide, docet negare,
he, who sneakingly demands Justice, as if he were begging an Alms, encourages
his oppressors the more impudently to oppress him. And yet, perhaps, he had not
adventured to express himself in this mode, if an unresistible impulse had not
made impressions on his heart, more for the sakes of others, then for his own.

For, though this Remonstrant has had many provocations thereunto, by the loss
of his most precious time, with the ruin of his estate and credit; thousands
perhaps, have suffered as much as he that way, whom patience, fear, or
stupidity have kept silent; and it would be a shame to him not to suffer as
mutely as other men; also he is reduced to a subsistence by Charity; but, that
has brought with it such experimental evidences, of Gods merciful supplying a
competency from day to day hitherto, that the damage is not only made thereby
supportable, but comfortable also: and in this kind, he has suffered no more
then the King, and many persons of honor have been exercised withal. This
Remonstrant has likewise been made the scorn and derision of his enemies,
neighbors and acquaintance, and is frequently persecuted with uncivil
upbraidings; but, he can pass them over with as little regard, as the barkings
of dogs, when he considers what Shimeies they are, who set them on, why, and to
what purpose: That, which above all this afflicts him, are the sufferings which
have suddenly befaln to some of his needy Creditors, and most near and beloved
Relations; who, not accustomed to the want of food, raiment, and such other
necessaries or conveniences as they formerly enjoyed, look otherwhile so sadly
upon him, that it makes his bowels yern: Yet, it may be, neither had that been
moving enough to embolden him hereunto: But, when to all these inducements,
there seemed to be added, in his apprehension, a likelihood of multiplying
those Confusions, Oppressions, and Innovations, which will be a dishonor to
God, the King, and these Nations; (and as well hazzardous to the Common peace,
as destructive to him and others in their private capacities) this Remonstrant
thought it better to adventure the tranquillity of one man, then to let so many
be in danger of perishing, by continuing sheepishly silent: And he confesses
there is somewhat of selfness, even in that also; because, he is afraid his own
Conscience would accuse him for neglect of his duty, and bring greater
distempers upon him, for his being silent at such a time, then those evils
which he might hope thereby to escape: For, GOD having carried him, a long time
through many vicissitudes and dangers, giving him frequent experiments what the
events of his own and other men's transactions were, and will be, (with an
ability in some measure more then ordinary, to illustrate to vulgar capacities,
those things which are considerable) he dares not presume to displease and
inrage his Conscience, to avoid the displeasure of men, whatsoever outward
disadvantages may happen. These things considered, with those Privileges which
are due by the Law of Nature, he conceives neither any digression or expression
herein contained is needless, or can be justly questionable; and that, he is
not obliged (his present condition being weighed) to make answer unto ought
objected, which may tend to the accusing of himself, though he were as
blameable as he is innocent. For, he intends nothing to the injury of Public
or private Interests; nor seeks for ought but his own according to Justice,
that he may do Justice to his Creditors and Relations.

They who live at ease in plenty; because, they see some appearances of a
progress toward the relief of this Remonstrant and other sufferers, do condemn
them as over hasty, and more importunate then they need to be: Yea, are pleased
to say, that much more is done for them already, then they deserve; and that
whatsoever shall be done for them, they will never be contented; which
Asseverations are better evidences of their dis-affection to the sufferers, and
of their want of true Charity, then of the truth of that which they affirm:
And, it is the very same which was imputed to this Remonstrant, at several
times, during his almost twenty years solicitation, by some who were formerly
in Power, when he Petitioned to be relieved for his sufferings in their
service; and how justly they did it, may be collected from the literal sense,
of this metaphorical illustration thereof: He complained of a consuming fire,
whereinto they permitted him to be thrown by their neglects; and after he had
long complained, they for a remedy, tossed him into a boiling Caldron; that, not
contenting him, they threw him into a Drying Pan; therewith he being no more
eased, renewed his complaint, and then, they laid him upon a Gridiron; that
being as painful, they turned him upon his other side; that, proving as
uneasy, he Petitioned again, and was only basted with a few Oily words, or
had Orders pined on him, like papers to keep roast-beef from burning; he then
once again, made an humble address for more effectual means of relief; whereto
some of them angrily replied, Nothing will satisfy this fellow: and seeing
none of the former condescentions, would give satisfaction, they at last cast
him into a freezing Lake, wherein he yet remains; and, but that the Charity of
others, did otherwhile a little thaw him, he ere this time had been frozen to
death, and laid where such Remonstrances as these are needless. These are the
Favors which this Remonstrant obtained, from those whom he served faithfully
and conscientiously heretofore, though he were personally known well near to
all of them, and though most of them were his familiar acquaintance, and some
of them his professed friends: Which when he seriously considers, and how he
has nevertheless been from time to time, so many years together, neglected and
abused; he can hardly discern whether has been more injurious unto him,
neighbors, or strangers; hypocrites, or profane persons; seeming friends, or
open enemies; his Contrymen, or some of his own kindred. But, now he hopes
better; for, worse they cannot use him, whom he opposed for their sakes, when
they were in Power. And, if that obedience which he now professes unfeignedly
to his Majesty, shall procure so much respect to his present condition, as to
allow out of what he thought his own, wherewith to dis-engage him from his
Creditors, and redeem his Family from that poverty, which now oppresses it, he
shall not only be therewith contented, but thankfully acknowledge also, to the
honor of the King and State, that he finds them, whom he had made his enemies,
to be much more just and merciful unto him, then his professed friends, of whom
he had best deserved: And it may be possible, that their Generositie,
whatsoever he has heretofore done (or here, or elsewhere expressed) will make
them as confident of his Allegiance, as they are of the most faithful of those,
who profess obedience and conformity to the Government, and in the most usual
mode.

Let it not seem unsavory to any Reader, that this Remonstrant, insists so
much upon his personal sad condition and grievances: For, by them he became
sensible of other men's Oppressions: By the reality of his own wrongs, he
perceived what just cause others might have to complain: Also, without
particularizing his sufferings, they could not probably be redressed; and no
reasonable or conscientious man, will grudge him the liberty of inserting a
leaf or two into that discourse, which was for the relief of many, together
with himself; composed solely at his cost and labor, without the least
contribution thereunto vouchsafed, either by them or any other: For he may say
on his own behalf, as Ulisses did, when he pleaded for the armor of Achilles
before the Grecians.

-- meaque haec facundia siqua est
Quae nunc pro domino, pro vobis saepe locuta est,
Invidia careat, bona nec sua quisque recuset.
-- Do not envy my pen,
Which often for the weal of other men
Has been employed, if that otherwhile,
I, make use of it for mine own avail.
But, the means hitherto provided for the relief of this Remonstrant, and other
Purchasers and Lenders, does not yet appear likely to have that gracious
effect, which was by them expected, and intended by his Majesty. Therefore, he
prays it may not be offensively taken, if he declares plainly, what the
effects thereof hitherto are, and may probably be hereafter, according to his
understanding: For, his purpose being to express nothing but in order to the
preservation of himself and others from destruction, (nor to be more bold in
language, then the heedlesness of this Generation shall constrain) it cannot be
justly conceived that he would wilfully insert any word or clause, which might
by giving just offense, deprive him of that benefit which he desires to
attain; unless it be thought his Oppressions have made him mad; (as many wiser
men have been, who suffered less) and if so, he is rather an Object of pity,
then of displeasure. He is thankful to his Majesty, for not taking those
advantages at large, which were providentially put into his hands; and
gratefully acknowledges the Indulgence vouchsafed to Purchasers by his
Commission, for mediating on their behalf, manifest his compassion to be more
then their own Trustees have expressed; especially his often hastening the Act
of General pardon, and desiring the Parliament to make the Plaster as large as
the soars; nevertheless, the Instrument drawn up to those purposes, seems not
to have passed through their hands, who are so sensible of his Peoples
Grievances, as he himself was, nor is it possible that he can in so short a
time have that full cognizance, which he may have hereafter, of the true state
of those many differing Causes, which are to come under consideration, in
relation to Purchasers; and therefore the means by him intended may be so
defective without his default, that many will be more damnified, then relieved
thereby. This is found and felt by experience already. The work imposed is too
heavy for so few workmen, in regard the Commissioners are persons of honor,
who have other weighty affairs which will divert them, and take up so much
time, that not a few being already quite ruined by delay; many more will be
destroyed before their Causes can be heard and determined. Some of them have so
little whereby to subsist, that they cannot spare out of it, so much as the
charge of Solicitation will require. And it is feared, most of those who are
yet able, will be wheeled round in such perpetual motions, as they were at
Worcester and Drury-houses, to their impoverishing also, by the long contests
which will arise from several interfering Securities, Interests, and Claims,
still multiplying debates and expenses; when so many thousands as are engaged
by Original Purchases and Subcontracts, shall from all parts betwixt Saint
Michaels-mount and Barwick (some of them two or three hundred miles from their
habitations) flock together, with witnesses, Counsel and Sollicitours, to their
great cost here, and neglect of their businesses at home. Such a multitude
cannot but so obstruct each others proceedings, that many who are best able to
bear the burden, may be sore straitened and depressed, by losses in one place,
and expenses in another; by seeing Officers and making Friends, for that which
will amount to little or nothing at the last: For, of much of those Lands which
were Purchased, as aforesaid, the Prelates have not power to make Leases for
longer term, then during their own lives; and there being no Rule settled by
Parliament, whereby final Agreements may be made (in that, and some other
Cases, without dispute) the Purchasers will have as questionable Titles
hereafter, as they have now; and be perhaps all dead or beggared, before any
satisfaction shall be enjoyed.

As for the Lands claimed by the Prelates, there is little hope the late
Purchasers will have any considerable redress in lieu of them, if the said
Prelates be permitted to proceed as they begin; for (except two or three of
them only, as this Remonstrant has heard, who perhaps desire the Episcopal
Function should be reduced to the Pristine Constitution) so ambitious are they
of Pre-eminence, and so greedily hunt after immoderate Riches in their old age,
that regarding neither the tears of the oppressed, nor Orders of Parliament,
nor the Kings gracious condescentions published on the behalf of Purchasers;
they following the dictates of their own Avarice, take up the whole Rents, make
forcible Entries, grant Leases to them who will give most, and Arbitrarily
seize the estates of the Purchasers, before the times limited are expired, or
the Kings Commissioners can have time to take their Causes into consideration;
and before many can have means to present them, or be in a capacity to treat.
This Remonstrant in particular, having now lost about eight years 300. l. per
an. in a Purchase of their Lands who were hererofore called Delinquents, which
Lands cost him as good as almost twenty years Purchase in ready money. Also
1681. l. 15. s. 8. d. charged by Ordinance upon the Excise in Course, which,
with the Interest thereof, has been eighteen years almost, unpaid. And now he
is in danger to lose totally between five and six hundred pounds per. an. more,
in Prelates Lands, in Possession and Reversion; part whereof coming into
possession the last year, being unstockt, and not demisable, by reason the
Title is disparaged, has cost him in Taxes, with other duties and necessary
disbursments therein dispended, more then twice so much as he could raise out
of them, by occasion of the said Prelates forcible Intrusions: The remainder of
this Remonstrants stock and goods, were by Attachments out of the said Prelates
own Court, (without arrest, or any cause formerly made known, according to
equity, or the Common Law of this Land) illegally (and some of them, as he
thinks, feloniously) taken in the night, and carried away, by the said Prelates
Officers or Agents, being strangers, without any known lawful Officer. And, the
said Remonstrant neither being at home, nor having the liberty of his person,
or any other means left to defend himself against such outrages, or to maintain
his family, but by charity, is by this usage, and that which has been thereby
occasioned, deprived of as much of his estate, as being sold to the value, and
proportionably distributed, might have satisfied most of his personal debts,
had it not been so torn from him by some unconscionable Creditors, and the said
Officers maliciously confederating together, to the taking away, at the third
part of the value, the remainder of his household stuff, wearing apparel,
victuals, and the beds whereon his wife, children, and servants lay; as also
the wood in his yard, without any other Authority, but Will and Pleasure; for
the use of the Prelates now Tenant, who being reputed (perhaps because a
Papist) a true Son of the Church, is now seated upon that Farm, which he has
forcibly seized; some of his said Agents being so shameless, as to make answer,
when the illegality of their proceedings was objected, that this Remonstrant
should not be left able to prosecute his remedy at Law, or words to that
effect, which they have made good: Insomuch, that this Remonstrant, is
compelled in his old age, to shut up himself in a lone room, without a servant,
night and day, both in sickness and health; his wife necessitated, above fifty
miles distant, to keep possession, with her maid in a naked house, standing
far from neighbors, (and much farther from honest men) and his children and
servants being scattered, to seek harbor and livelihood where they can get it.
This, and much worse, is the Remonstrants present outward condition; by delay
of the Relief hoped for, and by his being thereby disabled to prosecute means
of redressing his grievances any further: In the like condition (as he
believes) many thousands are at this day among the said Purchasers, Lenders,
and such as fall under them, by the ruin of those who are impoverished by
their wants.

For, the hopes which they had eight or nine Months past, of a timely
settlement, has had so slow a progress, that many who had fair expectations,
and best means to improve them, begin to be afraid, it may succeed at last, as
in an old Tale, it is said, befell to him, who brought a large piece of cloth
to his Tailor, to make him such garments as it would extend unto; who at first,
told him, it would make a very good suit, cloak, and coat; but after it had
been in his custody awhile, he said to his customer, it would make but a suit
and a cloak; after that, it would make but a cloak; being kept a little longer,
he could make but a suit of it; after a few days more, but a short coat only;
and at last, no more but a very fair Cloth-button: And perhaps, with such a
Result some of the Purchasers may button up their baggs of Papers and Evidences
(if the King take not their Causes into his special Consideration) and go home
three times more damnified, then by losing all at first, without more cost and
trouble: For, when they have summed up the money, paid for their Purchases at
first; for passing their Conveyances and Concomitant charges; Interest and
Brockage for money borrowed; expenses in suites at Common Law and Chancery
thereby occasioned; as also in Contests many years before Committees and
Commissioners for removing Obstructions; and thereto added what it will cost
now, before there will be a final settlement, it may possibly amount to so
much, that the recompense will be less worthy of thanks, then a peremptory
denial would have been at the beginning; as this Remonstrant has found by
experience; who verily believes, that after his Demands and Receipts had been
stated by the Committee of Accounts for the Kingdom, examined again by the
Committee of the Navy; Re-examined by a select Committee of Parliament, and
upon that threefold Examination, had 3950. l. reported to be due unto him, and
payment then ordered; if he had totally quitted the said debt, and hoped no
more for it, he had been at least 5000. l. richer, then he is at this day: For,
if delays occasioning expenses with the loss of eighteen years time, and the
money misspent, and so long forborne, had been avoided, and other ways employed,
he might in that space have turned it to more considerable profit. The Proverb
says, He that gives quickly, gives twice. A benefit vouchsafed speedily, and
seasonably, may be doubled, yea tripled thereby, (as Opportunities may occur)
whereas, by being long delayed, Suites, Forfeitures, Interest, or such like,
may so augment damages, that twice so much afterward, will not be so
beneficial, as a quarter thereof might have been at the first; and to destroy
men under a color of doing Justice, and showing Mercy, is like the Cats
playing with the Mouse, (a making sport at other men's miseries) and one of the
greatest cruelties in the world. In brief, by what is afore-expressed, this
Remonstrant has neither the liberty of his person to attend the Commissioners,
nor wherewith, but by Charity, to subsist, much less to bear the charge of
prosecution, so long as his cause may possibly be undetermined; yea, it will be
little better then putting him all that while upon the Rack, yet peradventure
be no more available at last, then meat set before a dead man.

But, all this Remonstrating is to little purpose, except somewhat may be
proposed, out of which an Expedient shall be raised, whereby the Publick-Faith
may be redeemed, and the Grants and Securities aforementioned be made good, or
else a satisfaction given in such manner, that particular Animosities may be
allayed, without overburthening, or enseebling the whole Body-Politick; which
this Remonstrant thinking possible, will contribute his conceptions thereunto,
though perhaps he may have little or no thanks, (but a jear) for his labor.
And, though he be so broken in his estate, and overcharged with musings in his
mind, that he can hardly compose himself for such a serious contrivement, yet
he may stammer out such notions, that wiser men less disturbed, may either make
more practical, or at least, thereby take hints to discover and prosecute a
better Expedient of their own: For, the most prudent men sometimes oversee,
what a Fool takes notice of. The only way to settle an universal Peace and
Concord, is to satisfy all Interests, as much as may be; especially in things
necessary to a competent subsistence, even to the answering of their
expectations, who are most carnal, so far forth as they are just; in regard
they are likely to be most troublesome. Venture non habet aures, and there are
now so many laying claim to that Interest, as will make it dangerous, to
exasperate them all at once; and will be injustice to leave any of them
unsatisfied, as touching reasonable demands. They whose Grievances are most
considerable, are such as have Lent or Contributed upon the Publick-Faith;
Soldiers, who adventured their lives in the service of the Parliament;
Purchasers of Lands or estates belonging to the King, Queen, Prince, Prelates,
or those who heretofore adhered to the King against the Parliament, and such as
had either Grants of Estates, or Parliamentary Securities, for payment of debts
declared to be due unto them. It cannot be now expected, that the Lands of the
King, Queen, Prince, or such as were heretofore reputed Delinquents, should be
enjoyed by the said Purchasers, except so far forth only, as in consideration
of Improvements, the former Owners will freely, of their own nobleness, give
way thereunto, if we look for a perfect concord on their part. And then, how
the Purchasers of those Lands, and the Parliaments other Creditors may be
satisfied, a course must be other ways provided; which will be the more easily
effected, and the less burthensom, if the Purchasers of Prelates estates, may
have satisfaction out of the same Lands; as this Remonstrant conceives, in
equity and prudence, they ought to have, and also may have, to their reasonable
contentment, with an addition of honor and advantage, both to the King and
Nation, without wrong to the Episcopal Function, being constituted and
confirmed according to Primitive Ordination, derived from the Canon of GOD's
Word; such an Episcopacy never being intended (as this Remonstrant believes)
to be exploded out of the Church of England by the Solemn League and Covenant;
or to be barred out of Scotland, if the persons were regulated and qualified,
as they are charactered by Saint Paul.

Those Temporalities which they claim as Prelates, belonged not to them by
divine right as Bishops: but, were conferred in time of Popery, to support them
as Barons, when they were authorized to sit in Parliament: which Privilege,
being taken away by Act of Parliament, assented unto by the late King, that
work is at an end: and work and wages being Relatives, cease both together.
Temporal and Spiritual Lords in a Parliament, resemble plowing with Oxen and
Asses in one teeme, and by weaving (as it were) Linen and Woollen together, may
make that Linsey-woolsey, both in Civil and Spiritual things, as will be
pleasing neither to GOD nor men. The services whereto the Bishops were chiefly
ordained, may be best performed, (and with least obstruction to civil
transactions) in Synods, or National Councils and Conventions, where no Lordly
titles or usurpations are to be claimed or allowed: nor any Precedencies, but
for Orders sake only, lest Precedencies, and temporal Dignities, may overawe
their fellow members, and disadvantage the Truth. Bishops being regulated, as
aforesaid, and exercising only a Primacy of Order, as Speakers in Parliaments,
Prolocutors in Synods, and Presidents in Councils, ought to be restored; and a
competent and an honorable maintenance might be provided for them out of those
legal perquisites, which heretofore belonged unto them quatenus Bishops, (and
consist with an Evangelical Discipline) none of which are sold from them: and
out of those Impropriations, which they formerly Leased for Fines and yearly
Rents, giving a Plow-mans wages to their poor Curates. These Impropriations, if
they might be timely reserved from being again so misdisposed of by their
Avarice, would amount to a sufficiency: yea, and to a far larger Revenue, then
many Bishops formerly had, if they were prudently distributed; and would be
likewise a quieter subsistence, and somewhat more proper to their Calling;
because a maintenance settled upon the Ministry by the Laws of the Land.
Moreover, to enlarge that maintenance, convenient places of residence, with
Demeasnes and annual Rents enabling them to be hospitable, and incouragers of
others to Piety and Virtue, might and would be afforded, by the said
Purchasers, out of what was sold unto them. And such a Portion, being settled
on them, and their successors, by King and Parliament, as the Donations of
Nursing Fathers of the Church, (and not derived from heathenish or other
superstitious beginnings dishonorable to God, and scandalous to Religion)
would redound more to their honor, then their Baronies and Lordships; be more
comfortable to their Consciences, when they must resign their Bishoprics; make
their Ministry more effectual to their particular Flocks, and to the preserving
of Unity in Fundamentals, between those Congregations which are of differing
judgments; render their posterities more prosperous, and their persons more
beloved both of GOD and men. The worst this Remonstrant wishes, even to those
Prelates, who do but pretend to be the Bishops of Christ, is, that they truly
were so; and that they had humility enough to accept of such an offer, on
condition he wholly left his hope of repossessing his said Purchase, though he
thinks it more possible for him to be restored thereto, then for them long to
enjoy that wherewith they seem absolutely invested. Let this be well
considered; for though the Prelates and their Favorers, term him a Scribbling
Fool; The tatlings of Children and Fools, are sometimes to be listened unto by
wise and grave men, who know they often speak Truth, when others either will
not, or dare not.

When the King shall by experience know, how useless the Prelacy is, both to
him, and to the Church of GOD; and how serviceable such as are called Bishops
may be, when reduced to the Canon of the Word, it is hoped, he may persuade
them to submit thereto, and that some of them, will be so convinced in
Conscience, as to perceive it will be more honor to GOD and them, then
disparagement to their persons, to evidence the power of Truth upon themselves
in an humble conformity, and restrain them from unmercifully seeking to enrich
themselves by the destruction of so many Families as are now in danger of
perishing by their immoderate Avarice. As for the rest of the Hierarchy, this
Remonstrant cannot imagine to what good end they may be continued, which will
be equivalent to the preventing the thousandth part of that mischief, which
will ensue the dispossessing of those who have Purchased their estates. Deans
and Chapters, with their Appendants, are a Whimsey of a late invention, as now
constituted, which the Primitive Ages neither knew, nor perhaps thought of: A
Plant which our Heavenly Father never planted in his Church; nor are they
necessarily pertinent to the service of GOD, or to the edifying of mankind in
Piety or Morality; but rather burthensom and scandalous. Most of those vast
Revenues which they claim as sacred, (if not all) are no more worthy to be
reputed Holy things then the price of dogs, or wages of Strumpets, as I have
elsewhere said, in regard much of them were obtained by merchandising for the
souls of men, and were Sacrifices to the Devil, worse then Sacrilege, given
(or exacted) by their cunning Brokers, in derogation from Christ's meritorious
Passion, for expiating of Adulteries, Murders, and other heinous crimes: Which
if they could make evident to be sacred Offerings, and accepted of God as truly
such, they might hope ere long to make men believe, that their houses of
Office, their very dunghills, yea, their sins, or any thing they pleased so to
term, were also sacred. But, what reasonable man can imagine, why such an
impertinency should be preserved, when the State is so necessitated, though it
were some way useful, and when so many thousands of serviceable and innocent
persons may be destroyed by the readmission thereof? Whereto are they
necessary? If you suppose it be to elect Bishops, when they shall be reduced to
what they Originally were and ought to be; that Constitution, will admit of no
such Election: Such as now are, may be as well chosen by the King himself, as
by virtue of his Letters directed to the Deans and Chapters; or more properly,
by his Conge deslere to the Pastors of the respective Diocesses; which
Presbyters may likewise officiate, (if need be) at their Cathedrals by turns
(having provision made for them at such times) more to the edifying of the
People then heretofore: And their Cathedrals which, (to speak truth) are more
pertinent to the Civil honor and magnificence of the Nation, then essential to
the Worship of GOD; (and being built, ought rather to be upheld, for decency
and convenience, then wholly neglected) and may so be, without any great
burden to the Purchasers, by contributing toward their Repair a yearly Rent to
that purpose, if the old Fabric Lands be not sufficient, and unsold: These may
also, be of use for pious exercises and devout meetings, more to the glory of
GOD, and the edifying of his People, then at present they are, by those
irreverent persons, who serve their own selves only, under a pretense of
serving GOD, with empty ounds, Tautologies, vain Repetitions, and loud
vociferations, mingled with abominable profaneness: For, this Remonstrant
heard it lately credibly averred, that one of those, who is to oversee and
direct those who sing in the Quire, hearing a discord in their Music, was so
serious in his Musical Devotion, that moved to indignation, he passionately
swore aloud in these words, By God, a snarle: And that another, angrily calling
upon the Boys to raise their Voices higher, cursed them with four several
great Curses within a little space, whilst they were chanting out their Divine
Service, (as they call it) because they answered not his expectation. Oh!
abominable zeal.

But, should it be granted, that GOD required their Will Worship, that, they
were conscientiously devout therein; that, their Prelaticall Constitution, at
least were not scandalous, and that their large possessions were the real
charitable Donatives of truly devout Benefactors, irrevocably set apart from
common use (not one of which particulars can be proved) yet, little or nothing
considerable, is or ever was performed, to such pious uses as are pretended, or
were intended. For, by their own Canons (or, by such as they approve of, and
will be conformable unto, when it may be for their personal advantages) there
is but a third part of their yearly Profits due to them. One third is by those
Canons to be employed in maintaining their Cathedral-Churches and
dwelling-Houses, with the services and necessaries to them belonging: Another
third, is to be for relief of the Poor and Strangers; and a charitable Bishop
of York, (as the Remonstrant remembers) was so far from the mind of our
Prelates in these days, that to relieve the Poor in a time of Famine, he sold
away most part of the Utensils and Ornaments of the Churches in his Diocese. A
third part only, of the Revenues of the Cathedrals and Prelates, was to have
been made use of for themselves and their Families, which has nigh quite
swallowed up the other two parts: For, it is well enough remembered, how ruinous
many of their Edifices were, before the beginning of the late war, and how
slovenly kept in some places: It is also well known, that the Poor were usually
relieved with little more then the scraps of their superfluities; and that the
Strangers by them entertained, during the days of their Residency, were but
their fellow Prebends, their kindred, their familiars, and now and then a bold
Guest, who had no need of their Hospitality; and why should many honest men,
more serviceable then they, be starved or beggared, by being deprived of what
they bought of the Nations Representative; that such large Revenues might be
shared by a few, and consumed to so little purpose? With what confusion of
face, will these pretenders to Piety and Hospitality appear, when Christ Jesus,
personated in this life by their Conscience; or, when he shall hereafter in his
own person, say unto such, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity: For, having
large Patrimonies entrusted with you, to supply the wants of the members of his
mystical body, they neither fed him, when he was hungry, except with stones and
Scorpions, instead of bread and fish; nor gave him drink when thirsty, except
mingled with Vinegar and Gall; nor clothed him when naked, but only with
superstitious rags, or else Robes impurpled with his own blood; Nor housed him
when harbourless, except in a prison, because he approved not of their
Vanities, Avarice and Ambition.

This Remonstrant, is not so cruel to Beasts nourished out of curiosity, and
for men's pleasures only, as to starve them when they are bred; much less that
men unprofitably employed at the Public cost, should be left destitute of a
competent subsistence, when that abuse is reformed; nor ought such in his
judgment to enjoy more then a just competency, much less ten times more then
better deserving persons. All the whole Hierarchy of this Nation (as this
Remonstrant is informed) does not consist of a much greater number, then those
Prophets of whom Jezebel fed four hundred every day from her table; if so many
of those now in being, shall enjoy a plurality of Prebendaries, Parsonages,
Vicaridges and Spiritual promotions, as did heretofore: For, some had two or
three Dignitaries, some more; and it the Hexameter of this well known Distich
be a true memorial of it, one of them had five beside his Income by Usury; (For
the Pentameter concerned him not.)

Usury, St. Dunstans, Paul's, Windsor, Salsbury, Christ-Church,
Bristol, Westchester, Banbury, Bangor, Asaph.
The Impropriations only, formerly belonging to the Prelates, (which are all
nigh out of Lease) are worth yearly (as this Remonstrant is credibly informed)
an hundred forty and two thousand pounds. The Parsonages and Vicaridges, which
beside their Cathedral Dignitaries, the Deans, Prebends, Archdeacons, and some
of the Bishops had in Commendam, being no Parsonages or Vicaridges of the least
value, (if they have pluralities as formerly) may be worth to each individual
person, between two and three hundred pounds per an. at least, one with
another; to which being added the Profits of their Spirtual Functions and
Jurisdictions, and their Temporalities now repossessed with vast improvements,
will probably amount to above a thousand pound yearly, for every individual
Prelate. And what a barbarous cruelty were it, under color of a Mock-Piety, to
destroy many Families, for the superfluous enriching of every one of these? To
starve a whole Hive of Bees, to feed a single Drone? and peradventure, to the
occasioning of that, which may draw after it a worse consequent. For, these (as
the Remonstrant believes) are one kind of those Locusts which came out of the
smoke of the Bottomless Pit, and were in part driven hence about the end of the
last hundredth year, as a noysom pest. Therefore, this Remonstrant hopes, that
you whom it concerns, will consider how imprudent an Act it will be thought by
unbyassed men, in this and future generations, needlessly to hazard the
confusions, despairations, exasperations, and destruction of so many thousands
of Families as may be impoverished, to the impoverishing of as many thousands
more by their poverty, if the sale of Cathedral Lands should be made void to
the said Purchasers, for the superfluous enriching of an inconsiderable number
of useless persons; and for the pleasing of a few, whose Claim and Interest
dies with their persons, to the discontent of many whose right will never die,
but still revive, and continue for ever in their heirs; yea, and to do it
contrary to Laws and Presidents, for confirmation of the like sales, judged
agreeable to Justice and Equity, by Princes, Parliaments, and other grave
Councils, upon mature deliberation: And it is hoped also, if (as report goes)
the Prelates intend out of their vast Fines and Rents, to raise and maintain
two Regiments of Horse in the Kings service, to be continued by his favor in
that which they repossess; it will be perceived, that they would but stick him
down a feather, in lieu of the Goose which they have gotten: For, the Incomes
of two of their Cathedral Revenues, will yearly defray that expense, and leave
those Proprietors of them, more then ever they heretofore possessed: And
perhaps the King will take notice also, that (if it tend not to the beginning
of another Prelatical war) it is at best offered but to make such a diversion
for the present, as anciently succeeded, when to prevent the intention that
former Parliaments had to take away their large Possessions for Public Use;
they then offered to their Kings a contribution, toward the recovering their
right in France, or toward regaining of the Holy Land, (as they called it)
which tended only to their own advantage, though respect to them was thereby
pretended.

This Remonstrant could allege much more, which is of Public concernment,
both in reference to what is last mentioned, and to the Publick-Faith; but, the
times will not bear it: much Reason, as well as much Learning, would make some
to grow mad; and it were imprudence to express more then can be born, to the
rendering of that less effectual which is expressed. He had lived 36. years,
when the last great Pestilence broke in, whereof he was a Remembrance to this
Nation; and having survived since that time 36. years more, has seen enough to
give him cause to fear, that a worse infection is beginning; which if GOD's
extraordinary mercy prevents it not (by shortning those days for his Elects
sake) may continue at least 36. years together; even a Spiritual Pestilence,
intermixed with many natural Plagues and Distempers: For, some have begun to
make way for it, by endeavoring how they may divert us, from heeding the True
Antichrist, and to draw this Generation, to look after a new Antichrist, by
ridiculously confining him, and the two witnesses, to persons, fraternities and
places, which neither consist with those Terms, Qualifications, Transactions,
Powers, civil Death and Reviving, which do manifest them, according to what is
revealed in GOD's Word; nor with that universal Relation which they have to the
Catholic Church, and to the overthrow of the enemies thereof; as will appear
when that impudence is more evident; and when to see her delusions, and to hate
and prosecute the WHORE, GOD shall put it into the heart of that King, with
whom the tenth part of the mysterious Babylon shall fall from her.

As for that scarecrow of a pretended Sacrilege, wherewith fools only are
affrighted, and with which the Prelates ignorantly (if not impudently) charged
as well many preceding Kings, Parliamenes, and persons of Honor and Integrity,
as the late Purchasers of Cathedral Lands, it will shortly appear so ridiculous
a Bugbear, that the Publishers of that fancy, will be ashamed (if they have
any shame) to hope they shall be able to persuade his Majesty, and this Nation,
that alienating of their Prelatical possessions from the Church (as they call
their Corporations) is the sin of Sacrilege. For, this Remonstrant is so
confident on his part, of the contrary, that if the Prelate who claims that
which he has Purchased, will thereupon hazard but half the value in other
lands, and allow him but as competent and wise Judges in the Case, as the
Parliament of England, and the Pope of Rome were in Queen Mary's days (when
the like Sales were questioned) the said Remonstrant, if judgment pass against
him, will resign all that he has Purchased of the said Lands for a farthing:
Or if that all the Prelates be able to prove his said Purchase Sacrilege; or
if he be not able to prove that many Prelates who now or heretofore possessed
such Lands, as aforesaid, by color of a divine Right, did not more
sacrilegiously get them, enjoy them, and dispose of them, then the late
Purchasers, (to wit) when they alienated them for 99. years, to bribe
themselves into a Deanary or Bishopric, or when they conferred them in Fee, or
by Lease to their Kindred, Minions or Concubines. Much more might be added to
evidence these things, and to vindicate those from aspersion, who have bought
the said Prelates Lands, or alienated them by Public Authority; but since I
had written that which precedes, I had view of a Printed sheet, composed by a
learned and judicious Author, and entitled, An Apology for Purchasers of
Lands, late of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, wherein so much is alleged to
justify the alienation of Sales, and Purchases of Lands belonging to
Ecclesiastical persons, and that estates granted by Parliament, as aforesaid,
ought by Reason, Law and Presidents to be made valid: that I might have spared
this Remonstrance, if I had not known by long experience, that men who are
sleepy, (or very busy in serious prosecutions tending to their own profit or
pleasure) will seldom heed or hear Reason, until awakened by some unusual noise.

It appears then by the Premises, that the Purchasers of Lands belonging
heretofore to the Prelates, may have a satisfactory proportion of the said
Lands, and yet leave enough to be an honorable maintenance for Bishops,
regulated according to their Primitive Institution: and that they who had debts
secured by Ordinances or Orders of Parliament upon the Publick-Faith, and such
as Purchased the estates of the King, Queen, Prince, or of them whose estates
were sold to pay Public debts, for adhering to the King, must be satisfied by
some other Expedient, to prevent those mischiefs which may else befall to the
disturbance of Common Peace, by discontenting the one Party or the other: For
indeed, till there be a mutual forgiveness, as aforesaid, and such a
contrivement, that every man may possess his own, we in vain shall otherwise
endeavor, for a settled peace.

Now, to complete the satisfaction desired, there are many hundred thousand
Acres in this Kingdom, in Forests, Chases, and other waste grounds, which
being divided betwixt Lords and Tenants, reserving a portion out of their
proportions, would amount (with a little contribution out of their estates, who
have no Interest in those Lands, that all might help to bear the burden) not
only sufficiently to discharge all Public debts aforementioned, and to give a
competent allowance to the remaining Purchasers; but advance such an
improvement also, in corn, grass, cattle, wood, and timber, for fireing,
building of Ships, and houses, in time to come, (as provision may be made in
Parliament) that might yearly feed a million more of people, increase Trade,
supply other defects, produce many conveniences, and prevent not a few
mischiefs: For, that Land which is not worth sixpence by the acre yearly,
would be improved to five shillings per annum, that of five shillings to ten,
that of ten to twenty, and some to much more; and, by that means, likewise, one
of those previous signs of that righteous Government, specified in the
Remonstrants BRITAINS-GENIUS long since published, might perhaps be thereby
eminently fulfilled (to wit) that,

-- Oxen of the largest Northern breed
Should fatted be, where Sheep now scarcely feed.
This Expedient would be justly offensive to none (as our case now stands) but,
to men of corrupt principles, and such as neither know nor understand the true
Interest which Public or private persons have in such lands; or, who are not
willing to lose those opportunities, which they have by the near situation of
their dwellings, to take wholly to their own use, what belongs in a larger
measure to other men, living at a farther distance: Or, it may be some poor
people unlawfully intruding upon those wastes, having erected Cottages upon
them, to the wrong of their neighbors, will complain thereof: But, it will be
without just cause, since they may be better provided for by such a division,
both for their own and the Public welfare, out of those Lands. For, the most
part of those poor people who have so entrenched upon the right of other men,
to the impoverishing of many Parishes, are very wicked and dissolute persons,
living upon pillfering and stealing, or keeping unlicensed Alehouses in blind
corners, wherein is more idleness, drunkenness, and profaneness, by night and
by day, (especially on the Lords day) then can be imagined by those who have
not seen it. Also, a small starvling breed of Jades, and of other unserviceable
and improveable cattle, eats up yearly many large Commons, without any
advantage comparatively considerable, with that which might be raised by their
improvement. The making of Barren Lands fruitful is a temporal blessing, which
may be preparatory for a Spiritual Mercy, and a cure of that Curse which is
imposed, by making a fruitful Land barren, for the sins of the people that
dwell therein. The Forests and Chases, (though many have now almost forgotten
it) were heretofore one of the greatest Oppressions in this Kingdom; and being
settled, either by Laws, or by Customs equivalent to Law, may quickly be
revived. Beasts and Beastlike men (such as professed Hunters, Falkners and
Keepers have been for the most part) had well near the sole benefit of those
Forests and Chases, which were replenished with game. The King received no
profit by them, and not much pleasure for which he paid not yearly, more then
it was worth; and his Subjects were so misused and tyrannized over by his
Officers, that many Gentlemen and others were enforced to forsake their
habitations in and about those Forests and Chases, to prevent undoing, or
avoid their unsufferable insolences: And it would be a double mercy, if by now
sacrificing them to Justice, occasion of the like tyranny for the future might
be taken away, and the Publick-Faith vindicated from scandal and violation, by
satisfying for the remainder of lands sold as aforesaid, and for those debts
whereunto this Nation is liable both in Justice and Conscience. And the
Remonstrant humbly prays, that by your mediation who are in authority, it may
speedily be endeavored, unless the Wisdom of this Generation can find out a
better Expedient: For, as it was said heretofore, Jerem. 21. v. 12. to the
house of the King of Judah, so, says this Remonstrant, Hear the Word of the
LORD, Oh King and People of England, Thus says the LORD, Execute Judgment in
the morning, (that is, as soon as the cry of oppression comes to your ears, and
power into your hands) and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the
Oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it,
because of the evil of your doings. Do Justice, that you may find Mercy, and do
not frustrate the prayers of distressed Suppliants, as did they whom GOD has
made exemplary for their failings; nor let all the fore-warnings of your
Remembrancer be still in vain, but give ear Oh regardless Generation, to what
is timely hereby expressed relating to your welfare.

This Remonstrant, will now add for a Corollary, to what has been hereby
offered to consideration, two exemplary executions of GOD's Judgments, for
Oppression and Injustice; and one pattern of righteousness in an Ethnic Prince
in times of old, with two or three presidents out of antiquity, warranting that
freedom which he has assumed to express his mind so plainly at this time, and
then conclude. One of those monitory examples, shall be that prodigious
Judgment recorded in holy Scripture, to have been executed upon Sodom and
Gomorrah, whose sins were Pride, Idleness, fullness of bread, and not
strengthening the hand of the needy, for which God having visited them with a
war, as these Nations have been, and delivered them by the hand of Abraham for
Lots sake, whom he providentially sent to dwell among them, to be both by his
counsel and life, a means to bring them to repentance: They neglecting to
improve those mercies, and continuing in their sins, GOD in a fair Sun-shining
morning, after they had spent the preceding night in prosecuting their
abominable Lusts, suddenly destroyed them by a most prodigious sulphurous fire
descending from heaven, to be an everlasting memorial of his wrath against
obstinate impenitent sinners; which is so well known, that it needs no further
illustration. The other shall be an example no less prodigious, commemorated in
Ethnic History, which the Author declared in words to this effect.

In the year of Rome, 720. and in the 43. year of the age of Marcus Aurelius,
upon the twentieth day of August, about Sunset, at Palermo a Seaport in the
Isle of Sicily, there chanced a thing perilous to them who then saw it, and no
less dreadful to those who heard of it afterward. Whilst they of Palermo were
celebrating a great Feast with much joy, for the great spoils which they had
taken at Sea from the Numidians, and which the Pirates purposed to divide among
them, they were partly prevented by the Magistrates and partly by the said
accident: For, when the people were returned to their houses, there appeared in
the City a dreadful monster in this form; he seemed to be of the length of
three cubits, his head was bald, so that his skull did appear; he had no ears,
but two holes in his neck, whereby it was supposed, he heard; he had two
wreathen horns like a Goat, his right arm was longer then his left, and his
hands were like the hoofs of horses, his shoulders and his head were both of
one height, his shoulders shined like the scales of a fish, his breast was
hairie, his face in all things like unto a man, save that he had but one eye in
the midst of his forehead, and but one nostril; From the middle downward,
nothing could be seen, because he sat in a Chariot which concealed it; the
Chariot was in fashion like other Chariots then used, and drawn with four
beasts; two Lions before, and two Bears behind. Within the Chariot stood a
great Caldron with ears, wherein this monster sat: It wandered a great space
through the City, from one gate to another, casting out sparks of fire; which
caused so great a fear throughout the City, that women with child miscarried,
and some died outright with fear: Men and women, great and small, ran to the
Temples of Jupiter, Mars, and Februa, making importunate prayers, with sad
cries. At the same time the Pirates were in the Governors Palace, whose name
was Solyno, born at Copua, and in that Palace the spoils being kept, thither
the Monster came, after it had wandered through the City, and cutting off one of
the Lions ears, wrote with the blood thereof, upon the Palace gate, these
Letters, R. A. S. V. P. I. P. P. These Letters were diversely interpreted, so
that the Interpretations were more then the Letters. But in the end, a
Prophetess greatly esteemed for her science, opened the true meaning of the
Letters, saying, R. signifies Reddite, A. aliena, S. si, V. vultis, P.
propria, I. in, P. pace, P. possidere, which words altogether, make up this
sense, Reddite aliena si vultis propria possidere in pace Render to other men
that which belongs to them, if you will possess in peace that which is your
own. The Pirates were wonderfully afraid of this command, and the woman highly
commended for her exposition (but the injunction was not obeyed.) The Monster
went the same night out of the City, unto an high hill named Jamicia, and there
continued three days within sight of the City, the Lions and Bears terribly
roaring, and the Monster casting forth flames; during all which time, there was
neither bird seen in the air, nor beast in the field near that place, and the
people offered great sacrifices to the gods, yea their own blood, to appease
their wrath. Three days being passed, there appeared in the Element a
mavelous dark cloud, seeming to darken the whole earth, and then it began to
thunder and lighten so terribly, that many men died, and diverse houses fell to
the ground; and at last there came such a flame of fire from the Monster, that
it burnt both the Palace where the Pirates were, and all that was therein,
consuming the very stones thereof; yea the tempest was so great, that there
fell above two thousand houses, and more then ten thousand persons died in the
Tempest. In that place where the Monster stood upon the said hill, the Emperor
built a sumptuous Temple to Jupiter in memorial thereof, of which Temple
Alexander the Emperor made afterward a strong Castle. This is taken out of the
Epistles of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor.

Thus you have an evidence of two witnesses, one of divine credit, and the
other recorded by one of greatest fame among heathen Philosophers and
Emperors, to show how dangerous it is to neglect Justice, and not to render
unto every man his own, when God requires it to be done.

Also, how honorable it is for Kings and States to do righteous things, and
how necessary and warrantable it is, both for men oppressed, and others thereto
conscientiously moved, in such times and cases as many are in at this present,
to speak truth plainly and boldly, even to the highest Powers on earth, this
that follows may illustrate. A testimonial of the first, tending to stir up
Princes and States to be ambitious of the like glorious virtues, is taken out
of an Epistle of the same Emperor, written to Antigonus.

In the twentieth year of my age, I lay (says he) during the Winter season, in
the Isle of Cheten, which now is called Cyprus, where in former time lived a
King, greatly renowned for Clemency and other Heroic virtues, and who lay
there buried under four Pillars within a Tomb, whereon was engraven in Greek
Letters, without the addition of his name, (which indeed (says my Author) I
could not learn from any one) an Epitaph to this effect,

Whilst, by the permission of the gods, I here lived and reigned, my endeavor
was to nourish Peace, and prevent Discord. I desired nothing, but what might be
virtuously obtained, without any vicious practices, and what I could acquire by
a peaceable means, I never sought to obtain by war and force; or to procure
that by rigor, which might possibly be gotten by mildness: I never openly
reprooved any man, before I had first admonished him in secret; neither
delighted in flatterers, but hated and abhorred lying, both in my self and
others: I coveted nothing that was another man's; but, was content with what was
justly mine own; spent not prodigally, nor spared nigardly; nor ever deserted
any friend in his Adversity. I delighted more to forgive, then to revenge; and
punished not the greatest offenders, but with compassion, and much sorrow in
mine own heart. Being born of a woman, I was to be subject to the condition of
mortals, and dying, was laid here, to be meat for worms as other men are; and
having endeavored to live a virtuous life, did willingly resign my Sovereignty
to Death, and my Spirit to the Gods who gave it.

How think thou Antigonus? (said the Author) What an Epitaph was this? How
glorious was his life, how eternal deserves his memory to be? I swear unto
thee by the Law of a good man, and as the gods may prosper me, I took not so
much pleasure in Pompey with his Jerusalem, in Semeramis with her India, in
King Cyrus with his Babylon, in Cajus Caesar with his Gauls, nor in Scipio
with his Africa, as I do with this King of Cyprus in his grave: For more glory
bath that King there in that sharp Mountain being dead, then all these, and all
those in proud Rome, who are now alive.

Now, out of many approved presidents justifying, by the acceptance they had,
the just freedom which men oppressed may challenge, in plainly and boldly
declaring their grievances and oppressions to the greatest Potentates of the
world, I have chosen two, the first of a Jew, and the other of a German, both
which came to Rome, to complain unto the Senate there, on the behalf of
themselves and Countrymen, oppressed by the Romans. Their speeches being long,
I will here Epitomize; and first, that of the Jew, spoken to the Roman Senate,
the third year after Pompey sacked Jerusalem, and whilst Valerius Gracchus
governed Judea.

Fathers Conscript, Your good fortune permitting it, or to say better, we for
saking God, Jerusalem which was Lady of all the Cities in Asia, and Mother of
all the Hebrews in Palestine* is now servant and tributary to Rome: whereat we
Jews need not to marvel, nor ye Romans to be proud thereof; for the highest
trees are soonest blown down by violent winds. Great were those Armies whereby
Pompey vanquished us, but greater have our offenses been, for which we were
forsaken of GOD. I would have you to hear by words, but rather to know it by
experience, that we have a merciful God, who can do more alone, then all your
Gods together, and who shows compassion, though among fifty thousand there be
but ten good men: They are our great offenses only, which have made you to be
Lords over us; and not your Power or Virtues. For, whilst we agreed in the
Unity of Faith in one only God, he prospered us; and so long as the wrath of
God is upon us for our sins, so long shall you be Lords over us, and no longer.
Then shall we recover what we have lost, and ye shall lose what you have won:
And as we are now Commanded, so shall we be then Obeyed; but at present, and
whilst we are swayed one way, and ye another, neither can you incline me to
the worship of your Gods, neither shall I be able to draw you to believe only
in in that one God, the Creator of all things, to whom I refer the disposing of
all things. Touching that which I have chiefly to say, Know you, that in times
past, Rome had peace with Judea, and Judea with Rome; and being friends,
preserved each other in peace; but now it is otherwise, and whilst we sigh for
peace, we see, you make preparations for war; whereas, if you would expel
those who bear us evil will, and we could know and take heed of them who
provoke us to rebel, neither should Rome so much oppress Judea, nor Judea hate
Rome. Friendship is lost, not so much for the interest of the one or other, as
by their indiscretion who pretend to be Mediators; for if they who take upon
them that office, be greater enemies then those between whom a war is begun,
they do but cast wood into that fire, which they should quench with water.
Since the banishment of Archelaus from Judea, in whose place you sent unto us,
Pomponius, Marcus, Rufus, and Valerius, we have had four Plagues, the least
whereof was sufficient to poison all Rome. What greater calamity could happen
unto us, then to have Judges sent from Rome, who took up all the evil, customs
of wicked men, and were themselves Inventors of new Vices? And when they, who
ought to punish the lightness of youth, are the Ringleaders of Levity? It is
openly said in Asia, that the Thieves of Rome, do hang the Thieves of Jewry:
and I must plainly tell you, we fear not the Thieves which rob us in the woods,
so much as those Judges who spoil us in our houses. We dread not Robbers on the
highway, nor those who make open war upon us, nor the Plague of Pestilence
half so much, as your corrupt Judges. To that, which is here heard in the
Senate, and not seen with us, you give more credit, though reported by one who
has been but three Months in the Province, then to that which is reported by
many who have governed thirty years. Consider ye Senators, that if ye were
advanced to this dignity because you were the wisest, the most honest, and
moderate among the people, it would appear in your being so just and virtuous,
as not to believe all you hear since you have to do with many of diverse
Nations, whose ends and intentions are variable. I speak the truth unto you,
your Judges have done so much injustice, and shown such ill examples, that they
have taught the youth of Judea, those vices which our Fathers never heard of,
nor we ever saw or read of before: And ye being mighty, and reputed noble,
disdain to take counsel of men that be poor, as if to know much, and to have
little wealth or esteem, were never found together. As ye have given counsel to
us, so be pleased to take counsel from us, and know, that though your Captains
have won many Realms by shedding blood, the way to keep them, is by clemency
and mildness, without bloodshed; and therefore pray and advise your Judges,
whom ye send to govern strange Provinces, that they be more diligent to
preserve the Common peace, then to employ themselves in taking Fines and
Forfeitures, lest else, they slander you who send them, and destroy those whom
they should govern and protect: for the reason, why they are not justly obeyed,
is, because they command unjust things: Righteous impositions and just commands
make men humble and obedient, whereas unrighteous commands, make meek and
humble men obstinate and froward; and the more evil things are commanded, the
less good things are obeyed, when such persons enjoin them. Believe this, Oh ye
Romans, that from the levity of those in Authority, springs the shamelesness
and disobedience of the People. The Prince, who imposes Government upon those
whom he knows not to be qualified for such a trust, intends not so much
that they should do Justice to his People, as that they should increase his
treasure and serve his lusts; but let him be well assured, that when he least
thinks of it, his honor and credit will be turned into infamy, his treasure
consumed, and some notable vengeance fall upon him or his posterity. I having
other matters to speak of in secret, will here conclude, with this advice, that
ye keep us and our Country in safety; (for which you have hazzarded your
selves) and that ye do Justice impartially, for then we shall reverence your
commands. Be merciful, and we shall be meek; be not cruel in punishing our
weakness, and we shall willingly obey your just commands; Command not with
proud severity, and you shall find in us the Love which Fathers may expect from
children, and not that treason, which oppressive Lords usually find in their
servants.

These words, though bold and sharp, were (as the Author says) heard with
admiration and approbation of all the Roman Senate.

The other speech which I will here make use of, was reported by Marcus
Aurelius to have been spoken in the Senate of Rome, in the first year of his
Consulship, by a poor Countryman, living near the River Danubius, who came to
ask Justice of the said Senate, against a Censor who sorely oppressed the
Germans: This Rustic was in outward appearance, in some respects, more
contemptible then this Remonstrant: For, he is described to have been a man who
had a small face, great lips, hollow eyes, of a Sunburned complexion, having
curled hair on his head, and a long thick beard; his raiment and coat was of
beasts skins, his shoes of Porcupine-leather, his girdle of Bull-rushes, his
head bare, and a club in his hand: In this equippage he entered the Senate,
whereon though many persons were there attending to have their affairs
dispatched, this poor man was admitted before all others, and spoke in this
manner.

Oh Fathers conscript, I Mileno a Plowman, dwelling near the River Danubius,
salute you worthy Senators of Rome, beseeching the immortal Gods so to govern
my tongue this day, that I may speak that which may be for the welfare of my
Country, and incline you to do that which may be for the Public honor of
this Empire, for without the help of GOD, we can neither obtain that which is
good, nor avoid what is evil. By divine permission, and our wrathful GOD's
forsaking us, such was our evil, and your good hap, that your proud Captains of
Rome, took our Country of Germany by force of Arms; of which ye had been
prevented, if we had timely appeased the wrath of God. Great is the glory you
have achieved by your Conquests; but greater will be your Infamy, by the
Cruelties which you have committed: For you shall know, (if you know it not)
that when the wicked Victors went before the triumphant Chariots crying, Live,
Live, invincible Rome; the poor Captives walked after, saying in their hearts,
Justice, Justice. Give me leave to speak plainly, your covetousness, Oh ye
Romans, in taking away other men's goods, has been so extreme, and your
commands in strange Countries have been so extravagant, that neither the depths
of the Seas can suffice you, nor the wideness of the earth secure us; and there
is no other consolation left us in our troubles, but our hope that the Gods who
are just, will execute Justice on those who are unjust; which assurance being
wanting, we should with our own hands destroy our selves, to avoid the
inhumanity of our enemies: But, I hope in the just Gods, that you, who without
just cause, have cast us out of our houses and possessions, shall by them be
cast out, both of Italy and Rome. In my Country, we take it for an infallible
Rule, That he who takes from another man his right, ought in reason to lose
his own; and I trust, that what we have for a Proverb in Germany, you shall
have here by experience. By my blunt language, and by the homely apparel that
I wear, you may well imagine me some rude and barbarous Groom: Yet, I want not
reason to know who is righteous in keeping his own, and who a tyrant in
possessing what is another man's: For though we plain Countrymen cannot speak
eloquently, we are not ignorant of the difference between good and evil, or
that the Gods will take away in one hour, what Tyrants have been gathering many
days, and restore in one minute, that which good men have lost many years.
Believe me, Ob Romans, Goods unlawfully gotten by the Fathers, are the undoing
of their Children; and it is impossible, that a wise man should find any
contentment, in that which is gained unlawfully, and with an ill conscience. I
wonder how he that keeps another man's goods, can sleep or rest one hour,
knowing he has done injury to the Gods, scandalized his neighbor, pleased his
enemies, lost his friends, and put his person in peril, by endamaging those
whom he has robbed. He that takes away my goods unjustly, will the same day
take away my life if he can. I say and affirm (not caring whether he be Greek,
Barbarian, Roman, present or absent, who shall be offended thereat) that he is
and shall be accursed of the Gods, and hated of men; who will turn a good fame
to an infamy, Justice into Wrong, Rule into Tyranny, Truth into Lies,
certainties into things doubtful, and destory his own happiness, by depriving
other men of their contentment. You Romans are naturally proud, and your pride
blinds you, or else you would perceive, that being Lords of great Provinces,
you are slaves to your own Riches; and that they both deprive you of your
honor, contentment and rest. Hearken to what I shall say, and I beseech the
Gods to make you so understand it, that I lose not my labor. I hear all the
world exclaim against Pride, and yet none embrace Humility; every man condemns
Adultery, yet I see few who live Chastely; most men curse Excess, yet I perceive
not any who is Temprate; all men praise Patience, yet none will patiently
suffer; They blame sloth, yet spend their time in idleness; All exclaim against
Avarice, nevertheless every one robs his neighbor; and I speak it here
openly in the Senate, not without grief, every man's tongue extolleth Virtue,
yet they enslave all their members to Vice; and this I object not against those
Romans which are in Iliria alone, but against those also which I see here in
this Senate. In your Houses, and about your Arms, you have this Motto,
Romanorum est debellare superbos, and parcere subjectis; but, you might more
truly have written, Romanorum est spoliare Innocents, and reddere subjectos.

What just occasion brought you from the banks of Tiber, to invade us who lived
peaceably nigh the River of Danuby? Were we friends to your foes, or enemies to
you? Did we go to conquer other Counrites, or were disobedient to our own
Lords? Did we either despise your friendship, or defy you as Adversaries? Did
any of our deceased Princes bequeath our Lands unto you as their heirs, thereby
entituling you to a rightful claiming us for your subjects? Have we destroyed
your Armies, wasted your Fields, spoiled your People, or done any outrage or
injury, which might provoke you to revenge? Of a truth, none of these, or of
any such occurences have happened, as usually give occasion of controversies
betwixt neighbors; but mere Covetousness and Ambition were sole causes of your
intrusions: For, in Germany, we felt your Tyranny, as soon as we heard of your
Fame. If you be offended with what I have said; be pleased with what I will
say; which is this, that the Name of Romans, and the Cruelties of Tyrants,
arrived together in one day upon our People. They who have much, do oppress
them who have little; Covetousness produces Malice, and Malice makes way to
open Robbery. I conjure you Romans, by the immortal Gods, to heed what I say,
and consider what you have done: For either the words of the Gods are not true,
or else men with their oppressions, and the world, must come to an end: Fortune
must fix a Pin in her wheel, or else that which you have gotten in eight years,
will possibly be lost in eight days; since nothing is more just, then that the
Gods should make you slaves, who have made your selves Tyrants. Do not think,
though you have subdued Germany, and are Lords thereof, that it was by your
warlike prowess: For, you are no more warlike, nor more courageous, nor more
able to endure hardship, then we Germans: But, we, as is aforesaid, provoked
the Gods to wrath, and they to punish our sins, have ordained that you should
be a scourge to our persons. You are not so strong, nor we so weak, that you
had enjoyed the spoil of our Country, if the Gods had favored us as much as
they did you: Therefore you obtained not the Victories by the weapons which you
brought from Rome, but by the Vices you found in Germany: We were not overrun
for being cowards, but for being wicked; and when your Vices are at full, and
the Gods as angry with you, as they are now with us, things will succeed better
on our behalf. Think not to be the more prosperous or victorious by your great
Armies or vast Treasures, or for that you have more potent Gods to assist you,
or because you build greater Temples, or offer larger Sacrifices: For know, if
you know it not, that none are more favored of the Gods, then they who execute
Justice and show Mercy. The triumphs of Conquerours are not achieved by
politic Generals, experienced Captains, valiant Soldiers, and numerous
Armies: For we have found by experience, that with all these concurring, they
can but begin a battle, and that then, the Gods themselves dispose of the
Victory: And if I am not deceived, the wrath of the Gods toward us, is so much
appeased since our sufferings, and so incensed against you for your cruelties
to us, and your unthankfulness to them; that, you who now esteem us to be your
slaves, may possibly hereafter acknowledge us to be your Lords.

In my travails hither, I have seen high Mountains, large Provinces, several
Nations, and barbarous People; and finding Rome to be so many miles distant
from Germany, I wonder what fond toy came into your heads, to send to conquer
it. If it were for desire of Treasure, I believe, ye spent more in subduing it,
then the Revenue of all our Country will amount to in many years, and yet may
perhaps also lose it, before you re-imburse what it cost. If it were glory,
that you aimed at, great is your vanity; for, little honor is it to have Forts
and Towns, where you have not the hearts of the People. If you did it to
enlarge your bounds; it became neither wise nor valiant men, to enlarge their
dominions, and diminish their honor. If you say, it was done, that we should
not be barbarous, but civilized according to your mode, I should be therewith
well contented: But, how can you give good Laws to strangers, who neglect and
break the best Laws made by your own Predecessors? With what credit can they
correct others, who deserve as much correction? How can the blind lead the
Lame? Why should the proud Romans subdue the innocent Germans? And since every
man is so corrupt, and so alienated from the love of God and Goodness, that
each takes what he can, and kills whom he lists, what remedy is like to
succeed, when neither they who govern will endeavor it, nor they who are
oppressed dare complain? Rulers are so hard to be entreated, and so little
regard poor men's grievances, that it is not more grievous to endure their
oppressions at home, then to come and exhibit their complaints here; because,
in their own Country, they have but one Persecutor, and in this place very
many; they being rich, and the Complainants poor. Rome, if she be the Mistress
of Germany, ought in equity to preserve us in peace by her Justice; Whereas
they who go from hence thither, despoyl us of our estates there, and they who
are here, rob us of our Good name, saying, we are a People without laws,
without Reason, without a King, and may as Barbarians be made your slaves: But,
in these slanders you are injurious, since we being as we are, and as the Gods
created us, remain peaceably in our own Countries, without desiring to invade
others, might more justly and rationally say, that you are men without Law or
Reason, in that not being contented with the sweetness and fertility of Italy,
you seek to conquer all the world by bloodshed. If you say, we deserve to be
slaves, because we have no Prince to command us, nor Senate to govern us, nor
Army to defend us; I thereto answer, that having no Enemies, we need no Armies;
that, being contented with our Lots, we wanted not a proud Senate to govern us;
and being all equals, had no necessity to be subjected to the humors of a
Prince, whose office duly executed, being to suppress Tyrants, and maintain the
People in Peace, we wanted not a person to be kept among us to either of these
ends; and, if you therefore say, we have in our Country no Commonwealth nor
Polity, but live as brute beasts in the Mountains; therein also you slander
as: For, in our Country, we suffer no Liers, nor Rebels, nor Thieves, nor
seditious persons, nor men who bring us fantastical apparel, or strange
Customs from other Clymates: But, are modest in our Raiment, temperate in our
meats and feeding, and needed no better behavior then our own. Though we have
not the Merchandises of Carthage, nor Oils of Mauritania, nor wares of Tire,
nor steel of Calabria, nor Odours of Asia, nor the Gold of Spain, nor the
silver of Britan, Amber of Sydonia, silk of Damascus, corn of Sicilia, wine of
Candy, or purple of Arabia: Yet, we have a Commonwealth, and are not brutish:
For, these, and such like things, yield more provocations to vice, then helps
toward a virtuous life. Blessed is that Commonwealth and Nation, not where
riches abound, but where Virtues are commanded, practiced, and improved; not
where light, proud, and froward persons inhabit and domineer, but where sober,
serious, prudent, and meek men reside; and therefore you may have cause to envy
our Poverty, and we to pity your condition in being Rich. Would God, you were
as well contented with your wealth, as we could have been with our Poverty
before your invasions; for then you had not robbed our Country, nor had we been
forced hither to complain, where our tears and complaints are not so much
regarded, as to effect a diminishment either of your pleasures, or of our
grievances.

You may think perhaps, I have no more to say; but it is not so; there yet
remains that to be spoken, which may astonish you; and I will not be afraid to
speak it, though you have not been ashamed to do it; for, open offenses, merit
not secret reproofs. I marvail, Romans, what ye mean, to send over unto us such
ignorant Governors, who (I swear by the immortal Gods) neither seem to know
your Laws, nor to understand ours! Ye send not those who are best able to
defend us by executing Justice, but, those who are best befriended in Rome; as
perhaps, you give to those of the Senate the office of Censors, more for favor
or importunity, then for desert. I can say little here, in respect of what they
do with us. What you authorize them to do, I know not, but what they do, is too
well known unto me. All bribes that are brought unto them, they take openly,
and share and poll us all in secret, to the utmost of their power. They punish
the faults of poor men, and connive at rich men's transgressions, that they may
take occasion and encouragement to commit greater; and whereas they should use
means to diminish reproach and slanders, they increase them. To demand Justice
without a bribe, is the certain course not to obtain it. Will your Tyranny and
Avarice never have an end? Though you wrong us in words, oppress us not also in
deeds. Our bodies are able to bear those irons with which you load us; but the
Tributes and Taxes which you impose, are greater then we can sustain. If
nothing will content you, but all that we have in Germany, go thither and take
it, for we affect not, as you do, to live poorly, that we may die rich, and to
deprive our selves of contentment during life, that others may squander away
our superfluities when we are dead. If our service content you not, strike off
our heads: for your swords are not so dreadful to our eyes, as your tyrannies
are abominable to our hearts. Do ye know, Oh Romans, what you have done? if
not, I will tell you: Verily, you have caused many of us to swear, that we will
forbear to cohabit with our wives, and slay our children as soon as born,
rather then leave them in the hands of such wicked and inhumane Tyrants as ye
are: Yea, we determine as desperate men, to resist the natural motions of the
flesh all our life time, rather then get our wives with child: thinking it
better to restrain our lusting twenty or thirty years, then to leave our
posterity to be your perpetual slaves. But, to what end is this complaining?
Perhaps you will sometimes hear us, as now you hear me; but when you have heard
us, you will be still slow in relieving. I will tell you some of those things
which I have observed, that you may reform them. If a poor man come to complain
and demand Justice, if he has no money to give, nor Wine or Oil to promise,
nor a Revenue to maintain his expenses nor Friends to mediate for him; then
after he has declared his grievances; you, for awhile, give him fair words,
seem to pity his sufferings, and promise him speedy relief. But in the mean
time make him totally spend that little which he had, and wast the best part of
his life in vain hopes and tedious prosecutions, without any effect at all to
his profit: Yea, on the contrary, they who at first promised him favors, do at
last join hands with his oppressors, and quite undo him. Most say in the
beginning, his cause is good, yet though upon his trial they find it so proved,
they give sentence against him at the last; so that he who came at first hither
to complain against one, returns home complaining against many, yea against
all, and crying out to the immortal Gods for vengeance.

I will declare unto you my life, Oh Romans, that ye may understand, how we now
live and subsist in my Country: I get my livelihood by gathering Acorns in the
Winter, by Fruits in the Summer, and reaping Corn: Sometimes I fish, both for
pleasure, and to supply necessaries, spending most part of my time alone in
Woods, Fields and Mountains, because I would not behold the outrages which are
perpetrated by your Officers in our Country; whose oppressions, if I could
fully declare them, would appear so many and so heinous, that either they would
be deprived of their Employments, or my punishment would certainly ensue. But
what good success can I hope for? When I consider the things which I have seen
within these fifteen days now passed away since my arrival in Rome; where such
things have been committed, that if they had been done in Germany, the Gallows
and Gibbets had worthily hung as thick with malefactors, as Vines with clusters
of Grapes? For, I have observed, (beside other things observable) such
immodesty in apparel, such intemperance in your feeding, and such disorder in
your lives and affairs, that having beheld as much as I desired: and my heart
being at rest, by spitting out that poison which was in it, I am ready to make
recompense for it with my head, if I have offended, etc.

This, and somewhat more, which for brevity sake I omitted, was spoken in this
bold manner, by a person as contemptible as this Remonstrant (to a greater and
a more absolute Power then we live under) on the behalf of himself and
Countrymen, who were thereby oppressed, and, who, though reputed the greatest
Tyrants of the world, were not so Tyrannous, as to be enraged by his
upbraidings and bold expressions, whom oppression had exasperated: For, we find
it attested by that famous Emperor, who occasionally related this Speech, that
it was highly approved, both by the whole Senate and by him, as well becoming
the Speaker, in such a case; yea, notwithstanding the tartness thereof. His
testimonial after he had said much in praise of this Oration, to those unto
whom he declared it, was delivered in words to this effect: By the faith of a
good man (said he) I saw this German stand boldly on his feet, and undismayed a
whole hour, whilst all we in the Senate sat beholding the earth with shame,
not able to answer him one word; because indeed he had astonished us, to see
the little regard he had of his life. But, the Senate agreed altogether, (said
he) the next day to send new Governors and Judges into Germany; commanded him
to deliver unto us in writing all that he had said, to be registered among the
good sayings of strangers; made him a Freeman of Rome; chose him to be a
Senator, and appointed him a maintenance out of the common Treasury. By this,
it appears, that there is a way, whereby a prudent Senate, or Supreme
Authority, may advance their honor, if they please, by hearing with patience
and good acceptance, those bold and free speakings, tending to the execution
of Justice, which Fools mis-interpret as scandalous, and tending to their
dishonor or disadvantage. And the Remonstrant has made use of these Ethnic
precedents and testimonies, that they who profess Christianity, may be the more
ashamed, to hear that Heathens and mere natural men should surpass them in
generousness, in zeal to Justice, and in compassionately permitting grieved
Supplicants boldly, plainly and openly, to signify their grievances, and
particularize their Oppressors, if need be, not only without blame, but also,
with Approbation, Remedy and Reward.

Here, this Remonstrant, purposed to conclude: But, as many times, he knows
neither when he shall begin to write, nor what he shall write until he has
begun: So, be knows not sometimes when he shall make an end, until he has
done. Whilst he was transcribing what is last added, Providence offered to his
view an Epistle written by Marcus Aurelius, then Censor, to his friend
Catullus, concerning the news which was at that time in Rome: Which
comprehends so many particulars pertinent to our consideration at this
present, and which have such resemblances to occurrences in this our
generation, that he could not omit it: Therefore, it is here epitomized in
these words, preserving the true genuine sense of that Epistle.

Marcus the new Censor, to Catullus now aged, sends greeting. Ten days past
I received thy Letter in the Temple of Janus, whom I take to witness, that I
had rather have seen thy person. Thou desire my Letters may be long, but
shortness of time, compells me to make them shorter then I would. To answer thy
expectation of knowing what news is now here, I shall not be so able as I could
have been, if thou had desired to be informed, Whether any thing that was
good and old, is yet remaining here amongst us in Rome or Italy: For, by our
evil destiny, all that was good and old is ended, and new things which are
evil, do now begin to abound. The Emperor, the Consuls, the Tribunes, the
Senators, the Aediles, the Flamins, the Praetors, the Centurions, and almost
all things are new save the Virtues, which are grown obsolet. We pass the time
in making new Officers, in devising new Projects and Counsels, in raising new
Taxes, with such like; and there have been more novelties within four years,
then in four hundred heretofore. We now assemble three hundred to counsel in
the Capitol, and there we brag and boast, swear and promise, that we will
extol the Virtuous, subdue the Vicious, favor the Right, not wink at wrongs,
punish the evil, reward the good, repair the old, edify new, pluck Vices up by
the roots, plant Virtues, follow that which is good, reprove Tyrants, and
relieve the poor and oppressed: But, when we are gone from thence, they who
speak the best words, commit the worst deeds. The Senators pass away their time
in saying, We will do, We will do; but, every man seeks his own profit, and
forgets both private men's injuries, and the Weal-Publick. I often hear in the
Senate, much eloquence in words, fair shows of zeal to Justice, and much spoken
by many in justification of themselves; and when I come abroad, am ashamed to
see their evil works, with their cruel extortions, and find it to be very
frequent for them who commit the greatest crimes, to be most severe in giving
sentence against others for the same offenses. We behold our own faults in
mirrours which make them seem less, and other men's in multiplying-glasses,
making them appear greater. Oh! how many have I seen condemned by the Senate
for one fault committed but once in all their lifetime, when they themselves
commit the same fault, or worse, every hour! I read, that in the time of
Alexander the great, there was a famous Pirate called Dionides, who robbing all
Ships he could meet withal, Alexander set forth a great Navy to apprehend him,
which having taken him, and presented him to Alexander, that King said unto
him, Why Dionides, do thou spoil so on the Seas, that no Ship can sale in
safety for thee? The Pirate answered, If I spoil by Sea, why do thou spoil
both by Sea and Land? Oh Alexander, because I fight with one single Ship at
Sea, I am called a Pirate, and because thou robbest with two hundred Ships at
Sea, and troublest all the world with two hundred thousand men by Land, thou
art called an Emperor. I swear unto thee Alexander, if the Gods were so
favorable to me, as they are to thee, and so adverse to thee, as now they are
to me, and would give me thine Empire, and bestow on thee my little Ship,
peradventure I should be a better Emperor then thou art, and thou would be a
worse Pirate then I. This bold speech pleased Alexander so well, that he made
him General of a great Army; and he became more virtuous by Land, then he was
vicious by Sea. Now, in Italy, they who rob openly, are called LORDS, and they
who rob privately, are called Thieves.

I read in the Annals of Livy, that there came an Ambassador from Spain to
Rome, to treat of a Peace with the Romans, which Ambassador proved before the
Senate, that he had been robbed ten times of his goods, whilst he was at Rome,
and that he had seen one of those who robbed him, hang another who defended
him; and that seeing so wicked a deed, he took a coal, and wrote upon the
Gibbet these words. Oh Gibbet, thou art planted among thieves, art made by
thieves, and hanged full of innocents. The whole history wherein these words
are found, was written with black ink, and these words in Vermilion Letters.

I cannot tell what other news to send thee; but every thing here is so new and
tender, and joined with such ill Cement, that I fear all will shortly fall
suddenly in pieces. Some, are so hastily and so highly promoted, that I dare
assure thee rather of their Fall, then of their lives and firm standing. We
have already seen many, at whose rising we wondered, and as much marvelled at
their sudden fall. We have seen Cincius Fulvius, in one year made Consul, his
children Tribunes, his wife Matron to the Virgins, as also Keepress of the
Capitol, and after that, not in one year, but the same day, saw Cincius
beheaded in the place, his children drowned in Tiber, his wife banished, his
house rased to the ground, and all his goods confiscate to the Common Treasury;
and this rigorous example we have not read of in a Book, but seen with our
eyes, that we might the better mind it. Since I have begun, and thou art in a
strange Country, I will write all the news which is here. This year, the 25. of
May, an Ambassador came out of Asia, who considering it would be dangerous
sailing home in Winter; and seeing after long stay his business was not
dispatched, (being a man of a good courage, and zealous of his Countries
affairs) coming one day to the Senate, and seeing the Senators enter the
Capitol unarmed, as the custom is, laying aside their Arms, he spoke thus, in
presence of all the Senators. FATHERS CONSCRIPT, I am come to Rome from a far
Country, and have found Rome without Rome. The fame of the place brought me not
hither, but the renown of them who govern it. I came not to see that Exchequer
wherein the wealth of all Realms is treasured up, but the Sacred Senate, out of
which should issue counsel for all men: I came not to see you, because you were
Conquerors of other Nations, but, because I thought you were more virtuous then
all other. But, I dare say, except the Gods have made me blind, or taken away
my understanding, either you are not Romans of Rome, or this is not Rome of the
Romans your predecessors. We have heard that the Kingdoms conquered by their
valor, were conserved by the wisdom of this Senate; but methinks you are more
likely to lose, then to keep what your Fathers got; For their exercise was in
realities, and you consume your time in complements and vain ceremonies: I have
almost killed my self with laughing at you, to see with what punctualities you
leave off those Arms at the Senate gate, with which your Ancestors defended the
Empire. What profit is it to your Suppliants, that you lay off those Arms which
may hurt one, and put on those which destroy all the world? What avails it us,
that you enter the Senate without sword or dagger, whilst you are armed with
malice in your hearts? Know, ye Romans, we dread you not, as armed Captains,
but, as malicious Senators; we fear not your swords and d^ggers, but your
hearts and tongues. It were less injury, if going armed into the Senate, you
took away our lives, then to suffer Innocents to be destroyed, by not
dispatching their affairs. I neither understand what ye intend, nor can suffer
with patience what I see you do. In my Country we disarm Fools: Now, whether
your Arms be taken from you as Fools or Madmen, I know not: If it be done
because ye are Fools; surely it is not the Law of the Gods, that three hundred
Fools should govern three hundred thousand wise men. I have tarried here for my
answer a long season, and by your delays, I am further from a dispatch, then I
was the first day. We bring you hither, Honey, Oil, Saffron, Wood, Salt, Silver,
and you send us away to seek Justice elsewhere. You have one Law whereby to
gather your Tributes, and another whereby to determine Justice: For, we must
pay our Tributes in one day, but you will not discharge our Arrands in a whole
year. Either take away our lives, that our businesses may have an end, or hear
our complaints, that we may live to serve you. If you think my words
extravagant, and find them offensive, so you will do Justice to my Country,
take my life; and so I make an end.

These were his words, Catullus, which I got in writing, and may now say, that
the same boldness and high spirit, which Romans exercised heretofore in other
Countries, Strangers now dare to express in Rome. For this Speech some would
have had him punished; but God forbid that any man should suffer for saying
Truth in my presence; seeing that is more then enough which men suffer, though
we then persecute them not, when they boldly inform us of their grievances. The
sheep cannot be preserved from wolves, if the Shepherds dogs bark not; and
there is no Law of Gods or man's which awardeth punishment for Liars, that will
permit any one should be punished for speaking Truth: Yet now, men are
chastised more for murmuring against one Senator, then for blaspheming all the
Gods at once. We need not seek to the Gods in our Temples: For, the Senators
take upon them to be Gods; but there is great difference betwixt them: For, the
Gods do nothing that is evil, and the Senators nothing that is good: The Gods
never lie, and the Senators never speak truth: The Gods pardon often, and they
never forgive: The Gods are content to be honored five times in a year, and
the Senators would be honored ten times in a day: The Gods are constant in
every thing, and fail in nothing, the Senators are steadfast in nothing, and
fail in all things; and when they intend not to amend their faults, they cannot
endure their Suppliants should inform them of the Truth. But, be it as it may
be; this I am sure of, that it is impossible for them to be just, or sincerely
to apply themselves to any virtue, who withdraw their ears from listening to the
Truth: And no mortal man, be he Orator, or Consul, or Censor, or Emperor, how
well soever he takes heed to his ways, and orders his desires, but he shall
other while have need of some Reproof and Counsel.

Now I have written concerning others, I will inform thee of somewhat
concerning my self, because thou desire it. Know that in the Kalends of
January, I was made Censor in the Senate, which I neither desired nor deserve.
No wise man will spontaneously take upon himself the burden and charge of
looking to other men's affairs; for it is an hard task to please every man in
such an office; and he who undertakes it, must often make show in countenance,
of that which is not in his heart. Good men only ought to be put into office,
and in the eighth Table of our ancient Laws, it is enjoined, That charge of
Justice be never given to him who seeks or desires it, but that men be chosen
to such places with great deliberation, because few men are so virtuous and
loving to their Country, as to take offices upon themselves, so much for the
benefit of other men, as for their own utility. Unhappy is Rome, if I be one of
those who best deserves such an office. I had no need of it, but accepted
thereof to fulfill the command of Antonius my Grandfather, and to be obedient
to the Senate, who had thereto elected me of their own accord, etc.

This Remonstrant leaves it to your grave wisdoms, who are in Authoriry, and to
all other prudent Readers, to make that Use and Application of these preceding
Fragments of Antiquity, as they shall find cause; and to consider whether these
be not Exemplary Precedents, which may excuse at least (if not justify) those
plain and free expressions, which both his private necessities, and the
constitution of Public Affairs do require at this present, in relation to the
Common Peace, to the preservation of Public Honor, and to himself. Howsoever,
he will now conclude, adding only an humble Prayer to all you who are in Power,
and one reasonable request to them, on whose behalf he was chiefly induced and
emboldened, to draw up this Pleading. His Prayer to you in Authority, is, that
by your mediation and endeavors in your several capacities, means may be
prosecuted, whereby, to the honor of GOD, those Covenants, Contracts and
Securities, made and granted by this Nations Representative, may be preserved
without infringement, according to the Tenor of his Divine Law; That the
Honor and Privileges of the Humane Nature, may be duly tendered, by acting
according to the Law of Reason; and that the credit of the English Nation may
be kept from being violated and disparaged, by making good what their elected
Representative engaged to perform, either in Specie, or, by a Recompense nobly
and generously vouchsafed; and not by that irrational way of Discount, which is
by some proposed: For it is not only impossible, after so many years, and so
many transactions, of which no memorials were kept, in expectation of a future
account; but it will be very injurious also, unless the said Purchasers and
Lenders may be allowed to demand and receive satisfaction upon Account and
Discount, for all their losses, their hindrances by expenses in time, and their
suits, solicitations, and forbearances occasioned (without their default) by
those engagements which necessitated them to be Purchasers or Lenders; as also,
for all improvements, by them made at their proper cost, together with the
charges of prosecuting a Composition before the Commissioners lately authorized
to mediate the same; and for damages sustained by Interest of money, and loss
of the profits of those Lands, which are intruded upon, and left unoccupied the
mean while. These particulars being omitted, it will be as unconscionable a
Proposition, as it would be to Merchant-Adventurers, (who must balance their
losses at one time, with what they gain at another) to compel them to make
sale of their Wares, brought home at their last Voyage, according to the
Disbursments only at that Return, without any respect had, to what they lost
formerly, or may possibly lose hereafter. Nay, it is far more unconscionable,
in regard that whereas Merchants do usually gain sufficiently, at one time or
other, to make them both savers and gainers, toward the advance of their
estates; many of the said Purchasers and Lenders, have been by casualities, by
having that which was due unto them detained many years, and otherwise by gross
injustice, very great losers, (without their own default) in every Purchase,
Loan and Contract, made to and with them, who were entrusted with Public
Concernments, and exercised the Supreme Power, without contradiction; and
whereto, being conscientiously obedient, they ought in equity to have their
obedience rewarded, as it was said, their Piety and Charity should be, who
administered to his necessities as a Disciple of Christ's, who came in the name
of his Disciple, though peradventure he was an Impostor. And it is more then
probable, that many of the said Purchasers and Lenders, if they have gotten
ought, or been savers by the said Parliaments Grants in one particular, have
lost more then the whole Interest and Principal of their Disbursments in the
rest of their Contracts, Expenses and Debts, pretended to have been secured
unto them by the said Parliament, as it has happened unto this Remonstrant in
his own particular.

His single request, beforementioned, to his Fellow-Purchasers and Lenders,
shall be but this, that, they would be more just and respective unto him, then
some of them have been (as he hears) in their Censures passed upon this
Remonstrance, when it was perused in private: For, though it were voluntarily
by him composed, with as much regard unto their good, as unto his own
oppressive sufferings, without putting them to any cost or pains, (though also,
none or few of them had more just cause to complain; though he is more certain
of the reality of his own oppressions, then of all theirs, and though the
Common Grievances may thereby be more illustrated, then by many of their
sufferings.) They, nevertheless, not considering (as usually they do in their
own cases) that Egomet mihi proximus, do grudge this Remonstrant the mentioning
his personal wrongs; and (as if they who suffered most, had least right to
complain) misconster his insisting upon his own Oppressions, as not comely in
their judgment, or else, as likely to make his Arguments the less effectual on
their behalf; which want of Prudence, Justice and Charity, he cannot well
approve of; and therefore desires them to be more thankful to their friends,
lest they discourage every man from Apologizing for them, when they cannot, or
dare not speak for themselves. Though this Remonstrant intends well to all, he
has no such ill meaning to himself, as in the prosecution of the Common
Interest, sottishly to neglect his own well being, when it is therewith
involved. He might have inserted much more in relation both to the Puhlick
Interest, and to his own, but he confesses he has omitted in prudence, not a
few Arguments of more strength then any yet alleged; because, he knows they
may at this time, be more mischievous to him, then available to that Cause for
which he pleads; and that it would have been rather madness then discretion,
to produce them out of season. That, which he has offered to consideration, is
expressed with a good Conscience toward GOD, his Prince, his Country, and to
each individual person therein: and he desires no otherwise to prosper in this
world, then as he is an enemy to no man's person, whatsoever his judgment be,
but only to his Errors and Vices; and as he unfeignedly desires rather their
conversion, then their impoverishment, shame and confusion. He does but hereby
endeavor, (as he has often done heretofore) to discharge the Office of a
Remembrancer to these Nations, and in barking like a true English Mastive, when
he thinks his Masters House or Flocks are endangered by Thieves or Wolves; and
therefore, though his name be herein already Aenigmatically inscribed, and was
thought by him at first, to have been a sufficient attestation hereof: he does
now upon more deliberation, openly subscribe what he has Remonstrated with
this name

George Wither.

A BRIEF Advertisement, Not unreasonably hazzarded.
THis Remonstrant, being desirous that the Honor and well-being both of the
King and People, may be preserved by a timely supply of all their necessities;
and hearing since the conclusion of this Remonstrance, that his Majesty has
present use of a very great sum of Money, an Expedient, came suddenly into
thought, whereby in his judgment, he may not only be supplied, but thereby
prevent also a great mischief which is already felt, and whereof we shall every
day grow more and more sensible, by that diligence which is now practiced to
draw a considerable part of the Kingdoms Treasure into private hands.

For, the Ecclesiastics, by being repossessed of about an hundred forty and
two thousand pounds per annum, (as this Remonstraant is credibly informed) by
Impropriations, now well near all out of Lease, besides Parsonages and
Vicaridges, with other vast Revenues lately so much improved, that their Annual
worth is greatly enlarged, have already raised so many hundred thousands of
pounds by Fines and Rents, that it has exhausted the Treasure of this Kingdom
out of the Peoples purses, into their secret Hoords; even so much, that there
is not sufficient for men to follow their Trades and Callings, pay Taxes, and
sustain their Families, without great penury: And the said Ecclesiastics, (as
it is famed also) are so suspicious of the Securities of these Times, and
(perhaps, justly so fearful lest the King and his Council, or the King and the
next Parliament, may take their Uselesness, Avarice and Ambition, into such
serious consideration) that, to provide for what may possibly succeed, they
will either hide their money in the earth, where much of it may be quite lost;
or else keep it so close, that little of it will be employed, for Advance of
Traffic and Negotiations betwixt man and man, and Trade thereby obstructed,
much more then at present; especially, by that time they have fleeced every
sheep within their Jurisdictions. Therefore, the King and his Council, (upon a
view taken of what they have received) may if they need it for Publick-uses,
get speedy supply of money, (as legally as they repossess those Lands) by
requiring a Benevolence from all the Prelates, now enriched to excess, merely
by the Kings Favor; and who, being (for the most part) old men, with one foot
and a half in the Grave (and some of them childless) shall not only have more
left then is necessary; yea, much more (though nothing be left them but their
yearly Rents) then either their Predecessors had, or then they will deserve, as
now they are constituted: But, by this means also, much money which is, or
which probably would else be Hoorded up, to the Public damage, will be
dispersed to the advance of Trading, and to the employing of many thousands,
who now want bread for their Families, because there is not wherewith to set
them on work: Or else, (which will be a far better Expedient, if the King were
so pleased) he may be supplied more to his honor, by the Purchasers of the
said Prelates Lands, if by his favor they were thereto enabled, as they might
justly be: For, this Remonstrant is persuaded, if they might have their
Bargains and Sales confirmed by Parliament, with his Royal assent, they would
contribute a more bountiful supply then the Prelates; and would be Possessors
and Occupiers of those estates for the future, more to the glory of God, more
for his, with the Public honor and welfare, and more for the lawful benefit
and advantage of private Persons: And, this Remonstrant can not forbear openly
to profess, that he thinks in his conscience, the Prelates are neither
consistent with an Orthodox Christian Discipline, nor with the lawful Interests
of King or People: And, that he wonders at the madness of this Generation,
seeing so many thousands within their knowledge undone by trusting to the
Bargains, Sales and Securities of their Parliaments, which were thought the
best Security in the world; that, they will now adventure their money upon so
slender a security, as the hand and seal only, of old doting men, who are
Tenants but for life, (perhaps, but during pleasure) without a general
warranty, by some good Collateral Security. But, let those adventrous
Contractors do as they please; The Remonstrant having played the Fool himself
in trusting to such Securities, has no reason to grudge other men the liberty
to buy wit with their own money; and though in charity, he would prevent their
damage, yet, knowing he shall never be able to make such men wiser by examples
or counsel, until they have as well paid for it as he has done, he will
scrible no more to that purpose; but conclude all with this prayer, GOD BLESS
THE KING and PEOPLE, and incline those who can better vindicate the Public
Faith of this Nation, to contribute their endeavors in due season.

FINIS.
THough this Authors writings have been contemned, and disgracefully termed
Scriblings by some; yet, because by them the constitution of the Generation
wherein he lives, may be partly known; very many have importuned him, to
publish a Catalogue of those Poems and Discourses which have been heretofore by
him composed and imprinted, together with those which are not yet published;
that, they who are desirous to collect them for their private use, may know by
what names to enquire for them. Therefore to fulfill their desire, the said
Author has here set down the Titles of so many of them as he remembers at this
time, (not in order as they were written, but as they came to mind) whereby, if
any of those Manuscripts which were lost when his house was plundered, or by
other casualities, shall be brought again to his hand, he will be very thankful
to the bringer, and give him a Copy thereof, if he desire it, or what other
satisfaction he shall reasonably demand.

Those Books which were composed in his minority, and may therefore be called
his Juvenilia, are these.

1. Iter Hibernicum, or, His Irish Voyage. Verse. 2. Iter Boreale, a Northern
Journey. ver. 3. Patricks Purgatory. ver. 4. Philaretes complaint. ver.
These four last mentioned were lost in Manuscript.

5. Fidelia. ver. 6. Eglogs. ver. 7. An Epithalamium. 8. A Funeral Elegy on P.
H. 9. Abuses stripped and whipped; two Books. 10. The Shepherds Hunting. 11. The
Shepherds Pipe, composed jointly by him and Mr. W. Brown. 12. The Scourge. 13.
The Mistress of Philarete.
These Books following were composed when he was of riper years.

14. Withers Motto, (videl.) Nec habeo, nec careo, nec curo. 15. An Apology to
the Lords of the Council, in justification of the Reproof of Vices in his
Poems. 16. A Satyr to the King. 17. A Treatise of ancient Hieroglyphics, with
their various significations; a Manuscr. lost. 18. Emblems, in folio. 19. A
preparation to the Psalter, in folio. 20. Exercises on the first Psalm, in
prose and ver. 21. Exercises on the nine Psalms next following, in pro. and
ver. all lost. 22. A metricall Translation of David's Psalms. 23. A translation
of Nemesius, De natura hominis. pro. 24. A metricall translation of the
Canonical Hymns and Songs. 25. Three Books, of Hymns and Spiritual Songs, for
several occasions. 26. The Scholars Purgatory. pro. 27. The pursuit of
Happiness, being a character of the extravagancy of the Authors Affections and
Passions in his youth. prose, not Printed. 28. Riddles, Songs and Epigrams; not
Printed. 29. A Discourse concerning the Plantations of Ulster in Ireland, with
preconjectures of what consequents would probably ensue. pro. 30. The Duchess.
ver. not Printed. 31. Domestic Devotions. pro. not Printed. 32. Another
Funeral Elegy: not Printed. 33. A Tract of Usury, wherein, that Lending for
increase, which is forbidden in Scripture, is distinguished from that which is
lawful: not Printed. 34. Meditations upon the X. Commandments, with Sculptures.
ver. 35, Familiar Epistles. prose, lost. 36. The Authors confession of his
Faith, both in Fundamentals, and in relation to most points controverted by men
of several judgments in Religion: not Printed. 37. A precatory Meditation and
Soliloquy with God, on the behalf of his children and their posterity, if they
have any: not Printed. 38 A Discourse to a Friend, touching the consolations in
close imprisonment: not Printed. 39. Britains Remembrancer.
These that follow, were written since the beginning of the Long Parliament.

40. Campomusae. ver. 41. Vox pacifica. ver. 42. Vaticinium poeticum. ver. 43.
Caveat Emptor. pro. 44. Se defendendo. pro. 45. Justiciarius Justificatus. pro.
46. Letter of Advice touching choosing Members of Parliament. pro. 47. Mercurius
Rusticus. pro. 48. Britains Genius. 49. A Petition and Narrative to the
Parliament. pro. 50. Opobalsamum Anglicanum. ver. 51. Carmen Expostulatorum.
ver. 52. A single Si quis. ver. 53. Carmen Terrarium Semicynicum. ver 54. A
thankful Retribution. ver. 55. The tired Petitioner. ver. 56. What Peace to the
Wicked? ver. 57. The Speech without door. pro. 58. Withers Disclaimer. pro. 59.
The Dark Lantern and perpetual Parliament. ver. 60. Boni Ominis Votum. ver. 61.
Know thy self. ver. 62. The true state of the Cause betwixt the King and
Parliament. pro. mis-laid or lost. 63. The Delinquents purgation. pro. 64.
West-row revived. ver. 65. The sinners Confession. ver. 66. A Cordial
Confection, etc. pro. 67. Verses to the individual Members of Parliament. 68.
Epistolium-Vagum-prosau^metricum. 69. Furor poeticus. ver. 70. A sudden Flash.
ver. 71. Salt upon Salt. ver. 72. Amigdala Britannica, or, Almonds for Parrets.
ver. 73. The British Appeal. ver. 74. There Grains of Frankincense. ver. 75.
The Protector. ver. 76. Carmen Eucharisticon, or a private Oblation, etc. ver.
77. Speculum Speculativum, or a Considering-glass. ver. 78. Fides Anglicana, or
a Plea for the Public Faith of these Nations. 79. A Declaration in the person
of Oliver Cromwell, given into his own hand, and tending to the settling of
such a Government as he never intended. pro. 80. A Private Address to the said
Oliver, in prose and verse, offering things pertinent to his consideration,
into his hand sealed up. 81. Another Address for the third day of Sept. 1658.
given to his own hands likewise. 82. Another Address given to R. Cromwells own
hands. Neither of these four last-mentioned were imprinted; for they were
private Remembrances both of their duties and failings; with forewarnings of
what is since come to pass.
These and some other scriblings, whose Titles this Author cannot now remember,
are here set down, not for ostentation, but to satisfy the requests of his
Friends. By these it may appear, how (for about 52. years together) he has
employed himself, and that though he be none of the wisest, and has failed in
many other things, he has been always well affected to his Country; and so
desirous to be serviceable to his generation, that perhaps he has not merited
to be thereby totally destroyed, though to God he has been an unprofitable
servant. Be it considered that some of these Books were composed in his unripe
age; some, when wiser men then he erred; and that in regard there is in all of
them, somewhat savouring of a natural spirit, and somewhat dictated by a better
spirit then his own, it will concern every man to try the spirits, and to
adhere to that only which is agreeable to the Touch stone of Truth, which is
left us by the Father of Spirits; to be the Test of all men's writings.


