To the most honorable the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled: The
humble Declaration and Petition of Major Geo. Wither.
THough a prayer of this length, is not usually preferred to your Honors, let
it nevertheless appear, for this once, excusable, in regard, the hardship of
bearing, what occasions this tediousness, to exercize your patience in
hearing, may perhaps, merit the more compassion.

Your said Petitioner, having long and patiently waited when the
Publike-Affaires, would afford leisure to redress his private-grievances; and,
then, perceiving his many sufferings, to be almost past remedy; his family nigh
destroyed; his life declining to the grave, and his just expectations every day
further off then before; he began to consider, that, charity to himself, being
the rule of regulating his love to others, ought not to be infringed; that
works of justice and mercy, should at no time be neglected, or seem
impertinent; that, a generall-well-being is not possible where particulars and
Individuals, ( whereof a Generality consists) are needlessly exposed to
destruction; and, that, no man is bound, silently, to suffer in, or for, that
Commonwealth, which is so unequal in her Distributions, as not to administer,
equally, deserved rewards and punishments, to her own Members; much less, when
she will find Times to hear; Bread to feed; and Bowels to compassionate her
malicious Destroyers; and, yet, has neither Leisure, nor Food, nor Pity for
them, who thought nothing too precious, to be hazzarded for her Preservation:
And, your said Petitioner thereupon intended to express his Grievances,
publicly, at large, and in such manner, as an unsufferable Oppression, joined
with Desperation of relief, might seem to require. But, having somewhat renewed
his lost hopes, by discovering Symptoms of your removing those Obstructions,
of justice and mercy, which of late, eclipsed the honor of the Parliament,
frustrated the endeavors of her best affected Members, and oppressed her most
faithful Servants; he has now changed his purpose; and humbly offers unto
this high Court, an occasion of performing an Act of Justice, and a Work of
Mercy, by imploring your favorable answer to his following Declaration and
Petition; conceiving, it shall be a thing acceptable to God, honorable to the
Parliament, and an Omen of a general mercy to this Kingdom. Motives, to
procure his humble Suit, he could allege too many, to be here added; and, some
of them are such, that, out of reverence to the honor of this Nation, he will
not openly mention them, whilst he has any hopes of redress: And, yet, least
the concealing of all, may render him, and his necessities, inconsiderable,
till his destruction be irrecoverable, he humbly offers these that follow:

1. That, your said Petitioner has not only given public testimonies of his
love to this Commonwealth, many years before this Parliament, or Army,
appeared against her Oppressors; and has continued constant to this
Parliament, ever since it began, notwithstanding many provocations, occasioned
by malignant Members: But, was the first also, (though without any particular
encouragement) who, in those, parts where he lived, contributed his goods, and
engaged his person, for the Publike-safety: And, that, he having frequent
solicitations, and large offers from the contrary Party, did nevertheless
proceed, and disburse, voluntarily, out of his own estate and credit, above
700. l. in your greatest need; for which, he must pay interest, until the
principal is discharged; and, for part of which money (the same having already
been owing above four years, he is now a Prisoner in the Gate House, to his
great charge and disgrace, who was never a Prisoner for any debt of his own.

2. That, in the beginning of this war, he was by special Order, plundered
by the Kings Forces; and that, the honorable House of Commons, being
certified, by an Inventorie testifying, under the hands of sixteen persons,
that this Petitioners damages (as has been since also averred by several
Oaths) amounted to above 2000. l. did thereupon, by their Order, of the 19. of
February, 1642. charitably, authorize your said Petitioners repair the said
damages, out of the estates of his Plunderers, and other Delinquents.

3. That, your said Petitioner, with humble thankfulness, and with due respect
to the honor of the Parliament, endeavored to execute the said Order; But, so
discountenanced was he therein, Delinquents, so impudently befriended, and the
said Order so slighted; that, he could not, thereby, recover half so much as
the Interest of his principal damages, (as by Accounts upon Oath, and by
Inventories of the particulars apprized, by sworn Apprizers; it does, and may
appear) and, that, instead of the Repair intended by the said Order, he is
engaged into so many troubles and suits, by seeking to execute the same; that,
he who had never before one Suit in Law, has now five suits, unjustly
occasioned, merely, by the said Order, to his intolerable charge and vexation.

4. That, by being plundered as aforesaid, he has now been deprived almost
five years, both of his Stock, and of an Employment: wherey he cleared, and
might probably have cleared, for sixteen years then to come, above 400. l. per
annum, toward his maintenance, and the advance of his Estate, over and above
all Rents and charges: And, that, by loosing the said Stock and employment, in
your Service; and by the Oppressions sustained in seeking relief, by means of
the foresaid Order, this Petitioner, has not only lost so much yearly
profit; but, has been thereby, compelled also, to borrow almost half so much,
to maintain his Family, and to pay Taxes, House-rent, and Duties, during most
part of the said time.

5. That, there is likewise due to this Petitioner (as appears by his Accounts
stated in Febr. 1646.) above 1681. l. for Arreares, besides other just demands,
amounting to 523. l. more then was certified by the Accomptants; all which
ought to have been paid unto him above three years now past, and most part of
it above four years since, as will appear by Deben^ers, and Warrants issued
upon them by the late General Essex, and the Committee of Safety* according to
the allowances and payments, then made to others. And there is now justly due
to this Petitioner, above 4150. l. for Arrears, and Disbursements, with (...)
the (...) (and as well, if not better proved, then most other men's losses) all
which he is the more hopeful to receive, because if it (...) wittingly,
demanded more then is due, he will ask no favor.

6. that, instead of what was graciously promised to such as had eminently
suffered, and of what was charitably intended, by the honorable House of
Commons, to this Petitioner, he has been many ways injuriously oppressed, yea
publicly, and falsely scandalized and misrepresented to the said House, to the
occasioning of his being fined in 500. l. and of his confinement, to this day
(being now almost a year and a half) by the unjust Report of one then sitting
in the said House of Commons, and by the concurrence of others, (of whom some
are now departed the Kingdom) who did then condemn the innocent, and justify
the offender, contrary to evidence; and to the disabling of your said
Petitioner, to defend himself, who was not only thereupon disgracefully fined,
and confined, as aforesaid, for having honestly discharged his duty; but, so
impoverished also, that of above twenty horses (which he kept constantly,
before his engagement for the public) he has, now, none; of eighteen household
servants, he has but one, which he is likewise unable to maintain; and,
instead of many dishes at a meal, is feign to make many meals of one dish;
which, at this present, also, he can hardly provide: yet, these are not the
worst requitalls of his known faithfulness; as will appear hereafter more at
large, if there be cause.

7. That, your said Petitioner, having had for many years past, as aforesaid,
neitheir Stock nor Employment, whereby to maintain his Family, or defend
himself, against his powerful scandalizers and oppressors, was forced (after
he had borrowed, until he was ashamed to borrow more) first, to sell, at low
prizes, much of his most necessary goods; and afterward, that, which he would
not have left, for ten times the value; even Jewels and Plate, given as
testimonies of their respect, by the Queen of Bohemia, the late Duchess of
Richmond, and other honorable persons; and yet, had perhaps perished, if God
had not moved a charitable Member of the House of Commons, to support him,
hitherto, beyond hope.

8. Lastly, that, your said Petitioner, has been imprisoned so long, for what
the State owes; and suffered so much, by them, against whom the State ought to
protect him; that, if he be not speedily relieved, he perceives no possibility
of feeding his Family, one month longer; much less, of paying his Creditors,
or avoiding the inconveniences, whereto he shall be shortly liable, by not
answering or prosecuting, according to the chargeable Formalities of Law and
Chancery; and, whereby, he has already suffered above 150. l. damage, through
want of wherewith, to prosecute his right, and defend himself, as the said
Formalities, require. In a word, he is totally ruined, merely by his
engagements for you, and by Petitioning and attending, now above four years,
without redress: his estate is so confused; his necessities are so many; his
credit so impaired, by being clamor'd on, for trusting to the publike-faith,
other men's goods, as well as his own; and, his friends have hitherto been so
few, or so unable: that, he knows not which way to turn himself; nor, by what,
he may fully illustrate, his present condition, except by the distractions and
confusions of this Kingdom, which, are epitomized in his: For, these lines
contain not the tithe, of what, he can, and will further allege, as motives
of your commiseration, if there be cause.

In consideration, therefore, of what is already expressed; and in regard your
said Petitioner has now been wheeled about, in, and by References, and
Committees, nigh four years, as aforesaid, without other effect, save increase
of scandalls, cost and troubles, which are likly to out-last the nigh expired
term of his life; and, whereby he is now disabled to toil any longer in those
Labyrinths, which have made wiser men giddie, and some of them mad, both to the
public scandal, and their own destruction; he humbly beseeches your
Honors, to set a period to his troubles; and not to expose him to those
desperate courses, or expressions, which others have imprudently fallen upon,
in lesse-sufferable extremities, to the dishonor of the Parliament, to the
loss of the peoples affections thereunto, the prolonging of the general
calamity, and to the hazzarding of all our happiness. Be pleased, for
preventing the ruin of his innocent children; the making of him a scorn to
his Foes; a shame to the Nation; and a burden to this Commonwealth, (whereto
he might perhaps, be some way as serviceable, as many others, who have better
thrived, by her undoing) to vouchsafe him, some part of those great sums,
whereof others have shared: yea, for your own honors sake, be pleased,
according to the ancient Justice, and Clemency, of English Parliaments, and the
many Religious Protestations made at the beginning of this, to take, his
necessities and faithfulness, into your speedy and serious consideration; and
vouchsafe, that the money due to him for his Repaires, Disbursements, and his
Arrears (the price of his blood) may be forthwith paid; or, at least, so much
thereof, as may discharge his engagements for the public; being about 1400. l.
and so much more, also, as may, once again, put him into some employment, for
his subsistence, before, that, which he has in hope, be quite wasted, by
Usury, or his life, by time. And, be likewise pleased, to grant, that, the
payment of the remainder, may be secured by an Ordinance, with interest for the
same, until the principal shall be discharged; or else, that in lieu of such
Interest, some Employment, (if he be thought worthy or capable of any, in this
Kingdom) may be conferred upon him, whereby, without charge to the State, his
Family may be fed, and his children educated, the mean while, by his own
labors. Herein, your Wisdom shall do an act of Justice, and a work of Mercy;
which, as this Petitioner is persuaded, shall be improved to a blessing;
redound as much to your honor, as, a free bounty, of greater sums, conferred;
give good contentment to all the well-affected, who shall hear thereof; enable
this Petitioner, to perform some future service, not altogether unworthy the
desired favor; and make the whole Kingdom hopeful, that, those are, or,
shall, suddenly (according to the general desire) be purged out of both
Houses, who have been the obstructers of Justice, and the prolongers of our
present miseries. Howsoever it shall succeed, your said Petitioner will
endeavor to rest contented with Gods good pleasure; to wait his leisure, as
patiently as he can; and, to pray for this Parliament, as in duty he is bound.


